AN EXPOSITION with Notes upon the first EPISTLE to the Thessalonians.

By WILLIAM SCLATER D. D. and Minister of the Word of God at Pitmister in
Sommerset.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for John Parker, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Ball. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD STANHOPE, BARON OF HARINGDON, ONE OF his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
RIght Honorable, and my very good Lord: Sensibly he spoke, and fittingly to
his times, who wayling said; Nusquam inueni requiem, nisi in libro and
claustro. Mentior, if my Soul accord him not. A window too soon I opened it,
as Noah to his Dove, to see, if yet the billows of the ancient Deluge were
calmed: if in some eminent Mountain she might find a place to settle on. And
behold, all swelling with the surges of Ambition, or soyled with the slime of
Luxury and basest Avarice: no place safe where she may pitch her foot.
Blessed be that God, that gives the hand, to receive her back into the Arc. O
munde immunde, said Saint Austine in his holy indignation. How fastens our
purest substance on thy pollutions? why seeks it rest in that, whose
composition is of tumults? (...), that have begun by Grace, to retire my
mind, from the tumultuous hurly-burlies it is tossed withal. And now with
Agur I pray, Pro. 30.8.
Lord, feed me with food convenient for me: my Tuguriolum, my little
Sheepe-cote, affoording retired priuacie, shall yield more tranquillity, then
the Sea of him, that would be styled, Monarch of the Catholic Church.

Right Noble Lord, fallor? or does your heart applaud us? that having more then
suruiewed what ever contentment the Royallest Court could afford; and spent
the better days in service to the State, at length makes choice of priuacie,
as safest harbor for old Age. Whether, trow I, do you more pity men
launching into that Euripus, or praise God for your own safe arrival? Thanks
be to God, that has safe rendered you to your self; and taught you to make
devotion the task of your Age. Eccl. 12.13.
Hoc est omnis Homo, To fear God and keep his Commandments. Continue herein,
I dare promise your conscience more tranquillity, your person more honor,
then all the Courts of the world can afford you. Still let your soul be
enamoured on the beauty of the Lords house: Still make your Closet a Temple,
wherein the praises of God may sound day and night. Haec via ad magni Regis
Palatium. To urge perseverance and progress in sanctity, is the bent of this
Scripture, thought probably the first of the New Testament, (...), hold fast
what you have received: He is faithful that has promised to give you the
Crown of Life. Exiguum est quod restat. To fail in the last Act is not so
shameful, as discomfortable, since we know who said, Psalm. 92.14.
Old Age must be more fruitful. If to these intentions my poor pains may be
useful to your Lordship, and the Church of God, I have what I seek; for other
things, prouidebit Deus. To whose gracious guidance and blessing, I humbly
betake your Lordship; and rest

Your Lordships Chaplain, ready to be commanded, WILLIAM SCLATER.
From Pitmister in Sommerset, SEPTEMBER. 29. 1618.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, a Debtor I acknowledge my self to the Church, by calling:
moreover, by promise: but conditionate; so be it I might know, what acceptance
my first fruits found with the Church of God. Such, I now hear, not without my
thankfulness to God, as far exceedes expectation, or desert. The delay of
the remainder has had these causes. First, that late intelligence. Secondly,
other vnceasing pains. Thirdly, the Nausea of some at home, whom no Sermon
pleases, longer then it is in hearing; nor otherwise, then it is extant in
their own broken, and sometimes senseless Notes. Fourthly, and now that
flagellum studiosorum, Calculus Renum, vexing ad maciem, ad stuporem: which
has made me welmost a mere Peripateticke in my studies. For poor me only it
is sinful, to hope, or accept abilities, so much as may afford an Amanuensis
to take my Dictates. Scilicet, God nails us, where he first seats us.
Howbeit, my succisiue hours, if sickness, or presenter pains afford any, I
promise to be wholly employed that way. Mean while, if anyes thirst be as that
of him in his flight, he may perhaps, in these Homilies ad populum, find, what
to thirst may afford, if not sweetness, yet savor.

Praying help of thy prayers, I rest,

Thine in the LORD, WILLIAM SCLATER.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST EPISTLE of PAVL to the THESSALONIANS.
1. THESSAL. 1.1. PAVL and SILVANVS, and TIMOTHEVS, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace
be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.


THe Inscription of the Epistle; wherein are, first, the persons sending.
Secondly, the persons to whom its sent. Thirdly, the (...), or greeting.

The persons sending are Paul, Siluanus, and Timotheus.

In the Epistles to this Church it is obseruable, that the Apostle prefixeth
his name: without any Title of dignity or office. In others, dignifies his
person with some Title of respect: an Apostle, or a Servant of God, or both.
Interpreters enquire reason of it, and thus resolve. Some impute it to his
modesty, and desire to win his Associates some equality of respect: some to
his prudence, and care to avoid scandal, that might arise amongst Nouices,
from show of arrogancy: some to this, that perhaps they were not pestered with
false apostles, as other Churches, amongst whom he needed to auow his calling:
whether one or other, is not much material to inquire: neither occurres any
thing of special notice, except this, That it is sometimes lawful for a
Minister, to use those Titles of honor and reverence, wherewith God has
graced him; sometimes more convenient the assuming should be forborne. PAVL,
where he sees the authority and fruit of his Ministry, hazarded by denial
of his Titles, insists largely in auowing of them; as to 1. Cor. 9.1. Gal. 4.
and 2.
Corinthians, and Galatians; and where he sees concealment more convenient to
avoid show of vain glory, he omits them.

The like is requisite for us. There are people so idly affected with Titles
of dignity, that the same Truth has more or less authority with them,
according to difference of persons, in these respects, that propound it. There
are men of another strain, so utterly distasting all Titles in a Minister,
that the mention of them, on any occasion, is censured of vain glory, and the
doctrine it self so much the less regarded. It is some part of a Ministers
prudence, in these trifles to see, what is most convenient for the peoples
edification. Ministers I have known of reverend parts for learning and
conscience, whose whole Ministry has been therefore despicable amongst
Idiotes, because nor Birth, nor University degrees have commended them to the
world; so idly are silly people carried away with trifles: yet when gold is
offered them, their care is not great how base the person is that brings it.
Nor should it be much material, by whom Gods Word is brought unto us; whether
by Isaiah, as some think, a Prophet Rabbi Solomon apud Lyram.

Hieron. in Prolog. ad Isaiam.


of the blood Royal: or by Amos, from Amos 1.1.
amongst the Heardmen of Tekoa.

His Associates are Siluanus and Timothy. Siluanus seems the same with Silas,
who Act. 17.4.
joined his pains with Paul, in first preaching to this people. Timothy had
also his employment there, not without profit for their confirmation.

Paul, whether as joint Authors in inditing the Epistle?



Paul's authority sufficient to commend them to Gods Church?

Paul ioynes them unto him: that by all means he might procure respect to his
doctrine.

It is lawful then to use humana subsidia, humane helps for advantage of the
Truth. Act. 15.23.
The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren go jointly in the decrees at
Jerusalem, that by universal consent Gods people might be more swayed to
obedience. Very Act. 17.28. James 1.17.
Heathens testimonies are not refused by Apostles, to advantage the Truth.
there Times, and Places, and Respects, wherein their mention may be of some
avail for Truth.

August. cont. epist. Fundamenti, cap. 5.
Says S. Austen, I had not believed the Gospel, had not the Authority of the
Church swayed with me. It was his Introduction to Faith: afterward, Ioh. 4.42.
as Samaritans, he believes upon firmer grounds. If by us they be used as
Introductions for a time, I see not what impeachment it is to credit of
Scriptures.

Mar. 1.27.
What new Doctrine is this, say the people in Christ's time! Admiring his
Miracles, say ours; denying the Truth, for show of Novelty. In such case, if
we show the Succession lineall of our Faith and Practice, and so take that
Cavil from the Ignorant, me thinks the Truth still gets advantage.





August. cont. dua^ Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifac. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Ad Curam nostram existimo pertinere non solum Scripturas Sanctas Canonicas
aduersus cos testes adhibere, -- Verumetiam de Sanctorum literis, qui eas ante
nos fama celeberrima and ingenti gloria tractauerunt, aliqua documenta
proferre; non quo Canonicis libris a nobis vllius disputatoris aquetur
authoritas, sed vt -- sciant a nobis rectam and antiquitus fundatam Catholicam
fideus aduersus recentem Pelagianorum haereticorum praesumptionem perniciemque
defendi. Polan. Praefat. in Hoseam.
Patres allego, non tanquam principium probandi dogmata Ecclesiae, nec tanquam
Iudices; sed vt testes duntaxat consensus in doctrina and interpretatione
Scripturarum: vtsi ex meis verbis quod sentio and dico quispiam non assequatur,
ex Patrum verbis intelligat.

The persons to whom the Epistle is directed, are next intimated and described,
To the Church of the Thessalonians. The City, whence the inhabitants have
their name, is famously known to have been the Metropolis or Mother-Citie of
Macedonia, anciently called Thermae, Suidas.
new-built by Philip King of Macedonie, after his conquest of Thessalie; for
Monument of which Victory, it was so reedified and enlarged, and obtained that
name: Even now a famous Emporie for Indian Merchandise, Maginus in Geograph.
but subject to the Dominion and Idolatry of Turks, known by the name of
Saloniki.

In this City, God was pleased by the Ministry of Paul and Silas, to collect
a Church; the History see Act. 17. noting the Tumults raised against them by
the Jews: such, that Paul was forced, for safety of his person, to fly to
Act. 17.10.
Beraea; and the Saints that gave him entertainment, especially Ver. 5.
Jason, scarce found security in their own houses; yet there God pleased to
collect him a Church.

where God will gather him a Church, no opposition of Men, or Devils, can
hinder it: Yea, often Experience has showed; where have been most violent
Oppositions, Gods Word has most mightily grown and prevailed. At Ephesus, what
Tumults were raised by Act. 19.23, 24, 25. etc.
DEMETRIUS, and the Crafts-men? yet a more worthy Church we scarce find
amongst them of Asia. The Apostle mentioning it by occasion, says, There was
opened 1. Cor. 16.9.
a great Door, and effectual; great occasion of doing much good, but many
adversaries. Like read we of Act. 18.16.
Corinth. Yea, in the Court of Nero, under the nose of that bloody Tyrant, in
Philip. 4.22.
Caesar's household was a Church collected. And generally it has been
observed, in Places and Times, where Gods Truth has been most opposed by
Persecutions, it has most prevailed, that the Church may say of it self as
Joseph, The Lord has made me fruitful, in the Land of my affliction. That
made Tertullian insult over the cruelty of Tyrants, and after a sort
exasperate it. Tertullian. in Apologet. ad Calcem.
Cruciate, torquete, damnate, atterite nos. -- Exquisitior quaeque crudelitas
vestra, illecebra est magis sectae. Plures efficimur, quoties metimur a vobis.
Semen est sanguis Christianorum.

I suffer affliction unto bonds, said the Apostle; 2. Tim. 2.9.
But the Word of God is not bound; that still has passage. Yea, where we see
striving of Adversaries, and Contradictions, thus let us think, Some good is
in working, Satan now feels his Kingdom begin to totter.

Its but our weakness and ignorance, if these things dismay us. Oppositions
have ever been in all places, where the Gospel has first been planted. The
Devil never left his possession, without much bickering and opposition. But
great is the Truth, and preuayleth. Where we find Adversaries, thus think we,
The Door is opening; occasion given us to gain to the Church of God.

Gamaliel should sway with Opposites, if not for Conscience, yet in Policy, to
forbear their turbulent Oppositions, lest happily they be found Act. 5.39.
fighters against God. If it be of God, they cannot overthrow it. Why rage
Psalm. 2.1, 2, 6.
the Heathen? Why band they themselves against the Lord and his Messiah? Yet
has he set his King upon his holy Hill Sion. Even by those means advanced he
his Christ into the Kingdom of his Church, whereby Satan labored to hinder
it. Our bands, says PAVL, Phil. 1.12.
have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel: zeal grows in Gods
children by opposition. The constancy of Gods people in Tertullians time, was
much admired by Tyrants, howeuer scoffingly they termed it obstinacy. Tertull.
qua supra.
And, illa ipsa obstinatio, quam exprobratis, magistra est. Quis enim non
contemplatione eius concutitur, ad requirendum quid intus in re sit? Quis non
vbi requisiuit, accedit? vbi accessit, pati exoptat?

We see how powerfully God was pleased to break through oppositions, to
fulfill his purpose, in calling this people to the state of his Church. Compare
their state present, we shall see in them a spectacle of Gods impartial
justice. They were a Church famous through the world; the fame of their faith
sounded far and near: Their place now become a receptacle for Mahomet, a
Synagogue for Satan, a Temple for Turkish Idolatry: Gods Kingdom is tied to
no particular place or people. Churches may become no Churches; where now God
has his Church, Idols, yea Devils, may hereafter be worshipped. The Churches
of lesser Asia, famous in their times, into their rooms have succeeded
abominable Idolaters. Bethel, once Bethel, the House of God; under Iereboam,
became Hos. 4.15.
Beth-auen, the house of iniquity. Jerusalem, the praise of the whole earth,
had promises singular made unto it, such as had no particular Church in the
world besides. Psalm. 132.14.
Here is my rest; here will I abide for ever: yet now, the place become a heap
of stones, and the people dispersed without Hos. 3.4.
King or Prophet, any show of a people of God. This is the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes.

Romans 11.20, 21.
not to be high-minded, but to fear: for if God spared not natural branches,
not other Churches, take we heed lest he also spare not us. We stand yet by
Gods mercy in state of his Church; having in gracious measure Gods Truth taught
and professed amongst us: But shall delude our selves, if we think this
favor so tied unto us, that by no unthankfulness, or disobedience we may
make forfeiture of it. I could wish it seriously meditated in these secure
times, wherein how true is it? that men Deuteronomy. 29.19.
bless themselves in their wickedness, and add drunkenness to thirst; and
as Israelites, when they lived in Theft, Adultery, all abominations, yet
because the Ier. 7.4, 9.
Temple of the Lord was amongst them, secured themselves from Gods wrath; so
we, for the Church and Gospels sake yet continued. I say as the Prophet, Verse.
12.
Go to Shiloh; take view of Rome, Thessalonica, Churches of Asia, where once
God set his Name: see what he has done to them; made them seats for
Antichrist, and cursed Mahomet. These things happened to them 1. Cor. 10.11.
as ensamples, and are written for our warning, to make us cautionate, that we
fall not by example of like unfaithfulness, and disobedience.

Sins exposing to like wrath of God; First, Isai. 5.4, 5.
barrenness and rebellion. Secondly, 2. Chron. 36.15, 16.
cruel usage of Gods Messengers. Thirdly, Amos 8.11.
light esteem of the Word of God; this brings that famine to be trembled at;
that either the rareness may make it precious, or the utter remoouall lay us
open to the extreme wrath of God.

In God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ. A description of the Church of
God, as some think, to put difference betwixt Christian Churches, and the
assemblies of Pagans and Jews, which are not in God, but in Idols; not in
Christ, but in an absolute god, whom they conceive, and worship out of the
blessed Trinity. In the Father, and the Son, that is, say some, in the faith
and worship of the Trinity; say others, in blessed and heavenly fellowship
with the Father and Son, by bond of the Spirit: let us add, that the words
import a kind of Heb. 3.14.
(...), and subsistence in the Deity, by means of that union mystical twixt
Christ and his Church. Lo, here the high dignity and privilege of the Church
of God, knit after a sort to the Deity in Christ, and made one with it: 1.
Ioh. 3.24. 2. Pet. 1.4.
the Father in us, we in him; the fruit shows it, mentioned by Peter, that we
are made partakers of the divine Nature: after a sort Deified, say some
Ancients, harshly; their hyperbole thus mollify; Gods creature we partake
analogically, not vnivoce.

It teaches us, first, 2. Cor. 7.1.
to purge our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that we may
preserve our subsistence in God.

Secondly, To 2. Cor. 16.14. 1. Ioh. 5.19.
separate from all society with Idolaters, and other profane persons, of the
World, that lies in that wicked one.

The (...) or greeting follows; wherein are, first, the blessings wished,
Grace and peace. Secondly, the Author or Fountain, God the Father. Thirdly,
the Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ. The explication and use of this clause,
see in the Annotations ad Roman. cap. 1. Grace, in Scripture signifies either
the favor of God, or the free gifts issuing therefrom: Peace, Romans 5.1.
sometimes reconciliation with God: usually, after the phrase of the old
Testament, prosperity. Grace, here understand Gods favor; peace, happiness,
and prosperity; distinguished by S. John into prosperity of the outward
estate, and prosperity of the soul, 3. Ioh. 2.
as thy soul prospers.

The Apostle prays not the first donation, but the, first, continuance.
Secondly, 1. Pet. 1.2.
multiplication. Thirdly, fuller manifestation of Gods favor to this people.

By degrees God manifests his favor to his children, and by drops, as it were,
instills the feeling of his love. Let not Christians wonder at it, when as of
Christ it is said, he grew, as in stature, and wisdom, so in Luke 2.^^.
favor with God. Shall we say (...) only? and ostensiue? in stature we are
sure really, why not also in wisdom and favor with God? as Ambros. de
incarnat. Dom. Sacrament. c. 7. Fulgent ad Thres lib. 1.
S. Ambrose, Fulgentius, and other Ancients long ago interpreted, limiting
themselves to his humanity, and that state of humiliation and poenalitie,
which for our sakes he underwent. Neither see I how it should seem strange,
being understood of the manifestation of Gods favor, seeing we read him
complaining, that he was Matt. 27.46.
forsaken of God, speaking ad sensum, according to that no feeling of Gods
favor, in the agony of his Passion: in the Saints of God, it can by no means
seem a Paradoxe, if that be true, that our assurance of Gods love is
experimental only; and their evidence none other, then what arises from
sanctification: so much as thou art sanctified, so much experience and sense
have thou of Gods favor; and if that be not perfited but by degrees, as
Ezechiels Ezech. 47.3, 4
Allegory seems to import; by degrees is the favor of God made manifest unto
us.

Genesis 27.10.
How have ye found so soon my sons? Gods love is not presently Romans 5.5.
powered into the heart, but after many conflicts with doubtings, combats with
corruption, experiences of Gods mercy, gather we firmness, rather then
fullness of assurance.

Moses, of whom it is said, Heb. 11.27.
He endured as if he had seen him that is invisible, is found at length
questioning the Number. 11.22.
power of God, which he had seen in all their passage, by so many experiments
proved. Resolutely, said JOB, Job 13.15.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; yet read we him wavering, and
distrustfully fearing, lest by continued afflictions, he should Job 6.10, 11.
deny the words of the Holy o^^ The sum is this, It is our duty 2. Pet. 1.10.
to endeavor assurance: our misery, and sin also to doubt of Gods love; yet
our state general in this life, to be encumbered with distrustful doubtings of
Gods favor to us in Christ. And of the Inscription thus far.

VERSE. 2.3. We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers,

Remembering, without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love, and
patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God even our Father.


THe matter of the Epistle now follows. It is spent partly in commendation of
this people; chiefly in exhortation: first, to perseverance in the faith and
grace received: Secondly, to progress and going forward to perfection.

The three first Chapters persuade continuance; the two latter progress in
Grace; some other particulars are incidentally touched, but these are the
chief bent of the Apostle.

The main incentiue to perseverance insinuated in this Chapter, is, the
consideration of the rich Grace of God, bestowed on them by the Apostles
ministry, and the general fame thereof in the Churches of God; from both
which forcibly is inferred the necessity of their care to maintain their
station; since they could not be ignorant, how much more desperate the case is,
2 Pet. 2.21.
to revolt from Grace, then never to receive it. And out of Natural principles
accorded by Scripture, know the price of a Eccl. 7.1.
good Name, how much it exceeds the most precious ointment. And how much more
inglorious and shameful it is, to cease to be, then never to have been
religious.

To this Argument, the Apostle prefaceth with thanksgiving to God, the sole
Author of all Graces that they had received; professing also his instance in
prayer for their establishment and profection in grace; to this end, that they
might neither be puffed up with self-conceit, by his ample commendation; nor
forget, that their confirmation and perfiting in grace, was to be expected from
that 1. Pet. 5.10.
God of all grace, Phil. 1.6.
who had begun the good work in them.

In the words we have two things; first, Paul's offices and acts of love
performed on their behalf: thanksgiving and prayer to God. Secondly, his
motive or incitement thereto, Remembrance of the graces of God bestowed on
them; three whereof are mentioned Verse. 3. the three Theological virtues, each
of them amplified by their effects, all by their soundness and truth, in the
sight of God, etc.

Paul's act in giving thanks to God for graces bestowed on this people, is
observed, how not for our own gracious estate only but for others blessings in
spiritual things, we ought to be affected unto thankfulness. First, Practice
of Luke 15.10.
Angels and Gal. 1.24.
holy Men. Secondly, communion of Saints. Thirdly, glory thence accrewing to
our God and Savior. Fourthly, our own benefit arising from use thereof in
their communication, by exhortation, Romans 1.12.
comfort, example, persuade it.

Larger handling and application of this point, see in Annotations ad Romans cap.
1. whither I remit the Reader.

The graces for which he gives thanks, are Faith, Hope, and Love: Their nature
may, on some fitter occasion, be hereafter handled; their Description by
effects here only take notice of; their Faith working; their Love laborious;
their Hope attended with patience: The work of Faith, there be that interpret
all good offices and fruits, growing from this radical virtue of Faith,
toward God, our Neighbor, our selves: some that work (...) perseverance:
what if we take it, for that first evident fruit thereof, the Act. 15.9.
purifying of the heart: as the Apostle associates conversion unto it, Verse. 9.
And secondly, after this sense, their holiness is more fully and distinctly,
according to all parts thereof, expressed.

To Love he gives labor, Heb. 6.10.
as elsewhere: thereby intimating their unwearied industry, and diligence in
procuring, and furthering the good of Gods Church.

To Hope, patience, 2. Cor. 4.18.
the expectation of eternal life, being that that mitigates, and sweetens the
bitterest afflictions incident into this life.

actuous and full of liuelihood, and operation, all saving graces are, is the
note. Says Peter, having reckoned up the gifts of Sanctification, whence we
gather assurance of calling and election: If these things be in you and abound,
they make you, that you shall neither 2. Pet. 1.8.
be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ, particulars viewed
evidence it plentifully. Iam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated; in a word, full of mercy, and good fruits. 1. Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.
Love, truly Christian, how fruitful and full of operation: like think of
all Graces accompanying salvation; herein they have all a relish of their
Fountain; that they are actions operative, full of liuelihood and efficacy.

Solomon may not unfitly be applied: Pro. 20.6.
Every man will boast of his own righteousness, but where may we find a
faithful man? thou say thou have faith, whereby thou hopest to be saved:
But will thou know, O vain man, Iam. 2.20.
that faith without works is dead? equiuocally faith, that is, in truth, no
faith, at least ineffectuall to salvation? we may by no means think he has
faith toward God, that has not Heb. 6.1.
repentance also from dead works; and care to 1. Ioh. 3.3.
purge himself as God is pure. Love, I confess, is much talked of, and much
commended; but the prouerbiall complaint touching Lot, of all virtue, best fits
this of love: it is praised indeed, but Matt. 24.12.
waxen cold: as Issachar, so generally Christians, see a Genesis 49.15.
goodness in ease. It is love enough, they think, to wish well to the Church;
to Psalm. 122.6.
pray for the peace, and building up of Jerusalem, though they move not one
stone to raise the walls thereof. It were well, this idle love were found
amongst people only, and had not spread to some part of the Ministry also. We
must remember that the description of our calling, by the toil of 1. Cor. 3.9.
husbandmen, and of 1. Tim. 5.18.
Oxen treading out the corn, and such like, were not resemblances peculiar to
Apostolical function, but ought to be answered in our industry. Job. 21.15,
16, 17.
Simon, says our Savior, Love thou me? feed my sheep: they love not
Christ, who being Ministers, feed more themselves then their sheep.

What should I speak of the tenderness and delicacie of the times, in respect
of the Cross? They are Flea-bitings, in comparison to the stings of Scorpions,
that we are called to suffer for righteousness; if we cast back our eyes to
former times of persecution. The hope of our Philip. 3.14.
calling is high; the glory hyperbolically 2. Cor. 4.17.
weighty, and everlasting; the afflictions light and momentany. Hope we
profess to reign with Christ; yet Romans 8.17. 2. Tim. 2.12.
refuse to suffer with him. Non stabit, non erit istud: he has no promise for
hope to rest on, that for the hope sake of heaven, is not patient in
tribulation.

VERSE. 4. Knowing, Brethren beloved, your election of God.


WHether that (of God) be referred to beloved, or to election, the Text is
indifferent: A second motive to Paul's thanksgiving and prayer on this peoples
behalf, is here specified. The knowledge he had of their election: The media
and evidences, whence his assurance arose, are propounded in the Verses
following.

The question here falls in, whether one may know the election of another.

There is, I understand, a new Paraclete lately dropped out of heaven, able by
inspection to discern and reveal to any man, his election: that reads in a
man's forehead election written, in as fair Characters, as that inscription on
the high Priests forehead, Exodus 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord.

This high slowne Eagle was pleased to stoop so low, as to catch flies,
namely, to use some notes of mine upon this Text, as his own, without any
alteration in substance, sauouring of his own industry, saving what he was
pleased to employ his memory in. I own them no longer; as Fidentine the Poets
scroll, so has he made them his own enough. I wondered, I confess, a man of
his Seraphicall spirit vnder-taking maintenance of such paradoxes against
received judgment of the whole Church of God, would move in so low a sphere,
as to take me with him in his walk, and to plow with my Heyfer: more, to see
him so syllabice preaching mine other notes, and scoffingly rejecting the
received Distinction of infallible and charitable judgment, as sauouring of
ignorance, and having no footing in the Word of God.

To the question mine answers were these: first, there is one reason of
singular persons; another of entire Congregations: of singulars, all we have,
is a probable conjecture; yet of entire Congregations, where the Word is
settledly preached and preuayleth, might Paul, may we indefinitely say, they
are elected; giving the whole denomination of the better part, because it is
more then probable, where God will have his Word powerfully preached, there
has he some people, Jsai. 6.13.
a tenth, at least, that shall return.

The second Answer was, in terms something different from the distinction of
Judgment, of certainty, and Charity, scoffed at by this man; yet in
substance all one. Of persuasion in this kind there are two degrees: the one
infallible, the other moral or coniecturall. Infallibly, except by special
Revelation, as Act. 9.15.
ANANIAS had for PAVL, none knows the election of another: Coniecturally,
according to evidences, which Charity is bound, in such case, to follow, we
may have persuasion of other men's election. And such I then resolved to be that
knowledge Paul here professes: how truly we shall afterward hear.

Let us now, first, something more fully explain the terms of the
Distinction. Secondly, enquire, whether it have ground in the Word of God.
Thirdly, afterward of whether sort, in likelihood, this of Paul's was. For the
first: Infallible certainty usually we call that, Cui non potest subesse
falsum, wherein a man cannot be deceived. Charitable or coniecturall, that
wherein it is possible to err and be deceived. In both kinds we must remember
to discern betwixt the thing whereof the certainty is, and the certainty it
self. The thing whereof the certainty is, is the Proposition whereto the
Assent is given. The certainty, the Assent it self. Necessarily must these be
distinguished: for it is possible to be vndoubtfully and fully persuaded even
of what is false: as Paul was vndoubtfully persuaded, that he Act. 26.9.
ought to do many things against the Name of Christ; his persuasion was
certain, in respect of the Assent, yet the thing utterly false. And even in
judgment of charity, there may be a firmness of persuasion, and assent,
though no truth in the Proposition assented unto. Infallible certainty implies
both these: first, firmness and fullness of assenting. Secondly, certain and
necessary truth of that which we are thus firmly persuaded of. Cortitudinem
Subiecti, Obiecti.

That of Charity, may imply some firmness of persuasion, imports not
certain and necessary truth of that whereof the persuasion is.

Whether this Distinction has any footing in the Scriptures, is the next
inquiry.

The first member is acknowledged by the Antagonist. Let us see whether the
other may not find footing there. They deny the Lord that 2. Pet. 2.1.
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation: after what judgment
speaks S. Peter? of infallibility, or of charity? I know, the man is as much
abhorrent from that Distinction of sufficiency and efficacy of Christ's death,
as from this, of infallibility and charity in point of judgment. I presume
also he holds, that none of Christ's redeemed are damned: yet of some damned,
says Peter, the Lord bought them, expressing that persuasion, the Church had
of them before their Apostasy. Where grounded? but on that rule of Charity,
1. Cor. 13.5, 7
to believe all good things of others, in whom we see no evidence of the
contrary. Compare Act. 8.13. Heb. 10.29. the same Peter expressing the
ordinary measure of certainty we have of other men's sincerity, uses a word,
importing, though not want of firmness of his persuasion, yet possibility of
falsehood in the thing. By SILVANVS a faithful Brother to you, (...), 1. Pet.
5.12.
as I suppose. And reasons he had enough so to suppose, The man having so largely
approved himself to the Church of God: only, because in the thing he might
err, a term is selected, implying possibility of his erring in the person,
yet sufficiently expressing such firmness of persuasion, as Charity
following outward evidences, might gather touching his fidelity. Like, see
Philip. 1.6, 7. Collat. we have seen the sense of the terms; and in part the
footing this Distinction has in the Word of God.

Of whether sort was Paul's judgment here professed? Of infallibility, says
the vpstart Prophet Traske; and thence is his collection: That one may know
another election, or that one that is the Child of God, may infallibly know
the regeneration of another: of whom, I desire first to know the quantity of
his Conclusion, whether is it universally or particularly to be understood? may
all know the election of all? or is it the privilege of a few? I purpose not
to quarrel about his making election and regeneration all one; I will take his
latter clause, as a limitation or explanation of the former; that his meaning
shall be; the Elect, not before regeneration, but after, may know, the election
of others, namely, after they are once effectually called: means he all the
Regenerate or some?

Certainly his reasons conclude as well for all, as some: as well for weak
Nouices, while they are weak, as for stronger men, that have received his
Spirit of discerning: even these, be they never so weak, are subjects of one
Kingdom: Citizens of one City: Children of one Father: Servants of one
Household: Members of one Body: or if there be any other similitude, more lively
expressing our near conjunction in the body of Christ; as well agree they to
Babes in Christ, as to stronger men: like say we of the Commandments, To put
difference, to love the brethren, etc. so that his giddie disciples need no
longer hang on him as their Oracle, to know their election; for any Nouice in
his School, may as fully reveal to them, that their names are written in the
book of Life.

Truth is, it is neither generally, nor particularly true; but universally
false; that any man, without extraordinary revelation, knows the election of
another.

Let us hear his Reason; first, is from the neerenesse that is betwixt us; we
are subjects of one Kingdom, Citizens of one City, Children of one Father:
therefore one may infallibly know the election of another.

Ergo.

conjunction is no sufficient cause of infallible knowledge of election or
regeneration; more then of the persons, thoughts, speeches, secret actions one
of another. Why may I not as well reason thus?

They that are Citizens of one City, branches of one Vine, members of one
Body, may know infallibly the persons, names, secret actions, speeches,
thoughts, each of others.

But, the Heb. 12.23.
Spirits of the just made perfect in heaven, all Gods people dispersed far
and wide over the face of the whole earth, are thus nearly linked together:
therefore they may know the persons, names, secret actions, speeches, one of
another.

And so it shall no longer be true that Isay has, Isai. 63.16.
ABRAHAM knows us not, and ISRAEL is ignorant of us; nor need Papists any
longer talk of a speculum Trinitatis, or relation of Angels, or toil
themselves to devise a mean of conueying our prayers, mental or vocal unto
the Saints departed; we have all in a short compendium, the nighnesse of the
bond; dead and living Saints are linked, as members in one body; therefore may
know each others wants, thoughts, actions; as well I dare say by this Argument,
as we, one the election and regeneration of another. Sir, let me know of you,
since the Argument it self affoords not by any virtue in it, your Conclusion;
How it is more auayleable to enforce knowledge of election, then knowledge of
men's persons, actions, etc. linked in this bond? or where you find Gods Spirit,
declaring the union and communion with the Father, and Son, and one with
another, infer as you do, that therefore we may thus infallibly know each
others election? The duties of love, compassion, 1. Cor. 12. and 14.
communicating gifts, etc. each to others benefit, I find in Scripture
sometimes inferred from this ground: the infallible knowledge of each others
election or regeneration, I find no where enforced out of our near conjunction.

The second reason taken from predictions of Prophets: It was prophesied that
the Elect regenerate should infallibly know each others election: therefore
they may infallibly know each others election. That Consequence is firm.

Ezech. 44. v. 23. They shall teach my people the difference between the holy
and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.

prediction of what shall be, but a prescription of what should be, as appears
to any man comparing the Verses foregoing and following; Verse. 21, 22.
as that they shall marry no widow, nor drink wine, etc. foretells nothing,
but prescribes Laws: whether to Priests of Jews, or Ministers of the new
Testament, or Pastors in the Church of the Jews, in the time of their
restoration, is questioned amongst Interpreters. Secondly, but the questions
are, first, whether this discerning be betwixt things clean and unclean, or
betwixt persons clean and unclean. Secondly, whether of cleanness Legal,
and External, or Leuiticall; or of cleanness Internal and Moral. Thirdly,
if of persons cleanness and uncleanness, whether of their Actions, or State.
These things so different and various, as they are, should, me thinks, not
thus confusedly be shuffled together: he is not ignorant, I think (though
ignorant enough) that there were of beasts Leuit. 11.
some clean, some unclean, as well in respect of sacrifice, as of private
use: for eating, wherein this Judas lying Rabbin is become so curious, that he
can revive the old ceremonial prohibition against eating Swines flesh, and yet
so cautelous for his own skin, that he, though an Hog-hater, yet is no lover
of Circumcision. But to proceed with our Distinction, there was of persons
likewise, an uncleanness Leuiticall, 13.14.
by leprosy, flux, touching of a dead corpse, and the like: if of this
cleanness and uncleanness of things, the Text be understood; what is the
discerning hereof to the infallible knowledge of election? if of persons, in
respect of Legal and Leuiticall cleanness or pollution; how touches this the
question? since these things might be discerned by sense; and the person
legally defiled, might yet be regenerate; the person legally clean, an
unregenerate Castaway.

But yield we it spoken of Ministers, and people of the new Testament, in
typical terms of the Law; there is yet nothing inferring power of infallible
discerning election or regeneration of others: we can teach the people what is
true, what is false; what is orthodoxe, what heretical; what pious, what
impious in doctrine: what is holy, what unholy; what good and evil in manners;
and so teach them that they may infallibly judge of these differences of
things, the Scripture having prescribed a form of wholesome doctrine.

But follows it thence that they may infallibly know each others regeneration?

In no case: yield it spoken of persons; there is a cleanness of the outward
life; there is a cleanness of the heart, as there is a 2. Cor. 7.1.
filthiness of the flesh, and spirit; Idolaters, Fornicators, unjust persons,
etc. that are such habitually, in their outward life, we teach to be
unclean: and to have Ephesians. 5.5. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10.
no part nor inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, while they are
such: yea particular acts of these foul sins, make them unclean, quoad nos,
till such time as they have testified repentance; yet God forbid, we should
think every particular act of unholiness, to evidence a nullitie of
sanctification. In like sort where we see the life outwardly reformed, care to
depart from every known evil, to do every good duty of piety, sobriety,
justice, charity; though there be some intercurrent infirmities, we teach Gods
people, to esteem them holy; but is this estimate so infallible, that they may
not err therein? or is the cleanness of the outward life, an undoubtful
evidence of the cleanness of the heart in Gods sight? and I wonder what other
evidence, but the actions, this man and his Sectaries have to judge of
regeneration by? which, if they may be so cunningly dissembled, as no eye of
man can exactly put difference twixt them, and the same in Israelites indeed;
that also laid for ground, that Solomon has, 2. Par. 6.30.
Thou only, O Lord, know the hearts of the children of men; how is the
discerning infallible, and such as wherein we cannot be deceived?

Malachi, Cap. 3.18. Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous
and the wicked; betwixt him that serves God, and him that serves him not.
Therefore the regenerate Elect may infallibly know the election and
regeneration each of other.

it was vain to serve the Lord, Verse. 14, 15. A day should come, when the Lord
should make it apparent to the eyes of very Castawayes and Atheists, that Psalm.
58.11.
doubtless there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that
judges the earth: then should they change their minds and say, how ever they
counted the life of Gods children madness, yet now they see by experience in
the day of the Lords retribution, Light is laid for the righteous, and joyful
gladness for the upright in heart. Most and best Interpreters understand the
place of the day of general Judgment: all consent, that the people discerning
twixt righteous and unrighteous, are those Atheists, mentioned Verse. 14. and
the thing they should discern, the happy estate of Gods children, and their
felicity, not directly their election and regeneration. Good Sir, if ye have
not by singularity quenched all fear of God in you, tremble thus to play with
the Scripture, and to pervert it to your own, and other men's destruction.

The third reason as he calls it, from the less to the greater, If we can know
common Graces, then much more true Graces. But common graces we may know. Ergo.

Mallem CERBERVM metueret, quam haec tam inconsiderate diceret: I had rather
this man were afraid of a roasted Pigge, then that he should prate thus
idly. It seems he has heard of some such logical Argument; but trow you,
if he were examined, he knew how it proceeds? is your comparison of things, or
probability? a Barbarian, I dare say, I am unto him. Hear a reason cast in
the same mould: If a weak Nouice may know the principles of the beginnings of
Christ, then may he know the deeper Mysteries of Faith. If he be fit for Milk,
much more for strong meat. Negatiuely your Argument would follow well: If you
understand not points of Catechism, much less profounder points of Faith.

Compare you the probability, and verisimilitude of the two; then know; it is
not less, but more likely, you should discern common Graces, of knowledge,
utterance, tongues, etc. then those special, that accompany salvation: there
being more means in your Disciples to manifest, in you to discern those, then
these. Their knowledge, by their tongue or pen you may judge of; the sincere
motions of their hearts, in Faith, Love, Obedience, except the searcher of
hearts be pleased to unlock unto you the closet of their deceitful hearts,
you cannot possibly discern. Fourth Argument: we are commanded to put
difference: therefore we may infalliby know the Regeneration and Election of
another: for it is written, Of some have compassion making a difference, Jude
22.

and the like holy means of restoring them that are fallen; If by infirmity
any had been overtaken, such they should restore in the spirit of Meekness
and Mercy. Those that more wilfully had withdrawn themselves, and bewrayed
more obstinacy, should taste more rigor. Is not the conclusion soundly
inferred? therefore the regenerate may infallibly know the regenerate. The
difference Saint Jude speaks of, is in the quality and degree of offenses; not
of election or reprobation of the persons.

Paul professes of Timothy, Epaphras, Hebrews; therefore may we.

Heb. 11.33, 34
stopped mouths of Lions, quenched violence of fire, foretold things to come;
and why not this man and his Disciples? But to the point; when you will reason
from place of equals, you must make your terms equal. What Paul knew, not
every one can know; except he have Paul's gifts, means, in Paul's measure. For
Timothy, there went Prophesies 1. Tim. 1.18.
before of him; PAVL had his revelation. For Hebrews, he professes no
infallible knowledge, but a charitable Heb. 6.9.
persuasion: and the like is to be thought of Ephaphras and Onesimus. And dare
you challenge like measure of discerning with Apostles?

Argument. 6.
Those whom we must love fervently, we may know certainly; you mean to be
elected and regenerate. But The Regenerate we must 1. Pet. 1.22.
love fervently; therefore we may know them to be such infallibly.

David, I trow, loved him well, that he made his familiar, Psalm. 55.13, 14
to whom he imparted his Counsels; neither will I doubt, but the link of his
affection was Grace appearing; knowing not his prescript only; but his Psalm.
26.4, 5, and 101.4.
professed practice. Yet had no infallible knowledge, I think, of his Election
and Regeneration, against whom he vtters such Psalm. 55.15.
dire imprecations. Persuasion of sanctity sufficiently, procures feruencie of
affection, though there be no infallibility of knowledge.



Simon Magus the Patriarch of Heretics? I should think Philip well persuaded
of his faithfulness, to whom he Acts 8.13.
ministers Baptism the seal of the Covenant; the pledge of remission of
sins: whom he permits to continue and company with him. What of Nicholas
Acts 6.5, 6.
the Proselyte of Antioch, chosen by common consent of the Church, to an office
requiring most fidelity: Yet Author of that Apoc. 2.15.
Sect of Nicolaitans, which the Lord professes to hate? What of Demas, Philem.
24.
reckoned up by Paul, amongst the wel-wishers to the Church of God, and his
fellow-laborers forsooth, we must prove that Paul was well persuaded of him? Go
to; he numbers him amongst those of whom he was well persuaded, Marcus,
Aristarchus; Lucas that only abode with him in his trouble, commends him to the
Churches respect, by the same Epithete he gives to the rest. And we may not
think he would labor to procure him reverence and respect with Gods Church;
of whom himself was not well persuaded. And of Master Traskes conclusion and
reasons, thus far. The (...) of his Sermon notes is extant with me, imparted
by an honest Gentleman, to whom after the preachment he was pleased to commend
this Jewel of his fancy.

It will be wondered perhaps, I should bestow this pains upon a man so
illiterate, and in a point so ridiculously absurd. This is mine Apology. Even
his speech, they say, frets like a Gangreene, and increases to more
ungodliness, in that giddy multitude, whose style it will ever be; to be
constant in leuitate sua. Such Whirligigge Weather-cocke brains there are
amongst them, so childish in understanding, that they are wherryed about with
every blast of vain doctrine. Besides, I hear, that even of such parties
amongst us, Papists have taken notice so far, as by them to make our Church
odious through multiplicitie of Sects: the trash of Traskites is cast as dung
into the face of our Church; that never yet took notice of their Fanaticall
Judicial Author, except This insolent Sectary has lately (since the writing
this Treatise) received, for his outrageous behavior, public stigmaticall
punishment.
condignely to punish him. Lastly, who knows whether God may be pleased to
give him repentance and sight of his error by this means, before he be too
far entangled in the snare of the Devil?

Our conclusion is this: No man, except by extraordinary revelation, can
infallibly know the Election or Regeneration of another. Our Reasons these:

First, The mean we must follow in judging of other men's election is not
infallible. Therefore our knowledge cannot be infallible. The medium whence
we gather, whatsoever good opinion or persuasion of others, is, their actions
materially good, their conversation outwardly holy, their hearts, I trow, we
shall leave to him, that styles himself the Lord that Apoc. 2.23.
searches the hearts and tries the reins. If then the Acts of sanctity be
all we judge by, how may we call our judgment infallible; there being no act
that can possibly run into our sense, but may proceed from a man of the
hollowest heart?

Secondly, Infallible knowledge of Regeneration presupposes as infallible
knowledge of the Motives, Grounds, Intentions of the actions of obedience, in
the performers: These being the principal differences distinguishing
Regenerate men's actions, from their counterfeits in Hypocrites and Ciuilians.
Suppose thus; To acts of Righteousness can be concluded to issue out of a
sanctified heart, that flow not from 2. Cor. 5.14.
the love of GOD; conscience of the Commandment; desire and intention to Mat.
5.16.
glorify God; tell me, if you can, whither your Hercules, or any other of your
Sect, praying with their Centaures voice, and tumbling out in Prayer what ever
comes into their Budgets, do it to glorify GOD, or to whine Praise from men?

-- Et eris mihi magnus APOLLO. Thirdly, To know our own Election and
Regeneration is difficult: therefore to know other men's impossible; 2. Pet.
1.10.
Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; It is a task of much
toil and pains; such diligence else had not been enjoined by the Apostle, 2.
Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves whether you be in the faith; examine your own selves; he
doubles the exhortation to intimate, that its not a single search will serve to
procure assurance: and weigh but these Reasons: First, our willingness to be
deceived, and flatter our selves, in nothing more, then in our spiritual
estate. Secondly, the small measure of Grace comparatively to the mass of
corruption dwelling in our members. Thirdly, that counterfets of saving Grace
approaching so near the nature of it. As to discern a grain of Mustard seed
in a heap of chafe, or in a mass of other seeds near of kin unto it, so
difficult is it to discern grace in our own hearts. Fourthly, the whole body
of sin must be mortified, every member of the old man mortified in a measure.
2. Pet. 1.5, 8, 9
All graces accompanying salvation in their number, though not in their degree,
complete, must be had, and discerned to be had of him that will be sure of his
Election and Calling. Fifthly, to which if we add consideration of our partial
declinations, frequent interruptions of the exercise of Gifts received, the
ebbing and flowing of Grace in our hearts, together with the experience of all
Gods Children, that are truly such: we shall see it is no idle man's
employment, to procure and maintain assurance of his own Election. And shall
we think it so easy to discern another man's? The task is easy, if Master
Traske say true; permit we our selves to the inspection of him or his
disciples, we shall presently attain that assurance, that with so many sighs
and groans, and strong cries and tears, we scarce at last procure in any
measure of infallibiltie or undoubtful certainty.

Fourthly, Consider the manner of ascending to assurance of Election and
Salvation, wherein I may justly suspect, these men are yet vncatechized, the
conclusion will easily appear. It is by discourse; the ground whereof GODS
Spirit lays down in Scripture in general Propositions. The assumption is
made by our own spirits assisted and sanctified by the Spirit of God: Suppose
thus: Romans 8.14, 17.
They that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. I am led by the Spirit of God: I therefore a Child of God
and Heir of Salvation, in like sort. Christ is Heb. 5.9.
Author of Salvation to all that obey him: I obey him, therefore to me is
Christ Author of Salvation.

The proposition we are assured of certitudine fidei, the assumption, only
certitudine experientiae, out of that taste we have had of Gods goodness, and
experience of his Spirits power in sanctfying us. Can I feel, and
experimentally know the impressions of Gods Spirit on another man's heart? taste
I the sweetness another feels in Gods infusion of his love into his heart, by
the Holy Ghost given unto him? Is my Conscience witness of GODS ways to
another man's soul, or of the actions of another man's heart? If not, where is
mine infallible knowledge of another man's Election and Regeneration? That Hose
2.17.
Manna is absconditum: that is, says an Ancient, the sweetness felt of
Christ's dwelling in the soul, is not seen of any, but felt of the Eater; the
name on the white stone none knows but he that receives it: the benefit of
adoption is not known but by experience.

Fifthly, I would now tell him out of Jeremy, how Ier. 17.9.
deceitful the heart of man is above all things; who can know it? but that he
has forestalled me; professing that in this judgment he has not to do with
the heart, but with the Spirit that sanctifies the heart. But, Good Sir, will
you discern so infallibly the Spirit sanctifying the heart, and not see the
heart he sanctifies? fidem tuam. No, that is not the meaning; But this
knowledge he receives not from men's hearts; but from the Spirit that
searches the hearts and tryes the reins. From the Spirit? I demand speaking
to him in the Word, or by secret inspiration? Non redoles, sed oles. I assure
you, you smell strongly of the Euthusiasme of Anabaptists and Familists, the
fathers of your Faction. And of the question thus far: It remains now to be
enquired whether Paul speaks after Judgment of infallibility; and not rather
of that of charity.

Of that of Charity only, was and is my resolution: The Reasons these: The
certainty and firmness of persuasion expressed in the term of knowledge, he
extends to all in this Church of Thessalonica: for for them all he gives
thanks, Verse 2. And was his persuasion so infallible of all in this Church? A
strange Church, visible was in this City, and such, I dare say, as the earth
never yet affoorded, since men were multiplied on it; wherein was no Mat. 3.12.
and 13, 26.
Chafe mingled with the Wheat; no Aug cont. Epist. Parmen. lib. 13. cap 3.
Tares amongst the good Corn. Nunquid in agro dici potest, quid paleis ad
Triticum, quando eadem radice portantur? Nunquid in area, vbi pariter
triturantur? Sed vtique in horreo, quid paleis ad Triticum, said Saint
Augustine sweetly? The privilege of Heaven it is, as of Gods Granarie to
receive Wheat only without Chafe; In the Field they grow together; in the
floor, they are threshed together; the separation is not made till they come
to the Granarie. In the Arc was a Cham, in Abraham's Family an Ishmael; in
CHRIST'S School amongst the twelve, Ioh. 6.70.
a Devil incarnate. Let him believe that lists, in Thessalonica there were
none in the Church, but who were of it; and that Paul's certainty of every of
their election, was infallible, not subject to error.

If this reason persuade not, that other will enforce. Cap. 3.5. Lest the
Tempter had tempted you, and our labor should be in vain. It should seem
then, he was something fearful of their Apostasy, and jealous lest that
might befall them, that he mentions to the Corinthians, that they 1. Cor. 15.2.
had believed in vain.

Can we think he would fear the utter Apostasy of any whom infallibly he
knew to be elected? was he to learn, trow we, that Matt. 24.24.
the Elect cannot possibly be so deceived; when as he teaches so peremptorily,
that 2. Tim. 2.19.
foundation stands sure; and the Romans 11.29.
gifts and calling of God are without repentance and reuocation?

It remaynes then, that his knowledge here professed, was probable only, not
infallible.

If to any the term seem strange, that a persuasion possibly erroneous should
be styled knowledge; let him know, that it is an hyperbole not strange in
common language, or use of Scripture, to express settled and firm
persuasions, though subject to error, in the name of knowledge, Act. 3.17. I
know that through ignorance you killed the Prince of life. I know, that is, I
am firmly persuaded. 2. Cor. 9.2. I know the readiness of your mind. I am
persuaded of it. Compare also Phil. 1.25. Philemon. 21. I know thou will do
more then I say. Like here. By this time, I hope, it appears this dream has
no footing in this Text, nor in Truth, in any Word of God. I would now entreat
the man and his disciples, per si quid charum aut sanctum; Philip. 2.1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, not to make a rent in the
body of Christ, but to endeavor Ephesians. 4.3.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: who are you, or what
your gifts so extraordinary, that we should imagine, God reueales to you what
he conceales from all others? and lays open to your view the book of Life,
wherein are recorded the names of all that he has chosen to salvation? And
what is the profit of this strange doctrine? what the possible issues of it?
except to breed security, presumption, proud 1. Cor. 4.5.
judging of secrets before the time. Shall I say what I think, and not without
ground? The man would seem somebody in the Church of God; and having no gifts
nothing extraordinary, by odnesse labors to make himself famous. That
withal let be added, there is no small eye to profitable advantage; who would
not, as Act. 8.18, 19
Magus, with large money redeem this power, to be able to discern who are
elected: who thinks gold dear to purchase assurance of his election and
calling? They must therefore that will be his disciples, take up this cross;
to keep back none of their temporalties from their Paraclete, as he said
merrily, upon pain to forfeit their election. What marvel then if some
besotted silly women, and servants, have purloyned from their husbands, and
robbed their masters, to maintain this Saint-seeing-Saint-making Saint?

To the seduced, I say as Paul in another case; Let Romans 14.5.
every one be assured in his own mind. Gal. 6.4.
Every one prove his own work, his own heart, so shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another.

We now proceed to enquire what profit this Text, without strayning, affoords
us?

Paul's example; In charity to number them amongst Gods chosen, in whom we
see, as much as man may see, the fruits and signs of election. S. John writing
to a religious Lady, styles her 2. Ioh. 1.4.
Elect, because he had seen her and her children walking in the Truth. We are
Heb. 6.9, 10.
persuaded of you, says Paul to the Hebrews, such things as accompany
salvation; such has been your work and labor of love: yea in the midst of
infirmities, we shall see love strayning to maintain good opinion of election
and sanctity. Paul, though he reprove the dullness of hearing in the
Hebrews, and blames justly their Heb. 5.12.
slow proceedings in knowledge, setting also before their eyes that Heb. 6 6.
terror of the Lords judgment upon Apostataes, to stir up to profitiencie,
yet still holds charitable opinion of them, as of people in state of salvation.
So ready to 1. Cor. 13.7.
believe all good things of others, is Christian charity, where it has the
least probability to induce it.

Babes in Christ, may be the Nature of the new man, though not so confirmed as
in stronger men. Secondly, and should imitate him that Matt. 12.20.
quenches not the smoking flax; yea winkes at infirmities, and
notwithstanding them, gives his children testimony of sincerity. Thirdly,
cast back their eyes to their own estate, at first entrance into Christian
practice; perhaps they might bethink them of some sins strengthened in them
by long custom, or natural inclination, that have hung on fast, and pressed
down sore. It is well, me thinks, and much to be rejoiced in, that we see
them humbly submitting to reproves; acknowledging, accusing, bewayling,
striving against such sins; such beginnings are in beginners comfortable,
enough to sway charity to a good opinion of them.

There may appear in such men sins that may justly cause an (...) or
suspense of judgment, if they be such as we call vastantia conscientiam; but
what ever may be presumed to be but infirmity, 1. Pet. 4.8.
charity will cover rather, then rashly censure of insinceritie.

These few directions take notice of to order charity in her judgment: First,
measure no man by particular facts, seem they never so foul, lest thou
condemn the Matt. 26.74.
generation of the just: Particular falls argue weakness, not a nullitie of
sanctification.

Secondly, what ever may be imputed to infirmity, presume may stand with
Grace: there is no destroying repugnancie twixt it and true sanctity, so as
they may not stay in the same subject.

Thirdly, there is culpa lata and culpa leuis: there are Matt. 7.3. and
moates and beams, 23, 24.
Gnats and Camels, if you commit sins in comparison: there are leuiora
delicta: which Charity allows to be reproved as sins, yet not to be
censured as opposites to Grace.

Fourthly, be favorable in sins, first, strengthened by ancient custom.
Secondly, natural inclination. Thirdly, furthered to committing, by multitude
of temptations and entisements. No sins should be more cautionately watched
against, more rigorously dealt withal by delinquents: nor gentlier handled in
the censure of charity.

Fifthly, measure no man by his state and behavior in passion: passions are
violent, and have made See 1. Sam. 25
the holiest in their behavior little less then bestiall. Thus far of Paul's
judgment, and charitable persuasion of this peoples gracious estate. There
follow the evidences, swaying him to this persuasion.

VERSE. 5. For our Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but also in Power,
and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men
we were amongst you for your sakes.


THree of Paul's evidences swaying charity to judge them Elect, are here set
down: First, the power of his Ministry. Secondly, the gift of the Holy Ghost
connexed with it. Thirdly, the fruit of the Spirit; full assurance of the Truth
of the Gospel: witnesses whereof, he makes their own hearts, whereto he
appeals for record.

The prudence of PAVLS charity is here worth our notice; believing nothing,
but by evidence. Instructing our charity to like wisdom in judgment; to be
guided by reasonable evidences: inioyning us to believe no more of others then
probable evidence may induce us: compare Heb. 6. verse. 9. 2. Ioh. 1. verse. 4.
Philip. 1. verse. 6, 7.

It is said indeed of charity, 1. Cor. 13.7.
It believes all things; is easy of belief, and ready to be persuaded any
good thing of another; yet is it not foolishly credulous, without reason, and
against evidence, to think the profane holy.

When Peter saw in Simon Magus the signs of hypocrisy, all his charity would
not afford him commendation of sincerity. I perceive, says he, for all this
flourish thou have made of Faith, Act. 8.23.
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And Paul
himself, that by precept and practice so much commends charity, and in
charity credulity, yet sticks not to say of Hymenaeus and Alexander, they 1.
Tim. 1.19, 20.
had made shipwreck of Faith; for he had no reason to believe Faith could be
there, where was no conscience nor care of holiness.

It is a strange kind of charity I have heard of in Wheat, but Matt. 3.12.
chafe in the floor, whose portion is unquenchable fire. It is not to be
doubted, but the Children of the Church have, some of them, Matt. 11.23, 24.
greater damnation, then many Aliens that know not God.

Secondly, not much unlike is their error and imprudence,

A religious zealous Gentleman, for a frequent hearer of Sermons, though in the
mean time the tongue be taynted with common swearing, the body with foulest
uncleanness, the hands with violence and oppression: I say not much of other
things, but thus I think I may judge: A common outrageous swearer has no
soundness in him of the fear of God. Iam. 5.12.
Swear not at all, said the Apostle, lest ye fall into hypocrisy: as if the
custom of swearing did cast out all sincerity; and the overmuch familiarity
with the Name of GOD in that kind, empty the heart of all fear of his
dreadful Name, and made us mere Formalists in Religion.

Thirdly, this also affoords us just Apology, and answer Abraham, believe
above hope: and judge quite contrary to our evidence. We must believe the heart
is chaste, when the mouth fomes out nothing but filthiness, and speech not to
be named; we must think they have faith of the firmest, that have no
knowledge, nay, despise instruction, that they are sorry for their sins, if
they say so, though we see in them practice such as Solomon speaks of, making
sports of sins, and triumphing that they can do mischief. But has not our
Savior taught us to judge of the fountain by the streams? of the affections
by speeches and actions? Mat. 12.33, 34, 35.
Can a good tree bring forth bad fruit? affords a purified heart, nothing but
filthy and unclean actions? Let good be good; evil, evil: And thus think,
though Charity be not causlesly suspicious, yet neither is it foolishly blind.

The evidences themselves now follow. First, is the power of Paul's Ministry;
Our Gospel was not in word only, but in power. Their Gospel they call
metonymically their preaching of the Gospel, as Romans 2.16. It is said to be
in word only; when the sound thereof rings in the ear, or at most reaches to
the understanding; working therein some literal notices and apprehension of
the things taught: In power, when it pierces into the heart, and preuailes
with the affections, so far, as to work a change of the whole man; and to 2.
Cor. 3.18.
transform him into the Image of God.

This virtue and power of the Gospel goes with PAVL as a mark of Election, is
so questionless, where it preuayles to Conversion. In the power and preuayling
of GODS Word may seven degrees be distinguished. First, Conuincing. Secondly,
Terrifying. Thirdly, Thoroughly humbling. Fourthly, Delighting. Fifthly,
Restrayning. Sixthly, Partially reforming. Seventhly, Thoroughly renewing.

First, It is powerful to convince when it so far preuailes with the
Judgment and Understanding, that the Hearers cannot but confess, it is true
that is taught; and dare not open their mouths to contradict it. Thus far
prevailed Stephen with Libertines and Cyrenians, by clear evidence of Truth;
that they were not able to Acts 6.10.
resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke. And APOLLOS mightily Acts
18.28.
convinced the Jews, showing by Scriptures that Jesus was that Christ.

Secondly, To terrify: when passing from the understanding to the Conscience,
it strikes it with horror and fear of wrath due for sin. So vertuall was
the speech of Paul a Prisoner, in the heart of his Judge, that he Acts 24.25.
trembles to hear him treat of Temperance, Justice, and the Judgment to come.

Thirdly, Thoroughly to humble; when all 2. Cor. 10.5.
high thoughts of selfe-righteousnesse are cast down: and the guiltiness of
sin feelingly acknowledged; men yielding themselves culpable of eternal
condemnation; the issues whereof are Acts 2.37.
perplexities, and remediless fears in some utter and final desperation, as
we have instance in Genesis 4.13.
Cain.

Fourthly, To delight; when the heart is affected with some kind of sweet
taste and relish in the good Word of God, and is taken with some kind of
rejoicing and delight therein as we read of those Mat. 13.20.
temporary believers; to whom may be added those the Apostle says, Heb. 6.5.
taste the good Word of God. Hence follows desire somewhat eager to be farther
acquainted therewith, till such time as persecution arises for the Gospel.

Fifthly, To restrain, when it becomes a bridle to withhold and curb the
headstrong inclination to evil; so that corruption breaks not forth into
ancient outrage; whether through fear of wrath conscience is stricken withal;
or Heb. 6.5.
hope to partake the glorious recompense of Gods Children: or shame, in the
Church of God to be noted of impiety.

Sixthly, To reform in part; when in some particulars it preuayles to work
obedience in positive duties; as Mar. 6.20.
HEROD in many things heard JOHN Baptist.

Seventhly, In none of these degrees find we the pledge of Election; even
Cast-awayes have thus far felt the power of the Word. But when a man can say,
his conscience bearing him witness through the Holy Ghost, the disposition of
his heart is thoroughly altered and changed, from Profaneness to Holiness; and
that he has so seen the face of God, that 2. Cor. 3.18.
he is transformed into the same Image from glory to glory; that man has, if
Paul could judge, a pledge infallible of his election to life. Bernard. in
Cantic. Sermon. 57. Ad locum.
Sinon solum compungeris in sermon illo, sed and conuerteris totus ad Dominum,
iurans and statuens custodire iudicia iustitiae eius; etiam adesse ipsum iam
noueris, praesertim si te inardescere sentias amore eius.

It shall behooue us, as many as desire to make our Calling and Election sure
to our selves, to inquire whether in this degree we have felt the Word of God
powerful in our souls. It is something, when we can say, we have felt the
terrors of the Lord in the Conscience; something, that we have been humbled
and pressed with the burden of our sins; something, that we feel
corruption restrained, our lives though but in part reformed; If there Grace
make a period, thus far yet it aduantageth men, vt mitius ardeant: But of thy
Salvation, and Election to life, thou have no full evidence, till thou have
felt Gods Word powerful to change and renew thee, after the Image of him that
created thee.

And that is the thing intimated in the next particular. And in the Holy Ghost.
There be that conceit the Apostle to understand the extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Ghost, in Primitive Church given by laying on of the Apostles hands, as
those of tongues prophecy, etc. Chrysostom and Theodoret better expound it,
that gift of God, that work of his Spirit, whereby they were borne anew and
sanctified: For as touching those other gifts, though excellent and
extraordinary, yet were they no evidences of Election, since many Mat. 7.22.23.
Luke 10.20.
Cast-awayes have been partakers thereof: And as many of Gods Chosen have
been without them. The Holy Ghost therefore understand, renewing and
sanctifying them.

an undoubtful evidence of Election, from whence a man may conclude infallibly
his own choice to life, and charitably entertain like persuasion of others:
in whom he sees probable evidences thereof. When God is pleased so far to
magnify the power of his Word in our hearts, as John 17.17.
thereby to sanctify us: implies not our Savior so much, when praying for it
to his Father, he limits it to them only, that according to Election of Grace
he had given him out of the World? and excludes the World? And what else
means Paul, when he makes Regeneration as it were an actual putting us in
possession of Salvation? He has Tit. 3.5.
saved us by the washing of the new birth, 2. Tim. 1.9.
saved us and called us with a holy Calling; by this Calling whereby we are
made holy, given us possession of Salvation in the beginnings thereof.



Me thinks then it must be, they are truly and really united unto Christ;
for how else partake they his Spirit to sanctify them? Are they sanctified
that have not his Spirit? or have they his Spirit that are not members of him?
or else is it true that Sanctification is a privilege peculiar to the Elect?
Thus think; other Graces as illumination, etc. they may partake that are not
knit unto Christ, Heb. 6.
a disposition to Sanctification may be vouchsafed unto them: they may have it
in fieri, not in facto esse. The truth or rooted soundnes thereof, how can they
partake? since they partake not the Psalm. 133.2.
Ointment of our AARON, that are scarce his excrements; nor so near him as the
skirts of his clothing. And if any passages of Scriptures seem to sound
another way, and to term them Heb. 10.29. Heb. 6.4, 5.
sanctified; they mean, First, sacramentally. Secondly, or putatiuely.
Thirdly, or at most by way of disposition.

Cognatae sanctitati. First, is Civility, or as we commonly term it, civil
honesty: The second, Grace restrayning. It may be they differ only as the
cause and the effect; Civility, as some think, being the fruit of restrayning
Grace: let us yet distinctly inquire of them, and their difference from true
Sanctity.

Betwixt Civility and Sanctification observe these differences.

First, Civility is often wrought by mere moral education according to
natural principles, without any knowledge or so much as desire to be
acquainted with the Word of God. So see we many, following that rule of the
Law of Nature; What thou would not have done to thee, do not thou to others,
careful of common honesty in matters of contract and traffic with men,
living in obedience to Civil Laws, restrained from Drunkenness, Whoredom,
and the like Enormities; though utterly unacquainted with the Word of God.

Sanctification, though it incline to careful observance of the same duties,
yet not by Aristotle's Moral Precepts, but by John 17.17.
the Word of God. And this we may boldly say, A civil Christian observing
these duties without knowledge of their Iniunction in the Word of God; is as
far from Sanctification as were Heathen Moralists; since they also out of some
grounds performed like duties.

Secondly, If usually it is obseruable: Civility stays, if not only, yet
principally in duties of the second Table: where the light of Nature is
cleerest. For matters of Piety, if any be observed, it is but ceremoniously,
and so far as they tend to preserve credit and esteem of moderate men, in
those societies whereof they are members.

True Sanctity as conscionably observes duties of Tit. 2.12.
Piety, as of Justice, and Charity, and is as careful to give Mat. 22.21.
unto God the things that are Gods, as unto CaeSAR, and Neighbor what belongs
unto them.

Thirdly, Civility stays for most part in Negatiues, in abstinence from
evil, thinks it Charity enough, not to impair the wealth of the Neighbor;
though his estate be not supported by any work of Liberality and Mercy.

In Religion, sufficient it seems to profess dislike of Popery, though they
be utterly ignorant in Rudiments of Orthodoxe Faith, and grounds of pure
worship of God.

True holiness teaches not only to eschew evil, but 1. Pet. 3.11.
to do good. And though it know Abstinence from evil a necessary branch of
Christianity, yet has learned withal, that the life of true Virtue stands in
action.

Fourthly, Civility reaches not beyond the outward man, the Pharisees
principle is known, Mat. 5.
Adultery in the fact is only forbidden: that in the thought and affection
free.

Sanctification goes over the whole of the whole man, the 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body is thorowout sanctified. And these are some
differences twixt Sanctity and Civility.

See if from the other Cousin, restrayning Grace we may be able to discern it.

First, Restrayning Grace, if it be only restrayning, has in it
painfulness; inward coffeehouse at the bridle, God puts into their
mouths. GODS Word is Bands; his Law Psalm. 2.3.
as Cords; as stomakefull Horses are kept in with the bridle, yet some at the
Bit, that restraines them: So

The heart truly sanctified, is desirous to be restrained; yea, if it were
possible, to have inclinations to evil utterly abolished. This they count
their misery, not that flesh is bridled, but that it has so much liberty Romans
7.23.
to rebel against the Law of the mind.

Secondly, Men restrained only, not sanctified, desire to extend their liberty
as far as possibly may be, with any color or show of lawfulness, the thing
once yielded lawful, they seem niceties not to be stood upon, to enquire
after expediencie, or with what limits and bounds they are lawful in action.
Those Scriptures and Preachers please best, that seem most to promise and
permit Liberty.

A man truly sanctified, chooses rather 1. Cor. 6.12.
to subsist within his bounds, then in any degree to exceed limits of lawful
Liberty: And is of his mind that said, It is better to live where nothing,
then where all things are lawful.

Thirdly, No small difference arises out of the Grounds of their abstayning
from evil, which in the restrained, are fear or sense of Gods wrath; of
Magistrates Sword, Infamy and the like. Sometimes, some one Master-lust which
they desire to feed; are loath to cross, for whose sake they curb their other
inordinate affections, that they break not out into outrage, as Augustine
says, the ancient Romans were restrained from Intemperance, Injustice,
Covetousness, by that infinite Lust they had after glory and large Dominions;
Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 12.
Caeteras cupiditates huius vnius ingenti cupiditate presserunt.

The sanctified man eschewes evil, because it is evil, and displeasing unto
God, whose love he has had so plentiful experience of: he fears the Lord
and his Hos. 3.5.
goodness: trembles at his offense because Psalm. 130.4.
of his mercy: The love of Christ, as it after a sort constraynes to duty, so
restraynes from evil.

Fourthly, the restrained, when means of restraint are once removed, grow
licentious, none more, as longing to quench their long thirst after evil: when
Iud. 17.6.18, and 19.
there was no King in Israel, and the people left to do, every man what seemed
good in his own eyes, then fall these bridled hypocrites, to unbridled lusts,
Sodomie, Idolatry, what not?

The sanctified are a law unto themselves, as some expound the place. The Law
is not given 1. Tim. 1.9.
to the righteous; he needs it not as a bridle by the terrors of it, though as
a Directer by the Doctrine. These are some helps to discern truth of
sanctification, from the counterfaits of it in Ciuilians, and men restrained.

There is annexed hereto a second effect of their Ministry and power thereof;
their full assurance, their much full assurance: Whereof? of the divine Truth
of the Gospel taught them, by Paul and his Associates. They make it of two
sorts, first, general: secondly, particular, of whether the Text must be
understood, is a question. I think of both.

Where the question is, whether this undoubtful and full assurance of the
Truth of the Gospel be peculiar to Gods chosen: Thus I think we may resolve,
by distinguishing the degrees of the minds assent in this kind, thus they are;
the first is called commonly Suspicion, more fitly conjecture: a lighter
inclination and propension of the mind to the Gospel, as possibly or probably
true: the second, Opinion, ^herein the mind is strongly swayed to think it
true, but not without some fear of the contrary. Thirdly, the third they call
Faith; a firm and undoubtful persuasion of the Truth of the Gospel: which
also has its latitude: not only in the point of adherence, but in this of
assent. Here we read of (...), much fullness of assurance; in other places of
an (...), little faith. Thus I think: Though the minds of Castawayes and
unsanctified men, may be possessed with settled opinion of the Gospels Truth,
and so convinced thereof that they are not able reasonably to contradict it;
yet that Col. 2.2.
riches of assurance of the understanding to the acknowledgement of the
mystery of Christ, is peculiar to Gods chosen. I may err, but these reasons
sway me: first, It is wrought by Phil. 1.9.
experience and sense of the truth thereof. Secondly, imparted by the Spirit of
God: 1. Ioh. 5.6.
It is the Spirit which testifies, that the Spirit is Truth. Thirdly, the
fruit of it, me thinks, euidenceth it, to wit, firm adherence and cleaving to
the goodness apprehended in that Truth, such as that no violence of
persecutions is able to remove.

As touching that other, which they call particular, it is so peculiar to Gods
chosen, that no Reprobate partakes in it: to riches and much fullness of
assurance, few even of Gods children ascend.

To further us to that general full assurance, these are helps affoorded to
Gods children: first, the solid Romans 15.13.
comfort and consolation this Gospel affoords the conscience, pressed with
sense of Gods wrath due for sin. Secondly, that rauishing of the affections
to love of this Truth, so strange and supernatural, that whereas there is
scarce any antipathie in nature greater, then that betwixt Romans 8.7.
man's heart in nature, and the Word of God; now a man is so affected with it,
that the dearest blood is parted withal, rather then the least jot of the
Truth of the Gospel. Thirdly, that change so admirable it works in the whole
man, from sin to righteousness. These few Precepts of God, says Lactantius,
Lactant de falsa Sapient. lib. 3. cap. 27.
so change the whole man, and make him new, that you can hardly know him to be
the same. A thing which Philosophy has much labored in, but could never
atchieue. The utmost their moral wisdom reaches unto, is this, it hides
sins rather then remoues them; Sapientia eorum vt plurimum efficiat, non
exscindit vitia sed abscondit. These effects of the Word of God, are more
auayleable to work this fullness of assurance, then any testimony of the
Church, howeuer magnified by Papists; and to say truth, a great argument: but
can an humane testimony, being, first, variable: secondly, possibly erroneous,
give full satisfaction to the mind that doubts? Iudicent docti. And of these
evidences of election thus far, out of Paul's appeal to his hearers hearts,
for record of this Truth, occurres nothing, that I dare doctrinally deliver to
the Church of God.

VERSE. 6. And ye became followers of us and of the Lord, having received the
Word in much affliction with joy of the holy Ghost.


ANother probable evidence which Paul followed in his charitable judgment, is
here expressed; and sets forth their holy practice: The other before mentioned,
were gifts of God seated in the heart; the manifestation of them is here
explaned. The particulars are three. First, their action, they were followers.
Secondly, the patterns they imitated, us and the Lord. Thirdly, the thing
wherein they imitated, or as the words may be also conceived, the Antecedent,
or cause moving them to imitation, receiving the Word; which also is amplified
and set forth to their commendation, by mention, first, of the cause naturally
hindering, or opposite to receiving the Word, in much affliction. Secondly, by
the manner of it, with joy of the holy Ghost.

It is something sauouring of Grace, and no less then supernatural, to turn
the apish inclination of our nature to imitation, to the conversation of the
Saints; and to make choice of them for our patterns. The complaint is ancient
in Seneca, Seneca de vita beata, cap. 1.
that commonly men live not ad rationem, but ad similitudinem: And as beasts,
follow the drove of foregoers, non qua cundem est, sed qua itur: plausibly we
think best, what is received by common consent, and whereof we have most
examples; that error the Heathen noted, though the cause thereof he knew not,
nor observed all: Through the vicious disposition of our hearts it is come to
pass, that the worst examples have our greatest allowance, and good things
therefore seem evil, because practiced by good men. It argues some change of
our hearts natural temper, to choose out best men to be our precedents:
Besides, consider we, first, the natural Genesis 3.15.
enmity between the two seeds. Secondly, how 1. Cor. 4.13.
despicable the persons of Gods children are in the eyes of the world. Thirdly,
the common esteem of their holy courses amongst men in the flesh, censuring
them Sap. 5.4.
as madness. It must needs be acknowledged something more then nature
affoords, so far to honor the Saints, as to choose them for patterns, and
so to prefer in judgment their conversation, as to addict our selves to walk
in their steps.

To which if we add consideration of the lot of Gods Saints, and the hard
terms they undergo that undertake their courses, in contempt and other
heavier 2. Tim. 3.12.
afflictions: It is apparently supernatural to vow our selves their followers.
What carnal man befooles not Moses his choice, Heb. 11.25.
preferring the afflicted estate of Gods children, before all the preferments
PHARAOES Court could afford him? and who rightly judging, confesses not,
Grace wrought this wonder?

He shall ever go with me in repute of a Saint, that limits his life to the
practice of such precedents.

And were followers of us, etc. In their fact considered apart, is obseruable
our duty: Thus to honor the Saints living and dead, eminent in gracious
practice, by following their holy example. Therefore said JAMES, Iam. 5.10.
Take the Prophets for example of patience. PAVL claymes to himself this honor
Phil. 3.17.
of imitation: Heb. 13.7.
charge Gods people to afford it to their Pastors.

The Lord has dealt mercifully with us, in providing us all helps convenient
for our salvation. Two senses there are of learning, sight and hearing; they
are neither of them without their means of instruction. As to our hearing he
has furnished us with Ier. 3.15.
Pastors, to feed us with knowledge and understanding, and given us in our
Temples, as to Jews in Wilderness, Matt. 3.3.
the voice of Cryers, Prepare the way of the Lord; so to our sight he has
laid open the book of Scriptures, the great Book of his Creatures, wherein
the rudest may read his Romans 1.20.
power and wisdom in plain Characters written; the practice of his Saints
whose conversation we may see, tracing out unto us the way that leads unto
life: therein providing, not only the honor of his eminent Saints: but our
instruction and encouragement to sanctity, for these reasons especially:
first, knowing how naturally we are addicted to imitation; and how examples
more move then words, as Bernard said, Validior est operis, quam oris vox: In
this he would not be wanting unto us; that if we will needs be imitating, we
may have such patterns, as shall not misse-leade us into error. Secondly,
besides, lest any should be with opinion of insuperable difficulty in the
duties, discouraged; he has sampled us with men of our own mould, subject to
like infirmities, that in the harshest amongst Christian offices have gone
before us: In so much that the duty cannot be named, so harsh to flesh and
blood, wherein his Saints have not gone before us. That I think may well be
numbered amongst the most difficult, Matt. 10.38.
to take up our Cross and follow Christ. Can we name the Cross that some of
the Saints have not comfortably endured? It is hard, you will say, to part with
goods: there were that suffered that spoil Heb. 10.34.
with joy: hard to exchange hopes of advancement for rebukes. It is Heb. 11.26.
chosen willingly by Moses, and counted honorable. Too much to leave Country,
and Kindred, and Fathers house: Did not Genesis 12.1, 4.
Abraham so? Hardest to leave life, especially by violent torments? what death
can we think of so full of Heb. 11.37.
shame, or torture, but has been endured by the Saints of God? so fatherly
has the Lord provided for our benefit, in providing this honor for his Saints.

due praise, and Matt. 26.13. Heb. 11.
commemoration of their virtues. It suffices not Papists; but they style us
sacrilegious, because we give them not Gods honor of invocation: August. de
vera Relig. cap. 55.
though Augustine long since delivered it for a rule: Honorandi sunt propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem. And can they be more dishonored
by any means, then by being made Idols?

Judge in your selves whether more dishonor them; we by denying them
Invocation, which we know, they desire not; or Papists, by refusing imitation,
which God has allowed them. There never was Saint that practiced rebellion, or
attempted insurrection under any pretense, against the Lords Anointed. 1. Sam.
24.6.
God forbid, says DAVID, that I should lay hand upon the Lords Anointed.
Preces and lachrimae were wont to be armor for Saints, against Tyrants. Those
Saints were Nouices; herein no precedents for our Catholics: for following
their examples they will be pardoned, and will make them amends by invocation.
It calls to mind their Predecessors the Scribes and Pharisees: forsooth, they
would Matt. 23.29.
reedifie the Sepulchers of Prophets, but yet were murderers of the Lord of
Prophets.

Seneca thought proved the thing naught, Argumentu^ pessimum turba est, Seneca
de vita beata, cap. 2.
we count demonstratiue for goodness, and think our selves safe if we follow
the Drove, though it be in praecipitia. Job 32.9.
Great men, said ELIHV, are not always wise: yet to our people they seem
good; best patterns to be resembled. For Saints commended to our imitation,
we give their practice the praise; admiring their sanctity, but preferring in
imitation the impiety of the mighty.

Laudamus veteres, sed nostris vtimur annis. Sarah commended to our women's
imitation for 1. Pet. 3.4, 5, 6.
modesty and gravity in attire, shall have her commendation: But any
light-skirt Dame, or Courtly Herodias shall rather be imitated. Fashions in
apparel, though never so foreign, and almost monstrous, which nothing but
fashion can make us think seemly, yet because in fashion with Gallants,
Christian women must follow. For shall they be singular?

Bernard in his time to one so obiecting, Bernard.
Hoc faciunt eum quibus habito: I must do as others or else be noted of
singularity; Propterea, inquit, exi de medio eorum, ne aut in vrbe notabiliter
viuas, aut exemplo pereas aliorum: what do you that profess Gods fear in
such society, where either sanctity shall be counted singularity? or
examples of evil followed, drown your souls in perdition? or why labor you
not rather to draw them to your gravity, then run after them in vanity? Let
them see your good works and imitate you, at least forget not whose Precept it
is, Romans 12.2.
Fashion not your selves to this world. And of their fact and their inferior
pattern thus far.

It is not impertinent here to add that inquiry, how far Saints practice
may be our pattern: And how far their example warrants or binds us to
imitation.

Their actions admit this Distinction: First, some of them are noted as
sinful, wherein they bewrayed humane infirmity: these are spectacles of
natural frailty, not examples for like practice: they are written for our
caution, not for imitation: in part also to prevent our discomfort, August.
cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 22. cap. 96.
as AUGUSTINE, Vt neque iusti in superbiam securitate extollantur, nec iniqui
contra medicinam desperatione obdurentur.

Genesis 22.10.
Abraham attempts to slay his son; so Israelites Exodus 12.35.
rob Egyptians. It is no warrant of coozenage to any man: for the general rule
binds us, Romans 13.8.
Owe nothing to any man but love, and it is a mark of the ungodly, Psalm. 37.21.
to borrow without conscience of paying again.

To this kind may be annumbred, First, what they may be presumed to have done
by special instinct, though we read it not: secondly, as 2. King. 1.10.
ELIAS in calling fire from heaven; Number. 25.7, 8.
PHINEHAS in slaying the Adulterer; Judge. 16.30.
SAMSON in auenging himself on Philistims with his own death, of which fact,
Bernard. de Pracept. and Dispensat.
says BERNARD, Si defenditur non fuisse peccatum, priuatum habuisse consilium
indubitanter credendus est: Dispensations stretch not beyond the particulars to
whom they were given.

Genesis 12.1, 4.
Abraham leaves his Country for Pilgrimage in Canaan; as Matt. 3.1.
John Baptist professed a kind of Eremitage Is not the inference pretty?
therefore Pilgrimages are satisfactorie: Eremitage a state of perfection.

had Act. 4 32.
all things common. Act. 20.34.
PAVL makes his hands minister to his necessities. There is no footing herein
for Anabaptisticall community, nor necessity laid on Ministers to use manual
labor, except where cases and times are like.

Quid multa? The Apostles self has set us our line, of us and of the Lord.

Christ then is the pattern of patterns, the rule and measure of all
examples. Therefore Paul to his Precept, Be followers of me, sets this limit,
1. Cor. 11.1.
as I am of Christ. In him as the gifts of Grace were transcendent, so their
exercise supereminent; he erres not that follows Christ as his Precedent, in
any thing wherein he is commanded imitation.

Are then all Christ's actions to be imitated? Thus distinguish them: First,
some were of divine virtue, as his works miraculous. Secondly, some of divine
prerogative, as his sending for the Ass and Colt without leave first asked of
the Owner. Thirdly, some Mediatorie. Fourthly, some Moral. Fifthly, some
indifferent and incidentall. The three first sort no man may attempt to
imitate: his moral acts were they wherein only he intended to give us
example, whereto only he has tied us to imitation. Compare Matthew. 11.29. 1.
Pet. 2. etc.

Of his actions, yea gestures indifferent, circumstantial, incidental, we have
questions hotly disputed. His gesture, especially in the Sacrament, we have
pressed with might and main, and laid on us by some, with as great necessity,
as his moralities of Patience, Meekness, Humility, Obedience. Me thinks then
they should be able to prove within compass of those things, whereof Peter
says, 1. Pet. 2.21.
He gave us an example that we should follow his steps: to urge any thing
supra statutum, as simply necessary, is to urge superstition: to yield to any
thing supra statutum, as simply necessary, is to yield to superstition. Let
them take heed that thus press this gesture upon our consciences as necessary
to be imitated, they incur not crime of superstition, from which they would
seem to be most abhorrent.

Are we bound to this gesture, so that to use any other, is sin? Yes, say
they: then either because it was amongst Christ's moral acts, wherein he has
commanded us to imitate, or else by virtue of that Mandate, 1. Cor. 11.24.
Hoc facite, Do this. A third member when they assign me, I will take notice
of. But neither was it amongst his moral acts, wherein he has commanded us
to imitate; nor is it comprised within his Mandate, at the institution. Ergo.

May we number it amongst his moral acts? we must then show what Law of God,
vertually at least, comprizeth this Conclusion; Thou shall sit at the
Sacrament. And again, in religious moralities it is unlawful to do aliud or
aliter, other thing or otherwise: why then stand they? yea, why sit they? why
lean they not one in the bosom of another? or how dare they in the least
tittle swerve from their pattern?

Comes it under the Mandate, Hoc facite? then is it amongst the Sacramentals of
the Supper. For (hoc facite) comprizeth not Circumstantials, but Sacramentals.
Is it Sacramental? where is the signification it has of any act of God to us,
or of us to God? Sacramental actions all whether of the Minister, or Receiver,
have their mystical resemblance and signification.

These eager spirits have much haunted me; the ghastliest Argument they ever
put forth to affright me withal, has been this, from the example of Christ.
And though I never heard it urged, but where the Answer has made it totter;
yet never could I sway with any Minister, or other I have dealt withal, as to
make him forgo his hold thereon: for in their Logical Disputes it is no
absurdity, to deny the Conclusion.

I will truly acquaint you with the several manners of urging. The first
paper is thus: That gesture that Christ and his Apostles used at the time of
the institution, is to be used of us at the time of receiving the Supper. But
the gesture of sitting is that gesture which Christ and his Apostles used at
the time of the institution: therefore must be used of us.

Formally enough. But when I wonder, will they prove their proposition? that
we are bound to use the Gestures, Vestures, other circumstances of first
administration. And where appears that Christ or his Apostles sat, as we call
sitting?

And why may I not thus reason? What Vesture Christ used at the first
administration, is to be used in ours. But a seamelesse Coat was the Vesture
which Christ used at the first administration. Therefore is to be sed of us. I
dare say the Argument proceeds as firmly for the habit, as for the site and
position.

The second paper thus. To swerue from the imitable example of Christ, is a
sin. Not to sit in the act of receiving, is to swerue from the imitable
example of Christ, therefore not to sit is a sin, and per consequens, to sit
a necessary duty.

may be imitated: or that which must be imitated. If that, which may be
imitated; your proposition is false; If that which must be imitated; your
assumption.

This man explaines himself; distinguishing betwixt his works miraculous, and
others, and by imitable understands that wherein it is possible to resemble
him, belike them, we must gird our selves with a Towell, and wash our peoples
feet before our administration; for so did Christ; and his actions is not
miraculous, but possibly imitable. Yea, of this act he says more then ever
he said of his gesture. Ioh. 13.4, 12, 14, 15.
If I your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another feet; for I have given you an ensample, first, that ye should do as I
have done to you. And I marvel these Apish Imitators, in this action which he
calls exemplary, secnodly, whereof he says it ought to be done in imitation of
him, think not themselves bound, whereas in the gesture they acknowledge a
bond, though by no probability of Scripture, they can prove it exemplary, or
with an ought to be done, pressed upon the Conscience.

To put end to this enquiry; Give me I pray, a true reason, why, his gesture
in preaching, binds us not to imitation, as well as his gesture in the
Sacrament. My memory may fail me; but I know not, that it is ever recorded,
Christ taught in any other site then sitting. Mat. 5.1.
That he sat down and taught his Disciples, I read; that he stood, I read
not; a true difference between these in this point of necessary imitation, I
would feign hear.

The rite and outward form of Baptism used by John, whereto also our Savior
submitted himself, was not sprinkling, but Mat. 3.16. Act. 8.38.
going down into the water; why are we not strictly bound to this imitable
example of Christ and his Forerunner? and yet must think our selves bound to
his gesture in the Supper?

Lastly, let this, though it may seem a nicetie, be taken notice of; that in
this question they change the very predicament where the inquiry lies. To
speak properly and exactly, sitting is not in the predicament of Action, but
in that of site and position. And whereas in matter of imitation, the Actions
of Christ fall only into inquiry, they divert the question to his site and
position: qua fide? And why should we not urge the quando, and vbi, and
habitus of Christ's administration from his example; as well as his gesture? Thus
far of that question occasionally; out of a desire, if it be possible, to
give satisfaction to the scrupulous, in as much as concerns the Argument from
Christ's example. This is the rule; The precept of imitating our blessed
Savior, is limited to his actions, not extended to his gestures; Among his
actions, to those that were moral, not to circumstantiall, or incidentall.

The last particular in the Text remains, having received the Word. These
words at first sight I conceived to express the special matter wherein they
imitated: And propounded the question, how in receiving the Word, they might be
said to imitate the Apostle and our Savior; considering, their employment was
rather in delivering the Word by preaching, then receiving thereof by attending
to others. And thus resolved. There is a kind of oblique imitation of Christ
and his Saints; suppose when men apply the virtues exercised by Saints in their
callings, to works that concern them in their place. As, Fortitude and
Courage Christ and his Apostles manifested in preaching the Gospel: This
people in preaching used not their Fortitude; but in receiving and maintayning
the Gospel expressed like Courage. The same Graces they are that all Saints
exercise, yet as their callings are distinct, so are the employments wherein
they use them. The same Diligence, Fidelity, Courage, all Gods people in their
places and callings exercise: though the acts wherein they are exercised, are
as their callings, distinct. Suppose then thus, that in receiving the Word,
this people were Imitators of Christ and their Ministers; because what Courage,
Constancy, Resolution they showed in preaching, these expressed in
entertayning and maintayning the Gospel. And this kind of imitation we may
use in the extraordinary actions of the Saints. Abraham at Gods command is Genesis
^^.10.
ready to sacrifice his son. In the particular, thou may not attempt to
imitate; yet learn from Abraham's example; think nothing to dear for the Lord
that he shall call for.

Yea, in this kind, worst men may be our patterns, Luke 16.8, 9.
Children of this World are wise in their generation, to provide against time
of necessity; be thou as wise to provide for everlasting Tabernacles, by
liberal dispensing the unrighteous Mammon. The Devil, said Father Latimer, is
a diligent Bishop never idle in his Diocese; if we learn not of God, for
shame let us learn of the Devil to be watchful and painful in our charges.

Thus then; by reuiew of the Text, me thinks I see the Apostle desiring
rather to express the Antecedent, or moving cause to this imitation; It was
their receiving of the Word: After they had received the Word, they became
followers of Christ and his Saints. The note thence is this:

We may never expect reformation of the people after Gods Image shining in his
Saints, till such time as the Word finds admittance with them, how can we?
this being the Ioh. 17.17.
truth whereby they are sanctified: The mighty weapons whereby 2. Cor. 10.4, 5.
high things, and thoughts are captiuated to the obedience of Christ: That
two-edged Heb. 4.12, 13.
Sword, that pierces to the discovery, prevails to the killing of our
corrupt inclinations. That vehiculum Spiritus, Gal. 3.2.
by which all grace is conveyed into the heart.

Of receiving or admitting the Word of God, there are five degrees;

First, when it is so far given way unto, that men are content to give it the
hearing, Mat. 13.19.
though without care or regard to be acquainted with the Mysteries it reueales.
Accordingly we see it vanish as a confused sound into the air, so that though
there be Isai. 28.10.
line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, yet
never descends it so low as the Mat. 13.20.
understanding, to work so much as speculatiue knowledge of that it teaches.

Secondly, when from the ear it passes to the understanding, and the mind
conceiues the sense which that sound presents unto it.

Thirdly, when the mind is so far prevailed withal, that it assents to the
truth of what it understands.

Fourthly, when the affections embrace it as delightful and pleasing.

Fifthly, when the heart and conscience give way to the prescripts thereof, and
suffer it to sway them to obedience, receiving it into Luc. 8.15.
an honest and good heart, and bringing forth fruit with patience: In these
steps of receiving and admitting the Word, degrees may be distinguished, these
generals only, I commend to be meditated, as amongst Hearers we shall easily
see them exemplified, subordinate they are all each to other. Subjection of
Conscience requiring the wills persecution of the conceived goodness of the
Word. Persecution, Faith of the truth and goodness: Faith, Knowledge;
Knowledge attentive Audience. By these steps is wrought that reformation of
Gods people, after his Image shining in his Saints.

Acts 16 14. Col. 3.16.
open their hearts to attend to what God Word speaks; and so to attend, that
it may dwell plenteously in them, ruling in their hearts, as the Centurion in
his house; then might we expect Righteousness to flourish out of the Earth,
and abundance of Peace so long as the Sun and Moon indureth. But so long as
that is true of us, that the Lord complaynes of by Hosea: He Hos. 8.12.
has written unto us the great things of his Law, and they are become a
strange thing unto us; whiles we turn our ears from hearing the Law, and
scorn to have conscience controlled by the Word of God; I shall never wonder
to see Christians become Pagans in their lives; so far from the lives of
Saints, that Heathens in comparison may seem Saints to our people. Labor
there has been much for reformation amongst us; he is blind that sees not
the labor necessary; the error is only in the things to be reformed; which
would GOD we did not so limit to Rites and Ceremonies, that they forget the
more necessary in life and manners. Audacter dicam; our Ceremonies cannot be
half so Popish, as men's lives are Paganish, neither savors our Church of
Superstition, but some of our people strongly of Atheism and Irreligion. What
marvel? when as the Word of God has scarce come, so much as in a confused
sound, into many corners of the Land; and even to this day they have seen the
misery of Israel to be without a teaching Priest. High time it is for
IEHOSAPHAT to disperse 2. Chro. 17.7, 8
Levites into the Cities of Judah, before Atheism quite ouergrowes; I should
then hope through GODS mercy, to see our people walk as becomes Saints; And
never think Saints dead, whiles I saw their practice revived in our people.

There follow amplifications of their fact in receiving the Word of God; first,
by the hindering cause of entertayning the Gospel, which with holy resolution
they learnd to contemn, and on hardest terms received the Word, in much
affliction: That circumstance adds much to their commendation. The rule is
true which this Text occasions us to take notice of.

Christian practices are never m^^^ commendable, then when they are holden
against impediments. In days of ease what Mat. 13.20, 21
Hypocrite gives not way to the Gospel? the Encomium of Disciples is, Luke
22.28, 29
to abide by Christ in his temptations. The Glory of the Angel of Pergamus is
this, Apoc. 2.13.
that dwelling where Satan's throne was, in days when ANTIPAS Gods faithful
Martyr was slain, yet he had not denied his Name.

Truth is, what comfort has man in any duty, till in it he may see something
wherein he goes beyond an Hypocrite? Hest. 8.17.
what Persian so profane, that becomes not a lew, to enjoy their freedoms and
prerogatives; with hardest terms to entertain the Gospel? The Gospel with
persecutions, is the privilege of Israelites indeed.

The Argument is strong for Jobs uprightness against Satan's cauils, when the
fence removed, which Satan suggested to be the hold-backe from Blasphemy,
Job 1.10, 11, 22.
he still continues in the fear of God. To love naked Piety, is no small
sign of integrity; how much more to embrace and harbor persecuted Religion?

matter of infamy and penalty, to deny it audience. But think you if the
Lord should send his fiery trial amongst us, as to our forefathers, he should
find faith on earth, love of his Truth in our people? how many have we mincing
the matter, and setting the Lord his limits in matter of Religious Profession
and Practice? so far as may stand with their reputation, so far are they
for the Gospel; but what if thy Credit and Gods Truth come into balance? shall
thy Reputation sway more then love of the Truth? Mat. 8.34.
Gadarens, I dare say, had as much truth of Religion as thou. Some Pharisees
more; whose defect yet is noted in this, that they Ioh. 1^.42, 43
loved the praise of men more then the glory of God. What should I speak of
those whose professed resolution is, to burn for no Religion, which is to say,
they are of no Religion; stark Atheists in life; their Religion mere Policy,
a serving of Times rather then of the Lord; for whom is reserved the Jude verse.
13
blackness of darkness for ever?

A second circumstance of their fact, amplifying their praise, is the joy they
felt and manifested in receiving the Word, with those harsh conditions it was
tendered unto them; in much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost.

Difference of ranks amongst men, giving way, and entertaynment unto the
Gospel. First, in the first we may range Matt. 13.21.
our Temporaries, or rather Temporizers; that seeing they sail secundo
flumine, all things running current for the Gospel, are carried full sail to
the profession of Faith; whom yet the least note of reproach, even Thou Matt.
26.69.
art of Galilee, makes ready to deny and abjure the Truth.

Secondly, farther they go, whom reproaches, the least afflictions, daunt not:
and yet when the least spoil of goods, or hazard of liberty comes toward
them, as Paul's Associates, 2. Tim. 4.16.
forsake us, betray, as much as in them lies, the cause of Truth.

Thirdly, there are, Paul intimates, amongst hypocrites, some halfe-Martyrs; in
much affliction receiving the Word, much, first, for variety, Secondly, for
greatness, Have ye suffered Gal. 3.4.
so many things in vain? 1. Cor. 13.3.
If I give my body to be burnt, and have not love: his Hypothesis puts nothing;
yet half intimates, conviction of judgment may be so strong for truth, the
terrors of the Almighty so forcible with Conscience in some Believers, that
death may be submitted unto, rather then the Gospel denied; by such as whose
hearts were never warned with love of God and his Truth; how tremblingly, and
with what grief of heart, suppose ye, come such to suffer, whom fear only of
greater torments succeeding death, in case of denial, makes to swallow up
inferior fears of bodily tortures, and constant in auowing the Truth?

Fourthly, yea, amongst Hypocrites, may be found men ambitious of suffering,
ioying in the Truth, in afflictions, perhaps for Truth sake: that Hypocrites
Mat. 13.20.
joy in the Word, our Savior is witness; The Lord by Ezechiel tells of some,
to whom hearing of the word taught by the Prophet, was as melodious Ezech.
33.32.
Music: The nouelty perhaps affects them, as Athenians, or the deep
Mysteries, as curious scioli; or the promises mistaken to be absolute, as
Carnal Libertines. Why, not afflictions also for Truth, as Mercenaries in
respect of the rewards promised? or as seeming pledges of sincerity, as men
willing to be deceived; or as means to procure fame of constancy and
courage, as ambitious? Certainly, Paul more then intimates, that such feel the
Heb. 6.5.
powers of the World to come; As the desire of beatitude is natural, though
what it is, or how attained Errors are infinite: so the knowledge and faith of
true blessedness, may work maruellously in men unregenerate: and after a sort
sweeten afflictions unto them, out of natural grounds: such as are, Number. 23.10.
desire and hope to have share in heavenly happiness; at least out of carnal
ambition, to leave behind them fame of constancy and Martyrdom in the Church;
as Heathens out of like desire to be immortal in the mouths of Posterity,
devoted themselves, and ran headlong into the jaws of death, to be enrolled
amongst the Fathers and Tutors of their Country.

Fifthly, where then lies the point of this peoples commendation? that they
received the Word, First, in affliction. Secondly, in much affliction. Thirdly,
with joy. Fourthly, and that of the Holy Ghost; so is that joy termed, that is
ministered by Gods Spirit; and thus differs for that natural, carnal or
secular joy of Hypocrites under the Cross. The grounds of it are spiritual;
such as are, First, that Christ and Phil. 1.12, 13, 14, 20.
his Grace shall be magnified in us. Secondly, that good that comes to the
Church of God by our sufferings, as, First, confirmation of weakelings.
Secondly, occasioning aliens to enquire into the cause of truth, and after a
sort preparing them to embrace it. Not, but that the Heb. 12.2.
joy set before us, and the hope of immortality, furthers our joy in
afflictions, and sweetens to GODS Saints, the sour of the Cross; but that
they see some further good, which more or as much affects them, as their own
comfort and salvation.

taking up of the Cross to follow Christ, is amongst those duties in casu,
which it suffices us to perform, praeparatione animi; in the readiness of
mind: howbeit it shall behooue us to examine how we stand resolved, in case
the Lord should call us to suffer for his Name; and how grounded our
resolutions are. How we are affected in the petty Gal. 4.29.
persecutions of Ishmael, the only trial almost any of us are called to
endure. Cushites how many are there amongst us? alike minded for Religion, 2.
Sam. 16.18
as Cushi in matter of Polity. Their wisdom is to join themselves to the
preuayling side. Madness they think it to dye for any Religion. Subordinate
Religion, and all to Policy, making it a very Pedissoqua, a Lackey to their
Covetousness, Ambition, Epicurisme; yea, measuring truth of Religion, by more
or less avail, to compass their proiects of prosperity; as if Christ had
changed his Cognizance, and the Cross were no longer the Badge of a Christian:
but temporal felicity the surest mark of the Church.

What should I speak of our murmuring under the Cross? and quarrelling at the
dispositions of GODS Providence, as if that endless Wisdom had been
ouer-seene in ordering us by Acts 14.22.
tribulations to enter into his Kingdom. A Strawberie way to Heaven had been
much better: and the green Meddow in Cebes his Table, then these thickets of
bushment, and ascent of craggie Rocks that lead to virtuous happiness.

I confess, we have many ambitions of suffering; ioying in tribulations for
the Catholic Cause, and that, which some call, the cause of the Gospel. Who
maruels? when they have the^ sweetened to the sense of carnalitie, by them their
portion is made fat, and their meat plenteous. Prisons they find affording more
means of enlarging their Temporalities; then houses of greatest freedom; or
Pulpits of largest Elbow-roome. In none of these find I a sample to this
pattern; yet are there, I doubt not, but can say they joy in tribulations,
because they see glory comes to GOD by giving testimony to his Truth; and good
to his Church by confirmation of weakelings.

In much affliction with joy, etc. So true is it, that Gods Word received with
an honest and good heart, brings with it sweetness enough to digest all the
sour and bitterness of afflictions that attend it; compare, Psalm. 119.50.



difference betwixt afflictions for sin, and persecutions for Righteousness:
those are justly Deboras; these seldom or never want their comfort; usually
are attended with joy and rejoicing. As 2. Cor. 1.5.
our afflictions abound, so also our comforts, if not in sense, yet ever in the
cause.

How many causes of Joy bring they to the soul!

First, we are hereby conformed to Mat. 5.12. Heb. 2.16. John 15.19. 1. Pet. 4.
the Prophets and righteous men that have gone before us: yea, to the Prince of
our Salvation.

Secondly, they are pledges to us of our Acts 5.41.
choosing out of the World; and of our walking with a right foot to the
Gospel.

Thirdly, of our more then ordinary Grace Romans 3.4.
we are in with our God, when he chooses us to be his Champions.

Fourthly, means of how many gracious gifts? their exercise at least, and
confirmation, and increase.

Fifthly, yea, 2. Cor. 4.17.
work to us after a sort that inualuable Crown of Glory.

What coward may not this encourage to resolution under the Cross? his
comforts are proportioned to his afflictions. Gods love is never more
plentifully Romans 5.5.
shed abroad in our hearts, then in our afflictions for righteousness: to say
truth, what should dismay us? Is it love of ease? that is carnalitie. Doubt of
success? that 1. Cor. 10, 13.
is infidelity? suspicion of weakness? we know who has said, his 2. Cor.
12.9.
Grace shall be sufficient, and he perfits power in weakness.

Provided always, as Peter gives the caution, or cause of suffering be good;
If we suffer 1. Pet. 4.15.
as evil doers, if but as busibodies, what thank, or what comfort have we?
if for the Name of Christ, happy are we: Verse 14.
the Spirit of the glorious God rests upon us. It is not the pain, but the
cause that makes the Martyr, said the Martyr Cyprian. Not to be reviled, or
imprisoned, to lose liberty, living, no nor life, sorts us to Prophets, that
were before us; except perhaps Priscillianists, and Donatists, and Traiterous
Jesuits, may be thought consorts of Prophets, but to suffer, as Prophets, for
Mat 5.10.
Righteousness. I know some men ambitious of suffering; I advise them to
provide that their cause and calling too be warrantable. I cannot else warrant
them comfort in their afflictions. I should tremble at the cross laid on me
for sin; and be jealous of my strength, yea, in the best cause, where I had
needlessly thrust my finger into the fire, yet would hope 1. Cor. 10.13.
of issue to be given with the temptation, where I see good cause, and calling
to suffer, for I know Him faithful that has promised.

VERSE. 7.8. So that ye became ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia.

For from you sounded out the Word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and
Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward, is spread abroad, so that
we need not speak any thing.


THE connection framed by others I motion not, thus I conceive, the Apostle
amplifies their faith and patience by the measures thereof: such were their
proceedings therein, or rather such the specialtie of Gods favor in the
distribution; such, that though they came after others to Christ, yet became
they presidents to their precedents; so richly endowed, that it might well
beseem their Ancients to make them their patterns. The amplification stays
not there, but adds mention of the Churches whom they had out-stript; All that
believed in Macedonia and Achaia. And because it might seem strange, the
notice of a Church so newly planted should so far be divulged; a greater
wonder Paul mentions, no wonder but truth; In every place where he came, heard
he report of their Faith, though further remote then Macedonia their Country,
and their Neighbor Region Achaia.

The particulars of their commendation here touched, are these, First, their
precedencie in Faith to their Ancients the Churches of Macedonia. Secondly, the
famousnesse of their gracious estate and practice. Thirdly, their propagation
of it to others.

Types. In gracious practices it is not enough to be followers and of the
company, but we should strive to become precedents and Presidents unto others.

In Religion it should be, who may go foremost. That was the blessed state of
John Baptists times, the Matt. 11.12.
Kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by force, it
was who might throng first in for a share in the Gospel. As Soldiers at the
surprising and ransacking of some wealthy City, where the prey is made free,
strive who may come first to the spoil; so was it in John's days, for this
rich treasure of the Gospel; so should it be now. S. Paul for common gifts,
gives charge to strive that we may excel. And weigh these Reasons.

First, good and evil things have their measure of graduall quantity
according to the greatness of their effects. An evil thing the more it hurts,
the more evil it is, and more damnable in the Ringleader. A good thing, the
more it profits, the better and more beneficial to the first beginner: It much
amplifies the praise of Corinthians compassion, that they were so forward,
because their 2. Cor. 9.2.
zeal had provoked many.

Secondly, God has pleased for our encouragement in this kind, to expound us
different measures of heavenly rewards, to be proportioned to our measures of
grace and exercise thereof; that though none want his fullness, yet every ones
glory is not alike abundant. The Disciple has Matt. 10.41.
a Disciples reward: The Prophet, the reward of a Prophet: as discrepant in the
measure, as is excellently the employment and work of a Minister, above that
of a Hearer.

Bernard. in Psalm. Qui habitat, sermon. 9.
Sit licet elatis pariter omnibus vnus idemque denarius vitae reddendus
aeternae; at in ipsa tamen sicut stella a stella differt elucitate, and alia
claritas solis, alia claritas Lunae, alia Stellarum: sic erit and resurrectio
mortuorum: and quamuis domus vna, diuersae tamen in ea sunt mansiones; vt
videlicet quantum ad aeternitatem and sufficientiam, and qui parum, non
minoretur, and qui multum non abundet; quantum vero ad eminentiam and
discretionem meritorum, vnusquisque accipiat secundum suum laborem, ne quid
omnino pereat quod in Christo sit seminatum.

Thus has the great God of heaven been pleased to excite our dullness; but
behold a cursed modesty, no where more frequent then in gracious practice; we
still look for a Leader that may first give the adventure, are both to be
singular or ouer-forward in goodness. And they that in all other things like
even envious emulation, in Grace and Piety love not to be emulous. In Riches
whose covetousness desires not eminence? in honor what Haman would not be a
transcendent? even in lewdness men strive for peerless excellency. It is a
glorious style amongst Drunkards, to be King of Good-fellowes: only in Grace,
any modicum is thought sufficient; here only we fear a nimium, Eccl. 7.16.
to be just overmuch.

August. in Epist. 144.
Humanam dico propter infirmitatem, says Augustine, paraphrasing that place;
This preariseth the Apostle, as having more to say, had the people been able
to bear it: for we owe more service to righteousness, then men use to afford
unto sin: How happy were we, if the stream of our ancient desires and
pains to sin, were carried in any measure of proportion to righteousness!
But how just is the tax laid on us by our Savior, Luke 16.8.
the Children of this world are more wise; more eager, more any thing in their
generation, then the children of Light!

It is true, I confess, which perhaps is the holdbacke, the best measure of
sound grace is saving, the meanest place in Gods Kingdom, happiness al
sufficient: yet take this with you, he has no grace in soundness that thinks
he has sufficient, nor shall he find any place in that house of so Ioh. 14.2.
manifold Mansions, that strives not to 2. Pet. 3.18.
grow and excel in Grace, and in the knowledge and obedience of our Lord and
Savior.

To whom they became Types is next expressed: To all that believe in Macedonia
and Achaia; that, as appears by their description here, were in CHRIST before
them.

So ofttimes it falls out that the latter in conversion becomes the more
excellent in Christian practice: Subitus calor longum vincit teporem, Hier. ad
Paulinum de institut. Monachi
that it may have place here that our Savior said: There are first which shall
be last, and last which shall be first. As in a race, ofttimes he that sets out
last, outstrips the forerunner, and comes before him to the Goal.

PAVL last called to Apostleship, yet not inferior to the chief Apostles in
measure of gifts, 1. Cor. 15.9, 10
in labors much more abundant: DAVID vaunts not himself, but magnifies the
power of GODS grace in his use of the means, when he professes, he was
become Psalm. 119.99. Nouissimus in ordine, primus in meritis est, Hier. qua
supra.
wiser then his Teachers, and of more understanding then they that were his
Ancients.

high-mindednesse and conceit, that they have already attained, whence issues
neglect of means sanctified to their establishment and growth in Grace. We
have seen Nouices in Religion, Smatterers in divine Knowledge, presently
become Teachers of their Teachers; scorning the Ancient style of Gods people to
be termed Disciples; they hear not to learn, but to judge, as Critics only
and Censors of their Ministers; marvel not if GOD plague such pride,
permitting them to decays: for his profession it is to Iam. 4.6.
resist the proud, and to add grace to the humble.

Secondly, withal they may be observed, for insolent and contemptuous carriage
toward their Inferiors in gifts, and disdain, no less then scornful,
toward them yet left in the power of darkness.

Thirdly and lastly, bearing themselves as men made perfect, and contented with
that which they have already received; so respecting what they have come unto,
that they forget Phil. 3.13, 14.
pressing toward the mark.



First, the greater love of God seen in pardon of sins so long continued;
whence issues greater ardencie of their love to God, and zeal to do him
service. For they that are truly penitent, after they thoroughly have a feeling
of their former sins forgiven, become more thankful to the Lord for his
mercies all the days of their lives: they Luke 7.47.
love much, because many sins are forgiven them. Experience has often found,
the viler man before calling, and he that has most earnestly persecuted the
Saints of God, and the true Professors of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in
proof the most fervent, when God has once touched and turned his heart.

Secondly, perhaps also that adds spurs to their progress, their late taste
how 1. Pet. 2.3.
gracious the Lord is, whom now they feel so sweet, that they think they
shall never be satiate with the pleasures of his house.

the Mat. 20.14, 15
last as much, perhaps more, then to the first.

1. Pet. 3 4.
Meekness and Humility; now doting upon toys and garish trifles in apparel,
repenting that ever they carried face of the Daughters of Sarah. Desirously
embracing all oportunities of hearing, now, as Felix in his trembling, Act.
24.25.
putting it off to their times of leisure; so that Nouices and Petties in
Christ's School, are become their betters in almost all gracious practice. I
mention it, as PAVL, the Romans 11.13, 14
power of his Apostleship amongst Gentiles, to see if by any means, I may
provoke them to emulation, that they may recover their standing. Me thinks
they should scarce look on their Iuniors in grace, without this thought; How
shameful is it for us their Ancients, not to hold pace with after-commers in
gracious practice?

1. Cor. 4.7.
who has discerned thee? Secondly, is not God Romans 11.23.
able to graffe them in? Thirdly, and they may prove thy Superiors in measure
of gifts and holy practice: this people later in calling, become precedents to
their Ancients in faith.

VERSE. 8. For from you sounded out the Word of God, etc.


THe second branch of their commendation, is the propagation of the Truth, and
spreading the Word to others: whether by publishing it to those with whom they
had commerce in other Countries, as some conceive, or by their obedience
occasioning the world to take notice of the power and holiness of that Word,
that had wrought so mightily to their reformation?

property and duty of all Saints, partakers of the heavenly vocation;
desirously inuiting others to fellowship of that comfort themselves have tasted
in the Gospel: passionately speaks DAVID, Psalm. 34.8.
Oh, taste and see how gracious the Lord is: with like affection see the Saints
in new Jerusalem, Zach. 8.21.
provoking one another to seek the Lord. The woman of Samaria no sooner has
glimpse of Christ's Messiahship, but she is dealing with the Ioh. 4.29.
men of her City to see and receive him: Like instances see Ioh. 1.42, 45.
Act. 11.19, 20.

Compassion should teach us to Jude 23.
rescue them out of the fire. Secondly, the glory coming to the grace of God
by their salvation. Thirdly, the benefit thence accrewing to our selves, first,
by increase Matt. 25.29.
of our own gifts: betwixt spiritual and earthly blessings this is one
difference: in these, the more we impart, the less we reserve: in those, we
lose not by communicating, rather by enclosing and concealment to our own
private.

Secondly, our glorious Dan. 12.3.
reward in Gods Kingdom becomes the greater. And it is the privilege of that
heavenly inheritance; it is not straightned to any by multitude of enioyers. If
we follow the other sense, this is the note: There is scarce a better mean to
propagate the Gospel, and to fasten it on the affection of Aliens, then the
obedience and sanctity of those that profess it. It is as the Cant. 1.3.
Odours of Christ's ointment, with the fragrancie thereof drawing affections.
John Baptists austeritie and reverend Matt. 3.5.
sanctity, draws out Jerusalem and the Region of Jordan to hear him: even
Herod hearing his fame, desires to hear him; and in Mark. 6.20.
reverence of his sanctity obeyes in many things. S. PETER attributes so much
unto it, that by 1. Pet. 3.1, 2.
it, without the Word, Aliens, he thinks, may be won; preparatiuely at least,
to think well of that doctrine, the fruits whereof they see to be so holy. And
as nothing more obdurates Aliens in their infidelity, then the 1. Sam. 2.17.
profane lives of carnal Gospellers; so scarce any thing preuailes more to
work liking of the Truth, then the holiness of those that give it
entertaynment.

Our duty is to walk worthy of our vocation, that we may Tit. 2.10.
adorn and win credit to the Gospel that we have undertaken to profess, at
least so provide that the Word of 1. Tim. 6.1.
God be not blasphemed by occasion of our disobedience. It is hard to say,
whether Christians unreformed do more good by profession, or harm by their
scandalous life.

To Aliens, I dare say, they bring more prejudice by their profaneness, in
hindering their conversion, then they can procure good to Gods Church, by their
naked profession. At the building of the Temple under Zerubbabel, their
Adversaries make semblance of Ezr. 4.2.
helping forward the building, pretending that they also sought the Lord.
Greater enemies Gods people had none to hinder the proceedings of the Temple,
then these colored friends, that offered to put hands to their holy work.
Neither know I any, whose courses are more prejudicial to the enlargement of
the Church, then those hypocrites amongst us, that carrying show of godliness,
2. Tim. 3.5.
deny the power of it in their conversation.

The last particular enlarging their praise, is the famousnesse of their Faith.
In every place their Faith to Godward was spread abroad.

Papists lighting on like Romans 1.8.
commendation given to the quondam Church of Rome, desire us to take notice of
it, and thence would feign infer a necessity of communicating with their now
Synagogue of Satan, for their Faith was renowned through the world: says Paul
any whit less of this at Thessalonica? yet how is the faithful City become
Isai. 1.21.
an Harlot? miserum and fuisse foelicem: as miserable, fuisse fidelem.



Romans 11.22.
fall from Faith, and lose the very fashion of a true Church visible, the
Apostle as plainly intimates: and to this Church gives as ample commendation of
Faith, as to that of Rome, which yet is now long since become a cage of
unclean birds; though it is hard for them to show the time, and first Author
of their defection. Secondly, me thinks it should suffice, to manifest that
there is a defection, by that wide discrepance, betwixt their Faith now, and
that commended by the Apostle, though circumstances of revolt could not be
euidenced. Is any so mad, as to question whether his house burn, when he sees
it on a flame, because he knows not the incendiarie?



2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
a mystery of Iniquity, secretly insinuating it self into the Church, under
color of the mystery of godliness. Thirdly, the Authors and Times of their
defection in most particulars, have been shown by our Divines; see Philip
Mornay his mysterium iniquitatis. PERKINS his Problem. Centurie-writers
euerywhere. We leave them, and proceed to our instruction by this Text.

Your Faith is spread abroad, that is, the fame of their faith, so gloriously
manifesting it self by the fruits in their life: That though the gift of Faith
be not immediately seen, yet makes it self evident by the fruits of it. Else
James had never said, Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy Faith by thy works: Suppose then these; First, Act. 15.9.
Conversion. Secondly, Romans 10.10.
Confession. Thirdly, Gal. 5.6.
Compassion, etc. Conceive it thus understood: First, of Faith confirmed.
Secondly, out of temptation. Thirdly, in some fruit or other. Of Joseph yet a
Nouice we find failing in the point of confession: but have reasons to think,
his heart was in gracious measure purified, his life reformed: while temptation
was upon him, of fear to be Ioh. 12.42.
cast out of the Synagogue, much weakness he bewrayes. Temptation once
ouerblowne, and Faith confirmed, he shows Ioh. 19.39.
more courage for Christ, then the chief of his Apostles.

How then may we presume they have Faith, in whom appear fruits of nothing,
but grossest Infidelity? Timorousness, shall I say, to profess his Name,
whom they boast to believe in? that might be imputed to the weakness, and
infirmity of Faith, but cruelty toward Gods children; yea, to the children
of their own bowels; so insatiable addicted to intemperate Bowzing, Luxurious
wantonness, all Uncleanness, that amongst Infidel Pagans is to be seen more
care 1. Tim. 5.8.
to provide for Families, more conscience to depart from evil. Faith, PAVL
tells us, Gal. 5.6.
works by love. The Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.9.
purifieth the heart. Behold in these Boasters, such a faith, as neither fears
God, nor reuerenceth Man, nor goes so far as civility, or light of Nature,
to purge the outward life from gross and notorious sins. Show us thy Faith
by thy works, or never make vaunt of Faith in thy heart, that by no outward
evidence thou can approve to the Church of God.

So that we need not to speak any thing. It seems then, Paul's course was,
where he came, to commend the faith and sanctity of the people, amongst whom
his Ministry had been effectual.

Teaching us that, there is place in our Ministry for commendation, as well as
for reproof, or exhortation. PAVLS Epistles abound with Praises of the
Churches to whom he writes; and amplifications of their commendation by all
circumstances. See 2. Cor. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. The great Shepherd of the sheep, the
Arch Doctor of the Church, omits not the Apoc. 2. and 3.
due praise of the Churches, whom he sharplyest reprooues.

Paul wind himself into the heart of Agrippa by this means? and drew him Act.
26, 27, 28
almost to be a Christian. See also Philip. 4.8.

draws on others 2. Cor. 9.2.
to emulation of like practice, through holy ambition of like praise in Gods
Church.



In this kind ye may observe men faulting both ways.

flattery and undue praise, where is nothing prayse-worthy, as also by
forbearing reproof of palpablest sins. Hieronym. aduers. Pelagian. lib. 1.
Pelagians, by Hieromes report, directing a Minister his carriage to the
people, propound him this rule: Seruus Dei nihil amarum de suo debet ore
proferre, sed semper quod dulce, and suaue est. A practice, says Hierome,
fitter for Heretics then for the Lords Prophets; by such suauiloquentia, and
Romans 16.18.
fair speeches, Heretics are went to deceive the hearts of the simple. There
is a time, says Paul instructing Titus, to Tit. 1.13.
reprove sharply; and so 1. Tim. 5.20.
that others also may fear.

like sort to be avoided; it is too much querulousnesse, for want of nothing,
many times, but what in this life cannot be attained: exact perfection. In so
much that every little blemish in the people, ouer-cloudes their many virtuous
parts, that no notice is taken of them to commend them. The great God of
Heaven, that God of pure eyes, more readily takes notice of the least good
thing to commend and reward it; then of smaller sins to reprove and punish
them. The 1. Reg. 14.13.
little goodness found in ABIIAH, amongst all the sons of Jeroboam, the Lord
passes not without mention, and recompense.

VERSE. 9.10. For they themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had
unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true
God,

And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.


THE words have this sum: they specify the evidences which the Churches
followed, in giving to Thessalonians commendation of faith, they were two
special fruits and effects of faith: First, conversion. Secondly, expectation
and patient waiting for Christ to come from Heaven. Their connection is plain
with the last clause of the Verse foregoing: we need say nothing in your
praise; for they prevent our commendation. Their entrance into this Church,
understand their first preaching of the Gospel, and the success thereof.

Conversion is an inseparable attendant and fruit of saving faith.

No fruit of Faith, (says a newfangled Teacher) but an antecedent and
preparatiue thereto. Repentance goes before Faith. What mean you by
Repentance? what by Faith? what prioritie or precedence understand you? in
Nature or Time? The man's love to play with ambiguities; laughes at the rule.
Qui been distinguit, been docet. Thus conceive. First, all Repentance
presupposes some Faith. Secondly, some Repentance goes before some Faith.
Thirdly, saving Faith is in Nature before saving Repentance.

Of the first, Even legal contrition, which is this man's Repentance, though
absurdly he define it, a sight of our misery, presupposes some faith; who
mournes or is cast down with the terrors of the Almighty, that believes not
the sentence true pronounced in the Law, and applied to him? The people of
Niniue believed God, Ion. 3.5.
then humbled themselves in sacke-cloth and ashes.

Of the second, This Repentance goes before faith justifying; that is before
persuasion of Gods love in the pardon of our personal sins. Yea, has place
in many, that perish in everlasting despair, as we have instance in Cain, and
Mat. 27.3.
Judas, etc.

But if you speak of saving Repentance, Repentance, as Paul calls it, 2. Cor.
7.10.
to salvation never to be repented of; you must then understand, that the gifts
of Faith and Repentance are simul tempore; neither before or after other: the
acts and exercise of the gifts, may you distinguish a prioritie of Nature,
which belongs to Faith: though the truth is, the exercise of both is so
coniunct, that it is hard for the Christian in whom they are, to distinguish
which has the precedencie in time; that it may have place here that our
Savior has, the Luke 17.20.
Kingdom of God comes not with observation, but as the Corn, Mar. 4.26, 27
grows up, man knows not how.

Godly sorrow for sin, 2. Cor. 7.17.
the cause of Repentance presupposes Faith; persuasion of Gods love, and
readiness at least to pardon our sins. For can a man ^^eue for the offense
of God, as it his offense, without persuasion of Gods love to him in Christ?
some of Heb. 12.17.
ESAV his tears may drop from his eyes, that apprehends God only as a
terrible Judge. Ingenuous sorrow and hearts grief is peculiar to them, whom
God has bestowed his Spirit Psalm. 51.12.
of ingenuitie, and Adoption, to seal them to the Day of Redemption.

Secondly, And see, whether all the 2 Cor. 7.11.
fruits of Repentance

Thirdly, Why am I long to wash an Ethiopian? breed 1. Tim. 1.4.
endless questions, rather then edifying in the faith.

My conclusion I resume; Conversion is an inseparable attendant and fruit of
saving Faith. Conversion understand the turning of the whole man from all sin
to all Righteousness. The whole man, Paul distinguishes into these three
members; the 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Spirit, Soul and Body; in all and every of these is this Change wrought; to
speak (...), it brings man from hatred of GOD to love of God, from contempt of
God to fear of God, from ignorance of God, to knowledge of him. So, from love
of sin, to hatred of sin, from hatred of Righteousness, to love of
Righteousness; from delighting in sin, to grieuing for sin: from practice
of iniquity, to practice of Piety, etc. Not only from sin to
Righteousness; but from counterfeit righteousness to unfeigned Righteousness.
There is malum opus, and malum operis; Evil works; and Isai. 1.16.
evil in good works. The Convert puts away not only his evil works, but the
evil that is in his works; the gross faultiness that, before Conversion,
claue to his best works. Thus conceive, it brings a man from mere sins, to
contrary Dan. 4.27.
virtuous practice: from an evil manner of doing good duties, to a form more
holy. Suppose, First, from Seruilitie, to Ingenuitie; Secondly, from
Formalitie, to Sincerity; Thirdly, from Civility, to true inward Sanctity.

respect Hos. 3.5.
of Gods goodness. Inclined to well doing, not only for reward, but for
Conscience of duty, glory Mat. 6.16.
of the Commander, and 2. Cor. 5.14.
thankfulness to his mercy.

Prayers and Sacrifices; nor seemingly stricter obseruers of Isai. 1.14.15.
New-moones and Sabbaths. Conversion so alters these Formallists, that they now
more study to be, then to seem religious.

dung Phil. 3.7, 8, 10.
and dross; and longs after experience of the virtue of Christ's death, to
mortify the sins were formally restrained only; the power of his
Resurrection, to quicken their hearts to newness of life.

Whether this Conversion presupposes not Faith, etiam inimici sint Iudices.

to these two things: First, to the Captain or Darling sin; never think thy
self a Convert indeed, till the corruption that most swayed in thee before
calling, grow specially loathsome and detestable unto thee. Secondly, next to
thy grounds of departing from evil, thy manner of performing holy duties; By
that said in the explanation, thou may direct thy self; whether thy fear of
God be servile, or ingenuous; thy service mercenary, or son-like; thy Piety
formal, or sincere, etc.

And of their act in general thus far; they turned: the Text further
intimates, First, the terms of their turning; from what, to what they turned:
from Idols to God. Secondly, the end or consequent of their turning; to serve
God; where is subioyned a description of GOD, by two attributes, in opposition
to Idols; the living and true God.

Of the first, It is required what an Idol is.

Answ. The most general and compendious description of an Idol strictly
taken, is this. An Idol is a false god: The Antithesis in the Text applaudes
the description; God to whom they turned is the true God. Idols from which they
turned, are thereby intimated to be false gods. So Paul elsewhere in stead of
Idols puts their Periphrafis; they are such as by Gal. 4.8.
Nature are not Gods.

Idols are of two sorts: First, Creatures whether imaginary or real invested
in Gods properties, actions, or worship. Secondly, the true God falsely
conceived.

Of the first, Thus understand, whatsoever it is besides the true God, whereto
men ascribe Divine properties, actions, or worship, that is to them an Idol,
or false god; there be that to Christ's humane Nature attribute power to be
every where present; to fill Heaven and Earth: his humane Nature is, by this
means, made an Idol; because, being a Creature, it is clad with that Divine
Property, Immensitie. Scotus to Angels gives this power; without outward
evidence or revelation, to know the secrets of men's hearts. Angels are by this
means made Idols; because, being but creatures, they have assigned them a
Divine property; to see in Mat. 6.4.
secret, to discern Ier. 17.10.
thoughts, and to try the reins.

Like think, when Divine worship inward or outward, is given to any thing
besides Jehovah. What ever that is, it is made an Idol. Images adored with
Divine Worship; Saints inuocated, by this means are made Idols: because Gods
Worship is given them. And these ye may call Idols in Religion.

In respect of other Divine Honor given to Creatures, there are Idols secular,
as, Wealth trusted unto, having supremacy of our love and confidence, by this
means becomes an Idol; which made Paul say, Covetousness is Col. 3.5.
Idolatry. No man was ever seen praying to his Pence: yet have we seen many
putting 1. Tim. 6.17.
confidence in their wealth more then in God. The rich man's goods are Prou.
10.15.
his strong City, therefore his Idol.

Of the second, The true God falsely conceived or worshipped, by that means
becomes an Idol. Augustine enquiring the sense of Iosuah his charge to the
people, Put away the strange gods that are amongst you, thus discourses. Can
we think they had at this time amongst them, simulachra Gentium? In no case,
for they are said to have Josh 23.8.
cleaned unto God.

And if they had had amongst them such gross Idols, after so many threatenings
of the Law, so many Judgments executed upon their fathers; is it likely the
Lord would so have prospered them in their Wars against Canaanites? when he
so forsook them for one ACHANS theft in the accursed thing? what then is his
meaning? August. in John: quaest. 29.
Propheta sanctus, says AVSTINE, in cordibus eorum cernebat cogitationes de
Deo alienas, a Deo, and ipsas admonebat auferri. Quisquis enim talem cogitat
Deum, qualis non est Deus, alienum Deum vtique and falsum in cogitatione
portar: Strange conceits of God, too too abhorrent from the nature of God, they
carried in their minds; these were the strange gods, the Prophet commands to be
put away. For whosoever conceits God otherwise then he is, carries in his
thought an Idol, a strange and false god. Thus say we truly, the Heathens
worshipping an absolute God out of the Trinity, worship not God, but an Idol
of their own brain.

We have seen what Idols are: The commendation of this people is, that they
turned from them, and thereby euidenced the truth of their Faith. Our duty is
from their commended practice, as John prescribes it, to 1. Ioh. 5.21.
keep our selves from Idols, a point confessed: yet think not, it is for
nothing, the charge is so often renewed, and enforced on Gods people. No doubt
the Lord saw our propension is strong to Idolatry, that he so strictly and
often urges the charge. They must Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3.
overthrow their Altars, burn their Groves, hew down their Images, abolish
their very names out of their places. Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3.
Make no league of amity with Idolaters, nor reserve the instruments or Isai.
30.22.
ornaments of Idols, but cast them away with extremest detestation.

Their style in Scripture is abomination, stercorei Dij; a term so base and
stinking, to teach us so to loathe them, as those excrements that cast out most
loathsome and noisome stench into our nostrils.

Hence also has GODS Spirit so carefully recorded Histories of Gods vengeance
upon Idolaters, that we might tremble 1. Cor. 10.6, 7
to fall by like disobedience, lest we incur like heavy wrath and vengeance
of God.

What remaynes for us, but to be exhorted, more and more to fly from Idols and
all communion with them? If thou have left their worship, think it not
sufficient; abandon their names, their instruments, their ornaments, think thy
faith and love toward God increases, as thy hatred of Idols, his riuals,
increases in thee.

What 2. Cor. 6.14, 16
communion has light with darkness, Christ with Belial, the Temple of God
with Idols?

What need, may some say, this exhortation? we have long since renounced
Idols, and joined our selves to the true God. Vtinam. But, to say little of our
people, which as the Jews in JEREMY, measure Religion by their Ier. 44.17, 18
belly, and because in times of Idolatry, things as they think for this life,
went better with them, hang Rome-ward still in their affections; who sees not
how favorably men begin to think of the Church of Rome? Images with
Doctrine may well enough be retained, that is, stumbling blocks laid before
the eyes of the blind, so we cry, Take heed. And Politicians many are of
opinion, there may be a reconcilement of the two Religions: so may there, I
dare say, of light and darkness, of Christ and Belial, of God and the Devil,
as well as of Christ, and Antichrist, Christian Religion, with Antichristian
superstition.

But let us remember what we heard in the explanation: there are secular
Idols, as well as Idols in use of Religion; as much to be fled from, as
Heathenish or Popish Images.

There are some, says Paul, that make their Philip. 3.19.
belly their god. What are Drunkards, but gross Idolaters? sacrificing their
Patrimonies, their Health, their soul to Bacchus?

There be that serve Mammon, make wealth their god, offering bodies and souls
to the Devil to get wealth; Religion, Faith, Obedience, all must be sorted so,
as may suite with our intentions for riches: GOD shall be forsaken, Body
wasted, Conscience wounded, Soul damned; and all to get treasure. Beloved,
thus think: He is as much an Idolater that prefers his wealth, before
obedience; his pleasures, before Gods service; as he that Isai. 44.17.
falls down to a stock, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my god.

Follows the terminus ad quam, to God. It is not enough to forsake Idols and
their worship, except we cleave to the true God, and zealously addict our
selves to his service. Therefore said IOSVAH, Put away your strange gods; Josh.
24.14.
and seek the Lord; fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and truth. As
in other particulars of Repentance, it suffices not to fly from evil, except
Isai. 1.16, 17.
we cleave to the good: so think in this.

Amongst the Heathen were some that scoffed at Idols, but were stark Atheists:
as that Dionysius dealt with Esculapius golden beard, plucking it off with this
scomme, No reason the son should be bearded, and the father beardlesse; and
stripping Apollo of his golden coat, he clothes him in wool: It was lighter
for Summer, warmer for the cold of Winter: what odds I wonder, betwixt this
Atheism, and that Idolatry?

A like sin is notorious in many of our people, professing they are no
Papists, being far worse, flat Atheists in life, practicing no Religion at
all. Great men they think themselves, that they inueigh against Popery,
though mean while they live in gross ignorance of God, and contempt of his
pure worship.

How much better were it to continue Papists, then to lose all sense of a
Deity? to live without all dread of God, and fear of his holy Name? Though it
be true, there is no hope of the salvation of an obstinate Idolater: yet this,
I think, as true, that as Christ speaks of Sodom and Gomorrhe, their state
in judgment is more tolerable then the state of unthankful Cities; so the
damnation of Idolaters is much more easy, then that of Atheists. Thou that
abhorrest Idols, Romans 2.22.
committest thou sacrilege? Thou that scoffest at Popery, fallest thou into
Atheism?

To say in a word, In turning from Idols, two extremities are observed.

First, flying Idols, and falling to superstition: that furious Iehu, destroys
Baals Altar and Priests, yet 2. King. 10.28, 29.
departs not from the cleanlier Idolatry of JEROBOAM. Our people have left
Image Worship, yet retain their fathers Traditions.

The second is, turning from Idolatry, but degenerating to mere Atheism, if
not in opinion, yet sure in practice. How many know we scoffers at Popery? as
great deriders of pure Religion? laughing at Traditions, yet ignorant of Gods
rule of worship?

My Brethren, what auayles it to leave Idols, if you cleave not to the true
God? to abhor strange gods, and to worship none? to detest superstition, and
to practice profaneness? I dare say, there is more hope of salvation for the
grossest Idolater, then for the Atheist, though such but in life; the one has
some conscience to be wrought upon, some sense of a Deity to affright; the
other is without God in this world, therefore without hope of a better state in
the life to come.

To serve the living and true God. Be like then God cannot be served, till
Idols be forsaken: Matt. 6.24.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. When the people professed to Ioshuah their
purpose to serve God, IOSHVAH replies: Ios. 24.16, 19
They could not serve him. What is his meaning? Augustine. qua supra.
says Augustine: not with that perfection, that beseemed Gods Majesty: or,
secondly, not without Gods grace assisting, and enabling them, as if his
purpose were to check their presumption. Better thus, as later Interpreters
expound; supposing they retained their Idols, they could not acceptably serve
God: therefore presently subioynes IOSHVAH: If ye will indeed serve the Lord,
Ios. 24.23.
put away the strange gods, that are among you, and incline your hearts to the
Lord God of Israel. To like purpose said the Apostle: 1. Cor. 10.21.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; nor be partakers
of the Table of the Lord, and of the table of Devils. Intimating as great
Antithesis, betwixt God and an Idol, as betwixt God and the Devil; betwixt
honoring of an Idol, and of God; as betwixt worshipping God, and worshipping
the Devil.

1. King. 18.21.
betwixt God and Baal: as the Samaritan Colonies, who would 2. King. 17.33.
fear the Lord, and withal serve their own gods; as Jews in Zephanies time,
were wont to swear by Jehovah, Zeph. 1.5.
and by Melcom: as they amongst us, that sour our pure Religion, with the
Leaven of Popish superstition.

The second are they, that half share themselves betwixt God and Idols; their
Conscience they reserve to God, their knee they bend to Baal: an 1. Cor. 8.4.
Idol they know is nothing; yet to this nothing, they prostrate their bodies;
Gracing idolatrous Masses with their presence, and holding all semblances of
outward reverence with the most devout Masse-mongers: As our curious, or
covetous Travelers. Let them read Paul's censure of such practice, 1. Cor.
10.20. and tremble to continue it.

There remaynes in this clause the description of that God, who alone is to be
served, in opposition to Idols. The Antithesis is remarkable, showing the wide
differences betwixt our God and Idols.

Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7.
they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, feet and walk not, hands and
handle not: as Ioash scoffs at Baal, to calm the tumult and turbulencie of
his zealous worshippers; If he be a god, Judge. 6.31.
let him plead for himself: they are not able to avenge their contempt upon
those that wrong them. As for our Psalm. 33.13.
God he is in heaven, his eyes see, his eyelids try the children of men: he
has life in himself; gives life to the creatures; auengeth himself on them
that provoke him; saues such as trust in him.

Secondly, he is the true God. Truth understand, not that he shows in his
Assertions or Promises, but truth of his Nature: he is very God, that has in
him truth and substance of Deity. Whereas Idols are 1. Cor. 8.4.
nothing in the world, nothing of that Idolaters conceit they are, having
nothing of the divine Nature, which their worshippers ascribe unto them: see 2.
Reg. 19.18.

Me thinks then we should not choose but join with Ioshuah in his choice
betwixt God and Idols; If others will needs serve wood and stone, the work of
men's hands, yet Josh. 24.15.
we and our houses will serve the Lord, the living and true God, that is Iam
4.12.
able to save and to destroy.

The second fruit and evidence of their faith follows. It is, their patient
waiting for the coming of Christ.

VERSE. 10. And to wait for his Son from heaven.


THat act of theirs let us first take notice of, and then see the description
of the matter of it: First, by his Relation: secondly, Adiunct: thirdly, Effect.

The word in Paul's sense, as I conceive it, implies three things, (...).
every of them a strong evidence of faith in this people. First, hopeful
expectation, and, as Peter calls it, looking 2. Pet. 3.12.
for the blessed appearing of Christ to Judgment. Secondly, Contentment with
the delay, in David's phrase, Psalm. 37.7.
tarrying the Lords leisure. Thirdly, patient continuance in the service of
God, and enduring all afflictions waiting thereon, notwithstanding the reward
be long delayed.

How forcibly from every of these is inferred the presence of Faith? of the
first: hopeful expectation of Christ's coming to judgment. Can it be where is
not persuasion of reconciliation with God? who is there, but, as Foelix, Act.
24.25.
trembles at the very mention of Judgment to come, so long as he has
conscience of sins, and wants assurance of the pardon of them? O Death, O
Judgment, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man living in his sins?
how desires he to have all mention and thought of it buried? how is he
astonished in the serious apprehension of it? what marvel? while he apprehends
Christ only as a severe Judge, 2. These. 1.8.
coming to render vengeance to them that know not God, and disobey the
Gospel. I never wonder at our faithless people, distasting in our Ministry
nothing so much, as the doctrine and terror of the last Judgment; poor
faithless impenitents, they know not their peace with God; nor while they
practice, can they believe pardon of sin. That once obtained, how welcome
should not the mention only, but the day be? the Luke 21.28.
day of Redemption, and full deliverance from sin and misery. Well therefore
may we make this hopeful expectation of Christ's coming to Judgment, a work
and fruit of Faith.

See we the second branch: waiting the Lords leisure, and that with hearty
contentment. This is apparently a fruit of Faith; whether we consider, First,
the general description of it as it is in practice of Saints: Secondly, or the
great opposites of contentment, which only Faith masters. He that believes,
Isai. 28.16.
makes not haste, that is, is contented to wait the Lords leisure for
deliverance; proportionally, for all blessings that he has promised; but weigh
especially the many impediments of contentment, we shall confess it is a
work of extraordinary faith, comparing the miseries Gods children here feel,
with the freedom Christ's coming brings with it. First, what a vexation is it
to Gods children to dwell in the world, as 2. Pet. 2.8.
LOT in Sodom? where what they see and hear, is welnigh nothing but vanity,
and vexation of Spirit Psalm. 120.5, 6.
. Woe is me, said DAVID, that I am constrained to dwell with MESHECH; and my
Soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace: When withal a man
considers what accompanies Christ's second coming; separation Mat. 25.32.
of Goats from the Sheep, gathering all that Matt. 13.41.
offends out of his Kingdom, must it not be acknowledged great faith that
works contentment? Secondly, add unto this, consideration of other
afflictions, the portion of Gods children in this life, though, when we compare
them with the glory that shall be revealed, we cannot but say with AUGUSTINE;
Hic ure, hic seca, vt in aeternum parcas; yet when we meditate the promise of
Apoc. 14.13.
resting from our labors, and and 21.4.
having all tears wiped from our eyes, do we not sometime wish in our
weakness, that Will of GOD, for protracting our troubles, altered? and what
but Faith can calm our coffeehouse? Thirdly, but that misery of miseries,
the remaynes of sin, the rebellion of nature against grace, whom does it not
in a holy manner discontent? who blames Paul if he Romans 7.24.
cry out for deliverance, or any for hastening of our full deliverance? who
had not rather, if the Will of GOD were so, presently exchange necessity of
sinning for necessity of obeying; infirmity for power, imperfection for
perfection of righteousness? yet Faith teaches to rest contented with this
Will of God, and what but Faith can do it? and this persuasion that even this
delay works some way to our good.

Thirdly, the last thing in this waiting, is, Continuance in Gods service
notwithstanding afflictions be our portion; and the promised recompense so long
delayed. I should have faynted in my affliction, but that Psalm. 27.13.
I verily believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living.

And look to the present condition of GODS Saints, it shall be found often such,
that they must believe one contrary in another; that there is a reward for the
righteous, when they feel naught else but misery: that God forsakes not, when
he forsakes. What can make us in that state hold out our holy courses? but
Faith and persuasion of GODS Truth, and love and power to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think; yea contrary to all that we
can see, or feel: And this made Paul say, We 2. Cor. 5.7.
walk by faith, not by sight.

Paul to AGRIPPA, King AGRIPPA, beleeuest thou the Prophets? Beloved
Christians, believe you in the Lord Jesus? I would I could answer my self for
you, as Paul does for Agrippa, I know you believe. But this once I know, as
SOLOMON: Every man will boast of his own righteousness, of his faith, Prou.
20.6.
but where may we find a faithful man, a true Believer? I will tell you how
you shall know them.

See thou a man holding his course steady in Christian practice, though he
meet with afflictions never so many, for the hope sake laid up for us in
Heaven? say of him in thy Charity; That man has faith; feel thou in thy
self that steadfast and vowed resolution; though the Lord should prolong thy
life to the Coming of his Son to Judgment, and in all that time press thee
with afflictions; yet for that hope sake, so far from enjoying, thou
resoluest to cleave to thy God? bless God for the gift of faith; to thee, I
dare say, it is Philip. 1. vlt.
given to believe in the Lord Jesus.

Search every man his heart, how in this particular it is affected. Infirmities
in practice we shall find many: resolution in the main, if we find, Lord,
what comfort have we? I leave it to every man's serious examination; wishing to
you all this peoples measure of Faith, in hopeful expectation, patient waiting
for Christ's Coming; firmest resolution to break through the temptation of long
delay, notwithstanding afflictions that accompany Gods service.



this Jesus is now resident in Heaven, and so shall be in respect of his
humanity, till Act 3.21.
the time of consummation. The Heavens must contain him till the time that all
things be restored. Col. 3.1.
Above, Christ now sits at the right hand of his Father, from Phil. 3.20.
Heaven we look for the Savior.

And is it not strange, men in so many things orthodoxe, should dream of
Christ's bodily presence perpetual upon Earth? And that his humane Nature, as
his Deity, fills Heaven and Earth? what then is become of that himself spoke
in the days of his flesh? The poor ye shall have always with you; Mat.
26.11.
Me not always. And, It is expedient for you that I John 16.7.
go away. How is it that the Scriptures send us to seek him in Heaven, and
thence to expect him?

Forsooth, visibly, he is in Heaven; inuisibly, every where. Belike then, his
Ascension into Heaven is nothing but his vanishing out of our sight; he never
left the Earth, but only vanished, like some Phantasme, out of his Disciples
sight: Let us be content with the simplicity of Scriptures; and seeing they
teach us to look for him from Heaven; thence let us exact him.

His description follows, First, by his adjoined raising from the dead;
inserted, as an establishment of that hope, notwithstanding his death.
Secondly, but specially by his effect, as comfortable as any is or can be to
us, naturally the Children of wrath. Wherein consider we, First, his action;
deliverance or rescue. Secondly, the property he has in it: Jesus who
delivers. Thirdly, the persons delivered, us: the misery from which he
delivers: from the wrath to come.

Jesus who delivers; It seems then his property in communicable to deliver
us from Hell: No Creature in Heaven or Earth is therein sharer with him. There
is no name given under Heaven by which we can be saved, save Act. 4.12.
only the Name of Jesus, him has Rom 3.25.
God proposed to be the propitiation: him has God the Father John 6.27.
sealed, and sent with commission to the work. Understand it by way, First, of
Merit. Secondly, Efficacy. Thirdly, Aduocation.

The necessary conditions required to our deliverance, performable by no
Creature, prove it. First, Romans 3.26.
yielding full satisfaction, every way equivalent to the offense of God: which
none but a person of his excellency could perform. Secondly, Heb. 1.14.
rescuing us out of the power of Satan, who had us, as Gods Iayler, delivered
to be tormented: a rescue possible to none from that Mat. 12.29.
strong man armed, but this Son of God stronger then he, his privilege and
prerogative Royal it is, to deliver us from the wrath to come.

Mat. 1.21.
Sole Savior of his people from their sins. As they have erected their Head
to be a Counter-Christ; so thousands of others, to be Counter-Iesuses.

So many Saints, so many petty Saviors they have made; to share with our
Jesus, in this honor of saving souls from wrath. Jesus delivers only from
wrath eternal; Jesuits Saints, by their ouer-flowing righteousness, from
temporary wrath in Purgatory. Yea, so many Christians, so many Saviors in
part of themselves, as if Christ had paid but part of our price; merited
something toward our ability of saving our souls from the hand of Hell. I
say not much on this occasion. But sure I am, what ever comes under the Curse
of the Law, from that Christ Gal. 3 13.
redeemed us by being made a Curse for us, and that not by us, but Heb. 1 3.
by himself; bearing 1. Pet. 2.24.
our sins in his body upon the tree.

Let us carefully preserve this honor untouched to our Jesus. Many Popish
Errors may be holden without remediless peril of damnation. In this point
who so is Popish, or Jesuitical; let him fear lest he forfeit his share in
this blessed Deliverance.

The act it self follows; Deliverance or rescue.

Deliverance?

Merito. Secondly, Spiritu; is the compendious answer. Thus unfold it.

act is past, in the virtue permanent.

gives his Spirit to work Faith, to make us capable of this Deliverance,
according to the tenor Ezech. 36.27
of the Evangelical Covenant.

Ier. 32.40.
puts his fear in our hearts, and causes us to walk in his Statutes.

1. Cor. 10.13. 2. Cor. 12.7.
or protects us in temptation, that the issue may be comfortable.

1. John 2.1.
intercedes for pardon; suppeditates Grace, by renewing acts of Faith and
Repentance. Finally, protects and safegards us from the rage of Satan, that
that 1. John 5.18.
evil fasten not on us, to deprive us of Salvation. Thus does our Jesus
deliver us.

Join hereto consideration of persons sharing in this Deliverance: Us.

Us, in this question, has a double Antithesis, one unto Angels, another to
men; vessels of wrath: both would be weighed, the better to provoke to
thankfulness. He took not upon Heb. 2.16.
him Angels, but the seed of ABRAHAM. Not Angels, their nature he assumed not,
nor sustained their person in suffering: they fell irrecouerably, and suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire.

That is not all the specialtie of his Love. Man's Nature he assumed, but does
he deliver all Mankind? not sure in the issue; nor, I dare say in his
intention.

Therefore see ever restraints annexed in the Word of God. Us, says Paul, Romans
5.14.
whom he calls, whether Jews or Gentiles. Us, that believe them, that God John
17.9.
gave him out of the World. Us, says PETER, whom he has redeemed 1. Pet.
1.18, 19
from our vain conversation: more, or other then God has chosen, have no
share in this happy Deliverance. And these restraints are current in the Word
of God.

Two other, others have made: one, Jews in their envious Pride; another,
infirm Christians in their ignorance or weakness.

They forbid us to 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
preach to Gentiles that they may be saved; at no hand endure speech of turning
Act. 13.46, 50
to the Gentiles: yet are they all Abraham's seed that follow his faith. ABRAHAM
was justified Romans 4.10, 11
before circumcised. A sign, said the Apostle, that to the uncircumcision also
was intended the blessing of ABRAHAM. If Paul seem a Judge incompetent; says
Isai. 8. Let Romans 15.9, 10 11, 12.
Gentiles praise God for his mercy. And again, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his
people. And again, He that shall rise to reign over Gentiles, in him shall
the Gentiles trust.

A second causlesse restraint, is that Gods Children make in their weakness:
thus, under this (Us) come Believers, none but such as ABRAHAM, that are fully
assured and never doubt of their Deliverance: none but such whose
sanctification admits no interruption, nor scarce evidence of imperfection, by
particular falls of Infirmity. What then shall become of the generation of the
Just? whose doubtings and frailties are recorded in Scripture? yea, as
Disciples in another case; Who then can be saved? Better things is the Apostle
persuaded of many weaklings; and speaks more comfortably to weary souls.
They are all in compass of ABRAHAM'S Covenant, that walk in the Romans 4 12.
steps of ABRAHAM'S faith; yea, though they be not able to keep pace with him.
Be merciful, said NEHEMIAH, to them Nehem. 1.11.
that desire to fear thy Name; that would feign fly from evil, but cannot,
as they desire, being clogged with the flesh. Who shall deliver me, said the
Apostle; me, whom sin Romans 7.23.
leads captive in particulars: I thank my God through JESUS CHRIST. And there
is no Romans 8.1.
condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS, not walking after the flesh,
but after the Spirit; though in particulars flesh prevail to misguide them.

Us then, that he has called; us, that believe in any measure, so we strive
to grow in faith, and bewail our infidelity; Us, that would do good, and
endeavor to fly from the corruption in the World through lust; yea, though we
reach not that height of Faith and Obedience that we desire and strive for: Us
our Jesus has delivered.

From what misery? from the wrath to come. A phrase of speech not frequent in
the Scriptures, what it comprizeth let us hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. Our Savior seems to explain it, when he terms it, the Mat.
23.33.
damnation of Hell: under it comes usually poena damni, and poena sensus: the
loss of the good things prepared for the righteous; the painful evils
whereinto the damned are plagued.

Mat. 25.41.
Perpetual separation from the glorious presence of God and his Saints:
irrecouerable loss of those joys, that neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor the heart of man conceived: a little of them felt in this life, the
taste of them in peace of Conscience, and joy of the Holy Ghost, how seems it
a little Heaven upon Earth? how tortures it Gods Child for an hour to lack?
how much more doleful is the perpetual and hopeless loss of them, that they
all incur who share not in this Deliverance? as our Savior said, Luke 13.28.
What wayling and weeping and gnashing of teeth follows then in the damned, to
see ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and JACOB, and all the Prophets clad in the glory of Gods
Kingdom, and themselves shut out of doors?

To leave what they lose, consider what they feel; torments and anguish
intolerable, see how Gods Spirit has pleased to express them. Though no
earthly thing be sufficient to express the anguish of it; yet resemblances are
chosen of things most bitter to sense, thereby to acquaint us something with
the grieuousnesse of it.

To man's sense, nothing more sharp then fire; of fires, none more scalding
then that of Brimstone; It is fire, fire of Brimstone, Apoc. 21.8.
a Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, for ever before the Throne of God.

It were something yet, though the pain be extreme, if there were hope either
of end or mitigation. But these torments admit neither, they Jude 7.
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; they go cursed into everlasting fire;
the Worm dies not; and the fire goes not out. The Tormentors are Spirits;
therefore immortal: the tormented as immortal in body and Soul; the fuel
never fayles; a Isai. 30.33.
River of Brimstone there is continually streaming, for ever to keep it
burning; the breath of the Lord is as Bellows to blow it.

Yet if some intermission or mitigation might be obtained, it were something;
but hear the Glutton in Hell; I am horribly tormented in this flame, but so
much water as Luke 16.24.
in tip of the finger LAZARUS might bear, to cool his tongue, is begged; and
not obtained. Merciless Abraham, may some Wretch say: nay, merciless Glutton
to the pore Lazar, and more merciless to his own soul. It is just with God,
there should be Iam. 2.13.
Judgment merciless, to such as would show no mercy to their brethren, nor to
their own souls.

The extent of the torment, makes it yet more grievous. No part free, either in
soul, or body: open their eyes; what see they? but Devils to torture them, or
other damned tormented with them? perhaps, Wives and Children, through their
negligence, or cursed example, brought into the same place of torments. Open
their ears, what hear they but bitter weeping and wayling, howling and
yelling, after the manner of Dragons, for the great wrath of GOD justly fallen
upon them? would they fly? they are in Prison, in Chains, in Darkness. Would
they dye? they cannot, they are immortal. Would they supplicate to the Judges?
he is justly inexorable: he called, and they refused: therefore he Pro. 1.26.
now laughes at their destruction. Would they think of any thing to comfort
them? they have no leisure for torments, their sinful pleasures remembered,
torture their Conscience; the good things inioyed, add much to their anguish.
What should I say more? If a man can think of any thing that may be
tormenting, if of any circumstance that can aggrauate torment; thus let him
think; it is little, all too little, to express the torments and anguish,
that comes under this term, of the wrath to come.

From this wrath to come, our sweet Savior, our blessed Jesus has delivered
us. To grow toward some profitable vse-making of this point; let us something
more particularly inquire, who they are that come under this Us, the rather,
for that this Grace, for the very enjoying of it, is thought so universal,
that the prophanest Miscreant dares prattle of his portion in it.

Us, say Libertines, whosoever are members of the Church; us all that are in
the Church visible. That were well for Capernaites; And yet says our Savior,
Easier shall it be for Sodom and Gomorrhe at the Judgment, then Mat. 11.24.
for Capernaites: though members of the Church visible. And it is not to be
doubted, but that as the grace offered, and contemned, has been greater to men
in the Church; so have they heavier damnation, then many out of the Church.

Briefly: us that believe, us, he has delivered from the wrath to come, us
that obey him: he is Author of salvation to all Heb. 5.9.
that obey him. us, that he has purged to be Tit. 2.14.
a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works: us he has delivered
from the wrath to come. For all faithless, disobedient, impenitent Sinners, on
them John 3 36.
the wrath of God abides for ever. And be Ephesians. 5.5, 6.
not deceived, you Remorslesse, Whoremongers, Covetous, Idolaters, for these
things sake comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. q. d. Ye
may perhaps flatter your selves with hope of impunitie, in respect of your
outward prerogatives: ye are baptized, so was Judas: yet Ioh. 17.12.
a child of perdition: ye are hearers of the Word; coozen not your souls with
that Sophistry. There were that heard Christ Luke 13.26.27
teach in their streets, and yet were shut out of Gods Kingdom. Thou have
preached to others; so may thou, and Matt. 7.22.
yet thy self be a Cast away. In a word, what ever thy privileges are, if a
child of disobedience and impenitently such, on thee comes this heavy wrath of
God.

Will you see how many sorts of sinners the Scripture excludes from sharing in
this deliverance? 1. Cor. 6.10.
No Whoremonger has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God: No
impenitent Whoremonger, And what is he better that with a high hand co^mits
Whoredom, blusheth not at it; glories in it, as in a point of manhood? ye
have a Catalogue of the damned Crew, mentioned by Saint John; you would wonder,
some of them, should deserve that style. In the forefront are the Revel. 21.8.
fearful, such as for fear of men shrink from holy Profession and practice.

I would to GOD our moderate Professors would think of it. May I not add
cursed Swearers? yea less then these, Revel. 22.15.
Liars. What think you then of lying Swearers? theirs sure is the blackness
of Darkness, the deepest Dungeon in the lowest Hell.

The Persecutor and Troubler of the Saints: of whom said our Savior, Serpents,
generation of Vipers, Matt. 23.33.
how can they escape the damnation of Hell? These with many other their
consorts, have their part in the Lake, that burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death; which is the wrath to come.

Secondly, Gods children have herein matter enough to comfort them in all
afflictions of this life, which they are called to suffer: If they have
received to believe in the Son of God, and have hearts to obey him. GOD may
visit thee with sickness in thy body, loss in thy goods, blemish in thy name,
crosses in thy children, horror in thy conscience; all these to humble thee.
But yet thou art delivered from the wrath to come: yea these very crosses tend
to this end, Job 33.16, 18.
to deliver thy soul from the Pit; we are chastened of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.32.
that we may not be damned with the world.

thankfulness, to the Author of this deliverance. No great recompense for
such a deliverance, yet all the Lord requires; all that we are able to render
him: yet a duty of that nature, that if we can heartily perform it, we
need no better evidence that we are sharers in it. That our dull hearts may the
better be excited hereto, reuiew the Arguments the Text affoords. Where
consider the greatness of the misery from which we are freed, the wrath to
come, the damnation of Hell, torments easelesse, endless, and remediless: the
name of hell we justly tremble at; what think we, should we do, in the sense
of the torments? The Lord, the better to show us his rich Mercy in our
deliverance, is pleased sometimes to cast a flash of this fire into our
conscience, the Worm we sometimes feel gnawing and griping there; that
little flea-biting, that short pain, how intolerable is it! O think then, how
rich the mercy of thy sweet Savior was, in freeing thee from the extremity
and eternity of that torment. Is one hours griping of this Worm so
intolerable? what is a thousand years? what is eternity? from this eternal
wrath, Jesus has delivered thee; and can thou not afford him thanks for so
great a blessing?

Let the next consideration be of the persons, Us; this term is doubly
considered: First, Absolutely: Secondly, respectively to others. Us, that were
by Ephesians. 2.3.
nature children of wrath, that walked after the fashion of the world, doing
the will of the flesh. Us, that by our sins crucified the Lord of Life: Us,
has this Jesus delivered. Compare our selves with others. How many millions of
men and women has the Lord Christ suffered to perish in the state of nature?
how many for birth, more noble; for policy, more wise; for riches, excelling
more. In behavior before calling, perhaps more tolerable: yet us, the least of
all Saints, the chief of all sinners has the Lord delivered: mooues not this
to thankfulness? See then the means of thy deliverance: himself was made a
curse for us, subjected to the wrath of God, to the pains of Hell, all this to
work our deliverance: me thinks we should now every one say to our souls as
DAVID, Psalm. 103.1.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me bless his holy Name:
borne I was a child of wrath, lived as a vessel of wrath, being abominable,
disobedient, to every good work as reprobate; yet in the fullness of time came
this Son of God, to be borne under the Law, to bear the curse of the Law, to
deliver my soul from the wrath to come; my soul, from hell, when he suffered
thousands of others, to perish everlastingly under guilt of their sins.

Secondly, it teaches us, says ZACHARY, to dedicate our selves Luke 1.74, 75
to serve this Jesus, cheerfully, in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life.

Monstrous is the abuse of this mercy of our Savior, strange the turning this
Grace of our God into wantonness: what Argument so strong to persuade to live
to his glory, as this, that when 2. Cor. 5.14, 15.
we were all dead, he dyed for us? what one thing more frequent occasion of
profaneness, and dishonouring the Name of our God? Tush, what talk you
precisely of holiness? Christ dyed for us, to save us from hell: therefore
belike, they resolve to crucify him afresh. To whom I say, as Moses to Israel,
Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh foolish people and unwise; oh hellish people
and profane! What? because the Lord, in riches of his mercy, dyed for thy
sins, and freed thee from the wrath to come; will thou therefore dishonor
him in thy life, and cause his Name to be blasphemed? as Peter to Simon Magus,
I say also to thee, Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this blessed and
comfortable deliverance.

The end of the first Chapter.
THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
VERSE. 1. For your selves, Brethren, know our entrance in unto you that it was
not vain.


THis Chapter propounds new Arguments of perseverance; in number two. First,
from the graciousnesse of the instrument, by which they were brought to the
Faith, ad Verse. 13. Secondly, from the experience themselves had had of the
power and efficacy of the Doctrine of Faith; inde ad finem.

The Context stands thus; he had said Chap. 1.9. that the Churches of God
euerywhere took notice of, and declared the issue, and fruit of Paul's first
Ministry, amongst this people, q. d. and not without cause; for you know that
our entrance to you was not vain.

The chief Conclusion is: PAVLS entrance was not vain. And it is amplified by
certain helping causes, auayling to make his Ministry effectual.

First, in Paul, first, his boldness: Secondly, his sincerity: Thirdly, his
meekness, and amiable demeanor toward them.

Secondly, in the People; their reverent and respectfull behavior in hearing,
Verse. 13.

Sense; our entrance: that is, first, Preaching: was not vain; say some, in
the matter, not vain, but substantial and sound. Rather, in the fruit not
vain; GOD so blessing his pains, that thereby they were converted, and
brought to the Faith, Chap. 19.

Paul speaks of himself, is generally true of all others, dealing sincerely in
the work of the Ministry: Their preaching seldom or never wants fruit;
seldom this fruit, conversion of Gods people. Ioh. 15.16.
I have sent you and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit.
Ier. 23.22.
If they had stood in my counsel, they should have turned the people from
their evil way. Though, Esaias his Ministry wrought nothing in the multitude,
but blindness and obstinacy; Isai. 6.13.
yet was there a Tenth, that should return.

Marvel not at it: the proper end of the ordinance is, that thereby sinners
should be converted unto God, and hereto we are sent, Ioh. 15.16. What Christ
speaks to Peter, and Andrew, is true of all in their measure; they Matt. 4.19.
are made Fishers of men.

Besides, the promise is made of his presence, and Spirits assistance to work
with us, in the faithful discharge of our Ministry: Matt. 28.20.
he is with us to the end of the world, not only by his power and providence
to protect us, but by his Spirit and Grace, to give life to our Ministry.

them to the work, without doubt of success to give themselves, with
instance, to their Vocation and Calling: As for many other reasons, enough to
encourage the most negligent, and timorous; so especially for this, that they
are assured their labor shall not be altogether vain in the Lord. What may
incite us if this will not? that GOD has assured us, we shall save the souls
of his people: Pro. 11.30.
he that wins souls, is wise, yea glorious in the sight of God.

What if it be our lot, to preach the Gospel, even where the Name of Jesus was
never heard of? what if it be a people never so deeply drowned in Idolatry,
and profaneness? our Ministry shall not be in vain. And see how many
Arguments of encouragement the LORD has given us. First, that our service
shall be accepted whatsoever the 2. Cor. 2.15.
issues be; though perhaps it be true of us as of our Savior, We Luke 2.34.
are sent as well for the fall, as for the rising of many in Israel. Secondly,
not accepted only, but plentifully Isai. 49.4. Bernard.
rewarded: Lest any say, if the issues be answerable, Bernard says well, we
have our recompense secundum laborem, not secundum prouentum.

Secondly, it shows to what cause we may impute the



lay the foundation: 1. Cor. 3.6.10
others that build thereupon: some that plant: others that water. I think I
may boldly say, they are either not sent, or else unfaithful in their Calling,
whose Ministry is not in one of these kinds, effectual. Secondly, the fruit
of our Ministry is not always manifest, there may be fruit that is not
presently discerned: says ELIAS, 1. Kin. 19.10, 18.
I only am left; yet was there a greater remnant, 7000. Ioh. 12. It is noted
that amongst the Ioh. 12.42.
Rulers there were some that believed in Christ, who yet being but Nouices,
durst not confess him. In Iezabels household was a faithful 2. King. 1.14.
Obadiah; think you he had escaped with his life, had he been so known to
Iezabel? Lastly, if yet no fruit, yet sooner or later it shows it self; God
will not always be wanting to the labors of his servants, faithfully and
sincerely performed.

VERSE. 2. But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully
entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto
you the Gospel of God with much contention.


FOllow now the helping causes or means to the efficacy of Paul's Ministry:
where first occurres his boldness in delivering Gods Truth to the people;
amplifyed, First, by the measure of it, intimated in mentioning the hindering
causes thereof, his afflictions. Secondly, by the Fountain whence it issued:
We were bold through our Lord.

one necessary property of a Minister desiring to have his Ministry
fruitful, that is, boldness in delivering Gods Truth to his people: the
nature of it thus conceive out of the Etymon of the Word. First, when a man
speaks all the Lord commands him to speak: As PAVL kept back Act. 20.27.
nothing of Gods counsel. Secondly, when with liberty and freedom of speech
he vtters his message, without fear of men's faces: see it enjoined and after
a sort explayned, Jer. 5.7, 8.
Go to all that I send thee unto; speak all that I command thee; be not
afraid of their faces.

Prayed for with instance by Apostles, Act. 4.29. enjoined to be remembered by
the people, in their prayer for the Apostle; and a reason there given, that he
might speak, Ephesians. 6.19.
as he ought to speak: as if he had thought the timorous delivery of the
Word of God, beseemed neither the Messenger, nor the Majesty of the message.
Examples see in Elias, and him that came after him, in the Spirit and power of
ELIAS.

Hereto, we all, whom God has put in trust with the expedient for the people
to know. Reasons are many: First, it is that, that procures us authority in
the consciences of the people. I know not how, things timorously delivered,
though never so truly, lack their life in the Hearers hearts, whiles they
begin to think, our selves suspect the Truth, of what we deliver. Secondly,
it is no small encouragement, to meditate, that the Lord is with us, to defend
us: and that prevailed so far with Jeremy, that though his resolution was,
to Ier. 20.9, 11.
speak no more in the Name of the Lord; yet when he considered the Lords
presence with him, he could not but prophecy. Thirdly, that Argument me thinks
is piercing, Ier. 1.17.
lest the Lord destroy us.

Helps to procure it: First, assurance of our Calling from God. It brings with
it how many Arguments of Confidence? First, assurance of protection. Secondly,
Conscience it self suggests necessity of boldness. Thirdly, puts to silence
all those idle debates, and consultations with flesh and blood.

Secondly, assured warrantie of what we teach, whether to inform judgment, or
to rectify affections: therefore Paul wills to build all exhortations,
reproofs, etc. 2. Tim. 4.2.
upon doctrine, that we may be able to demonstrate, what we reprove, to be a
sin; what we persuade unto, to be a duty.

Thirdly, a clear Conscience before God and men: This makes Pro. 28.1.
bold as Lions; and nothing more deiects the spirits then guilt of sin.

Fourthly, Act. 4.29.
prayer to God, to abate that timorousness natural, that in best duties
shows it self.

Secondly, The people hence learn, as not to forget their Ministers in Prayer
to GOD for this grace to be doubled upon them; so to bless God that stirs
up the Spirits of their Pastors, to deal thus freely in their Ministry. We
hear, how in great places sins abound, to the infection of the meaner
people; questionless, from this as one main Reason. Amos 7.10 13.
AMOS his words too rough for Court ears; and Bethel is no place for such
people, etc. Amongst our people, if any be in wealth or authority superior to
his Minister, plain dealing with their sins, scarce suits with good manners;
as to the Gallants in Israel, so to ours, they seem 2. Reg. 9.11.
mad Fellows that deal resolutely in reproof of their sins: And therefore
see, if the judgment threatened to Israel, be not come upon our people, the
Lord has made the Prophets tongue Ezech. 3.16.
cleave to the roof of their mouths, that they are not as reproouers unto
them; even because they are rebellious, and God purposes to destroy them.

The measure of Paul's boldness follows: Though he had suffered afflictions and
reproaches at Philippi, yet was he bold to spoke the Gospel unto them, etc. So
then

Afflictions in Gods Children ought not to quench grace; neither do they
quench, but rather inflame it. PETER'S boldness Act. 4.13, 20.
admired by the Rulers; it was rather increased then abased by their
threatenings; like instances see Elias, Jeremy, John Baptist, etc. Why, they
ought not, these are Reasons:

First, They are pledges to us of sincerity: next, to the warrantablenesse of
our actions, for the matter, and the testimony Conscience gives of our regular
intentions; Persecutions are best evidences of our walking with a right foot to
the Gospel: that except we will therefore faint, because the Lord 1. Pet.
4.14.
seals up to us our faithfulness, why should they daunt us?

Secondly, 2. Cor. 1.5.
Comforts are usually given to Gods Children proportionable to their
afflictions; and if ever we have experience of Gods love, it is under the
Cross.

Thirdly, The end of afflictions is, to Hosh. 5.15.
quicken grace.

Why they do not in the event; ordinarily mean; sometimes it is true, we
bewray humane frailty, but ordinarily so it is, that as corruption in men
unregenerate, the more it is opposed, the more it storms, and grows
outrageous; so Grace, the more it is opposed, the more inflamed like new Job
32.18, 19.
Wine without vent; so is the Spirit: like Ier. 20.9.
fire in the bones, so Gods Word suppressed in a gracious heart.

First, Reasons.
In such times we best see our frailty natural; are most lowly in our own
eyes; cleave closer unto God; seek him more diligently; pray more fervently.
In the days of ease, how seem we to our selves petty gods, as Peter? and
such mountains, as David speaks, as if we were immovable? What marvel if
God leave us to our selves? to humble us, to make us less confident in our
selves; more dependent upon our God.

Secondly, Afflictions sanctified to Gods Children, abate corruption, the only
clogge unto grace in our hearts. As the outward man perishes, so 2. Cor. 4.16.
the inner is daily renewed.

Thirdly, With the affliction the 1. Cor. 10.13.
issue is given; the issue vertually; grace sustayning that the issue may be
comfortable.

Paul has; the afflictions are 2. Cor. 4.17.
light and momentanie, the glory weighty, incomparably glorious, everlasting.
If that persuade not, let that terror of the LORD sway with us; If any Heb.
10.38.
withdraw himself, my soul (says the Lord) shall have no pleasure in him.
Wonderful is the delicacie and tenderness of our nature, much given to ease.
But thus think: better here to have pain, and there Luke 16.25.
comfort; then to live at ease, and after death to be plunged into Hell
torments.

trials. A man never knows so well what Grace he has or wants, as in
afflictions. In days of prosperity profane Hest 8.17.
Persians became Jews; Hypocrites Mat. 13.20.
joy in the word, etc. the comfort is this, You are they that have continued
with me in my Luke 22.28.
temptations, therefore, I dispose unto you a Kingdom. The fountain of Paul's
boldness remaynes; Bold in our God; that is, say some, trusting and relying
upon our God for support: all according to God, led by his Spirit, rather then
by petulant humor. Best thus, Thorough God, and encouragement ministered to us
by his Spirit.

humil^tie and thankfulness is here remarkable; transcribing glory of all
grace to God; not mentioning any good thing of himself, but with
acknowledgement of God for the Author; so alibi. Of his laboring: not I, but
1. Cor. 15.10.
Gods grace which is with me; of his gracious abilities Christian; they are of
Christ Phil. 4.13.
strengthening; ministerial; they are of 2. Cor. 3.5, 6.
God, the only enabler to so great performances.

His example let us imitate in all our mentions and meditations of the good
things God has wrought in us, forget not the Author, 1. Cor. 4.7.
what have we that we have not received? In this grace specially of constancy
under the cross. Can we say, as PAVL? Though we be afflicted, yet we faint
not? magnify the power of God supporting our weakness. Nothing is more
changeable then the nature of man, from good to worse; especially pressed with
afflictions. The Lord, the better to provoke to this duty, lets us see in
others, the picture of our own nature; how many great Servants of GOD have
stumbled at the Cross? say thou with thy self, if thy strength be more; It is
God that supports me; God only perfecting his power in weakness.

In our God, in such appropriating God to himself, the property of saving
faith deserves our notice: discerning a particular interest to the Covenant of
Grace. So Job, Job 19.25.
My Redeemer lives. THOMAS, Ioh. 20.28.
My Lord and my God, what else, but this, puts difference in the point of
believing, betwixt faith of Gods Children, and that of Devils? Papists say;
Charity. But Charity is not Faith, nor part of it; nay, a grace disparale
from Faith: in the point of believing, we must see a difference; which is
little, or none without particularitie.



Mark 1.15
Commandment to believe, we have every where, and what is spoken to all, is
intended to every particular. Secondly, Mark. 16.16
promise also propounded to all to be believed for their parts. Thirdly,
Sacraments particularizeth promise. Fourthly, Romans 8.16.
testimony of Spirit given in every Elects heart. Evidences out of which it
arises to be labored for of all Gods Children.

First, Confidence in God through Christ; and dependence on him, for all
blessings of this life, and that which is to come.

Secondly, Propension of the heart to new obedience. Of Paul's boldness, the
first helping cause to the efficacy of his Ministry thus far.

The next in order is his sincerity.

VERSE. 3.4. Our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile:

But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, so we
speak not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts.


THE words contain two special evidences of Paul's sincerity, set out in an
Antithesis; wherein he first remooues from him certain opposites of
sincerity; imposture, impuritie, guile. Secondly, assumes the property of a
Minister dealing sincerely in his Calling: he sought to please God; and thereof
gives:

Reasons.
First, Gods favor toward him in approouing him so far, as to entrust him
with the Gospel.

Secondly: the meditation of Gods omni-science, and power to discern secrets.

The Connection thus conceive; he had said, that at Philippi he had met with
many afflictions; and because it might be demanded what the reason might be,
his preaching should be thus attended with troubles; it is assigned here: the
matter of his Doctrine, and manner of his carriage in it: his exhortation, or
preaching was not, as that of false apostles, fitted to the corrupt opinions,
and unclean manners of men. No marvel therefore if attended with tribulations.

It is then no new thing that a Minister dealing faithfully in his Calling,
should be attended with persecutions, carry he himself never so meekely and
peaceably amongst men. Ieremies complaint is known; a man that had no dealings
with any in matters of the World; yet striving with all the earth, Ier. 15.10.
and the common execration of the World.

No marvel. First, Such is the quality and matter of their doctrine, so
opposite to man's corrupt nature, that lighting upon it, it exasperates it to
Romans 8.7.
enmity against it self, and the publishers thereof.

Secondly, There goes with such a man's Ministry, a kind of Gall and Wormwood
to men unreformed; so pierces it into the Conscience, so vnbowelleth it
corruption. That two-edged sword in his mouth, Heb. 4.12.
searches to the discovery, and arraignement of the most hidden, and best
beloved corruptions, as our Savior giving reason of that inhumane insulting
over the corpses of the two witnesses, assigns this: because they Apoc. 11.10.
vexed those that dwelt on the earth. I am persuaded its true, what face soever
such men set on the matter, covering the sting of their souls, in the best
manner they can; if they be hearers, its true of them that Isay has, Isai.
75.21.
There is no peace to the wicked.

It teaches you, as Paul advises, 1 Thessalonians. 33.
not to be moved with our afflictions; so as thereby to grow jealous, either of
the soundness of our Doctrine, or uprightness of our hearts. You know, or may
know we are thereto appointed; and ye cannot be ignorant, it has ever been
the lot of Gods faithful Servants in their times; who wonders at Mat. 14.4, 8.
HERODIAS thirsting after JOHN BAPTISTS blood? when he beats so continually
upon the unlawfulness of Incest; or at IEZABELS 1. Reg. 19.2.
swearing the death of ELIAS, reproouing her Witchcrafts and abominable
Fornications? the more I wonder at those men, Ministers especially, that think
it so strange a thing, that to profane persons, a Ministers person should be
so odious. This once I dare say, either the Lord must alter the nature of his
Word; or Ministers palpably flatter, and give way to their peoples sins: or
else, dealing faithfully, suffer persecutions. Let us now take view of the
words.

Our Exhortation: that is our preaching. Synecdoche: because exhortation is a
chief part of preaching. And let that be our note: Exhortation is an
essential part of preaching; so that though a man interpret, and deliver
Doctrines never so soundly; yet is he a defective Preacher, except he join
thereto exhortation. Hence sometimes in Scripture, the Sermon is styled a Act.
13.15.
word of exhortation. If any have a Word of exhortation, let him say on; he
that prophecieth, says PAVL, speaks to 1. Cor. 14.3.
edification, comfort, exhortation. To preach, says the Apostle, is to 2. Tim.
4.2.
improoue, rebuke, exhort, etc. practice of Saints is every where occurrent, of
Peter; with many other words did he testify and Act. 2.40.
exhort: so Prophets, after Doctrines laid, descend sometimes to comfort,
sometimes to reproof, sometimes to exhortation.

This, that styled, by the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.15.
dividing or cutting of the Word aright. The Scriptures deliver things, as it
were in a gross sum: Ministers are appointed, to share out of the gross, to
every one his portion; to the ignorant, instruction; to the erring,
confutation; to the distressed, comfort; to the obstinate, terror; to the
backward, exhortation.

The reason is plain, to every defect of the people must the Pastor apply
himself according to the rule, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. and like as the Lord has so
tempered the Scripture, that it serves for every necessity of his people; so
must we to whom the dispensation thereof is committed; apply and digest it. In
every part of man, we shall find defects. In the mind, either ignorance that
must be instructed; or error, that must be confuted; the conscience is
either benumbed, and must be terrified; or distressed, and must be comforted;
the will and affections, either disordered, and must be rectified by
correction; or drowzie, and must be quickened by exhortation, etc.





Secondly, And alas, how defective generally shall we find them? that not one
of many is able or careful, in making use of the Word, to go farther then the
Minister directs and leads him?

We are all here admonished, to whom the dispensation of the Word is
committed, as the Scripture 2. Tim. 3.17.
completely furnishes us to every good work of our calling, so carefully to
exercise our selves in every particular of duty, in the work of the
Ministry. The Pastors in Israel, for defects this way, we find sharply
reproved, heavily threatened by Ezechiel.

It is a liuelesse and unprofitable kind of teaching in use amongst many,
contenting themselves with bare expositions of the Text, almost
paraphrasticall, or with naked propounding of Doctrines, to inform the
judgment, leaving the conscience and affections wholly untouched. I shall
never wonder, if such men's ministry be unprofitable, failing in those things
wherein especially stands the life of Preaching.

Be you of the people admonished Heb. 13.22.
to suffer the Word, not of Doctrine only, but of exhortation: yea, if need
be, of reproof. Brethren, we are fallen into a strange Age for curious pride
in our people. Though they would laugh to hear a Minister read them a Lecture
of good husbandry, or teach them the use of their manual instruments; yet
none amongst them so rude, but undertakes to prescribe to a Minister a form of
Preaching. Let him expound to us the Scriptures, deliver us instructions; but
what has he to do to be dealing with our sins? as who say, the whole
office of a Pastor stood in this: the informing of the Judgment, or as if the
defects in conscience and affections, were not as great, as those in the
understanding? Paul, I trow, knew well what preaching meant; he branching that
whole into his parts, commands, though to lay Doctrine as ground of all, yet
withal to 2. Tim. 4.2.
improve, rebuke, exhort. And this let me say; he that feels not as much need
to have his conscience dealt withal, by terror and comfort, his affections by
reproof, or exhortation, as his judgment by information, has profited little
in knowledge of his original sin, or in sensible acquaintance with that
breach it has made in the whole man. Yea more, he that endures not as well
our reproves and exhortations, as our Doctrines and bare Narrations, bewrayes
either open profaneness, or else Act. 7.51, 54
Hypocrisy.

See we now the particulars opposite to sincerity, which Paul remooues from
him: they are, First, Imposture. Secondly, Impuritie. Thirdly, Guile. The
Interpretations are many: this I think best, that the two first be referred to
the matter of his teaching: the third, to his manner of dealing and affection:
for the matter of his preaching, it was neither erroneous, nor yet unclean, it
tended to breed, neither error in judgment, nor impuritie in the conversation.

caution and care becomes us in our Ministry, that what we teach, tend
neither to error, nor uncleanness: our Doctrine, says the Apostle, must be
1. Tim. 6.3.
wholesome, and according to godliness.

First, he that breaks the least of the Commandments, and Matt. 5.19.
teaches men so, he shall be minimus, that is, nullus, in the Kingdom of
heaven.

Secondly, and the blind guide whether wilfully, or otherwise blind, Matt.
15.14.
falls, with him he misse-leades, into the ditch.

And if such an heavy woe be due to them, Ezech. 34.4.
which seek not that which goes astray; what think we shall be the portion of
such as lead them out of the way?

Doctrine erroneous is of two sorts. First, grossly such, that is directly and
openly opposite to Gods truth, taught in Scriptures.

Secondly, covertly erroneous, which one, fitly to the use of the word, calls
Imposture. It is when by cunning, men set so fair gloss upon error, that,
under a show of truth, and pretense of holiness, it is conveyed into the
Church.

Paul tells of some, that 1. Tim. 4.2.
spoke lies through hypocrisy: such as forbade marriage, not, forsooth, as
simply unlawful, but as less excellent in it self, then single life; and a
state nothing so expedite in any, for the Kingdom of God: enjoined abstinence
from meats, under fair pretenses of mortifying the flesh; but so intangling
consciences in a snare.

The false apostles in Galatia, mingled Moses with Christ, in the article of
Justification, to say Faith justified not at all; or Christ conferred nothing
to justification; had been an error too palpable in the Church of God: mix
works with faith, the care of good works will be so much the greater.



Not to say much of errors in matter of Faith, take this one note to discern
an Impostor by: if his doctrine tend to unclean and carnal liberty, he is
sent to Deuteronomy. 13.3.
prove thee, not to guide thee.

Peter notes it a property of false teachers, 2. Pet. 2.19.
to promise liberty, and set loose the conscience, where God has bound it; if
any man's doctrine tend that way, this think of him, he is an Impostor.

Libertines taught, that in the Church Christian there lay no band on the
conscience, to submit to Magistrates, for we have Christian liberty. True,
says Peter, but yet 1. Pet. 2.16, 17
we are servants of God, according to every moral Precept, and may not use
liberty, as a cloak for lewdness; that Precept is moral, and binds ever,
Honor the King.

The Pharisees taught, as Papists now do; that if a man bestowed all he had
upon the Church, and furtherance of Religion; though he neglected sustenance of
Parents, Mat. 15.5, 6, 7
he was free: in respect of a greater good he furthered. Hypocrites, says our
Savior, that by your Traditions disanull the Commandments of God. There were
little commandments, said the same Pharisees, slight duties as it were,
wherein a man need not be so strict, or precise: he might give his eye leave to
look wantonly, his heart to think lasciuiously; so the body were kept from
the grossest act of uncleanness; vain oaths were no great matters, to be
stood upon; so they swear truly the Law, they taught, was sufficiently
observed. And a number such like licentious doctrines, suitable to the humor of
many, too many in the Church at this day. If thou hear a man in that humor,
that he will set thee loose, where God has bound thee, and give liberty to
run to uncleanness, or breach of any Gods Commandments, of him be jealous;
what ever his gifts be, he walks not with a right foot to the Gospel. The
Law of God is Psalm. 19.8.
undefiled; as it proceeded from a pure God, so it self is pure, teaches
purity, condemns uncleanness: kills it in the hearts of all GODS Children.
And these are the things Paul remooues from the matter of his Doctrine, from
his affection and intention he disclaimes deccit.

As the matter of his Doctrine was true, plain, and pure; so his affection
free from guile; I think, he means that spiritual guile, which the Scripture
calls, Hypocrisy: thus briefly conceive the nature of it; it hides the evil
that is; counterfeits the good, that is not. Hypocrites, says Bernard,
Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 66.
desire to seem, not to be good; not to seem, but to be evil; their study
is not, Color virtutes, but vitia colorare, quodam quasi virtutum nimio: they
care not to follow or practice virtue, but to color vice by putting upon it
the painted complexion of virtue: as SIMON of Cyrene, Sermon. de sancto Benedicto.
says the same Author, they bear a Cross, that is not their own; lacking a
religious intention, angariantur: and the good things they love not, they are
forced to do, through love of vain glory, which they long after.

A vice, above many, hateful unto God: most to be avoided of Ministers and
people: marring the best actions, and making them loathsome unto God: there were
that preached Christ, but Philip. 1.16, 18.
not sincerely: in their preaching, Paul professes rejoicing, for some
advantage he saw might thereby come to Gods glory: themselves had no comfort,
for that no sutablenesse of their affections and inventions, with the matter of
their doctrine and pretenses they made of honesty.

Truly said Saint AUGUSTINE, Non virtus, Aug. de Tempor. Sermon. 59.
sed causa virtutis apud Deum mercedem habet: And it is the essential
difference twixt an Hypocrite and a true Nathaniel: his actions only are
glorious, his affections no less then sordid; a true Israelite to good
actions, suits as good intentions.

To root out hypocrisy, to plant sincerity, these are helps available.

First, continual meditation of Gods All-seeing, and All-searching Eye. Heb.
4.13.
The God with whom we have to deal, to his eyes all things are naked, and
uncovered.

Secondly, consider the issue of hypocrisy: Good works are manifest
beforehand, 1. Tim. 5.25.
and they that are otherwise, cannot always be hid.

VERSE. 4. But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel,
so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts.


Follows now the other part of the Antithesis, wherein he assumes the
property of sincerity; assigning reasons of his behavior. In the words are
two things. First, Paul's sincere behavior in his Ministry. Secondly, his
reasons and motives thereto. He sought not to please men, but God.

The point is this, A Minister may not be a man-pleaser; more then that
man-pleasing cannot stand with sincerity: some thus explain; he may not
please men against God.

First, when men cannot be pleased, but with GODS displeasure: the rule is
good to walk by; but this further conceive it, as meant not simply de euentu,
but de conatu: he is not presently insincere. In whom it sometimes befalls,
that men perhaps of corrupt minds, find pleasing, and contentment: Even to
the Hypocrites of Sion, Ezechiels Ministry was for a while, as Ezech. 33.32.
Music: and our Savior his doctrine is admired by the people, they that meant
to apprehend him, give him this testimony; John 7.46.
Never man spoke, as this man speaks.

But understand it, de conatu: when a man bends himself to this as his maine
end, to please men, and yield them contentment: This is it that cannot stand
with a Ministers sincerity.

Secondly, by men, understand carnal men, as they are such; they that desire
to please carnalitie, must alter the nature of that doctrine wherewith God has
instructed them; it is enmity to the flesh; Romans 8.7.
the flesh to it. Our doctrine is salt; wholesome and tending to preserve from
putrefaction; but not without much tartness and biting.

Thirdly, Understand it chiefly of our Doctrine, not of our civil conversation
in things indifferent. Paul's practice was, in use of liberty to please all men
in all indifferent things: we may not think that in doctrine and moral
practice, he tempered his behavior so as to please carnally, with these
limits; how far a Minister should be from this humor of man-pleasing, these
reasons prove.

First, Gal. 1.10.
If I please men, I am not the Servant of Christ, that is, if I bend and apply
my self to fit the people with doctrines pleasing to the humors of carnal
men; or made man's favor the utmost of mine intention, I were not the servant
of Christ.

Secondly, in false prophets this noted as a property and blemish, to seek
out Placentia for the people.

Thirdly, it crosses the maine end of preaching, to bring men to Repentance.
Hereby the Ezech. 13.22
hands of the wicked are strengthened, not to return from their evil way.

Let it be to us, in place of Ministers, a warning to fly this fault: then
which, I know not any more pernicious in a Minister: Three ways it is incurred;

First, in matter of Doctrine: when it is such as is pleasing to the erroneous
opinions and corrupt affections of men. As false apostles in Galatia, loath to
offend Christians by rejecting Christ; as loath to displease Christians
Iudaizing: or too much to abase the pride of nature; desiring to please
carnally, thus moderated the matter; CHRIST must be the principal and
original; Moses and Nature second Causes to perfect Justification. Right as
Papists now, to ascribe all to Nature, were too gross Pelagianisme; to take
from men all liberty in moralities, too distastefull to pride of nature; let
grace therefore have the principality; nature, a power, upon excitement, to
work with the Spirit of God; thus they shall please all parts. Amongst our
selves, how many are in this kind guilty? to legitimate Adultery,
Drunkenness, Absence from religious exercises on the Sabbath, were too open
Libertinisme; but wanton words, sitting by the Cup in good fellowship on the
Lords Day, such as these must be permitted: wherefore? I marvel: except to
please carnally.

Secondly, In manner of preaching and delivery: The false apostles in Corinth,
perceiving how the naked simplicity of Paul's preaching grew irksome to nice
and curious ears of Grecians; bent their studies, almost wholly to words, and
in preaching grew emulous of Heathenish Orators, under pretense perhaps, to
make the Doctrine more plausible; in truth to humor the people, and to win
to themselves the vain praise of Eloquence.

Thirdly, A man may teach truth, naked truth nakedly, and yet be guilty of
this crime of man-pleasing; as when his aim is this, to give contentment to
the people, and to win himself applause from the Hearers.

Secondly, since this is a fault in a Minister, see, and I beseech you, see the
great error of many; that, in opinion of their greater discretion then GOD
has granted to their Teachers, are become Prescribers unto their Preachers.
And though, I dare say, they have scarce learned the Art of good hearing: yet
think themselves able men to give Precepts and Rules of Preaching. One is this
amongst many; A Minister must so carry himself in his Dostrine, that he may
by no means offend his people: For if they love us not, we shall never do
them good by Preaching. A kind of popular pleasing carriage they would have in
a Minister; such belike, as that the most carnal, and profane amongst his
Hearers may not be offended.

Which if they understand of just offenses, they have us easily according. But
do you not remember what our Savior answers, when his Disciples bring
tidings that Pharisees were offended? Mat. 15.12, 14.
If they will be offended, let them be offended: It is truth and necessary
truth I have taught; let them bewray their blindness, Christ repents not his
Preaching. And when Jeremy complained of that issue of his Preaching, every
man cursed him; what says the answer of God unto him? if he will be a Prophet
after Gods heart, Jer. 15.19.
he must still take away the precious from the vile; yea see, how stiff he
requires him to be in that case: Let them turn to thee, turn not thou to them.

The Apostle tells us of a dangerous disease in the ears of men: It is the 2.
Tim. 4.3.
itching of the ear: it has this property; it cannot endure wholesome
Doctrine, but vain, triuiall, fabulous things it delights to be tickled
withal. God forbid, any faithful Pastor should tickle it. Salt is better for
it, then Oil: though it be more biting, it is much more sovereign.





Secondly, Have we not seen the power of the Word, so far changing the
temper of the heart, that it has made of enemies friends? how many have come
to hear, as the Pharisees our Savior, to entangle him in his Doctrine, who yet
have gone away relenting, and whose salvation is more hopeless then that of
scoffers. Yet have we seen them suddenly brought Act. 2.13, 37.
upon their knees. Truth is, Gods Word needs not help of humane policy.

Thirdly, Hear what Gods Spirit, upon like occasion, answers to his Servant
John. It seems he was troubled with some such doubt; little hope there
appeared of good to come by publishing the Book; yet is his charge: Apoc.
22.10.11
not to seal the Book; though he that is filthy will be filthy still; yet
will the righteous increase in righteousness.

Lastly, by this, you hear to be a fault in the Minister, you of the people
may take notice of like faults in your selves, some few palpable in this kind
amongst the people shall be noted. Two sorts of men we find faulty in this
kind: the first are, in truth, stark Atheists, ungodly men, their disposition
such, as the Poets fable of their Proteus, changing himself into all shapes;
so these fashion themselves to all manners and all companies, that by all
means they may get advantage by all men. Amongst Saints, they can Saint it;
and amongst Devils, play the Devils incarnate. Come they amongst men religious,
their speech, gestures, all things shall pretend Religion: Are they sorted with
profane persons? to them also they suite their manners. And it is a world to
see how they please themselves in this man-pleasing carriage, and think
themselves greatest Politicians, the only wise amongst men: what think we,
are these but stark Atheists, without God in this world? Iam. 3.9, 10, 11
monstrous fountaynes they are, says James, that out of one hole, send forth
bitter water and sweet; monstrous mouths, out of which comes blessing and
cursing: with the same mouth bless they God, and curse man made after the
similitude of God: nay God himself, in whose Image they were created, and they
are monsters amongst men, that are thus variably suited to all men's manners.

A second sort are our peaceable, civil, honest men, as they would be termed;
whose chief study is to have the good will, and good word of all men, their
glory in contentions even for Gods cause so to carry themselves, that they
displease neither side. The worst men, said the Heathen, are Neuters in
contentions: worst, says Gods Spirit, Revel. 3.15.
are the lukewarm, neither hot nor cold: And, says our Savior, in case of
confession, he that is not Matt. 12.30.
with me, is against me, he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad.

The next thing here deserving our notice, is the Anti-thesis betwixt the two,
God and man; pleasing men, and pleasing God, as if he thought them to be
incompatible; and were of opinion, that a man desiring to please men, could not
please God: and certainly it is a truth, being expounded as before. Let a man
please carnal men, he cannot but displease God: Let a man seek to please God,
he cannot but displease men; that, as our Savior said, ye cannot serve God
and Mammon; so may we say, ye cannot please God and men.

That this seem no paradoxe, consider the great contrariety betwixt corrupted
nature, and Gods pure Majesty; light and darkness, good and evil: or, if
there be any things that have greater repugnancie, are not more contrariant,
then Gods nature and carnal man: see, if you will, the things proceeding from
God to man, carrying stamp of his purity; and judge, whether there be not
natural enmity in man's nature against them. First, the Romans 7.12.
Law of God is holy, just and good; pure, as the Lawgiver: the wisdom of the
flesh Romans 8.7.
is enmity unto it. Secondly, the Spirit and Grace of God; what greater
contrariety then twixt it and the flesh? when they meet in one person, greater
discord arises then that Christ speaks of, betwixt a man and his son, even
betwixt Gal. 5.17.
a man and himself: there is nothing that a fleshly man desires or does, but
God dislikes; nothing that God prescribes, but flesh detesteth. Let God forbid
sin, flesh becomes so Romans 7.13.
much the more sinful: let him enjoin a good duty; even for the
Commandment, carnalitie more abhorres it.

It shows, and teaches us to bewail the fearful deprauation of our nature
by the fall of Adam. Can nothing please us that pleases God? Oh brethren, thus
was it not from the beginning; there once was such likeness twixt God and us,
that what he liked we approved, what he hated we detested; now behold nature so
far depraved, that it is grown directly repugnant to the Nature and Will of
God, insomuch that he cannot please God that will please men; and a man that
will give contentment to his own carnalitie, displeases presently the
Majesty of God. And let it teach us, as to bewail this fearful deprauation,
so to mortify our earthly members, and to beware how we cherish and give
contentment to sensuality, lest we yet further increase the enmity betwixt
God and us.

Secondly, see we, how foolishly men please themselves in this, that they so
demean themselves, as to please all, even carnal men. A great thing to thank
God on, q.d. they thank God for this, that they displease God, and lack their
evidence of his favor. In such men's pleasing carriage one of there two, I dare
say, is incurred. First, either running with them to the same excess of riot,
1. Pet. 4.4.
else they speak evil. Secondly, or forbearing all wholesome admonitions and
Ephesians. 5.11.
rebukes prescribed: separate thy self from their corrupt conversation, give
thy self to do what is pleasing in the sight of God, had thou the wisdom
of Men and Angels, thou can not but be displeasing to carnal men.

Lastly, cease hence to wonder at that causeless wrath rising in carnal men
against Gods children: the reason is evident, when Iehoshaphat asks of Achab,
whether there were no other Prophet by whom to enquire of the mouth of the
Lord? Yes, says Achab, one there is, MICAIAH by name, and we may by him
inquire of the Lord, he is likely to give us as good resolution as any of the
rest, but 1. King. 22.8.
I hate him: why? he prophecieth not good to me, but evil: he dealt as a
Minister desiring to please God. What wonder, if to Achab a carnal man, his
ministry and person was so hateful?

Not as pleasing men, but God. So then, the main aim of a Minister, of every
Christian should be this; so to walk that he may please God, and be approved
of him. See 1. These. 4.1. Col. 1.10. 2. Cor. 5.11.

His reason (me thinks) is binding, we must all appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ: a motive, that should prevail even with vilest men: please
that Judge, at whose bar thou must one day stand, to be quit or condemned,
according as thy person and actions shall please or displease him: we pity the
folly, and madness of that malefactor, that standing at the mercy of the Judge
for life or death, according as his after-carriage shall please or displease
him, will rather exasperate him, then seek by all pleasing means to make him
favorable; such is our case; we all are culpable before God, and liable to
condemnation, at his mercy we stand to be either saved or damned: his desire
is but this, that for the remaynder of our life, we so demean our selves in
holiness and fear, that we may please him; whom should not this reason
persuade? Let us all labor so to serve him, that we may be pleasing and
acceptable before him in Christ. Things requisite hereto, some concern the
state of our persons, some the matter of our actions, some the manner of
performance.

For the first: two things there are that make our persons there was report
before his translation, that he pleased God; by good consequence it follows in
Paul's divinity, that therefore HENOCH Heb. 11.5, 6.
had faith in Christ, inasmuch as without faith it is impossible to please God.
The reason is plain, because all the faithless man's actions, whiles he is
such, are censurable according to terms of the Law, wherein the least blemish
or imperfection adiudgeth the performer to condemnation: here is the privilege
of the Believer, his obedience done in weakness, so be it in sincerity, is
sure to find acceptance with God, for Christ his sake, to whom Faith knits us,
and whose perfections it gives us interest unto.

A second thing, in the person, making actions unpleasing to God, is
fleshlinesse: They that are in Romans 8.8.
the flesh, cannot please God, all things sauouring flesh, are stinking in the
nostrils of God, even our best actions that have relish thereof: this the
reason, why those virtuous actions of Heathens, were in them so abominable,
because their persons were faithless, and fleshly; God approues his own works
in us.

Secondly, for the matter of our actions, they must be such as have warrant
from the Word of God; prove what is acceptable unto God, and Romans 12.2.
what the good and acceptable will of God is. Whatsoever is contrariant to his
will, that is grossly a sin; whatsoever is added to his will, or but besides
it, that also abominable.

In manner of our service that it may be acceptable, two things are requisite.

First, that it be tendered to our God Heb. 12.28, 29
in reverence and fear. Let every act of service done unto, carry a relish of
awe and dread of that endless Majesty. Think when thou come to hear, how
great a God that is, in whose presence thou stand; whose Word thou hear;
a God that is in his wrath a consuming fire, and learn, as Isay, Isai. 66.2.
to tremble at his Word, etc.

Secondly, In sincerity and singleness of heart, as unto the Lord, that
pondreth the hearts: which is with God a thing so much set by, that he
esteems it as perfection.

And of Paul's behavior thus far, his motives follow.

First, Meditation of the great favor God had vouchsafed him, in trusting him
with the Gospel.

Secondly, Consideration of Gods Omni-science, and power to discern hearts.

In the first, considerable are

First, The effect that meditation had in the Apostle.

Secondly, The favor it self. It made him careful to please God.

So works the meditation of Gods favors in a gracious disposition, so ought
it to do in all men, that they become careful to please God. Compare, Romans
12.1. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8, 11. John 24.14. Luke 7.47.

More specially thus conceive; the specialtie of Gods favor in trusting him
with his greatest treasure, was it that chiefly prevailed.

The preferment God gives any of us in his favor, ought specially to persuade
obedience and care to please God. He had dealt with Israel Psalm. 147.19, 20.
so as with no other Nation, they of all others should therefore be excited to
praise him and live to his glory, more mercifully with us, said MOSES then with
our Deuteronomy. 5.3.
Fathers, in making this Covenant with us; so much more should we think our
selves obliged to obedience. See also, Mat. 13.

The more odious is the turning of Gods grace into wantonness, the abuse of
his patience to security, his mercy to presumption; his love to
licentiousness; yea, the favor of favors, Christ's death is made occasion of
the vilest abominations. So did not David, nor so Paul, they have least share
in Gods favors, that thus abuse them to licentiousness.

Our duty it shall be, for our better excitement to cheerfulness in Gods
Service, to take notice of the specialtie of his favor and loving kindness
toward us. There is not, nor can be to Gods Children a greater provocation to
faithfulness in his Service: nor is any thing in experience a greater clogge
to our hearts in holy duties, then that unwise and envious casting our eyes on
others preferments in Gods mercy, with neglect of our own, while every man
thinks God has done more for others, then for him, It is good in this case to
look downwards; and see how many are behind us in the favors of God. And
here have we a large field of comparison to walk in, there scarce being any
but may say, in some thing or other God has given him preeminence above many
others. Compare thy self as a man with other creatures: as a Christian with
other men; as a sincere Christian with Hypocrites: as such a Christian, suppose
a Magistrate or Minister, with other Christians. It was in Gods power to have
made thee a beast, he has honored thee so far, as to make thee a man, to
stamp thee with his own Image; he might have left thee as thousand others
without God, without Christ, without hope in this World: he has made thee a
member of his Church: perhaps a lively member of his Sons Body, quickened
with his Spirit; a favor denied to many in the Church. Perhaps a Minister, his
instrument and coworker to the saving of his people. Thus if we could
carefully observe the specialtie we have in Gods favor, how should our hearts
be enlarged to thankfulness and fidelity in his Service?

Lastly, let us on this occasion enquire, how the meditation of Gods favors
works on us. And so much the rather: Because

First, Herein depends no small difference twixt Gods Child, and an Hypocrite;
and

Secondly, the motives to obedience are the things that specially form, and
determine our obedience to acceptance, or otherwise. The works of obedience
in any calling, may be performed by an Hypocrite. From the works therefore no
man can firmly conclude the sincerity of his heart; from the motives he may;
and from none other more firmly, then this; that the experience and meditation
of Gods love excites us. Thou may name the Hypocrite, whose works, for their
outside, have been as glorious, as those of Gods Saints; An Hypocrite, that
from this ground has done a good duty, thou shall not find amongst the ten
thousands of Dissemblers.

It is said of Iehu, 2. King. 10.16, 30, 31.
he did what God commanded in destroying BAAL his Priests, ACHABS posterity;
his motives were, partly vainglory; partly, desire to settle the Kingdom
upon his own Posterity. Wherefore, though he had seen Gods hand on Jeroboam
for his Idolatry, yet upon the same politic ground, he continues the sin.
The favor it self follows: He was approved of God, so far as to be
entrusted with the Gospel, observe it as a compendium of the honor and office
of a Minister; God trusts him with the Gospel, the greatest treasure of the
Church. An honor often celebrated by the Apostle, Gal. 1.17. Tit. 1.3. 1. Tim.
6.20. 2. Tim. 1.14. 1. Cor. 9.

The parts of this trust are, First, safe custody, care to preserve it from
adulterating by Heretics, etc. 1. Tim. 6.20. 2. Tim. 1.14. Gal. 2.

Secondly, faithful dispensation, Tit. 1.3. 1. Cor. 9.

It is a pretty inference Sasbout has hence, interpreting that serua
depositum enjoined to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.20. Discimus ex hoc loco, etc. we
learn from this place, that in Paul's time the mysteries of Religion were not
deposed with the vulgus, but with the Bishops of the Church, plebi id tantum
sciendum est, quod ad mores formandos, and ad vitam pertinet: yet the Apostle
Iudes charge to the whole Church, is, to Jude 3.
strive earnestly for maintenance of the Faith. And Peter will have every man
able, to 1. Pet. 3.15.
make Apology for his hope.

But I answer: In respect of public dispensation, and specially of care to
keep it pure from deprauation, it is Ministers privilege to be entrusted with
the Gospel, in respect of knowing, believing, maintayning, even with dearest
blood: It is committed to all, and every of the Church of God: the dispensation
is ours, that is our honor, the belief and defense of the Gospel belongs to
all, even the meanest amongst the vulgus.

First, thus better may Ministers use the meditation, as a help to digest the
indignities they suffer from carnal men, and that base esteem their persons
and calling are subject unto. Even our lot it is that was the Apostles, to be
counted the 1. Cor. 4.13.
skumme and off-skowring of the world: the very calling we have often cast as
disgrace, into our faces; and reproach they think they have done us sufficient,
when they vpbraid us with the Priesthood, though from or by that Priesthood,
they have their Christendom, honor of their birth, yea salvation of their
souls, and were without it but as Pagans, Bastards, no better then vessels of
wrath; by it they are initiated into Christ, by it is their marriage
consecrated, and that bed made undefiled: by it, if they have any grace that
accompanies salvation, by it they receive it; without it, ordinarily no
spiritual gift that seals them to the day of Redemption. Our wisdom it
shall be to think as basely of men, thus abasing us, and to know our selves;
esteeming our selves, not according to the opinion of men, but according to
that estimate the Lord holds of us: two of the preciousest Jewels in the eyes
of the Lord, he has trusted us withal: First, the Gospel of his Son:
Secondly, the souls of his people; what infamy should not that thought digest?

to the Lords 1. Cor. 4.1.
Stewards.

His second motive follows; the consideration of that property of Jehovah, to
try the hearts. The sense is diversely conceived, metonymically some think the
mean put for the end; trial of hearts, for knowledge of them resulting from
trial. That sense standing affoords us this point of notice: the meditation of
Gods omniscience, his power to discern the heart, is no small help, and
inducement to sincerity. Therefore when the Lord prescribes to Abraham to be
upright, he adds direction to this mean, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me: and David in that last charge to Solomon, to serve God with a
perfect heart; prescribes this mean or motive: 1. Chron. 28.9
The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts. See also Psalm. 139. ad ver. 18. As the chief Fountain of hypocrisy
is either ignorance, or not consideration of this divine property; so a
principal motive to sincerity is the persuasion and serious thought of it.

As many of us as call upon the Name of the LORD, and desire to depart from
this iniquity of hypocrisy, this let us meditate; To the eyes of that God
with whom we have to deal, all things are naked, and uncovered, the secretest
thoughts, and intentions of the heart not excepted.

Reason accorded by experience, will easily convince us of it; his word, in
mouths of men of our own mould, how dives it into the bosoms of the hearers!
1. Cor. 14.24, 25.
displaying the secretest thoughts and inclinations of the heart, in such sort,
that, as the King of Syria, so the people think, we have our carry-tales, and
almost Familiars to acquaint us with their private factions and speeches:
which, though in their actions they might have some occasion to think; yet how
of their thoughts? whereof God only and their hearts are witness: say thus
rather, God is in us of a truth, or the Inspirer of this word is truly (...),
when the word, that comes from him, has such power to search out and manifest
secrets.

Secondly, a creature of God we have all in our bosoms, the faculty of
conscience witnessing our secretest thoughts, intendments, purposes; if his 1.
Joh. 3.10.
creature have this power, much more the Maker of it, Compare Psalm. 94.8, 9,
10, 11.

What remaynes for us, but to meditate seriously, and often, this property of
our GOD? This, if any thing, banisheth hypocrisy. This think, GOD before whom
I stand, sees as well my motives, as my deeds; mine intentions, as mine
actions; as well what I think, as what I do; can pierce through the vizzar of
formalitie, seeing he understands the thoughts of men, and their vanity.

There is a second exposition thus: God tries hearts, that is, in his
judgment, examines, not so much the actions, as the affections; not only what
is done, but with what minds good duties are performed: so that it suffices
not at that day, that our actions have been regular, except our hearts also
have been upright in performance. It is natural to every man, as Solomon
intimates, to be well conceited of their courses, especially when they know
their actions such as are enjoined, but the Pro. 16.2.
Lord pondereth the hearts, weighes with what minds and affections even best
actions are performed.

The best actions done without accord of the heart, are loathsome unto God. Ever
observe it to come in as a diminuent term to good performances, that the heart
was not upright. 2. Chro. 25.2.
AMAZIAH did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart. ISRAEL turned unto God, their actions were amended, but
faynedly; their hearts hung still after their abominations: on the other side
imperfections many are winked at, where the heart is upright with God. 1. King.
15.14
ASA left the high places standing, nevertheless his heart was upright before
God, therefore is he enrolled amongst the righteous.

To say in a word, for want of uprightness we shall observe, the Lord
reproving what he had commanded; threatening, what he had enjoined; yea
punishing, what he had rewarded.

IEHV 2. King. 10.30.
had his command to destroy ACHABS posterity; the Mandate he observes to the
utmost tittle; that obedience GOD rewards with the Kingdoms continuance in his
posterity unto four Generations; yet threatens the Lord Hosh. 1.4.
to visit that blood of ACHAB upon the house of IEHV: for what cause? his heart
was not upright in performance, aiming not so much at doing the Will of God, as
to settle the Kingdom, in more peace, to his own posterity.

Our care let it be upon this ground, as to provide our actions hold current
with the rule of the Word of God, so that our hearts be upright in performance,
for GOD shall one day bring not our actions only, but our hearts to trial.

Blessed shall he be at that day, that can say as HEZEKIAH, Thou know,
Lord, that I have done what was good in thy sight: and Isai. 38.3.
walked before thee in Truth, and with an upright heart. I dare say of that
man's actions, how full soever of other imperfections, for sincerity sake they
shall be accepted and rewarded. And woe to that Hypocrite, whose works have
been outwardly glorious, and his inwards full of hypocrisy, and
dissimulation. Have thou preached Christ? the work is glorious: yet if as
those Paul mentions, Philip. 1.16.
not sincerely, thy self may be 1. Cor. 9.27.
a Castaway. Have thou given Alms, built Churches, Hospitals, done the
greatest amongst good works? and has it been Pharisaically only, to be
praised of men? thou have thy reward. But more esteemed shall be the poor
Widdowesmite, given out of a compassionate affection to the poor members of
Christ, then thousands of gold and silver vaine-gloriously bestowed. The old
rule is, non quantum, but ex quanto: not what or how much, but with what heart,
with how much good affection thou give is respected. I could wish that in
these days of complement and formalitie, this one little piece of Gods Truth,
might be as frontlets between our eyes.

I know not how it comes to pass, formalitie is now so grown into fashion,
that a Minister requiring any more then it in duties of piety, incurres
censure of strictness more then is meet. And our people, as Jews, conceit
the work done of duties enjoined, Isai. 58.3.
binds the Lord to recompense, and highest reward. Fools and blind! as if the
Lord were as man judging only after outward appearance. The Lord pondereth the
Spirits, tries the hearts, Pro. 21.27.
detests all sacrifices of wicked men, much more when they are brought with a
wicked mind.

VERSE. 5.6. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor
a cloak of covetousness: God is witness.

Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you nor yet of others, when we might
have been burdensome as the Apostles of Christ.


THe Apostle proceeds in auouchment of his sincerity, removing from himself
three other properties of false-hearted Ministers. First, Flattery. Secondly,
Covetousness. Thirdly, Vaine-gloriousnesse, as some interpret.

The two first, he, First, avouches to be far from his courses. Secondly,
and for flattery, appeals to the people as witnesses, of his abhorrence from
it; from color of covetousness, God, he affirms, as a true witness can
free him: so that in the words are two things: First, his Protestation.
Secondly, the Confirmation.

Flattering speech understood, such as is fitted to please the carnal and
corrupt humors of men; or as a learned Interpreter describes: Speech fitted to
the will and humors of others, for our own advantage; as when with such
intention we, first, either ascribe to them good things, which they have not;
or, secondly, applaud their evils as goodness; or, thirdly, amplify their
good parts above their merit; or, fourthly, extenuate their evil more then is
meet: the prodigal, it calls liberal: the covetous, good husbands: tattling
is, in the style of flattery, affability, obstinacy, constancy, very sloth
stayednesse, and maturitie of judgment. Enormities, are infirmities; never so
little morality, purity not less then Angelical.

How far it should be from a Minister; the Isai. 5.10.
woe in ESAIAS denounced against flattery, abundantly proves: how crosses it
the end of the Ministry? Ezech. 13.22.
hardening the wickedst in their lewdness, that they cannot return from their
evil ways? and so exposing them to the wrath of God. It is well observed by
Plutarch, to have been the ruin of most States: for Israel and Judah, I know
well the flattery of false prophets is as often as any thing accused, as cause
of their captivity.

And if any thing prove the overthrow of this Kingdom, it is justly feared, it
will be this of flattery in Ministers. It is not so much the committing of
sins, that prouokes Gods wrath, as obstinate continuance therein, oftenest
occasioned by flattery: men have taught their tongues to speak placentia, and
not to Court only, but even to Country; AMOS his words seem Amos 7.10.
ouer-heauie, their sins are generally grown Polypusses, and men's ears are
taynted with that Grangrene, their tongues crying out to every one, pointing
finger toward them, Noli me tangere. It is magna ira Dei (said AUGUSTINE) vt
desit correctio, and adsit adulatio: such tongues bind men to their sins:
Delectat enim facere, in quibus non folum non metuitur reprehensor, sed
laudatur operator: this wrath of God is justly come upon us. The Ezech. 3.26.
tongues of Prophets cleave to their roofes, and they are not to the people as
men that reprove, because they are rebellious, and the Lord purposes to
destroy them. Hieron. ad Celant. de institut. Matrisfamil.
The complaint of Hierome I cannot omit. In multis isto maxim tempore regnat
hoc vitium: quodque est grauissimum, humilitatis ac beneuolentiae loco ducitur;
Eo fit, vt qui adulari nescit, aut inuidus, aut superbus putetur.

The properties of flatterers see, and fly from them. First, they will be
sure, observing humors, to fit their speech to please, fearing to offend there
where is hope of advantage: they seek placentia, not salubria, was Ieremies
observation.

Secondly, their disposition basely servile, as humors vary in the flattered,
so speeches in these Parasites. Right Cameleons, says Plutarch of them; or as
Proteus, turning themselves into all shapes and colors.

Thirdly, hope of advantage ceasing, none are found more bitterly inuectiue: He
that puts not into their mouths, they Mic. 3.5.
prepare war against him.

A second vice disclaymed by the Apostle, is Covetousness: the nature and
kinds of it, see largely in Annot. ad Romans 1. how ill it beseemes a Minister,
Paul taught his Timothy, prescribing means to avoid it, 1. Tim. 6.11.
by making righteousness our treasure.

The cloak or pretense of covetousness, what is it? The colors of holiness,
piety, or other virtue usually pretended by men of covetous disposition to
make way to their gain; Ambros. ad locu^.
vt sit genitinus efficientis; AMBROSE, Ex cordo faciebat non in hypocrisi,
quasi contemnens pauca, vt forte plura offerentur.

Foulest sins have ofttimes fairest pretenses: oppression of widows,
Pharisees conveyed under Matt. 23.10.
color of long prayers.

Herod's cruel intention, cloked with pretense Matt. 2.8.
of doing homage to Christ.

The murder of Naboth, maskt under show of 1. King. 21.12, 13.
justice, against blasphemy.

Goliath his sword lies hid in an Ephod; no sword to Goliahs, no cruelty to an
Hypocrite, yet lurkes that sword in a holy garment; this cruelty cloked with
pretense of greatest devotion.

The fearful sin of these times, as that Bernard plaints of, not so much
colere virtutes, but to color vices, quodam quasi nimio virtutum.
Complexion-makers we have, not only for withered faces of ouer-worne
strumpets; but for vgliest and most deformed sins, to give them countenance
of virtues.

Sinners, I confess, we have of all ranks, desperate and forelorne natures
that Isai. 3.9.
declare their sins, as Sodom, and hide them not, in whom light of nature,
and all, even natural conscience seems utterly extinct. Others, of as vile
affections and practice, but men of more cleanely conueyance, that have learnd
this art of coloring, and making clokes for sin. Murder amongst Duellists,
is styled manhood; the Adulterer thinks, his Lust, Love; the Drunkard, his
Riot, good Fellowship; Proud Minions term their Pride Handsomeness, or
Cleanliness, or Fashion, or Adorning of their Calling.

Learn we of Paul, 2. Cor. 4.2.
to cast away these clokes of shame, and in sincerity, as in the sight of God,
so to demean our selves: weighing,

First, How justly the sin is so much more odious in Gods sight, by how much
more holy color it is disguised withal: under color of long Prayer, they
devour Widows houses, Mat. 23.10.
therefore shall receive the greater damnation.

Secondly, Though coloring may serve us for advantage amongst men: yet to his
eyes, with whom we have to deal, all things are naked and uncovered; It is
not pretenses will stead us at that day, when God shall 1. Cor. 4.5.
enlighten things hidden in darkness.

Thirdly, nor can they stop the mouth of Conscience, when God shall please by
Judgment to wake it. And what auayles it, my Brethren, if we have men to
applaude us, when our own hearts condemn us?

Fourthly, The issues of such coloring have often been, impudency and
remorcelessenesse in sinning. By degrees such Hypocrites lose all Conscience,
and sense of sin; till at length they grow outrageous in abominable
iniquities.

The confirmation follows. Of freedom from flattery, he makes the people
witnesses: from covetous intentions, God is appealed unto for record.

The lawfulness of Oaths, as well voluntary as imposed, might here be observed
against Anabaptists; but that it has already been treated on like occasion;
and our people have generally swarued to the other extreme.

The ancient companions of Oaths, as they are called, we must remember to take
with us. First, Truth. Go to Heaven for a witness of untruth, thou shall be
sure to find there a heavy Auenger of perjury, and false swearing. John 8.44.
Lying is of the Devil, forswearing of the Prince of Devils.

Secondly, That is necessary, but not sufficient. Pharisees gloss indeed was
such, it was enough not to forswear. Our Savior the Lawgiver, and best
interpreter of the Law, adds more; Mat. 5.33, 34
Swear not vainly; or unnecessarily: but with Ier. 4.2.
judgment.

First, As some interpret, using thy best discretion to discern circumstances,
whether they be such as may warrant an Oath unto thee; as first, whether what
thou auowest, be of such weight, as deserves so great confirmation. It is not
safe to play with Saints: much less with the Name of the fearful God.

Secondly, Whether, the truth, being weighty and of importance, may not by
some other mean be discovered. Truths auouchable by Oath, are truths
questionable, and Heb. 6.16.
in controversy. These in Oaths assertory: besides these, in those they call
promissory; Justice is required: for Oaths may not be bonds of iniquity. The
third vice Paul remooues from him is, as most conceive it, vain gloriousness:
we will give way a little to common error; and on this occasion inquire,
whether to seek praise from men, be simply sinful? The Heathen were so far
from condemning it, that they desired by all means to cherish the love of
glory, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. c. 13.
insomuch that it is amongst Tullies Rules for institution of Princes, to
nourish, and, as it were feed them with Praise. Simonides in Xenophon, makes it
one special difference betwixt men and bruits; that men are touched and
affected with praise. Yea, the Apostle seems to whet us on to virtuous and
holy practice, by the argument of praise.

Say Schoole-Moralists in resolution of this Quaere; not to seek praise from
men, but to seek vain praise is unlawful. That vanity they thus limit out:

First, When the thing for which we seek praise, is not in us, or not
prayse-worthy.

Secondly, When the persons whose commendation we desire to hear, are of
partial or uncertain judgment.

Thirdly, When the fame or good opinion we desire to win from men, is not
referred to the glory of GOD.

Truth is, this is warrantable, to do things prayse-worthy; and not to despise
the good opnion of Gods Children. Howbeit, to make that the main aim of our
intention in well-doing, savors strongly of vanity and foolish ambition: And
should be far from a Ministers, yea, from every Christians courses.

First, It savors strongly of Hypocrisy.

Secondly, Depriues of Gods Reward.

Thirdly, It is repugnant to Humility, the comfortablest virtue that can be in
a Christian. Of Pride and Love of man's own excellency, Bern. Epist. 42.
there are two kinds.

First, Caeca superbia, blind Pride. Suppose when a man thinks that good, and
commendable, that is not; or arrogates that good he has not; or ascribes the
good he has, to himself, not to God.

Secondly, the other is vain Pride: a vice, says Bernard, when a man, whether
for that he has, or that he has not, delights rather in praise of himself,
then in the praise of God.



Xenophon said truly, Nulla suauior est auditio, quam laudis: there is nothing
we are more delighted to hear, then our own praise. False teachers are
generally noted of it: fitting doctrine and manner of delivery to the humors
of the people, for this end, to be praised of them. They saw the poor people
delighted with eloquence, and ostentation of various Learning; accordingly they
fitted themselves to their vanity, speaking in the Clouds, that the people
might rather admire them, then be edified by them in their holy faith, atque
vtinam ne.

Remedies of it.

First, Learn to be lowly in thine own eyes, to contemn thine own
excellency. Dwell often upon Meditation of thine own natural vileness: take
frequent notice of thy infirmities and imperfections: and thou shall be forced
to say, They that praise thee, flatter thee.

Secondly, Forget not whence thou have 1. Cor. 4.7.
received, whatsoever prayse-worthy gift is in thee; Good reason thou will
think the bestower should be praised in his gifts, rather then the receiver.

Thirdly, Consider how soon the giver can recall them; turn wisdom into
folly; eloquence into silent dumbness or rusticitie. There are Romans 11.29.
gifts that are irreuocable. The usual matter of Pride, are endowments of
another nature.

Fourthly, The inconstancy of the giddie people seriously considred, abates
vain-gloriousnes. No reed in the Wilderness more wavering then they. Christ
one while lift up to Heaven, with an Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna; straightway to the Cross, with a Mat. 27.22.
Crucifige. Paul first a God; by and by a Murderer, whom vengeance would not
suffer to live. I wonder not at his so 1. Cor. 4.3.
vile esteem of men's censures; knowing how uncertain, inconstant, void of all
solid comfort they are.

But what if by glory, we understand the just testimony of his honor and
dignity, and acknowledgement of his superiority over the people, to be
testified by their payment of his deserved stipend? neither is the Metonymie
strange in Scripture; and thereto suites the amplification subioyned: but I
dare not swerve from the stream of Interpreters.

The amplification follows; by mention of that which might have been some
help that way; his power Apostolical: Though we might have been burdensome,
as the Apostles of Christ.

Burdensome: whether by way of charge, or by use of Apostolical authority?
this latter some resolve on. But, as Beza well observed, if that Apostolical
authority be interpreted gravity, and moderate use of his power, we may not
think the Apostle forgate it: If immoderate rigor, and Pharisaicall
austeritie; the Apostles had no such custom, and were of another spirit.

Burdensome, therefore understand, chargeable by exacting mayntenance, as
Verse. 7. As Apostles: that (As) take here, not exemplariter, but causaliter.
Paul purposely showing his right and title to maintenance, which in favor of
the people he forbear to use.

our temporal profits may give place to edification of Gods people; and our
right in things temporal be parted withal, that the spiritual benefit of
Gods people may be promoted. This Apostles practice we have elsewhere in like
kind; his title to maintenance, he auowes by Law of God, of Nature; and
Nations, yet forbeares use of it, 1. Cor. 9.15.
lest the Gospel should be hindered: like see in our Matt. 17.17.
Savior, in Abraham, that none say it is a duty peculiar to Ministers.

loss of thy brothers soul. Consider, with how dear a price they were
bought, not 1. Pet. 1.18, 19.
with silver and gold, but with the precious blood of the Son of God. Destroy
not thy brother for meat, no nor for money, for whom Christ dyed.

VERSE. 7.8. But we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her
children.

So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto
you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were
dear unto us.


IN this Text is set down the second helping cause to the preuayling of Paul's
Ministry; his meek and amiable demeanor toward them, set out: First, by
similitude: secondly, amplified also by the fruit or effect of it in the
Apostle, Verse. 8.

Gentle as a Nurse: that like as a nursing Mother, in the tenderness of her
affection, deals with the Infant of her womb, bearing the waywardness of the
child, and laboring by all means to give it contentment; such was the
Apostles carriage toward this people, so meek, so pleasing.

The virtue here commended unto us, implies the exercise of two Christian
graces, whereof it seems after a sort, to have its composition: First,
Meekness: secondly, Placiditie, as for want of a playner term, I am forced to
call it.

Meekness: understand that gift of the Spirit, moderating the affection of
anger, so far, that it is not easily provoked, or set on fire with any
froward or untoward behavior of others; a virtue often commended to our exercise
in the work of the Ministry. To Timothy, Paul enioynes use of it toward
opposites, that are such of ignorance, not of hopeless obstinacy, though
perhaps he had seemingly lost many a wholesome instruction, and admonition: his
Reasons; First, God may in 2. Tim. 3 25, 26.
his time give them repentance, if at any time, we should not think our
patience fruitless. Secondly, their bondage hard under Satan, that easily
leaves not his hold. Thirdly, their misery by means of that bondage, should
make us meekely compassionate.

To Titus like duty is enjoined upon other reasons: First, Tit. 3.2, 3, 4
remembrance of our own forlorn estate. Secondly, of the power and grace of
God in our rescue. Such meekness beseemes us all toward the people of God,
that no waywardness, except hopelesly obstinate, should prevail, to make us
surcease pains, in using means to gain unto Christ.

That hasty hot spurre-humour of many Ministers and people, so soon weary of
weldoing, because they see not present success of their endeavors, sorts not
with Christian meekness or compassion. It has, I confess, great examples,
but none without check.

Thus let us think: First, many a wholesome admonition, holy Sermon, sweet
motion of Gods Spirit, neglected we in days of our vanity: had the Lord
been as careless of us, as we are of our Brethren, we had still continued in
that damnable estate of disobedience. Secondly, the purchase is excellent, if
at any time God give opportunity to gain it; such as we should think cheap
rated at any pains, we can take to procure it: Iam. 5.20.
Thou shall save a soul, and cover a multitude of sins.

Thirdly, perhaps the cause of so little good doing by the means, sticks in
our selves; through, First, lack of prudence, to observe circumstances; or,
secondly, neglect of prayer to God, for his blessing upon our endeavors.

The second branch of gentleness is Placiditie, a pleasing kind of carriage,
fitted to yield all good contentment to our Brethren, so far as may stand with
good conscience. So Paul professes to have become a 1. Cor. 9.20, 22.
Jew to Jews, weak to the weak, all things to all men in things indifferent,
that by all means he might win some; so runs his iniunction to all Gods
people, not to Romans 15.2.
please themselves, but every man another in things that are good to edifying.

The ancient Caveat must here be remembered; that this rule leads ad Aras only;
permits not to gratify another, with violation of our own conscience. In
things lawful become all to all, to win some; but take heed how thou
infer the good fellows Conclusion: therefore to become mate for every
pot-companion: to run with the intemperate, to the same excess of riot, so
do good to others, that thou destroy not thy own soul, by clogging it with
the guilt of sin: Ephesians. 5.11.
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, says this
Apostle, that in things lawful, commends to us by Precept and practice, care
to gratify and yield contentment to our brethren.

sociable joining with their people in matter of honest and lawful recreation,
and would exact all, after the rule of some, more austere in that behalf. It
is not vainly noted by our Savior, Matt. 11.18, 19.
JOHN BAPTIST came neither eating nor drinking; the Son of man came eating
and drinking: the one by austeritie, the other by more familiarity labored to
gain to Gods Kingdom: he is ouer-rigorous, that interdicts to any sociable
conuersing either with Nouices, or Aliens, as in things indifferent, or
tempering his demeanor in things of that nature, so as upon reasonable
observance, he shall find to be fittest for their gayning unto Christ.

Paul.

As a Nurse, understand, not a Nurse mercenarie, but a nursing mother, whose
affections are most tender, therefore it is added, her own Children.

With what tenderness of affection a Minister should be devoted to his
people, is the note. If any more tender then another, that affection should a
Minister express. In similitudes, thus have we our Predecessors professing
their love. 1. Cor. 4.15.
As Fathers, Gal. 4.19.
As Mothers: here as nursing Mothers. Timothy his great commendation was, that
he would even Philip. 2.20.
naturally care for the welfare of Gods people.

To naturalize this tenderness of loving affection, these meditations are
forcible. First, of their miserable state in nature. Secondly, dangerous
station in grace: When our Savior saw the people, as sheep without a
shepherd, Matt. 9.36.
he had compassion: the word signifies, the yearning of the bowels, such as is
in the most tender pity and compassion. Thirdly, of the dear price they were
purchased withal, Act. 20.28.
the blood of God. Fourthly, the comfort accrewing to us by their happiness,
though the people by us have their salvation, yet we by them our Crown, Dan.
12.3.
increase of our glory. But that which will most affect, is experience of
sorrows, remembrance of our own misery, in nature. Compassion is best learnt
by experience; wherefore our high Priest, Heb. 4.15.
that he might be merciful, tastes of our infirmities, and temptations. And
the Lord seems to have said enough, to procure from Israelites pity of
strangers, for that themselves had been Pilgrims, Exodus 23.9.
and knew the heart of strangers.

So being affectionately desirous of you, etc. for farther amplification of his
love toward them, he mentions the effects and fruits of his love, which he
felt in himself, especially his liberal disposition, and kind-heartednesse,
as we may call it, so great, that he professes he could have found in his
heart, to impart unto them with greatest contentment, the dearest things, not
the Gospel only, but his own Life.

So liberal is love, if not prodigal of the dearest things, to those that are
dear unto it. 1. Cor. 13.4.
Love is bountiful: this frank disposition see in Love. First, of God to Man.
Secondly, of Man to God. Thirdly, of Man to Man. In love Romans 8.32.
God spares not his own Son, but gives him to die for our sins: that Son
of GOD in like love communicates himself, his Life, his Soul, his Spirit, his
Prerogatives, his Kingdom.

In some answerablenesse of affection, the Saints Heb. 10.34.
suffer spoil of their goods, with joy, Revel. 12.11.
love not their lives unto death, no Exodus 32.12, 32.
not their salvation, in comparison of Gods glory.

For their Brethrens sake, Act. 4.32, 34, 35.
sell their possessions, and expose them to common use; yea lay down their
lives for the Brethren.

If this be the property of love, where is that virtue to be found amongst
men? with the Lord himself we are desirous to indent, mincing the matter with
niggardly limits, when he calls any thing from us for support of his glory: so
far as may stand with reputation, says the ambitious; so far as with peace
and good will of Neighbors, our popular men-pleasers are for the cause of
their God. Had the Lord Christ been so straightened in his bowels to usward, what
had become of our poor souls? he had glory and honor the same with his
Father; yet for our sakes emptied himself, and became of no reputation;
humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross; and stand we with him
on terms of reputation?

I cannot wonder at our Nabal-like churlishness, those thoughts and deeds of
Belial toward our Brethren, when with our God and Savior, that 1. Tim. 6.17.
gives us all things so liberally to enjoy, we deal thus niggardly: he has
nothing of the soundness of love toward God or Men, that is thus illiberall
and pinching in his affection.

Not the Gospel only but our souls: by an usual Metonymie, our lives;
whether by pains in preaching, or by persecution? the latter is resolved on by
Interpreters.

May we not infer it from Paul's practice, as a duty in a Minister to lay
down his life for the peoples sake, the cause of truth requiring it? I dare
say, Paul had no thought of his supererogating in this measure of Charity: but
understand, this, for the actual performance, is amongst the duties, that are
duties in casu, not necessarily to be acted, till the Lord call for life in
way of Martyrdom; yet ever must it be resolved on, praeparatione animi. And in
case the cause of Truth, and good of the Church call for it, we 1. Ioh. 3.16.
ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren: so much, First, Christ's love in
dying for us, requires at our hands. Secondly, together with the good of the
Church; by, first, confirming weaklings: secondly, encouraging the timorous:
thirdly, occasioning Aliens to enquire into the Doctrine, whose sweetness is
such; whose divine Author so certainly known by the Teachers, that life is
not dear, to procure it support and propagation.

First, this measure of liberal resolution in love toward Philip. 1.21.
death becomes advantage: Every child of God is a gayner by death; most they
that make a virtue of necessity, whom God honors with the Crown of
Martyrdom. Secondly, and if from any measure of love, to the Brethren, we may
conclude our 1. Ioh. 3.14.
translating from death to life; most from this, when life is not holden dear,
to purchase glory to God, and good to his Church.

Secondly, withal we must take notice, of Gods tender

Me thinks, comparing our selves in these times, with the Saints of God, that
have gone before us; I cannot, but as admire Gods power, so marvelous in their
weakness, so wonder at our tenderness; ready to shrink from holy practice
and profession, for reproaches, and a little loss of commodity and ease. Had
we lived in days of our Fathers, when fire and faggot seemed an easy
compendium of tortures, what had become of us?

Thus think, God is merciful to us in thus tempering afflictions to our
strength. Withal, by these light troubles, takes trial of our resolution, and
would perhaps prepare us to greater tribulation.

The manner of Paul's inclination to these offices of love remaynes (...): he
would in that term express that pleasance, and contentment he found, in the
harshest duties of love toward this people.

And it must be observed, as a circumstance adding much grace to every good
performance, when it is done with pleasance, contentment, and hearty good
liking. To preach the Gospel as of necessity, is scarce thanke-worthy, to 1.
Cor. 9.17.
do it willingly, has approbation, and reward with God. The Apostles speech
seems strange; ye have begun not only to do, 2. Cor. 8.10.
but to will. Is it more to will, then to do? Not so: but it is more to do
willingly, then of necessity, because something we think must be done.

Hence find we the will, sometimes accepted without the work, never the
work, where this will is wanting: in works of Mercy, if there be 2. Cor. 8.12.
a ready mind, a man is accepted, though his gift be small; yea in case of
inabilitie, though none at all. In new obedience, if the will be present,
defects flowing from infirmity, are winked at. Martyrdom it self is not
Martyrdom, except it issue from love, and be commended by this complacentia.

Evidences of it take these: First, gladsomnesse, and joyful entertayning
occasions of weldoing. Secondly, such men are Tit. 3.8.
provident, and forecasting to do good works. Thirdly, their grief is not, to
do, but to fail in doing duty, the 1. Ioh. 5.3.
Commandment is not grievous, or burdensome, but defects in obedience.

Means to procure and increase it: first, consideration of the glorious
reward: secondly, the present peace and comfort conscience feels in weldoing.

VERSE. 9. For ye remember, Brethren, our labor and travail, for laboring
night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached
unto you the Gospel of God.


THE Apostle in these words makes probable his protestation, of so hearty
wel-wishing to this people. Reason enough they had to think him thus kindly
affected toward them; for that on such terms of hard travel and handy
labor, he forbear exacting maintenance due for preaching, in favor of them.

The words abound with occasions of question, wherewith men of corrupt minds,
lacking better employment, have pestered them. That is, first, whether Paul in
this practice did supererogate? So Papists affirm, for herein he did more then
was commanded.

Supererogatory works, in their Language, are good works, done over and above
enjoined duty. From other good works they thus differ:

First, Where there is a Commandment, there lies a bond upon the Conscience to
do so, and no otherwise. In these of Supererogation, the Conscience is not
bound; they are left to our discretion to do, or omit.

Secondly, Matters of Precept, if they be done, have reward: if omitted,
punishment. In works of counsel, the omission has no punishment; the
performance has greater reward.

Paul: had he preached for his hyre, he had done nothing against duty;
therefore preaching on free cost, he did supererogate.

casu, upon special occasion. Example, to preach the Gospel, is a duty
ordinary, ever binding a Minister: Woe to him if he preach not; to preach
freely, is not always a duty; yet in case, either necessity of the Church
enforce it, or 1. Cor. 9.16, 18
appearance of scandal require it, in that case it becomes a duty.

Or thus, Precepts some are of strict Justice; some of Equity and Charity. To
abstain from recompense, is no Precept in strict Justice: but yet is a Precept
of Equity and Charity. As to abstain from this or that meat, is no duty in
strict Justice. But in case Romans 14.15.
our Brother be offended, Equity and Charity commands abstinence; we else
sin 1. Cor. 8.12.
against Christ, against the Brethren. Such think this fact of Paul, a duty
in Equity and Charity, to which he was bound: in respect, first, of the
Churches poverty, secondly, of appearing scandal.

A second question falls in occasionally; whether it be a duty of a Minister,
binding him at all times, in all places, in every estate of the Church, to
preach the Gospel freely? so some have concluded absurdly from this practice
of the Apostle. But

First, Why then prouides the Lord so liberally, for Levites maintenance?

Secondly, and 1. Cor. 9.5, 13, 14.
why inferres PAVL thence, our title to a salarie?

Thirdly, With what Conscience takes CaePHAS and the Lords Brethren recompense
from the Churches?

Fourthly, How durst Paul press it as matter of duty upon the Conscience of
the instructed, to Gal. 6.6.
make the instructor partaker of all his goods?

Fifthly, And how professes he remission of his right, if he had no title to
exact it?

Sixthly, Yea, he declares it to be Christ's Ordinance, that they that preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

give Mat. 10.8.
freely, because they had freely received.



Secondly, Others, to that time.

Thirdly, Distinguish some will have us betwixt Doctrine and labor therein.
The Doctrine we give freely; for labor, require recompense.

Fourthly, Our Savior orders the affection only, prohibiting a mercenary
affection and greedy appetite of gain. In the meane-time permitting to eat
and drink, and take supply of necessities, in places where they should preach:
upon that ground, The Mat. 10.10.
labourer is worthy of his byre.

As to Paul's example, and reason built thereon, thus we answer: In practices of
Saints, binding to imitation, we must have eye not only to their fact, but to
the circumstances of doing. Circumstances often vary the case so far, that
what is necessary for one, in some case, at some time, on some occasion; is not
necessary, nor perhaps lawful to another, circumstances being altered. PAVL
Act. 16.3.
circumcised TIMOTHY, to avoid scandal of Jews; yet could at no hand be
brought to circumcise TITUS; so far had circumstances varied the case; there
now appearing peril of Gal. 2.3, 4.
betraying Evangelical liberty. In this point of maintenance; other Churches
he professed 2. Cor. 11.8, 9
to have spoiled; of Corinthians refuses stipend. The sum is, in case,
first, Of scandal. Secondly, Of Churches poverty, Paul forbeares his right;
out of those cases uses it. In like case we think our selves bound by Paul's
example: else free, to take benefit of the Lords Ordinance.

Messalian Heretics; Religious men may not labor with their hands. For it is
written, Mat. 6.25.
Be not careful for the body.



Secondly, Prohibits only distrustful carking for things of this life, without
dependence on Gods providence or confidence in his promise. Confer 1. Timothy
5.8.

Labor John 6.27.
not for the meat that perishes.



Secondly, Must be understood comparatively, rather for the food that lasts to
everlasting life.

The sum is, Paul's practice warrants it, in like case: though out of these
cases, First, Distractions: Secondly, And such indecorum must be carefully
avoided.

Paul's Example seems binding: his Precept specially, 2 Thessalonians. 13.10
He that will not labor, may not eat.

In casu, it becomes a duty; simply, or at all times no duty, rather sinful.

First, The charge is to 1. Tim. 4.13, 15. and
attend to reading, and to be in such things; 5.17.
to labor in Word and Doctrine.

Secondly, To free our selves from 2. Tim. 2.4.
distractions by secular employments; since Apostles rid themselves of an Office
more coniunct with the Ministry, that they might Act. 6.2, 4.
give themselves only to the Word and Prayer.

Thirdly, And the Lords provision for Levites was so made, that they might
attend the Altar, and wait continually on the Sanctuary.

In Paul's Example a wide disparitie appears, as, First, Having an
extraordinary Spirit to assist him for his Function. Secondly, Yielding of
right upon special occasions: as First, To avoid show of Covetousness.
Secondly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.8, 9.
To ease the Church distressed. Thirdly, By example, to win authority to his
Canon concerning labor.



that principle; The Labourer is worthy of his hyre; And labor, said the
Apostle, in word and doctrine.

To shut up these questions: miserable is the state of that Church, wherein
Ministers are forced to handy-labour; one of the two me thinks it argues:
either the extreme poverty; or the profane unthankfulness of the people.

VERSE. 10.11.12. Ye are witnesses, and GOD also, how holily, and justly, and
unblameably we behaved our selves, among you that believe.

As ye know how we exhorted, and comforted and charged every of you (as a
Father does his Children)

That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and
glory.


PRaecisio est, as Rhetoricians call it, q.d. to say in a word, ye know how
unblameably we behaved our selves amongst you. Withal conceive, the Apostle
intimates another furtherance of the preuayling of his Ministry; his
unblameable life; set out first, by the parts, secondly, signs thereof;
approved by appeal to the LORDS, and the peoples testimony.

His practice should be our pattern, whomsoever God has honored so far as
to assume him to minister before him; yea, of all those, over whom Gods Name is
called, the duty is to depart from iniquity. Testimonies are infinite; Mat.
5.14, 15, 16. 2. Pet. 1.10. Philip. 3.15. 1. Pet. 2. and 3. tot.
view these few cited in the Margin. Reasons whereby it is pressed manifold.

First, it brings glory to God.

Secondly, Comfort to our Souls.

Thirdly, Benefit even to Aliens. As the neglect draws,

First, Blasphemy on the Name of God.

Secondly, Fearful expectation of vengeance on our selves.

Thirdly, Farther estranging of Aliens from the life of God.



Two special Branches of this blameless life, the Apostle points us unto.

First, Holiness;

Secondly, Justice.

Holiness conceive to contain whatsoever duty concerns our personal
carriage, without relation or direct respect unto men: deduced by the Apostle
to Titus, into First, Tit. 2.12.
Piety, Secondly, and Sobriety. Justice, an even carriage in all commerce, or
dealings we have with men.

And here two sorts of men fall under just reproof.

First, They, whose private conversation, in respect of Piety and Temperance,
is free from stain, and blemish of enormious transgression; who yet, in
occasional dealing with men, forget all rules, I say not, of Charity and
Compassion, but of common Equity: yea, almost of rigorous Justice: Prosecuting
the smallest wrongs, with extremity of revenge; exacting smallest rights,
after rigor of Law; not abstayning from Fraud, Rapine, Violence, or if there
be any other harsh dealing, that we may censure injustice: of whom we may
wayling say, as PETER, 2. Pet. 2.13.
Spots they are, and blots in our Assemblies: by whose occasion the way of God
is blasphemed.

A second sort there are, whose glory is that their lives are harmless;
Justice they observe exactly, and plain dealing in their passages of traffic
one with another; perhaps also neighbourly offices of kindness, and mercy
sometimes pass from them; whose personal carriage yet viewed, no Leopard is
found fuller of spots, then their lives of foul blemishes. Cursed swearers,
scoffers at Religion, insatiable drunkards, etc. And in this kind what not?
worst friends they say to themselves. But the Proverb is, Qui sibi nequam, cui
bonus? neither hurt they themselves only; how many bane they by their
pernicious example? What God would have joined together, let no man put
asunder. Justice and Sanctity are sister-Graces. There is neither in
soundness, where either is wanting.

Ye are witnesses, and God also. Ye, say some, of our justice, God, of our
holiness.

This twofold testimony of our blameless life, we should all labor to
promerit. Whence was the Apostles endeavor, Act 24.16.
to have clear conscience before God, and before all men. And his charge, to
Romans 12.17.
procure things honest not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of
men. The one for our comfort, the other for our brethrens commodity. That is
known of Bernard: there are two things necessary, Conscientia propter te,
fama propter proximum. What comfort has our conscience, when men applaud us,
and God condemns us? and what profit comes to men by our private holiness;
when our outward life wants, if blemish, yet not suspicion of iniquity?

is it Ephesians. 5.12.
shame to name the things that are done of them in secret. Alas, what auayles
it to be applauded of men the mirror of honesty; when God, and thy conscience
accuse thee of hypocrisy?

A second sort there are almost (...): Their profession is, while God and their
conscience acquit them, not to care what men say of them; and in that
resolution, rush, if not into evils, yet into foulest shows and appearances of
evil. Paul belike said in vain, Philip. 4.8.
Follow things of good report, and labor to have 1. Tim. 3.7.
good testimony from them without, and give none 1. Tim. 5.14.
occasion to the Adversary of speaking evil.

Says Bernard, paraphrasing that of SOLOMON, a Lilly amongst Thorns: The
manners of men, as Lillies, have their colors and odours; that which comes
from a pure heart and good conscience, has the color of a Lilly, if good name
follow, it is more truly a Lilly, when neither candor nor odor of the Lilly is
wanting.

VERSE. 11. As ye know how we exhorted and testified, etc.


WHat he protested of his holy and blameless life, he here makes evident by a
sign: it was the careful performance of every branch of his office,
exhorting, comforting, testifying, which acts of his office, he sets out:
First, by the manner, in similitude: Secondly, by the matter, that they would
walk worthy of God.

The inference of holiness out of care to discharge his calling, occasions us
this observation:

Holiness best shows it self in careful discharge of our personal
functions. He is holy indeed, that is such in his place. Thus think, there is
by Gods ordinance a double calling of every Christian: First, general, as he
is a Christian. Secondly, particular, as such a Christian: suppose a
Magistrate, Minister, Master of a Family, etc. he is not holy, that lives
unblameably, in the common duties of Christianity, neglecting faithfulness
in his special station. It goes current with Politiques; he may be bonus
Ciuis, that is not bonus vir; that Maxim is no principle. In Christianity, I
dare say, he is no good man, that is not such in his place. Eli is thought to
have been a good man for his own private behavior; his goodness was foully
blemished, by being 1. Sam. 2.22, 29.
so ill a Magistrate, and though from particular omissions we may not infer a
nullitie of his honesty, yet may we without fear say, he was a defective
good man, so far no good man, as he failed in the duties of his office.

Paul amongst the Apostles for pains, as they in the Prophet, Isai. 65.5.
Stand aloof, I am more holy then thou; because no Drunkard, nor Adulterer,
etc. in life a type to his flock; though never so ignorant, or negligent in
the Word and Doctrine. This is, I confess, something a rare virtue among that
Crew: to be types to their flock in conversation. But they should remember,
this duty concerns them as Christians: Christianity binds them to such
holiness in life. The Ministry requires 2. Tim. 4.2.
instant preaching, and so requires it; that it cries, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Woe to us if we preach not the Gospel, though otherwise our lives were no
less then Angelical: like think of other particulars; the Graces of Gods
Spirit must all be exercised in the particular Vocation.

Follow the specialties of Paul's office so carefully performed by him.
Exhorting, Comforting, Testifying: where again occurres the observation made
ad verse. 3, though in more particulars. Instruction, is not the whole of
preaching: Thereto must be added Exhortation, Comfort; if need be,
Obtestation. See what is there largely said.

Here only reuiew the necessity of all these in the course of our Ministry.

First, Of Exhortation. That mayme we received in the fall, and have increased
by long custom of evil, remains in the best and most regenerate; as in
nature, we are strongly inclined to evil strangely auerse from every good
duty; So in state of Grace, there are remnants of that propension to evil, no
small relikes of drowsinesse and dullness to good duties. In Prayer, Hearing,
every religious Office, who, that observes himself, finds it not? those Eccle.
12.11.
words of the wise, the Lord has given us, as goades to quicken our dullness,
when we are exhorted by the Masters of the Assemblies.

Secondly, Of Comfort: There is no calling, no duty but has his crosses
attending: Without us, the World; whiles scoffing at Piety, and laughing it
out of countenance; whiles threatening; whiles vexing; always laboring to
discourage; few to accompany, many to oppose us. Within us, Conscience of
infirmity and imperfection; so preualent with many, that they become weary of
well-doing, because they are weak in doing. How needful for the people were a
Barnabas, Acts 4.36.
a son of consolation, to support the weak, and comfort the feebleminded?

Thirdly, Of Contestation. The word signifies, after phrase of Scripture, a
serious and grave admonition joined with authority and commination. Exodus
19.21.
Contest the people, says the Lord to Moses, that is, charge them with
commination. Compare Nehem. 13. Genesis 43.3. Paul's testifying then was, his grave
and serious admonition joined with threatening.

How necessary this course of proceeding in our Ministry is; judge by that
security, and remiss carelessness, wherewith even gracious dispositions are
eftsoons overtaken; desiring to enlarge Conscience, and to slake those strait
bonds, wherein it stands bound by the Word of God, in so much that they begin
to be of the Politikes opinion; there may be a nimium of Justice; an overplus
of holiness and care to depart from evil. All which considred, show necessary
use of all these is in our Ministry; and should sway the people to admit them.

As a Father does his Children. The manner of Paul's performing these Offices
we have here expressed; it was with fatherly authority. Before, he puts on
him the indulgence of a Mother; here, he assumes the affection of a Father:
expresses he the same or some other thing? There be that conceive him to
intimate some difference of his carriage toward them, according as he
observed their growth in Grace, and longer standing in Christianity. Whiles
they were Nouices, and Babes in Christ, he used them with all motherlike
indulgence; when grown to more strength, he interposeth something of fatherly
authority, perhaps he would signify, that in midst of his mother-like
meekness, he forgot not occasionally to use the gravity and authority of a
father.

In our Ministry one course is to be holden with Nouices, and Babes in Christ:
another, with men of more standing, and strength in Christianity: toward
Nouices, motherlike indulgence: to others, fatherly gravity and severity.

First, Impositions on Nouices may not be ouer-strict, Mat. 9.17.
of Wine and Vessels, used by our Savior, in way of Apology for his more
mildness in Injunctions, then John used to his Disciples.

Secondly, Instructions, for matter and manner, tempered strong meat is for
strong men: Heb. 5.12, 14
Milk for Babes; so our Savior instructs his Disciples, Mark. 4.33.
as they were able to bear.





not quench the smoking flax, and our power to use sharpness, is limited 2.
Cor. 13.10.
to edification. As ill they that in matter of Iniunction and manner of
Admonition, limit us to mildness, and tender respect to pretended weakness:
though in instruction nothing pleases the palate, but strongest meat; why so
much strictness required of them? their sins reproved with such sharpness?
others with so much mildness? you should ask also, why you are instructed
otherwise, then Infants and Babes in Christ? And the Apostle will answer you:
It is your shame to stick still in Heb. 5.12.
principles: and should be thought as shameful, not to outstrip Nouices in
measure of Sanctity.

to temper our indulgence with gravity and authority; that we impart not the
Majesty of our Ministry. Teach and exhort, (...): Tit. 2.15.
withal peremptorinesse of commanding. 1. Tim. 4.12.
Let no man despise thy youth; some thus interpret: Though young, yet so carry
thy self in thy Ministry, that they may reverence and fear thee, for thy
Gravity and Majesty therein.

Corah to Moses, so our people to us in grauer proceedings; Numb. 16.3.
We take too much upon us, and forget our selves; It is our pride, with such
authority to warn the unruly.

VERSE. 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and glory.


THe matter thus pressed by the Apostle remaynes, that they would walk worthy
of God: where we have, first, the Duty: secondly, the Reason, whereby it is
enforced.

The duty, to walk worthy of God. The sense thus conceive; that at no hand
thou imagine it possible for us to demean our selves, so as to demerit God,
and to be worthy, by way of desert, of those endless favors bestowed on us in
Christ: It shall ever be true, that Jacob said, Genesis 32.10.
We are less then the least of Gods mercies, and his goodness he has
shown us. PAVL speaking of our sufferings for CHRIST, says, They are not Romans
8.18.
worthy of the glory that shall be reueiled: No, says BERNARD, Bernard. de
Annunciatione, sermon. 1.
Though all the passions of all Saints should fall upon one man.

But to walk worthy of God, is to walk fittingly to his nature, and so as may
beseem a people whose God the Lord is. The Apostle Peter, me thinks, well
expresses it, when he exhorts, 1. Pet. 2.9.
to show forth the virtues of him that called us out of darkness. So that to
walk worthy of God, is so to demean our selves, that the Image of God may, as
much as is possible, show forth it self in us, and that we may express the
nature of God, whose people we profess our selves.

should be the measure of a Christian man's life, to come as near, as may be,
to the nature of God; so runs the exhortation; to be 1. Pet. 1.15, 16
holy, as he is holy: Luke 6.36.
merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful: for, First, we profess our
selves his children. Secondly, herein stands no small part of our happiness,
to resemble his Majesty.

That nature of GOD he has acquainted us withal. First, by those attributes
he assumes to acquaint us therewith. Secondly, by their lively resemblance in
the person of our SAVIOVR, called therefore, as some think, the express Heb.
1.3.
Image and Character of his Fathers person.



How answer they to the nature of God, that styles himself 2. Cor. 1.3.
the Father of mercies, and GOD of pity? that is justice, and love it self,
and delights in no style oftener, then to be called the God of Peace.

The reason annexed, because, he has called us to his Kingdom and Glory,
wherein, were it not I have stinted my self to that was public delivered,
these particulars might, not without profit, be insisted on: First, the Agent:
Secondly, Action: Thirdly, Term.

Now it suffices to observe, the high dignity of every one effectually
called, he is by calling entitled to the Kingdom and Glory of God. Therefore
Paul calls this calling, Philip. 3.14.
the high or supernall calling, not because the Caller is heavenly, but because
the honor, to which we are thereby advanced, is indeed sublime. Hence also it
is termed, Heb. 3.1.
the heavenly Vocation, not so much for that the Author, means, and manner
are heavenly; but because the state, whereto we are brought, is heavenly and
glorious.

This is that the Apostle, in such an heap of words amplifies, when he
says: We are come to the Mount Heb 12.22, 23.
Sion, the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, the company of
innumerable Angels, and to the Congregation of the firstborn, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men. Not that we have now full
fruition of the glorious Deity: but, First, the use of Scripture is, says
Austine, to enunciate things that shall be, in the present or preter time, to
signify certainty of accomplishment in time prefixed. Secondly, withal we
have present title thereto: Gal. 4.1, 2.
As the Heir in his nonage is Lord of all in title, though use is not
permitted till time appointed by his Father. Thirdly, And we are now united
with God in CHRIST, and made one body with the whole Church Triumphant and
Militant.

First, This glorious advancement of the Children of Paul, turn our eyes from
things Temporal, to things Eternal, we should see glory, such as no Kingdom
of the Earth is able to afford us; and say, SOLOMON in all his Royalty, was
not dignified as the meanest amongst Saints.

Secondly, Our wisdom it shall be to examine our title the Scepter of his
Word: yet so, as that whosoever is here admitted into the Kingdom of Grace, has
title to the Kingdom of Glory.

Our being in Kingdom of Grace, we best discern: First, By the Guide that
rules us. Secondly, The Law or Rule we walk by; The Guide, is Gods Spirit. The
Rule, the Word of God. These two are so inseparably linked together, that
neither without other, comforts any thing. As Romans 8.14.
many as are Gods sons, are led by his Spirit; and as many as are guided by
GODS Spirit, are ruled by his Word. Whereto add, Thirdly, The contempt of
earthly things, in comparison of the gracious estate of Gods people, howsoever
afflicted: as thou see instance in Heb. 11.25.
Moses.

VERSE. 13. For this cause also thank we God, without ceasing, because when
ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the
Word of man, but as it is in truth, the Word of God, which effectually works
also in you that believe.


HItherto of the helping of causes in the Apostles self, to the preuayling of
his Ministry; follows another in the people; their reverent and respectfull
behavior in hearing; explayned in this Verse; wherein are considerable, First,
Their demeanor toward the Word. Secondly, Paul's manner of mentioning it, with
thanksgiving. Thirdly, The fruit of their so holy receiving the Word: it
wrought effectually, etc.

For this cause we thank God.

A great blessing of God it is to a Minister, when he falls on a people
reverently affected to the Word in his Ministry.

A comfort worth all other comforts that can betyde a Minister from his people;
and therefore mentioned by the Apostle, not without thanksgiving: a favor,
that the Lord has denied to many his choice servants. Jeremy heavily
complains him of this, that when Ier. 20.8.
he spoke to the people in the Name of the Lord, Gods Word was turned to him
to matter of reproach. And how unwelcome, think ye, was that tidings to
EZECHIEL, that Ezech. 2.3.
he should go to a rebellious house; a people that should resist against the
Word and Spirit of God. Hence it is, that the Lord, when he would comfort his
Servants, and animate them in their Ministry, nourishes them with hope of
such a blessing: As to Isay, for his comfort against the multitude of dull
ears, and gross hearts, it is promised; There should Isai. 6.13.
be a tenth that should return. And howsoever it be true, we have our reward,
secundum laborem, not secundum prouentum: as Bernard comfortably observes: yet
what matter of dismaying is it to a Minister? to labor without apparent hope
of 1. Cor. 9.2.
this seal to his sending; the conversion of the people to the obedience of
faith.

to whom God gives a people reverently demeaned toward, and the Word in his
Ministry.

Their commended behavior follows; they received the Word as the Word of God;
that is, First, with persuasion that the Word was GODS. Secondly, accordingly
fitting their behavior, so as was seemly for the Word of God.

A man desiring to profit by the Ministry, must settle himself in this
persuasion, that the Doctrines delivered from the Scriptures, have God for
their Author. With such mind came Cornelius and his Company to hear, what
Act. 10.33, 44
the Lord should command them by PETER; accordingly they demean themselves in
all reverence and fear; and reap the fruit of such reverent attention. While
PETER yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on all those that heard him. This 2. Pet.
1.20, 21.
know first, said Peter, and hold for a ground, in your attention to the
Writings of Prophets, whether privately meditated, or publicly interpreted:
That no Prophecy came of any private motion, but holy men of God spoke as they
were inspired by the Holy Ghost. This to say truth, is the key to all
profitable hearing. First, binding the ear to attention. Secondly, the mind
to faith. Thirdly, the heart to reverence. Fourthly, the will and conscience to
obedience.

When the Lion roares, all the Beasts of the Forests tremble; when GOD is
known to speak, what Atheist dares but yield attention? Who stops not curious
Quaeres of his incredulous mind, that knows, It is the God of Truth, whose
Word he hears? what heart so obstinate, that trembles not in such
persuasion? Even dissembling Israelites on that ground resolve; Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Exodus 19.8.
All that the Lord commands us, we will do.



To this end consider we, First, The majesty of the Scripture; that having so
little help from humane eloquence; carried, for the most part, in plainest and
lowest style: yet preuayles to draw the mind, 2. Cor. 10.5.
to subject the very thoughts and Conscience to obedience and reverence.

Secondly, The searching power of this Word of God; diuing Heb. 4.12.
into the bowels of the Soul and Conscience.

Thirdly, The great malice of Satan against it: showed in all times, by
stirring up Heretics to adulterate; Tyrants (had it been possible) to destroy
it.

Fourthly, The wonderful efficacy, showed in altering the disposition of man's
heart: so far, that howsoever, it is as contrary to the corrupt nature of
man, as light is to darkness; yet, where it preuayles, things dearest to
nature, are not esteemed half so precious, as the Word of GOD.

Antithesis; they received it, not as the word of man, but as the Word of God.
A precedent worthy our imitation, instructing us to a meet manner of
receiving the Word of God. As Peter prescribes to Ministers, 1. Pet. 4.11.
to speak as the words of God; so suppose the Prescript for hearing, from this
pattern, to hear it as the Word of God ought to be heard; ever putting
difference twixt it, and the word of man; the specialties thus conceive: First,
with the best and chieftie of our reverence and attention. The Prophet Isay
prescribing it, expresses such a degree of reverence, as can scarcely without
Idolatry be allowed to the word of a man; he would have us even Isai. 66.2.
tremble at the words of God; the very sound of it should be as the noise of
Thunder, at which we naturally tremble and quake.

Reasons we have many, pressing such a measure of reverent attention. First,
the Wisdom, Power, and Majesty of the Author, showing it self so
wonderful in every line almost of the Scripture, that it breeds admiration in
the attentive and considerate Reader; so has every word his weight, every
sentence replenished with divine Wisdom, that it is all 2. Tim. 3.16.
profitable to instruct, comfort, exhort, correct. Secondly, to which add,
meditation of the Majesty and Power of the Author, how able he is to avenge
himself on the least irreverence. Thirdly, of the high mysteries it contaynes,
so plainly delivered, with such variety, as may sway the ear of the most
curious Sciolus, to reverent attention. Fourthly, weigh also, how nearly the
knowledge and obedience of it, and every parcel in it concerns us, insomuch
that thereon depends the salvation of our souls; so many causes, commanding
the best of our attention, and reverence, we must acknowledge.

Psalm. 58.4, 5.
as the deaf Adder, so stop they their ears, refusing to hear the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely: noted also by Solomon, in his time,
and threatened with a judgment to be trembled at; which is grown to such
height, that it becomes matter of reproach, to be a common frequenter of Sermons.

To open this deaf care: First, let that of Solomon be remembered: Pro. 28.9.
Whosoever turns his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable: that whereas in their prayers, they seem to place their sole
contentment, and confidence; in case of contempt toward hearing, their other
devotions become abominable. Secondly, if this move not, let that terror of
the Lord prevail, a day will come, when anguish of soul shall force these
miscreants, to importune the Lord with their importunate outcryes, for audience
and mercy; Lord hear, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But hear what GODS wisdom
protests, When they cry, Pro. 1.24, 26, 28.
he will not hear, but will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their
fear comes.

Secondly, drowzinesse and dullness of hearing, complained of by the Apostle;
when they hear, and hear not; hearing without attention and regard, tendering
their presence in the Congregation to fill up the number, but with such
Oscitaurie, and gaping drowzinesse, that they regard not what is spoken unto
them. That, if a man should ask them account of their hearing, as David did
Ahimaaz of his message; no better answer should he receive: 2. Sam. 18.29
I saw a tumult, said AHIMAAZ, but I know not what. These heard a noise; good
words they say, All of God; but what of God, or his Will, they know not.

For remedy, consider, first, this Word of God, that you so slightly regard,
is that, that one day Job. 12.48.
shall judge you. Secondly, and it is not amongst the least of Gods spiritual
plagues, to be given up Isai. 6.10.
to drowzie and dull ears. Thirdly, the last is the 2. Tim. 4.3, 4.
itch of the hear, listening rather to fables then to the wholesome words,
which are according to godliness, insomuch that whosoever will be so frivolous, as
to pester his Sermons with idle and impertinent stories, never so fabulous,
finds attention in our people, much more serious, then he that with greatest
evidence of the Spirit and power delivers the deep mysteries of salvation.

Secondly, as with our best reverence, the Word of absolute faith and credence,
that herein we may put difference twixt the Word of God, and the word of man:
suppose thus; whereas the words of the wisest, and most judicious amongst the
sons of men, justly admit not only disquisition, but contradiction, because
Romans 3.4.
all men are liars; this honor we owe to the Word of God, with absolute
credence, without any suspense of judgment, or contradiction to entertayne it;
very 2. Cor. 10.5.
thoughts must be subjected to Faith, when once we know the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it; for the witness of God is greater then man's. I, what the Lord
avouches, who dare deny him credit? And howsoever something brought to us for
the Word of God, may justly be examined, because there be that say, Thus says
the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken by them; yet when once it shall appear
to be the Word of the Lord, to question the Truth thereof, beseemes rather
Atheists, then professed Christians.

Where comes to be reproved, not only that general infidelity of professed
Atheists, questioning the Truth of Scripture; but all the particular unbelief
of our people, that hearing any thing, even with ^^ynest demonstrance, taught,
above power of nature, or their shallow conceit; not only enquire, as
NICHODEMVS, How can these things be? but resolve of the negative, These things
cannot be: Act. 26.8.
Why should it seem a thing incredible, that the Lord should raise the dead?
reedifie the body out of the ruins made by death, that could at first build it
out of nothing? To this day seems it more then a problem, a mere paradoxe
amongst our people.

The very Commandments, where they are crossing to corrupt humors, are
cancelled, at least slighted, and shifts studied by defiled consciences, to
divert that stroke, that pierces from the consideration of their divine
Author.

the absolute subjection of the conscience to obedience: that whereas all the
commands of men are limited to their rule; and absolute obedience is due to no
mere creature, how authorized soever: This Word of God must so be received,
that Exodus 19.8.
whatsoever the Lord shall command, we must resolve to do.

Where the tax lies heavy upon our licentious Hearers, coming to hear, with
reservation of purpose to continue their sins, and desire to have conscience
at liberty, to obey, or disobey, as themselves see fitting. They must give
Preachers leave to talk, they will give them the hearing. Obedience shall still
be at their liberty, and choice, wherein and how far to yield it; let these
consider, who said, God is a Lawgiver, Iam. 4.12.
able to save and to destroy; that suffers Heb. 2.2.
no transgression, or disobedience, to pass without just recompense of reward.

Which also works, etc. The fruit of such receiving the Word follows. It works
mightily in them that believe. So lively and mighty in operation is the Word
of God in due manner received, transforming the Hearers into the Image of it
self; in such sort that what it prescribes, it works: prescribing Faith, it
^^rks Faith; urging Obedience, it works Obedience; commanding Knowledge, it
enlightens to know: strange and wonderful is the virtue of it, received as it
ought. It makes the Churl liberal; the Profane, holy; the Drunkard, sober;
the Adulterer, chaste, etc. There is no duty so harsh to flesh and blood, so
crossing to profit, pleasure, any thing; but it preuailes with conscience of
such Receivers, to practice.

Euthusiasts blasphemy, in whose language it hears nothing but a dead Letter;
aduising our Hearers, to notice the true cause of so little efficacy, of this
mighty Word in their hearts; commonly it is imputed to the Minister, either
his gifts are weak, or his affections cold, or his heart not upright. The
fault must needs be the Ministers, if the Word be not effectual in the
Hearers. Truth is, these all or some may be impediments; yet who has not seen
mighty effects of weak gifts in the Minister? etc.

Rather sticks the cause in the people, not hearing with what reverence, faith,
conscience, that this Word of God should be received withal.

They come to hear, as Athenians, for novelty; or as the Jews, in Ezechiel,
for pastime and recreation; or as Critics, to censure the gifts of the
Minister: who maruels if they depart without profit, or experience of the power
of this mighty Word of God, whose actual efficacy requires due disposition
of the Receiver?

VERSE. 14. For ye, Brethren, became followers of the Churches of God which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of your own
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews.


THe Apostle proves by a sign, the effectual working of the Gospel in this
people, that sign is, their willing and constant enduring afflictions for the
Gospels sake, set out in a comparison of Likes or Equals.

As the Churches of Judea, so these suffered: First, the same things. Secondly,
from like men.

supernatural virtue of Gods Word is here remarkable, as in many other
things, so in this, that it so rauisheth the affections with love of it, that
it makes us willing to suffer any affliction for it.

That this is supernatural, the enmity betwixt it and the nature of man
sufficiently shows. There is nothing which a man more naturally hates, then
the Word of God; insomuch that, what it commands, nature rebels against;
therefore, because the Law commands it: what it forbids, nature desires,
because the Law forbids it.

And this as true of the Gospel, as of the Law. How storms man's nature
against that doctrine of the Gospel? teaching the whole of our salvation to be
the work of Christ, and the grace of his Spirit; us to be nothing in merit, or
ability, to further, in any sort, our righteousness or salvation? what power
but supernatural, can work this change in the nature of man, to make him
prefer in his love, that which he so naturally hates, before wealth,
pleasure, honor, life it self?

Augustine, to some requiring miracles to prove the doctrine of the Churches,
to have proceeded from God, thus answers; He that sees the world believe, and
himself believes not, is himself a strange wonderment: so, he that sees Gods
Church suffer such tortures, for the Word of God, and yet questions the divine
Author thereof, is a marvelous, or rather a monstrous Atheist.

It is a question ordinary amongst Schoolmen, whether the justification or
conversion of a sinner be a work miraculous; they say no: though they
acknowledge therein something above nature, yea against particular nature. Quid
maius potest esse prodigium, quam sub momento breuissimo ex rapacissimis
Publicanis Apostolos fieri? ex persecutoribus truculentis praedicatores
Euangelij patientissimos reddi, ita vt eam quam persequebantur fidem, etiam
effusione sui sanguinis propagarent, says Cassian.

of Scriptures came out from God. To Gods children let it be a settling of
their Faith, that it never waver about this principle.



men strongly deluded, and even ambitious of suffering. Yet betwixt the Devils
and Gods Martyrs these differences are obseruable: First, in the manners and
conversation of one and other, to the eye of Naturalists evident.
Priscillianists were known to be men of vicious life, and in matters of Oath
and Religious Hypocrisy, professedly impious: To Christ's Martyrs, their
persecutors have been forced to give testimony of their honesty. Pilate
could say of our Savior, Luke 23.4.
I find no evil in this man; Lysias in Paul finds Act. 23.29.
nothing worthy of Death or Bonds; Pliny to Traian gives testimony of
Christians in offensive life; except in matter of their Superstition (as he
calls it) they were unrebukable.

A second difference arises from measure of their passions and patience;
where, Story and Experience gives eminence to Christians. Sawes, and Spits,
and Gridyrons, were trials peculiar to Christians; never was Christian
severity so savage against Heretics, as was Heathenish or Heretical
Cruelty against Gods Children; under which, notwithstanding their patience was
perfect, to the astonishment of Beholders, who can sample, amongst Heretics,
that of Lawrence on the Gridyron? daring as it were the Tyrants malice, Assum
est, inquit, Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 41.
versa and manduca. Ita animi virtute vincebat ignis naturam, says S. Ambrose.

The power of the Word of God we have thus seen in general; as it is observed
by the Apostle, and inferred to be so mighty in this people, so let us view
it. It wrought effectually in this people; for they imitated the Churches in
suffering.

That man may say indeed, the word is mighty and effectual in him, with whom
it preuailes so far, as to make him a willing sufferer for the Truths sake.
Something it is, when it works Faith and Obedience in days of ease; yet in
some reuolts it has thus far prevailed. To whom it is given not only to
believe, Philp. 1.29.
but contentedly to suffer for the Name of Christ, theirs is the privilege.

The hardest point of obedience, is to obey in suffering. Mat. 20.22.
Can you drink of my Cup, said our Savior to his ambitious Disciples? that is
the trial.

Reasons.
First, Naturally we love ease: and there is nothing more hard to flesh and
blood, then passions and patience. Wherefore herein have been noted the
foulest falls of greatest Saints.



Luke 9.23.
He that takes not up his cross to follow Christ, is not worthy of him: whosoever
does it not daily, in the preparation of his mind, is no meet Disciple for him.

The amplification of their sufferings is by comparison of likes; they suffered
as others: the points wherein they resembled are, First, the passions, same
things. Secondly, quality of persecutors, from like men; their own
Countrymen. This latter brought to amplify their patience, there being no
unkindness that goes so near, as what proceeds from men linked to us in
bonds of Nature, Amity, or otherwise.

the unlimited violence of a Persecutors malice against Gods Children for
truths sake; It knows no bonds of Nature, or Amity; breaks furiously through
all, to wreake it self upon the Truth. Neither Country, nor Friendship, nor
Kindred, nor any thing that a Persecutour respects in his malice. Here a man's
chief enemies are they of his own house, Luke 21.16.
Father against Son, Son against Father; Parents and Brethren betray, and
persecute to death.

How near was the Tie betwixt Saul and David, by Kindness, and Affinity?
that is no restraint to Saul's malice; nearer that betwixt Cain and Abel; yet
inhibits not from cruel Murder. In all experience, no Hatred so deadly, as
what arises for cause of Religion: whether the cause be this, that the Lord
thus punishes the contempt of Religion in Persecutors, giving them up to be
void of natural affections; or what else I know not; once this I know, the
greatest amongst spiritual Plagues are reserved for Persecutors; and it is
Romans 1.31.
no small wrath to have Nature so far depraved.



try all, as if some new thing were come upon him. It is bitter, I confess, to
see natural Love turned into unnatural Enmity. But remember who said: When
Psalm. 27.10.
Father and Mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up. And he that in such case,
hates not Father for Christ's sake, is not worthy of him.

VERSE. 15.16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all men,

Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved: to fill up
their sins always; for the wrath is come upon them to the utmost.


THE Apostle occasionally mentioning the Persecutions raised by Jews, against
the Church, digresseth a little to a description of their manners; yet so, as
he has still respect to his principal purpose. His aim seems this: to
prevent the scandal might arise to Gods people, in respect of Persecutions
raised by Jews. It might seem strange, the Lords only people in time past,
having such knowledge in the Law, and Prophets, should persecute the Gospel;
some weakling might perhaps think, there was something amiss in the Doctrine;
when Jews did so eagerly oppose it. That scandal the Apostle would here
prevent: showing it to be no new thing in that Nation; Such cruelty was become
hereditarie to them; and persecution, after a sort, their National sin. To
this end, he remembers them how they dealt with our Savior, and their own
Prophets.

That the Conclusion in this digression, may be this; Cruelty in Jews may to
no man seem strange.

First, from their former facts. Secondly, Reasons.
their malignant nature. Thirdly, Gods wrath upon them.

Who killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets.









Sins committed by others through our instigation, become ours by just
imputation and participation. What sin thou excitest another to commit, that
thou committest; the guilt of it redounds to thee, in as high a nature, as to
him that is the immediate Executioner. In Naboths death the Judges and false
witnesses were the next Agents. 1. King. 21.7, 13, 23.
IEZABEL the plotter only, and instigator; she is punished for sheading Naboths
blood, though her hand was not upon him. Even in men's courses it seems just;
that not only the Executioner; but the Plotter, Abetter, Instigator, Concealer
of Treason be punished with death.

Yea see, how a far less degree of participation, brings guilt upon our
souls. The Rulers among the Jews, that but tolerated the breach of Sabbath,
are charged to Neh. 13.17.
have broken the Sabbath. Yea, least countenance giving to Idolatry, 1. Cor.
10.18, 21.
makes culpable of Idolatry.

Communicate not with other men's sins; beware how thou provoke another to
evil; lest the guilt of his sin, yea, of his soul redound to thy Conscience.

There is a rule that most men walk by. Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden; smart for his own sin. A true rule,
but misinterpreted. Thine own sins are they, not only which thy self
actest; but what thou prouokest others to commit. AHAB wrought evil in the
sight of the Lord, etc. 1. King. 21.25
whom IEZABEL his Wife provoked. AHABS sins are Iezabels sins; because she
provoked to commit them.

Thy childs impiety and uncleanness are thy sins, if thou give him
countenance to commit them. Thy Neighbors Persecution, is thy Persecution, if
thou encourage him to persecution.

To which end consider, Gods Commandments bind, not only to our own personal
performance of duties: but to further their performance in others. Turn, and
Ezech. 18.32.
cause others to turn. They enjoin, not only to fly sin in our own
persons, but to hinder it in others within our compass: Thou shall Leu. 19.17.
not suffer thy Brother to sin.

how sins once set on foot by Parents practice, are oft-times continued in
the Posterity to many Generations.

Cruelty began amongst Jews, in the days of Prophets: continues in that
Nation, till destruction of their City; Isay calls them Isai. 1.4.
a seed of the wicked; as if their Fathers had propagated their Cruelty with
their Nature. JOHN BAPTIST, Mat. 3.7.
a generation of Vipers; as if it had been as natural to Jews to receive
cruelty from their Parents, as for Vipers to receive Poison from their Dam. So
Ahabs Posterity resemble his manners; and all that come near him, or his
Race, taste of his malice; Hence see we, in all Ages, sins spreading over
Nations; therefore called of some, National sins; so pass they along in
every Generation, as 2. King. 5.27.
GEHEZI his Leprosy, to his Posterity.

The question is often moved; whether, as Adams first sin passes to his
Posterity; so other actual sins of immediate Parents? The resolution is
general, they do not; because, say some, their actual sins are personal
and singular; whereas Adam stood as a public person, in whom the whole
Posterity was to stand or fall; As others conceive in terms; In the precept
given Adam, was the whole Posterity bound; man's whole nature was in Adam
obliged, to preserve that rectitude wherein they were created: whereas in
immediate Parents Children are not bound. Though this be truth, yet may we not
deny, but the sins of other Parents, though not the individual acts, yet
the same in kind, pass after a sort, from the Parent to the Posterity. Thus
conceive. There are some fleshly, and, as they are termed, sensual sins; as
Drunkenness, Adultery, etc. there are other more spiritual. Those sensual
have a kind of propagation from Parents to Children; a stronger inclination and
pronenesse to them, they derive from Parents through temper, and constitution
of the body, by customary practice of such sins, wrought in the Progenitors.
For others more spiritual, as Pride, Idolatry, Swearing, etc. we see them
often continuing in the Posterity, but by other means; as, First, cursed
example of Parents, which it is natural for Children to imitate. Secondly,
Education, when they are nuzzeled and trained up therein. Thirdly, Chiefly, by
Gods just Judgment upon the Parents, thus visiting their sins; by giving
over the Posterity to walk in the steps of their cursed conversation. How it
comes to pass we cannot so distinctly explain, but find in experience, such a
lineall descent of sins, from Predecessors to Posterity.

JEROBOAM made Israel to fine. A long many Generations, his Successors
continue his sin; it is still the cloze of their story, 2. King. 13.11 and
15, 28. etc.
They departed not from the sins of JEROBOAM that made Israel to sin.

It is foretold of these last times, Iniquity shall abound. How should they
choose? when they receive, as a sink all the infections of foregoing
Generations: yet woe to us, if we help forward the infection.

Consider, First, All sins of all men occasioned by our example, we shall smart
for; as well as for those, in our own persons committed. Our personal sins
are burden enough to press us to Hell: how much heavier load carry they with
them to judgment, unto whom the sins of Children, even to a thousand
Generations, are imputed? if they continue so long in the Posterity.

Secondly, Me thinks, we should think it enough, that we have been means
to convey to our Children Adams sin, and his curse. Let us beware, how we
strengthen their vicious inclinations, by our own lewd example; to make them
twofold more the children of the Devil.

Thirdly, Think in your selves how bitterly in the anguish of their souls, at
the last Day, Children of your own bowels, baned by your example, shall curse
you; and say; Cursed be the womb that bare me, and the ungracious father that
begat me, especially, for baning my youth with his profane example: teaching
me, by his practice, to blaspheme Gods Name, to hate his Children, etc.

I beseech you, let us lay these things to heart; and beware how we become
On-setters to profaneness. In good courses, the happyest man is the beginner.
All the good, that is by his occasion done, shall be to him rewarded. In
evil, the heauiest woe is to the Ringleader: All the sins, that by his
on-setting and occasion have been committed, shall be to him imputed to his
heavier condemnation.

God they please not, and are contrary to all men.

How is it understood de euentu, or de conatu? of the issue or of the endeavor?
some think of the issue; supposing it subioyned by way of prevention, to
signify; that howsoever they thought themselves the only Church and people of
God; yet they, of all others, were least in his savor.

If of the endeavor, thus conceive, q. d. they care not to please God, and are
men of most barbarous and hateful disposition; right (...): opposing
themselves to all; not Israelites, but Ishmaelites, men of savage and wild
nature; their Genesis 16.12.
hands against every man; every man's hand against them. As if the Apostle would
express a most Inhumane, Barbarous, and Gyant-like behavior in this people;
such as our Savior expresses of the unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.2.
that neither feared God, nor reverenced man.

Such Monsters men grow that are taynted with Persecution; insensible, losing
all sense of Deity, and common humanity. Those Giants, not only in stature,
but in manners, were the seed of Cain, in whose way they walked: see to what
height of Barbarism they grow. Genesis 10.9. and
NIMROD a mighty Hunter before the Lord, and the rest of his fashion, build a
Tower to Heaven, if not to pull God out of his Throne, 11.4.
yet to fence themselves against his Majesty. PHARAO, becoming an Oppressor
of Gods people, falls to like Impiety and Inhumanity. Exodus 5.2, 14, 18.
Who is the Lord that he should obey him? and Israel must be beaten, for not
doing impossibilities. And what a Monster grew Julian after his revolt? in
Death blaspheming Christ, under the name of Galilaean.

Fly Cruelty and Persecution of GODS Saints: it draws with it, in Gods heavy
wrath, a tail of foulest Barbarism, and Immanity.

Forbidding us to speak, that is, to preach to the Gentiles: so proouing
themselves Hosts humani generis: contrariant, Enemies to all men. So are they
all to be reputed, that hinder preaching of the Gospel, as capital enemies
of Mankind. Needs any proof? They deprive us of the greatest good: are
enemies in the things that neereliest concern us. The Romans 1.16. etc
Gospel is Gods power to Salvation. And fides ex auditu: 10.14, 17.
how shall they believe without preaching? and how be saved, without believing?

Of other Persecutors said our Savior, they can Luke 12.4.
but kill the body: these are means to cast body and soul into Hell, by
keeping from them the means of Salvation. I enter not the question, whether
Preaching be the mean, sine quo non, we come to Salvation; I take it for
granted by the Apostles sentence; they forbid to preach that they may be saved;
what says he else? but that by forbidding to preach, they hinder their
Salvation. Let no man say, they are willing they should have the Word read to
the people, and that is mean sufficient to Salvation. I am persuaded, whosoever is
enemy to preaching unto the people, would as willingly withold the reading
also.

They Luke 11.52.
have taken away the key of Knowledge; neither entering themselves, nor
suffering those that would, let them see here with whom Saint Paul does yoke
them: Even with the obstinate shedders of our Saviors blood, who neither
please God, nor love any man. What vengeance God has in store for such, I
would rather themselves should seriously consider, then give us occasion to
mention. But if the Lord would admit no recompense for the blood of the body,
but Number. 35.31.
the blood of the slayer; how much sorer vengeance has he in store for those,
that taint themselves with the blood of souls? That cries louder then the
blood of ABEL.

To fill up their sins always. Declares he their issue, or their intention?
The intention, say some, in respect of Gods counsel; the issue only in regard
of themselves. This was not that they aimed at, but that followed as the issue,
and consequent of their courses, they filled up their sins.

when a man once wilfully runs into a course of sinning, he knows no stay,
till he come to extremity of profaneness. There is in such courses a
praecipit^um. When a man is on the top of a Hill, it is at his choice, whether
he will thence throw himself down, or not, but once let him headlong
himself, there is no stay, till he come to the bottom: so in case of
transgression, it is easier to keep our selves from entering desperate courses,
then once giving our selves the reins, to make stop before we come to
extremities. Gentiles fell first to Adultery; Romans 1.14, 26, 28.
from Adultery to Sodomy; from Sodomy, to a Reprobate mind, drawing with it a
Legion of other enormities. He that is filthy shall Apoc. 22.11.
be filthy still; It is spoken, Prophetando, non optando, CaeLIVS.

Reasons are thus given: there is, they say, a linking together of sins, as
it were in a Chain: one draws in another. One degree of sin, another in the
same kind; one sin, another of another kind: Anger cherished, grows to
malice inueterate: Hatred, to Murder; Murder, to Parricide: so Drunkenness,
Adultery; they both bring beggerie: occasioning Theft, Rapine, Murder; What
not? There are, they say, certain capital sins; that have others attending,
as Tributaries to nourish them. Whoredom, Gluttony, Ambition and other Pride,
are perhaps the master-sinnes; Covetousness their attendant to nourish them.

Secondly, Wilfulness in sinning silenceth Conscience, and by degrees
extinguisheth it.

Thirdly, Gods Judgment on such men's souls, giving up to the swindge of their
affections.

So that they utterly delude their souls, that running headlong to a course
of sinning, conceive opinion to leave sins at pleasure. What need to Saint it
in youth? time enough to repent in age. In the mean time, like men past
feeling, they give themselves to work wickedness with greediness. Oh fools
and blind! that think it so easy for a man accustomed to evil, to learn to
do well. Ier. 13.23.
Can a blacke-Moore change his skin, or a Leopard his spots? then it is
possible to alter custom of doing evil. How much ado have Gods children to
mortify corruption, to stay that natural Fountain of evil, that it stream
not out continual enormities into their lives? and after utmost striving
against sin, by Prayer, Fasting, Meditation, etc. yet still Romans 7.23.
feel the Law in their members, rebelling against the Law of their mind? If so
much ado be to repress corruption merely natural, how much more difficulty,
to alter nature strengthened by long custom?

Be admonished to stay from entering ungracious courses; or rather pray God, as
DAVID, Psalm. 13.13.
to keep from presumptuous sins: wickedness is much easier to keep, then
to cast out: God in his wrath gives up forlorn men to reprobate minds.
Would thou keep thy self from murder? repress rash anger: from Sodomie?
fly Adultery: once give thy self to a course of sinning, there is no
retyring without a spiritual miracle.

To fill up sins. The Apostle conceiues there is a certain full measure of
sinning, whereto impenitents come, before the last wrath cut them off: that
measure, measure not by natural inclination, or that fullness whereto vicious
nature would carry them: that measure is without measure: the Horse-leach and
the grave are not more insatiable, then an impenitents desire to sin. They
would live ever, said GREGORY, that they might sin ever. And this is one
reason, why their torments in hell are endless, because their desires to sin
were endless.

But this full measure understand, that whereto God in his secret, though just
judgment, determines to permit them, before in his last wrath he take them
away.

is then a measure of sinning, to which God in his wrath permits every
impenitent, beyond which he cannot pass, to which he shall come before the
last vengeance seize upon him. Mat. 23.32.
Fill up the measure of your Fathers, that on you may come all the blood of
Prophets. The Amorites must not yet be cut off, because their iniquity Genesis
15.16.
was not yet full.



And it should patient us awhile, though we see the enemies of Gods Church
tolerated with impunitie; when once they are at their top in doing evil, they
fall headlong into desolation.

For the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost; (...), until the end,
some interpret: intimating the limit of time, set to the wrath of God; which
once expired, wrath should be removed; All, to extremity, and in full measure,
answerable to the measure of their sins. All, There be that think him to
express the perpetuity of Gods wrath, as you would say, wrath is come upon
them finally, so as it shall never be removed.

as an evidence of Gods extreme wrath upon any people or person, to be given up
to outrage, and obstinacy in sinning: so Paul proves Gods wrath manifest from
heaven against Gentiles, because they Rom 1.24, 26.
were given over to the swindge of their brutish affections. And David in a
Spirit of prophecy praying Gods utmost vengeance upon his enemies, thus
expresses it: Psalm. 69.27.
Add iniquity to their iniquity. The Lord thus threatens to plague contempt
of his Word and Judgment on Jews; that they should Ezech. 24.13.
never be purged from their sin, till they dyed.

And consider, First, the persons, whose judgment this is. Secondly, the
consequents of the judgment. Thirdly, and manner of inflicting it easily
appears.





Desertion, God forsakes them: Secondly, Tradition, giving up to the power of
Satan.

holden captive of the Devil 2. Tim. 2.26.
to do his will, in Drunkenness, Whoredom, Idolatry, Superstition. What
greater evidence of Gods wrath can be upon their souls, then this divine
Desertion, and delivery over to the power of Satan, to work wickedness with
greediness?

Lazar: to live in Epicurisme, an evidence of Gods hate to the wealthiest
Glutton.

On them to the utmost. These once the people highest in Gods favor; no Nation
graced with such pledges of his love: now the chief spectacle of Gods utmost
wrath, and extremest displeasure.

The higher any people or person is advanced in Gods favor, the heavier
vengeance lights on them in case of their unthankfulness and disobedience.
Capernaum lift up to heaven Matt. 11.23.
, is brought down to the lowest Hell: justly for their rebellion, and abuse of
Gods high favor: this makes the state of an Apostata more fearful, then of a
simple Alien, because his taste was more of Gods grace and favor.

How great are the prerogatives of GODS favors, vouchsafed to this Kingdom,
liberty of the Gospel, peace in the profession and practice of Piety! such
as Adversaries have long enuyed us: other Churches of God never yet so fully
enjoyed: Let us not be high-minded, but fear. Every disobedience is in us more
heinous; Gods vengeance will be more extreme, if perhaps we prove unthankful
and rebellious.

Luke 12.47.
thy stripes be more. Is thy wealth greater? see thy 1. Tim. 6.18.
works of mercy be more abundant. Have we more power and plenty of preaching?
see that we more abound in knowledge, practice, every grace of God; more
tolerable else shall be the state of Sodom and Gomorrhe, at the day of
Judgment, then ours.

VERSE. 17.18. But we, Brethren, being taken from you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with
great desire.

Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I PAVL, once and again, but Satan
hindered us.


THe coherence seems this; the Apostle had occasionally mentioned their
afflictions, and professed his love, because he saw they might happily question
his love, as pretended only, since he so soon left them, and was so long
wanting to their comfort: he makes Apology; professing, First, his departure
was enforced, his absence grievous; no other then when a Father is bereft of
his children. Secondly, in body, not in Spirit. Thirdly, striuen against.
Fourthly, but hindered by Satan; (...). The word intimates a separation, such as
Death makes twixt Father and Child: that look what grief a Father sustaynes
when he is bereft of his children, or poor fatherless Orphans deprived of
Parents; such and no less grievous was that, occasioned by his separation and
absence.

So grievous to a Pastor sincerely affected to Gods people, is even enforced
absence from the Flock: the kindest Father takes not more tenderly, the want
of his dearest children. Reading the story of Paul's departure from Act. 20.18,
ad 36.
Ephesus, me thinks I see the behavior of a dying Father in his last farewell
to his children; so pithy and passionate are the Exhortations and Counsels;
every word enough to make the hardest heart to melt, Verse. 37.
in the hearing, and such relenting wrought they in the people.

No marvel: First, the dangers wherein they are: Secondly, and Act. 20.28, 29,
30.
price of their souls considered.

thus affected. Secondly, and they have cause to fear the vengeance, threatened
to men merciless to fatherless, that enforce such separation.

(...). The Apostle is by some conceived, to intimate the separation and
absence to be but for a short time, supposing him so to speak according to his
hope and opinion; by others, to signify the suddenness of his enforced
separation; whereto agrees the story, Act. 17. ad verse. 11.

Satan specially insidiatur initijs nascentis Ecclesiae, and is most turbulent
in the first planting of Churches. At Ephesus, when 1. Cor. 16.9.
the door is opening, Adversaries are multiplied. Hence in Primitive Church
grew those bloody persecutions, that plenty of Heresies, wherewith the world
was pestered. At first rising of Luther, what vprores was the whole Christian
world filled withal? and still as the Gospel spread it self newly from
Kingdom to Kingdom, so grew tumults more frequent and outrageous.

Particulars of Gods children may observe, temptations most frequent, and
vehement in their first retyring from the world, and turning to their God; then
conscience becomes a Lion: persecutions arise, all the power and policy of
Hell combine, to detayne, or work a rescue.

The reason is evident: It is the Devils observation from much experience; it
is easier to hinder a Church from planting, to hinder the rising, then to
destroy it, once settled upon the foundation. Paul for this is fearful to
admit. 1. Tim. 3.6.
Nouices to the place of Pastors; knowing, that as their falls are most
dangerous, because they are Ministers; so most easy, because Nouilions.

nor childbearing, without groans and outcryes. Our Savior, then whom the
Sun never saw man more peaceable, harmless and inoffensiue, escaped not the
clamours and oppositions of graceless men in his Ministry. Paul, whose
courses tended all to peace, so as no man's more, parting with many rights for
peace sake, tempering himself in things indifferent to every man's infirmity,
yet meets with tumultuous contradictions.

My son, Ecclus. 2.1, 2.
when thou entrest Gods service, stand fast in righteousness and fear, and
prepare thy soul for temptation. The beginnings are most violently assaulted.
Arm therefore against Satan's incursions.

First, especially against that of Pride, the usual overthrow of Nouices;
which made Bernard advise, in our beginnings specially to labor for Humility,
though graces be then small, yet as small is experience of infirmity in
temptation.

Secondly, Remissness and temper: though usually beginnings are most fervent,
yet as no violent thing is of long continuance; so suddenly is that fervor and
heat of devotion slaked. Bernard.
And then, as BERNARD, Contrahitur animus, subtrahitur gratia, protrahitur
longitudo vitae, deferuescit nouitius feruor, ingrauescit tepor fastidio sus,
blanditur voluptas, fallit securitas, reuocat consuetudo.

Thirdly, diuerting the stream of affection from substance to circumstance;
from the main foundations of Faith, to the nice impertinences of humane
ceremonies; by which wile of Satan, how many have been transported into
faction, carried to an unbrotherly separation from the Church of God!

In person, not in heart. In Christian amity, our persons may be sundred,
affections can never be divided. Brotherly fellowship may increase love,
separation quenches it not. What marvel: First, presence is not necessary to
procure it, nor therefore to perserue it. It comes to pass, said Austine, by
this means, that we love those whom we never saw: that whereas all other
love grows specially from society and familiarity; Love Christian is
procured by bare consideration, and report of Graces, we hear of others never
so far distant from us.

Besides, in this friendship above all other, is eminent similitude of manners
and affections, without sight. As we are all quickened by one Spirit, so we
are sure, what gracious affections are in our selves; the same are in all
others, partakers of the same Spirit; what care we have of others, the same we
know all Saints to have of us, etc.

This is the preeminence of Christian Amity, above all other Friendship
whatsoever. Augustine.
Saint Augustine notes of Friendship four kinds. First, Natural, where the
bond is Nature. Secondly, Carnal, where the glue is flesh. Thirdly, Mundiall,
where the tie is profit. Fourthly, Spiritual, where the link is Grace and the
Spirit of God. To this last belongs eminence in the point of indissoluble
continuance. Natural affections, some Monsters have put off: want of presence
diminishes. Carnal affection, every little unkindness, discontinuance in
evil abateth. Mundiall Friendship, where gain and profit makes the union,
want of fruition vnlooseth. Spiritual Amity nothing dissolueth: no not that
which dissolues all others, lack of society:

Religion changes our love, destroys it not, knits affection so near, as no
other bond can possibly conioyne them. And what, I wonder, is the love men
lack? except, what Peter calls, neighbourly running to the 1. Pet. 4.4.
same excess of Riot? what brotherhood? but as Moses reports of Simeon and
Leui, Genesis 49.5.
brotherhood in evil. No other Amity, I dare say, is hindered by the Gospel,
then Saint James says, is enmity against God.

Endeavored more abundantly, etc. and with great desire.

Gracious affections the more they are opposed, the more fervent they grow, by
opposition their fervor is increased: the Spirit suppressed in Elihu, is Job.
32.18.
as Wine that has no vent. The Word in JEREMY, as Ier. 20.9.
fire in his bones.

As Lime is inflamed by Water: as a stream grows more furious by obstacles
set against it: as cold in winter, increases heat in the stomach: so do
oppositions gracious affections. As corruption in carnal men becomes more
sinful by the Commandment; so Grace in Gods Children by that that would
suppress it.

First, In temptation Faith usually claspes closer to Christ; Prayer is most
fervent; vigilance greater against the Adversary; means, with more diligencie
attended.

Secondly, Afflictions increase Patience; excite to seek the Lord more
diligently.

Thirdly, Even sin it self occasional increases Grace. Gods Children
rising again, become sollicitores, timoratiores, circumspectiores,
feruentiores; as it were to make amends for former remissness.

Whether the Lord would show his Grace to be no whit inferior to corruption;
that, as corruption in Nature storms most when it is opposed by the
Commandment; so Grace grows more fervent by Satan's oppositions. Or whether
Gods Children begin to think, there is some extraordinary excellency in that,
whereof Satan labors to deprive them; and therefore strive the more to
maintain it. How it comes to pass, I determine not: but usually we see it
true; gracious affections are increaby oppositions.

This discernes Counterfeits from current graces, these are inflamed; those
quenched by oppositions. There is something like faith, that is but shadow of
it; would thou know it from that faith that saues? when Mat. 13.21.
persecution arises for the Gospel, such believers go away. There is
something like love, that is not love to Gods Ministers, and Children: would
thou know it from that Cognizance of CHRIST'S Disciples? Any thing crossing to
corrupt affections, turns that love into enmity. Plain rebuke, changes it
into hatred. There is something like obedience, that is not conscionable
obedience; thus thou shall discern it: when any thing is to be lost by
obedience, rebellion is rather embraced.

How many Counterfeits, masking under color of Christianity, are here
discouerd? Generally men love to sail, secundo flumine; the stream must be
with them; if the current run to profaneness, that way they follow. It is
not Grace that is thus delicate; to be quelled with every storm of
opposition. Grace is rather inflamed by what opposes it.

But Satan hindered. How? Is a question frequent, but not determinable, whether
by sickness, or by imprisonment, or tempests at Sea, who can resolve.

But here may be noted, Satan's enmity to Communion of Saints; that part of it
especially, that stands in amiable conuersing, and holy society one with
another. On this occasion was raised the persecution against Stephen; thereby
Acts 11.19.
to disperse the Church of God: so great increase and propagation he perceived
it to have, by brotherly fellowship, and sociall conversation.

The excellent fruit and comfort of brotherly fellowship thereby appears unto
us. The rule is good; what Satan specially opposes, therein is some special
excellency for our comfort.

Well weighed this shall be found, next to public ordinances, the most
profitable. First, for Comfort. Secondly, Provocation. Thirdly, Increase.
Fourthly, Confirmation.

Love brotherly fellowship: forsake not gatherings together of Saints: think
not uncharitably, the times are so evil, as to inhibit us meeting for
religious conference: Walk wisely, and cut off occasions of speaking evil
from the Adversary.

VERSE. 19.20. For what is our hope or joy or Crown of rejoicing? Are not even
ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming?

For ye are our glory and joy.


THE Apostle makes probable his desire of their presence, by that esteem he
held of them, and that benefit he expected from them. They were his hope, etc.
No marvel if their company was so longed for.



Theodoret suppose the Apostle to put on him the affection of an indulgent
Father; and in such like passion of love thus to style them. Secondly, There
are that think he so styles them, materialiter; the matter of his hope; the
proof of whom he conceived hope. Thirdly, What if he entend to teach, that
from their conversion he conceived hope, of that glory which the Lord has
promised to thee, that turn others to righteousness? that the sense may be;
the means of his hope and glory.

the gayning of souls to Gods Kingdom, is no small pillar to support our hope
of salvation; and a pledge to us of our glory; so runs the promise: They that
Dan. 12.3.
turn others to righteousness, shall shine as stars.

How should this animate us to be instant in season, out of season? to bend our
forces to rescue our people out of the snare of the Devil? First, their
conversion no small 1. Cor. 9.2.
seal of our sending. Secondly, a secondary evidence of our own Renouation.

Thirdly, a pledge of our sharing in the highest degree of heavenly glory.
Therefore said Solomon, Prou. 11.30.
He that wins souls, is wise; he, if any, lays up for himself a good
foundation against the World to come. No man with more comfort presents
himself to the face of the Judge, then the Minister, that can say: To me and
Isai. 8.18.
the children which thou have given me; the sons and daughters, whom, by thy
blessing, I have begotten through the Gospel.

Before Christ at his Coming. That is comfortable indeed that steeds us in the
Day of Judgment. Therefore SOLOMON preferres Prou. 11.4.
righteousness to riches, because it more auailes in the Day of Gods Wrath.
PETER 1. Pet. 1.7.
says, before Gold; because Gold perishes, faith is found to our praise at
the appearing of Christ. SOLOMON Ecclus. 12.13, 14.
Gods fear, before pleasures, treasures, honors, all things; because it more
comforts Conscience at the Great Day of Accounts.

Col. 3.2.
fasten our affections rather upon the things above?

Filij ADAM, genus anarum and ambitiosum, Bernard.
said Bernard: Why dote ye so much upon the riches, honors, pleasures of the
earth? that are neither verae, nor vestrae: all things leave us at that Day.
Only a good Conscience, our good works, and gracious gifts accompany us to
that dreadful Tribunal. Then shall we find a little obedience, and fear of
God more comfortable, then all the pomp the World can afford us.

Seriously think on these things; and make this the measure of excellency in
all things: to be available for comfort, at the appearing of Christ.

The end of the second Chapter.
THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
VERSE. 1.2. Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
be left at Athens alone,

And sent TIMOTHEVS our Brother, and Minister of God, and our Fellow Laborer
in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you, concerning your
Faith.


THe Apostle proceeds to satisfy the people, in the doubt they might make of
his love, and care for them, in respect of his absence: his desire and purpose
was to have come in person; that being hindered by Satan, he sent Timotheus to
supply his absence. In which sending, the particulars, are, First, the cause
inwardly moving him, his ardent love. Secondly, the person selected to that
business, Timotheus. Thirdly, the end, to stablish and comfort them.

His ardent affection he sets out in two properties: First, that it was after
a sort impatient of further delays. Secondly, that with contentment it
underwent his own inconvenience.

Those two properties of love unfeigned, deserve our notice. First, though it be
patient of all other things, yet is it holily impatient of detaynment from
doing good to those it imbraceth: 1. Cor. 13.7.
outward grieuances it bears; Its own desires are burdensome, till they be
accomplished. David expressing his loving desires to enjoy the Lord in his
Ordinances, resembles them to the Psalm. 42.1.
thirst of the heart in Autumn; what time, by Aristotle his observation, they
are most impatient of Christ: all time he thinks long, till he may appear
before God; and grows enuiously emulous Psalm. 84.3.
of the Sparrowes happiness, in approaching the Lords Altar.

Paul resembles his desire after Galatians restoring, to that of a Gal. 4.19.
woman in travel to be delivered; the pains of travel breed not greater
desire to see the man-child borne into the world, then Paul's love in him, till
Christ were new formed in them.

It seems the eminence and height of love, rarely exemplified, earnestly to be
endeavored.

The second property; it preferres, in some cases, another good before its
own: convenient for Paul's comfort had been Timothees continued presence, yet
for this peoples comfort contentedly he parts with him. See 1. Cor. 13.5.

Particulars conceive thus. It preferres, First, another Genesis 13.9.
temporal good, before it own. Secondly, another spiritual good before 1.
Cor. 8.13.
all it own temporal. Thirdly, another necessity, before it own
conueniencie in things spiritual.

Use it to cure, if it be possible, the disease of the later times, so
generally spreading over all sorts and degrees of men. In the last days shall
come perilous times, abounding with many dangerous and infectious sins. See
if he place 2. Tim. 3.1, 2.
not self-love in the forefront, as a radical sin, and mother to many that
follow. These perilous times are fallen upon us, wherein the saying is much
pleasing: Quisque sibi proximus, every man is next Neighbor to himself. And
ordinata charitas incipit a se; but they should remember, it is inordinate, si
desinat in se.

In matter of Alms even out of superfluities, how often hear our Neighbors,
Nabals answer? They 1. Sam. 25.10, 11.
have Families of their own: should they take and give to strangers? In office
of lending, that thought Deuteronomy. 15.9.
of Belial often rises: the Iubile, or something proportional will come.
Shall they hazard the principal, to do good to the needy? In case of
contention and Law suites, Paul is thought no man for the world: 1. Cor. 6.7.
part with right for peace sake: so may a man part with all that he has.

Yet it may be, when their spiritual good comes in balance with our earthly
profit, we are ready to prefer it. Now, would God, not only earthly profits,
but even sensual pleasures were not more dear to many, then salvation of our
Brethrens souls. I beseech you, Brethren, what so great good see we in meats
and drinks, apparel and sports? that by intemperate and unseasonable use of
liberty therein, we should wound our weak Brothers conscience: Romans 14.15.
if thy brother be offended, thou walk not after charity. Dearer then the
Earth, or all the Kingdoms thereof, should be the souls of our Brethren; and
our selves should rather undergo any evil of pain, then occasion our
Brethren to one evil of sin.

Remember who said: Look not every one on his own things only, but to the
things of another: Please not our selves only, but others in things good to
edifying.

Reasons, First, we have herein the imitable example of our blessed Savior,
Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
emptying himself of his glory, not for his own, but for our benefit; like
mind should be in us.

Secondly, not love of our selves, but love of Brethren, has those excellent
co^mendations and encouragements: whether the Lord thought the Commandment
unnecessary to inioyne us a thing so natural, as is self-love; or whether it
seemed to want restraint, rather then encouragement: Self-love scarcely ever
hears well in Scripture.

VERSE. 2. And sent TIMOTHEVS, etc.


Follows the person selected to supply Paul's absence, and his commendation.
Particulars commendable are five. First, a Brother. Secondly, a Minister of
God. Thirdly, a Labourer. Fourthly, a Fellow Laborer. Fifthly, and that in the
Gospel of CHRIST.

A Brother he is called, in respect of that common Spirit of adoption which all
Gods children partake, and whereby they call God, Father: The usual Epithet
of Christians.

There are Ministers, that are not Brethren: Ministers, that are not Laborers:
Laborers, that are not Fellow Laborers: Fellow Laborers, but not in the
Gospel of Christ: all these was Timothy, and that was his great commendation.

have 1. Tim. 3.7.
a Nouice admitted to the Office; it were some part of our happiness, if we
saw not men of very offensive lives intruding into the function.

Secondly, Ministers, not Laborers; such the Lord Jsai. 56.10.
to be given to sleeping; to Ezech. 34.2.
feed themselves and not the Flock.

Thirdly, Laborers, but not Fellow Laborers; whose 1. Tim. 6.5.
that dote about questions, breeding strife rather then godly edifying.

Fourthly, there are that join labors, but not in the Matt. 12.25.
Satan is not divided against himself. All these holy properties concurred in
TIMOTHY. Ministers thus qualified, are Gods great blessing unto any people:
Consider them severally.

First, necessary quality in a complete Minister, is piety and experience in
Christianity. Reasons prove it. First, hereon depends in great part his
fitness to teach Gods ways unto his people. A man that will soundly teach
conversion to another, Psalm. 51.13.
it behooves him, first, have experience of it in himself: He that will
soundly comfort, 2. Cor. 1.4.
must himself have tasted Gods consolations. In other matters of speculation
and morality, unexperienced men may speak plausibly; these they utter as some
strange language, that speak not from experience. Secondly, a Ministers duty
is not only to teach, but to be an 1. Pet. 5.3.
example to the Flock. There are two senses given us as helps of learning,
Sight, and Hearing: the one makes benefit by Doctrine, the other by Example.
Thirdly, and hereon depends much what, Mar. 6.20.
our authority with the people.

Secondly, Paynfulnesse: so runs the Precept, Be 2. Tim. 4.2.
instant in season, out of season: so was practice of Saints. ISAI Isai. 49.4.
wearied himself and spent his strength. And the saying is, we should be as
Candles, spending our selves to give light to others.

Thirdly, Love of unity and study of it. Singularity and turbulencie must
be as far as any thing, from the courses of a Minister. It it noted of
Heretics, they were (...), loved 2. Pet. 2.10.
to sing their own Song, to go in a strain of their own beyond the
ordinary. And Paul plaints of doting Questionists, that delighted in studying
cases, and pestering men's minds with Quiddities of no moment for edification:
To. 16.17, 18
mark such and avoid them, they serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies.

Fourthly, Consent in the truth; that it may be true of them, as of PAVL, 2.
Cor. 13.8.
They can do nothing against the truth, but for it.

Such Ministers, Such Laborers, Mat. 9.38.
pray GOD to thrust forth into his Harvest. These are the Ier. 3.15.
Pastors after Gods own heart, that shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding, etc.

Lack they honesty? be they never so learned or laborious, First, besides
that with Aliens they do more hurt by evil example, then good by their
Doctrine; Secondly, perhaps with the wisest they impair the authority and
power of their teaching: Thirdly, at least you want one help in the way to
Heaven, when they finger out the way, but foot it not as Guides by their
example. Have they honesty, but labor not? Mentior, if I think not their
show of honesty does more harm with the people, whiles they are idle or
ignorant, then the prophanenes of others?

Do they labor, but dissent? what do they but distract the people, and bring
them into a Maze, not knowing which way to take?

Consent they in error? The more poysonfull and banefull grow they to the
peoples souls. It shall therefore behooue you, to pray for Ministers that may
be Timothees indeed; Brethren, Laborers, Fellow Laborers in the Gospel of
Christ. Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 30.
Such Ministers are worth Gold; worthy to eat Gold, says BERNARD. Da mihi
alterum TIMOTHEVM, and ego cibo eum, si vis, etiam auro, and poto balsamo.

To stablish and comfort you concerning your faith.

The end of sending. Great Cap. 1.3, 6, 7.
commendations PAVL has given to this peoples faith; effectual; courageous,
exemplary it was: yet to this people so eminent in faith, Timothy is sent to
establish and comfort them as concerning their faith.

Thence learn we, There is not the strongest in faith, but needs
confirmation; none so courageous, but needs comfort. Therefore Abraham the
Mirror of Faith, privy to his weakness, submits to the Romans 4 11.
use of Circumcision; receives that sign as a seal, that is, a means to
confirm his persuasion of justification. Hieron.
Petrus mergitur and meretur audire, modicae fidei, etc. Si in illo modica
fides, in quo magna sit nescio. See also, Romans 1.12. Luke 17.

Weigh but the many mighty Oppugners of this Grace of God: he that seems to
himself strongest, will not question the necessity of confirmation, if not
for his present, yet for his possible wauerings. These they are:

First, Satan's incursions. This grace he desires especially, by Luke 22.31.
winnowing to shake out of our hearts. To tell how violently he assaults Gods
Children, seems needless: setting before them their past sins, their
present infirmities: affrighting with fear of Hell and terrors of Judgment,
etc. If those things have not befalne us, they may befall us. It will be too
late to seek armor in the Day of Conflict.

Secondly, The Worlds onsets.

First, By Persecutions from Aliens, wherein how hard it is for our infirmity
to hold out, let the fearful falls of Gods great Saints, those many caueats
and comforts, given for encouragement, and our frailty natural teach us.

Secondly, Seducement by Heretics, those mystical Heretics, especially the
Ministers of Antichrist, armed with all the power and policy of Satan.

Thirdly, Apostasy of Hypocrites: hereat how many stagger; when they see men
so eminent in knowledge, and outward acts of Piety, Turn back from the holy
Commandment! one of the two is presently suggested; either themselves are no
better then they, or Gods promise of perseverance is uncertain.

Fourthly, Scandalous falls of Gods Servants; making many waver and grow
suspicious, lest they through like weakness fall into like extremities.

Thirdly, Our own corruption and fleshly concupiscence; always Gal. 5.17.
fighting against Grace, sometimes Romans 7.23.
leading us captive, clogging us in every good duty, till we begin to think
such rebellion in our members, such dullness in best performances cannot stand
with sincerity.

Fourthly, Divine tentations. The Lord himself sometimes Job 13.26.
writes bitter things against us; withdrawes the sense of his love, Psalm. 51.12.
the joy of his salvation; in such sort, that whosoever judges of himself by his
sense, must say as David, the Lord has forsaken him. All these strong
oppositions against faith, show how necessary for the strongest and most
courageous, confirmation and comfort is.

Isaac to Jacob, with unexpected speed bringing his Venison? How have thou
found so soon, my Son? Behold, Gods Children of longer standing and more
experience, complain them heavily of doubtings and infidelity; and
notwithstanding daily use of Gods Ordinances, and striving against sin, find
it hard at times to maintain so much as endeavor of perfection in faith, and
mourning for infidelity. Dare they answer as Jacob? The LORD has brought it
to their hands; I dare say of such as boast of perfection, and contemn Gods
Ordinances, they lie as Jacob. God has not wrought it. Only the Devil has
deluded them. Our perfection is to acknowledge imperfection; he is perfect in
Paul's mind, that Philip 3.14, 15.
acknowledges himself imperfect, and strives to that mark. Secondly, But
yield thy faith as firm as was Abraham's: art thou sure it shall so continue?
It is good to provide against possible dangers, and in that respect to use
means of confirmation.

Those means are first, continued use of Gods Ordinances, Hearing, Reading,
Sacraments, Prayer, etc. Ministers are given you, not only to gather you into
the Church; but to continue you therein, and Ephesians. 4.12, 13
to build you onward to perfection.

Secondly, careful observance of all Gods favors in former times vouchsafed.
Keep Record and Register of all Pledges and evidences of Gods love; how he
has given issue out of temptations, as 2. Cor. 1.10.
Paul, 1. Sam. 17.37
David, etc.

Thirdly, Store thy self with knowledge of the Word of God. Make thy memory as
the Mat. 13.52.
Storehouse of the wise Scribe, filled with holy sentences of Law and Gospel,
that against every temptation thou may have what Ephesians. 6.17.
to oppose.

Fourthly, Tie thy self precisely to obedience, and the study of Sanctity.
Faith relyes not on our works; yet I think with Lombard, Hope and Faith also
arises out of our works; and is furthered thereby. I say not by their worth,
but by their presence. Obedience is the best evidence faith can follow, in
applying Gods promises made to us in Christ. Vainly in respect of comfort does
any man meditate the general promise, that is not able to assure himself that
they belong to him. And that assurance grows from our obedience and 2. Pet.
1.10.
sanctification.

VERSE. 3.4. That no man should be moved by these afflictions; for your selves
know that we are appointed thereunto.

For verily when we were with you, we told you before that we should suffer
tribulation, even as it came to pass, and ye know.


HOw necessary comfort and confirmation was for this people, Paul here
preuentingly shows; in respect of the afflictions had befalne him: whereout
he knew, Satan would work his own advantage amongst the people. Wherewithal
he interlaceth arguments to prevent wavering in that respect.

First, From consideration of the ordinance and appointment of God; where the
argument lies not so much in the inevitable necessity, as in the conformity
that should be in us, to every will and appointment of GOD.

Secondly, from his prediction. Reason they had none to be moved with these
afflictions. It was no more then they were forewarned of, and taught to expect;
where the prediction is amplified by the concordant event; it so came to pass.

That no man should be moved, etc. The word signifies to be drawn away by
flattery, or to yield to flattery. The Apostle supposed and foresaw how the
Devil would take occasion in these afflictions, by flattery to insinuate
himself into the minds of Gods people; by promise of more ease by a contrary
course, to draw them from soundness of Faith and Piety.

Such a mild Artifex is Satan leaving no course unassayed to withdraw from the
faith; In days of prosperity by terror of afflictions; In times of
tribulation, by flattery, and promising more ease.

His flattering insinuations conceive these and their likes.

First, he bears us in hand, that the course attended with crosses, cannot be
that which most pleases God: he is no step-father to his children; it is
likely, if our ways pleased him, our very enemies should be at peace with us.
See Ier. 44.

Secondly, or else it is suggested, there is no providence taking notice of
things well or ill done upon earth, at least Mal. 3.14.
no profit gotten by the service of God.

Thirdly, if neither of these succeed, yet ease is pleasing to flesh and blood;
he knows we are Epicures by nature, of voluptuous disposition, of Issachars
mind, rest is good, etc.

cum mulcet quam cum terret. First, learn in wisdom to measure the goodness
of Faith and Piety, rather by the comfortable end then the pleasing
beginnings. Secondly, and know, the reward of Religion stands not chiefly in
blessings of this life, but, First, in Gal. 6.16.
inward comforts. Secondly, Mar. 10.30.
graces of Gods Spirit. Thirdly, heavenly happiness.

We are thereto appointed. So is the Ordinance of God, that Act. 14.22.
through tribulation we must enter into his Kingdom.

Reasons of the Ordinance if any demand: First, the Lord by this means would
settle us in persuasion and hope of a better life after this; which made Paul
say, that the tribulation of Gods Saints in this life, is an 2. These. 1.5.
argument demonstratiue of a Judgment to come.

Secondly, withal, inflame desire and longing after that happy estate; so
fares it with most and best of Gods children; the ease of this life abates
their egre pursuit of the things that concern his Kingdom. And it is
remarkable in the Lords courses, when his children have been most fleshed in
the things of this life, and begun to surfeit of prosperity, he has mingled
to them a cup of bitterness, visited with affliction. See Genesis 14.12.

Thirdly, there is a twofold dross ouer-growing the Church in days of peace:
First, of Hypocrites, creeping into the body and outward face of the Church.
Secondly, of Corruptions, growing into the lives of his Saints, as filth on
standing waters. Tribulation is Gods fan; his Furnace: in times Matt. 13.21.
of persecution Hypocrites go away; the Hos. 5.15.
fervor of all gifts and gracious practice is increased in his children.

1. Pet. 4.12.
Think not strange of afflictions, as if some new thing happened unto us; we are
thereto appointed. This way walked all Gods Saints, the Cloud of witnesses that
have gone before us into heaven. The Author and Heb. 2.10.
Prince of our salvation, was consecrated by afflictions. Luke 24.26.
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory? And
ought not Christians to suffer like things, and so to enter Romans 8.17.
fellowship of Christ's Kingdom? There are certain Col. 1.24.
remaynes of Christ's sufferings reserved for us, sweetened indeed by Christ's
Passion, yet unavoidable, of all those that 2. Tim. 3.12.
will live godly in Christ Jesus.

What ever we think, there is no part of a Christians life more
discomfortable, then that which is Luk 6.26.
free from afflictions: we lack that way-marke, to assure us of our walking
with a right foot to the Gospel.

when thou Ecclus. 2.1.
entrest into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness, and fear, and
arm thy self for temptation: as the wise Builder, sit down and cast thy cost,
thus reckoning, it must cost him many a reproach and vexation, that resolves to
live godly in Christ Jesus: they disadvantage their continuance, that with
other expectation make entrance into Christian courses. David said truly, There
is a reward for the righteous, yet stands it not in ease and outward blessings,
severed from the Cross, but, first, in the sweet peace of a good conscience.
Secondly, gracious endowments of Gods Spirit. Thirdly, the happiness of a
better life, Iam. 1.12.
promised to those that endure temptation.

and blood; see we how to stablish our hearts, that the bitterness of
affliction dismay not from holy practice. Consider, first, they are all swayed
by the will, appointment and providence of our gracious God. Says David, 2.
Sam. 16.11
What if the Lord have bidden him curse? after he resolves, The Lord had so
appointed. Surely with Christians, acknowledging a particular providence
reaching to all actions and accidents of this life, this principle cannot but
be perswasiue for patience, and silence those many murmurings of our hearts
against the baseness and indignity of the instruments.

Secondly, in afflictions we are nearest some blessing from God. It may be,
said DAVID, the Lord will look upon my affliction, 2. Sam. 16.12
and do me some good for this evil. It is past may be, that all afflictions
of Gods children tend to their Heb. 12.10.
profit, and Romans 8.28.
work to the good of them that love God, and are called according to his
purpose: In temporal things we have seen often experiences; in others, we
are sure either to have some sin more mortified, or some grace more quickened;
some good or other, think the Cross makes way for.

Thirdly, 1. Cor. 10.13.
The issue comes with the temptation: never comes affliction without his grace
accompanying it, that the issue may be comfortable, and joyous to the children
of God.

Fourthly, God rewards vltra condiguum; afflicts citra condignum: that
persuasion whosoever carries, and is acquainted with his foul sins, willingly
prays with AVSTINE: Hic ure, hic sica, vt in aeternum parcas.

We told you before. So should Gods people be acquainted as well with the
hardship, as with the comfort; as well with the sour, as with the sweet of
Christian practice: as our Savior promising his Disciples peace in him, Ioh.
16.33. Matt. 10.16, 17 Act. 14.22.
foretells their afflictions in the world.

For, first, unexpectedness, besides that it makes them more grievous:
Secondly, It disaduantageth them also in their armor and preparation to bear
them: praemoniti praemuniti.

Peace, peace, all shall be well: or in wisdom, as they term it, to conceal
from Nouices the hardship they shall meet withal in Christianity: whence it
comes, that meeting with the Cross, either they go back, as missing the ease
they promised themselves in Christian courses, or else are found unprovided in
days of affliction. It is meet for us to prefer the wisdom of Gods Spirit,
before our own carnal discretion: if our Savior and his Apostles thought
meet to forewarne of the Cross; who are we that we should think a
contrary course more convenient?

I say then, as the wise man, When thou entrest Gods service, expect affliction.



way to that happiness lies by Act. 14.22.
the Cross. Secondly, it is not possible in this life, and that to come, to
have Luke 16.25.
comfort, as Abraham intimates to the damned Glutton. Hieronym.
Difficile, imo impossible est, vt and praesentibus quis and futuris fruatur
bonis, vt and hic ventrem, and ibi mentem impleat: vt de delitijs transeat ad
delitias.

Lest the condition seem hard, consider the sweet fruits of bitterest
afflictions. First, they are means to 1. Cor. 11.32.
exempt from condemnation. Secondly, to make Heb. 12.11.
partakers of the quiet fruit of righteousness. Thirdly, are attended with
their 2. Cor. 1.5.
comforts. Fourthly, 2. Cor. 4.17.
work to us the incomparable crown of glory.

VERSE. 5. For this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your
Faith, lest by some means the Tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in
vain.


A Second end of Paul's sending Timothy, is here expressed; to know their Faith,
that is, their continuance therein; which curious care of the Apostle was
furthered by a double fear: First, of the Tempters malice. Secondly, of their
defection.

To know your Faith.

Paul be doubtful of their Faith, having seen so excellent fruits thereof in
their patience, zeal, conversion?

man's Ier. 17.9.
heart is deceitful; and knew well what our Savior taught, of some Matt.
13.21.
believing for a time. Secondly, though utter Apostasy from faith fall not
into Gods children, yet declinations there may be, and interruptions of Faith
for a time. Thirdly, and there is a holy 2. Cor. 11.2.
jealousy in Christian love, whereby fearing the worst, they provide to
prevent it. Fourthly, he was not ignorant of the danger the Luke 22.31.
strongest are in from Satan's malice. Fifthly, and knew it no less his duty
to labor their confirmation, then to endeavor their conversion.

ought Ministers to be careful of the peoples perseverance, no less then of
their first conversion. Our first care is to gain souls to Christ; it is no
less our duty parta tueri: hence Apostles, where they had planted Churches,
so carefully settled a standing Ministry; and themselves in person eftsoons
returned, Act. 14.22, 23
to confirm the Disciples hearts: as knowing, they were given not only to
gather the Church, but Ephesians. 4.12, 13
to build it even to perfection.

Yea, there are Reasons, why the specialtie of our care should be intended to
Conuerts rather then to Aliens. First, our actual bond is nearer with them
that are, then with those that possibly may be members in Christ's body.
Secondly, the state of a Church in act, may, if it be neglected, prove worse
then the state of a No-Church: while it continues a Church, the condition is
happyer, yet may it possibly become more miserable: upon this ground, Apostasy
is far worse then simple Infidelity, because of a simple Infidel there is
hope, he may become a Believer: of an Apostata, there is no hope, that he
shall Heb. 6.6.
be renewed to repentance.

gather only, and not Ephesians. 4.13.
to build the Church to perfection? Secondly, suppose we our people so
established in the present Truth, that they need no more our 2. Pet. 1.12, 13
admonitions and remembrancing? Thirdly, or can we be ignorant of Satan's wiles,
and not take notice how by our Exodus 32.1. Gal. 1.6.
absence he aduantageth his Kingdom? Fourthly, or suppose we our people so
strong, that he dares not give them the encounter? Hear then what Paul
intimates in his fear for this people, so renowned for Faith, so eminent in
all Grace; yet even of these he is fearful, lest the Tempter had tempted them.

There is not the greatest amongst the Saints, but lies open to temptation.

The Gal. 6.1.
spiritual and most sanctified amongst Galatians, the Apostle advised to
consider, that they also might be tempted: the Luke 22.31.
Disciples of our Savior, Satan desired to winnow; yea durst give onset to
Matt. 4.
the Son of God clad with our infirmities; has prevailed against greatest
Saints left to themselves; so that I think their falls are without parallel
even amongst Nouices, as in David, Solomon, Peter, etc.

Truth is, such must expect the most exquisite of Satan's temptations, most
subtly contrived, with greatest violence urged, inasmuch as he knows;
First, it is not his ordinary skill that preuayles against them. Secondly, by
their falls expects a double advantage.

First, their falls he thinks likely the fears of others inferiors in grace;
and hopes, the great Champions once overcome, the petty Soldiers will dread
the encounter; as 1. Sam. 17.51
Philistims fled when their Giant was overthrown. And certainly that hope does
not always fail him: weak ones grow ouer-timorous, almost hopeless of
victory, seeing so foul falls of their Superiors in grace, not considering,
First, that these things are permitted to make us cautionate, not desperate.
Secondly, that God many times 2. Cor. 12.9.
perfects his power in weakness; enabling a weak Nouice to endure that brunt
of temptation, that stronger men have been borne down withal.

A second advantage he aims at in their temptation and overthrow, thus
conceive: Eminent examples he knows are preualent whether in good or evil.
No precedent has proved more pernicious in evil, then that of the most
eminent in the grace of God: seldom fall such alone; but their falls are like
the falls of mighty Cedars, bearing down before them a multitude of weaker
plants.

Paul, Let 1. Cor. 10.12.
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; and what ever our graces
be, Romans 11.20.
yet be not high-minded, but fear.

Three faults of men eminent in grace are specially here taxed.

First, Security, when men conceited of their strength, grow careless of the
danger they are in, crying peace to themselves: these forsooth are at defiance
with Satan, and dare almost dare him to do his worst. Oh consider, we are yet
in militia, in the Church Militant, not Triumphant. God Romans 16.20.
shall shortly tread down Satan under our feet. But in the meane-time,
insidiatur Calcaneo; if thou be careless, fear lest he supplant thee.

Secondly, Presumptuous casting themselves into occasions of evil. So
grounded, they seem in Religion, that they dare enter a Duellum with the
subtillest Papist; so stablished in Sobriety, all Sanctity, that the
prophanest and most leprous company can cast none of their contagion upon them.
Whom I would entreat to remember, the falls of Gods greatest Saints by such
presumption. Memorable is that speech of Nehemiah to Israelites admitting
Marriages with the Daughters of a strange god. Fell not Nehem. 13.26
SOLOMON by these means? yet amongst the Nations, was no King like to him, and
he was beloved of his God. Let his fall be our fear; and make us cautionate
how we tempt the Lord, by head-longing our selves into occasions of evil.

Thirdly, Priding our selves in opinion of our strength.

The Victory is half gotten, when the heart begins to swell with Pride. We
may allude to SOLOMON: Prou. 16.8.
Pride goes before destruction; and a hautie look before the fall.

On this ground Paul advises, to Gal. 6.1.
restore with meekness those that are fallen through infirmity, considering
our selves may be tempted, and need as much compassion from others, as they
now expect from us.

The fault is common amongst many, through too little acquaintance with humane
infirmity, and lack of observing their own corrupt inclinations, and Satan's
undaunted malice; to insult over the falls of Brethren; and rather rigorously to
reprove, then compassionately to restore. We have enough to talk on, when
tidings is brought us of Brethrens faultings. And as Pharisees, though guilty
of as great sins, Joh. 8.5.
yet urge the stoning of the Adulteress; so we think extremity all too
little toward others sins.

Let us consider; First, our common infirmity, that we have not yet fallen,
bless God that kept us from like temptations. Secondly, Satan's unlimited and
impartial malice; sparing none, no not the greatest, when once the Lord shall
say unto him, 1. Reg. 22.2^.
Go and prevail.

Lest the Tempter had tempted you. The Tempter, an Epithete of Mat. 4.1, 3.
Satan; as some say, in respect of that first tentation; as others, because he
has made it his proper office, and it is his ordinary practice to tempt. Where
the question falls in, whether it be the property of Satan only to tempt:
understand it not of temptations Genesis 23.1.
of trial, but of seducement, which Augustine calls the noxious or hurtful
temptation.

There be that think it so the property of Satan to tempt, that it agrees to
no person or thing besides, save as it is Satan's instrument, Aquin. part. 1.
quaest. 145. art. 2
that though men tempt instrumentaliter, the world materialiter, yet
efficiently the Devil only is said to tempt: they allege this Text for
proof.

But how said JAMES? A man is tempted of his own Iam. 1.13.
concupiscence? our Savior, Out of the Mat. 15.19. Bernard. in Cantic. Sermon.
32.
heart ascend ill thoughts, though the Devil rake not in that puddle. Bernard,
there is morbus mentis, as well as morsus Serpentis: There is malum innatum, as
well as seminatum. There are ill thoughts, which are partus cordis, besides
those that are seminarium hostis.

Yet is the title in a sense peculiar to Satan, because he is the Tempter
(...); the chief or principal Tempter; or because all sins and temptations
come at least indirectly from the Devil; in as much as by him was procured the
deprauation of Nature; so that to him, as to the first cause may all noxious
tentations be resolved. Whether the only or the principal; a Mat. 4.3.
Tempter we are sure he is. See we, first, what it is to tempt. Secondly,
parts of Satanicall temptations. Thirdly, kinds. Fourthly, reasons.

To tempt, in this sense taken, intimates an endeavor Iam. 1.13.
to draw our hearts from God, and to entice to disobedience. The parts of
temptation are three; First, Suggestion: the casting of evil thoughts into the
mind; as into Ioh. 13.2.
IVDAS his heart, the Devil threw that thought, to betray his Master.
Secondly, persuasion; the pressing of the suggestion with some reasons that may
persuade the mind to approve, incline the will to consent to that evil as
good. The suggestion is after a sort the conclusion; the persuasion the
argument to enforce it. Example: Genesis 3.5.
Eat the forbidden fruit; is the suggestion to Eve; Ye shall be as gods, the
persuasion. Mat. 4.6.
Cast thy self down headlong; the suggestion. The Angels have charge to keep
thee, the persuasion.

And it is urged, first, sometimes by way of inticement; as when by promise of
some good that giving way to the suggestion draws with it, we are allured
rather then terrified: as the evil spirit in the mouth of Ahabs prophets,
undertakes to 1. King. 21.21
entice him, by promising prosperous Voyage to Ramoth Gilead.

Secondly, Sometimes in way of terror; as when by expounding some fearful
evil, he labors to draw from us consent to his suggestions.

Thirdly, The last part of Satanicall temptation, is instigation. The instant
and importunate urging of the suggestion; giving no rest till he has procured
consent, if it be possible. Satan 1. Chro. 21.1.
provoked DAVID to number the people; It seems he was not satisfied with once
suggesting or persuading that thought of Pride, but with instance again and
again renewed, pressed onwards to execution. So find we often a kind of
importunity in urging temptations.

The kinds follow: they are diversely distinguished; first, ex modo. First, Some
are immediate, wherein Satan uses no instrument in tempting; as in that of our
Savior. Secondly, Some mediate, wherein men or women are used as his
instruments; so tempted he Adam by Eve; Ahab by false prophets. Thirdly, Some
mixed; as wherein perhaps the suggestion is from Satan immediately; the
persuasion or instigation by his instruments.

Secondly, Ex euentu; by their issue; some are effectual, some ineffectuall
temptations; Effectual, wherein he preuayles, more or less. Ineffectuall,
wherein he preuayles not: as in our Savior, Genesis 39.10.
Joseph, etc.

Reasons of tempting in respect of Satan.

First, His envy at man's possible felicity: through envy of the Devil came
sin into the World. Bern. de aduentu Sermon. 1.
It is Bernards opinon, that man was created to supply the defect of Angels in
Heaven, and to repair that breach that their fall had made in the heavenly
Jerusalem. Satan envying us that happiness, labors by temptation to draw us
from it.

Secondly, The blind malice and spite wherein he is carried against God and
his Christ. The sense of torments which he indures, makes him oppose, as much
as may be, whatsoever is glorious to God; as is the obedience and salvation of
his Children.

Reasons of GODS permission if any ask; though it should suffice us to know,
the Lord keeps the hook in his nostrils, and wills nothing of his Children but
what he ouer-rules to their good: yet probably these may be alleged: First,
2. Cor. 12.7.
To humble his Children, and prevent Pride and security. Secondly, That Christ
not only in person, but in his members may conquer Satan. Thirdly, That the
equity of giving Iam. 1.12.
us the crown of life, may appear to all. What ever the Reasons are, Satan
we are sure has his employment in temptation.

To Mat. 26.41.
watch and pray, lest we enter into temptation. The parts of the prescript are
two. First, Watchfulnes, implying, First, expectation of tentation. It is no
small advantage given to Satan, to promise our selves immunitie from his
assaults; thence is it, that in the conflict we are found unprovided for
resistance; Tertull. de orat.
Tertullian of the Disciples. Adeo tentati sunt Dominum deferendo, quia somno
potius incluserunt, quam orationi. If ever we have rest from Satan's
temptations, it is only to advantage himself through our security. He left
our Savior Luke 4.13.
for a season: but for a season; to teach us, after one tentation to expect
another: and never to be secure of so dangerous and watchful an Adversary.
Secondly, Circumspection; diligent heed-taking to our selves, that we give no
occasion of 1. Cor. 7.5.
advantage to the Tempter.

The second part of the prescript is Prayer; advised because of our infirmity:
I dispute not the question, whether it be lawful to pray freedom from all
temptations. Truth is, it is utterly unlawful to pray general immunitie;
exemption from particulars, may perhaps be prayed; yet with submission to the
will of God. Howbeit strength to resist, tentation, grace to support in
temptation our duty is to pray. 1. Cor. 10.13.
Gods promise to grant, if we pray as we ought. They ill provide for their
comfort in temptation, that under pretense of unworthiness to obtain, or
coldness in Prayer, neglect this Ordinance of God, that to all other the
spiritual armor Ephesians. 6.18. Bernard.
gives strength. Grauis equidem nobis est inimici tentatio, sed long grauior
illi oration nostra.

Thirdly, To these let be added the complete armor mentioned by the Apostle.

Fourthly, Observance of Satan's wiles, and our own infirmities; where his
greatest likelihood is to prevail.

Secondly, The censure is not harsh to say of any entising to evil, that they
are instruments or Job. 8.44.
Children of the Devil, whose works ethey do; whose nature they resemble; One
said once, Quot peccata, tot Daemonia; so many evils, so many Devils; we may
truly say, so many Tempters, so many incarnate Devils. A people rise in every
place; Pharisees were not more painful Mat. 23.15.
to make Proselites, then they partners in their excess of riot. Prou. 4.15.
Their sleep departs, except they cause some to fall. Our Savior stuck not
to call Mat. 16.23.
PETER Satan, in that case.



Bernard, Bern. in Cantic. Sermon. 32.
it is scarce possible to put exact difference; neither is it much material to
know. This hold for a rule: Whatsoever thought exalts it self 2. Cor. 10.5.
against the obedience of Christ, is a temptation; whether from Satan, or from
thine own heart, is somewhat curious to inquire; our care should be, not to
consent thereto.

The Tempter: The Devil then is a Tempter, but sure we are he is no inforcer.
He may suggest, persuade, provoke to evil; enforce he can no man to yield to
his temptations. There is a threefold liberty of the will; First, from sin.
Secondly, from misery. Thirdly, from necessity. The two first we lost in
ADAM; from necessity and coaction the will is still so free, that if it could
be constrained, it were no will. Therefore the Lord in conversion, forces not
the will, but sweetly inclines it. The Devil in temptation, compels not, but
persuades it. Truly said the Heathen, Nemo nolens malus: and nemo peccat
inuitus. Not a Bear or Lion, but a Serpent supplanted our first Parents: a
creature not stronger, but more subtle then others. Serpens, Bern de duplici
Baptismo.
o EVA, decepit te; decepit profecto, non impulit aut coegit. The evil spirit
returning, ingreditur, non irruit, eum alijs septem nequioribus, non
fortioribus.



the consent is not full.

Secondly, In Gods Children is flesh and Spirit: the will is partly fleshly,
partly spiritual, as far as it is spiritual, it consents not; but qua
carnalis, it yields willingly to motions of evil.

This once we are sure; force there can none be offered to the will. The
Devil may tempt, he cannot enforce. Therefore Eve desiring in best manner to
excuse her self, complaynes of deceit, not of constraint. The Serpent Genesis
3.13.
beguiled me, and I did eat.





Out of the Mat. 15.19.
heart come evil thoughts, Murders, Blasphemy, etc. as waters issue from
their Fountain. Secondly, say the worst thou can of the Devil, all is but
this, he tempted, cast the thought into thy heart, persuaded and provoked to
evil; he forced not to consent: that power if he had, he would, in the utmost
extent, use against Gods children. Thine own will blame as much, or more then
the Devil: his temptations, till thou consent, are thy crosses, not thy
sins; thy will only makes them thy sins. Away therefore with such
Fig-leaues, and remember it, as one property of confession, to which pardon of
sin is promised, to accuse rather then excuse the sinner unto God: who ever
finds a child of God in prayer for pardon, accusing the Devil, and not rather
himself? I Psalm. 51.4.
have sinned and done wickedly in thy sight, says David: yet it is likely,
that as to the numbering of the people, so to Adultery and Murder, Satan was
the prouoker.

And our labor should be in vain.



Isai. 55.10, 11
As the Snow and Rain return not empty, but accomplish that whereto he
sends them: so is his Word. At least the refractarie shall know, there has
been Ezech. 2.5.
a Prophet amongst them.

Nor in respect of the Apostle. We are unto God a 2. Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor in them that are saved, and in them that perish: he that
labored in vain and spent his strength, Isai. 49.4.
yet knew his labor was with the Lord, and his work with his God.

It remaynes then that he intends it vain, in respect of the people; in case
they had given way to Satan, and revolted from the Faith.

Apostasy and defection from Faith, and Obedience, makes the Ministry, all
things vain unto us. Therefore Paul feared he had Gal. 4.11.
labored in vain amongst Galatians, perceiving their begun defection from the
Gospel they had received: and, have Gal. 3.4.
ye suffered so many things in vain? he intimates their passions and
patience, all would be vain to them, in case of their revolt. Compare Ezech.
3.20. 2. Ioh. 8. For the Crown of life is promised not to beginners, but to
those that continue.

John's words, Look to your selves, that you lose not the things ye have
wrought. There are amongst us many whose beginnings are comfortable. It shall
be far from me to doubt of their perseverance: yet let me say as PAVL, Heb.
13.22.
Suffer the words of exhortation. Caueats are not amiss to them whose zeal is
most fervent, especially in these times wherein we see iniquity abounding,
and Matt. 24.12.
the love of many waxen cold. Brethren, how many have we seen of excellent
beginnings and proceedings, yet grown weary of well-doing? And allured with
ease, or profits of this life, or affrighted with reproaches, etc. (horresco
referens) turned back from the holy Commandment given unto them. Let their
falls be our fears, or cautions at least, to make us watchful, how we give
way to like temptations. In all is the same inclination natural to Apostasy;
and were it not, we are 1. Pet. 1.5.
kept by Gods power to salvation, like would be our issue. I beseech you
therefore, beware how ye 2. Cor. 6.1.
receive the grace of God in vain; lose not the reward of your hearing,
praying, obeying all things: fear to be noted of backesliding, or to abate any
thing of your discreet fervor. No state is more discomfortable, then that of
Apostasy, better never to have known, then 2. Pet. 2.21.
knowing to turn back from the holy Commandment.

Will it be amiss to acquaint you with the wiles of Satan? and by what
degrees, he insensibly draws many into that state? First, from feruencie he
leads to temper, to moderation, as plausibly he terms the Revel. 3.15.
lukewarm, worst temper of the soul in devotion. Not good, he says, to be
ouer-egre; we may Eccl. 7.16.
be just overmuch; there is a reason in all things: by which pretense of
discretion, how many have left their first love, and fallen into profane
neutralitie?

Secondly, alluring to carnal liberty upon former evidences of Gods favor,
and suggestion of unchangeableness of Gods love, and the irreuocablenesse of
his gifts and calling. True suggestions. But how, I wonder, can they think
themselves amongst the Called according to Gods purpose, that turn his grace
into wantonness? when as the 2. Pet. 1.10. 2. Tim. 2.21.
evidence of that calling and election, is care to depart from evil? They
should remember, that though it be necessary to repent in hope, yet it is
dangerous to sin in hope. Bernard. de Annunc. sermon. 3.
It is Infidelis fiducia, and solius maledictionis capax quando in spe
peccamus. Cause enough such have to fear, lest former signs of grace, were
shadows only of that grace that saues, or the Hypocrites flashes, their
strong delusions.

Thirdly, there is yet a third, and it is much amongst men, that love to make
experiments in earthly vanities, and to prove whether it be not possible to
preserve their wisdom, with a little indulgence to the flesh. Solomon, in
that humor, made shipwreck of good conscience, Eccl. 2.3.
whiles he desired to prove his heart with worldly vanities, to see whether
they could afford him any such contentment, as worldlings fancied to
themselves therein. In this case it is safest: First, to rest in Faith of the
Word of God: It tells thee all is Eccl. 12.13.
vain to the fear of God, believe it without proof. Secondly, in evils, it
is safest to learn by other men's, rather then by our own experience. Believe
their relation, that having glutted themselves therewith, cry out of nothing
but vanity, and vexation of spirit. Were he not a mad man, that seeing the
infectiousnesse of the pestilence or leprosy in others experience, would, for
more sensible proof, adventure into infected houses? should we not think him
out of his wits, that would not believe the fire will burn, till he had
thrown himself into a scorching flame? as furious and infatuate are they,
that throw themselves into the mouth of the Devil, to prove experiments of
possibility in the rescue.

Annexe we preservatives against this dangerous evil. First, beware of Psalm.
19.13.
presumptuous sins, sins against conscience, and in pride and contempt of
God committed. If any shall Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
bless himself in his wickedness, upon hope of Gods mercy, to that man's
sins the Lord will not be merciful.

Secondly, fear to Ephesians. 4.30.
quench or smother the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, that would lead thee to
perfection.

Thirdly, in Gods service seek not earthly things, as if they were the reward
of Religion. By this occasion many have revolted from Faith and all fear of
God, for that they Mal. 3.14, 15.
missed that ease and honor, they aimed at in entering religious courses.

VERSE. 6.7. But now when TIMOTHEVS came from you to us, and brought us good
tidings of your Faith and Charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us
always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you,

Therefore, Brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction and
distress, by your Faith.


HItherto of Timothees sending to Thessalonica, together with the causes
thereof; follows his return thence, and the report he makes to the Apostle,
touching their gracious estate: wherein are obserueable, First, the matter of
the tidings and relation. Secondly, the effects of it in the Apostle.

The things he makes relation of, are, First, their Faith. Secondly, love to
the Saints. Thirdly, specialtie of love to the Apostle: declared by two
effects, and properties of love. First, remembrance of him. Secondly, and
desire to see him.

The effects in Paul are, First, Comfort. Secondly, Life. Thirdly,
Thanksgiving. Fourthly, Prayer, etc.

Of your Faith and Charity. The frequent conjunction of these Graces in the
Apostles writings, occasions, to observe their undoubtful concurrence in the
hearts of Christians. Compare Col. 1.4. Philem. ver. 5. 1. These. 1. verse. 3.
etc.

Thom. 1.2. q 65. art. 4.
The question is ancient amongst Popish Schoolmen, especially the followers of
Thomas: And is thus resolved: To Faith they assign a double subsistence, one
in genere Naturae, the other in genere Moris. The meaning of their terms thus
conceive: Faith, they say, has the truth of his subsistence in genere Naturae,
when it has all the essentials of its Nature, Scot. in 3. Did. 36. ad Art. 4.
whereby it is distinct from other intellectual habits, and is principle of
the proper acts thereof, in respect of its proper objects.

Suppose when there is wrought in a man, a firm and voluntary assent to
divine Revelations, for the authority sake of the divine Reuealer. Such Faith,
true in it kind, who can deny may be without Charity? Faith true in genere
Moris, when it is grown to have a virtuous subsistence in us, that is, as
Scotus interprets, an acceptablenesse with God, and becomes to be a
disposition to beatitude, and fit to attain the utmost superexcedent end. This
they confess is not, nor can be without Charity. In which opinion, beside
more obscure and Philosophical explication, what great odds can be discerned
from that we teach? Even we confess there may be true Faith, where Charity
is not, true in it kind; assenting firmly to the whole truth of God, which
some call Catholic, some Historical Faith. But that there should be
justifying Faith, and such as gives us interest to Christ's righteousness, and
eternal life, without Charity; we hold a dream fantastical, having no
footing in the Word of God.

Faith that iustifies, Gal. 5.6.
works by love: If there be any that works not by love, Saint James says,
Iam. 2.26.
it is a corpse of Faith, without life and power to justify us in the sight of
God: yet follows it not hence, that they join in the office of justifying,
because they meet in the hearts of Gods children. Knowledge is so coniunct with
Faith in the mind, that with many it goes for a part of Faith: yet was it ever
heard, that knowledge speculatiue should justify us in Gods sight? we conclude
then, that justifying Faith, or, to use the School term, Faith true in genere
Moris, is never severed from love of God and his Saints.

may seem frivolous, and his Prophecy untrue. Suppose ye, that Luke 18.8.
when the Son of man comes, he shall find faith on earth?

Sure, if it be true, that our people generally vaunt of themselves, never
were times fuller of faith, then these last days, of which Christ prophesied a
scarcetie, and as I may say, a famine of faith: There is no man so profane, so
ignorant, so rancorously malicious against GODS Children, but professes faith
as firm as Abraham's; as effectual almost, as that of Martyrs: Bring we it to
this Touchstone:

Thou say thou beleeuest Christ dyed for thy sins. Thou do well; so does
many an Hypocrite profess, when his conscience tells him, his faith is but
fancy. But will thou know, O thou vain man, that faith without love is dead?
faith works by love; Luke 7.47.
and who so has many sins forgiven, loves much the forgiuer, and all that
he knows beloved of him. How will thou persuade us thou have persuasion of
Gods love to thee, when thy heart tells thee there are none more odious to thee
then those that are dearest unto God? In that league entered twixt God and his
Church, thus stands the case; there is a community of Amity, and a community
of Enmity. Psalm. 139.21.
Gods foes are their foes; Gods friends Psalm. 16.2, 3.
their friends. Now, blessed be God, that keeps his hook in the nostrils of
his foes; and in a Christian Government, restraynes by fear; there were else
no living for Gods Children on earth, in this Generation so full of faith, or
rather so utterly faithless.

More especial Characters euidencing truth of Charity.

First, That which they love in Saints, is their Saintship, though there be no
other Lodestone of love, nor bond in Nature, nor personal merits, or the
Image of God, shining in them, draws affection. Disciples are loved, Mat. 10
42.
eo nomine, because Disciples. And to love of this quality, I dare say, no
faithless man can come.

Secondly, To this let be added, that their love is universal, and, as I may
say, impartial: In it are comprehended Col. 1.4.
all Saints. Any in whom they see the Image of God shining, so far as they
can discern, they embrace in their love. And this we may conceive as a mark
discerning whether we love them as Saints, or in other respects. If grace be
that we love in them, where ever it shows it self, whether in noble or base,
poor or rich, etc. our affections are thither drawn.

There is in many a Iam. 2.1.
partial and proud love, as James notes it; whether it be sound or not, judge
ye. Rich, and Honorable, and men of Fashion, though perhaps inferior in
grace, yet have the preferment in our Love, our Society, Conference,
Countenance, etc. The meaner sort, whom God perhaps has made more Iam. 2.5.
rich in faith, and more honored with plenty of his grace, even for their
mean estate, are as meanly, if at all, regarded. When may we look for David's
spirit in such men? A King to make himself Psalm. 119.63.
companion of all such as fear God, and keep his Precepts.

And that ye have good remembrance of us, etc. As to their faith was joined
love, so in their love is observed a specialtie toward the Apostle. They loved
all Saints; but had especial remembrance of Paul; him, above many, they
desired to see.

Though none of Gods Children may be excluded from our love: Secondly, Yet
there are, that may have specialtie, and preeminence in our affections, as Paul
had with Thessalonians. Christ loved all his own; yet is John singled out with
that special Encomium; The Ioh. 13.23.
Disciple whom he loved. Divines anciently observed a necessary order in loving.

The tie of affections in this kind is fourfold. First, Nature. Secondly,
Society. Thirdly, Personal Merits. Fourthly, Common Utility.

First, The common bond of Christian affections, is Grace. Hereto may be added
that of Nature and Blood, that justly makes it stronger. It may be
questionable, whether a man may prefer a Graceless Child, before a Gracious
friend. Of this, I think, is no question; but that a man may love a Gracious
Child, or Father, or Brother, more then a Gracious Stranger.

Tim. 15.8.

soul 1. Sam. 18.1.
claue so close to the soul of JONATHAN; a man to who^ for care he was so much
indebted.

and PRISCILLA laid down Romans 16.4.
their own necks for PAVLS safety; they thought of him as David's Servants of
their King; His soul 2. Sam. 18.3.
was worth a thousand of theirs. The loss of one Paul to the Church of GOD, is
more then of thousands of common Christians.



The LORD seems notwithout cause to prescribe us this order of loving; perhaps
to work in us a holy kind of emulation, and striving to excel in gracious
gifts and practices. Certainly, there is easily observed in the holiest, a
desire, perhaps from Gods own inspirement, to be dear and entyre to the
Saints of God; and a kind of ambition, to be of more then ordinary esteem
amongst Gods Children. It should seem to this end, that we might all labor
to excel in Grace, that some might have preferment in the affection of Gods
people.

Acts 6.1.
Murmuring that their Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration.

Now, God forbid, the meanest amongst Saints should be despised of the
greatest. There are some Offices of love, rathest to be extended to the
weaklings in faith. Nam and matter quem aegrotantem nouit filium, August.
magis fouet and saepius amplectitur.

Yet may we not censure Gods Children, as if they brake duty, because some
are in affection preferred before others. First, The measures of Grace, or
common Utility, may make such difference necessary. Secondly, And perhaps,
some cause of less esteem, sticks in the persons thus seemingly neglected.
The Image of GOD, the only Lodestone of gracious affections, perhaps in them
has more naeues and blemishes. They make not so straight steps to their feet;
perhaps are after a fort 2. Pet. 2.13.
spots and blots in our Assemblies, and too foul blemishes of their holy
Profession. I say not, for particular infirmities they should be excluded from
our love. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Love couers a multitude of sins.

Yet may not such be offended, if in such case they see not like manifestation
of entyrest love. Austine, August. de doct. Christ.
that thinks our love should be equal to all, in respect of the affection;
yet allows a difference to be made in the effects thereof. Wherefore it shall
behooue them to wipe away those spots, wherewith they blemish the amiable
beauty of Gods Image, that draws affections of his Children: And for us all,
let it be our care, to labor for as much eminence in Grace, as we desire to
have in Gods Childrens love,

The second thing here obseruable is, how to Paul. The man by whose Ministry
they were converted, the specialtie of their affection was carried. Where
worthy our notice is the affection of a people that has tasted the power and
comfort of the Ministry.

How dear to such those Ministers are by whom they have received Comfort,
Conversion! Confirmation. Romans 10.15.
Their feet are beautiful. The peoples dearest things, their Gal. 4.15.
right eyes, their Romans 16.4.
lives are not thought too dear for them; Examples: LYDIA, and the Iayler.



As we to see you. So should there be recursus gratiarum, an intercourse and
exchange of kindness betwixt Minister and people. Saint Paul calls for an
(...). That seeing 2. Cor. 6.12, 13
his heart was enlarged, they should not be straightned in their bowels.

Paul, If 1. Cor. 9.11.
you reap their spiritual things, is it much, to impart your carnals?

The people again plaint as much of their Ministers; they will have their due,
but care not to do their duty. There should be recursus gratiarum. They are
unthankful people, that receiving benefit of our Ministry, return no
recompense of their love and kindness; And they are unconscionable Ministers,
that take the hyre of Laborers, and live as Loyterers.

VERSE. 7. Therefore, Brethren, we were comforted over you in all our
affliction and distress, etc.


THE effects of this good tidings in the Apostle follow to be treated: the
first is comfort; and a kind of sweetning, the news of their faith brought to
his afflictions.

Of all comforts the people can afford to their Ministers, there is none like
this; their holy courses continued. See how Paul amplifies it. It comforted him
in all his afflictions; put a new kind of life into him; filled him with joy
unspeakable. Like affection he expresses, when exhorthing to unity, he
presses it by this issue; Philip. 2.2.
his joy should be fufilled. q. d. still he should think something lacking
to his joy, whiles discords and such like fruits of the flesh bare sway in the
people; and as if nothing could be added to his joy, if they walked as became
the Gospel, so speaks he. With like mind, Saint John professes; He had no
3. John 4.
greater joy, then to hear of his Children how they walked in the Truth. As to
a Father, discreet and kindly affected, no comfort is greater then the gracious
demeanor of his Children.

I say then as PAVL; Philip. 2.2.
Fulfill our joy; make our lives comfortable; sweeten the bitterness of our
afflictions with your constancy in holy courses.

I dare say, it is neither your civil courtesy, nor protection, nor
liberality, nor any thing, that can yield us half the solace, that the sight
of your holy behavior. Wonder you at it? First, Gods Glory, which we hold
more precious then our lives, is hereby advanced. Secondly, The assurance of
our Calling, our Crown hangs after a sort hereon. Thirdly, The profit will be
yours, whiles by this means we are Heb. 13.17.
encouraged, with more cheerfulness to do our duty. As it even Ier. 20.8, 9.
kills our spirits, to labor without fruit. If these things move not, oh, yet
let the comfort of your own souls sway you. Our joy is something by your
obedience: yours will be more. Psalm 34.8.
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Once try the sweetness Gal. 6.16.
and peace, that is felt in holy Courses.

Now hear how great cause have we to complain, of a barbarous affection in
our people? Therefore running to the excess of Riot, because they know, it is
Gall and Worme-wood to our souls. Alas, Brethren, what have we deserved, so
ill at your hands, that you should thus delight in our discomfort, that spend
our strength to save your souls? This account make, how ever the grief is
ours for the present; the horror at last will be yours; ye shall find it true
that Abner speaks in his monition to IOAB; 2. Sam. 2.26.
Surely it will be bitterness in the latter end.

VERSE. 8. For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.


THE second effect, life; we live, if ye stand fast. And not otherwise? Life
has diverse degrees. He lives, that has but breath or heat left in him; more
he, that has use of sense, and motion. Vita is vitalis, when it is led with
cheerfulness and joy of heart. Paul was alive when he said, Romans 7.9.
he dyed; but his life was as death, discomfortable and bitter to him. Envy
Job 5.2.
stays the silly one. He lives in that death: but is as dead, because he
enjoys not himself. That the sense is this; our life is lively, through the
comfort we feel in your perseverance.

Some help we have here, for fuller understanding of the sixth precept. We
usually scant the sense of GODS Commandments; whence it is, that we so much
fail in humbling our selves for our transgressions; and rest contented with
mere civility: crying out of too much niceness, even in Moralities. The
Pharisees for this have their Mat. 7.
tax from our Savior. PAVL Acts 22.3.
tutoured by a Pharise, hence grew so selfe-conceited, being most miserable,
yet Romans 7 9.
reputes he himself as happy as any man alive; till such time as the
Commandment came, and he had now learnd that the Law was spiritual. Like
generally is the conceit of our people from the same ground. None are reputed
Thieves, but Robbers; nor Adulterers, but such as defile their bodies with the
gross act of uncleanness; Nor Murderers, but such as shead blood. Whence it
is, that Civility goes current for complete Righteousness: and the Law of God
is thought to be satisfied, when the grossest breaches are avoided.

Know we, there are Murderers in Divinity, that are none in Policy: Thieves
in Divinity, that are none in Civility. Usurers are no Thieves in Policy;
yet grand Thieves in Divinity. Mat 5.22.
Angry Fools are counted men in Policy; are Murderers in Divinity. To
rectify this error; Take taste in this Precept how large the sense of others
is.

A Murderer we call him, that unlawfully depriues of life. But we shall
err, if we think life not taken away, till it be utterly extinct. Those
Thieves, in the Parable, that wounded the Traveler and left him Luke 10.30.
half dead, were Murderers; impair but the cheerfulness of life, by deading
a man's spirits, thou art a Murderer.

Esau was in his degree a Murderer of his Mother Rebecca: whiles by his
ungracious match with the Daughters of HETH, he made Genesis 27.46.
her life bitter unto her. The Israelites by their Idolatry made 1. Kin. 19.4.
ELIAS weary of his life; were therefore Murderers of him. False prophets in
EZECHIEL, made Ezech. 13.22.
hearts of righteous sad by their lies; were for that guilty of Murder before
God. In a word: Impayring of the comfort and joy of heart, which makes life
lively, must be censured a degree of Murder. It impayres life, though it
extinguisheth it not.

Learn we by this little direction in one precept, in examining our lives by
the Law of God, to extend and draw out the sense at largest. Ampliare praecepta.
The profit of such proceeding is plentiful.

First, It preuents that, which is the bane of many a soul, flattering our
selves in the miserable and cursed state of Nature; fancying to our selves in
morality, such a measure of righteousness, as that we scarce think we need
Christ to cover our wants, or grace to work greater perfection.

Secondly, It is a preservative against Pride; the Nurse of Humility; how
great so ever thy obedience is, the Law of God in largest sense taken, finds
thee culpable of transgression in every Commandment.

Thirdly, How sweetens it the grace of God in our reconcilement, and the pardon
of sins? No soul is so rapt with admiration of Gods love, as that that
considers, Luke 7.47.
how many sins God has forgiven unto it.

VERSE. 9. For what thanks can we render again to God for you, for all the
joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God?


THE third effect is joy; where considerable is, First, the manner of
propounding it.

Secondly, the measure of it.

In mentioning it, he begins with Thanksgiving, or rather seems to study,
in what manner he might address himself, to render any competent measure of
thanks to God.

What thanks, etc. The question imports him, to apprehend such a measure of
Gods love in that benefit, that he could by no means satisfy himself in any
measure of thankfulness: such speeches in Scripture argue the minds of Gods
children at a stand, unable to express what they conceive. Psalm. 84.1.
How amiable are thy dwellings! I cannot express the loveliness of them.
Psalm. 119.97.
How do I love thy Law! The measure of love is inexplicable; or signify the
insufficiency they find in themselves, to do what they desire.

how highly Gods children prize the favors of God, even such as to many seem
of smallest value. Nothing they think sufficient, that they can think or do
in way of thankfulness to God. Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all the benefits he has done unto me?
I know nothing sufficient: this only I know, GOD will accept thankfulness for
his mercies. The Lord has promised to accept desires: Can a child of God
satisfy himself with desiring? he would do as well as desire: his desires
he thinks never fervent enough. We may truly say, God is more contented with
the obedience of his children then themselves. And it is easier for a child of
God to yield pleasance and contentment to his gracious God, then to himself.



The Israelite indeed, knows how to amplify by all circumstances even
meanest benefits, still thinks himself too cold in the heartiest performance
of thankfulness and obedience; so see David, in the fervor of his deuoutest
praises, Psalm. 103.1, 2
calling unto his soul, and all within him, to praise the Lord; as if in
greatest heat and ardencie of affections, he had felt a frostie coldness in
the temper of his soul.

For all the joy wherewith we joy for your sake. The measure of joy is here
expressed, together with the means of it, for your sake, or by your means;
such fellow-feeling of their welfare, wrought his love to this people.

Remarkable here is the sweetness and amiablenesse of Christian love,
affoording so many comforts, and joys to our souls. Amongst many graces it is
most amiable; as in other respects, so, for that it gives us interest unto, and
sense of all the happiness of others; their Faith, Obedience, Unity, every
good gift of God, brings home joy unspeakable to our souls. Compare Phil.
2.2. Col. 2.5.

That not without cause, Saint Peter, with such 1. Pet. 4.8.
emphasis, exhorts to feruencie of love; so many things there are eximious and
eminent in love above many other Graces: First, 1. Cor. 13.
all without it is as nothing. Secondly, none so plentiful and rich in
virtuous fruits. Thirdly, none so lasting: Prophecy, and Tongues, and Faith,
and Hope, end with this life, only love is endless; the life of Saints in
heaven is love.

Super Cantica Sermon. 83.
Bernards observation is in this kind elegant. Of all the motions and
affections of the soul, love is the only, wherein we may reciprocate with
God. If God be angry with us, may we be angry with him? far be it: rather
let us fear and tremble, and pray for reconcilement. If God reprove us, shall
we dare to reprove him? nay, rather justify him. If he judge us, we may not
judge him, but rather adore him, etc. But in this of love we may reciprocate
with God, to reloue him is our happiness; woe, if we answer him not, in some
measure of relouing affection.

That forementioned ads to it no small commendation. It brings home joy to the
soul, from every good grace and blessing of God bestowed on our Brethren, so
amiable is Christian love: he never wants joy that has it, if from his own
sense it flow not, yet results it plenteously from others happiness. And I
dare say, he has no joy that wants it, that bears ill will at Sion; Gods
blessings on his children are the tortures of all such, as walk in the way of
Genesis 4.5.
Cain.

VERSE. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly, that we might see your face, and
might perfect that which is lacking in your Faith.


THe last effect of Timothees tidings in the Apostle, is prayer, amplified by
the manner, that it was, First, Assiduous. Secondly, Fervent. Thirdly, the
matter to see them, and that for this end, to supply the defects of their Faith.

Night and day, is a phrase of speech importing assiduitie and frequent
performance of that, to which they are annexed. Luke 3.37.
ANNAH served God with fastings, and prayers night and day: not but that she
had her times of necessary refreshment, but that she was frequent in these
duties. Praying exceedingly. The word is, more then exceedingly, as you would
say, excessiuely; so intimating the feruencie of his affection in begging this
blessing of God.

So are gracious affections of all others most seruent, and that love
strongest, where Grace is the bond. DAVID of IONATHANS love: It 2. Sam. 1.26.
was wonderful, passing the love of women. Women's judgment is more shallow,
therefore their affections strongest; they are the weaker vessels, if we
respect their judgment; but their passions, no less then violent. David
willing to express the fervor of Ionathans love, preferres it by this
comparison. Of friendship they make three kinds. First, Profitable, where
profit is the bond. Secondly, Pleasant, where pleasure is the link of
affections. Thirdly, Honesty, where virtue is the loadstone of love: the
preeminence Heathens give to that founded on Virtue; which, they say, is the
only perfect friendship.

For, first, it must needs be best love that, what is most amiable, procures.
In a gracious eye; more Psalm. 15.4.
lovely is Virtue clothed with rags, then Dishonestie in Princely Robes.

Secondly, in this concurres the best profit and delight: No man's graces so
mean, but may yield us benefit, and delightful contentment.

Thirdly, the helps and furtherances of love, (...), and beneficence, are here
eminent: Aristotle gives reason, why perfect amity could not be inter males,
they are at discord in themselves, are fickle and inconstant in their desires
and judgment.

Romans 12.18.
peace with all, as much as may be. Desire love of none, but such as fear God:
there can be no sound friendship nisi inter bonos.

I cannot but wonder, to see gracious men ambilitious of graceless men's love:
First, God has Genesis 3.15.
put enmity betwixt the two seeds; we are too foolish, if we think to
reconcile it. Secondly, besides, how harsh are the terms, on which their
friendship must be maintained? many a foul sin must be winked at and given
way unto, in case we think to hold peace with them. Reproves, are gall and
worme-wood, til such time as their hearts are reconciled to the Law of God:
entyrenesse and constancy of love can none be expected so great, as is
procured by gracious goodness.

Praying excessiuely. So do gracious desires express themselves by frequent
and fervent prayers. Look what a gracious heart longs after, it prays for
with importunity; as David for Psalm. 84. and 42.
restoring to the Tabernacle.

see afar off, and wish to partake. Number. 23.10.
Let my soul dye the death of the Righteous. Prayers daily and fervent, are
not found in them. Pro. 17.16.
The Fool has a price put into his hand to get knowledge, but has no heart:
he is loath to weary the Lord with suites.

Gods children, as they specially feel the misery of the want; see the
excellency of the blessings: so are they daily and importunate in praying for
them, and are of Jacobs mind; Genesis 32.6.
they will not let the Lord go, except he bless them. This account make;
heaven is not won with wishing; the strongest cries, and tears, are all
little enough, to procure grace from the Father of lights.

How should this persuade us to continue in prayer? performances are weak,
Romans 7.18.
desires strong and fervent, if they be gracious.

They may well be jealous of sincerity, that grow cold and negligent in prayer.

To see your face, and to perfect, etc. The things thus prayed for, are here
expressed; to see their face, and that to this end, that he might add to their
perfection. Would not the writing of so pithie an Epistle, so full of divine
Doctrine and exhortation suffice to this end, without his presence and
personal preaching? his lively voice had in it more lively energie, and that
Preaching was more powerful even to increase Faith, then Writing. The
privilege of this Ordinance it is, to Romans 10.17.
beget Faith; principality it seems to have, amongst the means to increase
it. Therefore Paul having written to Hebrews a large Epistle, yet advises
them to Heb. 13.22.
suffer the Word of exhortation from their Pastors; and writing to Rome a
plentiful Epistle, yet longs Romans 1.11.
to see them, that he might bestow upon them some spiritual gift.



God has dealt graciously with us in these times, storing us with variety of
holy men's labors; we shall be unthankful, if we despise so great Grace of
God offered to us; yet beware of that delusion, to think good books better
then good Sermons. Fear 1. These. 5.20.
to despise prophecy, so to addict your selves to reading, that you Pro. 28.9.
turn your care from hearing the Law; your reading, praying, all things, in
that case become abominable.

Defects of Faith. Could there be any in men so renowned? Some say, the Apostle
speaks hypothetically, to supply defects of Faith, if there were any: but what
needs such supposition? when every man's Faith is apparently defective, has
wants to be supplied, except perhaps we may think, Faith is privileged above
1. Cor 13.9.
knowledge? all gifts, etc. to be in this life made perfect. Petrus mergitur
and meretur audire -- modicae fidei: Hierom.
si in illo modica, in quo magna sit, nescio.

Defects of Faith are of two sorts. First, Actual. Secondly, Possible; and of
both kinds are found in the First, Matter. Secondly, Measure of believing.
Defects in the matter thus conceive; when some points of Faith known and
believed, there are others either unknown, or not believed. Thus was the Faith
of some in Corinth defective in the Matter; the Article of Resurrection being
doubted of, or denied. And Peter, till farther instruction, Act. 10.14.
remained doubtful of the abrogation of the Law, and breaking down of the
partition wall.

Secondly, in the Measure of believing: And that in all the parts of Faith;
thus numbered by some. First, Knowledge. Secondly, Assent. Thirdly, Adherence.

First, Knowledge. Faith, the more implicit, the more defective: the more
explicit, the more perfect. The less distinctly Articles of Faith are
understood, the more implicit and defective is Faith. Faith true for the
substance, may be where the points of Faith are but confusedly understood,
whiles Assent is given to what is known, particularly; and in gross or
universally, to what is unknown, so far as it is carried under the notion of
divine revelation. Inasmuch as our 1. Cor. 13.9.
knowledge of things reueyled is much what indistinct, our Faith must be
acknowledged implicit and defective.

Secondly, Assent. In the measure of assenting like defects See Psalm. 37. and
77.
doubtful and even tremulous is our assent, especially in temptation? For our
own particular, there lives not the man so trustfull, that believes and doubts
not; that viewing his imperfections, is not forced to cry out, Mar. 9.24.
Lord, help mine unbelief.

Thirdly, Adherence. There is easily apprehended by a Act. 11.23.
with full purpose of heart, maugre all misfortunes, to cleave unto God.

All which considered, who amongst us dares challenge such perfection of Faith,
as has mixture with no defects? Who can say, he understands all, yea almost
any point of Faith so fully, that nothing may be added to his distinctnesse of
understanding? In the part of particular assurance, some Fools I have heard,
boasting of vndoubtfulnesse for the matter of their own salvation, but have
presently remembered that in the proverb, Empty vessels sound lowdest; they
most vaunt of Faith, that have least experience in the practice of it. Never
mettest thou with temptation that could shake thy faith? never with corruption
so rebellious and masterlesse, as to make thee question truth of mortification?
Thou art, I dare say, another Abraham, or else an Hypocrite in believing.

It is well, if in these days of peace we have resolved to put on us that
pious kind of cruelty to neglect Father and Hieron.
Mother, Wife and Children for Christ's sake and the Gospel, in case the Lord
shall call us to that trial. But may we not think we flatter our selves, when
we begin to halt betwixt God and Baal, even for verbal persecutions? how
fear we not our earths-quaking, when that Matt. 26.70.
Rock of Faith is shaken with one blast of temptation?

But suppose thy present wants none; yet possibly they may be. Gal. 6.1.
Thou may be tempted. ABRAHAM the mirour of Faith, had his faultings by
partial Infidelity.

Peter in the strength of Faith walks safely on the Sea, but at the sight of a
storm Matt. 14.30, 31.
begins to sink, and deserves to hear, Oh thou of little Faith! What
betides any one, may betide every one; let us not be high-minded, but fear.

there is no soundness of Faith, because there are defects in believing:
condemn we not the whole generation of the Just, as Infidels and faithless
men? they all had their (...), wrastled with doubtings; It was their happiness
that they so wrastled, and finally 1. Ioh. 5.4.
by Faith gate victory over the world.

perfection in believing. Thou say, thou beleeuest vndoubtfully Christ dyed
for thy sins. Thou do well, if thou do it. But fear, lest thy faith in
the issue prove no better then presumption. Behold, men of as great obedience,
more knowledge and conscience wrestle with doubtings: thou that have no care to
know God, nor depart from evil, professest undoubtful assurance of Gods love
in Christ: qua fide. Papists tell us of a kind of Faith, which they call
Priuilegiatam, Faith with a privilege. If any such Faith be granted to men
profane, it is Faith with a privilege; but from such privilege, pray we,
Good Lord, deliver us. May I think he gives to men, so drowned in
disobedience, such perfection of Faith? when his own children, striving
against sin even to the shedding of blood, complain them of defects? Is God
become a Stepfather to his children?

Is Faith defective? Be all exhorted in GODS fear, given you to believe, yea,
and to suffer for his Names sake, still 2. Pet. 3.18.
to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior. First, Mar.
9.24.
pray with the blind man, Lord, help mine unbelief: with the Disciples, Luke
17.5.
Oh Lord, increase our Faith. Secondly, and 1. Pet. 2.1.
long after the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby: the Word
was the Seed, must be the Food of our Faith. Strange is the negligence of many
in hearing, it seems through long immunitie from temptations. How have we
known them, as in Amos 8.11, 12.
some famine of hearing the Word of God, posting from Sea to Sea, to hear a
Sermon, now embracing every triuiall occasion of absence from the Congregation?
I say as he; King. 20.11.
Let not him that girds on his armor boast, as he that puts it off. Our
warfare is not accomplished, howsoever we seem to have a Truce, and to be at
peace with the Tempter.

VERSE. 11. Now God himself, even our Father, and our LORD JESUS CHRIST, direct
our way unto you.

And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another and
toward all men, even as we do toward you;

To the end be may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God,
even our Father, at the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints.


WE have here the practice of what was professed; an earnest and devout Prayer,
wherinto the Apostle breaks out upon occasional mention of his usual
practice in that kind. Wherein are considerable; First, the persons to whom it
is directed; to God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, the matter
of the request;

First, his prosperous journey toward them, verse 11.

Secondly, their increase and abounding in love, verse 12.

Thirdly, the reason of this latter petition, intimating the benefit they shall
receive by such their increase and abounding in love, verse 13.

God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct, etc. In ancient Divinity
the inference was fluent; since Christ partakes equally with his Father in the
honor of invocation, Athanas sermon. 3. contra Arian.
therefore also in divine Essence. The honor equal; therefore the excellency
of Nature. Secondly, To which add his participation of divine office and
property, here also intimated; by providence ordering the affairs of men; is
not the illation sound for the Deity of our Savior? John 1.3.
By him all things; without him nothing was made: Heb. 1.3.
he bears up all things by the Word of his Power; is therefore God with the
Father, blessed for ever.

our faith is vain, and we are yet in our sins.

First, Suppose Christ a mere Creature, how can thou be assured his
obedience or passion was satisfactory for

Secondly, Neither could we believe, any thing he Heb. 9.14. 1. John 1.7.
his Deity giving virtue to his Sacrifice.

Thirdly, Besides, it belongs to the Mediator, not tread Satan under our feet;
to destroy Death and Hell; to judge the World in righteousness; to give us
admittance into that Kingdom prepared and purchased for us in his blood. Are
these works of a mere creature?

The World once groned to see it self become an Arrian; Hieron.
the Patriarch of that Heresy God took away by a remarkable vengeance. The
famous Council of Nice cursed to Hell the Blasphemy it contained. Could we
think it possible, in this clear Light of the Gospel, it should dare to
peep out amongst us? It seems, the father of lies, remembering, how of old it
aduantaged his Kingdom, having tried his skill and malice in sowing Discords
and Dissensions in matters of smaller moment to his no great advantage, hopes
once again to taint us with Arrianisme; if to no other issue, yet to make our
Church and Religion odious: since from amongst us, there rise up men of perverse
minds, speaking so perverse things. But blessed be God, that has kept our
Teachers from the least taint of that Heresy; and stirred up the heart of his
Anointed, to fire out this Blasphemy from amongst us. Gods people may yet be
admonished to furnish and fortify themselves in this main pillar and
foundation of faith; their being none so firm, but impudency of Heretics
dares assay to shake.

Direct our way unto you. The first thing in the matter of the Petition is,
that God would please, in his providence, to order him a straight, and
prosperous course unto them.

So do Gods Children wait for Gods hand to lead them, and think those
iourneyes prosperous wherein God is the Pilot. Saint Paul on this ground makes
request for a journey to Rome, and defines it Romans 1.10.
prosperous, when it is according to the will of God.

In judging of Gods direction, eye must be had, First, not only to the Act.
16.6, 7.
ends intended whereon Popish Pilgrimages and such like dotages are founded:
but, Secondly, as much to our calling, that we run not into praecipitia.
Protection is promised us, while Psalm. 91.11.
we are in our ways. Suppose thus: when first, some work of our calling
leads us; Secondly, or Genesis 12.10.
necessity; Thirdly, or such like occasion and opportunity calls us from our
station. In a word, when we can say, Digitus Dei est hic: Gods finger is our
Mercury to point us out our way.

Iam. 4.13.
Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City,
etc. without any respect to the providence or hand of God; for that ye ought
to say, If God will; and, If it sort with his gracious pleasure and direction.
What is your life? or what know ye what shall be to morrow? or how can ye
promise your selves prosperity or protection, where Gods direction is
neglected?

Not less blameworthy are our superstitious Votaries or Intentionaries, that
walk out of Gods Church, to the Shrines of Saints, and that spectacle of Gods
wrath, the Holy Land. The places, they say, afford helps and excitements to
devotion: whereas the date of those Prescripts is long since expired. Time was
when Jerusalem and Mount Garizim were the places of worship; but now the days
are come, wherein, as our Savior, neither in Ioh. 4.21, 23.
Jerusalem, nor in that Mountain men should worship God, but the true
Worshippers should worship him in Spirit and Truth; and 1. Tim. 2.8. De
Hierosolymis and de Britannia^ aequaliter patet aula coelestis, Hieron. ad
Paulum. de institut. Monachi.
in every place we may lift up pure hands, free from wrath and doubting; while
the heart is clean; the affection fervent; faith steadfast; places and times
are indifferent to private Devotions. Heaven is a Circumference; the Earth the
Center; God is every where nigh unto them that call upon him in sincerity.

To these we may add our curious Travelers, that to see fashions, wander from
Gods presence, Vagabonds, as Cain, about the Nations. Genesis 34.2.
Dinah her judgment is usually their portion; their return is with spoil of
bodily or spiritual Chastity. They will fetch us strange Languages, though it
be from Babel, with their own confusion; bringing home, as Seneca once
plainted, Non solum verba, sed vitia: more of their lewd manners, then of their
learned Language. Let Gods call be our Load-starre; His hand as the Cloud to
Israel; to move or pause according as it gives direction.

VERSE. 12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love, etc.


THE second thing requested, is their increase and abounding in love; where the
object and inducement is annexed.



urges 1. Cor. 1.10, 11
unity upon the Corinthians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11.
labor to Thessalonians. Secondly, Special excellency of the duty; Rather
1. Cor. 14.1. and
prophecy then tongues: rather 12.31.
charity then all gifts. It is the most excellent way. Both, perhaps, had
place in this people, rathest the latter: but thereof before and after. The
object we here take notice of, toward your selves; and toward all men.

The property of Christian love is here obseruable, embracing all men, only
seruato ordine. So runs the Precept, Mat. 22.39.
Love thy Neighbor; whether he be so by co-habitation, or friendly affection,
or Grace, or Nature; There is none but in one of these degrees is Neighbor
unto us. David indeed professes Psalm. 139.21.
his hatred of Gods enemies. But his hatred by the common gloss, was of their
sins, not of their persons. And though all offices of love may not be
extended to all, yet some there are that may. If we mourn for reiection of
those whom God has cast off, as 1. Sam. 16.1.
SAMVEL for SAVL, Romans 9.2, 3.
PAVL for the Jews, there may seem some error, but it is, error amoris: Luke
19.41.
Christ weeps over Jerusalem.

If any should be excluded, most probably our own or Gods enemies; for
personal enemies, the Precept is direct; Mat. 5.44.
Love your enemies. And in as much as we know not whether Gods enemies shall
persist in that state, when they curse, we must bless; and pray for them that
persecute. So Luke 23.34.
Christ for Jews crucifying and blaspheming. Acts 7.60.
STEPHEN for his enemies stoning him to death.

to Neighbors in affection.

Mat. 5.45.
heavenly Father, whose children we would seem, does good to the unkind;
neither are we his children, except in that extension of love we resemble him.
Secondly, and amongst Luke 6.32, 33.
Publicans and sinners it is received to retaliate kindness, and to exchange
good turns. Christian Charity should go one strain beyond Heathenish love.
To requite good for good is civil courtesy; evil for evil, malicious
policy; evil for good, hateful ingratitude; good for evil, only Christian
Charity.

Secondly, There are whose love reaches no farther The Genesis 19.9.
name of a stranger was odious unto them. Amongst Israelites the Lord assigns
them Exodus 23.9.
to care, no less then Widows and Fatherless. And though we yet know not
by experience the heart of a stranger, yet we know not what we may do. Heb.
13.3.
We are yet in the body; It may be our lot, as of ancient Saints, to Heb.
11.37.
wander up and down destitute, and to live in exile.

Thirdly, What should I speak of those whose love Nabals in their greatest
abundance. Christians may we call these so scanted in their Charity? Charity
is a Prou. 5.16.
fountain, whose waters stream out as Rivers into the streets; interdicting
to none, taste of necessary kindness.

As we to you. So ought Ministers to exemplify in their lives what they
prescribe to others. See 1. Pet. 5.3. 1. Tim. 4.12.

First, Else grow our persons and prescripts contemptible. By being 1. Tim. 12.
types, we prevent contempt. The Scribes could not Mat. 7.29.
teach with authority, in likelihood therefore, because they bound heavy
burdens for others shoulders, Mat. 23.4.
moved them not with the least of their fingers.

Secondly, Yea, holiest duties grow loathsome; as the 1. Sam. 2.17.
people abhorred the Sacrifices, through the lewd lives of the Priests.

Thirdly, And our selves become 1. Cor. 9.27.
Cast-awayes, having with some furtherance of their Salvation: As Noah's
Shipwrights built the Arc, themselves perishing in the Deluge.

Deuteronomy. 33.8.
let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be upon thy holy ones: that we may all endeavor
to join to our light of doctrine, integrity of life. Of scandalous Ministers
it is hard to say, whether they do more good by teaching, or harm by their
lewd practice; the Mat. 23.3.
wisdom prescribed by our Savior, is rare in our people; Validior est operis
quam oris vox; and plus mouent exempla quam verba. They seeing our neglects,
grow presently of opinion, the duties are not so necessary, nor the sins so
dangerous, when their Teachers are in both respects so dissolute. Glorious is
the reward of gracious Ministers, and their Dan. 12.3.
recompense eminent. As much more intolerable their Mat. 23.
damnation, in case they blemish and prejudice the holy Doctrine by their lewd
conversation.

many as are called after the Name of the Lord; he that said we are lights of
the World, commanded you also to Phil. 2.15.
shine as Lights in the midst of a crooked Generation, Tit. 2.10.
to adorn the Gospel, and 1. Pet. 2.12.
to win aliens to love of the truth by blameless conversation. It is usual
with people, to note Moates of Ministers; and we, they say, must live as we
teach, else woe unto us. But is it not as true of you, you must live as you
profess? for though our falls hurt as fulmina, yet yours as grandines. And what
auayles it to prescribe to children, or to correct their disobedience, whiles
your selves practice, what you condemn and chasten in them; neglect doing of
what you prescribe them?

VERSE. 13. To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness.


THE second inducement, is consideration of the gracious effect of their
growth, and abounding in love; in as much as hence flows, hereon depends their
stablishing in unblameable holiness.

There is no stablenes of Grace severed from Charity. Conceive, there are
Graces transeunt; as there are others permanent. There is a Mat. 13.21.
temporary, as well as an impregnable faith. To reprobate reuolts is granted
illumination, Heb. 16.4, 5.
taste of the sweetness of the Gospel, of the heavenly gift, of the powers of
the World to come: but all transeunt Graces. How differ they from those in Gods
Chosen; save only that they are not formed to a virtuous subsistence by love?
Says not the Apostle the same? Knowledge of the truth they received, but not
2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
love of it; therefore God sends upon them strong delusion. And again, he is
therefore persuaded of Hebrews such things as accompany salvation, because of
their Heb. 6.9, 10.
work and labor of love.

Holiness, unblameable holiness issues out of love; and the best means to
preserve the heart and life unblameable in holiness, is to store it with love.
Therefore said PAVL, Romans 13.9.10
Love is the fullness of the Law: The whole of the Law is love, no duty to God
or man, but love inclines unto; No sin, but love ruling restraynes from. All
defects in obedience, issue from defect of love: love of God, makes careful to
know and obey him; fearful to offend him: love of neighbor, makes careful
to preserve his honor, life, goods, fearful to impair any his comfort: that
not without cause Paul prays for abundance of love to preserve in holiness;
all defects in holiness issuing from defects of love.



First, Would we be assured the Graces God has given us are permanent, and
such as accompany salvation? see if they be accompanied with love. There is no
stablenesse of any Grace severed from love. Have thou Knowledge? so have
Hypocrites. Have thou Faith? so have Devils. Have thou Love? so has no
Hypocrite nor Devil.

Secondly, And which of Gods Children desires not to be kept unblameable in
his holy course of obedience? What misery like this to a Child of God, but in
particulars to be Romans 7.23.
captiued to the Law of sin? Would thou live unblameable? store thy soul
with love. When love fails, obedience, all holy duty fayles.

The Angel of Ephesus Revel. 2.5, 6.
slakes in his love. See how remiss and dissolute he grows in the maynest
parts of duty: yea, consider, how little a breach of love, hinders weightiest
points of duty: the least breach that may be, is rash Anger; even that 1. Pet.
3.7. 1. Tim. 2.9. Iam. 1.19, 20.
interrupts our Prayers, the weightiest of Christian Offices.

Means of increasing. Pray Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length and breadth, and depth and
height of Gods love to thee in Christ. I am deceived, if it silence not all
suggestions of flesh and blood, any way opposing exercise of love to men. What
will thou say? he deserves not? what deseruedst thou at Gods hand? he loved
thee freely. He is an enemy? When we were Romans 5.6, 10.
enemies, we were reconciled to God. Impious. Christ dyed for the ungodly.
Unthankful? thou more to God. Provoking? God also is provoked every day, and
yet Lam. 3.23.
renewes his mercies with the Morning.

In a word, there is no exception that flesh and blood can put to our love of
men, whereto GODS love, considered in the largest dimensions, frames not full
answer.

Secondly, Empty thy heart of inordinate self-love; remembering the singular
commendations of love extant in Scripture, the emphaticall exhortations and
excitements to love there recorded, are all intended to love of Brethren, not
for our selves. And of the first general part of the Epistle exhorting to
Constancy and perseverance in faith, thus far.

The end of the third Chapter.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
VERSE. 1.2. Furthermore then we beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walks, and to
please God, so ye would abound more and more.

For ye know what Commandments we gave you by the LORD JESUS.


HItherto of the first part of the Epistle, spent in exhortation to
perseverance, follows like instant exhortation to perfection and progress in
Grace: First, generally propounded in the three first Verses. Secondly,
particularly explayned to the cloze of the Epistle, Cha. 5.23

In the general exhortation obseruable are, first, the modus, I beseech and
exhort. Secondly, the matter to abound. Thirdly, Reasons pressing the practice.
First, They had received how. Secondly, Know the Commandments, etc.

(...). A Ministers task is an endless task; there is still in it, (...);
something left him to do. Has he planted knowledge? besides, that it is true
of all men; they know but in part, John 13.17.
practice must be urged. Is their practice approouable? perseverance must be
pressed. Continue they in well-doing? he must urge their progress: that not
without cause the Ministers toil is paralleld with that of the 1. Cor. 3.9.
Husbandman; so still is the end of one task the beginning of another. To Ier.
4.3.
break up the fallow ground of our peoples hearts, that it may be fitted to
receive the precious seed, what labor requires it? after the seed sown, there
may Mat. 13.25.
grow tares, sleep we never so little; and there must be 1. Cor. 3.6.
watering of that we have planted, as of Egypt from Nilus.



Consider that, as it fares with our own souls, so with our peoples. How much
ado have we to hold what we have received? much more to hale on our slow-backe
Nature to perfection: many are our ruins, and decays in Grace, that need
repayring. Discomforts often arise; fightings without, fears within. What we
feel in our selves, let us not doubt but our people are acquainted withal.
And we cannot be ignorant, how nearly it concerns us to see to our peoples,
as to our own safety; in case they perish through our negligence, to us they
perish; and we are Ezech. 3.20.
answerable for their blood.

We beseech, etc. The manner of propounding; in love and meekness; as Philem.
8.9. Apostles sometimes deal more peremptorily; charging duties upon the
people with grauest adiurations, 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.

The direction thus conceive. First, persons. Secondly, states of persons.
Thirdly, parts of the ministry must be distinguished. First, some are of that
temper, that meek dealing makes the more refractarie; and what issues from
love, they impute to our fear. Another sort of contrary disposition, rough
handling rather exasperates. Some, says our English Seneca, are as thorns:
handle them roughly, they pierce you; some as nettles; rough handling is best
for your safety.

Secondly, the holiest have sometimes their extrauagancies: 2. These. 3.6.
Brethren walk inordinately. In such case God himself Job 13.26.
writes bitter things against them; and we know how peremptory 2. These. 3.12,
14.
Paul's proceedings are.

Thirdly, there are parts of our office, which the meekest temper best
beseemes; suppose instruction and exhortation. Reproves of open sins, PAVL
will have so carried, that 1. Tim. 5.20.
others also may fear. The wisdom of a minister stands much in this; to know
with what temper to carry himself toward different persons, in different
parts of his ministry.

That ye abound more. The matter of the exhortation; to abound. In Grace we may
not rest contented with competencie, but must labor for abundance; Ephe. 3.19.
to be filled with all fulness of God. Phil. 1.11.
Filled with the fruits of righteousness; Col. 1.19.
with the knowledge of Gods will, etc. In things earthly, Heb. 13.5.
contentment is required with what is present; In Grace, a holy covetousness,
and insatiableness of desiring, is warranted unto us.

Reasons, First, its the plenty of Grace, that makes us not 2. Pet. 1.8.
idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of God.

Secondly, and according to our measures of Grace, so shall be our measures of
Glory.

thought sufficient: men you may well think, that never 1. Pet. 2.3.
tasted how sweet the Lord is; secondly, nor have had experience of temptations.

A day may come when they shall say, Blessed is the man that has his
storehouse full of these things; and all will be found little enough, and too
little to quench the fiery darts of the devil.

This abundance and riches of Grace, let us couetously seek for: means
furthering to attainement.

First, in greatest measures carry lovely conceit; God Iam. 4.6.
resists the proud, adds Grace to the humble.

Secondly, use gifts to the glory of the bestower, and good of brethren: Mat.
25.29.
to him that has; and uses, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

Thirdly, diligently attend to means sanctified: Word, Prayer, Sacraments,
Obedience. More: It should seem they had a comparatiue abundance; yet not so
ouerflowing, but there might be added to their plenty. In greatest fullness
there are defects; and none so perfect in Grace, but must strive to more. PAVL
counted not himself Phil. 3.13.
to have attained: thought it his perfection, to acknowledge imperfection, and
to strive toward the mark. There is in this life quaedam, vt it a dixerim,
imperfecta perfectio: BERNARD. But (...) imperfecta. August. cont. 2. epist.
Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Sicut possimus dicere perfectum esse vi^^^em, cuius been promonetur accessio,
quamnis non perficiatur intentio, nisi fuerit facta preuentio.

walk by this rule, and thus think: Bernard. de sanct. Andrea ser. 1.
Ascendendo, non volando, attingitur summit as scalae. Proficiencie is
comfortable, and a pledge that the Lord will perfect what he has begun.

Available furtherances of care to proceed, are: First, Learn Philip. 3.
to forget that which is behind: think not so much of what thou have attained,
as what remains to be achieved. It is safest, in this case, to consider our
wants; how far we come short of what we should be.

Secondly, prudently choose to compare thy self with superiors, rather then
with underlings in Grace: we usually think highly of our selves, because we
see many, in many things, come short of our measures; therefore seeming to our
selves half Angels, because we are not as some others, half devils. Our
knowledge is thought superabundant, because more then that of forefathers, etc.
Whereas first our means are more, secondly, our standing longer; and we may
well presume, God Luke 12.48.
looks for more, where he commits more: rather set before us the most eminent
among Saints, as Gods Spirit directs us. In faith Romans 4.12.
Abraham, In patience, Iam. 5.11.
JOB; mirrors in these virtues, are made our paternes: no example oftener
propounded, then that transcendent of our Savior.

Ye have received how; and know the Commandments. Reasons pressing the
exhortation; first, they were not ignorant of the duty, having had the charge
so often pressed by the Apostle: and, secondly, that in greatest manner; as in
the name and from the authority of the Lord Jesus; thirdly, were also informed
how and in what sort to demean themselves, that they might please God:
therefore neglects could not but be heinous and mortal in them.

In points of duty sufficiently made known unto us, should be our especial
care of obedience, Ioh. 13.17. First, because omissions are in that case most
heinous. To him Iam. 4 17.
that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. So to him also
that omits of ignorance; but specially Ioh. 9 41.
to him that knows: Secondly, the punishment more grievous. Impenitent
negligents, whether of ignorance or knowledge, are damned. Yet mitius ardebunt,
Luke 12.47, 48
that of ignorance neglect duty; then those that sin of knowledge.

join 2. Pet 1.5.
to faith, virtue, to knowledge holy practice. The days foretold by Esaias, are
come on us, through Gods great mercy; the Isai. 11.9.
earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord: would God our obedience were
in any proportion answerable. But the complaint is too just; our science more,
our conscience less, then that of blinder forefathers: more is our
understanding; greater by far, was their devotion.

To excite to this care, let it be meditated. First, that no knowledge is
comfortable, severed from obedience. 1. Ioh. 2.4.
He knows not God, that keeps not his Commandments.

Secondly, the issue of unfruitful knowledge, is Romans 1.21.
grosser ignorance, and infatuation. Thirdly, of all sins burdensome, none
more then those of knowledge, when God is once pleased to arraigne the
conscience: There is left Ioh. 15.22.
no cloak for such sins. Ignorants yet can say as fools, Non putaram: they
knew not that they did evil: these have nothing to calm conscience, no not in
forest accusations.

Fourthly, the promise of sound knowledge is made Ioh. 7.17.
to holy practice: knowledge and practice are in such a league, that they are
mutually helpefull each to other: knowledge, the mother of practice; practice,
the nurse of knowledge.

Fifthly, Seeing sins are of most difficult pardon; having in them a spice
almost of presumption. The plea for pardon of Jews made by our Savior, is
made favorable by this circumstance, they Luke 23.34.
knew not what they did. This reason there was of Gods mercy to PAVLS
blasphemy and persecution; that 1. Tim. 1.13.
he did it ignorantly. Sins of knowledge are not incapable of pardon: there
were sacrifices of atonement Leuit. 5.
for sins willingly committed. Yet is the forgiveness of difficult
procurement and assurance.

VERSE. 3. For this it the will of God, even your sanctification --


THe Apostle declares the Grace of God, wherein he expected their
proficiencie; sanctification: annexing new reason thereof; the will of God.
Sanctification passiuely taken comprizeth two things. First, Conformity of our
nature, to the nature of God. Secondly, Conformity of our actions to the will
of God. Of the first speaks Peter; stiling it 2. Pet. 1.4.
the participation of the Divine Nature: by analogicall resemblance of
qualities; when we are patient, merciful, just, holy, pure, as our God is
pure: it is usually made to comprehend, First, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Freedom from filthiness of flesh and spirit. Secondly, Presence of gracious
habits and qualities, inclining to holy performances.

Holiness of our actions is described, Their conformity to the will and
Commandments of God. When what he prescribes is done, so as he prescribes it
to be done. When, what he commands to abstain from, we fly from, in that
manner that he prescribes. The care of it every where urged upon us. First, we
have here signification of the will of God, Emphatically to be understood.
Secondly, 2. Pet. 1.4.
Promises many and excellent given us to this end; as that God will be a 2.
Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.
father unto us, dwell in us, as in his Temple, if in holiness we be careful
to resemble him. Thirdly, It is made evidence of our title to all favors of
God; election, redemption, justification, adoption. Fourthly, the issue and
reward promised, Romans 6.22.
life eternal. Fifthly, and that nothing may be wanting to our excitement, we
are remembered, that Heb. 12.14.
without it no man shall see the Lord.

By so many reasons has God pleased to press upon us the care of holiness:
would we think, in the Church of God, there should be found men so
desperately profane, as to scoff at the endeavor of it? how true is it of our
times, that the Prophet complained; he that walks uprightly, makes himself a
prey, a reproach, and byword to the generation of Esau. Should not the Lord be
avenged of such a nation as this? Marvelous is Gods patience; I should
marvel else that we are not consumed.

And for their own practice, how generally is the care of holiness cast off?
with that hellish protestation; they are not Saints; If they would say (Angels)
I would say with them; but they are Saints, that are Gods children: and whosoever
persists alien from the life and affection of Saints; Saint John doubts not to
say of him, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
He is of the devil.

Let us, having so many and so excellent promises, be exhorted to 2. Cor. 7.1.
purge from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to grow up to full
holiness in the fear of God.

For this is the will of God. Gods will signifies, First, his faculty.
Secondly, act of willing. Thirdly, tropically the thing willed: in which sense
it is here taken, q.d. It is that the Lord requires of you especially;
therefore to be endeavored.

So should the significations of Gods will be motives, strong enough to
persuade obedience. Though no other inducement, or reason appears; this alone
should sway us, that so is the will of the Lord. For, first, his power is
absolute to command. Secondly, his will the rule and measure of Justice. God
wills not things, because they are just; but things are just, because Gods wills
them. Thirdly, the Nature of obedience is this; to do what God wills,
intuitu voluntatis, and because he wills. Let this be our rule to walk by:
that we may silence in our selves the idle disputes of flesh and blood. That
coeca obedientia imposed by Romanists upon their Priests, is due to no
creature; to God yet, and him only, we owe it.

There are in this curious age rise, presumptuous inquiries many. That of
Moralists is ancient, whether ius be in rebus. Generally it is affirmed for
most moralities; howbeit it must be granted, particular equity of every
prescript is not to us apparent. Our people must have equity shown in every
prescription; else see they no necessity of obedience. No equity appears to
them in Christ's precept, Luke 6.35.
to lend freely; no reason the borrower should have benefit by their money,
they none by his labor. But if Christ say, Lend freely, it is safest to
captiuate thy thoughts to the obedience of Christ. Romans 12.2.
Prove what is the acceptable will of God; that once understood, obedience
better beseemes thee, then curious inquisition.

There are with whom the ancient inquiry is frequent; Cui bono, Mal. 3.14.
What profit is it to serve the Lord? First, It is enough we have conscientiam
recte factorum. Secondly, yet true it is, no man serves God for naught.
Thirdly, and why should it not suffice us, that the Lord wills and commands it?
when as in his impositions he intends, Job. 22.2.
not his, but our benefit. Ita enim voluit Deus sibi ab Homine seruiri, vt ea
seruitute non Deus, sed homo seruiens inuaretur, LOMBARD.

VERSE. 3, 4, 5. -- That you should abstain from fornication.

That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor.

And not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God.


THe general matter of proficiencie thus explained, the Apostle descends to
particulars of duty, comprised under that whole of Sanctity; leading the
people along sundry the Commandments, wherein of likelihood he saw them most,
either defective, or endangered.

Like wisdom in particularizing generals of our doctrines and exhortations
beseemes us in our Ministry: First, both for that errors are most frequent
in particulars; and where generals are acknowledged; conviction is difficult in
particulars. Secondly, as also, for that our people are either impotent, or
negligent to proceed in Meditation, farther then the Preacher leads them.

The first particular instanced, is of duties belonging to the seventh
Precept: that here seems to have full explication. First, the sin to be
abstayned from; Fornication. Secondly, the virtue to be exercised, Chastity.
Thirdly, the measure of both, very lust to be mortified: else thus conceive
particulars. First, the duty, Abstain from fornication. Secondly, the
means; Know to possess your vessel, etc. Thirdly, Reason. Verse. 15.

Fornication, in property of speech, is that act of uncleanness, committed
betwixt persons unmarried. Largely taken, it compriseth all whatsoever breaches
of Chastity. First, whither in the Matt. 5.28.
heart, by inordinate desire. Secondly, or in the 2. Pet. 2.14.
eye, by wanton and lascivious looks. Thirdly, or in the Ephe. 4.29. and 5.3.
tongue, by filthy and rotten speech. Fourthly, or in the act, by doing Genesis
39.9.
that great wickedness. See Annot. ad Romans 1.

A sin which the Lord has severely threatened, grievously punished from
Heaven, cursed to the pit of Hell: yet reckoned generally amongst leuiora
delicta, and, as Papists call them, venial sins. A trick of youth, say our
Youths, of that which brought in the Genesis 6.
flood upon the world of the ungodly, fire and brimstone and 19.
upon Sodom, Number. 25.
pestilence upon Israel, etc.

Our wisdom shall be to notice the odious foulness thereof, that, if it be
possible, Conscience of the sinners may be more remorcefull, and a sin of so
foul nature, not so slighted: First, the Apostle makes it eminent above all
sins, in this respect, that it alone is 1. Cor. 6.18.
against the body, depriving it of that great honor whereto God has advanced
it, to be a member of Christ, a Temple for his Spirit to dwell in. Secondly,
usually they are counted greatest sins, that imply breach of most
Commandments. Adultery is Verse. 15.19.
Sacrilege, Profaneness, Dismembring the body of Christ; draws with it
Thefts, Murders, what not? Thirdly, they say also, sins are most pernicious,
that are most delightsome; because the affections are most taken, and
streightest detayned by them: therefore perhaps Solomon said of the Harlot, her
Eccles. 7.26.
heart is snares and nets, her hands as bands; so easily are men taken, so
hardly rescued, being once bewitched with the bestiall pleasure of that
luxury. Fourthly, variety of Judgments threatened, shows it heinous above
the ordinary. Waste of Job 31.12.
goods, blemish of Pro. 6.33.
Name, rottenness of bones, Hos. 4.11.
hardness of heart, etc. plagues of all sorts threatened to deter us. Fifthly,
executions have been grievous; on Sodomites, old World, Israelites; of whom,
said the Apostle, there fell in one day for this sin, 1. Cor. 10.8.
three and twenty thousand. I say then as PAVL, Fly Fornication.

VERSE. 4. That every of you should knew, etc.


WHether in these words Paul would prescribe remedy against lust, and means
of abstayning from the sin; or intends only to explicate the Commandment in
the positive part, is no matter of curious inquiry. In the words are; First,
the persons to whom he prescribes. Secondly, the duty prescribed.

Every one of you. In moral duties no man has exemption. Revel. 20.12.
Great and small stand to be judged; every man is countable for his sins: 2.
Cor. 5.10.
rewarded according to his deeds, whether they be good or evil. For the
particular in the Text. The Deuteronomy. 17.17.
King may not multiply wives, no not to continue succession; much less
Strumpets to glut insatiable lust. Ephesians. 5.5.
No Whoremonger or unclean person has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God.



August.
First, Some are of opinion, they had their special dispensation, to this end,
that they might multiply the holy Seed.

Secondly, The rule of Ber. de praecep. and dispensat.
Bernard must in such cases be remembered: where we find in Scripture any
practice of Saints, swaruing from the general rule; Aut eos peceasse fatendum
est, sicut homines; aut certe sicut Prophetas, familiare Dei consilium
accepisse. For us, we are sure the rule holds general, every man is bound by
this precept of Chastity.

There were in Austins days, men that pleaded immunity by their sex; thinking
women only bound by the precept of Chastity: and a great disparagement they
thought it to the dignity of their sex, if their adulteries must receive like
punishment with those of women: An vere sexus nostri dignitas hanc sustinebit
iniuriam, vt cum alijs socminis praeter vxores siquid admittimus, in luendis
poenis mulieribus comparemur! Why not, says Austine? Yea, why not rather? since
by strength of their sex, they seem more able to master their lusts; and of
duty should guide their Wives by example? That saying of Iam. 4.4.
JAMES, Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, stops the mouths of all such idle and
impious Distinguishers.

Our times have also forged Dispensations. What men's judgment is, I know not;
but seldom have I seen it penanced in the Greater; as if it were sin only
in the meaner people.

Generally the sentence of the profane Poet is applauded by the multitude: Non
est scelus scortari Adolescentem: It is no such heinous matter, for young men to
be given to whoring. But if Psalm. 119.9.
young men be bound to reform their ways by the Law of God: if they Lament.
3.27.
must bear the yoke in youth; if the iollity of that Age shall be Eccl. 11.9.
brought to Judgment; let such tremble to hearten themselves in such sins as
exclude from Heaven, and give Revel. 21.8.
portion with Hypocrites, in the Lake that burns for ever. Should know: that
is, have skill. The Apostle seems to imply, that there is a kind of art of
Chastity, and great skill required to possess our vessel in holiness, etc.
Truth is, Christianity is an Art or Science; and no small skill is required to
Regular exercise of Christian virtues. GREGORY NAZIANZENE said once, the cure
of Souls was the Science of Sciences; generally it is true of Christianity; It
is the Art of Arts: the art of living well. To this end, Saint Peter advises,
to join to our virtue, 2. Pet. 1.5.
knowledge; as I conceive him, skill in the exercise of Christian Virtues. Paul
in a particular, makes it a point of Phil. 4.12.
mystical knowledge; to carry himself equally, and with even hand in all
Estates.

In Prayer, he would intimate wonderful skill required; and not learnt but of
an Romans 8.26.
heavenly Schoolmaster. That knew the Disciples well, and therefore it is
their Petition, Luke 11.1.
Lord, teach us to pray. To say in a word, what one Christian Virtue or Duty
is it, that asks not skill to the right use and performance of it? take
instance in that of Faith. How to uphold it when it wauers: to restrain it
when it degenerates toward presumption: how to turn the eye of it, from the
Law to the Gospel, from Gods Justice to his Mercy; Here sure is the wisdom
of believing. How many see we for lack of this skill, if not utterly
mis-carry, yet dangerously hazarding their souls to ship-wracke? the Presumer
thinks of the rich mercy of God; the Desperate, of his strict Justice. Wisdom
would teach to fit our meditation to our present state. See it in a duty, that
may seem most easy; suppose, hearing the Word of God. It is not, as is
thought, a work of every Idiot and idle Fool, to be a hearer; to hear as we
ought, requires skill more then ordinary; to tie our minds to attention, that
they may be free from wandering: to apply our affections to the quality of
what is taught; that when we hear matter of fear, our hearts may Isai. 66.2.
tremble at the Word of God; when matter of grief, they Neh. 8.9
may mourn; when matter of comfort, rejoice, etc. Such skill requires every
Christian Duty to the Regular performance of it: that we may well conclude of
Christianity, It is the Science of Sciences; even an Art of living well.



Surely, if any where, here that has place that the great Phisician once
spoke, Ars longa; vita breuis.

Compendiums they have framed to themselves here, as in other Sciences: To love
God above all, our Neighbor as our selves; This is Mat. 7.12.
the Law and the Prophets. To fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccl. 12.13.
this is the whole of man. But foolish men, that consider not the infinite
particulars which these comprize! And that it is the least half of a Christian
John 13.17.
to know, though exactly, the heads of Duty.

To love God, comprizeth his worship, outward, inward; 1. John 5.3.
keeping of all and every his Commandments. To love our Neighbor, exercise of
1. Cor. 13.4, 5
Patience, Kindness, Mercy, every good grace and office wherein we may do good
to Brethren.

Willingly would I persuade our people, if it might be, of the skill no less
then artificial, requisite to Christianity; not to deter them by the
difficulty, but to reform their negligence, and to excite their industry. And
if they would but seriously consider that part of this Art, that stands in
speculation, they would easily acknowledge it to be no idle man's occupation, to
be a Christian. To know necessaries of Gods Nature and Will, can we think it
obuious? when as David having long traveled in the Word of God, with an
extraordinary Spirit, yet prays illumination, that he Psalm. 119.18.
might see the wondrous things of the Law. Who ever sounded the depth of any
one Commandment, to know all particulars of duty therein comprised? Who so
quick-sighted, as to understand thoroughly particular circumstances of known
duties? Dare any arrogate prudence so exact, as to observe them regularly in
all his practice? Thou know thou must pray: but know thou how thou must
pray? To pray, is not to utter a Petition, which a Parrat may do; but thou
must pray with 1. Cor. 14.15.
understanding, with 2. Chron. 6.29.
feeling of wants, with Iam. 1.6.
faith to be heard, with feruencie of affections: the practice of all these how
full of difficulty? to guide affections of wrath, fear, joy, grief, etc.
Heathens observed to require much prudence; may not Christians more, to their
Christian moderation? That I be not infinite; It will be sufficient if I may
but convince our people, that Christianity is an Art; that the practices
thereof require skill more then ordinary; that once euinced, I hope those
outcries against overmuch teaching, will cease: for suppose, you know all we
are able to teach you, for substance of faith and practice; yet to learn
skillful practice of them, the wisest amongst us may not blush to go to
school.

To possess his Vessel in holiness and honor. The particular, wherein Paul
requires this skill, is the preserving of Chastity; in his phrase the
possessing of our Vessel in holiness.

What is the Vessel? says AUGUSTINE, August. cont. Julian. Pelagian. lib. 4.
cap. 10. and lib. 5. cap. 7.
the Wife; the Woman or wife is the 1. Pet. 3.7.
weaker vessel. Al: the body, the vessel or instrument of the soul. Al: the
instruments of generation: 1. Sam. 21.5. The vessels of the young men are
clean, that is, their bodies, or instruments of generation.

That first interpretation, S. Austine fell into by this occasion. Dealing
against Pelagians in the question of Original sin, and the manner how it is
conveyed to posterity, he was thus urged by Julian: The soul is created pure,
the body propagated by a lawful act of generation in the marriage bed: for
that bed Heb. 15.4.
is undefiled: by what chinks creeps in this infection of Nature? Saint Austine
answers, that howsoever the use of the marriage bed be, for the substance of
the act, undefiled, yet may impuritie insinuate it self, through intemperance
and overmuch feruor of delight. Truth is, there is as well Conjugal, as
Virginal chastity; which stands, not only in keeping our faith inuiolate to
the wife of our Covenant; but also in the temperate and moderate use of the
marriage bed. And I am half of his mind in this; whatsoever in that act is not
either for procreation, or prevention of Fornication, comes of evil.

Rather by the vessel understand the body. Not that the heart has liberty to
lust, so the body be kept from the act of uncleanness; 1. Cor. 7.9.
burning lusts are commanded to be remedied; but so speaks he fittingly to
reform opinions corrupt and monstrous; that to the 1. Cor. 6.13.
body was permitted a kind of liberty, so the heart were kept pure from that
uncleanness.

Possess; that is, keep and rule the body in holiness: understand it
chastity and freedom from pollution by unclean lust. Honor of the body,
stands in two things: First, Col. 2.23.
Health and cheerfulness. Secondly, dedication of it to the holy Ghost, as 1.
Cor. 6.19.
a Temple for him to dwell in; and an Romans 6.13.
instrument to be used to the glory of God.

The sum is this; that not the heart only, but the body also must be
preserved in chastity. 1. Cor. 6.20.
Glorify God in your bodies and souls: they are both the Lords; his
Creatures, his purchase: both bought with the price of his blood. It seems the
Corinthians were carried away with that error, to think pollution of the body
almost indifferent: The bodies, they thought, should not rise again; therefore
it was not much material, to what uncleanness they were abused: yet, says
the Apostle; First, the body is for the Lord, dedicated in creation to the
glory of the Maker; and by Redemption, to Christ. Secondly, the Lord for the
body, to redeem it. Thirdly, our bodies are members of Christ. Fourthly,
Temples of the holy Ghost. Fifthly, parts of Christ's purchase. How can we think
it free to abuse them to his dishonor?

Our duty is to purge from all filthiness as well of flesh as spirit, of body
as of soul: in our bodies God requires to be glorified. The people of Corinth,
as in the point of fleshly Fornication, so in that of Idolatry, seemed to hold
a kind of indifferency for the outward man. They might be present at
Idoll-feasts and sacrifices; so they reserved their hearts and consciences unto
God. Our people, in like cases are alike indifferent. Talk they may merrily,
that is filthily; so they think no harm: though even of Idle words, our
Savior said, we are countable. Bernard. Epist. 1
Quod si de ot ioso, quanto districtius de verbo mendaci, mordaci and
iniurioso, de elato vel lasciuo, de adulatorio aut detractorio iudicabuntur?

It remaynes to point at the rules of A^te in this kind auayleable. First,
diligent guard of senses, especially Job 31.1. Ambros. de Joseph. Patriarch.
cap. 5.
the eyes; the first darts of lust are of the eyes: The second of words. Pro.
2^.33. Gen 19.6, 7.
Thine eye shall look upon strange women, and thy heart shall utter lewd
things.

Secondly, fly society of adulterous wantons. Pro. 5.8.
Come not near the door of her house. Genesis 39.10.
JOSEPH hearkens not to his Mistress, to be in her company.

Thirdly, sober use of meats and drinks; Ezech. 16.49.
fullness of bread occasioned that height of uncleanness in Sodomites.

Fourthly, faithful and industrious employment of our honest vocations. David's
1. Sam. 11.2.
idleness seems the first occasion of his lust. And in Sodom was abundance
of uncleanness, by means of Ezech. 16.49
abundance of idleness.

Fifthly, Prayer to God, whose gift it is; his 1. Cor. 7.7.
special gift, especially in single life.

Sixthly, diligent heed-taking to occasions, that in experience we have observed
to be the bellows of Concupiscence.

Seventhly, if none of these serve to preserve virginal Chastity, a
comfortable remedy God has provided. To 1. Cor. 7.2.
avoid Fornication, let every man have his own wife. He is a Monster in lust,
whom that remedy reformes not.

VERSE. 5. Not in the lust of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God.


NOt in the lust of Concupiscence. Rather thus: Not in the p^ssi^no, lust. Lust
is lust, be it never so moderate; when once it grows to violence, and notable
disturbance of Reason, then it becomes Passion. In the breach of this Precept,
degrees are distinguished. First, the foming out of lascivious thoughts and
wanton desires, delighting the sensual appetite. Secondly, the ardencie and
burning heat of such desires; which Paul elsewhere calls Romans 1.27.
burnings; and here passions. Thirdly, eager seeking occasions to vent our
passionate lusts. Fourthly, the breaking of them out into execution. The
Apostle seems not to tolerate, so much as ardencie of lust; and almost to
intimate, they cannot vnremedied stand with good conscience.

difference of corrupt affections in Gods children, and in men unregenerate;
some stirring they have in the most sanctified; ordinarily they are not
passionate, save in the unregenerate. Unlawful and rash anger may arise in
Gods children; passionate wrath, fury and rage is not ordinary with them.
Motions of envy have been found in Gods children; as in Iosuah, for Moses; in
Number. 12.1.
Aaron and Miriam, against him: but passionate spitefulness, such as in Cain;
in Haman, Hest. 5.13.
that grew sick of envy, is not common in Saints. Lascivious and wanton lusts
have their stirrings perhaps in the most holy: but passionate lusts, such as we
read of 2. Sam. 13.2.
Ammon, are not ordinary with them. When we were in the flesh, Romans 7.5.
the passions of Concupiscence wrought in our members. Now we are in Christ,
Gal. 5.14.
We have mortified the flesh with the passions, and lusts thereof.



Genesis 19.9.
more enraged by Lot his meekest admonitions. Thirdly, Passions are restless,
and fill with coffeehouse till they break out into executions; as in Achab,
Haman, Ammon, Cain, etc.

We have men professing the fear of God, in some affections so intemperate,
and full of passion, that they give just cause to be jealous of their
mortification. In their wrath, they must needs give vent; and by bitter
speeches disgorge the venom of their spite. Such affections are passions, I
like them not in Christians. They Gal. 5.24.
that are Christ's, have mortified the flesh, at least in the passions thereof.
The Stoics said, Passions are not incident into a wise man. Nor are such
passions ordinary in a true Christian.

As the Gentiles, etc. Gentiles in common phrase of Scripture, signify all
people, not of the seed of Abraham. Of Gentiles there are two sorts: First,
Gentiles by nature. Secondly, Gentiles in state. Gentiles by nature, we are
all, that come not from the loins of Abraham. Gentiles in state, are such as
continue in the state of Gentilisme, not yet admitted into the Covenant of
Abraham, nor called into the Church: of this latter sort Paul would be
understood. It is the reason of the Apostle to dissuade lasciviousness;
therein lived Gentiles, that knew not God; the more detestable should the sin
be amongst Christians.

Ungodly examples are permitted to increase detestation of evil, not to
encourage to imitation: Impious courses of impious men, should make impiety
more abominable. Imitation we are sure makes us culpable before God, not only
of like sins personally committed, but in a degree of all sins of like
nature by others committed. The Matthew. 23.35
blood of all Saints from ABEL to ZACHARY, comes upon that generation of
Jews; with what justice may some say? I think, because their cruelty argued
approbation of like sin in their bloody Progenitors. To walk in the ways
of wicked men, what is it but to approve them? the fact proclaims, we think,
like actions of others good and warrantable.



Think these best uses of lewd examples. First, grieve at the dishonor of
God, and the ungracious courses of men made after Gods Image. Secondly, bless
God that has not given thee over to like sins. Thirdly, pray to be preserved
from contagion of evil. Fourthly, detest evil the more, because practiced by
such men.

As Gentiles. At least thus much we are here taught, That Heathenish practices
are unseemly for Christians, the people of God. Therefore are those cautions
so frequent to Israel Gods people: Deuteronomy. 12.30.
Not to do to the Lord their God so as Heathens to their gods. Iere. 10.2, 3.
Not to learn the way of the Heathen, to be afraid of the signs of heaven: to
Christians, not to be distrustfully Mat. 6.31, 32
careful for things of this life, because it is Heathenish; in a word, Ephe.
4.17.
not to walk as Gentiles walk, in vanity of their minds, etc.

Is there nothing wherein Christians may hold semblance with Heathe^s? Excellent
things are written of Heathens, Temperance, Justice, Honor of Parents,
Conscience of oaths, etc. May not these be exercised by Christians, because in
practice against Heathens? No question yes; and the rather, because in use of
Gentiles. Therefore may be observed in Scripture arguments both ways: good
practices of Heathens brought to shame Christians; as their sins to increase
detestation.

Their actions conceive to admit this distinction: First, some were materially
good. Secondly, some materially evil. Thirdly, some evil by circumstance. Of
the first, says the Apostle. Romans 4.2, 14.
Gentiles do by nature the things of the Law. Act. 28.2.
Barbarians were kind to Strangers destressed. They made conscience of oaths,
as there are plentiful instances in story. Though simple fornication they
thought was no sin; yet of Incest in some degree, Paul bears them witness,
they were so far from practice, that 1. Cor. 5.1.
they would not name it. Of these let us think; Their practice should be our
provocation to good duties; It should shame a Christian, that in any thing
commendable an Heathen should go before him.

A second sort of actions in them, were evil by circumstance. They mourned for
their dead; that is not unlawful: but their mourning was without moderation;
that was evil in them. Here our rule is: The faulty circumstances must be
avoided: the things themselves may be practiced. To mourn for the dead, no
piety forbids. Genesis 23.2.
Abraham mourned for Sarah, Isaac for Abraham, Ioh. 11.35.
Christ for Lazarus. But to mourn immoderately, as men without hope, is
Heathenish; in no sort beseeming Christians.

Whether to this head may be referred other their actions, is questionable.
Example.
Sundry things are noted in their practice, wherewith the Lord vpbraides his
people, that Heathens exceeded. Iere. 2.11.
No nation has forsaken their gods. Israel has forsaken me. Mal. 3.8.
No nation has spoiled their gods. Israelites robbed their JEHOVAH of tithes
and offerings: of these thus think: There is a kind of oblique imitation
prescribed, not much unlike what our Savior inioynes touching the unjust
Steward; whose wisdom he commends to us to imitate, not in the particular.
The rule is this: the same things may be done, but applied to other obeicts.
Gentiles held constant to their ancient Idols. Shall Christians do so to
Idols? No. But let it shame Christians, not to cleave as close to the living
God, as Gentiles did to dumb Idols. Gentiles made conscience of sacrilege;
would not withdraw maintenance consecrated to service of Idols. Are Christians
bound to contribute to Idolatry? God forbid. But it is the shame of
Christians, to rob God of his portion, when Heathens made conscience of
sacrilege.

Lastly, there were of their actions toto genere malae; and, as they are
styled, abominations. Of these the rule holds universal. Gods people in them
may hold no correspondence: their evils must be so much the more detested,
because in use amongst Heathens. See Deuteronomy. 18.9. These abominations caused the
Lord to abhor the Heathen; and for these things so loathsome, the land spued
out her Inhabitants.

These distinctions I thought not impertinent to propound, as limitations to
the Apostles ground; the rather, for that I see sundry men ouercarried in their
zeal against Gentilisme, and Idolatry; so far as to think they may do
nothing in the worship of God, which is in practice of Idolaters: which ground
universally holden true, see how many absurdities follow. The Priests of Baal
offered sacrifice to Baal; might not Elias therefore offer sacrifice to the God
of Israel? The Idolatrous Israelites prayed to their Idols; may not Gods people
therefore pray to their God? They worship their Idols in Temples: may not we in
Temples do service to our God? This rule held of such indifferents: Their
actions Idolatrous, as they are Idolatrous, we may not do. Idem may do in
infinite particulars, though not ita. Heathenish practices, qua heathenish, are
unbeseeming Christians.

Esau and Jacob? both borne almost in the same instant of time; yet how
different in their manners, courses of life, events? Truth is, Parents usually
are the evil Planets, either neglecting their holy education, or baning their
youth with ungracious examples.

A charge God gave, none should observe flying of birds, or any such like
superstitious contingencies. How frequent are such superstitious notices
amongst our people! A Hare may not cross them, but it bodes ill fortune; nor
the salt fall toward them, but some mis-hap is conceited near them: What
should I speak of Charms and Sorceries, and such like deuillish superstition?
For these did Canaan vomit out her inhabitants; we hear, but fear not, nor
tremble to do alike presumptuously. I would we were only like heathens, and
did not far exceed them in sundry abominations. Truly may be said of many,
that the Lord speaks of Israel; we have Ezech. 16.51
justified the heathen; and they may seem righteous in comparison of us. What
Paul speaks in one case, may be applied to many; such fornication amongst
Christians, as was not named amongst heathen; such drunkenness, I am sure, as
heathens detested: such perjury, as they held abominable; such oppression and
fraud, as some of the Nations severely punished. Usury, which they matched
with robbery, with murder; Christians not only practice, but defend. Whence
it is come to pass, that the Romans 2.24.
Name of God is blaspehemed amongst heathens and Idolaters.

Remember we are Christians, not Gentiles. And if the Lord for such
abominations plagued heathen that knew him not; how much sorer vengeance has
he in store for Christians, to whom he has so clearly reueiled himself by
his Word.

Their Periphrasis follows. Which knew not God. The usual circumscription of
Gentiles, as Ier. 10. vlt. Psalm. 79.6. Gal. 4.8. etc.

And yet Paul tells us, that to very heathens God had made himself known: Romans
1.20.
The invisible things of God, his power and Godhead, Gentiles were not ignorant
of. Never was Nation so barbarous, but had some notices of a Deity. In some of
their writings, excellent sentences are found expressing the nature and
attributes of the Godhead. Plato thus describes: Deus and viuens immortale,
sibi sufficiens ad foelicitatem, aeterna substantia, Causa omnis boni in
Natura. Of his providence, they have learned discourses: extending it to all
particular events, even to permission and ordering of evils; notable disputes,
sending to uphold the justice of God, in that, which to many seems confusion,
that there be righteous to whom it comes after the work of the wicked: and
wicked, to whom it falls after the work of the righteous.

How reconcile we? Distinctions are many. First, after the means. Knowledge of
God is twofold. First, by his works; which all Gentiles had. Secondly, by his
word: that the prerogative of the Church.

Secondly, God is known, First, as Creator; so Gentiles knew him: Secondly, as
Redeemer, in Christ; so they knew him not: they were Ephe. 2.12.
without Christ; the Romans 15.20.
Name of Jesus not heard amongst them.

Thirdly, knowledge is of two sorts. First, one effectual, 2. Cor. 3.18.
that transformes us into Gods image. Secondly, the other ineffectuall,
standing only in speculation, without efficacy and power in the soul and
Conscience. The sum is: By the works of God they knew him; so far as the
creatures could reveal him: by his Word, they knew him not; that was the
privilege of the Church.

As Creator and Governor of the world, they knew him: as Redeemer, in Christ,
they knew him not.

Lastly, some imperfect and ineffectuall notices they had of the Godhead, such
as deprived of excuse, knowledge effectual and powerful to reform, they had
not. And hereof would the Apostle be chiefly understood.

The description conceive to be propounded causally. The Gentiles lived in the
passion of lust: no marvel: the cause is evident: they knew not God.

Ignorance then is a master, a mother-sinne. Pull it, thou pullest all sin.
There is no sin, into which an ignorant man, in the point where his ignorance
lies, is not ready to fall. See if the Apostle say not is much. Ephe. 4.18.
Aliens from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, 1. Cor.
12.2.
they were carried to dumb Idols, as they were led. Through 1. Tim. 1.13.
ignorance it was, that PAVL blasphemed, persecuted, oppressed the Church of
God. That Jews crucified the Lord of glory: A sin so fertile of sins, is
this of ignorance, that the wonder is more to see an ignorant man restrained
from any sin, then running into foulest abominations.

Our endeavor should be the more to come out of this so dangerous a snare of
the devil; and as Paul prays, Colos. 1.9.
to be filled with all knowledge and spiritual understanding. Reasons many
have been often pressed. This of the Apostle let not be forgotten; that it is
the mother, not of devotion, but of abomination. That ignorants are kept from
grossest sins, is of Gods providence withholding temptations: were they
tempted, no question, to them they would run with as great greediness, as they
do to those wherein they now wallow.

They knew not God. Some knowledge they had of God, but ineffectuall to reform
them; that knowledge is esteemed ignorance.

Erroneous and unfruitful knowledge is in esteem as no knowledge, in truth no
better then ignorance. If any man seem to know, neglecting virtues, he 2.
Pet. 1.3.
is blind and cannot see far off: his knowledge is as no knowledge. First, in
respect of any honor that comes to God, all is as one. Disobedience whether in
ignorance or knowledge, dishonours God.

Secondly, in regard of their comfort, all is as one: no more comfort has such
a man in his Ioh. 13.17.
idle knowledge; then the verriest Idiot in his ignorance.

Learn we that have received to know God, to show the power of our knowledge
in holy practice. If any say he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments,
he is a liar, and there is no truth in him. Gods grace has been marvelous to
us, in the means of knowledge: happy were we, if we were not defective in
that that neereliest concerns our comfort. But how justly may we complain,
as Seneca, on like occasion? Postquam docti prodierunt, boni desierunt, and we
have learnd to dispute, not to live. Disputants we have many amongst
Christians, more then practicke Moralists. Curious fowls laboring for
knowledge, only that they may know, and in company of learned, be able to
mainetaine discourse. Oh brethren, what auailes it to have all knowledge,
though it were Angelical, and not to have obedience? to know as Angels, and
live as devils? Can such knowledge save us? shall it not rather aggrauate
condemnation? If ye know, Ioh. 13.17.
happy are ye if ye do; if ye know and do not, woe worth the time that ever
ye knew.

Gentiles which knew not God. So should ignorance be a sin peculiar to
Gentiles. Therefore Gods Spirit so every where makes it their peculiar
description, Iere. 10.25. Psalm. 79.6.
Not to know God. As if it were almost the difference specificall discerning
Heathens from Christians.

I could wish it were now with Christians, as it seems to have been generally
in Paul's time; that ignorance were a sin peculiar to Heathens: And that this
description did not as well befit our people, as ever it did the Heathen. But
who sees not, that it agrees as well to our multitude, as ever to Gentiles;
yea, that many Heathen know more of the Godhead, then men that have long lived
in the Church of God, bearing themselves as Christians? Heathenish Christians,
or worse then Heathens; that have not learnt of God so much by his Word, as
Gentiles knew by view of the creatures! Of such I dare be bold to say; When
Heathens and Pagans, Turks and Infidels go to heaven, then shall such
Christians, 2. These. 1.8.
as know not God, and disobey the Gospel.

VERSE. 6. That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter, because
that the Lord is the auenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and
testified.


A Second particular of sanctification, belonging to the eighth precept, is
here specified; prescribing us abstinence from breaches and violations of
justice commutatiue. Wherein considerable are; First, the sins to be avoided,
Ouer-reaching and fraud. Secondly, Reasons pressing care to avoid them.

First, of the sins; which we will conceive to be meant of ouer-reaching,
and fraud exercised in matters of contract. A common place, necessary to be
handled in respect of the times; wherein is place for the Prophets caution: Let
no man trust his Mic. 7.5.
friend or his brother.

Necessary; yet exactly to prescribe in it, is not so easy; the Cases
depending for most part upon circumstances, and those, many of them, nice, and
not easily observed.

The general rule of direction, is this: There must be equality betwixt the
thing, and the price; so that, what odds soever there is in the excess or
defect, betwixt the price and the value, that is all to be imputed to injustice.

All the question is, how this equality must be judged. The general
observation is; that the value of things, passing in exchange, cannot
ordinarily be found out, otherwise then by probabilities: Nor punctually
determined, but by common estimation. Howbeit general directions are on this
manner.

The value or worth of things is of two sorts. First, natural: Secondly,
usual: thus for better understanding. The value or worth of things is
attended, either according to excellency given them in Creation; or according
to their fitness, and avail for use. In matter of contract, we respect not
the value Natural; but esteem the worth by conueniency for use. In Nature,
more excellent is one Sparrow, or Gnat, the meanest living creature, then
Pearls or Diamonds: Life and Sense are things of more excellency, then any
other qualities in liuelesse creatures; yet according to use, of more worth is
bread then thousands of these animalcula.

The value in respect of use, is thus esteemed. First, according to the
vertuousnesse of the thing, and the real properties it has to be auayleable
and of force for use. So a cloth substantial and skilfully wrought, is of more
worth, then that which is slighted. A beast strong and nimble for labor,
better then a weak or dull Ass: their real properties make them more fit for
use, and so of more value.

Secondly, it is attended according to scarcetie and rareness of commodities.
Times of scarcetie, make times of dearth. In Samaria, during the siege, an 2.
King. 6.25.
Asses head was worth fourscore pieces of silver: a Cab of Doves dung, worth
five pieces of silver. In the same place, the siege dissolved, a measure 2.
King. 7.18.
of fine flower is sold for one Shecle, two measures of Barley for one Shecle.

Thirdly, according to the mind of the Seller or Buyer, and that contentment
or pleasance he conceiues in the thing.

Fourthly, to these may be added, common estimation; according whereto the
price of most things is usually judged of.

Fifthly, there be that annexe consideration of Places and Countries; which
affoords no small variety of price and worth, in things thus exchanged. To
these all or some, Justice commutatiue requires the price to be proportioned;
so that if the Seller exact a price notably exceeding the worth of the thing;
or the Buyer give a price scienter, far inferior to the due value, both are
said in this kind to ouer-reach. This is the general rule to be observed in
matters of contract.

Against it offend sundry sorts of men, having framed to themselves other
rules, the very ruins of Justice in this kind. Amongst many this goes current:
Things, they say, are worth as they may have for them. A rule too too
fallacious and deceitful. And many times the custom is, to get some Partner
in the fraud, to bid largely, and then, equiuocally they can swear, to deceive
the simple: Thus much they were offered. Christianity has no such rules to
walk by; except they be cautelously understood. What if some simpler man, not
knowing the worth of the thing, or forced by necessity, has ouer-bid the
value? that is no rule to guide thy conscience; the rule of worth, is the
fitness of the commodity for use, or generally common estimation, or those
other circumstances of times and places.

No less culpable of ouer-reaching are the Buyers; many times working upon the
simplicity, as often, upon the necessity of the Seller. Pro. 20.14.
Its naught, its naught, says the Buyer, and when he is gone, he boasts of
his penyworth.

Scaeuola in Rutilius, in price for a piece of ground, and having the price
pitched by the Seller; Its more worth, says Scaeuola, and adds thousands to
the price demanded. How shall that Heathen rise up in judgment against our
Hucksters, and condemn them?

The course in use apud Thuriacos, is much commended by Stobaeus. Wherein it
was ordered, that the Seller should make Oath before the Magistrate, that he
sold for no more then the commodity was worth: And the Buyer swear also, that
he paid a just price, after the worth of the thing, at least by common
estimation. Such Laws, we may well say, are necessary for the times.

Questions pertinent to this place, are these: First, whether in no case it be
lawful, in selling to exceed the worth of the thing sold? Put case, a man in
his need is instant with his Neighbor, to buy some thing, which without his
damage, the Seller cannot want; yet overcome by instance and importunity, he
parts with it; but at a dearer rate, then the thing is worth of it self.







pretium iustificatum and limitatum; so they call that, that consists within
some reasonable limits of Justice. And it has three degrees. First, Pium:
Secondly, Discretum: Thirdly, Rigidum. The kind price, our English phrase fitly
expresses; so it is worth betwixt Brother and Brother. The discreet price, is
thus expressed: so it is not dear; it is a reasonable price betwixt man and
man. The rigid or rigorous price, is the price in extremity; no more worth to
a Turk.

Put case a man have diverse commodities, suppose pieces of cloth, of equal
goodness, for matter, workmanship, length, breadth, color, etc. According to
the first rate, worth ten pounds the piece; so worth betwixt Brother and
Brother; according to the second rate, betwixt man and man, worth ten shillings
more; in extremity and at the utmost, not worth above eleven pounds. Selling
for present money, perhaps a man would take the kind price, or at most the
price reasonable. Giving day for payment, he puts upon it pretium rigidum, the
full price in extremity.

There is another price, which they call pretium augmentatum or multiplicatum;
so called, because in respect of forbearance, it is augmented above the worth
of the thing in extremity. Whether is this kind of selling for day, a breach
of Justice? The general answer is, that it is an apparent violation of
Justice commutatiue, because equality is not kept betwixt the thing and the
price. Howbeit, there are of opinion, respect may be had to men's possible or
probable damage: and look what damage in probability the Seller may sustain
by such forbearance, for it, the Seller may provide in euentum; by adding to
the price above the worth. But if gain be that is aimed at therein, the
contract cannot be excused of Injustice, being merely usurious. And of the
first sin against Justice, by ouer-reaching, thus far.

The helper forward of it, is Fraud; whereof, see Annot. ad Romans 1.29. To set
down the several sorts of deceit used in matters of contract, were infinite,
and in truth impossible; so witty is the world grown to deceive their
Brother, their own Fathers, as we say in the Proverb, in the issue, as James
speaks, their own souls; out of which ill manners of men, have grown many
good Laws for Weights and Measures, etc. yet never was there Law of man so
cautelous and provident, as to prevent all particulars; the subtle wit of men
whetted from Hell, is so nimble to devise euasions, that not without cause
their Trades are called Crafts, Mysteries; as is said of Antichristianisme,
Mysteries of iniquity: particulars are numberless. Dark shops, fair
speeches, false fingers, protestations, swearings, for-swearings; all that
Man's, or Devils subtletie can devise, are frequent amongst men to deceive.
Alas, what is become of that ancient simplicity, so much commended in our
Forefathers? How is it, that Proverbs so Heathenish, are now current amongst
Christians? Plaine-dealing, we say, is best, but whosoever uses it, must die a
Beggar. Such indeed are the times, as those the Prophet complained of; He that
walks in his uprightness, Isai. 59.15.
makes himself a prey; but to the Deceiuer, is reserved a heavier vengeance.

His brother. As he specifieth the person, whom he would exempt from iniust
usage, so coucheth he a reason, showing foulness of the sin; a thing
monstrous and unnatural it is, to deceive a Brother.

Who is this Brother? Chiefly the man conjoined unto us in Christian
profession: more largely, what Christ teaches of the Neighbor, may be said of
the Brother. Every man with whom we have to deal, is this brother, whether
Grecian or Barbarian, Jew or Gentile, Friend or Foe. Mal. 2.10.
Have we not all one Father? Has not one God made us? Why do we transgress,
every man against his Brother? In love we say truly, there is order; one may be
preferred before another, according as they are nearer to us in Society,
Nature, Grace, or Friendly affection. In justice, and matters of common
equity, there is one Law for the Stranger, and for him that is nearest unto us.

The fraudulent dealing of Exodus 12.35.
Israelites with Egyptians, was warranted to them by special dispensation, and
that founded on equity: they had done their long and wearisome service,
without recompense; the Lord in compassion so dispenses with them: but
dispensations stretch no farther then the particulars to whom they are given.

I observe it the rather, because our people have in this case framed to
themselves Distinctions; such as Persians in their policy taught their
children: they must lie, and not lie, with a distinction: lie to their enemies;
tell truth to their friends. Not unlike are those amongst our people; something
shameful it is thought to deceive a friend; but for a Stranger, the excuse is
current, He was a Stranger to me; no reason of respect betwixt us. A simple man
that puts confidence in them, they are something scrupulous to deceive; but if
he be one that pretends skill in the Commodity, then caveat Emptor. With such
idle distinctions do they dawbe with conscience. But what Xenophon observed to
be the issue of Persian education, such is usually the event of these
distinctions in bargayning. Children, says Xenophon, forgot their distinction,
and made bold sometimes to lie to their best friends. So they that thus
distinctly begin to practice injustice, at length grow to promiscuous iniquity;
sparing neither friend, nor brother, no nor their own father, to advantage
their commodity. Should not the Lord be avenged of such a people? Yes.

God is the auenger of all such. The principal reason follows: wherein
observe, first the quality, secondly, the force of it.

It is taken from the dangerous and dreadful consequent of such sins; laying
us open to the vengeance of that God, that is in his wrath a consuming fire. It
should seem then, it may well enough stand with Grace, to abstain from sin,
for fear of vengeance. To this purpose we are sure Paul propounds it to this
people of God; that by terror of Gods wrath they might fly injustice. The Lord
himself, not only allures Jeremy by promise of his presence, but drives him
to duty, by Iere. 1.17.
terror of destruction. Our Savior propounds to his Disciples, meditation of
Mark. 9.43.
hellish torments, to deter from disobedience.

do good only for reward, without all conscience of duty, or love of God,
is merely mercenary: to eschew evil, only for fear of vengeance, argues an
affection merely slavish. But that there is a lawful intuitus of both, in
doing good, and eschewing evil; and that both may stand with Grace, we teach
with full consent; only we require that other respects may also lead us;
August. epist. 144.
conscience of duty, love of God, care of his glory. Qui tantum timet, est
inimicus iustitiae.

They also are injurious to their souls, and to the Grace of God, that
therefore censure themselves as merely Graceless, because fear of Hell is
found sometimes the strongest motive to obedience; yea, in times either of
their incipience, or tentation, and cannot be persuaded, fear is filial,
where sin is eschewed with any respect to vengeance. Paul then was no son,
that professes himself to be moved as well by 1. Cor. 5.11.
terror of the Lords judgment, as by love of Christ, to persuade men: and
vainly has Gods Spirit propounded meditation of Gods wrath, where he
prescribes the form of acceptable service, to be performed upon this motive in
part; Because our God Heb. 12.29.
is a consuming fire.

It must be confessed, that Gods love should chiefly sway with us. But if his
vengeance be a partial motive, may we not be in Grace? Is there not a
mixture of all Graces with their contrary, in the state of this life? of faith,
with infidelity; of obedience, with rebellion; of knowledge, with ignorance;
of fear with seruilitie, yea, and with security? As it is absurd to say,
there is no faith, where is some doubting; so all as unreasonable, to affirm
there is no filial fear, no Grace at all, where is any fear of God in
respect of his vengeance.

God is auenger. The Apostle seems to anticipate the secure thoughts of the
unjust and fraudulent, promising themselves impunitie amongst men: either by
cunning conueyance and concealment, or by defect of Laws, or partiality of
Magistrates. Let this yet be meditated, says the Apostle. God is the auenger
of all such.

Where man's justice fails, God with his vangeance makes supply, that
injustice may not escape unpunished. ACHAB and Iezabel had in Israel authority
without control; who should punish their oppression of Nabeth? The Lord takes
the cause into his own hand; and there is blood for blood, and an utter
extinction of ACHABS posterity. Hence is Salomons advise; Rob not the poor
because he is poor; Let not his poverty encourage thee to oppression; Pro.
22.22, 23
The Lord will plead his cause, though men be negligent. And, Enter not into
the field of the fatherless; for their Pro. 23.10, 11.
Redeemer is mighty, though themselves be impotent; he shall plead their
cause against thee.

Ambros. de Nabat. Iezraelit. cap. 1.
Nabathe historia tempore vetus est, vsu quotidiana, says Saint AMBROSE. Non
vnus ACHAB natus est, sed quod peius est, quotidie ACHAB nascitur, and nunquam
huic soeculo moritur. Uncontrollable authority, how easily degenerates it to
tyranny, till the poor have scarce any dwelling left unto them! Their power
masterlesse on earth, makes them forget that they also have a Master and Judge
in heaven. As if providence now slept, because discipline of Church and
Commonwealth sleeps. Consider it, all ye that forget God; and think the
Redeemer of the oppressed is mighty; never more ready to avenge the cause of
the innocent, then when, amongst his Vicegerents, it is most neglected. A
notice necessary for all times, all sinners, in all sins; most for days of
impunitie; in sins most slighted by the sons of men. Impieties there are
many, of no small enormitie, of little regard in this untoward generation.
Fornication and Adultery, sins of greatest haynousnesse, in state of most
Kingdoms passes, as matter of iustest toleration: and what through defect of
Laws, or conniuence of Magistrates, or hope of concealment, profane is the
liberty of Adulterers. Yet that of the Apostle should (me thinks) be meditated:
Heb. 13.4.
That Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: howsoever partial men's
proceedings are: howeuer cunning the Adulterers secrecy. For Kingdoms have
yet been so happily cautelous, as to prevent, so much as by enacted penalties,
the abuse of Gods Name by common and vain swearing: This language of Hell is
grown familiar, as lust in Sodom, amongst old and young; Princes and people.
Yet, me thinks, we should remember, how direful the threatening is, how
certain the execution. Exodus 20.7.
The Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain. How
might we hope to have freest sins in gracious measure restrained? if this
little notice of the Apostle might be as Frontlets between our eyes; that
where man's justice fails, God with his vengeance makes supply.

VERSE. 7.8. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has also given
unto us his holy Spirit.


THe words contain new reasons for the general exhortation to the study of
sanctity. First, as some think, from the Author, as others, from the end of our
calling. Secondly, from the foulness of the sin, in case we be found
negligent; the contempt reaches unto God. Thirdly, from the rich bounty of
God, in giving his Spirit unto us.

God has not called us unto uncleanness, etc. The Christian calling warrants
to no man uncleanness, leads unto holiness. Therefore it is the usual style, 2.
Tim. 1.9.
the holy calling; because it leads to holiness, and, though it find us not
holy, yet it makes us so. And if there be any term therein, seeming to tend
unto license, yet so it is mollified and explained, that uncleanness is still
excluded: see Gal. 5.13.

And see how every thing in it savors of holiness: the 1. Pet. 1.15.
Caller is holy: the means and Ioh. 17.17.
instrument, holy; the Spirit, the immediate worker, the fountain of all
holiness.

filled men's hearts, to lie against the holy Ghost: I had almost said, to
blaspheme him in the highest degree? How has he cursed to the pit of Hell,
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit? How is he Ephe. 4.30.
grieved with the unclean conversation of the wicked? How restless makes he
2. Sam. 24 10.
conscience, in the least stepping aside of them he has sanctified? and
proclaimed them all hypocrites, that calling on the Name of the Lord, depart
not from iniquity?

As many of us, as desire to know our selves partakers of the Heavenly
Vocation, let us be careful to 2. Cor. 7.1.
purge from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit; to be 1. Pet. 1.15.
holy, as he that has called us, is Holy.

Profane persons, as Esau, scoffing at the study of Sanctity in Gods
children, have no part in this prerogative; but such only as are called to be
Saints. As little, Libertines, that turn the Grace of God into wantonness,
and from some beginnings of seeming holiness received, encourage themselves to
licentiousness. First, Illum nation; which yet Heb. 6.4.
Castawayes are partakers of, so far as to become Mat. 7.22.
Prophets and Teachers in the Church of God. Secondly, Compunction, contrition,
tears for sin: which had place in the Traitor Mat. 27.3.
Judas, in profane Esau. Thirdly, Partial and Temporary reformation: To which
even Mar. 6.20.
Herod ascended; and those cursed reuolts, That 2. Pet. 2.20, 21.
turn back from the holy Commandment given unto them.

VERSE. 8. He therefore that despises, etc.


THe second reason inferred out of the former; it implies the contempt of God:
because it is he that calls to holiness. Ergo: conceive the Apostle to
preoccupate what ignorance might object.



Therefore he that despises, despises not men, but God.

Contempt of Ministers, in their regular prescripts, stays not in the persons
of Ministers, but reaches to the Majesty of God: As the contempt of an
Ambassador touches the King whose Ambassador he is. Therefore said our
Savior, Luke 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me.

The reason is, because such prescripts are Gods, in the sanction: ours only
in respect of declaration: As the Law of God, as the Lawgiver: MOSES his,
only as the Proclaimer. And as the Edicts of Princes are not therefore the
Edicts of the Crier, because he publishes them; but the Princes, whose
authority gives vigor unto them: so, the prescripts of holiness published by
us, are not ours, but Gods, whose Sovereign authority puts life into them.

That we err not; this may not so be understood, as if the neglect of every
thing delivered by a Minister, were presently the contempt of God, as Popish
Doctors would bear us in hand: for what if we preach the Iere. 23.16.
visions of our own brain; Shall God be thought to be contemned?

The charge to hear the Church ordinary, is not absolute, but to be
understood with limitation. Though our Savior commanded to hear Pharisees and
Scribes Mat. 23.2, 3.
teaching out of MOSES chair, yet a caveat he gives, to Mat. 16.6.
beware of their leaven. Therefore also he iustifies his Disciples, violating
Mat. 15.3.
their tradition; because if not in the matter, yet in manner or ends of
imposing they had exceeded their limits. But where their prescripts are
regular, of holiness truly so called, their contempt redounds to the Majesty
of God.



Strange is the delusion of men in this kind; that casting off the weightiest
of Gods Commandments delivered by his Ministers, yet think the wrong
insufferable, that contempt of God should be charged upon them. God they
reverence, and think highly of that Majesty: It is the beggerlinesse, or base
birth, or lewd life, or deformity of the Minister they contemn, not God. But
I would feign know whose message it is, that beggarly base borne, blemished
Minister bring unto thee, when he charge to sanctify the Sabbath? etc. The
command we are sure is Gods; to him reaches the contempt thereof. And has not
God chosen the poor of this world, to confound the rich? The 1. Cor. 1.28.
baser things, to confound the more honorable? Principal Apostles were
Fishermen; the rest, men of no great state or esteem amongst men. Only Judas,
a man of renown; therefore called Ischarioth, a man of that place; famous in
the place where his habitation was. As to outward blemishes; why are we so
carnal, as to judge after the outward appearance? The beauty within should be
most glorious in our eyes. Not only Moses, whose beauty is commended: But
Simon Act. 13.1.
Niger, whose deformity is recorded, was chosen to be a messenger of the Lord
of hosts.

May not lewd life of the Minister warrant unto us contempt? What of their
message? God forbid. Hear Mat. 23.2, 3.
Scribes and Pharisees speaking out of Moses chair; the message is Gods,
whosoever brings it. The contempt of it reaches to his Majesty; though woe to
them that say and do not.



Heb. 4.12.
the discerning of secretest thoughts, and intentions of the heart. Thine acts
of evil, that none eye has seen; save his only, to whose eyes all things
are naked and uncovered, the thoughts and intentions of evil, that never yet
were vented to the ears of man, thou shall hear in our Ministry discovered
and reproved. Can thou choose now but say, 1. Cor. 14.25.
God is in us of a Truth?

Secondly, If this persuade not, weigh the terror and astonishment, that a
weak man strikes the Conscience withal. That men of Lyon-like courage, like
the great Leuiathan, contemning Sword and Spear, should be so arraigned and
ouer-awed by a weak Minister, as to tremble at his words, argues it not a
Divine Majesty speaking in us? Is it not a wonder to read, how Paul a prisoner
in bonds, should strike Felix his Judge, with Act. 24.25.
trembling? I doubt not, but he might say, as Job, He could have made thousands
afraid with his countenance; yet see him now trembling at the voice of his
prisoner.

Thirdly, Consider the strange and no less then miraculous change, this
Ministry works in the hearts of men, in whom God will have it effectual to
salvation. There is no Antipathie so great betwixt any things in Nature, as
betwixt Man's Romans 8.7.
Nature, and the Law of God. Yet see, and say at length, as Pharao his
Sorcerers, Here sure is the finger of God; when thou beholdest a man so
ravished with love of that, which he most deadly hates by Nature, that he
preferres it Job 23.12.
before his daily food; yea, holds not life dear unto him, for support of the
Gospel.

Who has also given unto us his holy Spirit. The third reason here couched,
taken from the great favor of God, in bestowing his holy Spirit upon us. How
follows the Argument? Whether first, from the bounty of God, in bestowing upon
us a gift of such excellency? or secondly, from the ability ministered unto us
by the holy Ghost, to live holily? or thirdly, from the great danger
accompanying the neglect of holiness, after we have once been partakers of
the holy Ghost? This ^a^^est I insist on. And thence observe, How of all others
it most nearly concerns men, made partakers of Gods Spirit, to be careful of
holiness. I say not only, their sins are greater, because their abilities
are more to withstand temptation; but their state, in case of revolt, most
dangerous and irrecouerable. First, to such sinning wilfully, Heb. 10.26.
remains no more sacrifice for sin; secondly, nor is it possible Heb. 6.4, 6.
to renew them by repentance. Conceive it thus; not as if every sin of
infirmity should cast them out of all possibility of pardon and repentance;
for in case we so sin, we 1. Ioh. 2.1.
have an Advocate with the Father, to propitiate for our fraileties. But in
case, such wilfully take themselves to a course of sinning, and in Peter's
phrase, 2. Pet. 2.21.
turn back from the holy Commandment given unto them, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
adding drunkenness to thirst, to them God has threatened to show no mercy.

2. Cor. 7.1.
to purge from all filthiness, and to 1. Ioh. 5.18.
keep our selves that the evil one touch us not.

Gods fear is so put into their hearts, that they Ier. 32.40.
never depart from him. And they 1. Job. 5.18. Caietan. ibidem.
keep themselves that the evil one touches them not, at least tactu
qualitatiuo; so, as to alter the disposition of their hearts, and their
propension to holiness.

their taste of the Heavenly gift, of the good Word of God, of the Powers of
the world to come; dispositions, and the inchoate habits of true
Sanctification, they are truly made partakers of, who yet many of them fall
away. And let their fearful relapsings be our fears, and increase our care
to depart from Iniquity.

VERSE. 9.10. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto
you: For ye your selves are taught of God to love one another.

And indeed ye do it toward all the Brethren, which are in all Macedonia:
But we beseech you, Brethren, that ye increase more and more.


HItherto of those two branches of Sanctity, Chastity, and Justice. A third
is here specified, Brotherly love: wherein are considerable, first, the duty
it self, secondly, the manner of propounding, thirdly, the reason why the
Exhortation is so carried.

Touching this maine part of Holiness, love of Brethren, the surest evidence
of our 1. Job. 3.14.
translation from death to life, the Ioh. 13.35.
Cognizance of a Disciple; if it be enquired what it is; thus conceive it, to
be that favorable and well-wishing affection that is in Gods children, one
toward another, for Grace sake. It implies three things; first, love of
brethren, secondly, as brethren, thirdly, in brotherly manner.

First, The special object of this love, are the brethren; 2. Pet. 1.1.
partakers of like precious faith and Spirit of adoption with our selves. Not,
but that some degrees and offices of love are due to enemies and aliens; but
the specialtie of affection is carried to such as are actually Gods children.

Secondly, The Lodestone of this love, is their Brotherhood; Disciples are
loved Mat. 10.42.
eo nomine, because they are Disciples; Gods children, because they are his
children, stamped with his Image, sealed with his Spirit.

Thirdly, The Modus is, Brotherly; that is, first, It is prouocations to
procure it: The very name of a Brother is potent enough to draw affections.
Secondly, Impartial, whether poor or rich, etc. except where natural
affections are quite extinct, the bowels yearne after brethren. Thirdly, Entire
and fervent; nothing breaks the bond of brotherly love. Proportionally think
of Christian amity, in men partakers of the Spirit of adoption.

The evidences and fruits of it are, first, tenderest compassion and
fellow-feeling of miseries; secondly, succouring their distresses, and
cheerful Romans 12.13.
distributing to their necessities; thirdly, sociall conuersing together for
mutual comfort and edification. So was the custom of ancient Saints; and
those were the times when Grace thriued in Gods children. Now, I know not how,
Brethren have almost forgotten that they are Brethren; and every man stands
aloof, when necessity requires their succor. My brethren, these things ought
not so to be. We are all children of one Father, partaking the same Spirit of
adoption, have one hope of the same heavenly inheritance; and that shared for
the measures of it, according Mat. 25.34, 35, 40.
as our love, and the works thereof are more or less abundant.

The nature of the duty is thus; the exhortation to it, we see carried
Rhetorically; the Apostle, Orator-like, insinuating himself, and entering
their bosoms, as it were, in transcursu. With like artificium we see him
almost 2. Cor. 9.1.
wresting from Corinthians their contribution; when Rhetorically he seems to
pass by that which his desire is to press with greatest instance. And how
perswasiue with Act. 26.27, 28
Agrippa, was that acknowledgement of his present faith?

Truth is, the good opinion of him that persuades, is more then many Arguments,
alluring and perswasiue with every ingenuous disposition. Withal, we must
heed the differences betwixt flattery, and this holy Rhetorique. First,
Flattery ascribes good things where they are not. This pious Rhetorique will
see ground for commendation. Secondly, the flatterers aim in commendation, is
his own commodity. These heavenly Orators therefore insinuate, that they may
lead on the people to constancy in good duties.

Like prudence is requisite in us, to provoke to holy duties: take notice of,
and commend the good that is in any; thou know not what heartening prudent
commendation may be unto him. The Lord himself lets pass no good thing in
any, though clouded with infirmities, without laudatorie notice of it. See
Apoc. 2. and 3.

The harshnesse of many in their censures, readier to vilify the best things,
then to cover their imperfections; how many has it kept from entertaining holy
courses! If any be for the present alien, though not without apparent hope of
reclaiming, he is straightwaies censured, as another Elymas, Act. 13.10.
enemy to all goodness, and child of the Devil. Yea, where Charity cannot
but discern Seeds and beginnings of Grace, except they have presently attained
the perfection of others, all is as nothing. But, if by infirmity any have
fallen, though but in a particular, all his former righteousness must be
forgotten, and in the sin he has done, or not done, but is fancied to have
committed, he must die to our good opinion.

Learn we, to acknowledge and cherish by commendation, the smallest good
things in any; we know not how we may prevail to lead on to perfection; it is
natural to all men to be led with praise: And Gods Spirit tempering himself
to our natural inclination, forgets not Philip. 4.8.
by that argument to persuade to holiness.

For ye are taught of God to love. The reason why he is so sparing in pressing
this maine part of Sanctity, is here subioyned; Because they were taught of
God to love one another; which also he euidenceth by their fact; they did it to
the brethren in Macedonia.

The inference of Enthusiasts, and such like Phanaticall spirits hence, is
this; that there is no necessary use of the external Ministry to Gods
children; because, as the Apostle here affirms, they are all taught of God by
his Spirit.

Yet if we consult with the same Apostle, first, he teaches, the Ministry
necessary, till such time as we are made Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
perfect in Jesus Christ, secondly, charge not to 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
despise Prophecy, nor to forsake the Assemblies of Saints. Because first,
decays of Grace are incident into the most sanctified; secondly, dullness of
Spirit grows upon the most fervent; thirdly, forgetfulness of things best
known creepes upon the most mindful; fourthly, and who can say, he has
attained perfection? Since then, to help all these defects, the Ministry is
ordained, and by it, the Spirit is effectual, who shall dare separate what God
will have joined together?

Answers to the Argument are thus framed: first, the Apostle must be understood
co^paratiuely; not as meaning they had no need of his commonefaction, but not
such need, as men auerse from charity. Examples we want not of Sentences, many
in show simple, and universal, yet to be understood ex part, and in
comparison. If ye were blind, ye should have Ioh. 9.41.
no sin; that is, none in comparison, not simply none. Christ sent me 1. Cor.
1.17.
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; not so much to baptize, as to
preach. Secondly, though to instruct them as ignorants, was needless, yet to
admonish and excite them as deficient in the measures of love, was not
unnecessary; and thereto tends the correction subioyned.

Gods teaching is always effectual, and perswasiue; it works what it
prescribes. God teaches two ways; first, outwardly by his Ministers, that is
not always thus effectual; secondly, inwardly by his Spirit: the degrees are
two; first, enlightening the mind to know, what by his Ministers he propounds;
secondly, effectual inclining the will and affectons to embrace, and prosecute
the duties known. Every one that has heard, and Ioh. 6 45.
has learned of the Father, comes unto Christ; that is, believes in him.
Haec gratia a nullo duro cord respuitur. August. de praedestinat. Sanct. cap.
8.
God puts his Law in their hearts, and writes it in their inward parts; and
so causes them to walk in his Statutes, Ezech. 36.

How the Lord preuailes thus with the will of man, is questioned betwixt us and
^al^e Pelagians. It pleases them, that the Lord propounds to us only pleasing
objects, August. in Joan. traectat. 26.
fit to allure the will: as when a shepherd shows a green bough to a sheep;
or a father nuts and such like pleasances to his child, fit to allure them. As
if there were some fitness in nature to be allured with spiritual things; and
the propension to be affected with them, were not of Gods mere inspi^ement
and infusion. First then, said Paul amiss; It is God that Phil. ^.13.
works in us to will and do? Secondly, and vainly prays God to Heb. 13.21.
work in us what is wel-pleasing in his sight. Thirdly, as vnfittingly has
Moses taught, the natural Genesis 6.5.
inclination of the heart to be only evil: Fourthly, and Paul put Romans 8.7.
enmity betwixt wisdom of the flesh and the Law of God. Fifthly, the heart,
says Ezekiel, must be Ezech. 36.26, 27.
changed by the Spirit of God, before we can walk in the Lords Statutes.
Sixthly, and by old Schoole-Diuinitie, the habits of Faith, Hope, and Charity
are infused, rather then drawn out of the power of the soul.

And this is Gods teaching, whereof the Apostle here speaks; the giving of
Gracious abilities to do that which is pleasing in his sight; and not only
the exciting of the natural power of the will, and alluring it by pleasing
objects, as Semipelagians dream. What ever the manner is, the effect and fruit
is, ableness to do, and actual doing what the Lord thus teaches.

So that if any would know whether he be taught of God, the surest evidence
of election and our being within the covenant of Grace; his Gracious abilities
to holy duties must be examined: It is true of all such, that Paul speaks of
himself, they Phil. 4.13.
can do all things through Christ that strengthens them; and in comfortable
measure practice whatsoever the Lord prescribes; knowing, believing, loving,
obeying the truth. So that it is mere hypocrisy that pretends absolute
disability.

Ability is of two sorts. First, complete, which is not incident into this
life. Secondly, Competent for acceptance, whereof all taught of God are made
partakers. First, Heb. 13.18.
desiring in all things to live honestly. Secondly, Act. 24.16.
endeavoring to keep good conscience before God and man. Thirdly, Job 1.1.
eschewing evil, and working righteousness. Fourthly, and Mar. 9.24.
mourning for defects in obedience.

VERSE. 10. But we beseech you, Brethren, that ye increase more and more.


THe exercise of love in this people, has been commended; lest the
commonefaction might seem unnecessary, the Apostle corrects himself, that
they might not seem to have attained perfection; or in no respect to want
admonition. There is in this verse something tending to their praise, as that
to the Brethren of Macedonia, their love was extended; something also, wherein
their defect is noted; that to Macedonians only, their countrymen, their love
was limited; wherefore they are exhorted to increase more and more.

always to hear ill in Scripture: as in Pharisees limiting their love Mat.
5.43.
to friends, and such as were able, and willing to Luke 6.34.
retaliate kindness. As on the contrary, Abraham's beneficence is hereby
amplified, that it was almost Heb. 13.2.
promiscuous. Not but that in some offices and measures of love, some may have
preeminence; but utterly it is a fault amongst us, if any, especially of Gods
people, be excluded.

Reasons, First, the nearer we come to our Mat. 5.45.
pattern in loving, the more commendable is our charity. Secondly, and to be
impartial in love, is no small evidence, that our love is without
dissimulation.

members, 1. Cor. 12.22.
and necessary. Secondly, and no believer is now Ephe. 2.13.
an alien; Thirdly, and Religion makes us Romans 12.16. Psalm. 119.63.
equal, if it finds us not so.

Intensiuely Charity is conceived to grow, when the fervor of it is
increased. Such adding to the degrees of Grace received, is necessary in all
gifts, most in charity. As being, first, 1. Cor. 13. tot.
most fertile of all good fruits. Secondly, strongest bridle to corruption.
Thirdly, that which seasoneth all other gifts and duties.

Means to increase it; first, Labor to Ephe. 3.18.
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height and depth; and breadth and
length of the Love of God. The more plentiful our apprehension of Gods love to
us is, the more are our hearts enlarged to love God, and his Saints. Secondly,
Empty thy heart of self-love, the bane and breakenecke of Christian Charity.
Thirdly, Be not curious to pry into the infirmities of Brethren. 1. Pet 4 8.
Love must cover a multitude of sins; seldom is a charitable man curious, or
a curious man charitable.

VERSE. 11.12. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you.

That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may
have lack of nothing.


A Third breach of Sanctification here specified, is the care of quiet and
peaceable living together in Christian society. Wherein considerable are:
First, the duty, Secondly, the means available to performance of it.

The duty, Study to be quiet. The word signifies, to seek after, with a
kind of holy ambition; as it were thinking it our honor, to calm our
turbulent spirits, and to live at peace. Truth is,

Man's honor stands in gracious practices; and thereof should a Christian be
ambitious. It is a man's Prou. 20.13.
honor to cease from strife, said Solomon, speaking to this particular.
Possess your selves in holiness and 1. These. 4.4.
Honor; in Holiness, which is your Honor. 1. Pet. 5.5.
Deck your selves, said Peter, with lowliness of mind. That Grace of God, how
vilified soever amongst men, yet makes us glorious in the sight of God. For,

Can there be to the sons of men, a greater honor then to hold semblance
with the Majesty of God? Glorious is that Image of God, wherein we were
created, whereto we are renewed, into which we are 2. Cor. 3.38.
transformed from glory to glory: which also we manifest by gracious practice.

Paul speaks to the Critic Censors of his time; If you will needs be
judging, use your Romans 14.13.
judgment in this, not to put a stumbling block before the weak; so, If we
will needs be ambitious, hither bend our ambition, to grow honorable by
virtuous practice. See 2. Cor. 5.9. The desire of honor and of a name amongst
men, is natural; and not simply to be condemned: the error is chiefly about
the means. Let us make us Genesis 11.4.
a name, say they, at the building of Babel; their proud attempt, if it had no
other issue, should win them fame amongst men. How much more precious is the
name of the righteous amongst all posterity? When the name of the wicked
rotteth, and their memorial perishes with them. The ambition of worldlings
noted by DAVID, is, to call their houses after their Psalm. 49.11.
names; to erect Monuments of costliest fabrique, to perpetuate their
remembrance. How much better had it been for many of them, if their memory
had been buried with them? So loathsome are they become amongst men, by their
abominable lives; that they scarce ever come into mention of Gods people, but
with a style like that of Jeroboam, the son of NEBAT, 2. King. 10.29
that made Israel to sin. Thus think we, the least degree of Grace is more
glorious, then all the glorious aduancements that the world can afford us.

To be quiet. The quiet commended to our ambitious seeking after, conceive to
import, not only peaceablenesse, and shunning contentions and vain ianglings:
but a contented calm conversation, opposite to tumultuous turbulencie, and
restless intermeddling with things that concern us not. A duty much to be
endeavored; in no age, or Church more necessary to be urged then our own;
abounding with so many busy spirits, and restless Malcontents. Athens it
self nothing so mad upon Act. 17.21.
Novelties, as our English Nation. I have wondered often to see our guises of
apparel, so many times disguised; our people so Cameleonlike transfashioned
into the Italian, Spanish, French, any foreign form they have but seen in
Nations where they have traffiqued; and have thereout concluded, leuitie to be,
after a sort, our National sin. It much strengthened me in the opinion, to
consider, in matters of more weight, our love of change; and the Israelitish
humor revived in us; in Church-gouernment, to 1. Sam. 8.5.
be like to other Nations. Though we have seen Gods blessing on our
Ministry, to the envy of Adversaries, and admiration of Neighbor Churches;
and have demonstrated our Discipline to suite with the Primitive and
Apostolical state of the Church; this yet seems wanting, that we have not
experimented foreign forms; nor shaped our Altar according to the 2. King.
16.10, 11.
fashion fetched us from Damascus; from foreign Countries. I could wish, our
tumultuous and almost mutinous stirrings in that kind, had not made us a
reproach amongst Papists; and a scandal amongst the enemies of the Gospel. My
prayer to God shall be, to settle us in unity of minds and affections; that
we may 1. Cor. 1.10.
speak and think one thing; studying the things that concern peace, and
wherewith we may edify one another.

The means available that way, the Apostle prescribes us; First, (...). To
do our own business.

The question is here, what we may call our own business, wherein without
censure of curiosity, and disturbance of peace, we may employ our selves?
There be that think, the whole spiritual estate of another, in every respect
alienum. Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden; And are they Genesis 4.9.
their brothers keepers? The truth is, there is in this kind a degree of
unlawful curiosity; Mat. 7.13.
busy to inquire into other men's, too slothful to correct their own sins.
Howbeit the charge is not vainly given, Leuit. 19.17.
To rebuke a brother, and not to suffer him to sin; to Iam. 5.19, 20.
convert him that goes astray: Secondly, Nor has Gods Spirit in vain animated
to the duty, by remembering, first, the excellency Mat. 18.15.
of the work; Secondly, the good that comes to our Neighbor: Thirdly, and the
1. Pet. 2.12.
Glory redounding to the Grace of God.

There are of a contrary spirit, that with some pretty distinctions can wind
themselves into all businesses: In contentions, they deal as Neighbors; in
State businesses, as subjects; In other men's sins as Christians; In all
humane things, as men; Homines sunt, humanum nihil a se alienum putant. Thus
let us think, as many as love peace with holiness: They are (...), our own
things, whatsoever concern us, within compass of our general or personal
calling. They are extrauagants, that wander out of those bounds.

Our employments then, by PAVLS prescript, must stay within the limits of our
calling. Thence was that sharp tax of Peter by our Savior, Job. 21.22.
Quid hoc adte? It may be, that smart reproof made Peter give charge against
curiosity, as against theft or murder; no man must suffer as a thief or
murderer, no nor as a 1. Pet. 4.15.
busibody in things that concerned him not. Truth is, that Polypragmaticall
spirit hears ill amongst Heathens; their inuectiues are of the tartest against
it. To their writings I refer the Reader; aduising Meditation of these
preservatives against the sin.

First, The best things done with best intention, out of 2. Sam. 6.7.
Vzzah, 2. Chron. 26.16, 19.
Vzziah, Saul, etc.

Secondly, Necessary duties there are that press us in our own callings;
such as require the whole employment 2. Cor. 10.5.
exalted against the obedience of Christ, to be subdued? How many infirmities
to be bewailed and striuen against? etc.

Thirdly, Other men's faultings touch us not, farther Every man shall give
account Romans 14.12.
for himself to God.

And to work with your own hands, etc. A second preservative of peaceable and
quiet life, we have here prescribed; industry in our callings. Particulars of
the prescript are these. First, the duty, Labor. Secondly, the modus, or
property of it required: it is our own hands. Thirdly, Reasons pressing the
performance. First, so Paul had commanded. Secondly, and the benefits thence
issuing, whereat as at ends they must aim, are not small.



procurement of Psalm. 128.2. 2. Cor. 6.
Maintenance, secondly, avoiding of Idleness, thirdly, restraining and
mortifying evil Concupiscence, fourthly, 1. Tim. 5.14, 16.
disburthening of others, fifthly, enabling our selves to Ephesians. 4.28.
distribute to necessities of Saints. And where without manual labor these
ends cannot be attained, it stands in force by the Apostles Iniunction.

What if we say, he intends either it, or that which is Analogicall? Industry
of body or mind, according as diversity of Callings, requires either.

The Calling of a Magistrate requires not much handie labor; yet Iethro
observed in it toil enough to Exo. 18.18.
wear out MOSES. That of a Minister, is rather mental then manual; yet
toylesome as the 1. Cor. 3.9.
Husbandmans; or as that of 1. Tim. 5.18.
Oxen treading out the Corn.

Paul would teach us; Every one industriously to apply himself to the works
of his vocation. In state of Innocence, Adam has his task, to Genesis ^.15.
dress the Garden. After the Fall, was added Sudor, to labor; and necessity
laid on all his Posterity, to force them a maintenance out of the accursed
Earth.

The benefits of it, as it is sanctified to Gods children, are exceeding great.

First, It furnishes us, through Gods blessing, with all things necessary to
the comforts of life; and makes that little or more we enjoy, truly our own;
that, as the Idler cannot say he eats his 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
own bread, so may the Labourer call it his own, whether little or much, that
he enjoys.

Secondly, It has a spiritual use, for restraining evil Concupiscence. An
idle man's brain is a Shop for the Devil, fit to forge fancies most
fantastical. Hierome thought labor a dis-heartening to the Tempter; whence
was his advice, Semper aliquid age, vt te Diabolus inueniat occupatum.

Thirdly, It is a blessed means to furnish us to the Ephe. 4.28.
works of Liberality and Mercy; and by our Saviors Sentence, It is Act.
20.35.
more blessed to give then to receive.

Fourthly, Many a sweet promise it has in the Word of God; Pro. 10.4. and 13.4.
Abundance and Plenty, at least sufficiency follows it. It makes Eccle.
5.12. Pro. 6.10.11.
sleep comfortable.

The Curse of Sloth is Beggerie; Pro. 18.9.
He is brother to a waster, that is slothful in his business. And it is
noted as occasion of Sodomites brutish lust, that there was amongst them such
Ezech. 16.49.
abundance of Idleness.

Josiah, to break down the 2. King. 23.7.
houses of Sodomites amongst us; I mean those Nurseries of all Riot, Excess,
and Idleness, that make our Land another Sodom; our tippling Alehouses! I am
persuaded, our greatest furniture for Gaoles and Gallows, comes from these
Nurseries.

Neither stays the sin amongst deboshed Rogues; but is, I know not how,
become the Gentlemen's sin: Their Birth and Riches seems to them exemption,
not only from manual, but from mental labor: so spend they their time, as
Seneca complained, aut aliud, aut nihil, aut male agendo. Cain and Abel were
heirs apparent to the whole Earth; yet had their Genesis 4.2.
employments in special Vocations: And who may dare to exempt himself from
this Mandate of the Apostle? In the manner of employment may be some odds; one
more generous, another more servile: In this I am sure is none; that all ought
to be in their places industrious.

What should I speak of the sloth grown upon the meaner ranks of men: in
such sort, that the goods gotten by Parents industry, maintaining them in
fashion and reputation, a sluggish son, that brother to a waster, brings to
nothing?

It were strange, Religion should be made a color for sloth! Sure I am, there
is nothing which Religion less applaudes. Yet how many couens of lazy Friars,
under pretense of devotion and contemplation, have spent their whole lives in
doing nothing? And since those hiues of Drones dispersed amongst us, there are
risen up a scattered and vagring company, under color of devotion, and
hungring after knowledge, more the^ those drones, negligent in their vocations.
Paul, I should think, was no enemy to devotion; yet had such lived in his time,
his Canon had bin extended to the^; They should 2. These. 3.10.
not eat, that would not labor.

Let it be our care to bend our industry to the utmost in our callings. And
thus think we, God is as well pleased in the seasonable performance of duties
in our special callings, as in those that immediately concern his worship.

With your own hands; So that it is our personal industry that God requires
of us in our callings. Therefore Iethro aduising Moses a course for ease of
himself and the people, yet wishes reservation of Exodus 18.22.
harder causes, and inspection of his subordinates to be continued. And Levites
superannated and dismissed from more public services, yet are commanded to
keep Number. 8.26.
their charge, and to assist their brethren in offices of inferior nature.

To this property of labor, let us annexe the quality of the matter, wherein
it is to be employed: which Paul has in a like exhortation specified; it must
be some Ephe 4.28.
good thing. That good thing, so far as it concerns special callings,
conceive to be both honestum and vtile; an honest good thing; a profitable good
thing.

Honest it must be, that there be no repugnancie betwixt the particular, and
general calling, that binds to strictest observance of Phil. 4.8.
virtuous goodness. As damnable, as the most sluggish negligence, is double
diligence of many in evil: toyling themselves even to Wisd. 5.7.
weariness in the ways of wickedness. As how many callings are there, as
they are foolishly termed, whose very matter subject is sinful?
Complexion-makers, they say, there are for deformed Strumpets; that know how to
varnish over with Vermilion, the most wain-scot faces, and to fill up the
furrows, that wrinkled age has drawn in their cheeks; Cyprian. de disc. and
habit. Virgin.
there be that have learnd to make white hairs black, and black white; as if
they meant to give our Savior the lie, and to prove conclusions with the
Almighty. Many, that busy their heads, and beat their brains, to devise
newfangled and anticke fashions of apparel, for braine-sicke Gallants.
Suffices it such to say, they are painful in their employments? So may a
thief or Pirate say, he travels and ventures far for his purchase. Truth
is, many a man takes more pains to go to Hell, then almost the holiest to go
to Heaven. As it must be honest, so profitable also, wherein our labor is
bestowed; profitable, I mean, to community, that it may have place here, that
Paul speaks; The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one 1. Cor.
12.7.
to profit withal. Not only prophecy, and tongues, and gifts to teach, are
the operations of the Spirit: But Exodus 31.2, 3
BEZALEELS and AHOLIABS skill to grave, etc. is the work of Gods Spirit: And
therefore are gifts, and faculties and offices severally distributed in the
body of Christ; that by consideration of mutual necessity, the members might
have the same care each for other; and no man enclose his abilities to his
proper utility.

In which respect, fault, First, our curious crafts, our vain and unnecessary
employments, in Minstrelsie and the like: for Cui bono; so, I mean, as to be
made a trade for Christians to live in: Secondly, but more our pernicious
professions, that find too much applause amongst voluptuous Sensualists:
Tertul. Cyprian. de spectaculis.
as that of Pantomimes and Histrionicall Stage Players, amongst others holden
so accursed and damnable. Our personal industry Paul requires, but in things
that are good; that is honest, and apparently profitable to community.

So of the duty; the reasons follow. First, As we commanded you.

Paul authority to prescribe in matters of Ciuility?

Custodes vtriusque tabulae. The difference betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical
Magistrates they conceive to stand, not so much in the matter of the
prescripts; as in the ends of prescribing, and manner of inferring. As heeding
Civil duties stands in force by Gods Law, and tends to grace Christian
profession, so prescribes the Ecclesiastical: as means to support societies,
so the Civil Magistrate. Neglect of such prescripts, the Magistrate punishes
with the sword, or some corporal mulct. The Church, only with spiritual
censures. Secondly, But what if we say, It was done cessante Magistratu? Truth
is, in Paul's time Princes were Heathenish; perhaps also negligent in ordering
affairs of Government; at least, not taking into their care the Church of God.
Sure I am, it is no arrogancy in a Minister to remember the people of duties
of Civil honesty, and to urge upon their consciences care of obedience to any
Gods Commandments. And they that slight such prescriptions, though but of
Ministers, shall bear their sin, and make more heavy their own judgment.

The second reason, is from ends and uses of such their industry. First, That
they may walk honestly toward them without. The word may be rendered, seemly,
and according to good fashion.

Honesty in Scripture imports three things. First, Virtuous goodness.
Secondly, Gravity. Thirdly, Seemelinesse or decency. I am willing to follow
the Authentic Translation; and think, without strayning, the observation
flows hence; That Industry is no small part of honesty. First, virtuous
goodness, I am sure, there is much in it; it being the nurse of all virtuous
affections. Secondly, the comeliness of it such; that it has approbation from
very aliens; And not without cause said Salomons mother of the industrious
woman, Prou. 31.31.
Her works praise her in the gates.

So that their error is palpable, that have pent up all honesty within the
limits of seventh and eighth precept: and think all honesty stands in
chastity and fidelity; so their bodies be kept from adulterous uncleanness,
and their care be to pay every man his own, how ever dissolute their lives are
otherwise, the wrong is insufferable, if they be censured of dishonesty.

These are, I confess, some parts of honesty, yet stands not all honesty in
chastity and particular justice. In Paul's judgment, an Idler or busibody is no
honest man, no, though his chastity and fidelity were as great as that of
renowned Genesis 39.
JOSEPH. Yea, there is honesty in hearing the Word of God; and he is no honest
man, that does not with Luke 8.15.
an honest heart receive it, and bring forth fruit with patience. What think
you of Sodomites? were they honest men? Never saw the Sun a people more
conspurcate with lust, and all abominable uncleanness. Yet by our Saviors
sentence, Sodomites are more honest, then such as despise Ministers in their
Ministry. I am sure the Mat. 10.14, 15.
state of the Sodomites shall be more tolerable in the day of Judgment, then
the state of such honest men.

Secondly, How could I wish, many religiously affected to the Word and worship
of God, more careful of this point of honesty? that it never might be told in
Gath, There are amongst the most zealous Christians, Idlers, Busibodies,
inordinate walkers, that eat not their own bread. How do such blemish our
holy profession? an cause the way of God to be blasphemed amongst aliens?
Remember, that industry is some part of honesty; so judged amongst aliens;
toward whom Paul advises, To walk in all good fashion and honest deportment.

Toward them without. So calls he all those not yet called into the Church
of God; And even toward such aliens must Christians walk honestly and without
offense; precepts, See Col. 4.5. 1. Pet. 2.12. and 3.1, 16.

First, to prevent their blasphemy of that great name that is called upon us.
Occasioned by any our least exorbitancy. Not left unpunished, in those that
occasion it, No, not in 2. Sam. 12.14
DAVID, that man after Gods own heart.

Secondly, To 1. Pet. 2.12. and 3.1.
win them to the truth; a better preparatiue can scarce be, then the
inoffensiue lives of those that profess it; nor greater discouragement, then
neglect of such honesty, as falls within compass of their apprehension. It
would be meditated, that though in things spiritual, Naturallists and Heathens
know little or nothing, because they are 1. Cor. 2.14.
spiritually discerned: yet have they Romans 2.15.
written in their hearts some principles of the Law Moral; by which they are
directed to order their own lives, and enabled to judge of other men's. It
shall behooue us therefore in matters of this Nature, to walk accurately
toward them without, that they may 1. Pet. 2.1, 2.
glorify God in the day of their visitation: at least, have no occasion or
advantage to speak evil of our precious and most holy faith.

Now Lord, that our ways were made so direct, that we might keep thy
Statutes; At least in Moralities known naturally, we did not too foulely
corrupt our selves; and give occasion to aliens to blaspheme! How many
Christians by profession, are more then Heathenish in practice! grown
dissolute in duties, wherein the blindest amongst aliens can observe their
faultings. Whether such do more good by profession, or hurt by unholy life, is
hard to determine: or rather easy to prove, they bring more prejudice by
their licenciousnesse to the proceedings of the Gospel, then thousands of
others can procure furtherance by their gracious behavior. I say not but it is
Gods judgment on them that are offended, and farther estranged; but it is the
fearful sin of those that occasion their alienation; and Mat. 18.7.
Woe to that man by whom the offense comes.

And that ye may have lack of nothing. A second fruit of diligence;
prevention of want, comfortable furnishing our selves with all expedient
comforts of life: Such blessing follows diligence, by the blessing and promise
of God. The hand of the diligent, says SOLOMON, Pro. 10.4.
shall have plenty, at least sufficiency, plenty proportionate to his estate:
like promises Solomon has many to encourage to painfulness.

Their accomplishment, as all other made of temporalties, is ordinary only; it
may be failing in some few particulars. Truth is, the blessings of this life,
first, are not promised absolutely, but with limitation to expedience:
secondly, with reservation of power to the promiser. First, to chasten our
steppings aside. Secondly, to try our faith: patience, sincerity in obedience.
Thirdly, are accomplished, not always in the particular promised, but
sometimes in the equivalent, and by a commutation in melius. Howbeit,
ordinarily it is true: the diligent are fed with Pro. 30.8.
food convenient for them; and rare are the examples of men, diligent in their
business, that have been destitute of necessary provisions. No honest calling
so mean, but faithfully applied, has yielded competency to those that live in
it. It is amongst our quotidiana miracula, as Austine terms them; to see
hardest Laborers, with coursest diet, supplied with greater strength and more
solid health; then those that daily feed on delicates, even to satietie. This
is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes; and should, me thinks,
encourage the most sluggish amongst Loyterers, to industrious heeding the
works of their vocation.

VERSE. 13.14. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep; that ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope.

For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again: even so, them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.


SVcceedeth the last Branch of Sanctity, in this Chapter commended to Gods
people; moderation of sorrow and lamentation for the dead in Christ. Wherein
considerable are first, the duty to keep mean in mourning: secondly, Reasons
pressing the duty: first, least we bewray ignorance of the blessed state of
Gods children after this life: secondly, because immoderate sorrow is rather
for hopeless Heathen: thirdly, their death is no abolishing of Nature, but a
sleep for a time: fourthly, and resurrection is certain. First of the duty;
sorrow not as men without hope. It should seem, the Apostle interdicts not
sorrowing, but desires to moderate it. Augustine. de verb. Apostoli. Ser. 32.
Contristamur and nos in nostrorum mortibus necessitate amittendi, sed cum spe
recipiendi.

Religion abolisheth not affections, but only moderates them. Paul prohibites
not to mourn, but to mourn without measure; Ephesians. 4.26.
permits to be angry, so the cause be just, and due measure and moderation
observed.

Grace destroys not Nature, but rectifieth it; it does not abolish Reason, but
rectify it; depriues not of Sense, but teaches right use of Senses;
proportionally kills not Affections, but only orders them. And the Gal. 5.24.
mortifying of affections pressed in Scripture, must so be understood, that the
Carnalitie of them only is stricken at, not the Affections themselves.

He Heb. 7.26.
was holy, harmless, separate from sinners; that knew no sin, per
experimentum, yet had use of Affections; Ioh. 35.
wept over LAZARUS, over the Luc. 19.41.
City; and not without Indignation, beheld the hard-heartednesse of
incredulous Jews.

Another sort of men we have, in practice more then Stoicall; whom no cross
from God or men can affect to sorrow; Loss of Goods, of Children, Wives,
Parents, things dearest, touches not so far, as to work the least
relenting. Their patience they think it, and insuperable fortitude, not to be
moved with these things; their patience is it, or rather their blockish
senselessness? Ier. 5.3.
Thou have smitten them, O Lord, but they have not sorrowed. It was not
patience, but stupiditie which the Lord complained of in his people.

Paul would here intimate; Moderation of Affections is no small part of
Sanctification. The Corruption that has by the Fall grown upon the
affections, stands chiefly in two things: first, their misapplying to unmeet
Objects: secondly, their exceeding, or coming short of their due measure. And
this is that Gods Spirit does in sanctifying them; first, directs them to their
right Objects; secondly, keeps them to their just proportion.

Very Heathen saw somewhat in this kind: wherefore some of them herein placed
the top of Wisdom; and he was with them reputed wisest, that had best stay and
guide of his Affections. Their virtues Moral are exercised all about
moderating the appetite and affectuous part of the Soul.

He that rules his spirit, says Solomon, is better Pro. 16.34.
then he that wins a City; and Contra, Whosoever has no Pro. 25.28.
government of his spirit, is like a City broken down, that has no walls.

A Meditation, if any other, meet for us: this part of Sanctity being so
generally neglected; insomuch, that we see many hungring and thirsting after
knowledge of God, in other parts of their life walking holy and blameless;
yet, I know not how, pleasing themselves, and almost justifying the inordinate
motions of their tumultuous Affections. In Wrath especially it is obseruable:
how small occasions kindle it? and when it is grown to a flame, no place left
for Right, Reason, or Religion, to sway it; nor is the gentlest remembrance
admitted, though it be as that of the Lord to Jonah, Ion. 4.4.
Do thou well to be angry? Remember we whose prayer it was, that our 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
whole spirit, and soul and body might be kept holy and blameless. And of
these generals thus far.

sorrow for the dead in Christ: and it is so carried in the Apostles
Exhortation, as if he would teach, Immoderate mourning for the dead in Christ,
to be for Christians most unseemly. The Saints before us labored herein, to
set bounds to Affection, and to cut off occasions of excess in that kind.
Abraham mournes for Sarah, even unto weeping; yet fearing lest he should
forget his measures, desires to bury Genesis 23.4.
her out of his sight: Egyptians mourn for JACOB seventy days; Joseph, his
natural son, Genesis 50.3, 10
only seven days. Not that he was less kind, but more Christian-like
prudent.

The Lord interdicts his Israel those Heathenish Rites of Deuteronomy. 14.1.
Balding and Cutting themselves for the dead: And our Savior intimates dislike
of Jewish Mat. 9.23.
Minstrelsie, for increase of Sorrow; Affection, he thought, in that case,
needed not the spur, but the bridle rather.

Indeed we read of some Saints excessive in this kind; David weeping for his
Absolon, as Rachel for her children, and would not be comforted. But first,
both it is noted as his infirmity; and secondly, in Austines judgment,
August. de doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 21. and contr. Faust. Manich. lib. 22. cap.
66.
he bewailed not so much his sons death, or his own Orbitie, as the
punishments whereinto his soul, so incestuously adulterous, so unnaturally
murtherous, should in likelihood be plunged. Non orbitatem doluit in eius
interitu, sed quia nouerat in quas poenas tam impie adultera and parricidalis
anima raperetur. And Bernard: Bernard.
Planxit merito David super parricida filio, cui perpetuo sciret obstructum
exitum de ventre mortis mole criminis. Thirdly, And what if David thus mourned
for Absolons damnation? Better hopes have Christians, of Christians that sleep
in the Lord. Such as make excess of sorrowing, for them most unseemly. For
first, how argues it ignorance in that point, wherein a Christians ignorance is
most shameful; the blessed state of Gods children after death? And how gives
it occasion to Gentiles to traduce us, when we bewail, as utterly lost and
extinct, those whom we profess to live with God? Cyprian. de Mortalitate.
Sp^^ nostra ac fidei praeuaricatores sumus, says Cyprian: Simulata, ficta,
fucata videntur esse quae dicimus. Secondly, And what ods, in this behalf,
betwixt hopeful Christians, and hopeless Heathens; while we equally give
reins to sorrow, and macerate our selves with like comfortless grief?

to our sorrow, for those, of whom we have reason to be persuaded, that they
sleep in the Lord. Let not the Monition seem unnecessary. Affections are
violent, especially having show of lawfulness to set them forward. More
frequent are the slips of Saints, in things for their matter lawful, then in
those that are simply unlawful. Conscience, even of good men, sets it self
loose, having plea of lawfulness for the action. Herein, Affection grows no
less then tumultuous, being able to warrant it self by instinct of Nature,
practice of Christ and his Saints.

Truth is, the custom of Mourning, but Stoickes, none condemned: howbeit,
says Bernard, the spiritual man that judges all things, Bernard. de
considerat. lib. 3.
and is judged of no man, preuents all his attempts with this threefold
consideration; first, whether it be lawful; secondly, whether decent; thirdly,
whether also expedient. Secondly, And we are not ignorant, things lawful in
their kind, may through neglect of due circumstances, prove sinful in the
doer. Eating and drinking are lawful and necessary; yet excess therein, is
censured of Gluttony. No wise man ever condemned Recreations as evil in their
whole kind; yet immoderate use of Sports, is little less then Epicurisme. And
sorrow for the dead, has example of Saints, yea of our Savior, to warrant it.
Paul's Mandate is more, Romans 12.15.
Flere cum flentibus; howbeit, excess in lamentation makes it sinful in
Christians. And here also has place that Caveat of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.7.
lest any be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow.

Meditations available this way, are these: First, of the blessed state of
Gods children, delivered from the burden of the body; Cyprian. de Mortalitate.
who thinks it not his gain? Saeculi laqueis non teneri, nullis peccatis and
vitijs Carnis obnoxium fieri; exemptum pressuris augentibus, and venenatis
Diaboli faucibus liberatum, ad laetitiam salutis aeternae, Christo vocante,
proficisci. Who is not of Paul's mind? To be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
is Phil. 1.23.
best of all; such Revel. 14.13.
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Thus think, as S.
Cyprian advised, Desiderari eos debere, non plangi; nec accipiendas esse hic
atras vestes, quando illi ibi instrumenta alba iam sumpserunt.

Secondly, That argument which with Ephesians in Act. 21.14.
The will of the Lord be fulfilled. Let us not make such Idols of our selves,
or ours, as for their deaths, so comfortable, to grow discontented at the Lords
appointments.

Thirdly, And if that Heathen could say, Praemittimus Why think not Christians
much more, Seneca.
They lose not their friends, but send them before? Thus of the maine matter in
the Text.

In our passage, let us notice the Epithete given to the death of Gods Saints;
they die not, but sleep; their death is a sleep. Usual in Scriptures. See
Ioh. 11. Act. 7.

What is it of Man that sleeps? Some Heretics made question, and at length
resolved, the separate souls cast into a dead sleep, to remain without
action till the general Resurrection; which if they would limit to the
organicall actions of the Soul, that without commerce with the body, cannot
be exercised; the strife were ended. But Experience has taught us, the Soul
has her immateriall acts, which without bodily organs she is enabled to
exercise. First, we see it in the streightest tie of the Senses, by Sleep,
Thinking, Meditating, Discoursing. Secondly, yea the most perfect actions of
the mind are, what time it has least commerce with the body. In 2. Cor. 12.3,
4.
Ecstasies, Paul had his greatest Revelations; and John in his Revel. 11.10.
rauishment saw his most heavenly Visions. Thirdly, perhaps also that Revel.
5.12.
place of John implies, that separate Souls have their employment in lauding
and praising God and the Lamb.

Limit therefore this sleep to the Body; whence I think it is, that our
Graves are called Isai. 57.2.
our Beds; wherein our Bodies, not our Souls, rest from their labors.

Reasons of the resemblance are thus conceived: first, for that it rests from
all toil and travel, and sense of evils: secondly, because it rises again
by the power of God: thirdly, and is as easily revived by the voice of God, as
the living man is awaked out of his shallowest slumber.

So that they err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, that
teach, the Body to be resolved by death into its first principles, without
hope of restoring to life. What then, trow we, is the Resurrection promised?
They say, Tertull. de Resurrect. Carnis.
of the Souls. But Tertullian well observed, They fall not, being immortal;
therefore have no need, nor are capable of Resurrection. And that the Bodies
also shall rise again, that same societas operarum, as he terms it, is
abundant conviction. Partners they were with Souls in doing good or evil,
must therefore participate in the reward or punishment.

Secondly, And how fitly hence flows Paul's exhortation, To keep mean in
mourning?

As men without hope. He means of Resurrection to glorious life, and a better
condition after death. The Periphrasis of Gentiles, and all aliens from the
Church of God, accorded by the like, Ephesians. 2.12. how fittingly applied to their
state, judge by these Reasons: first, they were without Christ, the ground of
hope: secondly, out of the Church, the place of hope: thirdly, without the
Covenant, the reason of all our hope and believing.



First, I wonder then the Prophets, David and Moses, so much magnify Gods
grace to Jews before Christ's coming, in Psalm. 147.19, 20.
giving to them his Statutes, and entering with them Covenant of Peace and
Salvation. Secondly, And why is that Blessing so much amplified to us Gentiles
since Christ, Act. 14.27.
that to us also God has opened the door of Faith, and made us Ephe. 2.13.
near by the blood of his Son?

I say rather as the Apostle, Romans 15.9.
Let us Gentiles, of these times, praise God for his mercy, whom he has
regenerated to a 1. Pet. 1.3.
lively hope in Christ Jesus, having left desperate so many Generations of our
Forefathers.

VERSE. 14. For if we believe that Christ died and rose again, etc.


THe last reason pressing moderation of sorrow is here couched; taken from
certainty of resurrection to life. Of it he lays two grounds. First, the
resurrection of Christ. Secondly, the Power of God: withal, limits out the
persons to whom this blessing belongs. The Article of resurrection, I mean not
here to insist on, but so far only as it receives strength from the
resurrection of Christ.

Christ is risen: Therefore us also shall God bring, again from the grave.



Heb. 2.17.
Man like to us in all things, sin only excepted; Gods power in raising
Christ from the dead, has made manifest a possiblity of returning from death
to life. Secondly, if withal we consider our union with Christ by the Spirit,
whose heavenly influence and Divine Virtue, in raising our souls to spiritual
life, all living members in his body have experience of; a necessity we shall
see of our being raised from death to fellowship of his glory. Thirdly, his
resurrection is undoubtful pledge to us of our Romans 4.25.
Justification, and full discharge from guilt and punishment of sin, that
alone keeps us under the Dominion of death, and debarres from entering the
glorious presence of God. So strangely follows the Argument from the
resurrection of Christ, to the rising again of Christians, even as many as are
by the Spirit members of his body.

So that, if any desire to know himself a sharer in the resurrection of the
Just; this let him first learn to know, whether he be one with Christ; that
union death dissolues not: yea, shall force the grave to render up the bodies
of Saints, that where the Head is, Ioh. 17.24.
there may the members be also.

Signs of this Union: First, Experience Phil. 3.10. Romans 6.5.
of the virtue and power of Christ's resurrection: enliuing our souls to all
gracious and holy conversation. Secondly, the Sympathy and fellow-feeling we
have of Romans 12.15.
the weal and woe, of our fellow members in the body of Christ. 2. Cor. 11.29.
Who is afflicted, and such burn not? They have no fellowship with Christ,
whom JOSEPH'S afflictions touch not nearly; and to whose greatest merriments,
the remembrance thereof puts not a pause.

The persons, to whom belongs fellowship in this blessed resurrection, are
described; Such as sleep in Jesus: that is, That continue in that blessed
union and fellowship with Christ until death, and in death. To such is the
blessing pronounced: To that condition Revel. 14.13. Revel. 2.10.26.
are the promises limited. In such Heb. 10.38.
as withdraw themselves, Gods soul has no pleasure; their former
righteousness is forgotten; Gal. 3.4.
their passi^ns and patience all become vain unto them.

Revel. 3.11.
to hold fast what we have received, the beginning of our subsistence in Christ.

Helps available. First, Fear of our own infirmity, in which respect we may
say as SOLOMON, Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always: Such fear, first, how careful makes
it to fly all occasions, that may withdraw our hearts from God! Secondly, how
conscionable, to use all holy means of preservation in that blessed condition!

Secondly, Deepest consideration of the Heb. 6.6. and 10.26. 2. Pet. 2.20.
fearful condition of such as fall from the Grace of God; becoming more
hopeless then Infidels; more profane then Atheists; I doubt not, but more
grievously tormented then the most savage amongst hopeless Heathen.

Thirdly, Prayer unto God, by whose grace only we stand; By 1. Pet. 1.5.
whose power alone we are guarded through faith to salvation.

VERSE. 15.16.17. For this we say unto you in the Word of the Lord, that we
which live, which remain at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which sleep.

For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangell, and with the Trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ shall
rise first.

Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord.


THe Apostle goes on in his purpose, setting down new arguments of
Consolation, in respect of the dead. In these Verses we have one, taken from
the order of our Glorification; wherein, they that are dead in the Lord, have
preeminence above those that are found alive at his coming: And thereby takes
occasion to explain the order and course of the Lords dealing at his second
coming. And because it is a secret strange to Reason, to win it the more
credit, he prefaceth thereto, verse. 15.

So that in the words we have three things to consider, first, the prerogative
of the dead above the living at the coming of Christ, secondly, the
explication, thirdly, the confirmation thereof. Take we the words as they lie
in order.

This we say unto you in the word of the Lord. The question is, where Paul had
this from the Lord? whether from some other grounds of Scripture, or by
special revelation, or by tradition?

the Mat. 24.31. Job. 5.28, 29.
last trumpe, and ministry of Angels in the resurrection; of the voice of the
Lord, and his descending from heaven, we have extant in the Evangelists.

What he here speaks touching the order of proceedings at Christ's coming, is
found no where but in this Apostle: whether this were amongst the special 2.
Cor. 12.1.
revelations, he had in his ecstasy, or at some other time discovered, we need
not enquire: we know him of that number, that spoke by inspiration of the holy
Ghost.

Whereas to win credence to this mystery, he prefaceth with mention of the
word of God, supposing it sufficient to procure faith to strangest secrets; we
learn, that in strangest mysteries and secrets farthest above the reach of
reason, our inquiries must stay, when once we are assured the mouth of the Lord
has spoken them. Therefore we may observe, it has been an imputation and
blemish to them that have questioned things strangest to reason, once uttered
in the Word of the Lord; as to Genesis 18.23.
Sarah, in the promise of a son to be borne in her old age, after so long
barrenness, Luc. 1.18, 20.
in Zachary, father of John Baptist, Number. 11.21, 22.
in Moses, etc.

our inquisition, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. To tell you how many
have fallen into errors and heresies damnable, by giving reins to reason in
this kind, were endless. We are not, I think, unacquainted, how in that
great mystery of the Trinity, some, by this means have bin blinded, whiles
willing to make that transcendent mystery hold correspondence with the shallow
conceit of their understanding, they have vanished away in their apprehensions,
and grown to deny that mystery, so plainly taught us in the Word of God.
Whence grew Arius to his heresy, denying the eternal generation of the Son
from the Father, and his equality unto him in power, wisdom, eternity, and
other essential properties of the Godhead? save that he could not conceive
things otherwise in Gods, then they are in humane generations. And Porphyrie
contradicting that Article of the Resurrection, fell thereto by ouer-far
inquiry, not able to conceive how the substance of our bodies devoured by
beasts, and so by digestion incorporated into their substance, could again be
severed. Brethren, know we, that Deuteronomy. 29.29.
things revealed, so far as they are revealed, are ours and our Childrens, and
that faith must go beyond reason in matters supernatural, believing what the
Lord speaks, even because he speaks them; though Nicodemus his question
cannot be answered, John 3.9.
How can these things be?

See we now the privilege it self: its propounded first, negatiuely, We
that survive, shall not prevent them that sleep: secondly, affirmatively, the
dead in Christ shall rise first.

Sense. It is enquired, how Paul reckens himself amongst those that should be
found alive at Christ's second coming, since he professes to Timothy, 2. Tim.
4.6.
the time of his dissolution was at hand; and after aduizeth this people, 2.
These. 2.2.
not to think the day of the Lord so nigh, as to fall within compass of that
generation. A question that much troubled S. Hierome; and much toils he
himself to find out a solution, rejecting in truth better expositions of
others then himself brings any.

Our later Interpreters think, the Apostle being uncertain of the time of
Christ's coming, would express here in his practice our duty, that is, to
stand in continual expectation of Christ's second coming to Judgment; and so
to order every day, as if it were the last day of the world. A duty it is
needful, to Mat. 25.13.
watch continually. But that the Apostle should upon this ground perform it,
because he knew not whether it might fall into his life time, is unlikely, by
that caveat given, 2. These. 2.

Unless perhaps we may think, that as yet it was not revealed to the Apostle,
that the Lords coming should be longer deferred. This once is a truth, The
Lord did not at once reveal all things to his servants the Prophets; but, as
the Author to the Hebrews speaks, (...), by parcils, as you would say,
acquainted them with his secrets. Instance we have in Abraham, that he should
have a seed of blessing, was first revealed; whether Genesis 15.2.
by generation, or adoption, it seems was not till after opened. When its
farther made known, that it should be of his body by generation, yet whether
by Sarah, or some other, seems not yet to have been revealed, which was in
likelihood the occasion of their Genesis 16.2.
error in Hagar; So perhaps in this particular; That there should be a second
coming of Christ to Judgment, and that this coming should be sudden, in a
time when it was least expected, was revealed when Paul wrote this Epistle:
That it should not be till the 2. These. 2.3.
departing from the faith, the revealing of Antichrist, and his consumption, by
the breath of the Lords mouth, it may be was an after-reuelation. And this is a
solution of the doubt not improbable.

Hierome.
Another exposition there is extant in S. Hierome, under the name of Diodorus,
howsoever rejected by Hierome, yet more probable then any himself brings. The
sum of it is thus, Paul reckons himself and his associates amongst suruiuers
at Christ's coming; not as thinking himself and those then living should be
found of Christ in the body, but knowing all the Righteous to make one body in
Christ Jesus, and himself one of the number; Nos dixit, pro eo quod est
lustos, de quorum and ego sum numero: We that remain, that is, those of the
faithful, that shall survive to Christ's coming. Thus far of the doubt.

The prerogative follows; the dead in Christ shall first rise, having their
bodies first glorified, and clothed with immortality, incorruption, glorious
splendor, etc. the Lord thus recompensing their seeming disadvantage, in
respect of those that know no death, but analogicall transmutation.

The disaduantages of Gods children, wherein they seem to be cast behind
their brethren, are ever recompensed with some privilege or prerogative,
wherein they also have their advantage. It may seem a prerogative of suruiuers
at Christ's coming, over those that are dissolved by death, that they without
death are clothed upon with incorruption; but see how the Lord recompenceth
their seeming disadvantage; they are first glorified in their bodies; raised to
a glorious life, before the living are changed. By plentiful induction it will
appear. It may seem the disadvantage of us Gentiles, that Jews had first
Romans 3.2.
the oracles of God committed unto them; had the ministry of Prophets, yea of
the Lord Christ himself, the Romans 15.8.
minister of Circumcision. But how plentifully has the Lord recompensed it
unto us, giving us more plenty of clear revelation, and greater measure of
grace, then ever he vouchsafed to the Church of the Jews! that we may say as
our Savior; Mat. 13.17.
What many Prophets, and Kings, and righteous men desired to see, and saw not,
we see.

We may perhaps think it to be some disadvantage unto us, that we lived not
in the days of Apostles and Prophets, that taught by special Revelation, and
unerring Spirit, what they taught the people of God; but fully is it
recompensed unto us; in that, many of the things which they a far off beheld
in the Prediction, we with our eyes see in the accomplishment. See it in other
particulars of outward or inward estate. Diversely has God ordered the state of
his children in this life, calling some to teach, some to be taught; some to
rule, some to be ruled; giving some, Wealth, Honor, Peace; exercising others
with Poverty, Infamy, Contempt amongst men. It is strange to see, how emulous
we are one of others preferment in these favors of God; whereas, if we would
rightly weigh it, we should see, that in these things, wherein we seem to be
cast behind our brethren, we have in one kind or other our advantage of them.
Their Wealth is more; so are their Distractions, and Cares, and Spiritual
Dangers; their Reckoning larger at the great Audite and Day of Accounts. Is it
not well, the Lord has freed thee from these Distractions? made thee rich in
Faith, given contentment, and daily experience of his Fatherly care in another
kind?

In that which seems the greatest disadvantage, as that the Lord so long
keeps us on the rack of an accusing Conscience, and withholds the sense of
his favor, in the pardon of sins, I am deceived, if there be not some
advantage to the oppressed. Usually ye shall see the course of their lives more
strict; sins, that others without scruple swallow up, these conscionably fly
from; their sanctity, for the most part, greater; and so, I doubt not, shall
be their glory. In a word: Is life short? the passage is speedier to the Joys
of Heaven: Is it prolonged? the more occasion have they of doing good; their
service greater, and so shall be their reward. We cannot think of any
disadvantage of Gods children, wherein they are cast behind their brethren, but
a recompense we shall find in one kind or another plentifully rendered into
their bosoms.



The people think it is well with Ministers, whose whole life may be spent in
meditation of the Word of God; whom God has chosen to be his Instruments to
save the souls of his people. The Minister again thinks it is well with the
people, to whom God has committed care of no souls but their own, and from
whom he expects less measure of knowledge and obedience. The subjects eyes are
dazeled with the glory of a Kingdom; and they are sure high in Gods favor,
that are eminent in authority above others. The Magistrate again thinks it is
well with the people, whose life is most retired from public employments; how
secure live they from envy of the Ambitions, and from the Curse of profane
Tongues? In a word, so emulous we are most, one at the seeming advantages of
others by Gods favor; that he is a rare man, like JOBS Job. 33.23.
Interpreter, one of a thousand, who thinks his own state and condition in
every respect best for him.

Against this emulation, we are stored with Reasons in the Scripture.

As first, It must be thought of, that the Lord whom Mat. 20.15.
Is our eye evil, because his is good? Why suffer we him not, to do with his
own what he thinks good? Who likes the sauciness of that Beggar, that
quarrels at his alms, because another fares better? What ever our gifts are
from God, they are Eleemosyna mera, mere Alms; for Romans 11.35.
who has given him first?

Paul, touching the condition of Servants; Ephesians. 6.8.
Whatsoever good thing any man does, yea, in place of a servant, the same shall
he receive of the Lord.

what he sees Mat. 7.11.
best for us, that he will give us? If Peace were better for thee then Trouble,
Riches then Want, Honor then Infamy, make thou question, but the Lord would
give it thee? Thou know not then the bowels of his Fatherly love to thee in
Christ, far exceeding the love of the tenderest father toward the son of
his loins.



VERSE. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first.


THe Explication follows; first, by causes principal and subseruient;
secondly, the order of proceeding then holden, Verse. 16.17. In the words are
three things considerable; first, that Christ shall come; secondly, the manner
of his coming; thirdly, the effects and consequents thereof.

That there shall be such a glorious coming of Christ to Judgment, Scriptures
plentifully prove. Act. 1.11.
This same JESUS shall so come, as you have seen him go into Heaven. Mat.
24.30.
They shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds, with Power and great
Glory. Jude 14.
ENOCH, the seventh from ADAM, prophesied hereof, Behold, the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints. The Lord was pleased to grant some intimation
hereof to the very Heathen, by their Sybillae. Augustine and Eusebius record
the Verses of Sybilla Erythraea to this purpose.

(...)
(...).
Whence they had it, whether by extraordinary revelation, or by some notice
from Scriptures of old Testament, it is not material to enquire. The Lord, it
seems, would have extant amongst the Heathen some Predictions thereof, as also
of other things; the better to make way for entertainment of the Gospel
amongst Gentiles, in the fullness of time, when they should see the Principles
thereof have consent from their own Writers, whose Authority was sacred
amongst them.

Reasons of it are many; amongst many take these few, Romans 2.5.
the day of declaring the just judgment of God. There is at every man's death a
judgment of absolution or condemnation passed upon their souls, according to
their faith, or infidelity, repentance, or impenitencie, but to us as yet
secret. The Lord therefore has appointed a day of general Assise, wherein
every man's works shall come to examination and public view, and all the world
be forced to acknowledge the equity of the Lords secret proceedings.

To this tend other actions of the Lord euidencing the same truth, as Jude 15.
conviction of all the ungodly of their unlawful deeds which they have
ungodly committed. Though I doubt not but its true of most men, they live and
dye as those heretics Paul speaks of, Tit. 3.15.
(...), their conscience being witness and judge against them; yet has it
pleased the Lord so to appoint, that there shall be a farther, and more public
conviction of them: that if any hypocrite shall be so impudent as to obtrude
unto the Lord the formal service he has done, his mouth may be stopped, and
his face covered with confusion; when his own heart shall tell him, men and
Angels witnessing, he has bin a Formallist only in Christianity.

2. These. 1.8.
disobeyed the Gospel. And this reason is furthered by two others. First,
though they now in their souls suffer what their sins have deserved, yet by
their bodies, the instruments of their souls in sinning, in the same state of
sencelesnesse with the bodies of Gods Saints. Its meet therefore, that there
should be such a coming of Christ, that as bodies and souls have been
fellows in evil doing, so they may both partake in the punishment of their
abominations. Secondly, moreover, its to be considered, that howsoever the
personal acts of sin in the ungodly, are, as they are acts, transient; and
seen to die with the committers; yet have many of them a propagation along
even to a thousand generations. It is said of Jeroboam, He made Israel to
sin. It is true, not only of the time, wherein he lived; but the infection
of that policy and example, reached to many succeeding ages. The same is true
of other sins and sinners; the poison and stench of their abominations,
continue long after the death of their first Authors. Saint Jude tells us of
some in his time, that walked in the way of CAIN, and BALAAM. Themselves were
long since dead, but the poison of their example, remained even to Iudes time,
and will do to the end of the world. And it is not to be doubted, but that all
the sins of other men, occasioned by their example, shall be punished in the^,
as well as those that in their own persons they committed. To the end
therefore that they may have a full measure of wrath, according to the full
measure of their sins; there must be a second coming of Christ to the
universal Judgment; and these are some ends in respect of the wicked.

I might be infinite in setting down other ends that respect Gods children. As
first, the clearing of their innocence to the faces of them that have laden
them with unjust slanders and accusations. Secondly, the recompensing of their
labors, that have not received, in this life, any visible reward.

And what should I tell you of the uses it has in respect of God himself, and
his Christ? How often quarrel we at the dispensations of his providence? that
he casts prosperity upon the wicked, and exercises his children with
continual afflictions. There must a day come, when men shall Mal. 3.18.
discern betwixt him that serves God, and him that serves him not; and the
equity of Gods present disposition shall appear to all men: when the wicked
shall be forced to confess, they found the Lord liberal to them in the things
of this earth; and Gods children have all their afflictions rewarded, with a
full measure of glory.

Let us now come to the manner of his coming, and then we subioyne the uses.
The manner is described to be with great terror, Majesty and glory: With the
voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpe of God. My purpose is not upon this
occasion, to enter the controversy about the orders and degrees of dignity
amongst Angels. That there is an order betwixt them, some being superior, some
inferior, we make no question. An Archangel we find here; and will make no
great quaere of it, whether as they have one supreme, so there may be others in
their several ranks, one superior to another: Amongst the evil angels, we
read of one called, The Prince of Devils; the other inferiors, and Ministers
unto him. Wherefore it is said, Mat. 16.41.
The Devil and his Angels.

Neither purpose I to speak much of the Ministry of Angels in the
resurrection, and day of Judgment. Ye have them briefly set down, Mat. 24.
First, To gather Gods children from the four winds, and to present them to
their Lord Christ. Secondly, to be witnesses perhaps, and give evidence against
the ungodly, of the sins they have secretly committed; we doubt not but they
1. Cor. 11.10
attend our congregations. Thirdly, to be instruments of Gods Mat. 13.41, 42.
vengeance upon the wicked. Lastly, to serve to the greater glory of Christ the
Judge, for which cause, he is said at his coming, To be made 2. These. 1.10.
marvelous in his Saints.

Touching the Trump of God, whether we must take it in property of speech, or
analogically, is a question: Interpreters vary in their conjectures: some take
it analogically only, to signify the virtue, and power of Christ's voice,
summoning us all together to his Judgment seat; as amongst Jews, their
assemblies were summoned by the sound of Trumpets: others otherwise. For my
part, I see not but we may take it properly. As at the giving of the Law, when
the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, the Exodus 19. and 20.
voice of the Trumpet was heard exceeding loud; so it may be here. Curious
enquiries about the matter of it, or means of sound, let us omit as frivolous.

The whole serves to express the terror, majesty, and glory of Christ, at
his second coming to Judgment; attended with thousands, even a thousand times
ten thousand of his glorious Angels; with his mighty voice shaking Heaven and
Earth; and by the power of his Trumpe raising the dead out of their graves, and
presenting them all at his Seat of Judgment. No marvel, if the wicked then
run to the Rocks to hide them, and to the Mountains to fall upon them; his
coming being with such majesty and glory. The uses follow.

And first, it serves for confutation of those 2. Pet. 3.3, 4, 5, to 10.
godless Mockers, whom S. Peter speaks of; that, in regard of so long delay
of his coming, grow to deride and scoff at the Promise. Such Atheists all
Ages have afforded: would God our own times were free; men that labor to
quench in themselves those notices of a Judgment to come, that the Lord has
written in their hearts with the point of a Diamond: And, which passes all
measure of Atheism and profaneness, have not stuck to reason against this
Principle of our Christian Faith. Will you hear how? S. Peter's Mockers thus
disputed; All things have continued in like state without alteration, ever
since the Creation: We see the same circumuolution of Heavens, vicissitude of
Times and Seasons. Ergo. Ans. Now, first (says Peter) their ground is false,
their own hearts being witnesses, save that they have wilfully shut their eyes
against the light of the Truth: For they cannot be ignorant, that the Earth
once perished by Waters, that Deluge having testimony, not only from Moses,
but even from Heathens themselves. Besides, they cannot but acknowledge a
sensible decay, and declining of all the creatures from their original
strength and perfection; we see them, as David, Psalm. 102.26.
waxen old as a garment, and now, as it were, of their own accord growing
toward a dissolution. Lastly, that Word of God, that was so powerful to give
them a beginning, is it not as mighty to put an end to the creatures? Suppose
then it were true, that the world stands still in the state wherein it was
created; the Lord, by whose Word and Power it was first made, and has, ever
since Creation, continued in this order, can with the same power of his Word
bring it to nothing.

Their second Argument against the Dissolution, is, as the Epicures against the
Creation; Quae machinae? What should the instrument and means of Dissolution
be? If we say Fire; it is one of the principal parts whereof it consists. Ans.
Yet can the Lord use it as a means of the Dissolution, as he once did Water,
the common Principle of all things, at the universal Deluge.

Third Argument, is from the long delay. Ans. Wherein, says Peter, first, how
much forget they themselves; measuring the days of Gods eternity by the
scantling of our time? Secondly, how little do they consider the ends and
reasons of the delay? which are, not the Lords forgetfulness, or change of his
purpose, but his patience toward us, in waiting for our repentance, and the
accomplishment of that number that he has chosen to life; of whom, perhaps
there are many as yet unborn.

To these of Peter's mockers, our judicious Atheists, as they would seem, have
added an Argument, as they think, irrefragable; taken from the seeming neglect
of the good and evil done amongst men.

as the unrighteous Judge in the Gospel, without fear of God, and reverence of
men, and yet in the top and highest Chair of prosperity?

to prove a second Judgment, these think invincible to overthrow it. The 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
present tribulation of the Righteous, is a demonstration of a righteous
Judgment to come. Whereto Solomon accords, in the use he makes of this vanity
he saw, amongst others, under the Sun. Eccl. 3.16, 17.
I saw a place of Judgment, and lo, wickedness was there; and the place of
Righteousness, and behold, Iniquity was there. Then said I, God shall surely
judge the righteous and unrighteous; for there is a time appointed for every
purpose. Secondly, neither is this seeming neglect so universal, as they would
make it: Some we see here punished, and rewarded, that we may know, there is a
Providence taking notice of all; some others yet respited, that we might know
there is a Judgment to come.

Act. 17.31.
to admonish all men, in all places, to repent of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, in as much as the Lord has appointed a
Day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom he
has appointed: as Solomon also presses the Exhortation, To Ec. 12.12, 13.
fear God, and keep his Commandments; seeing he will bring every work unto
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And I beseech
you, every one seriously think of it, there is not a vain oath, no, nor Mat.
12.36.
an idle word, but thou art countable for it at that Day. How much more for thy
Periuries and Blasphemies against God and his Truth? And let no man flatter
himself, thinking his greatness or smalnesse, his age or youth, shall excuse
him before God: Revel. 20.12.
Great and small stand before God, to be judged after the things written in the
Books. And even of the Iollities of Youth, said SOLOMON, Eccl. 11.9.
the Lord shall bring them to Judgment. Nothing shall stead thee at that Day,
but Faith and Repentance. Lest any say, even that Day may bring Repentance to
Salvation; and the Lord is merciful, and will then be entreated; hear what
Paul has, That Day is Romans 2.5.
a day of Wrath to all impenitent sinners; and thou may cry and howl, with
Heb. 12.17.
Esau, for the Blessing, but shall find no place for Repentance, because thou
neglectedst the time of the Lords Visitation.

A second use S. Paul points us unto, in his own practice; and S. Peter also,
having described the terror and glory of that Day, it should teach us all
faithfulness in our Vocations and Callings; 2. Cor. 5.11.
This terror of the Lord should make us persuade men: yea, says Peter, 2.
Pet. 3.11.
What manner men ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness! Fools
as we are, we dream of too much strictness in holy courses; and generally, it
goes for an Opinion current amongst the wise, We may be just overmuch. Alas,
brethren, do we consider the Majesty, Power, Purity, strict Justice of the
Judge, when we thus speak? He that brings even idle words to Judgment, and
forgets not a thought of disobedience, how will he spare our gross negligence
and presumption? How our formalitie and irreverence in his service? Says
PETER, What manner ought we to be in holiness? Even Angelical purity were
little enough, to present us to the eyes of that Judge. It is his great mercy
to us, that he has promised, to Number. 23.21.
see no iniquity in JACOB, nor transgression in Israel; yet so, as that he
would have us endeavor 1. Pet. 1.16.
to be holy, as he is holy, and to 1. Ioh. 3.3.
purge our selves, as he is pure.

The last thing to be considered, are the effects and consequents of his
coming; some of them respect the dead, whereof already; others, the living
that remain at his coming; some others, both.

VERSE. 17. Then we which live, etc.


AUGUSTINE here propounds the Question, Augustine.
Whether they whom Christ shall then find alive, shall not die at all; or,
whether in their passage toward Christ in the Air, they shall die, and be
revived: and seems to incline to that opinion, that they shall have their
death, and be again mira celeritate revived. Against him directly is the
Apostle; 1. Cor. 15.51.
We shall not all sleep; and PETER, Christ is ordained of God to be Judge Act.
10.41.
of quick and dead.

His Arguments are of small moment; To Genesis 3.19.
dust thou shall return; and, It is Heb. 9.27.
appointed to all men once to die. Caietanes answer is brief, but pithie; The
Statute, says he, is regular; but, illos non mori est singular; There be that
have their privilege and dispensation.

Touching the manner of this Raptus, whether it shall be by Ministry of
Angels, as seems to be employed, Mat. 24. or by an immediate power of God,
making our bodies of that agilitie, that, as Birds, we shall mount up into the
Air, is not curiously to be disputed.



Jude 14.
Majesty and Glory of the Judges presence. Secondly, to be his Assessors in
the Judgment, to be pronounced and executed upon the ungodly. Which made Paul
say, We 1. Cor. 6.2.
shall judge the world; whether by way of Comparison, as Ninevites are said to
Mat. 12.41.
condemn Jews; or by way of Approbation, is indifferent to be resolved.

notice of the glory God reserues for his children against the Day of
Judgment: that howsoever they are here contemned, and in the estimation of the
wicked, as the scumme and off-scowring of the world, the Lord Christ shall then
honor them so far, as to make them his 1. Cor. 6.
Assessours in the Judgment of the World. In the Regeneration, they shall sit
on Mat. 19.28.
Thrones, judging the Tribes of Israel. Such honor have all his Saints.



Now, if we had wisdom to measure the happiness and glory of Gods
children, not by their outward state in this life, but by their condition in
the life to come, we should never envy unto Solomon his Royalty, nor to any
Monarch of the Earth the perfection of Majesty. For to which of the Kings of
the Earth said the Lord at any time, they shall be his Assessors at the day of
Judgment? except to such only, as contentedly submit themselves to bear his
Reproach; and that have learnt with MOSES, to Heb. 11.25, 26
count the rebuke of Christ greater honor, then all the Majesty that the
World can afford them. They also shall die like men, and be countable for the
injuries and oppressions they have laden Gods children withal: yea, if they
repent not their ungodly deeds, stand to be judged of them whom they have
contemned and despightfully entreated.

admission of Gods children to the perpetual society of Christ, and
fellowship in the blessedness and glory of his Kingdom. The excellency of
that state, see at large described, Revel. 22.

to long, and pray for that blessed appearing and coming of the Son of Man,
Revel. 22.17.
The Spirit and Bride say, Come, yea even come quickly, Lord Jesus: The Romans
8.19.
Creatures with earnest expectation wait and long for the manifestation of the
sons of God. And by how many means does the Lord labor to draw our
Affections toward that blessed Estate? exercising, and even loading us with
Afflictions in this life; giving us taste of the comforts he has provided for
us in the life to come, in the Peace of Conscience, and first fruits of
Sanctification; yet so, as we have neither in perfection, nor without
interruption: To what end? but that we might, from the sweetness of the taste
here vouchsafed unto us, frame this kind of reasoning to our selves? If the
taste of this happiness be so sweet; Oh, what shall the fullness be? If this
glimmering light of Heavenly knowledge, when we see but as in a Glass,
darkely, be so delightful; what shall it be, to see the Lord face to face, and
to know him as he is? If our weak obedience, and the first fruits of the
Spirit be so comfortable, that we highlier prize it then all the treasures of
the World; what shall the perfection of Holiness be? When there shall be no
Devil to tempt, no Concupiscence to entice, no Flesh to lust against the
Spirit, no Law in our members to rebel against the Law of our mind. If the
communion we have here with Christ, in his Word and Sacraments, be so joyous,
that we are of David's mind, Psalm. 84.10.
One day in the Lords House is better then a thousand in the Tents of
ungodliness; and think it more honor, to be a Doore-keeper in the House of
God, then to reign in the Tabernacles of the wicked; what shall it be, to
enjoy the immediate Presence and Glory of God our Father, Christ our Redeemer,
the holy Ghost our Comforter? etc.

To which, if we add the consideration of the unchangeableness of that
estate, what can be added to that measure of happiness? We shall, says the
Apostle, be ever with the Lord.

the blessed state of Gods children after this life, is unchangeable and
everlasting. That inheritance 1. Pet. 1.4.
is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away. That life is Dan. 12.2.
everlasting; that Sabbath Isai. 66.23.
is perpetual, that glory is eternal; that joy lasts for evermore.

There be three things eminent in the state of glory, above that of Gods
children in this life. First, perfection. Secondly, perpetuity. Thirdly,
immutability. We see now but in a glass, imperfectly; 1. Cor. 13.12.
then face to face; we have now Romans 8.23.
the first fruits, only of the spirit, the 2. Cor. 1.22.
earnest penny of our redemption; then the full measure, according to the
measure of such creatures.

We have now peace of Conscience; but alas, how often interrupted with
unspeakable horror? Now rejoice we with 1. Pet. 1.8.
joy unspeakable, and glorious; but times fall out, as with David, that we
need pray, Psalm. 51.12.
Restoring the joy of the Lords salvation. There is peace, without trouble; joy
without sorrow; Foelix securitas; secura foelicitas, says BERNARD: foelix
aeternitas, aeterna foelicitas, says Augustine.

2. Cor. 4.16, 18.
solace we our selves in all afflictions, yea, though they seem to threate^ us
with death. It is a blessed change we make by dying in the Lord, or for him.
Give hopeless men leave to tremble at death, whose portion is in this life.
Let Gods children sealed with his Spirit, lift up their heads for joy, in their
dissolution: as Simeon sings his Nunc dimittis, Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 2.
quasi necessitate quadam teneretur in hac vita, non voluntate; says Ambrose.

Hicron.
that die in the Lord. Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille quem gehenna suscipit, quem
tartarus deuorat, in eius poenas eternus ignis aestuat, says Hierome,
intending to put measure to a mothers sorrow.

2. Tim. 4.8.
Love, and long for; and 2. Pet 3.12.
hasten unto the second appearing of Christ.

Fourthly, Know hence, that the miserable estate of the was Origens error, and
the Chiliasts, that within one thousand years after the resurrection, there
should be a year of Iubile for the damned in Hell; a year of release out of
their torments. I marvel then why Abraham said, They Luke 16.26.
cannot come from you to us. Why our Savior said, That Mar. 9.44.
worm dies not, that fire goes not out? why he calls that fire, Mat. 25.41.
everlasting? Bernard. meditat. cap. 3.
Procul a beata Paradisi patria exulati cruciabuntur in gehenna perpetua,
nunquam lucem visuri, nunquam refrigerium adepturi, sed per millia millium
annorum in inferno cruciandi, nec inde vnquam liberandi, vbi nec qui torquet,
aliquando fatigatur; nec qui torquetur, aliquando moritur: sic enim ignis ibi
consumit, vt semper reseruet; sic tormenta aguntur, vt semper renouentur.
Bernard. And I wonder, how else their punishment answers to their sins; they
sinned, says THOMAS, in aeterno suo; Just therefore that they should be
tormented in aeterno Dei. Their desires to sin, were everlasting, says
Gregory; is it not just, their punishment should be everlasting? Even now in
hell continues their impenitency; and can we think the sins may be
pardoned, that are not repented?

Lastly, the Majesty they offended, is infinite; some infiniteness then there
must be, to answer the violation of that infinite Justice; it cannot be in the
weight, lest the creature be abolished: It must be therefore in the
continuance.

VERSE. 18. Wherefore, comfort one another with these words.


THe inference out of this whole Treaty, touching the state of the dead in
Christ: wherein consider, first, the duty enjoined; Comfort one another: the
means of comfort; with these words.

The points obserueable are these. First; The duty we owe to the afflicted;
that is, comfort. 1. These. 5.14.
Comfort the feeble-minded. Man that is in misery Job 6.14.
should be comforted of his friends; but that men have forsaken the fear of
the Almighty.

we are Ephe. 4.25.
members one of another: therefore said PAVL, 2. Cor. 11.29.
Who is afflicted, and I burn not?

We our selves are Heb. 13.3.
yet in the body; and may suffer what others now feel.

2. Cor. 2.7.
Sorrow, says the Apostle, is a gulf; how many swallows it up for want of
comfort? Example see in Jobs friends, Barzillai, etc. Defective in this duty,
are, first, all men insensible of others sorrows; whom the afflictions of Gods
children touch not. They drink wine in bowls, says AMOS: but Amos. 6.6, 8.
no man is sorry for the affliction of JOSEPH. Therefore the Lord has sworn by
himself, that he does abhor the excellency of JACOB, and hate the Palaces
thereof. How can we be assured we are quickened by the Spirit of Christ, that
have Phil. 2.5.
not his affection? To count the afflictions of his Church, after a sort our
Act. 9.4.
own.

Secondly, They that make themselves merry with the miseries of their brethren;
and count it a chief melody, to see, and hear the maladies of others; when
Hest. 3.15.
SHVSHAN is in greatest perplexity, HAMAN is in the height of his iollity. How
many of the same spirit amongst us, triumph in the greatest miseries of their
brethren, that misery of miseries, a wounded spirit? there are, that can
sooner make matter of exprobration, then means of compassion; it is the fruit,
they say, of following Sermons. How ever it be true, It is a Heb. 10.31.
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, and wonderful intolerable to
wrestle with his wrath in the Conscience; yet far more heavy token of his
implacable displeasure is it, to live senslesly in sin, and not to be remembered
with some afflictions. Truly said HIEROME, Magna ira est, quando peccantibus
non irascitur Deus. It is cause of trembling, when the Lord comes to Psalm.
89.32.
visit our offenses with the rod, and our sins with scourges; but much more
grievous, that he threatens by HOSHEA; I will not visit their daughters when
they are harlots. Medicus, si cessabit curare, desperate.

Yea see how the Scripture teaches us, from the afflictions of Gods children,
to infer a far more miserable estate of the wicked. If Judgment begin at
the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17.
what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel? I begin to plague the
Iere. 25.29.
City where my name is called upon, and shall ye go free? If the Prou. 11.31.
righteous be recompensed in the earth; how much more the wicked and the
sinner? does he so chasten the infirmities of his children? what will he do
to the presumptions of his enemies, etc.

Remember what Solomon advises in this case: Prou. 24.17, 18.
Rejoice not, no not when thine enemy falls: neither let thy heart be glad,
when he stumbleth; lest the Lord see it, and it disple se him; and so he turn
away his hand from him to thee.

Thirdly, They that add affliction to them whom the Lord has wounded. Give
gall for meat, and vinegar to quench thirst, as the Jews to our Savior: make
more bitter the afflictions of Gods children; first, by insolences, secondly,
2. Sam. 16.
exprobations, thirdly, questioning sincerity.

Let all such barbarous, and inhumane natures remember, what David prays unto
such; not out of a reuengefull affection, but by prophetical instinct: Psalm.
69.24.26, 27.
Power out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
upon them. Add iniquity to their iniquity, and let them never come into thy
righteousness. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten. Hear what Obadiah
threatens to such a people; Obad. 15.
As thou have done, so shall it be done to thee; thy reward shall return upon
thine own head.

Let Gods people be exhorted, to beware this inhumanity; and as we desire to
partake comfor from God, so not to withhold it from the afflicted.

Reasons hereto inducing: First, it is the end why the Lord has been pleased
to Minister comfort to us; that we 2. Cor. 1.4.
might be able to comfort others, with the same comfort, wherewith our selves
have been comforted of God.

Secondly, The comfort we Minister to others, is reflected upon our own
souls. In spiritual things, no man is a loser by communication. No man loses
knowledge, by instructing the ignorant; nor abates his own zeal, by inflaming
the zeal of others, nor impaires his own comfort, but increases it, by
Ministering comfort to the distressed.

Thirdly, God himself becomes our debtor by promise, to Psalm. 41.1, 2.
recompense it into our bosoms.

Fourthly, The souls of the afflicted 2. Tim. 1.16.17
shall bless thee.

The matter or means of comfort follows: with these words:

The best comforts are they, that are drawn from doctrines of the Scriptures.
Romans 15.14.
Scripture-comforts are the comforts indeed.

Scripture-comforts exceed all others, in three specialties. First, they are
more solid, because more true; the very pith and marrow of comfort, is
contained in Scripture: there is that, the weary soul may rest, and build
upon. This, says DAVID, is my Psalm. 119.50.
comfort in mine affliction. Psalm. 119.52.
Thy word has quickened me. I Psalm. 119.92.
remembered thy word, O Lord, and received comfort.

Secondly, more universal. Some miseries there are, for which the Heathen
found out, and penned some shallow comforts. But how many be there, which they
could never find salve to cure? that misery of miseries, a wounded spirit, how
miserably do they comfort? No marvel; they knew not the storehouse of comfort,
the Mediator Christ Jesus, Romans 5.10.
that died, to reconcile us unto God.

Thirdly, More effectual. What words but these, have the Spirit of God
promised to make them effectual to the consolation of the afflicted? This
Isai. 59.21.
Word and the Spirit go together. The holy Ghost, the Comforter, seals it up
to the Soul, and Romans 5.5.
sheads Gods love abroad in our hearts.

And if we shall a little enter comparison betwixt the Comforts extant in the
writings of Men, and those propounded in the Scripture, we shall see, how
utterly vain, and of no worth, those are, in comparison of these.

To speak to the point Paul here treats of: Tully and Seneca have many large
Discourses, tending to yield comfort in the death of friends. The sum of all
they say, is this, Ea lege nascimur, Death is inevitable, none can avoid it;
foolish therefore for a man to grieve for it. Again, it is exitus communis,
none scapes it; and here they lay on load, with histories of Cities, Kingdoms,
Monarchies, that have come to ruin. Thirdly, sometimes they demurre, whether
any thing of Man remain after death? imagining no other Immortality, but in
the mouths of men, by commendation: either they are not, and then are not
miserable; or if they be, yet herein stands their blessedness, their souls
are rid from the prison of the body. What are the comforts Scriptures
afford in this case? Romans 8.3, 39.
Death separates not from the love of God, brings Revel. 14.13.
rest from Labors, leads to the Phil. 1.23.
presence of Christ; yea, of the very bodies teach truly, their death is but a
sleep.

See in another particular: Outward afflictions and vexations; what comforts
have they? Forsooth, either they are fatal, and cannot be avoided; or else
fortuitous, and therefore to be contemned: Compare the Scriptures; they are
swayed by the provident hand of a loving Father; that first, 1. Cor. 10.13.
tempers them to our strength; secondly, uses them as means to Heb. 12.11.
mortify our sins, to 1. Cor. 11.32.
prevent damnation; Thirdly, they 2. Cor. 4.17.
work to us an incomparable weight of eternal glory.

In infamy and contempt; they show us the vanity of popular applause. What is
fame, but aura popularis? the breath of the people. And honor, they say, is in
honorante, not in honorato. Hear Scriptures: God has chosen 1. Cor. 1.28.
the vile things, and things of no esteem, to confound the mighty; these that
now are counted the offscouring of the earth, shall one day Mat. 19.18.
sit on thrones judging the tribes of Israel; and, Mat. 5.12.
great is their reward in Heaven. I might be infinite in this kind; but
whereto? who maruels, if the comforts of men be not comparable to those, that
proceed from the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation? He that made
man's heart, best knows the maladies thereof, and what cordials to Minister
thereto for medicine.

that forsake this fountain of living waters, and dig them pits that can
hold no water? in deadliest sickness, when now the soul draws nearest to
the pit, delight most in the company, and presence of the most profane, and
ignorant, of their cursed acquaintance; The Minister, whom God has made Job
33.23.
his interpreter, and messenger of comfort to the weary soul, is last sent
for, and lest welcome; as if they thought, of all comforts, they were lest
precious, that the word of God affoordes.

Will you hear the form of comforting that so much delights them? Be of good
cheer, neighbor; you shall do well enough, by grace of God: I have seen
many as low brought, and yet have recovered: or if the worst come, it is but a
dying. We owe God a death, and there is an end. As Job speaks to his friends,
Miserable comforters are these to the afflicted: It is indeed appointed to all
men once to die. But hear what follows: Heb. 9.27.
After death comes Judgment. Where is that should support the soul, against
it be presented to the Lords tribunal? When every man 2. Cor. 5.10.
receives according to things done in his body: To such distress, alas, what
comfort can they minister; that have neither experience, nor so much as
knowledge, of the means of reconcilement unto the Judge; know not, to reveal
unto men that righteousness of Christ, wherein, who is not found, perishes in
everlasting horror, and torment of conscience?

Secondly, Learn we all diligently to converse in the let this Word Col. 3.16.
dwell plentifully in you; if not for the pleasantness of heavenly
revelations, therein contained; if not, that you may know how to direct your
lives according to the will of God; (though whosoever makes it not his Counselor,
shall never find it his comforter:) yet for your necessity sake, that ye may
have comfort, wherewith to support your souls, in the evil day of temptation.

Strange is the contempt of this knowledge, and comfort of the Scriptures
amongst men. Insomuch that even idle Ballads, profane Play-bookes, and lying
Fables, are with more delight conuersed in, then the sacred Word of God, able
to save, or destroy our souls. Hos. 8.12.
God has written us the great things of his Law; but they are become a strange
thing unto us; caused the Scriptures to be written for our comfort, and therein
affoorded us consolations, such as no writings of men deliver. Justly let their
souls perish in horror, and everlasting discomfort, that neglect so great
salvation offered to them in the Scriptures.

The end of the fourth Chapter.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.
VERSE. 1.2. But of the times and seasons, Brethren, ye have no need that I
write unto you:

For your selves know perfectly, that the Day of the Lord so comes as a
Thief in the Night.


THe Apostle in the former Chapter, has spoken of the last Resurrection,
coming of Christ, and state of the dead; showing what shall be the blessed
condition of men dying in the Lord, especially, after Resurrection. Now because
he saw man's curiosity would be ready to inquire, as the Disciples of
Christ, Mat. 24.3.
When shall these things be; and in likelihood there were such questions on
foot in the Church of God; he preocupates that inquiry; showing that it is
altogether curious; and both in it self, and in respect of them unnecessary:
because they perfectly knew that Day of the Lord should come suddenly. The
sum of Doctrine here taught, is; that the Day of the Lords second Coming is
uncertain, sudden, and unrevealed; and that uncertainty and suddenness
thereof is set out in a double similitude; the one of a Thief coming to
spoil: the other of a woman's travel.

The passage to this point is by way of Prolepsis; q. d. It may be inquired,
when these things shall be. Sub. The question is impertinent and needless; in
it self, because the thing is unrevealed; in respect of you, because you know
it shall be sudden.

The points of observation are these: It is an ancient policy of Satan, to
divert our studies and inquiries from things revealed and necessary, to matters
of secrecy, and mere curiosity. That the Lord shall come to Judgment, is a
point revealed; and of necessary use to the Church of God; when he shall come,
God has secreted to himself. But man's curiosity is made upon secrets; in
stead of meditating, and making use of that revealed, it would be informed of
the times and seasons. The Disciples had been informed of the Lords purpose to
restore the Kingdom to Israel; that suffices them not to know; but they must
be acquainted with the time, Acts 1.6, 7.
Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Of this curiosity the
Apostle elsewhere complains; there were that doted, and even 1. Tim. 6.4.
languished about questions needless, that had no possible determination by
the Word of God; no marvel, if they macerate and perplexe themselves that are
entangled therein. In aftertimes remained the same evil in the Church. Saint
Austine tells of some, that hearing the Doctrine of Creation taught in the
Churches of God, left the meditation and holy use of that Article of faith, and
fell to busy inquiries, Where the Lord was, What he did, and How he bestowed
his time, before he made the World. Another sort, that gave some credence to
the Doctrine of Original sin, and could not but acknowledge the deprauation
of Nature; but it tortured them to know, how it should be conveyed from Adam to
his Posterity. A fitter inquiry it had been, says Austine in his Apologue,
or Story of him fallen into the Ditch, to use means to come out of it, then
to know how we came into it.

What should I belong? One of the first occasions of Popery growing to such
height, was this doting about curious questions, wherewith their Schoolmen
pestered the World. The Devil used that policy, to divert men's minds from
things revealed and necessary, so long, that they lost almost all truth in the
Church of God. It were endless to mention all; take instance in that one point
of Angels. That there are such heavenly Spirits, and that they are Heb. 1.14.
deputed to the Ministry of the Church, etc. the Scripture plainly reuealeth:
This knowledge sufficed not; but they fell to Disputations about the time of
their Creation; whether it were before, or with the visible World; whether on
the first day, or when they were created. Touching their Orders, what, and how
many they were, their number, whether more fell or stood: whether they did
occupy a place; and so, whether many might be in one place at one time; and
how many might sit on a Needles point; and six hundred such like needless
points.

And in this policy, the Devil is not slack to this day, after we have seen
by lamentable experience, the woeful fruits of it. Touching the point of the
Text; when the Day of Judgment shall be, how many have taken in hand
curiously to inquire, boldly to determine, not the Age only, but almost the
Year and Day, wherein the Lord shall come. And how often hear we the
question amongst men, careless to go to Heaven, yet curious to inquire,
whether we shall there know one another not?.

Let us be admonished to take notice of, and prevent this policy of Satan.
Remember what Moses has; Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things belong unto God; things revealed only to us and our Children.
Our Nature is marvelous curious, and delightfully prone to Novelties, and
matters of secrecy; It is not the least part of our Ephesians. 4.17.
minds vanity. I beseech you consider, that in things necessary, and plainly
revealed, there is sufficient to exercise our wits, and to wear out our lives;
were our bodies of Iron, our years as those of Methusalem, our acritie as that
of Solomon. Lastly, consider the issue of such curiosity; it breeds nothing
but 1. Tim. 1.4.
questions without end, to no edification of our selves, or others.

You need not that I write unto you. Was it then a point unnecessary? why does
Paul teach it? was it necessary? how needless then to write unto them?

2. Cor. 9.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
frequent in Scripture.

Secondly, unnecessary it was not, in it self; for it is a point of
Scripture-Doctrine, whereof all is 2. Tim. 3.16.
profitable. But somewhat unnecessary, to be newly taught to this people.





Thirdly, How ever needless to mention to them, by way of instruction; yet not
for farther confirmation, and settling their judgments in that point of their
knowledge.

it is not unprofitable for us to be remembered, and after a sort newly
instructed, in points wherein our knowledge is most exact. Therefore we see the
Apostles themselves think it not (...), to insist in things wherein they
acknowledge the knowledge of the people. Paul is persuaded that the Romans are
Romans 15.14.
filled with knowledge, able also to admonish one another, nevertheless writes
boldly, to put them in remembrance. Saint P^ter to like purpose is not
negligent 2. Pet. 1.12.
to remember them of those things they knew, and wherein they were established.

Our Savior insists in some points of the Law Mat. 7.12.
of Nature, which are, as Jude speaks, known Jude 10.
naturally; and presses them not without instance.

Hear some Reasons:

ad vnguem. In matters of practice, how often are our best known rules
forgotten! the Philosopher has a saying generally true; Omnis mal^^ ignor^ns;
he means of that ignorance which he call particular: what through passion and
headstrong violence of affections, he lackes use of his knowledge, when he
consents to lewdness.



That we are justified by Faith, and by it alone, Example.
we are most of us fully instructed: but how Faith iustifies, whether as an
act, or as a quality, or as an instrument, how many think you do not yet
understand?

Thirdly, Add unto this, that there may corruptions grow upon us in the points
of our most perfect understanding; there are some parts of duty Jude 10.
known naturally, and therein, says IVDE, there be that corrupt themselves.

David had long traveled with an extraordinary spirit in the study of the
Word of God; yet saw he still some Psalm. 119 18.
wonders in it, which he could better admire, then conceive.

Secondly, Remember who said, Job. 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. Thy task is not
ended when thou know; there is something more required, to make thy
knowledge comfortable. Thou know thou should not swear. But have thou
gotten that command of thy tongue, that thou can bridle it from vain oaths?
so planted Gods fear in thy heart, that thou have learnt, as SOLOMON, Eccle.
9.2.
to fear an oath? Thou must give us leave to remember thee of Gods
commandment; that thy Conscience may be wrought upon; and thou driven from
practice of sin against Conscience, or be left inexcusable at the day of
Judgment.

And I beseech you, brethren, beware of this 2. Tim. 4.3.
itch of the ear, as Paul calls it; weary of plain truths, and carrying us
often, before our time, from rudiments, to matters of greater profoundnesse and
perfection. In our childrens education we like not, that they should be led to
the depth of Art, before they are sufficiently instructed in principles. It is
the great error of many to desire strong meat, before they are well able to
digest their milk.

I blame in no man, a desire to be led forward to perfection: But, first, ye
should consider, in all our Congregations there are Heb. 5.12.
Infants, that have need of milk, as well as strong men, fit for strong meat;
whose souls are with like charge committed to our care. Secondly, let thy
strife to perfection be according to right order, and method. Thirdly, and
think it is possible in every thing, to add something to the distinctnesse of
our understanding.

Follows now the manner, or measure of their knowledge herein. They knew it
perfectly, or as the word signifies, accurately and even exactly. From which
measure of their knowledge taken notice of by the Apostle, not without their
commendation, we observe; That in points clearly revealed, exactest knowledge
is required of Gods people. The Pharisees guise was in nurture of their
Disciples, to instruct them (...), after the Act. 22.31.
exactness of the Law. PAVLS advice is, that the Word of God dwell in us Col.
3.16.
plenteously, or richly. His prayer for the PHILIPPIANS, that they may be
Phil. 1.9.
filled with all knowledge.

His reason is, that they might be Phil. 1.10.
able to discern things that differ. Which, without exact knowledge, and
plentiful understanding, cannot be done. In many things so near is the
affinity betwixt good and evil, truth and falsehood, at least, as they are
presented to us by the seducer of the brethren, that without accurate skill, it
is hard, that I say not, impossible, to cut a difference. In days of gross
darkness, the devil was more bold, then in these times of light: Then durst
he obtrude to Gods Church, errors so palpable, that they might be felt. Since
God has pleased to cause the Light of the Gospel to shine clearly amongst
us, errors are disguised in the habit of truth; and we have now 2. Cor.
11.14.
Satan transformed into an Angel of light. In Isai his time, there were that
durst Isai. 5.20.
call good, evil; and evil good; light, darkness; and darkness light;
confound the apparentest differences of things. In the days of our Savior,
Pharisees were grown more subtle; together with the bread they Mat. 16.6.
mingled their own leaven. And such is the state of our times, that whosoever
shall compare ancient Popery, with that we have now refined by our new
masters, shall see they were Dunses in comparison, that had first to do in
publishing and defense of Popish errors. It went once for current doctrine
without distinction, that Scriptures might at no hand be permitted to the
Laity: that error is now refined. And their meaning they say is,
promiscuously without difference, and without a Catholic Commentary. Howbeit,
to discreet and sober men, well Catechized in the Roman faith, by license of
a superior, the Scriptures may be permitted in their mother tongue.

What should I tell you how near, in terms, they approach to truth; in the
maynest points of question betwixt us; from which yet they are almost as far
as may be? That we are justified and saved only by the merits of Christ; there
are amongst them that acknowledge in so many words. But what is their meaning?
by Christ's merits; not imputed to us, but purchasing to us a power to merit at
the hands of God.

It were long to mention, how in matters of practice and morality, the same
cunning of Satan may be observed. Who but a man of exact knowledge, having wits
exercised to discern betwixt good and evil, can put difference betwixt
counterfeit and current graces? There is nothing more opposite to humility,
then pride: yet how does pride it self mask under the vizar of humility? so
that it is now taken up amongst the differences of pride, there is, they say a
kind of humble pride. Who prouder, or more ambitious then Absalom? who, in
outward deportment, more lowly? 2. Sam. 15.5.
greeting with lowest courtesy the meanest amongst the people. These things
considered; show how necessary it is, for men desiring to keep faith and good
conscience, to labor for exactness and perfection of knowledge.

Defects in this kind, there are two especial, amongst our people. The first
is, gross ignorance: the second, confused and indistinct knowledge.

Causing the light of his glorious Gospel to shine unto us; and, for the time,
we might have been teachers: But how apparent is it, even where the means of
knowledge have been most plentiful, we are many, such as need to be
instructed; shall I say in rudiments of Christian faith? yea, surely in the
very language of Scripture. Insomuch that to this day, the terms of
Redemption, Vocation, Justification, are strange to our people; and we seem
Barbarians, when we mention these things in their ears. Oh brethren, consider,
I beseech you, and remember, who said; It is the Job. 3.19.
condemnation of the world, that Light is come into the world, but men love
darkness rather then light; and how the same Jesus shall one day 2. These. 1.8.
come in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that know not God, and
disobey the Gospel.

A second fault is that I termed, confused and indistinct knowledge. Thus
conceive it; when men in gross understand somethings of faith, and practice;
but necessary particulars thereto belonging, conceive not.

Christ died for us, is a principle in all men's mouths. Example.
What Christ is in his Natures, Person, Offices, Benefits to us, how few are
they that understand? That faith iustifies; what Libertine amongst us
professes not to know? how faith iustifies, or what it is to justify, seeming
Doctors amongst them comprehend not. Who maruels, if such nouices become a prey
to seducing Papists?

And of these circumstances of the Text thus far; see we now the substantial
conclusion therein delivered: It is, that the coming of Christ is uncertain,
and sudden; as is the coming of a thief to his prey. The quality of the
similitude is not to be passed over without our notice; affoording us this
observation: That things sinful, and unlawful, afford resemblances to
express holy truths, and to admonish of duty. Besides this instance in the
Text, there are others many in the Word of God. The employment of our gifts to
the glory of the bestower, we have pressed by resemblance of the Mat. 25.27.
usurers cursed courses: Wisdom to provide for everlasting Tabernacles, by
liberality to the poor Saints, is taught us, Luke 16.8, 9.
by the unjust? policy of the deceitful Steward.



Iere. 4.22.
wise to do evil; learn thou wisdom to do well. They are zealous for
superstition; it shall be thy shame, if thou be not as zealous for Religion.
They strive for their pleasures, for their sins; strive thou with as great
eagerness of Gods glory.

their own, with usury; so the Lord for advantage of his glory, by his gifts.
Approues he their practice? or rather vpbraydes our negligence, by comparison
drawn from men's courses in evil? They were best say, they may imbezzle their
Masters goods, because CHRIST, by that worldlings wisdom, would teach us
providence for our souls; or because he resembles his coming to a Thiefes, in
the point of suddenness, thence infer the lawfulness of the every.
Comparisons are borrowed from things sinful, and unlawful, to teach truth,
and admonish of duty; the use of them is, not to justify their evil, but to
remember us of duty, or to explain his truth.

Secondly, let Christians labor for this wisdom, to Ier. 8.7.
The Crane and Swallow teach us, to observe our season of visitation. Isai. 1.3.
The Ox and Ass, to acknowledge our great Lord and Master, that gives us all
things liberally to enjoy. The Prou. 6.6.
Pismire can teach the Sluggard providence, and industriousnesse. The worst
men, though sibi nequam, yet may do good to us, and be our Monitors to holy
Duties. Worldlings Psalm. 127.2.
rise early, and take late rest for the trash of this World: wilt not thou
redeem some time for heavenly advantages? Gods enemies agree as SIMON and
LEVI, as Genesis 49.5.
brethren in evil. Learn we like unity, and consent in goodness. Pharisees
travel Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. Jesuits hazard lives, to pervert
from the truth: oh learn of them, to be as painful to gain to GODS
Kingdom, as they are to win to the Devil. It is probably the reason of such
resemblances, to teach us, out of worst things to work our spiritual benefit.

The time and season of Christ's second Coming, is amongst Gods secrets, that
must be adored, rather then searched into. Not Scripture, but the event only
reueales it. Of Mat. 24.15.
that day and hour knows no man; no, not the Angels, no, nor the Son of
man, as he is man. True, say some; not the day and hour, but the year, at
least the Age, within some small compass of time may be known. I wonder by
what calculation, that the Scripture affords us. Saint Paul speaks here, not
of the seasons only; but of the times; and of both teaches, they are
unrevealed. The difference between the terms, the learned in that Language
thus assign, (...) signi^es time at large; and often, time of the largest:
(...), the article and point of time, that determines opportunity, as if to the
point in hand the Apostle would say; Touching the Year, or Month, or Age,
when the Son of man shall come, it is as much unrevealed, as the season;
whether in the spring, or f^ll, by day or night, at Mark. 13.35.
midnight, or cock crowing, or in the dawning, as our Savior himself
speaks; both are equally unrevealed, and therefore curiously inquired. Acts
1.7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has kept in
his own power; says our Savior to his Disciples, in a point conjoined
something near with the final consummation.

written for Romans 15.4.
our profit: what is concealed, we are as sure was not necessary to be
known, rather expedient to be concealed. And to say truth, what profit might
we imagine to come from the revealing, that flows not as fully from the
concealment? perhaps our preparation would be more hastened? and the malice of
the worst men thereby restrained.



Secondly, besides, what greater preparation to meet the Lord, was in Saul,
when he heard and believed, that his death should be the next morrow? some
pensive sadness, and desperate melancholy it wrought in him; no penitent
remorse for sin, nor godly sorrow to Repentance. How were those Jews the
better prepared, that knew, or might have known, by what the Lord foretold by
Esaias, the nigh approaching of their captivity? nay see, how they grow the more
indulgent to licentiousness, Isai. 22.13.
eating and drinking, for tomorrow they should dye,

Thirdly, I demand, for whom is this knowledge so expedient? for GODS Children
or for Reprobates? Gods Children have learnt by the concealment, to order
every day as their last; and so to live every hour, as if in the next moment
should be their Judgment. And for Reprobates, think we the same infidelity
would not be in them toward this, as to other Revelations? What auayled it the
wretched Sodomites, to be told by Lot, of their nigh-approching vengeance? He
Genesis 19.14.
seemed to them as one that mocked. And what was the old World the better, for
all Noah's preaching, and building the Arc for his own preservation? And what
would it avail an Infidel, if a Prophet, yea, one from the dead, yea, an
Angel from Heaven, should tell him, that to morrow should be his Judgment?
Questionless it is truth; Nothing teaches such men faith, but sense. It is
questioned amongst Schoolmen, whether the faith, that James affirms Devils to
have, be faith in property of speech, or not. And they resolve, no: for they
believe not what God speaks, because he speaks it; but because they feel
it. And like, commonly, is the faith, that Reprobates have of any truth
supernatural; sense is their only reason of believing; and by events only,
they give credit to Divine Predictions. How often threaten we out of Solomon?
The Pro. 23.21.
Drunkard shall be clothed with rags; A Pro. 21.17.
lover of pastime shall be poor: The Pro. 6.26.
Where shall bring to a morsel bread; Yet who believes our report? till he
feels his poverty seize on him as an armed man. And think you, in case the
time were revealed, the Son of man when he comes, should find faith on
Earth? In Reprobates, little or none; never a whit the more, for the Lords
revealing the time of his coming. I say then, as Abraham; When the Glutton
thinks so much power in a Messenger from the dead, to work faith in his
brethren; nay, says ABRAHAM, Luke 16.31.
If they hear not MOSES and the Prophets, neither will they believe though one
come from the dead. So, if, while the coming is certain, the time uncertain,
they repent not; neither would they repent, or believe, though the Lord had
revealed the day, and hour of his coming to Judgment.

Lastly, consider of this pretended expediencie, but by this Reason. Some
hundreds of years are past, since Peter said, 1. Pet. 4 7.
The end of all things is at hand: we see, or may see a sensible decay, and
languishing through age, in this vast body of the World. How is the strength
of the Earth worn out, with long travel to bring forth fruit, for the use of
man's life! the other creatures, how are they feebled since their first
original! Yea, how many signs of Christ's second coming have been evidently
accomplished in our eyes? 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 8
Apostasy from the faith, revealing of that man of sin, his consumption, in
a great measure, by the breath of the Lords mouth: And yet who almost bethinkes
him of preparation against that Day? and rather lives not, as if Death, and
Hell, and Judgment were all but Fables. To conclude this point therefore, as
great and far greater expediencie there is not of concealing, as of revealing
the time of Christ's second coming to Judgment; And the conclusion I hope is
clear; The and season of Christ's last coming is amongst Gods secrets; known
to no man, nor possible to be known by Scripture Revelations.

Tully says, they conceited, Magnum quendam Annum, a great Year, wherein all
the Stars should return to the original site, and position; when that Year
came, should be the end. Macrobius calculates this Year to consist of fifteen
thousand Sun-yeeres: Others of the same Heresy, allow it thirty six thousand
Sun-yeeres. They have calculated belike the Nativity of the World, as they use
to do of men; and thereby found out amongst the Stars, what we cannot find
in Scriptures, the precise time of the end of the World.

Amongst Jews, the prophecy of Elias, as they say, the Thisbite, as we, the
counterfeit, goes current; alloting to the continuance of the World, six
thousand years, Sexerunt Annorum millia huius mundi. Duo millia inane: Duo
millia lex: Duo millia Christus; postea finis: from them, it seems, Lactan. de
diuino praem. l. 7. c. 14.
Lactantius and Hierome received that error; and have added their explication,
to make it more plausible. The sixth thousand year is not yet absolved; that
time once expired, the consummation must needs be; and the restoring of all
things to a better state; what is the Reason? In six days God made the World;
rested the seventh; therefore must the World continue in this state, six
thousand years; and then be restored; for with God, a thousand years is as
one day; one day, as a thousand years.

Within our own remembrance, Osiander, Napier, and sundry others, have busied
themselves much in that question, and determined too peremptorily of the time
of consummation. O curious wits of men; not contented with things revealed, and
necessary, they must needs search into Gods secrets! Cui bono; was the old
saying, but to breed questions without end, rather then godly edifying, which
is in faith. Holily spoke he, that said in this point, Libenter ignoro quod me
scire Deus noluit: I am willingly ignorant, of what God would not have me
know. And know we, there is an holy ignorance, beseeming Gods Children, in
things that he has pleased to secret unto himself. As holily may we be
ignorant of what is concealed; as we can comfortably know what God has
revealed. Hereof thus think, since the Apostle so teaches; it is amongst those
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secrets that belong to God.

Mat. 13.35.
To watch continually; because in an hour when we think not of it, the Lord
shall come; thus conceive it, that we should stand in continual expectation
of it; think of every day, as if it were the last Day of the World, wherein
Christ shall come to Judgment. As Hierome professed, whether he did eat or
drink, or whatsoever he did else, he thought he heard that terrible Trumpe
sounding in his ear, Arise, ye dead, and come to Judgment. Oh that there
were such hearts in us, that the Swearer could think, It may be, the LORD
will now come, if not to the General, yet to my particular Judgment; his
wrath may seize on me, even while the Oath is in my mouth, and then what shall
become of my poor soul? that the Drunkard would think; the Judgment may
come even betwixt the cup, and the lip; as on Dan. 5.5, 6.
BELSHAZZAR in the midst of his iollitie. But alas, Brethren, how mock we
at the mention of that day, as those in Peter? or as Amos speaks, Put far
from us the Day of the Lord; and say, as those in EZECHIEL, The Judgment is
for a long time hereafter; and, with the evil servant, think, our Master will
defer his coming. There is no so great cause of security, as this; whereas,
alas, we know not, whether he will come even this hour, if not to the
general, yet to our particular judgment. There is nothing more certain, then
that the Lord will come; nothing more uncertain, then when he will come: that
the certainty of his coming, and the uncertainty of the time, might always
keep us in expectation.

A second duty that concern us in this respect, whereto this expectation is
subordinate, is; preparation, and furnishing our selves with those things, that
may with comfort present us to the face of the Judge. They are three
especially; First, Faith Luke 12.35, 40
to receive, and make ours the righteousness of CHRIST. Secondly, Phil. 3.9.
Repentance from dead works: Thirdly, Acts 3.19.
Diligence in our general and particular callings. Blessed is the Servant,
whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

VERSE. 3. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape.


THe Apostle in this verse continues the explication of his former conclusion;
withal describing, first, the state of the times. Secondly, the effect of that
second coming of Christ toward the wicked; the state of those times is this,
they shall be full of security. Thirdly, the effect that Day brings to the
ungodly, is destruction; amplified by three circumstances. It is first, sudden,
secondly, painful, thirdly, inevitable.

For the first, the note is this; Wicked men are never more secure, then when
their destruction is nearest: never nearer destruction, then when they are most
secure. Thus was it with Luke 17.27, 28.
the old world, thus with Sodom and Gomorrhe. Says Agag, when he is going to
execution, 1. Sam. 15.32
The bitterness of death is over. See Dan. 5.4, 30
BELSHAZZAR inter pocula, surprised by the Persians. Generally says Job of
Epicures; They spend their days in wealth, and Job. 21.13.
in a moment go down to Hell.

No marvel: first, height of security grows from height of infidelity, and
contempt of Gods threatenings. Faith breeds fear: the more we believe, the more
we tremble at Gods Judgments: 2. King. 22.20
as JOSIAH. All security comes from infidelity; height of security, from height
of infidelity. No marvel if the Lord now hasten his wrath, to justify his
truth; and to teach them by sense, what they would not learn by his Word.

Secondly, besides, there is a consequent of extreme security, mentioned by
Moses, upon which follows destruction immediately. Deuteronomy. 29.18.
It is, p adding drunkenness to thirst. When they once begin to bless
themselves in their iniquity, and to say they shall have peace, though they
walk on in the stubburnnesse of their hearts; then they grow insatiable in
their sins. Whiles any faith, or fear of God is left in the heart, there may
perhaps be a thirsting after the pleasures of sin, but no satiating of the
inordinate desire of evil: That fear removed, a man becomes as vile in
action, as in affection; glutting himself in the sins, that before he longed
after, but for some kind of fear, durst not commit. It argues therefore a
ripeness of sin, and Genesis 15.18.
filling up the measure of iniquity: high time now for the Lord to proceed to
vengeance.

Genesis 15.13.
as first, ripeness of iniquity in all degrees of men. Secondly, the little,
or Amos. 4.11, 12.
no profit we have made by former Judgments. Thirdly, the taking away of so
many of Gods servants, no doubt Isai. 57.1.12.
from the evil to come: so nothing more, then the general security we live
in. I cannot think, the great Day of the Lords coming is so nigh, as to fall
within the age of a man: because I yet see not the Romans 11.15, 26.
Jews calling accomplished: But sure, I am persuaded, there is some heavy
wrath of God approaching us. So general is the security, we are most
overtaken withal: Let a man in his mind walk through the earth, as the Angel;
he shall find, as he, Zech. 1.11.
the whole earth sitting still, and being at rest: Nothing almost now heard of,
but the peace God has pleased to settle in our borders; and the concord we
have with all Nations round about: which makes us, as it is said of the
inhabitants of Lachish, dwell securely. It shall behooue Gods children to take
notice of it: And let the security of others, work our fear and trembling,
and humiliation before the Lord: that, if it be possible, we may find a y
hiding place in the day of the Lords anger. Zeph. 2.3.


Secondly, This also may teach us, as David, least to fear men, when they
least fear before God; their very security is a token, their destruction is
not far off. Psalm. 49.16.
Be not afraid when such men are made rich, and when the glory of their house
is increased; God sets them aloft Psalm. 73.18.
in slippery places, that he may cast them down into desolation.

Thirdly, Fly security; he is blessed, says SOLOMON, that fears always; if
any thing set thee safe from the sense of evil, it is the fear of evil. The
effect that Day brings to the wicked, is destruction. Touching the Nature of
it, may be some question: some desiring to be Atheists, and to rid their
conscience of all fear of wrath, that they may sin securely; so conceive it,
as if it were an utter abolishing of their being; making, in that respect, the
state of man, all one with the condition of beasts.

See we what Religion, and reason teach, touching death and destruction of men.
That neither death, nor Judgment brings with it destruction of Nature, and
abolition of being, Scriptures, and Reason teach abundantly. First, If Gods
children had hope in this life only, they were 1. Cor. 15.19.
of all men most miserable: as having least taste of the comforts of this life.
And if there be not a vengeance laid up in store for the ungodly after this
life, they were of all men the most happy, that here live in iollity, come in
no misfortune as other men; and at death, cease to be, and so to be
miserable. Now far be it, says ABRAHAM, that Genesis 18.25.
the Judge of all the world should not do right; so order the state of things,
that neither here, nor hereafter should be reward for the righteous; nor
vengeance for sinners. Secondly, No other, in likelihood, is the destruction of
wicked men, then was of evil Angels that kept not their first estate. Their
destruction abolished not their Nature; but destroyed their joy: they are Jude
v. 6, 7.
kept in chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day: and with
them go the wicked to everlasting fire; to torture them, not to consume them.
Says Peter of Sodomites, whose destruction came from heaven; They suffer now
the vengeance of eternal fire.

What should I tell you of those Arguments, which out of Reason Naturallists
have drawn? showing of the soul, at least; it must be immortal.

First, Because, they say, it has in it, no principle of corruption, or
dissolution; being incorporeall, and as some of them taught, immateriall. At
the death of the body they wondered not; for they knew it consisted of contrary
Natures; and therefore carried in it principles of its own dissolution; but
for the soul, they thought the original thereof was Heavenly: made not of any
elementarie matter, but, if of any, of the Quintessence of the Heavens.

Secondly, Moreover, they observed in the soul, a kind of infiniteness of
desiring; which, nothing that this world affoords, was ever able to satiate;
and that desire being Natural, they thought, could not always be vain; but
should at least after separation from the body, find some infinite good thing,
in fruition whereof it should find rest, and full contentment.

Thirdly, Besides, they observed in the most desperate mainteiners of the
souls mortality toward death, unspeakable fears, wherewith their
consciences were surprised. Whence should they grow? from persuasion of utter
destruction, and abolishment? It could not be. For as Tullie said; The dead, if
they be not, cannot be miserable. No question therefore, from impression of
that principle, fastened in the hearts of al men; It is appointed to all men
once to die, and after that comes Judgment. ZENO was wont to say, he had
rather see one Indian, willingly, and of his own accord go into the fire to be
burnt (their custom see in Valerius Maximus: Lib. 2. cap. 1.
) then hear all the Philosophers in the world, dispute of the souls
immortality. His meaning was, that the cheerefulnes they showed in death, was
to him a more binding Argument, that the soul was immortal; then all
Philosophical speculations; thinking, there could be in no man such alacrity
in death, without a strong impression of immortality. So certainly, the fears
that Atheists are surprised withal in death, is an Argument strong as any,
that there is a life of the soul, after it is severed from the body.

What should I speak of that perfection, time, that wears out all things
corruptible, brings to the reasonable soul, and understanding? The body, the
elder it grows, the more feeble; the senses, that are exercised by bodily
Organs, have all their decay by age; whereas the mind, and understanding is
perfited by age; Job. 12.12.
With the ancient is Wisdom, and in length of days understanding. I spare
the testimonies of Ancient Heathens, that every Reader may find frequent in
their writings. That of DIDYMVS King of Brackmans to Alexander, I cannot let
pass. Nos non sumus incolae huius mundi, sed aduenae. Nec ita in orbem
terrarum venimus, vt in eo libeat consistere, sed transire; properamus enim ad
larem patrium.

Epist. 102.
SENECA: Cum venerit Dies ille qui mixtum hoc Diuini humanique seceruat, corpus
hoc, vbi inueni, relinquam: ipse me Dijs reddam.

Apud Galenum.
Porphyrie; Non est mirum animam, quae substantia incorporea est, posse separari
a corpore; cum ignis, qui est substantia corporea and corruptibilis, a lignis
quibus est coniunctus, possit separari, and reuertiin suam materiam sine sui
corruptione.

The sum is this; that neither death, nor Judgment brings to any man
destruction of his Nature, or abolishment of being.





The amplifications follow: First, it is sudden; coming in a time when it is
least thought of, and less expected; as travel upon a woman with child;
sometimes while they are eating, drinking, sleeping, laughing; and think of
nothing less, then of the pains of travel: thereof before. Secondly, as
travel; painful: The anguish, and pain of it, who may conceive? The
Scriptures, the better to fasten the impression in our hearts, have been
pleased to make choice of such comparisons, as best serve to express it to our
apprehension. Here, it is set out by the pains of women's travel; the
bitterness whereof, that sex can witness: in other Scriptures it is
expressed by the pains of fire. Nothing more painful to the sense, then
fire: of fires, none more scalding, or noisome, then that of Brimstone; such,
and more painful are the torments, that Day brings upon the world of the
ungodly.

Divines have referred all to these two heads: First, they call poenam damni.
Second, poenam sensus. The good things whereof they are deprived; as the
presence of God, the joys that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor the
heart of man conceived. The torments they feel, are such, as all earthly
things are too little to express: the Brick-kills of Egypt, the Furnace of
Babel, or if there be any thing a man can conceive more torturing, are all but
Flea-bites, to the anguish, and horrible torment they then suffer.

To this if we add the last circumstance; that it is inevitable, what can be
added to declare the horror? The Creatures are all then serviceable to the will
and appointment of the Judge. Revel. 20.13.
Grave and Sea give up their dead. Angels, as Gods Ministers, present them to
Christ's Tribunal. They are brought in indeed, Revel. 6.15, 16.
flying to the mountains to fall on them, and to the rocks to cover them,
from the presence of him that sits upon the Throne. But all in vain: The power
of God, his Justice, and truth, all glorify themselves in their destruction.
His mercy, then in respect of the effects thereof toward them, cease; that
Day, Romans 2.15.
is a day of wrath, and declaration of the just Judgment of God. Lord, Lord,
open unto us, say the foolish Virgins. What hear they? but Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire. Thus sudden, painful, and unavoidable, is the
destruction that great Day brings upon the world of the ungodly.

And I beseech you, brethren, seriously and betimes think of it, and lay it to
heart; Pray, says our Savior, and by all means labor, that ye may escape
the fears, and tortures of that great Day: and with comfort, stand before
Christ at his coming. Wonderful prodigal we are, generally, of our souls;
for the base profits, and pleasures of this life, exposing them to the bitter
pains of eternal death. Alas, what is it to gain the world, and to lose thy
soul? What, to fare deliciously every day, and at death, to be found in Hell,
in torments? What, to spend our days in wealth and iollity, and in a moment to
go down to Hell? Hear those wretched men, crying out of their folly, when it
is too late; Wisd. 5.8.
What has pride profited us, and what has the pomp of riches brought us? All
these are vanished as a shadow, passed away as a Post; left nothing behind
them, but guilt and pain, torturing, and tormenting the soul, without ease,
or hope of end. Let me therefore say, as Isai: Oh Isai. 55.6.
seek the Lord, while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.
There is yet place for mercy; when that Day comes, Nothing but indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon the soul of every one that has done
evil.

VERSE. 4.5.6. But ye, Brethren, are not in darkness, that that Day should
overtake you as a Thief.

Ye are all the Children of Light, and the children of the Day: we are not of
the Night, nor of darkness.

Therefore let us not sleep, as do others, but let us watch and be sober.


THe words have apparently this scope; to prevent the discomfort, that might
arise to Gods children, by the noise of that so fearful destruction, that the
Day of the Lord brings to the wicked. Wherein, besides the scope, obseruable
are, First, the condition, and state of Gods children. Secondly, their
privilege, in respect of that state. Thirdly, the duty, that concerns them
in regard of both.

From the scope and practice of the Apostle, subioyning comforts for Gods
children immediately, upon the mention of the terror of the last Day; thus much
we learn, that are Ministers, for our imitation: So to converse in terrifying
the ungodly, that we forget not to comfort Gods children. As we must warn the
unruly, 1. These. 5.14.
so comfort the feeble-minded. This is that, I think, Paul calls, 2. Tim. 2.15.
Cutting or dividing the Word aright; our Savior, Giving the household their
portion, when we share out to every one, what belongs unto him; terror to
whom terror, comfort to whom comfort belongs. So ISAI: Isai. 10.11.
Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. But say to the righteous, It shall be well with him: for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

Reasons may be, First, the tender disposition, and temper of their hearts,
ready to be immoderately cast down, with the least noise of any thing, that
sounds terrible from the mouth of the Lord. Isai. 6.2.
They tremble even at the words of the Lord, that howsoever wicked men are not
moved with the works of God, except they be maruailously extraordinary; yet
the very Word of God, sounding any thing fearful from him, makes them cry out
as MOSES, Heb. 12.21.
I tremble and quake. EPHRAIM and the Inhabitants of Samaria are brought in by
the Prophet, mocking at the Lords executions; well, Isai. 9.10.
The brickes are thrown down, but we will build it with hewne stones. But
see, Josiah, when he but hears the Words of (...) Law, his heart 2. King.
22.19, 20.
melts, and he is as a man ouer-whelmed with fear; so that the Lord is feign
presently to send him his comfort, that his eyes should not see the evil. As
an ingenuous child trembles at the Word of his Father; and more fears at the
shaking of the Rod, then a slavish disposition at the feeling of many stripes:
so, etc.

Besides, the truth is, if there be any thing terrible in our Ministry, it
belongs not to Gods Children, as they are such; as if there be any thing
comfortable, that is all, and only theirs. See Esaias 61. Romans 16.

Aug. de correption. and Great. cap. 9.
Some caueats must here be remembered. There are Children of God, says
Augustine, that are not so to us, though they be to God; as being written in
the memorial of God the Father, John 11.52. such was Paul before his
Conversion etc. To these, whiles yet in the state of Nature, discomforts are
not unprofitable, to bring them to Christ. Moses brought Israel to the borders
of Canaan, though Joshua divided it for an Inheritance unto them. It had, I
think, this Moral; the Law is that, that prepares us to grace, though the
Gospel be the instrument to convey it into our hearts.

Secondly, again, there fall out times when as Gods Children, though they lose
not their adoption, yet forget to demean themselves, as becomes the Children
of such a Father; in such case, God himself Job 13.26.
writes bitter things against them; and Paul casts forth the Thunderbolt of 1.
Cor. 5.5.
Excommunication against the incestuous Corinthian; that his spirit, by
Repentance, might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

Barnabas, Act. 4.36.
sons of consolation; and with these it is crime enough to be charged on a
Minister, that he does at any time, though with never so good caution,
proclaim the Lords terrors. Others again cry out, we are too prodigal of
our comforts; they like better in us, the spirit of James, and JOHN, Mark 3.17.
those sons of Thunder. It may be, such sometimes is our indiscretion; we
forget our rules of prudence: but shall I tell you, what I have observed in
these prescribers of both sorts? Those that call for continual comforts, are
of all others most unfit to receive them; such as never yet saw the horror of
sin, the terror of the Judge, nor felt, in any degree, the bitterness of a
wounded spirit: Only they would have their hurt healed with sweet words, and
are loath to take notice of the misery they are in, by reason of their sin.
And for the other sort, howsoever they seem to like best, reproves, and
threatenings of the sharpest; yet if the finger be but pointed at their own
sins, none so sensible, or tender, as they: save that usual their skill is
such, to turn off all from themselves to others.

It would be considered, that these things are to be ordered, not so much by
times, as by the people, and state of their persons: look what is their
condition, such must be their portion; of the obstinate, terror; of Gods
Children, comfort. And because, such is the estate of all visible
Congregations, that they are mixed companies, consisting of both sorts, they
walk with rightest foot to the Gospel, that so intermeddle these in their
teaching, that neither want what belongs unto them.

Gods people hence learn no small part of Wisdom, in all their reading,
hearing, meditating of the Word of God; that part of it especially, that is
spent in threatening and terror. Know thou for thy comfort, that fear God,
and eschewest evil, the Thundrings and Curses of the Law; though they belonged
to thee in the state of Nature, they belong not to thee in the state of Grace.
It is fearful, that Paul remembers out of Moses, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Book of
the Law, to do them: But comfortable, that he annexeth for Gods children,
united unto Christ: Christ has Gal. 3.10., 13.
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, etc.

I say not, but there is a good use of terrors, meditated by Gods children:
first, to provoke to thankfulness unto God, that has exempted them from the
common condemnation: secondly, to increase humiliation for sin: thirdly, to
quicken the dullness of our flesh, wherewith we are too often overtaken. But
this I am sure of; If there be any thing deadly in the Word of God, from that
his children are exempted; if any thing comfortable, therein they have their
portion. That from the scope; the particulars follow; wherein first offers it
self the gracious estate of Gods people: They are not in darkness.

Darkness, in property of speech, is the absence or privation of light.
Metaphorically in Scripture it signifies, first, the state of Romans 2.19.
Ignorance; secondly, the state of 1. Pet. 2.9.
Impiety; thirdly, the state of Psalm. 107.10.
Misery: Here specially put for the state of Ignorance.

That the state of Ignorance is a state of Darkness; such men live in a
perpetual night. Thus take the proportion; He that walks in darkness, Ioh.
12.35.
knows not whither he goes, wanders in a maze, not knowing whether he go
right, or wrong, or what mischiefs he may fall into. Such is the state of
every man grossly ignorant; whether he be going to Heaven, or Hell, to God, or
the Devil, he knows not; save only that he may learn, God dwells in Light,
and that the blackenesse of Darkness is reserved for such as live and die in
the state of Ignorance. Pessimae matris ignorantiae, Bernard.
pessimae itidem dua sunt filiae; falsitas, and dubictas. One of the two they
are never free from; error, or doubtfulnesse in the way to life. That may be
another, that it is a discomfortable estate, as that of Darkness; full of
fears, many times needless. None of the former Plagues spent upon Egypt, so
much affrighted Pharao, as that of Darkness. Before, some slight confessions
are heard from him; I have sinned; I, and my people are wicked: Now, Exodus
10.24.
Go you and your children all to serve the Lord. The Darkness of Egypt has
not half the discomfort in it, that palpable Ignorance; save only that it is
not so sensible, through our carnalitie. The foulest sins, God permitting to
temptation, such run into without scruple. No marvel, if Paul say of such,
They are in the 2. Tim. 2.26.
snare of the Devil, holden captive at his will; there wants but a temptation,
to drive them to the grossest evils. What should I tell you, how they are
oppressed with remediless fears, when God is once pleased to awake their
Conscience? The Jailer runs to his Sword, to rid himself of life, not being
able to answer his doubt, Act. 16.27, 30
What must I do to be saved?

And I would to God our people would take notice of it: It is true that our
Savior has; every man confessing, Ioh. 3.19.
Light is come into the world: God has caused the Light of his glorious Gospel
to shine amongst us, that we might all see clearly the Way that leads unto
Life. But that that follows, is too true of the World; Men love Darkness more
then Light; let them fear it be not their Condemnation. What a gracious
blessing has the Lord vouchsafed unto many Congregations, in the plain, and
plentiful preaching of the Gospel? and how would our Fathers have rejoiced in
that which we esteem not? They have, as Solomon, a Prou. 17.16.
price put into their hands, to get knowledge, but have no heart.

The reasons are, First, because Job. 3.19, 20.
their deeds are evil. Ignorance, and impiety, are mutual causes each to
other: from ignorance proceeds impiety, all the works of darkness; from
works of darkness, love of ignorance; through lothnesse to have their sins
reproved.

Secondly, Augustine in his time observed another: An opinion they had, by
ignorance to excuse their sins. They had learnd of Luke, that sins of
knowledge, Luke 12.47, 48.
are greater then sins of ignorance: therefore fled ad ignorantia tenebras,
in hope of excuse; not considering, that it is one thing not to know, another,
to refuse to know. Yea, says Augustine, the simplest ignorance of duty
excuses no man so far, Vt sempiterno igne non ardeat, si propterea non
credidit, quia non audibit, etc. sed fortassis vt mitius ardeat. Except perhaps
it be said in vain: Power out thine indignation upon the Heathen that have
not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name.

From this state of darkness Gods children are delivered: They are not in
darkness. Gods people then, though they be not freed from 1. Cor. 13.9.
all remains of ignorance, yet sure after calling, from gross and palpable
ignorance. See Ioh. 6.45. Iere. 31.34.

Grosenesse of ignorance thus conceive: it is partly in respect of the things
to be known, partly, in respect of the manner of knowing.

The principles of Christian faith are so plainly, and familiarly delivered in
Scripture; that even of a childish capacity, using the means, they may be
understood. Paul calls them Heb. 6.12.
the beginnings of Christ, the Heb. 6.1.
first principles of Gods Oracles. Now howsoever in some matters of greater
depth; Gods people may be to seek, yet in principles they are not ignorant.

Secondly, there is a kind of accurate, and exact knowledge, when a man
distinctly conceiues, not only generalities of faith, and practice, but
particulars thereto belonging; whereto are required Heb. 5.14.
wits exercised to discern: there is also a more confused, and indistinct kind
of understanding in gross.

That there are in the Godhead three persons, Example.
distinct each from other, by their personal properties, and manner of
subsisting; is the Article in gross. The manner of their distinction, as that
the Father begets, the Son is begotten, the holy Ghost proceeds; suppose
particulars belonging to this Article, and requiring a more accurate kind of
apprehension. He that is ignorant of the manner of distinction, is ignorant;
he that is ignorant of their distinction, we may say, is grossly ignorant.
And from such gross ignorance are Gods children delivered.

So comes the promise in the covenant of Grace; They Iere. 31.34.
shall all know God from the greatest to the least. Ioh. 6.45.
They shall be all taught of God. There is none so simple, but if he well
understood, the Word of God gives Psalm. 19.7.
him wisdom to know, at least, things necessary to salvation: See also 2.
Cor. 3.

Isai. 28.13.
Line upon line, precept upon precept: Yet not so understanding the plainest
principles, and rudiments of faith: yea, to this day, unacquainted with the
terms of Scripture, wherein the maine foundations of our faith, are delivered.
Should I acquaint you withal, whether it would breed more compassion of their
misery, or indignation at their wilful sottishness, is hard to say. If the
question were propounded to many of our people, that Paul once put forth to
the Ephesians; Act. 19.2.
Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed? I fear me, like would be
the answer: They know not whether there be an holy Ghost or no. In a point, I
am sure, of as necessary knowledge, and clear revelation, as gross and
palpable ignorance has been discovered. We all feel the smart of Adams sin,
in our bodies and souls; the earth, and all we put our hands unto, put us in
mind of our fall in him. How many yet know not the fountain of that misery?
nor have taken notice of any thing read, or preached so far, as to know by
name, that man, in whom we all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God? And for the person of Christ, by whom we have redemption from that misery,
alack the while, there are thousands amongst us, to whom, besides the Name of
Jesus, nothing is known of his Natures, Person, Offices, Actions, Benefits,
thence accruing to us; or of the means to apply them, and make them our own.
As it is said of the Athenians, they had an Altar to the true God, but the
inscription was to the Act. 17.23.
unknown God; so, some formal worship our people perform to God, and his
Christ; who, or what an one he is, to whom this worship is performed, they know
not.

I beseech you all, in the Bowels of Christ, and as you tender the salvation of
your souls, take notice of it; and labor for knowledge of God in Christ. Me
thinks there need no other Arguments, then this Text affoords. The state of
ignorance, is a state of darkness, as dangerous, as discomfortable, Gods
children are delivered from it. Thou can by no means be assured of thine
adoption, or salvation, whilst thou live in gross ignorance of the
Scriptures. Shall I say more? Because I know the people think highly of their
blindest devotion; be your devotion never so fervent, your prayers never so
freuent, your almes-deedes never so abundant, there is none of these please
God, while you live in gross ignorance, and love it. The Jews had the Romans
10.2.
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Rejected from Gods acceptance,
is all such blind zeal, such ignorant devotion. Their privilege follows:
That Day shall not take them as a Thief.

Shall it not then come to Gods children, as a thief, in a time unknown?
Answers are diversely conceived. First, In this respect as a thief, because in
a time unknown. In this respect, not as a thief, because it is always
expected. Secondly, There is difference betwixt coming as a thief, and taking
as a thief. It comes on Gods children as a thief, in a time uncertain: It
takes them not as a thief, working their spoil and destruction. But as our
Savior says of the Prince of this World, He comes, Ioh. 14.30.
but has no part in me: so comes the destruction of that Day, but has no part
in Gods children. Behold then the excellent privilege of the sons and
daughters of God. They are free from that destruction the last day brings on
the world of the ungodly. Hence in the Gospel, it is called The Luke 21.28.
Day of their redemption: by PETER, Act. 3.19.
The time of refreshing. And though then the Lord shall render tribulation to
them that trouble his, yet to them that 2. These. 2.7.
are troubled, he gives rest with the Saints.

What marvel? All causes of condemnation are removed from their persons. The
guilt and punishment of their sins, derived from them to Christ; and by him
Col. 2.14.
cancelled on the Cross: The power of sin, mortified by the holy Ghost,
dwelling in them; yea at that day, so abolished, that there remains not any
the least relic of inclination to disobedience; not the least want, or defect
of righteousness.

the Ephe. 2.3.
children of wrath; sons and daughters of disobedience. Who trembles not,
reading what PETER speaks of 2. Pet. 3.10.
the dissolution? what Paul and our Savior, concerning Romans 14.12.
strictness of accounts, then to be made of our works, words, of every, not
only evil, but even Mat. 12.36.
idle word? But, brethren, when we consider what the Lord every where assures
us, for our comfort; he comes to refresh us, not to torment us, to redeem, not
to imprison us: to save, not to destroy us; to destroy sin in us, not us for
sin; how much cause have we to lift up our heads with joy? and as Paul
says, to 2. Tim. 4.8.
love his appearing, and with the Revel. 22.17, 20.
Spirit, and Bride, to say, Come: Amen. Even so come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

VERSE. 5.6. Ye are all the children of Light, and children of the Day, etc.


(...) est. The Apostle continues still to set forth the gracious estate of
Gods children; he had said before, they were not in Darkness: as if that had
been too little; they are children of Light, and of the Day. The
amplifications are two. First, by the extent in the subject; Ye are all
children of Light. Secondly, by comparison of unequals: not of light only, but
of the Day: and in the Antithesis; ye are not of the Night, no nor so much as
of Darkness.

Light in property of speech, is that visible creature, quality, or whatsoever
you will call it, that makes things visible unto us. The Scripture translates
it to signify especially four things. First, Ioh. 3.19.
Knowledge. Secondly, Means of knowledge. Thirdly, Ephe. 5.8.
Sanctity. Fourthly, Isai. 59.9.
Felicity. Reason of the Metaphor arises from likeness, and semblable
properties of Light, to the things which it is translated to signify. The
property, and office of Light, is to discover unto us the differences of
things visible; not unfitly therefore is knowledge, and the means thereof
resembled by it. It is a thing marvelous pure, admitting no mixture; no bodily
creature, or quality purer: a fit Emblem for the sanctity that becomes Gods
people; wonderful pleasing, and delightful to sense: fitly signifying
felicity.

Children of Light: by an Hebraisme; such as to whom God has granted the
means of knowledge and sanctification; and made them effectual to your
inlightning and sanctification.

And of the Day. It is added to amplify the blessedness of their estate.
There is light in crepusculis: the clear light, is that of the Day. q.d. God
has been pleased to grant you in the means, and power of them, not a
glimmering Light; and obscure insight into the secrets of salvation; but after
a sort perfection of grace, and illumination; so that ye see, and see clearly
the things that concern your peace: he has freed you, not only from the
night, but even from the darkness of ignorance.

For the particle of universality; thus conceive it: First, either to have
reference to the means of knowledge. Secondly, or else to be spoken after the
judgment of Charity. Hitherto of the sense.

The points obserueable here are these. First, The blessed state of Gods Church
now in days of New Testament, as in other respects, so for the plenty and
clearenes of revelation, and knowledge granted us by the Gospel. I say not, God
was ever wanting to his Church, in a competencie of knowledge; but sure it is,
that light the Jews had, co^paratiuely was but as of the dawning, ours as the
clear light of the Day. Prophetical Scriptures, says Peter, are as the light
of a 2 Pet. 1.19.
candle shining in a dark place: The light we now have, is as that of the
Day Star. S. Paul speaking of the mystery of the Gospel, says, It Romans
16.25.
was hidden from the beginning of the world, till these last times. What is his
meaning? Say some, From Gentiles, not from Jews. Rather thus, comparatively
hidden, being never so clearly made known to the sons of men, Ephe. 3.5.
as it is now revealed to Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit.

It were long to instance in particulars. How are almost all things presented
unto Jews in cloudie Ceremonies? The very maine points of Faith and Salvation
taught them almost only by ceremonious resemblances. As Paul says of them in
another respect; God dealt with them, as with children, in their Gal. 4.2, 3.
minority and nonage; not only in loading them with a heap of ceremonial
rudiments; but in the means and measure of knowledge, making them all in
comparison, to use the Apostles phrase, but children in understanding.



Abraham perhaps, a man of extraordinary spirit, might be found amongst them,
to have exceeded our People, as in Faith, so in Knowledge. But compare their
Vulgus, with our many, the odds is exceeding great. So, not every of our
Ministers may be compared with their Prophets; their gifts and spirit were
above the ordinary: but compare our ordinary Ministers with their Priests and
Levites, our Apostles, and Evangelists, with their Prophets and Patriarchs; our
Light will appear as the clear Day; theirs, but as of the Dawning.



First, Consider the Rock out of which we were hewne; our Fore fathers, the
Gentiles, from whose loins we all descended. Time was, when it was the Jews
Privilege only, to know God by his Word. Psalm. 76.1. and
In Jury, says DAVID, is God known, his Name is great in Israel. He 147.19,
20.
showed his Word unto JACOB, his Statutes and Ordinances unto Israel; he dealt
not so with Gentiles, neither had Heathens knowledge of his Laws. God, by his
Creatures, made known to them his invisible Properties; the utmost issue and
effect of that Revelation, was, to Romans 1.20.
deprive them of excuse. Here then, if there were no more, we Gentiles have
cause to praise God for his Mercy. Had we lived in the days before Christ, a
thousand to one, we had perished everlastingly, for want of saving knowledge
of God in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, But see yet a further Blessing, laid up in store for us. Howsoever
to Jews he then granted a measure of Knowledge, Revelation, and all Grace
sufficient for their Salvation; yet such a measure, as is now vouchsafed unto
us, Jews themselves, though Gods beloved people, enjoyed not. 2. Cor. 3.18.
We all with open face behold the glory of God, shining in the face of Jesus
Christ. And if this persuade not to thankfulness, what may? Says our Savior
to his Disciples, on this ground: Matthew. 13.16, 17.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, etc. Many Prophets and righteous men have
desired to see the things that ye see, and have not seen them; I say not
only in respect of the events, which they beheld only a far off, and
saluted in the Promises; but in respect of the measure of Knowledge and
Revelation granted us under the Gospel.

Secondly, A second use general the Apostle makes, Romans 13.12. That the Night
being past, and the Day at hand, we should cast away the works of Darkness,
and put upon us the A^mour of L ght. A shame it should be to us, in these days
of so clear Light and Revelation, to be found in the deeds of Darkness,
Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
Walking as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their minds, having their
Cogitations darkened, being Aliens from the life of God, through Ignorance that
is in them. And mark it well, ye shall see how strongly the Inference flows
from this ground. This account we may well make:

First, Our sins are now all excuselesse; we have now Ioh. 15.22.
no cloak for our sins. What will our people plead for themselves, before
the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, for their Infidelity, Blasphemy,
Disobedience in all kinds? Perhaps, as fools, they Eccl. 4.17.
knew not that they did evil; or, as Paul excuses the Jews, 1. Cor. 2.8.
Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Now sure,
if any be ignorant, it is because they shut their eyes against the clear Light
of Truth shining unto them: As Paul speaks, If 2. Cor. 4.3.
our Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them that perish; not through defect of
means, but through wilful contempt of knowledge, tendered them in the means.

Secondly, As more excuselesse, so more shameless. He must, me thinks, have a
brow of Brass, that now lives in any gross sin, as Drunkenness, Whoredom,
etc. So clearly has the Lord made known his Truth, that even children are
able to tell a Sweater, etc. he fearfully offends Gods Majesty. Times were
perhaps (but those times are past) when a man might have swallowed up many a
foul sin, without notice of many; so gross, in former times, was their
Ignorance, so little their Knowledge, that I think it true of many, in many
foul sins, they knew not that they did evil. But I would feign know, what
now are the sins that almost Infants cannot discover: That we may now say as
the Lord of Israel, They are impudent children, and of a Whores forehead, that
walk in such notorious abominations.

Thirdly, If none of these move, let it be considered, our plenty of Knowledge
adds much to the weight of our sins. Every sin is now double, to that it
was in times of gross Ignorance, or less means of Knowledge. To him Iam. 4.17.
that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. Sins of
Knowledge, are cateris paribus, greater then sins of Ignorance: The Luke
12.47.
punishment, we know, is greater, therefore the sins. Ezechiel has a speech
something strange at first hearing: Samaria Ezech. 16.48.
and Sodom, says the Prophet, have not done half the abominations of
Jerusalem. Not half the abominations of Jerusalem? The Idolatry of Samaria,
the Lust and Cruelty of Sodom, for the kind and matter of the sins, might
well sway with those of Jerusalem: but yet consider circumstances; in degree of
heynousnesse, far greater were they of Jerusalem. Gods mercies to Jerusalem
more in every respect; in this especially, their Knowledge, at least, their
means of Knowledge, far greater then any vouchsafed to Sodom or Samaria. So
may we say generally of the times of the New Testament; our sins have this
one circumstance, to add much to their weight: our Knowledge, at least the
means of it, are far greater then any was ever granted to Forefathers,
amongst Jews or Gentiles.

Would God we had not too just cause to complain, as the Lord does of
Jerusalem: that as she had justified Sodom, so we shall, I say, the Jews;
yea, the very Heathen; that they, ungracious, and abominable, as they were, yet
may well seem righteous, in respect of our multitude, now living in times of
the Gospel. How odious to them was Drunkenness? To many of them, Whoredom,
Usury? Even of vain Swearing, many made much Conscience; Perjury they hated,
as Hell it self. The greater, no question, shall be the damnation of those
Monsters amongst us, Jude, v. 12.
without fear feeding themselves in such sins.

Thirdly, The last use, let be the duty that concerns us in respect of this
gracious estate; as it is inferred by the Apostle in the Text: Therefore let us
not sleep as do others, etc.

Sleep is of two sorts; one, of the Body; the other, of the Mind;
metaphorically set out under the resemblance of that of the Body, binding the
Senses, so that they cease, for the time, to do their office. I need not say
any thing, to express the nature of it: neither is it my purpose to show
Fryer-like, all the resemblances betwixt it and the spiritual slumber, here
forbidden us. Under it the Apostle especially shadows out a secure state of
the Soul, neither fearing God, nor thinking of his Wrath approaching nor caring
to prepare our selves to stand before him with comfort. It is then as if he had
said, Let not us, as is the guise of others, ignorant of the danger they are
in, lie snorting in our sins securely; but, since we know the Lord will come,
and know not when he will come, stand in continual expectation of his
Coming, preparing to meet him; that whenever he shall come, he may find us
prepared for him.

How far a Christian should be from security, let be our note.

Consider for enforcement, first, the watchfulness of our common Adversary,
getting greater advantage by nothing, then by our security. Blessed, says
Solomon, is he that fears always; his fear makes him watchful, his
watchfulness secures him from the touch of evil. Mat. 13.25.
When the Servants sleep, the Enemy sowes his Tares. Says Peter, setting
forth his nature and practice to this purpose, 1. Pet. 5.8.
He goes about continually, seeking whom he may devour.

Secondly, Besides that foreign Adversary, there is Hostis Domesticus; Every
man has his Enemy in his Bosom, Corruption of Nature; an Enemy always
dangerous; never more, then when he is See Heb. 3.13
most neglected.

Thirdly, If none of these move; Remember what Peter has: 2. Pet. 2.3.
Gods Judgments sleep not, but hasten toward us. They are never nearer, then
when we are most secure. When men say peace and safety, then comes sudden
destruction upon them.

Paul speaking of them, says, The 1. Cor. 10.11.
ends of the world are come upon us. If there were no other Argument, that of
our Savior were sufficient; As it was with Luke 17.28.
Sodom and the old world, so is it with us. I have compassed the earth to and
fro, says the Angel, and behold, the whole earth sits still, and is at
rest. That one thing only lets, The Romans 11.
calling of the Jews. The end, I would say then, were nigh, even at the
doors. The Lord has been amongst us in sundry of his fearful Judgments,
forerunners of extreme desolation. He has sent Amos 4.6, 10.
cleanness of Teeth, Pestilence after the manner of Egypt; shaken the sword
at our borders; taken from us the Isa 3.2, 3.
Judge, and the Honorable, the Captain, and the Counselor. Yet, I know not
how, as it is said of LACHISH, They were a secure people, dwelt securely,
without feate of evil: so we. God sends these judgments amongst us, as
Ezechiel to the Jews, in the Ezech. 12.4.
habit of a man going into captivity, to give us occasion to consider, in
what state we stand: It may be, says the Lord, they will consider. But behold
the deadness of our hearts, the depth of infidelity in us! where is the man of
many, that once enters into his heart, to say; Iere. 8.6.
What have I done? Or what is it the Lords requires of me, that I may escape
the things that are coming upon this generation? If the Lion roar, all the
beasts of the Forest tremble. The Lord of hosts cries to us daily by his
Word, and Judgments, yet who is it amongst a multitude that considers? To say
nothing of them, that lying in the very jaws of the Devil, never yet had
grace to bethink themselves of the future state of their souls; what is heard
from men of better inclinations, but peace and safety? God has given us peace
round about, and linked us in amity with most neighbor Nations: The Gospel,
they say, we have by Gods mercy preached plentifully amongst us. These are (I
confess) great blessings of God. But, brethren, where are all this while the
fruits of the Gospel? except the cursed fruits of disobedience may be imputed
to the Gospel. It is a remarkable speech in Jeremy to the Jews, boasting of
like privilege: Iere. 7.4, 12.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord is amongst us. But go to
Shilo, says the Lord, where once I set my Name; See, what I have done to it.
He would teach us, that his Grace is not tied to any particular place or
people: so, but for their disobedience he may, and will remove it. Where is
Jerusalem, the City of the great King? of which the Lord said more, then ever
he said of any place; Psalm. 132.14.
This is my rest, here will I dwell for ever. What is become of those Churches
of Asia, famous in their times, and renowned through the whole world? Where is
Galatia, Corinth, Thessalonica and the rest? all of them become either ruinous
heaps, or dwellings for cursed Mahumetans. And as Paul speaks, Let not us be
Romans 11.20.
high-minded, but fear. For infidelity, and impenitency, they were broken
off. By faith, if there be any, we have our standing. But, if for impenitency
he spared not them, let us take heed, left he also spare not us. The Lord give
us all grace, over whom his Name is called, seriously to think of these
things, and lay them to heart. And to Gods children, let this be argument
sufficient of watchfulness; The general security of the multitude that are
amongst us.

As do others. Whether this be added as a reason to dissuade security; or as a
prevention, to: cut off what some might object, I will not ouer-busily inquire.
It may be, he conceiues some such objection. What means this task of
vigilancie, so straightly laid upon us, more then others? Why may not we, as
others, sleep securely? The Apostle implies answer: Your state is other, then
that of others; Therefore, so must be your behavior; Ye are children of
Light: so are not others; your behavior should be as discrepant, as is your
state from theirs. The difference of our state from others in spiritual
things, should draw with it a difference of behavior. Ephe. 4.17.
Walk not henceforth, as other Gentiles walk; your state is now different:
Ephe. 5.8.
Though ye were Darkness, yet now are ye Light in the Lord. Walk therefore
as children of Light. The Scripture is plentiful this way; calling still for
our separation from the wicked, not so much in our persons, as in our
behavior. How often beats the Lord upon it to his people? That since he had
chosen them to be his peculiar people, they should fly from the profane
customs and conversation of the Heathen. See Deuteronomy. 12. Iere. 17. and that of
the Apostle, Romans 12.2.
Fashion not your selves to the world.



Me thinks the answer is ready. Our state is different. God has of his
mercy 1. Pet. 2.9.
called us out of Darkness, into his marvelous Light, that we should show
forth the virtues of him that has called us; not live in the vices of the
world, out of which we are called: And will we indeed be like to people
profane, and disobedient? First, says the Apostle, We Ephe. 4.20.
have not so learned Christ, if we have been taught as the truth is in Jesus.
Secondly, It is just with God, to make them Revel. 18.4.
fellows in punishment, that will needs be fellows in disobedience.

Secondly, There is another sort, and they are much amongst men. Mungrill
Christians, as I may term them: as it is said of Samaritanes, They feared God,
2. Kin. 17.33.
and served their Idols; and as of Israel, They swear by the Lord, Zeph. 1.5.
and by Melcom. So these make a mixture in their Judgment and practice of
profaneness and piety; of Christian Religion, and Antichristian superstition:
hear as Protestants, believe as Papists: profess as Christians, live as
Heathen: talk as Saints, do as Devils: so abominable, disobedient, and to
every good work so reprobate are they.

The Lord to Israel permitted no medleyes: A garment of Linsey-woolsey, his
people might not wear; nor sow their field, with Miscellane: to teach (say
most Interpreters) how far his people should be from such medleyes in
Religion. And though, I say not, it is a perfect rule to try truth of Religion
and Grace, by farthest distance from Heathens practice; for I know there are
some principles of Romans 2.14.
the Law written in their hearts: yet this I am sure of; evil things should
be so much more detestable unto us, because evil men practice them; and for
things good in their matter, Gods children should add another form and manner
of performance, that they may be acceptable unto God.

Shall I need to add other reasons? Consider this; First, If we be Gods,
There is another 1. Joh. 4.4.
spirit in us, then in the world; as different in his operations, as exceeding
in power. We have Paul telling us, That Romans 8.14.
as many as are the sons of God, are led by his Spirit; and they are none of
his, in whom that spirit works, Ephe. 2.2.
that rules in the children of disobedience.

Secondly, We should consider what Peter has. Christ has ransomed and
redeemed us, not only from the guilt, and punishment of our sins, but from
our 1. Pet. 1.18.
va ne conversation taught by traditions of our Fathers. They talk idly, that
boast of Christ their Redeemer from Hell, whom he has not freed from the
power of darkness.

Thirdly, That of the same Apostle may not be forgotten. 1. Pet. 4.3.
It is enough, if any thing be enough, that we have spent our former times in
doing the will of the Gentiles. The little that remains of life, how little it
is we know not, we should, me thinks, willingly consecrate to the service of
him, that has bought us with a price.

The second duty concerning us: in respect of our gracious estate, is,
Sobriety: strictly taken, Hieron. in Ezec. cap. 44. Ebrietas non solum in
potione vini, sed in omnibus rebus oslenditur: quibus and incontractibus and in
ne gotijs saeculi and damnis, and lucris, amore and odio men's inebriatur, and
fluctuaet, and statum suum tenere non potest.
it is that part of temperance inclining us to moderation in use of drinks.
More largely, it is put for whole Temperance; the moderation of our affections
in the pursuit, and use of all earthly things. Oh thou that art drunken, but
not with wine! says the Prophet, speaking of the people intoxicated, and now
at their wits end, by reason of Gods wrath. The truth is, there is a
drunkenness, wherein even Nazarites may be overtaken. Very cares of the world,
and voluptuous living have a kind of inebriating power, as much disturbing
reason, oppressing the senses, as wine, and strong drink. Our Savior else had
never coupled them Luke 21.34.
with surfeiting, and drunkenness. And see if there be any wine or strong
drink, more infatuating, and besotting the mind, then these; or more depriving
of sense in Spiritual things. S. Paul speaking of women that live in
pleasures, says, They 1. Tim. 5.6.
are dead, whilst they are alive. Sure it is, as soon may we work on dead
men, as fasten on such, any sense of goodness. And look if in all the
Scripture, there be any sort of people more sottish, then those that are noted
of Covetousness, and Epicurisme. The Pharisees being covetous, Luke 16.14.
laugh our Savior to scorn. Prou. 23.35.
Senseless they are of all corrections. In daily experience, we see men, whose
affections have the reins to follow the things of this life, how utterly
incapable they are of any heavenly instruction.

Let their misery warn us to labor for this Sobriety: the branches whereof
conceive these:

First, The limiting and bounding of our affections and desires, that they
exceed not measure in pursuit of earthly things. 1. Tim. 6.8.
Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content. Natura minimum petit,
says Seneca; A little, never so little, contenteth Nature; moderate Apparel,
Diet, Recreation, any thing in measure, suffices Nature.

To this end, consider first the vanity of them all, in respect of any
spiritual profit; our desires grow insatiable by this especially, that we
fancy in them more good then they can possibly afford us: secondly, neither
are they vain only, says Solomon, speaking from experience, but draw with
them in their loose, Eccl. 1.14.
vexation of spirit.

Secondly, A second branch of this Sobriety, respects the use of them, pointed
at by the Apostle; So use the world, as 1. Cor. 7.30, 31.
though we used it not; with as little intention of our desires and delights
therein, as maybe.

In property of speech, Sobriety is a branch of Temperance, moderating the
Appetite in use of Drinks. It respects, say Moralists, first, the quality,
secondly, the quantity of Drinking, setting bounds to Appetite in both
respects. For the Quality, it permits not to any frequent or ordinary use of
Wine or strong Drink. Give strong Drink Pro. 31.6.
to him that is ready to perish, and Wine to him of an heavy heart, says
Lemuel to Solomon her son. Drink Wine, says Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.23.
sed modice, hoc est, medice; to cure thine infirmities, not to cause them: Pro
remedio parcius, Epist 82.
non pro delicijs redundantius, Ambrose. The effects and fruits of it, are Pro.
20.1.
Luxury and Outrage. Secondly, for the Quantity, some set these bounds;
first, Necessity to satisfy Nature; to quench Thirst; secondly, Pro. 31.7.
Cheerfulness and alacrity, which some call Poculum Helaritatis. To the
third, which they call the Cup of Wantonness, no man proceeds without
violation of Sobriety.

The truth is, the Measure is best taken from that fitness it brings to do
the duties of general or particular Calling. What ever Measure exceeds that
limit, transgresses against Sobriety.

A Virtue it is, much commended unto us. The name it has usual amongst
Greeks, is amiable; they call it (...); As you would say, the keeper and
guard, as it were, of Wisdom.

The Vice contrary, is Drunkenness: a Vice, says one, to be lamented rather
amongst Germans; we may say, amongst English too, then to be defined. Very
children, out of effects, are able to define it, by beholding the manners and
behavior of men overtaken with it. The Spartanes, to make their children loath
it, Plutarch.
were wont to present to their view some of their Vassals gorged with Wine,
that when they saw their beastly demeanor, they might learn to detest it. The
Saracens by instinct of Nature so abhorred it, that by Policy of their
Country, none was permitted to drink Wine. Pittacus his Law was, to punish
every fault of a Drunkard with a double Mulct. He thought it so far from
excusing any sin, that it added a circumstance to aggrauate every sin.

What tell I you of Men, though Heathens, when bruit creatures, most of them,
by instinct of Nature detest it? Elephants, they say, are able to suck up in
their Trunk a great quantity of water; Ambros. de Elia. and Ieiun. cap. 17.
and yet to quench their thirst, are contented with moderate drinking. In case
they be defrauded of their hire, they will fill the hollow of their Snowt with
water, not to drink, but to power out; and so with a sudden inundation to
drown his Shop, of whom they will be revenged. Whole Pooles are on a sudden
drunk dry; and suddenly powered out, all is afloat; Cui non mirum, tam immania
belluarum corpora superfluum nil tenere? And see the insatiable Dropsy of
Drinking, so rife amongst Christians!

To set down all the abuses in every degree amongst us, were endless. It is
now made a point of royal entertainment, and a great part of our courtesy, to
bid welcome with excessive drinking. And he is no friend, that runs not into
fellowship of that excess and riot; though Peter has told us, not only
(...), 1. Pet. 4.3.
but (...), frequent and immoderate Bibbings are works of Gentiles, and fruits
of the flesh. And the greatest discourtesie that may be amongst Good-fellowes,
not to follow in Pledging, till neither Hand nor Foot (as the Poet spoke) can
do their office. The Persians, it seems, had entertained some such Custom at
Feasts; yet this Caution and Law they had, Hest. 1.8.
None might compel. Now it is a matter deserving the Stab, if a man by this
means be not ready to run to Hell for company; and to drown, I say, not his
Wit in Wine, but his Soul in Perdition. Amongst the Jews it was grown to an
height; wherefore the Prophet thunders Isai. 5.22.
that woe against it; they counted it a point of Manhood, to power in strong
drink. That beastliness even amongst us is grown into like reputation. As
Austin complained of his time, De verb. Apost. Ser. 4.
If a man gorge himself with Wine, drink his Measures out of measure, it is
nothing; Non inuenit crimen, etiam viri fortis accipit nomen, tanto nequior,
quanto sub poculo inuictior: So amongst us, he that drinks most, is counted
the stoutest man: Vomunt vt bibant, bibunt vt vomant; how great cause have we
to fear, lest the Land, for these and like abominations, spue out her
inhabitants.

What should I speak of what Habakuk in his time complained of, Hab 2.15.
Forcing others to Drunkenness? Good God, with what expense! Many of the mind,
that to the Poor they spare not the least Mite, yea, think all lost, that
Wives and Children partake; and yet spare not to spend Pounds to make their
Neighbors drunken, Quid multa? I know not any sin but is rife amongst us;
yet must I needs say, none grown so rife, or to such height, as this of
Drunkenness. And may I not say, as Jeremy, Ier. 5.9.
Should not the Lord be avenged on such a Nation as this?

What words may I use to dissuade it, unto men given to that sin? The Lord
has threatened vengeance of all sorts to deter from it; and we have seen
many exemplified on many. First, Beggerie, says Solomon, is the hire of such
as company with Drunkards. Secondly Famine God has sent on whole Kingdoms,
to Joel 1.5.
pluck the Cup from the Drunkards nose. Thirdly, By Hosea he tells us, It
takes away the heart. Fourthly, By Solomon, the fearful sins that accompany
it; first, Luxury; Veneri and libero conuenit, says Tertullian; De Spectac.
these two Devils of Drunkenness and Lust are conspired and even sworn
together: Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo, In Tit. Cap. 1.
said Hierome; secondly, Stupiditie; They have smitten me, shall he say, pro.
23.35.
but I have not felt it. Fifthly, In the body we see often loathsome and ougly
diseases; monstrous mis-shapennesse, till a man become a burden to himself:
Hos homines an vtres vertius aestimauerim, Amb. de Helia and Ieiun. cap. 17.
said Ambrose in another sense. Sixthly, In the soul such insatiable appetite,
that we may say of it, as Tully once spoke of Covetousness, when other sins
die with age, Sola ebrietas iuuenescit. Seventhly, And see if Drunkards be not
reckoned amongst the damned Crew, 1. Cor. 6.10.
that have no portion or inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.

I might be infinite, to set down the bitter Inuectiues of Divines and Heathen
against it. Ambrose said of them, They bring on themselves the Curse of CAIN;
their motion is with trembling; tanquam in paraly sin resoluti says Austin, --
Pedibus ambulare non possunt. Secondly, They were wont to use it pro equilleo,
says Ambrose; and it has often fallen out in the event, what Torment could
not wring out from men, Drunkenness has. Thirdly, The Romans held it good
policy, says the same Author, to permit to the barbarous Nations of the
Empire, free use of Wine, vt and ipsi soluantur in potus and eneruati
ebrietate, vincantur. It is much to be feared, God in wrath has given our
people to this beastly sin, to vnsinew the people of the Kingdom, and to
expose them to easier victory of the Adversary. Thus much of this sin, to
show the odious nature of it; too little, I fear me, to reform the evil
custom.

VERSE. 7.8. For they that sleep, sleep in the Night; and they that are
drunken, are drunken in the Night.

But let us who are of the Day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith
and Love; and for an Helmet, the hope of Salvation.


THe seventh Verse contains Reason, to press the duties of Watchfulness and
Sobriety; in form this: They that sleep, and are drunken, are so in the
Night: We are not of the Night, but of the Day: Ergo may not be drunken, but
sober. The Allegory (for so I conceive it) unfolded is this; As those that
give themselves to sleep and drunkenness, make choice of the Night to secret
their sins from the notice of men; and are few so impudent, as to do deeds
of darkness at Noonday; so, seeing we live in times of so clear knowledge
and revelation, and are delivered from the darkness and Night of Ignorance; it
shall behooue us to walk soberly and honestly, unless we will be too too
impudent in security and profaneness.

the modesty of the times wherein the Apostle lived, choosing, darkness and
secrecy to cover their enormities. The things they do, are such as a Saint
would Ephesians. 5.12.
blush to name; themselves, that do them, are not so shameless, but they choose
secrecy to commit them: Every one that evil does, Ioh. 3.21.
hates the light; he means principally of Grace and Knowledge; withal, that
of Sense, which is the ground of the Metaphor. Truth is, God Romans 2.15.
in Nature has imprinted some principles of common honesty, to restrain the
headstrong inclination of corrupt nature unto evil: till they be utterly
extinct, some remanents there are, as of conscience, so of modesty, in doing
evil.

Isai. 3.9.
declare their sins as Sodom, and hide them not; blush not to do deeds of
darknese in the sight of the Sun. Says the Lord of Israel, when he would
express a hopeless estate of that people, Were they Ier. 8.12.
ashamed when they committed abomination? They were not ashamed, neither could
they have any shame: therefore they shall fall among them that fall in the time
of their visitation. Think it spoken of these times.

The third duty follows; Arming our selves, as for a Conflict. Of Spiritual
Warfare I mean not to treat at large; who so would see the condition of it,
has at hand the learned Labors of expert Captains in the Lords Host. The
parts of the Armor here commended to us, M. Downham.
are Faith, Hope, and Love, the three Theological virtues, set out by
resemblance; Faith and Love, in the similitude of a Breast Plate; Hope, of an
Helmet. The unfolding of the Metaphor is thus: As Soldiers are wont especially
to fence their Breast for the Hearts sake, the seat of life; and the Head, the
fountain and original of the senses, as upon whose safety depends the
safety of the whole Body principally: so our care should be, against the
evil day to arm our selves with graces best serving to safeguard the soul;
amongst which, eminent are Faith, Hope, and Love, Touching them, two things
shall be handled: first, their nature briefly; secondly, their use in the
spiritual combat.

For Faith, thus in gross conceive the nature of it; It is an assent to the
truth of the Word of God, for the Truths sake of him that spoke, and inspired
it. Some principal respect think it to have to the Doctrine of the Gospel. It
is of two sorts; first, general, whereby we believe the Doctrine of the Gospel
in general; secondly, particular, whereby we believe it, as true to us. Of the
first sort, ye may conceive the faith of the Eunuch, being yet a Nouice: Act
8.37.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Of the second, that of Paul:
Christ loved Gal. 2.20.
me, and gave himself for me.

Both these have their use in Christian Warfare; one laying the ground of
Comfort; the other applying it to our selves. Temptations ye shall see
assaulting in both kinds; the Devil laboring to make us Infidels in the
general, that he may make us incredulous in the particular.

Example.
In Cyprians days, he stirred up Nouatus to broach this Heresy, That pardon of
sins purchased by Christ, belonged not to any denying Christ through fear of
persecution, though afterward repenting: a dangerous and discomfortable
Ground; the Mind giving credence to that error, and persisting therein; the
Conscience guilty of that sin, apprehends nothing but horror and
astonishment. Not much unlike are those we have experience of at this day.
Thoughts of Atheism and Blasphemy cannot stand with grace; no, not though
abhorred, mourned for, striuen against. A false conclusion; give way in that
general, all comfort in thy particular fails thee. Al. Omissions of known
duties cannot stand with sanctification. A false conclusion, except it be
mollified. Of Asa it is said, He removed not the high places, 2. Chron. 15.7.
yet was his heart upright with the Lord all his days. There be other
infirmities, besides that of ignorance, out of which such omissions may
proceed. Thus in the generality, we see how Faith is oppugned; withal, how
necessary Faith, and the right information thereof in the general, is for
comfort. Like think we of the particular: for let general grounds be never so
firmly believed, except with like firmness Faith can assume, the Conscience
is all-out as comfortless.

Every temptation suppose to be a secret Syllogism. Wherein sometimes we have
the Proposition corrupted; after, the Assumption assaulted; that the Conclusion
follow not to the comfort of Conscience.

In the question of Adoption, Example.
whether we be the sons of God; thus reasons the mind for comfort of
Conscience: Whosoever are Romans 8.14.
led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. I am led by the Spirit of God.
Ergo, I am the child of God. Sometimes the Proposition is assaulted by Satan;
it must thus be understood; whosoever in every particular action is led by the
Spirit of God, he only is the child of God; yield him but this to corrupt the
principle; thy conscience must assume the negative, ( Since James 3.2.
in many things we sin all) and infer the conclusion discomfortably. Or
suppose thou have wisdom to uphold the Proposition, as Paul has directed;
that it is meant of those that in Romans 8.1.
course of their life follow the Spirits guidance, though in particulars the
flesh prevail: then assaults he thee in the Assumption, and permits by no
means to be assured of our guidance by the Spirit of God. So that we see, how
necessary against the evil Day it is, to fortify our selves with faith
general and particular.

By the way observe, how professedly the Church of Rome sets her self, to
hinder all solid comfort of the soul in temptation. First, Allowing us no
sound ground for general says; the m^^ters whereof we must take on trust
from them, without daring to Act. 17.11.
search the Scriptures, whether the thing, be so; out of which, what faith can
arise more then merely humane? Secondly, accusing, yea, accursing the very
endeavor of special faith, as presumptuous; allowing us only a coniecturall
opinion, and probable hope, that it may be, we are such, and so qualified, as
they that shall be heirs of salvation. What a paper breast plate frame they us
of such faith, to keep out Ephe. 6.16.
the fiery Darts of the Devil? Leave them.

The second part of the Breast Plate, is Love of God and of our Neighbor. The
nature of this gracious affection is best known by sense. Thus yet conceive a
description of it by effects; first, wel-wishing; secondly, adhering; thirdly,
desire of union with the person loved. The kinds of it they make two: first,
Concupiscentiae; whose maine scope in loving, is the good of the lover:
secondly, Amicitiae; when we love, whom we love, for his own sake, without
respect to our own private. Of this sort is that we owe to God and men.

It steads us in the Spiritual Conflict; first, as an Evidence; secondly, by
its Operation. As an Evidence; the very presence of it is a mark of our
adoption, and 1. Ioh. 3.14.
translation from death to life: so, that if ever the Conscience be fifted
about the maine, whether we be in state of grace, or not; this gracious
affection presents it self to the eye of Conscience, to stay it from doubting.

Secondly, by the Operation; which ye may thus conceive: it causes us to
cleave close to what we love, and sets such a price thereon, Cant. 8.7.
that nothing will cause us to part with it. Suppose the temptation be, to
forsake the Truth of Religion; perhaps upon such allurements, as Domas was
misse-led withal; thus Love teaches to reason. The truth of Gods Word I have
found to be Gods Amos 1.16.
power to my conversion; the same has been Psalm. 119.50.
my comfort in trouble; sweetness I have found in it, such as the Honey-combe
cannot afford. How shall I forsake this Truth? etc.

The Helmet is Hope; that is, the firm expectation of the good things God has
promised, and not yet exhibited: the maine whereof, is the end of our Faith,
the salvation of our Souls. It is of two sorts; first, the hope of the
Hypocrite, which is, as Job says, as the Spiders web, with every blast of
temptation beaten down, inasmuch as it has no sure foundation nor evidence to
rest on; secondly, the hope of the Righteous, that Romans 5.5.
never makes ashamed.

The stead it does us in temptation, is such, that Paul calls it the Heb. 6.19.
Anchor of the Soulo. Thus conceive how. There are certain blessings which God
has promised, Christ purchased, yet we possess not, save only in title:
Phil. 1.6.
as, To perfect the good work begun, to the Day of the Lord Jesus; 1. Cor. 1.8.
To confirm us blameless to the end; To Romans 16.20.
tread down Satan under our feet, etc. The cases often fall out, that we feel
nothing less then what is promised; perhaps declining, in stead of growing in
grace; weakening, rather then establishing of faith, etc. the cunning Devil
working upon advantage of our sense, labors thereby to overthrow our faith.
Here now is the use of Hope; expecting above reason and sense, the blessings
promised; considering the faithfulness and power of the Promiser. Ioh. 13.15.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; Romans 4.18.
Against hope, ABRAHAM believes in hope.

VERSE. 9.10. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation
by our Lord Jesus Christ:

Who diad for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him.


THe words, as most conceive, are added as a reason enforcing the exhortation
to holiness of life; as they may be conceived, they are subioyned as a means
to stablish Hope; at least, are pertinent to the purpose of arming our selves
against the evil Day; through assurance of obtaining the Crown, the good
fight of Faith being finished. The reasons here couched, are two: first, Gods
gracious act, in ordaining us to life: secondly, the act of Christ the
Mediator, tending to accomplish that Ordinance of his Father.

Apply we them to the Apostles purpose; this ground they afford us. Gods
Ordinance touching our salvation, frustrates in no man the care of holiness;
puts rather, in Paul's apprehension, the holy use of all means, tending to
accomplish Gods appointment. Therefore, in Paul's Logic, the argument is
binding, from the Romans 12.1.
mercies of God, in electing, calling, justifying us freely, to enforce, the
resigning of our selves as an holy sacrifice to God.

Secondly, his Doctrine is, that the Ordinance reaches as well to the means,
as to the end. See 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.10. They mis-conceiue, that think
the Decree absolute, without respect to the means: It is to the end, and Romans
8.29. 1. Pet. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.5.
the means; to the end, by the means. There is no such Decree of God, as
miscreant Atheists talk of; to Salvation, how ever we live. The Decree is, to
save, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
by sanctification of the Spirit. And for the event, never saw the Sun men
more holy, then the most assured of their ordaining to life. Who more sure of
his share in that Decree, then our blessed Savior, Ephesians. 1.4.
in whom we are all chosen? Who more Heb. 7.26.
holy, harmless, separate from sinners? The Apostles, by consent of all; Luke
12.32. Mat. 22.
knew their election: Took any of them occasion thereby, to turn this grace
of God into wantonness? Nay, see how all their writings breathe out holiness:
And we shall be impious to imagine, they did not exemplify in their Practice,
what they delivered in their Prescripts?



First, I wonder Gods Spirit had not the wisdom to foresee that
inconvenience. And what is the reason he handles it so largely, propounds it
so clearly, with a charge to the People, Ioh. 5.39.
to search the Scriptures; to Ministers, to keep back Act. 20.27.
nothing of the Counsel of God? Knew he not, trow we, the temper of men's
hearts? Had he not wisdom to prevent the mischief?

Secondly, Where learn we to conceal from Gods people any branch of his
mercy and free love to their Souls? And what so great an evidence of the
freedom of his grace, as that he chose us before we were?

Thirdly, I wonder what Truth it is we shall publish, if all must be concealed
that ignorant and unstable men will pervert to their destruction. Christ was to
the Jews 1. Cor. 1.23.
a stumbling block, to the Gentiles foolishness: may he not therefore be
published, the Power and Wisdom of God, to salvation of his children?

Lastly, the nature of the Doctrine rightly taught, affoords no inference of
licentiousness: neither do they that share in the blessing, so abuse it. Will
others be offended? I say as our Savior, Let them be offended.

The truth is, such desperate resolutions are sometimes heard from men of
corrupt minds, seemingly, as from this ground. If they be elected, they shall
be saved, how ever holily, or vnholily they live. Now, first, what phrantike
carelessness of that pearl, the soul of man, more precious then the world,
proceeds this from? If I be elected: wretched miscreant! Is that the care thou
have of thy soul, that shall live ever either in bliss or torment? Why do
thou not rather give 2. Pet. 1.10.
diligence to make thy calling and election sure: then thus adventure thy soul
upon uncertain hazard? Secondly, how conceiuest thou such a mangled, and
halfed Decree of God, touching salvation? As if it were not as well touching
Ephesians. 1.4.
Sanctification, as salvation? Thirdly, Reduce thy Hypothesis to a
Categoricall; thus lies thy Proposition: The elect unsanctified shall be saved.
Wherein what babe discernes not an absurdity? The elect unsanctified? There
are no such elect. Those that are chosen to life, are chosen 1. Pet. 1.2.
to obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

Learn all Gods children from Paul's reasoning here, right use of meditating
Gods ordinance to life. It is holily used, when it is made an incentiue to
faith and good works. I am deceived, if such use in the issue, prove not a
comfortable evidence of election. The good use of Gods favors bestowed on us
in Christ, argues our sharing in them. It is a sign, says our Savior, Many
sins are forgiven her, that Luke 7.47.
she loves much. We may be confident to say of David, he had share in Gods
mercy; that so used the meditation as to infer, Psalm. 130.4.
Therefore he shall be feared. A strong Argument, that Christ died for Paul,
because the meditation of his death, makes him 2. Cor. 5.15.
live to his glory, that died for him. Generally, a sound evidence of our
ordaining to salvation, when we thence infer; therefore we will fight the
good fight of faith, that Gods ordinance may be fulfilled in us.

The particulars of the Text follow; where is, first, Gods act, ordained.
Secondly, the matter subject, us: Thirdly, the end, amplified by Antithesis;
not to wrath, but to obtain salvation. Fourthly, the means of accomplishment,
by our Lord Jesus, etc. appointed or ordained. The salvation of Gods children
is not only fore-knowne, or slightly purposed, but peremptorily appointed and
determined. The decree more unchangeable, then that of Medes and Persians that
might not be altered. Hence they are said, to be Act. 13.48.
ordained to eternal life: Romans 8.29.
predestined to be like to the Image of Christ. Ephe. 1.5, 11.
To adoption; to be the glory of his Grace, etc.

Egyptians, (their sleights we know in playing fast or loose) Aquinas notes,
to have made it alterable. But 1. Sam. 15.29
the strength of Israel is not as man, that he should repent. That 2. Tim. 2.19.
foundation stands sure. Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Isai. 46.10.
His counsels shall stand.

Not much unlike is their error, who yielding the decree unchangeable, make
the matter variable. The number of the predestinate is certain formaliter, not
materialiter; how many shall be saved, is determined; more or fewer shall not
be saved; but of the persons, who shall be saved, nothing certain is resolved.
First, How then is it said, Their Phil. 4.3.
names are written in the Book of life? The Lord, I think, would teach by
that Metaphor, the very persons to be resolved of, as well as the number.
Secondly, Romans 8.30.
Those whom he predestined; those, and no other, he called, etc. he says
not, As many, but limits out the persons.



certain, unchangeable, peremptory, particular: or if there be any other
term, to express the unchangeableness, and infallible certainty of this
Counsel of God, think it fitting this purpose.







Romans 8.30.
Vocation, Justification, Adoption; all spiritual blessings, that concern
life and godliness. Ephe. 1.3, 4.
He has blessed us in spiritual things, according as he has chosen us in
Christ. 2. Tim. 1.9.
He has saved and called us, according to his purpose and grace, given us,
before all worlds. The decree is the rule and measure of all Gods donations. We
now return the conclusion: The salvation of Gods children is not foreknowne
only, but unchangeably ordained and determined.

Damascene: That there is no act of God, more then that of prescience, touching
any thing that is or shall be; no not touching the salvation of man. The Lord
foresaw that there were some that should be saved; ordained nothing certain of
any man's salvation. First, the Scriptures plainly place both in God; as well
fore-ordinance, as foreknowledge. Whom he foresaw, he Romans 8.29.
predestined to be like to the Image of his Son. 1. Pet. 1.2.
Elect according to the foreknowledge of God. Secondly, Gods will is the first
cause of all things; neither could any thing be foreseen, in this kind
especially; but that God willed, not only to be, but himself to work.
Thirdly, the salvation of man, and all things that way tending, are the works
of God. Whatsoever God works, He Ephesians. 1.11.
works according to the counsel of his will; a strange and harsh conceit it
is, that the Lord should work more then he purposed to work. Leave them: and

Consider the plentiful consolation flowing from this Meditation to all Gods
children. Is our salvation built upon this foundation, the will, and peremptory
Decree of God? What should Gods people now fear to deprive them of it?
Afflictions? Luke 12.32.
Fear not, little fl cke; it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. Heresies and seducement? 2. Tim. 2.19.
The foundation of the Lord stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. Satan's
assaults? God, the Ordainer, Ioh. 10.29.
is stronger then all. 1. Ioh. 4.4.
Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world.

Bernard, can separate; but a man may deprive himself: see how many things the
Apostle has reckoned, that cannot separate; but amongst these many, our selves
are not; Soli id deserere possumus propria voluntate.

Bernard well; but the Proverb is, Non vidit omnia! Belike then, man's will may
frustrate Gods appointments. Where then is that of Solomon, Pro. 21.1.
The hearts of all men are in Gods hand, to turn whithersoeuer he will? Where
is the Promise, of Ezech. 36.27.
causing us to walk in his Statutes? So to put his Ier. 32.40.
fear in our hearts, that we shall never depart from him? Secondly, yea see if
the Apostles purpose be not to comfort us, as well against our own
infirmities, as against outward assaults. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them in Christ, walking after the Spirit, says
Paul, preoccupating the discomfort might arise from our common frailty.
Thirdly, Saint John takes it for granted, that the desire and striving for
salvation in the elect, is so certain, that except some outward adversary,
none can deprive us. He that is begotten of God, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
keeps himself, and that evil one touches him not. Fourthly, The will of
Gods chosen is so confirmed by grace, that they cannot wilfully forsake their
own mercy. This blessing we have by the second, more then we had in the first
Adam; establishment in that gracious estate, whereinto Regeneration brings us.
This promise we have in the new, more then in the old Covenant; To be 1. Cor.
11.8.
confirmed blameless unto the Day of Christ: Wherefore, my dear brethren, in
your holy endeavors, thus comfort your selves. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but Gods Counsels shall stand. Gods appointments are peremptory, and he
has ordained us to obtain salvation.

The matter subject follows: Us. PAVL then, belike, knew himself to be
within compass of this ordinance unto life. May we not thence infer, that
it is possible for Gods children to know their election? No, say Papists, and
others many, except you make your conclusion particular; of such as have Paul's
spirit, and revelation. It was the privilege of Paul and men of his rank to
know it; and that knowledge they had by extraordinary revelation. Audio: But
how appears it by any evidence of Scripture, that Paul knew it, by any other
then the ordinary fruits, and effects of election? And according to that
ground, I think we may make the conclusion general; that since all Gods
children have like evidences, they may have also like assurance of election.

We yield, they had their privilege in the measure, and degree of assurance;
the reason is plain, they had their privilege in the measure of common
evidences, Faith, Love, Obedience, Sanctity. Yet since the same evidences be in
a measure granted to Gods children of meaner rank, allow them their measure
also of certain assurance.

The state of the question thus conceive; of certeintie in assent and
persuasion, they make three sorts: one Natural, which arises from
demonstration: so know we the truth of principles. Another Supernatural; as
that first, of clear evidence. Secondly, of Prophetical vision. Thirdly, of
adherence. A third, they call Moral, arising from gross and figurall signs,
probable conjectures, inclining our minds to one part, rather then to the
other, as probably, or possibly true; and this is that measure or degree of
certeintie, which only they allow to the ordinary rate of Gods children, in
the point of their election. See we, whether a degree of infallible certeintie
be not possible to all.

First, The charge runs generally to all, 2. Pet. 1.10. Council. Trident.
To make their and they were wont to cry Anathema to him that shall say, Gods
precepts are not possible by grace to be fulfilled.

Secondly, Sundry parts of Scripture are penned purposely but all Gods children
1. Ioh. 5.13.
might know they have eternal life. Did Gods Spirit miss his end in the
inspiration?

Thirdly, The Spirit, that searches the deep things of is given to this end,
1. Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things that are given us of God: accordingly, He Romans
8.16.
testifies that we are the sons of God.

Fourthly, The fruits and effects of election, whence Act. 13.48.
Faith, Hope, Sanctification, etc. What should let, to ascend from the effects,
to knowledge of the cause?

Fifthly, The duties which God requires in respect of Col. 1.13.
Thanksgiving; laying down life for his glory sake, that has so freely
chosen and redeemed us.

Sixthly, The necessity of all Gods children requires Luk 12.32.
afflictions: secondly, of temptations. And how can we think it the privilege
of a few?

heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it?

The things of man, the 1. Cor. 2.11.
spirit that is in man, knows: secondly, especially Romans 8.16.
helped by the Spirit of God.







ratified and 2. Cor. 1.20, 21, 22.
sealed by the holy Ghost.

2. Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make our calling and election sure to our selves.

Evidences, amongst many, take these two fruits and effects of this ordination
to life: First, Ephesians. 1.5.
Adoption; that gracious act of God the Father, choosing us in Christ to be his
children: known best, first, by 1. Ioh. 3.1.
right pricing and esteem of this high favor of God. It is something, to Ephesians.
3.18.
comprehend the length, breadth, height and depth of the love of God. Secondly,
Crosses sanctified in respect of their use and fruit; the smart common to
children and bastards; the Heb. 12.7, 11.
fruit, peculiar to the sons and daughters of God. Thirdly, 1. Pet. 1.17.
filial fear of that gracious Father, that has chosen us to be his children.

A second evidence of election, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
is Sanctification. The parts whereof thus conceive, first a care 2. Cor. 7.1.
to purge our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Secondly, a
constant endeavor to grow up to full holiness, in the fear of God.

The end of the Ordinance follows, amplified by Antithesis; Not unto wrath,
but to obtain salvation. Not unto wrath.

It should seem then, there are some that are ordained to wrath. The
Collection is ancient, and has allowance even from some Papists. Negando quod
nos posuit Deus in iram, affirmationem insinuat, quod reprobos posuit Deus ad
iram, Caietane. As there are vessels of Mercy ordained to glory, so vessels
of Wrath Romans 9.22.
prepared to destruction.



They prepared themselves to destruction, God ordained them not to wrath.
Secondly, how apparent is it, that the Apostle there speaks of Gods actions
only? His Act it is, to love JACOB, and hate ESAV; to have mercy, and to
harden whom he will. If that be not plain enough, what say we to that of
SOLOMON? He has Pro. 16.4.
made the wicked for the day of evil; and that of IVDE, Jude 4.
Descripti ad hoc Iudicium. Touching the cause moving the Lord, whether there
be any other then the will of God, as the foresight of Infidelity, etc. is a
question, on this occasion, not so pertinently disputed. The Text leads us to
acknowledge such an Ordinance, points not at the cause.

Paul seems to make it one chief aim of the Lord, in his Decree of
Reprobation, to Romans 9.23.
show the riches of his mercy toward the vessels of Mercy. And weigh it
well, we shall see it adds marvelous amplification to the exceeding love of
God. Had he ordained all men and Angels to life, even so his mercy had been
exceeding great to the sons of Adam. But see the specialtie of his love, and
the privilege he has given us in his favor. Millions of men and women he
has ordained to destruction, whose state in Nature was no more miserable then
ours; whose strength in Nature was as great as ours, to exempt them from
condemnation; whose lives no more abominable then ours; whose care to be
reconciled, no less then ours; till God was pleased, in mercy, to prevent us.
How should this sweeten the favor of God to us in this respect, and even ravish
us with admiration of his love? And ye may observe, the Lord in Scripture
loves to amplify his love by this circumstance, He Heb. 2.16.
assumed not Angels, but the Seed of ABRAHAM. Was not ESAV, JACOBS brother?
Mal. 1.2, 3.
yet I loved JACOB, and hated ESAV. Whose Soul, that has tasted of this
mercy of God, can express the measure of it, and saints not rather in
admiration of it? Has God in his love preferred me before Angels, before so
many thousands of men and women; many of them more noble, wise, wealthy,
perhaps more civil, and kept from many abominations wherein I lived? Did he
single me out from the common mass of Mankind, to make a vessel of Honor
prepared to glory? Oh the unsearchable depth of his love to my Soul! How
passes it knowledge? How impossible is the comprehension of it? What measure
of thankfulness and obedience can I think sufficient, for so rich grace and
unspeakable love vouchsafed me so freely in Jesus Christ?

By Jesus Christ. By Christ then, and him alone, salvation is determined to be
given us. Him has Ioh. 6.27.
God the Father sealed. Act. 4.12.
No other Name given under Heaven, whereby we can be saved. Romans 3.25.
Him God has propounded to be the Propitiation.

If any ask Reason, this may suffice him; thus God determined to save. It may
be, other means might have occurred to Gods Wisdom, available to salvation:
But this was resolved on, as most convenient for the ends intended: as first,
the manifestation of Ioh. 3.16.
his endless love toward man; secondly, that even in forgiving sins, he
might show himself Romans 3.25, 26.
as just as merciful. What greater love, then to send his only Son out of
his Bosom, to assume our Nature, to undergo our Curse? What stricter Justice,
having mixture of Mercy, then to punish his own Son, undertaking our
sins, with that severity? Malice it self, though more then deuillish,
knows not how to quarrel at the Truth and Justice of God; or to crime his
Mercy, as unjust in forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, so fully
expiated by the death of the Son of God.



Merito; secondly, Spiritu. By his Merit, in paying that (...), and price of
Redemption, that Gods Justice required for satisfaction. By his Spirit,
applying that satisfaction, and making it ours; every way qualifying us, by
mortifying our sins, etc. to partake in the glory of his heavenly Kingdom.

having Romans 3.2.
the Oracles of God, and revelation of Christ vouchsafed unto it? Secondly,
What have Romans 11.
Jews lost by their reiection? Or what shall they 2. Cor. 3.16.
gain by their restoration? Thirdly, What is the reason Paul so presses
necessity of the Romans 10.13, 14. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
Gospels preaching to the Gentiles; if without this Gospel, revealing Christ,
the mean of salvation, they may be saved? Thus judge of the Opinion, as the
high way to Atheism.

A second Opinion there is, much of kin to the former, That even to men out of
the Church, all and every of them, there is help sufficient granted for
salvation. Cont. Belike then, the knowledge of Christ, without which, what may
we imagine to be sufficient? Of it speaks Paul, and says, There were Nations,
amongst which the Romans 15.20.
Name of JESUS was never heard of. Even at Athens, the Name was new; and for
the novelty of that Act. 17.18.20.
strange God, they desired to hear Paul further. Will they say? Though they
knew him not by Scripture, or Preaching, yet notice secret they had by
inspiration. Audio. But, first, What means Paul to say, They were Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ, till they had him preached unto them? Secondly, Is it likely,
the Lord denying them the means ordinary, would make it so ordinary, to teach
by immediate and extraordinary revelation? Thirdly, It is a wonder to me, this
being so universal a grace, it should be taught by none of the Gentiles to
their posterity; but they should all vanish away, in the darkness of their
Cogitations. As touching those few Sentences of the Sibyllae, extant in
Augustine and Lactantius; first, neither were they universally known;
secondly, and were full of obscurity and doubtfulnesse; thirdly, as most
think, not understood of them that uttered them.

Leaving these Dreams, proceed we to enquire, how and in what sort Christ is
means to us of salvation. There is of late sprung up in the Church of God an
Heresy, strange to Christian ears, That Christ no otherwise saues us, then by
Doctrine and Example; teaching us the way to Life, and by his own practice
guiding us so therein, that if we follow his steps, we are made partakers of
Salvation. Me thinks, they think of this second Adam, much what as Pelagians
of the first: As he hurt not his Posterity, otherwise then by the poison of
his evil example; so neither does Christ help us, but by his Doctrine and
holy Example.

Now, First, It is strange the Lord should so far demit his Son, and send
him down from Heaven in Philip. 2.7.
the form of a servant, for this end only to trace out the way to Heaven, and
teach it unto us. Sufficiently in all times taught he it to his Church, before
ever Christ was incarnate, inspiring the Prophets.



exempla Patientiae, says Leo, but not dona Iustitiae.

There is a second opinion, partly Popish, placing the main of Christ's
mediation in this, that he merited for us Grace to fulfill the Law, and so to
merit salvation at Gods hand. That Christ's merit has purchased unto us Grace
to live holily, we deny not; but that such Grace, as whereby we might merit
salvation, is in Scripture unheard of. This we find, First, That our 1. Pet.
2.5.
Sacrifices are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Secondly, That our services
shall be rewarded, for the promise sake of the Father, and the merits of his
Son; But that his merit has transferred such dignity to our works, that
they should become Romans 8.18.
worthy of the glory that shall be revealed, we find in no Scripture. This
still we find; our best works have, First, Their blemishes. Secondly, Their
interruptions. Thirdly, The most eminent amongst the Saints, Psalm. 143.2.
not daring to present their best works to be judged without mercy.

How then by means of Christ? The Apostle answers; In that he dyed for us.

In which words we are to consider, first, their Scope; secondly, Christ's Fact,
He died for us; thirdly, the end and fruit of his Death, That we might live
together with him.

Christ's death is as well an instruction to holiness, as meritorious of
salvation. Paul learned from thence, to live not to himself, 2. Cor. 5.15.
but to the glory of him that died for him: and propounds it, as matter Romans
6.11.
of mystical imitation to all Gods people. Well weighed, how forcible
incentiues affoords it to holiness?

First, It most lively sets out the horror and haynousnesse of sin, and the
fierceness of Gods wrath against it, more then all Judgments God ever
executed upon the world of the ungodly. They are fearful Judgments, and to
be trembled at, that we are remembered of by Peter and Jude; the downe-fall of
Angels, drowning of the old World, firing of Sodom and Gomorrhe, etc. and
such, as seriously meditated, cannot me thinks, but make us tremble and quake.
But of all evidences of Gods wrath against sin, none like this, the death of
his Son; if we consider, first, how dear he was to his Father; secondly, how
excellent his Person; thirdly, how bitter and full of agony his Passion;
fourthly, how holy, harmless, separate from sinners, himself was in
himself; knowing no sin by experience, or personal practice, but
vnder-going only the punishment due to sins of his Chosen. Every of these
circumstances in the death of Christ, set forth Sin to us in his colors, and
should make us swear our selves enemies to the works of Darkness.

Secondly, In it we see the wonderful Ephesians. 3.19.
and unmeasurable love of Christ to our souls, which passes knowledge; a 2.
Cor. 5.14.
compulsorie argument to PAVL, to live to the glory of his Redeemer.

To you that believe, Christ crucified is a stone elect and precious, but unto
the disobedient, 1. Pet. 2.7, 8.
a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense. A stone of stumbling indeed, and
rock of offense, especially through abuse of the meditation of his Death. The
Jews indeed stumbled at it, but by another occasion, and the Gentiles thought
it foolishness: the one, expecting a glorious estate of the Messiah in the
World; the other, deeming it a foolish and absurd thing, to expect Life out of
Death, Glory to issue out of such extreme Contempt. But our people, persuaded
(as they would seem) of the validity thereof, to procure remission and
salvation, stretch the virtue of it farther then ever it was intended: in such
sort, that the enforcement of holiness seems absurder from no ground then
this; Because Christ died for us. Rather since Christ died for us, what needs
such niceness? Let us feed our selves without fear; our sins are expiated
by the Death of Christ. To whom, me thinks, I may say as Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy.
32.6.
Do you thus requite the Lord, O people foolish and unwise? and protest with
Paul to men of that spirit, Gal. 5.2.
Christ shall profit them nothing.

Let all Gods people be exhorted so to use the Meditation of Christ's Death,
that it may be to them an incentiue to holiness. It is a blessed Soul that so
uses it; and reapes as comfortable assurance as any can be, that he has share
in the merit of it, when the Meditation is thus powerful to 1. Pet. 4.1.
work Mortification, and care to depart from evil.

It is said of David, he once, in an effeminate humor, longed to drink Water
of the Well of Bethleem: three of his Worthies break through the host of
Philistims, to save his longing. But when it is brought, he trembles to taste
it, because it was the blood of them that fetched it: 2. Sam. 23.15, 17.
Be it far from me, O Lord, that I should do the; Is it not the blood of the
men that went in ieopardie of their lives? So, it may be thy licentious nature
may long to taste of the pleasures of sin: but me thinks, when thou shall
consider, as DAVID, It is the blood of thy Savior; that, that cost him his
dearest blood, to expiate and kill it in thee; thou should say as he, Be it
far from me, O Lord: Is it not the blood of the Son of God, that made his
Soul an offering for sin, to purge me, to be of his peculiar people, zealous
of good works?

As touching the Fact it self, Christ's dying for us; because it falls fitlyer
to be largely treated in another Text, I spare to insist on it.

The fruit and end of it follows, That we might live together with him, that
glorious life which he now lives at the right hand of his Father; and that,
whether we sleep or wake, that is, live or die. So then,

How-euer God disposes of the state present of his children, their salvation
is certain: whether they live or die, this they are, or may be assured of,
living holily in this World, they shall live happily with Christ in the World
to come. Upon like Grounds, Gods Decree, and Christ's Death, is Paul's glorious
Triumph, in the name and person of all Gods children. Therefore, Romans 8.38, 39
neither life nor death, no State or Creature shall separate from the love of
God, or deprive of Salvation. And that of the same Apostle, Romans 14.8.
Whether we live or die, we are the Lords. And see how solid the foundations
of this Assurance is; built, first, on Gods Decree; secondly, on Christ's Death.
Can any hinder the Lords Appointments? or frustrate the virtue of the Death of
Christ?

1. Pet. 4.19.
Resigning our selves to the Lords absolute disposing in our outward estate,
whether it shall be by life or death: As 1. Sam. 3.18.
ELI, as 2. Sam. 15 26.
DAVID; It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems good in his eyes. Am I
assured, that neither shall hinder my salvation? Then, though the Lord prolong
my life, to see never so many evils; though he call to suffer death, never so
untimely, or full of torture; me thinks I cannot but say as they, The Lords
will be fulfilled.

Sometimes it falls out, that life to Gods children seems a burden: So did it
to 1. King. 19.4.
Elias, seeing the miserable deprauation of all things in the Kingdom of
Israel, and the implacable fury of that Monster Iezabel: So to Job. 6.9, 10.
Job, suspecting his strength in such extremity of Afflictions. Sometimes
Death, especially violent, affrights even to amazement: It is, indeed, the most
terrible of all painful evils. Consider we, in either temptation, what Paul
here teaches; What ever our lot shall be, whether Life or Death, our Salvation
is certain; founded on Gods unchangeable Decree, purchased by the precious
Bloud-shedding and Death of Christ.

If Life be perplexed in misery, yet he whom thou have trusted, is able to
keep what thou have committed unto him. If Death seize thee, whether natural
or violent, it cannot separate: whether we sleep, or wake, die, or live, we
shall live together with him that died for us.

VERSE. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even
as also we do.


THe words contain another Precept, subordinately serving to the practice of
the duties of Sobriety, Watchfulness, etc. formerly enjoined. In them,
obseruable are, first, the Duties, secondly, the Persons to whom they are
enjoined, thirdly, the necessity and ground of the Duties, fourthly, the
mollification of the Precept.

The Duties are, to comfort and edify. The word translated Comfort, signifies
indifferently to comfort, to exhort, to entreat. That of Edifying, is
metaphorical, and signifies first to build up: thence it is translated, to
signify any furthering or promoting of another, or our selves, in grace, or
gracious practice, by Instruction, Admonition, Exhortation, etc.

The Duty then is of all Gods people, to further each other by all holy means
in gracious courses. To the People it is said, Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another daily; to the People commanded, To Heb. 10.24.
provoke each other to Love, and good Works; to the People belongs that of
Jude, Jude 20.
Edify one another in your holy Faith. And long before, Leuit. 19.17.
To rebuke their Neighbor, and not suffer him to sin. Practice of Saints is
ancient; Before-time it was wont to be said in Israel, 1. Sam. 9.9.
Come, let us go up to the Seer, etc.

It is true, that in the manner of performing, something there is in all these,
peculiar to Ministers. Thus conceive this mutual edification to differ from
that we call Ministerial. First, the one is with Authority; the other, out
of sociall Charity. Secondly, to do these things in the Congregation, is so
peculiar to the Ministry, that he is guilty of Heb. 5.4.
usurping the honor of AARON, that intrudes upon it: yet in the Family and
private Conversation, the Duties belong to all.

Ioh. 9.22.
That whosoever joined to Christ, should be cast out of the Synagogue. I make
no question, but Gods Decree was as peremptory for the Ordainers, to cast them
out of his Kingdom. Christ, I am sure, cries heavy Woe to such, as Luke 11.52.
neither entered themselves, nor suffered those that would. And, but that I know
all have not Faith, and that the World cannot receive the Spirit of God; a man
might make question, whether these were the days of the New Testament, I
mean, for the behavior of the multitude. It was prophesied of those days,
Zach. 8.21. Mic. 4.2.
They should one provoke another to piety. The Prophecy is fulfilled in
those, whose hearts God has seasoned with Grace; whosoever hinders it, gives
evidence he has no part nor portion in this business. How full is every
Congregation of feoffing Ishmaels, that labor by reproaches, and like
persecutions, to discourage those they see coming onward to Christ? It is true
of these times, that the Prophet complained of in Israel, Whosoever walks
uprightly, makes himself not a reproach only, but a prey. And, which is
prodigious, me thinks, in Parents (to whom, what should be so precious as the
souls of their children?) rather then they shall share in the Inheritance of
the Saints, their temporal Inheritance shall be aliened from them. Woe, and a
heavy Woe to such: Mat. 18.6.
How much better were it, that a Millstone were hanged about their neck, and
they cast into the Sea?

A second sort, is of men sinning by careless neglect of these Duties;
thinking it well, and enough for them, that they hinder no man's progression in
grace. And surely, such are the times generally, that he seems to deserve the
repute of a good man, that does no evil, though he do no good.

Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden; and whereto serve our Ministers?

to turn, but to Ezech. 18.30
cause others to turn: and the sins of others, which thou art bound to
hinder, by not hindering, become thine. The duties in public, concern the
Ministers. But is it for naught, that ye are called a Kingdom Revel. 1.6.
of Priests? and have all received 1. Joh. 2.20.
an Ointment from the Father?

Be all exhorted to more conscience of these duties. First, Our near
conjunction in the Body of Christ requires it. There is in the natural body,
amongst the members, 1. Cor. 12.25.
mutual care each for other: so should it be in the Body of Christ. Secondly,
Thou losest not by any good in this kind done to another: The comfort and
benefit of all these offices, is reflected upon thine own soul. Thirdly, If
none of these move, let the example of wicked men sway with thee; They
compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. Prou. 4.16.
Their sleep departs, except they cause some to fall. Quodammodo Natural est
vnumquemque velle, sieve in vitijs sieve in virtutibus associare consortem. Let
not them be more industrious to gain to Hell, then thou art to win to
Heaven. Fourthly, Let the excellency of the work move thee. Thou shall
perhaps Mat. 18.15.
gain a brother; Iam. 5.20.
save a soul: for such Pearls who would not strive? Fifthly, Non est talis
illa Paradisi haereditas, vt possidentium numero minuatur.

necessity of private admonitions, exhortations, etc. collected from the
particle of illation. Necessity is of two sorts: First, Praecepti. Secondly,
Medij. Necessary in the first kind, we call all things that lie on our
Conscience by Cods Precept. Necessary as means, are whatsoever God has
ordained as helps and furtherance to obtain the ends whereto they are
ordained. This understand here. The necessity, our many infirmities, and
imperfections, abundantly teach us in experience. First, Our inconstancy
especially in good courses, if there be not continual means of confirmation.
There is nothing more variable then man's Nature, from good to worse. No
marvel, for goodness is all from without; has neither root nor nourishment
from our Nature. MOSES is but a while from the people, they Exodus 32.1.
fall back to Idolatry. PAVL no sooner gone from Galatia, but they are turned
to another Gospel. Gal. 1.6.
I marvel, says he, it is so soon. His marvel grew from this: he reputed
them gracious; relapsing otherwise, is not strange in men that are Natural.
Secondly, A kind of remissness and torpor, Ancients call it Acedia, the best
are often ouer-taken withal, except there be continual excitements. It is not a
fault peculiar to the Angel of Ephesus, to have Revel. 2.4.
his fervor abated; every of us admit such declinations; a spirit of slumber
we are often ouer-taken withal, that makes us dull in hearing, praying,
practice, all holy duties.

Wherefore suffer ye the word of exhortation, and admonition each from other.
DAVID Psalm. 141.5.
prays for a friendly Reproouer; as for a great benefit: and JOB despises not
the advice of his Job 31.13.
servant contending with him. Our times are generally in a Lethargy of
security: no man is more troublesome, then he that would keep us waking;
though that, says Austine, be the way to cure us. We think our selves able to
advise, and exhort our selves; we love not many Masters. Are we acquainted
with our own hearts when we thus speak? Alas, how cold, and even frozen are
our affections often? How dissolute our practice? How dull our memory? How
drowzie our Conscience? etc. wherefore suffer the word of exhortation. And to
this end further consider, that what we suffer not our Brethren to quicken in
us, by admonition; we occasion the LORD to Hos. 5.15.
revive by sharper corrections.

How many afflictions from Gods hand heavy and grievous, do I persuade my
self, we might prevent, if we were careful to minister, and admit wholesome
admonitions each from other? The LORD will not suffer Grace to rust in his
Children. If admonitions of Brethren be grievous, he will either make thine
own 2. Sam. 24.10.
heart to smite thee, and that stroke is grievous; or stir up some adversary
2. Sam. 16.7, 8
to reproach, and shame thee; or else, himself remember thee with some heavy
visitation.

The mollification of the Precept remains; for that of the persons, falls
fitter into another Text.

As ye do: He seems to prevent the objection they might in likelihood make,
as if this advice were a kind of reproachful exprobration of their neglecting
these duties. Not so, says the Apostle; that ye do this, it is my persuasion
and acknowledgement: Nevertheless, let me advise you to do, even what ye do.

to duties most carefully performed, there may be exhortations; neither may
we think much, to be admonished to do even what we do. Our Savior often
calls for audience from his most attentive Auditory; while they are hearing, he
cries out, Mat. 13.9.
Hear.

Reasons.
First, We hold it a rule current: that howsoever gracious gifts cannot be
utterly lost; yet gracious practice may be interrupted, even when it is most
necessary, it should be continued. Ye Gal. 5.7.
did run well, says Paul to the Galatians; their course it should seem was
interrupted.

Secondly, In best things, nothing is comfortable without perseverance. Gal.
3.4.
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? and that is known of EZECHIEL; If
Ezech. 3.20.
a righteous man turn from his righteousness all is forgotten. And howsoever
it be true, perseverance of Gods Children is certain; yet this is as true;
exhortations to perseverance are means of perseuering.

Thirdly, The Lord requires of his children continual growth, and increase in
holy practice. Standing at a stay in good courses, is as dangerous as
declining; yea, a step to backe-sliding. Therefore said the Apostle, Though ye
love one another, yet I beseech you 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
that ye increase more and more.



Through ignorance I know it is, it comes to pass, that our admonitions,
instructions, exhortations, are many times censured as accusations of our
people; and forsooth we seem to imply, the duties are wholly neglected, that
we press with such instance. And if they be points already known, we think
the insisting thereon, insinuates our ignorance. But specially; if they be
sins we reprove, and they not apparent in the Congregation, that is
presently interpreted, as a matter of slander, and no less then defamation
laid upon the Parish. Show the danger of Drunkenness, Whoring, etc. He makes
us, they say, a company of such Miscreants. There are none such amongst us.
Now vtinam. Would God we might once see our Congregations so far reformed,
that the public practice of such sins might be blushed at.

But suppose it true, we are free from such sins: In that case, think not
your persons, but your Nature accused. And that I am sure none can excuse from
inclinations to foulest sins. That speech of Hazael, argued little
acquaintance with the corruption of Nature: 2. King. 8.13.
Is thy servant a Dog, that I should do this thing? Sure it is, there is no
sin, nor degree of sin, but the seeds thereof remain in our Nature.

Secondly, Sometimes they are as IONATHANS Arrows, to give warning, and
prevent the sins in after-practice. As the Lord sometimes visits his Children
with afflictions, not so much to punish sins past, 2. Cor. 12 7.
as to prevent sins to come; so do his Ministers sometimes reprove, and
threatten sins, not so much to correct, as to prevent them; and make us
cautionate and watchful against them. Like think when thou hear thy self
admonished, to do what thou do; say, as thou may say; Sure it is but
need. A dull and drowzie Nature I carry about me, soon weary of well-doing:
or it may be, the Lord sees me likely to faint, and therefore directs the
Minister to be my Remembrancer; to prevent my declinings: at least, say; My
pace is too slow; the Lord uses these Eccles. 12.11.
as goades, to prick me forward to perfection.

VERSE. 12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you:

And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be at
peace among your selves.


Connection. The Apostle had given advice to exhort and edify one another: lest
any should infer; These duties being mutually performed in private, there
will be no great use of the Ministry; says the Apostle, Mistake not: though
the duties be enjoined you for private exercise, yet must the public
Ministry have its due honor and respect. Know them, etc.

Private Christian duties of exhortation, admonition, etc. must be performed,
that in no case the public Ministry be neglected. Heb. 10.24, 25
Provoke one another to love and good works: yet forsake not the gatherings
together of the Saints. It is their fault, says the Apostle, that are grown
in that kind dissolute. To the Hebrews, Paul had written a large Epistle, full
of heavenly Doctrines and Admonitions; by reading whereof, they might attain a
comfortable measure of knowledge, and other grace: yet I beseech you (says he)
Heb. 13.22.
suffer the words of Exhortation; he means from their Pastors ordinary, whom
God had set over them.

Need I add Reasons?

First, I say as James, He that said, Admonish, exhort, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
Despise not Prophecy. If then thou attend to Admonitions private, and
neglectest the public Ministry, art thou not a Transgressour of the Law?
Christian duties are all subordinate: They fight not; neither may we think,
the performance of one, dispenses for neglect of another.

Secondly, Though, no doubt, a gracious blessing may Mark. 16.16.
to be present.

Thirdly, The Lord has appointed the Ministry Mal. 2.7.
The people must seek the Law at the mouth of the Priest. And who of the
people must not say, as the Eunuch, in sundry points of knowledge, upon like
question propounded; Understand thou? etc. Act. 8.30, 31.
How can I, without a Guide? Besides, in every duty there is as well a Modus,
as the Action; circumstances many, to be observed in exhorting, admonishing,
etc. every duty. It suffices not to say, as the custom is, they know as
well as Preachers can tell them, what they must do: the manner of doing, must
be withal attended.



But we must remember, that God requires it as a duty in all that he Genesis
18.19.
commends in ABRAHAM. And if Paul, so great an Apostle, thought he might be
Romans 1.12.
comforted by the peoples Faith; who are we, to disdain the help of private
men?

Another sort there are, so highly conceited of the sufficiency of private
study, meditation, etc. that they think the public Ministry all-out, as
needless; and they, forsooth, choose to serve God at home. But think you, the
Lord has said in vain, Despise not Prophecy, Heb. 10.25.
Forsake not the Assemblies? Are thy gifts greater then were they of Primitive
Christians, that continued Act. 2.42.
daily in the Apostles Doctrine? Surely, though I know it is true; private
helps, seasonably used, are accompanied with a gracious blessing from God: yet
this I may boldly say with SOLOMON, Neglect of the Public, brings a Curse
upon the Private. Pro. 28.9.
He that turns his ear from hearing the Law, his very prayer shall be
abominable.

In the words are prescribed duties concerning them toward Ministers: The
particulars are, first, the description of the Object of these Duties: They
are, first, such as labor, that is their Work; secondly, such as are over us,
that is their Dignity; thirdly, that admonish, that is a specialtie of their
Office. Secondly, the duties the people owe to such, are, first, Reverence,
know them; secondly, Love; whose, first, measure, and secondly, ground, is
propounded: It must be singular love, and that for their Works sake.

To know, signifies not a simple notice or knowledge of our persons, but a
knowledge joined with reverence, and high esteem. I will not Psalm. 101.4.
know a wicked person; that is, such shall be extremely contemptible in his
eyes. Not to know, in this sense, is to contemn; To know, is to reverence, and
have in honor.

Duty pointed at, due from people to their Ministers; is Reverence, and high
esteem, in respect of their Calling, and the Work thereof. This is that, as
some think, that Paul means by 1. Tim. 5.17.
double honor: A single reverence and respect is not sufficient; every good
office must be doubled to them.

The Lord has every way endeavored to make them reverend.

First, Giving them Titles of highest respect: Mal. 2.7.
Messengers they are called of the Lord of Hosts, 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors of Christ, Angels of the Churches, Fathers of their People.

Secondly, Their Authority wonderful: To them are given Mat. 16.19.
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to open and shut Heaven; not as they
please: yet so, as the Lord ratifieth their regular proceedings in the Court-of
Heaven. Ioh. 20.23.
Power to remit and retain sins: So that the Conscience usually receives not
the assurance of Pardon, but by their testimony and declaration.

Thirdly, Their Gifts ordinarily above the common rate; as Knowledge,
Experience, Comfort; what not? The Psalm. 25.14.
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him Yet a greater insight into the
secrets of Gods Kingdom, is given to Ministers: Their lips, the Mal. 2.7.
Treasure-house of Knowledge and Understanding.

Fourthly, What should I speak, how the Lord by them, as Instruments,
conueyeth to his children all grace that accompanies Salvation? In such sort,
that what the people receive not by this Hand, as it were, of God, cause enough
they have to suspect, that it is not such as accompanies Salvation. 1. Cor.
3.5.
By Ministers he works Faith; by them he conuerts, sanctifies, comfort, 1.
Tim. 4.16.
saves.

Hence have their persons been ever venerable in the eyes of the Saints.
CORNELIUS Act. 10.25.
gives PETER more then sociall reverence; Galatians receive PAVL as an Angel
from Heaven; IOASH, an Idolater, salutes ELISHA; 2. King. 13.14
His father, the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel. Of Alexander, the Great
Monarch and Conqueror of the World, Antiquit. lib. 11. cap. 8.
writes Josephus; that he was so moved with the presence of Iaddus the High
Priest, that he dis-mounts himself to do him reverence; and in favor of
him, spares the sacking of Jerusalem. Thus has God done, to make them
reverend; thus have Saints and Pagans done, to testify their reverence.

Isay to come upon Israel: Isai. 3.5.
Children should presume against the Ancient, and the vile against the
Honorable; no less, that in HOSHEA, The people were as they Hosh. 4.4.
that rebuked the Priest.

This Confusion is come upon this generation, and I dare say, is forerunner of
a heavy Vengeance. No man almost so vile, but thinks himself a better to the
ablest Minister: yea, the name it self we have cast, as a term of Rep^och
and Contempt, upon our faces.

Reasons, some may not be denied to stick in Ministers:

First, In many, their slender, or no gifts to discharge Bernard. de Conuers.
ad Cler. cap. 29.
Curritur passim ad Sacros ordines and reuerenda ipsis quoque Spiritibus
Angelicis Ministeria apprehenduntur, sine reuerentia, sine consideratione. As
in Ieroboams days, Who would fill his hand, might consecrate himself, though
he were of the lowest of the people. Woe to the hands that admit them, and
thereby cast contempt upon the reverend Calling.

Secondly, Another, the lewd life of many in place of Mal. 2.3, 9.
casts Dung in such men's faces, and makes their persons as unsavory Salt, to
be trodden under foot of men. Through their occasion, the whole Calling is
exposed to contempt.

There are others in the people: first, That they see not the necessity of
their Ministry; nor therefore know to prize the worth thereof; specially,
their no experience of the comfort and power of it. Secondly, It were strange,
the plenty of the Blessing should make it contemptible: but true it is, in all
experience, familiarity even with such favors of God, breeds contempt. The
Word of God 1. Sam. 3.1.
was precious, while it was geason: Now we have every day Manna, though it be
Bread from Heaven, and Food meet for Angels, we grow to loath it; and with the
Word, the Messengers that bring it.

Now God be merciful to the sins of this Land; and pray all for mercy at
Gods hand for this, besides all our other sins; The contempt and vile esteem
of the Calling and Persons of Ministers; with it is entwyned the contempt of
the Word of God, yea, of Christ himself. And we have cause to fear, lest for
it, together with our disobedience, the Lord send Amos 8.11.
a Famine of hearing the Word of God.

The second duty enjoined in respect of Ministers, is Love. Where, is first to
be considered, the measure of it; it must be Love in abundance; in an
ouer-flowing measure; an ouer-ouerplus of Love for our Work sake. The Notes
here are two:

First, That there is a lawful preferring of one before another in the measure
of Love. They call it usually, the order of Loving. Paul makes profession, His
Love was 2. Cor. 2.4.
more abundant to Corinthians, then to sundry other Churches. And left any
think, it might be his infirmity; what he practiced toward them, he here
prescribes to be done to Ministers. Gods own Example we have herein, for
ought I know, as a pattern to be imitated: He hates nothing that he has
made; yet is his Love Tit. 3.4.
to Man above many, yea, Psalm. 8.4.
above all Creatures, celebrated. Amongst men, Israel is singled out with that
special Encomium, GODS Exodus 19.5.
peculiar People, the People of his Love. Accordingly, the effects and fruits
of Love toward them, abound in the measure.

If that Example may seem transcendent, that of his Son, in days of his
Flesh, is beyond exception. His own he Ioh. 13.1.
loved, all: But there was a Disciple that had the specialtie of his Affection,
JOHN 23.
the Disciple, whom he loved; that is, more then others.

In Love are three things; first, Well-wishing; secondly, Pleasure or
delight-taking in the party loved; thirdly, Beneficence, or actual
well-doing. In all these may be a preferment given to one above another. Of the
first: what the people speak to David, dissuading his going to Battle, must
be holden of all such like public persons: 2. Sam. 18.3.
they are worth thousands of others; their safety and welfare to be preferred
in our well-wishing. And for Delight-taking; who knows not, but though Mat.
5.44.
enemies must be prayed for, yea, though enemies unto God; yet must our Psalm.
16.3.
delight be in the Saints that are upon Earth, and such as excel in Virtue.
For Beneficence, the place is plain, Do good to all, Gal. 6.10.
especially to them of the household of Faith.

To set down particular rules of direction, according whereto to guide the
measures of Love, is not my purpose. This once, as a general pertinent to that
which follows, let be remembered; Persons, on whose welfare depends the common
good, are in all degrees and kinds of Love to be preferred.



In Alms, and works of Mercy, the prophanest thinks much, if they be not
equalled to the holiest. In Company and Familiarity, they that, I dare say,
hate the company of such, as run not to the same excess of Riot; yet make
it matter of Crime, that they are not admitted, on equal terms, with men,
whose graces are most amiable and lovely.

I am of Ambrose his mind; In Charity, Peccat qui praepostere agit; He
sins, that is preposterous in loving; setting that first, that should be
last. The worst I wish such men as envy other men's preferment, in the
entireness of our affections; That they would store themselves with the
amiable graces of Gods Spirit; that Psalm. 45.13.
Beauty within, as the Psalmist calls it. In the mean time, they must give us
leave, as the Lord charge JEREMY, to Ier. 15.19.
take away the precious from the vile.

The next point of notice, is the Particular; Who they are, Paul here commends
to the specialtie of our Love. They are Ministers. They then, by Gods
Ordinance, should have a specialtie in the peoples Love. The Scripture points
us to three sorts or degrees of Love.

First, (...), Love of Men, as Men, for the nature of Man, and common gifts of
Humanity they are endowed withal. This may not be denied to enemies, no, not
to enemies of God. Nature is Gods work, in whomsoever.

Secondly, (...), Love of Neighbors; that is, as I now interpret, such as are
near us in Society, Nature, or friendly Affection.

Thirdly, (...), Love of Brethren, for Sanctity sake, and fellowship in the
Spirit of Adoption and Regeneration.

The Apostle here points to a fourth; wherein he will have our Love
ouer-flowing, and, after a sort, excessive. It is to the persons of Ministers.
Does any man ask Reasons? Besides the general tie of like humane Nature;
besides that of Society and near Conjunction; yea, besides that Brotherhood
and participation of like precious Faith; they have yet something more, that
lays claim to a singular measure of Love. Besides eminence of Grace, and
Office, they are Instruments by which the Lord reaches to us all Blessings
that concern Life and Godliness. Whereout grew that question in Schools,
whether the fathers of the flesh, or the Spiritual Parents, should be
preferred. And though they confess, in matter of Beneficence, the Natural
has preferment above the Spiritual Parent, because he is more properly cause
of our being in Nature, then the other of our being in Grace; yet for that
point of wel-wishing, it is accorded; it must be more then to any private man
joined to us in the nearest bond of affinity or blood. So AQVILA and PRISCILLA
prefer Romans 16.4.
PAVLS safety before their own. Good Obadiah, not without adventure of his
life, 1. King. 18.4.
hides the Prophets in Caves from the rage of IEZABEL. So precious in former
times were the persons of Ministers.



The Reason generally is no other, then that was of Achab for Micaiah. Of all
the rest, he 1. King 22.8.
was most odious, because he dealt most plainly. See also Revelation 11.6.
Gal. 4.16.

It is strange to see, how every act of their life is sifted, how tender some
men pretend their Consciences to be, in a Ministers omissions but of
circumstances; when Gods Commandments are, without scruple, seen, and
suffered to be contemned. The truth is, not their Conscience, but their malice
is more to a Ministers honesty, then to the peoples greatest profaneness. Of
it I say no more; only I wish such men to consider, how tender care the Lord
has taken for the persons of Ministers. See, says PAVL, that they may be 1.
Cor. 16.10
without fear amongst you: Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm.
And what is done to them, is interpreted Luke 10.16.
as done to Christ, whether in good or evil; and so will be recompensed at the
Day of general retribution.

The motive or ground of this singular Love follows, Love for their Work
sake.

Not every love of a Ministers person, is that wherein a man has comfort, but
that especially which is for his work sake. There are, as it falls out, sundry
amiable gifts concurring in a Ministers person; suppose points of Nature, and
Art, Vrbanitie, Liberality, sociable Conversation and the like; but the
comfortablest Lodestone of Love is his work.

What is that? First, His labor. Secondly, That which results from his labor.
His labor in the 1. Tim. 5.17.
Word and Doctrine; which elsewhere he calls, The work of an Evangelist. His
governing and guiding the Flock by Discipline, and godly example: this is his
labor.

The work resulting out of his labor, when God is pleased to bless it unto
the people, is Repentance, New Birth, Faith, Comfort; Or if there be any other
Grace, or comfortable blessing of God, whereof the souls of the people are
made partakers; this is the fruit of his labor. Wherefore also God is not
ashamed to call them his 1. Cor. 3.9.
(...); giving us, after a sort, our partnership with him in the salvation of
his people.



In this it is true, as in any, love to Ministers and Saints. To love the
Saints and to do them good, is not so much: except the very Saint-ship be the
Lodestone of love. To love a Minister is not much; except his work be that
that draws affection. It is that our Savior points at: Mat. 10.42.
A Disciple in the name of a Disciple: a Prophet in the name of a Prophet. It
is noted of Iehoash a cursed Idolater, that he had much respect to the Prophet
Elisha; and at his death weeps over him with that bitter lamentation: 2. King.
13.14
Oh my father, my father, the Horsemen and Charets of Israel! what was the
reason of his love? questionless not his work: but the help he found in him
for support of his Kingdom. Of the people it is noted, they followed Christ,
and were sometimes zealous for his safety: the Reason was; he fed their
bellies by miracle, and cured their bodily diseases; his Doctrine, in the mean
time, sounds John 6.66.
harsh, and occasions many to forsake him. His reproves so bitter and
distasteful, that they John 8.59.
go about to stone him.

In like sort, I doubt not, but there may be found amongst men carnal, some
even loving respect to the person of a faithful Minister; as perhaps, for that
they are wel-vsed in their payments, and that which chiefly draws the brutish
multitude, the feeding of their bellies. Perhaps the gifts GOD has bestowed on
some, may draw not only reverence, but love to their persons. In all this yet
they have no comfort: except the work be it that draws affection. He that
can say, I love a Minister, because he teaches me to know God; because he
informs me of duty; and reprooues my steppings aside; that is the man that
has comfort in his love.

What think you then of them, to whom the work is the thing that is most
odious? To say nothing of the baser people, whose complaint professed is, that
the merry World is gone, since preaching came up: even amongst them that would
seem wise, this is heard sometime as reason of their less love; They could
love the Minister well, were it not for his double diligence in preaching. His
honesty, and peaceablenesse, and learning they seem to love; the work is
that they profess to hate. Oh cursed state of such men's souls! I conclude it
thus; He that loves not a Minister, even for admonition and reproof sake, has
no comfort in his love. Jews hear with patience Stephens narration; his
reproof is Gall and Worme-wood; Acts 7.54.
Therefore they gnash with their teeth and stone him.

And be at peace among your selves. The duty concerns the people, not only
toward their Ministers, though some so conceive, but each toward another.
Peace is of three sorts. First, Feigned, as that of Judas. Secondly, Inordinate,
as that of Herod and Pilate. Thirdly, Christian; the bond and limit whereof is
Sanctity. A duty euery-where commended unto us, Heb. 12.14. James 3. Psalm.
141.

And so how many Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6
Unities the Apostle remembers us of, that we might be persuaded to this
unity of minds and affections. It were long to number the reasons, the
Scripture gives to press the study, and endeavor of it. It is good and
pleasant: Psalm. 133.1.
how good and pleasant? some things are good that are not pleasant; as
patience, and tolerance of evils. Some are pleasant, but not good; as
Epicurisme, Vanity, and voluptuous Living; some neither good, nor pleasant; as
Envy, a torturing evil. But of Peace and brotherly Concord, says DAVID, It
is good and pleasant. It were long to tell, how God delights to style himself,
The 2. Cor. 13.11.
God of Peace; how Christ came Ephesians. 2.14.
to make our Peace. How the Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace; Gods
Children, Luke 10.6.
Children of Peace. Would God, we could once frame our selves to live at
Peace, I mean Peace with Holiness. For of unholy peace, I say as HIEROME;
Melius est dissidium pietatis ortum causa, quam vitiosa Concordia. And that
those unquiet spirits amongst us, would once turn themselves to more amiable
courses of Unity.

Surely, I must needs say, I sometimes think with DAVID, My soul has too
long dwelt with them that are Enemies unto Peace; and cry, Woe is me, that I am
constrained to dwell with Meshech. I am loath to say, as PAVL, Vtinam
excindantur, that trouble us; but I pray GOD give them more peaceable spirits;
or else as he, If any delight to dwell in Meshech, I would, for my part, he
had a Tabernacle there.

But sure, so long as those three Enemies to Peace be found amongst us, we
must never expect it.

First, Pro. 13.10.
Pride, by which, says SOLOMON, men make contention: whiles every man delights
to seem somebodie; a ruler even of those, that God has set over them. The
Sheep in Judea were wont to follow their. Shepherd. Their guize in England is
to go before him. It is as true of the Mystical, as of the Natural Sheep.

The second is Self-love; and this in things of this life, is still the Mother
and Nurse of Contentions; whiles every man urges extremity of right, and
parts with no penny profit, to purchase this peerless blessing of Peace. Genesis
13.9.
Thus did not ABRAHAM.

The third is, busy meddling in things that concern us not. Saint Paul does
not for nothing couple these two together; 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Studio to be quiet and do your own business.

Curiosity is a turbulent evil. They are restless spirits, that are so busy
and meddling with things impertinent to them. Be exhorted, I beseech you, in
the Apostles words, Philip. 2.3, 4.
to do nothing by contention and vain glory: labor for Humility: Look not
every man on his own things, but on the things also of another. Do your own
business. In a word: If it be possible, as much as in us lies, Romans 12.18.
let us have Peace with all men: so the God of Peace shall be with us.

VERSE. 14. Now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are disorderly,
comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all.


A Heap of duties are here couched together; four in number; the three first
have special respect to some particulars. The fourth concerns us, in respect
of all.

The particulars, Paul's prudence prescribes fittingly to the state, and quality
of the persons. In every of them consider we, First, The duty. Secondly, The
persons to whom it must be performed.

The first duty is admonition; the persons to whom it belongs, are the
disorderly. See who they are. Interpreters think the Metaphor borrowed from the
custom of War; wherein every Soldier has his station, and is assigned to his
rank; from which when he swarues, he becomes inordinate. So conceive they the
Apostle to intimate, that God has assigned to every of the Church his special
place and calling, wherein to serve God; wherein when they grow dissolute, and
transgress their limits, they violate the order that the Lord has prescribed.
In the next Epistle the Apostle seems to explain what he meant by the
inordinate, they were such 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
as transgressed the rule prescribed by him, for better ordering of outward
life. Join all together, we shall find four sorts of inordinate walkers.
First of them, that have no special station, or calling in Church or
Commonwealth, wherein to serve God. Secondly, Such as are dissolute or
negligent in their vocation. Thirdly, Those that intrude upon other men's
callings. Fourthly, Such as transgress wholesome ordinances, established for
better ordering of common life.

Touching the first sort, living without particular calling. The order set
down by the Lord himself for assignement of every one to his special
vocation, is as ancient as the World. Adam in Paradise is appointed Genesis 2.15.
to dress the Garden. It is Ambrose his observation out of Philo: Ambros. de
Paradiso, cap. 4.
Though Paradise, in respect of the fertility of the place, needed no
husbandry, yet because the first man was to be a Law to his Posterity,
therefore is he enjoined labor; to instruct us to painfulnesse, and
industrious employment in our vocations. Accordingly after the fall, thus
trained they up their Children; Genesis 4 2.
CAIN was a tiller of the ground; ABEL a keeper of sheep: like was the course
of Patriarchs, as we may read along the Story. Yea, the cursed seed of Cain,
though they degenerated into vanity, yet had they their several employments.
In the Israelitish Commonwealth, after their settling in the Land of Promise,
such provision was made, that every Tribe and Family had their husbandry to be
employed in. The Tribe of LEVI, whose exemption was most from manual Arts, yet
had their several places of Ministry.

In this first rank of inordinate walkers, we have, alas, how many to be
ranged? It is vain perhaps to speak of Monks, and such like Titus 1.12.
idle-bellies, as PAVL calls Cretians. Yet this I may say for them: they had the
fairest pretense of all of their disorderly order; giving themselves to
devotion and heavenly contemplation. A life, I confess, above all others to
be chosen, were a man borne to himself alone. But this ground we must
remember; Every man on Earth is a member of some common body. And is thereby
bound to employment in some office, good to community: Whereby it comes to
pass, that even this kind of life, spent wholly in devotion and contemplation,
is unpleasing to God. Because, howsoever herein they do good to themselves,
yet bring they no benefit to the common body. I confess, the life has great
commendation amongst Ancients; some of them call it, heavenly and Angelical.
And sure it is, such shall be the life of Gods Children after Resurrection,
spent wholly in praising and magnifying the Name of God. But till that time,
see how Angels themselves want not their employment; even they Heb. 1.14.
are sent forth to minister for good of them that shall be heirs of salvation.

To these may be added, how many of our Gallants, and their attendants, whose
whole life is spent, alas, how Epicurelike and unprofitably? in eating,
drinking, sporting, snorting, as if they were borne, as the wild Asse-Colt in
the Wilderness, to snuff up the wind, or as Leuiathan in the Sea, to take
pastime therein. Me thinks, seeing their lives, I cannot but think of that in
Ezechiel describing the sins of Sodom, so fitting it is to men of this
disposition. The Ezech. 16.49
sins of Sodom were Pride, fullness of Bread, abundance of Idleness,
unmercifulness to the Poor. No marvel, if they grew such Monsters in Lust,
having all things so at full to feed their Luxury.

A third sort are our vagrant and sturdie Beggars: whose base and brutish life,
what terms are sufficient to express? I know not how, our people think it
alms to feed them in their idleness; conceiting these the poor, whom the
Lord has commended to our compassion. His order in Israel was, there might
Deuteronomy. 15.4.
be no Beggar among his people. And Paul's Co^stitution: Men wanting, not
strength, but 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
will to labor, must not eat. The best mercy to such is that, which one calls,
Misericordia puniens. Thou can not better relieve them, then by correction.

The second kind of persons disorderly, are such as neglect employment of the
vocations, wherein the LORD has placed them. Of these especially speaks the
Apostle. His rule is; Whosoever has an Office, Romans 12.7.
must wait on his Office. And his Ordinance in Thessalonica, that if any
refused labor, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
he should not eat. Yea, he makes them flat Thieves, that so live. Such eat
not their own bread.

Now here, beloved, where should I begin to complain of unfaithfulness? It
spreades it self so generally over all orders, and degrees of men. This is
that eats out the large patrimonies of many, gotten with no small care and
industry of their Progenitors: while Children think themselves borne to
pleasures, and whatsoever is occasion or nourishment of all vitiousnesse in
life.

The third sort, is of them that intrude upon other men's callings; not sparing
the Function of the Ministry, which yet the Lord will have no man touch, but
he that is Heb. 5.4.
called of God, as was AARON. His Judgment on Corah and his company for such
intrusion, is recorded; their Censors kept by Gods special appointment, as
Number. 16.40.
a memorial and warning to all posterity. The Stories of Vzzah and Vziah are
known; the one stricken 2. Sam. 6.7.
with sudden death; the other Chron. 26.19, 21.
with leprosy, till the day of his death.

In the fourth rank, are to be ranged all those that wilfully violate
wholesome Ordinances, for better ordering of common life; whether in Church or
Commonwealth. Ad omnia sua strenui, ad communia pigri, Bern. de grad.
Humilitatis.
said Bernard, of such men delighted in singularity. Turpis est omnis pars
quae vniuerso suo non congruit, says Austine. And of the persons thus far.

The duty in respect of them, is to admonish; that is, to put them in mind of
their duty. It is the Mat. 18.15.
first step or degree in censures, which must go before sharper corrections.

Touching it, three particulars shall be briefly scanned.

Whose duty it is?

vt supra. They were the people of whom Paul said, they were Romans 15.14.
able; to whom he Col. 3.16.
prescribes, to admonish one another. Do ye ask Reasons? Besides the
Commandment of God, First, Mutual Jude 20.
compassion should teach it us. Secondly, Care of community, in respect, First,
Of the 1. Cor. 5.6.
infectiousnesse of the evil example. Secondly, Ioh. 7.1^, 12.
For danger of wrath.

It justly reprooues such as put over this duty of love from themselves to
Ministers; and think it so peculiar to them, that in no degree it belongs to
them. Erewhile we showed it pertinent to the people, with this difference: The
Minister does it, as of Authority; the people, out of sociall Charity. The
public performance is the Ministers; in private commerce, the peoples also.
And it is strange the Lord should commend to us care of each others body, Exodus
23.4, 5
goods, good name; and leave us careless of any souls, save our own.

The second question is, to what persons we owe it. Diogenes and the Cynikes,
Seneca Epist. 29.
says Seneca, were wont promiscuously to admonish all they met with. What if
they fell on deaf men? They answered, Words were gratuitous, and cost them
nothing. Besides, though they missed their end in many, yet admonishing all,
they might do good to some. With like zeal, shall I say? or passion, many are
transported, prodigally casting away sacred and precious admonitions upon Dogs
and Swine. Our Savior inioynes us in this point, caution and prudence. To make
choice of such, as we must admonish by the Word of God. Though words be
gratuitous, yet Gods Word is sacred and precious; We may Mat. 7.6.
not cast holy things to Dogs, nor Pearls before Swine. And says Seneca,
Proceedings of Art, must be upon certainties. A good Archer does not,
aeliquando ferire, but aliquando deerrare.



separating from their society.

The last quaere is, of the sins that may deserve admonition. They are not
only enormities, but even inordinatenesse. Be it but idleness and neglect of
our vocations. Shall I need to add Reasons? First, We are not ignorant, how
even moates in the Church are made beams amongst Aliens; the least slips of
men professing Gods fear, draw blasphemy upon his Name: Leuitie in speech,
vanity in our attire, etc. seem more to Aliens, then blasphemies in their own
mouths, or enormities in their lives. Secondly, little things have often great
and dangerous consequences; 1. Cor. 5.6.
A little leaven sowreth the whole lump; a little error tolerated, makes way
to greater. And every little sin, if it be neglected, draws with it weight
unto greater.

It is the error of most, to limit admonitions to gross and grievous sins.
We think of others as of our selves, through partiality; it is well they be
free from crying sins. Whereas the Lord bears in none, the breach of the least
iota or tittle of his Law; nor tolerates disobedience, no not erga minima;
toward the least of his commandments. And of the first duty thus far, the
second follows.

Comfort the feeble-minded. Wherein, as in the former, are first, the persons,
secondly, the duty we owe them. The persons he calls, the feeble-minded.

School Moralists treating of it, thus set out the Nature of
feeble-mindednesse. It is, they say, a dejected state of the mind, refusing to
enterprise or undertake things necessary, and enjoined, upon conceit that they
exceed ability. It is opposed to presumption, another extreme: whereby men
ouer-confident of their strength, attempt things exceeding the proportion of
their abilities.

Such, they conceive the sin of Exodus 4.10.13
Moses and Iere. 1.6.
Jeremy to have been; detracting the Lords calling, as exceeding the
proportion of their strength. Like is the sin of many, excellently gifted for
Magistracy, and Ministry, if others may judge; yet withdrawing from the
calling, as ouer-weighty, and beyond their strength: a sin so much harder to be
cured, becomes, it comes so near to the nature of modesty; and under color of
that virtue, deludes the minds of many, so long, till Church be almost
destitute of Ministers, and Commonwealth of able Magistrates.

It arises, they say, commonly from one of these causes, First, secret pride,
whereby men think themselves better able to judge of themselves, then others,
yea, then all men, are. Even in this seeming modesty there is colored pride.
Prou. 26.16.
The sluggard, says SOLOMON, thinks himself wiser, then ten men that can
render a reason.

A second cause usual is, as they call it, torpor pigritiae. Men are loath to
take notice of their abilities, and undertake such functions; because they love
ease, and would gladly free themselves from encumbrance of publik employments.

The last is, fear of faynting under the burden: which was that it seems,
which swayed with Moses. But as the Lord speaks to MOSES, Who is it that made
the tongue? is it not the Lord that called him to the function? And can we
think the Lord, whose hand leads us to such employments, will be wanting to us
in protection and support? What he said to Ioshuah, think spoken to all in like
case; Josh. 1.5.
I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee. 2. Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? says the Apostle: he means of himself.
Yet, 2. Cor. 3.6.
God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament. Competently, though not
co^pletely sufficient.

A degree of it in this kind, is to be seen in many, arising from causlesse
despair. So overwhelmed we have seen some with despair of pardon, that they
refuse to pray for pardon; or to enter a course of repentance. Like mind is in
many toward their inueterate sins. Such strength, they think, they have
gotten through long custom, that it seems too late to strive against the^; and
in that conceit, they Ephe. 4.19.
give themselves over to work wickedness even with greedines.

Now if this be the opinion of our ability in nature, we must all subscribe to
the truth of it. But do we consider the power of Gods Grace, while we thus
speak? Grace can work wonders; every day works strangely above nature. It
rescued Paul from persecution, Manasseh in old age, from Idolatry. Gods hand is
not shortened. This of pusillanimity according to the usual acception amongst
Divines.

That which Paul there speaks of, seems something different; feeble-minded in
his sense, are men dejected with sense and fear of afflictions; as we have
instance in Job 6.9.
JOB, 1. King. 19.4.
ELIAS: in many amongst our selves, depressed and cast down, and almost driven
back from holy profession and practice, through fear of the Cross. The
duty we owe them is, Comfort. Job. 6.14.
Man that is in misery, should be comforted of his Neighbor; the censure is
heavy on them that neglect it; Such have forsaken the fear of the Almighty.
See notes ad Cap. 4. verse. vlt.

As it should make all Gods children careful to perform it, First, themselves
being yet Heb. 13.3.
in the body. Secondly, having received 2. Cor. 1.4.
Comforts from God, to this end; so it justly reprooues the barbarous and
savage inhumanity of them, that, as David speaks, add affliction to him whom
God has wounded. A generation rife in all places, dallying with the heauiest
affliction of Gods children, an accusing and terrifying conscience. The
beastliest amongst brute creatures, even Swine, seem to be affected with the
outcries of their kind: men only more brutish then they, triumph in the
miseries each of other; and are not moved with their outcries, as bitter as
that in the Prophet; Isai. 38.^4.
O Lord, it has oppressed me: Lord, comfort me. See how bitterly Psalm. 109.16.
David in a spirit of Prophecy curses such men. And let the^ tremble at it,
whose practice it is.

The last particular remains; Support the weak. First, of the persons.
Secondly, the^ of the duty. The persons are the weak. Weakness is of two sorts;
first, in judgment: secondly, in practice. Weak in judgment, are such as
either for lack of information, or capacity, or illumination, are not yet
convinced of some truths convenient, or necessary for them to understand. Such
were many in days of the Apostle, whom therefore he calls Romans 15.1.
weak in faith; that could not yet be persuaded of the abrogation of Moses
Law; still thinking their conscience bound to observe difference of days and
meats. Such I make no question, are some amongst us in matters of ceremony and
indifferency.

Weak in practice are they, who though convinced of duty, yet through passion
or long custom, it may be, of evil, are overtaken in some sins.

The duty we owe to such, is Support; Romans 14.1.
Him that is weak in faith, assume: For this, the Shepherds of Judah are
heavily taxed, Ezech. 34.4.
They strengthened not the weak.

The duties we owe them, coming under the general of Support, thus conceive;
first, 2. Tim. 2.25.
meekest and mildest instruction: As Paul, though he condescend, as far as
may be, to their weakness, yet delivers grounds of better information; and
labors to lead them on to greater strength and perfection of knowledge.
Secondly, in things indifferent, yield of right, 1. Cor. 9.22.
Becoming all things to all men, that by all means we may win some.

Weak in practice: first, though their persons must be borne withal, yet must
their sins be Leuit. 19.17.
reproved; and they restored with the Spirit of Meekness: Secondly, let not
our first exactions be ouer-strict, Mat. 9.16.
New Wine may not be put into old Bottels, says our Savior, justifying his
milder impositions on his nouitious Disciples. Thirdly, at no hand reject such,
but cherish the least spark or smoke of grace that shows in them. Our Savior
Mat. 12.20.
quenches not the smoking Flax.

Reproved are here, first, careless scandalizing the weak; secondly,
rigorous proceedings with Nouices. And of these duties to these particulars,
thus far.

In the passage, take notice of Paul's prudence, in prescribing what is
convenient to every several state and condition of Gods people. As Jude in
like case gives like Prescript; Some, save with fear; on others, have
compassion, Jude 22.
putting difference. See also Isai. 61.

Follows now the general belonging to all these, that is, Patience, or, as
the word signifies, Long-sufferance. Be patient, or long suffering, toward all.

Now, though I confess, this virtue is of that nature, that it must be
exercised in a sort to all men; yet comparing this prescript with the like to
2. Tim. 2.25.
Timothy, I cannot but think, the Apostles purpose is, to prescribe us a
temper, and mean of carriage in performing the former duties: that the sense
may be this; Suffer not your patience to be overcome, so as to surcease these
holy duties, though you see not present success of your endeavors.

Lack of present success is no warrant to any, to surcease the duties of
Love, in Admonition, Comfort, Exhortation. The faults of Gods servants have
been noted in this kind. Jeremy seeing the present way-wardnesse of the
people, Ier. 20.9.
resolves to speak no more in the Name of the Lord. It is noted as his
blemish: and the Word of God gives him no rest, till he had altered his
resolution. Paul in like humor, enters like resolution at Corinth. The Lord
checkes him for it, and commands him still to speak unto them; assuring him
for all that, he had much people in that City. After his long experience, he
presses the duty by sundry reasons. First, 2. Tim. ^.25.
The time of Gods calling and giving blessing to our endeavors, is to us
uncertain: it should suffice us, if God at any time give them repentance.
Secondly, he puts us in mind of their miserable bondage under Satan; They are
in the snare of the Devil. It is no easy matter to rescue a soul out of
Satan's Dominion; that strong man armed does not so easily leave his possession.
Thirdly, To Titus, he remembers us of our own estate, and Tit 3.3.
behavior before calling; every whit as untoward, and desperate as theirs,
that are yet holden under Satan's bondage. Our sins wherein we lived as
grievous, our frowardness as great: yet when Gods bountifulness appeared, he
saved us. Cause we have to hope like favor of God for others; I am sure no
cause utterly to despair of any, because admonitions present are rejected. How
many did our selves, till day of visitation came, make light of? How many
gracious motions of Gods Spirit do we contemn? yet saw we Gods grace, after
all this contempt, marvelous in our conversion.

Jeremy, to resolve to speak no more in the Name of the Lord; and as the
Disciples, to call for fire from Heaven. Now, alas Brethren, had the Lord thus
dealt with us, left us to our selves, when we first rejected his heavenly
admonitions, what had become of our souls? How many gracious warnings had we
from the Lord, that past away without their profit? yet was the Lord pleased to
follow us with his mercy, and new offers of grace, till such time as he had
fastened them on our froward hearts; like patience, and unwearied compassion
becomes us to our Brethren. We have, First, the Lords example to provoke us;
He Romans 9.22.
bears with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction; Mat.
5.45.
causes his rain to rain, his Sun to shine on the field of the froward; so
long, says Tertullian, till he admit detraction from his glory; and men
begin to question, whether there be a providence taking notice of the sins
of men.

Secondly, We lose naught by our patience, what ever the issues be. What Paul
speaks of Ministers, is true also of private Monitors; They are unto God 2.
Cor. 2.15.
a sweet savor in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

Thirdly, The purchase, if God at any time give success, is of that worth,
that no pains can seem too much to procure it. Iam. 5.20.
Thou have won a soul. Me thinks, he says more, then thou have won a
World; the meanest soul being more worth then all the World.

Lastly, Let us consider, that the gain of one soul to Gods Kingdom, may
draw with it, we know not, how many more. First, The example of one Sinner
converting, is very preualent with other Aliens; yea, the more auerse they have
been before calling, the more remarkable is their Conversion. How do I
persuade my self did the conversion of Paul so hot a Persecutor affect even
Aliens, and make them pause about their courses? Secondly, Besides the example,
we know the Nature of Grace is such, it loves to communicate it self. Never
was Child of God envious in the point of Salvation; but could willingly
be-teeme another, any other, many others, all others a share with him in that
blissful condition. And if ye mark it, the gifts of God that occasion Pride
and Envy, are not those gifts that accompany Salvation; but others,
profitable, I confess, to the Church of God; yet such, as in want whereof a
man may be saved; in having whereof, he may be damned. Paul seems much to
tax the people of Corinth for Pride and Envy, desiring after a sort to
enclose their gifts to themselves. What were those gifts? not those of Faith,
and Charity, but of tongues and prophecy. For others, I dare say, GOD'S
Children are all of Paul's mind; they could wish Acts 26.28.
all men as they, not almost only, but altogether Christians. And generally
ye shall find it true, Every Ioh. 1.41, 45.
Convert desires to be a Conuerter of others. Since then, upon the conversion of
one depends perhaps the salvation of many souls, how willingly should we
digest the present aukewardnesse of those we admonish? if not for their own
good, yet for a more general, may come by Gods blessing to the whole Church of
God.

And lest any say as Ananias in case of PAVL, They Acts 9.13.
are Persecutors, or otherwise malicious; Thus let us think, First, The more
untoward, the more shall Gods Grace and Power be magnified in their Conversion.
And Secondly, let us remember, the worst men before calling, have often proved
the most excellent instruments of Gods glory, after their Conversion; an
instance we have 1. Cor. 15.10.
in Paul; and the reason assigned by our Savior: Luke 7.47.
They love much that have had many sins forgiven them.

VERSE. 15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow
that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men.


THE prescript is here for our demeanor in our personal wrongs: of two
branches. First, That we deal not by way of requital. Secondly, that we
labor to overcome evil with goodness.

In the first, besides the duty it self, are considerable, First, The manner
of propounding. Secondly, The extent of the duty. The manner of propounding,
is with special item and memento: See that none do it. The extent, as large
as may be; None may do it, no, not to any, how hostile soever and full of
prouocations.

What should be the reason of this special item in this case given? other
weighty duties we have propounded without such specialtie of charge. Thus I
conceive the Apostle: to intend one, or both these. First, Either to prescribe
prevention of the sin in others; Secondly, Or else, because he saw in Nature
a strong propension thereto, to make us the more vigilant against it.

Take the first sense, this is the note: Gods Children must be careful, not
only to eschew evil in their own persons, but also to prevent it in others.
Such exhortations are frequent. Heb. 12.15.
Take heed lest any fall away from the grace of God: he means not only to
make us careful for our own particular, but watchful over others, as the
reason annexed imports, lest thereby many be defiled. Leuit. 19.17.
Thou shall rebuke thy Brother plainly, and not suffer him to sin. Need I
add Reasons?

Consider, First, how other sins may subject us to wrath, in case we neglect
endeavor to prevent them. One Josh. 7.1, 5.
Achan sins, all Israel is discomfited, and flies before the Inhabitants of
Ai. With what Justice may some say? Sure there is no man but has matter enough
in him, and fuel for the fire of GODS wrath to feed upon. But I like their
sentence that resolve: Aug. in Josh. quaest. 8.
The people, though careful enough of abstinence from the cursed thing in
their own persons, yet had not that eye each to other, that they ought. No
marvel therefore, if they all smart for it. Says Austine, no marvel, if
Christians taste like extremities from Goths and Vandals with Heathen; though
they joined not with them in their Idolatry, yet through fear or shame they
neglected to oppose their sins, with that resolution that beseemed them.

Secondly, Add unto this the Apostles reason; Lest thereby many befiled. Know
we not that 1. Cor. 5.6.
a little Leaven leaueneth the whole lump? As wildfire easily kindled, hardly
quenched; so is an evil example. How long continued the poison of Ieroboams
example in Israel? and spread it self in time to the infection of Judah? yea
after they had seen Gods Judgment on Jeroboam and his seed, yet of Iehu the
Executioner of the vengeance it is noted; He 2. Kin. 10.31.
departed not from the sins of JEROBOAM, that made Israel to sin. Examples
have in experience the force of Laws; and the lewdest practices seem to have
warrant sufficient, when they are countenanced by precedents.

how the Reubenites, and half Tribe of MANASSEH had erected an Altar, not for
worship, as they truly protested; but for memorial; so fearful they grew of
GODS wrath, that they presently dispatched an Embassy to their Brethren, to
prevent their sin. And see how pithily they deal with them. Josh. 22.17.
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed to
this day, that ye must also depart from following the Lord? Oh that there had
been such a heart in this people for aftertimes! they had stood to this day
in the state of Gods people. Thus they, in a show only and appearance of evil.

I could wish the same mind in us; that we were thus careful to prevent
sins in others; that we were not only careful to live soberly, but to
prevent Intemperance and ryotous Excess in others. But, alas, how think we
all, it suffices to keep our selves unspotted of the World? whiles others
become spots and blots to the whole Church of God; and expose us all to his
wrath and vengeance. Every man, we say* shall bear his own burden; every
soul dye for it onw transgression. But know we not, that other men's sins may
become ours, whiles by our conniuence and toleration we give way to the
committing? how else said Paul to TIMOTHY? 1. Tim. 5.22.
Communicate not with other men's sins. And Nehemiah to the Rulers; Nehem.
13.17
What evil thing is this that ye do in breaking the Lords Sabbaths? This
account make; what sins of others thou labourest not, in thy compass, to
prevent, are thine in the guilt, as well as they of thine own personal
commission. Be exhorted therefore, carefully to perform this duty. To the
reasons foresaid, let this be added. The falls of others become our blemish,
and scandal amongst Aliens. The whole Church of God is traduced often for the
sins of some few Hypocrites. Says PETER, 2. Pet. 2.13.
Spots they are and blots to you, speaking of some few in the Church, not
answering in practcie, to their profession of Godliness. We cannot be
ignorant, how Heresies and Enormities rising in the Church of God, are charged
upon the Church; yea, upon our most holy and precious Faith.

Those furies of Anabaptists, and Familists, etc. are cast as dung into the
face of the Church: though the truth is, they had their condemnation, where
they had their first original. And though it be no strange thing, that there
should Acts 20.30. 1. John 2.19.
rise in the Church of God, perverse men, speaking and doing perverse things;
yet this withal is true in experience, their falls and faultings are the
Churches imputations. Wherefore, if neither compassion of the Sinners soul,
nor fear of Gods wrath, nor peril of infection move us; yet let the beauty
of the Church be precious in our eyes; and sway us to vigilance against other
men's sins.

Taking the other reason of the caveat, this is the note. First, Sins to
which our propensions are strongest, must be specially watched against. I know
not any sin, but we are prone unto it in Nature; yet truth is, that as in
the state and composition of the body, though all Elements enter, yet still
there is some one predominant; so in the state of the soul, some particulars
of sin there are, to which we are stronglyest inclined. Hence ye may
observe, in sundry passages of Scripture, an Emphasis set upon cautions, to
avoid some sins. Luke 12.15.
Look upon Covetousness and beware of it. Why not as well upon Pride, and
Luxury? It may be, because those sins are more easily discerned, more
generally detested: it may be also, because our Nature is marvelous having,
and much inclined to Covetousness.

Iam. 5.12.
Above all things swear not at all. Why, above all things? Is there no sin
comparable to that of Swearing? what think we of Idolatry, and Superstition?
no doubt these are in their kind as heinous, if not more. But it seems,
First, This being a sin of that slippery member the Tongue; and Secondly,
grown now through general use, familiar, Custom, that is another Nature, had
made it habitual. The propension thereto was greater; therefore is that
emphaticall caution given.

Need I add Reasons? that one is, me thinks, sufficient: 2 Cor. 2.11.
We are not ignorant of Satan's wiles. That old Serpent has learnd from long
experience, not to present in temptation, sins from which he knows us
abhorrent; but where he sees our propensions greatest, thither bends he his
temptations. What sins either Natural constitution, or evil custom most
inclines unto, there most frequently is every man tempted.



How prone our Nature is to retailing of wrongs; so that except we be
exceedingly cautionate against it, the best are easily ouer-taken in it. That
which Pharisees taught Jews, is most plausible to Nature; Love friends; Mat.
15.43.
hate enemies. SAVL a carnal man, wonders at DAVID. 1. Sam. 24.19
Who shall find his enemy at advantage, and let him go free? A thing he
thought is quite against the Principles of Nature, and common policy. That Lex
Talionis, yea, a Talio without Law, carries with it most plausible equity.
Insomuch that amongst all the Lords just proceedings, none seems to have more
pleasing equity, then that wherein he repines evil men, in their own kind.
As in Judges 1.7.
case of Adonibezek. And our Savior, Luke 16.
where he leads his Disciples to a farther strain, acknowledges it a matter
above the course of Nature; and such as wherein we approach nearest to the
Nature of Gods love. To do good for good, is Natural; good for evil, Divine
and supernatural.

Prou. 16.34.
He that conquereth himself, is better then he that wins a City.

None to any. The note is this. It is not permitted to any to avenge himself
on any for his personal wrongs. Private revenge is interdicted to all in
respect of all. Neither may any be his own caruer, in retayling of wrong. Know
we by the way, there is a wide difference betwixt that revenge, a Magistrate
takes of Malefactors; and that which private men persecute upon the injurious.
The Magistrate does it by Authority, and with warrant from God; Romans 13.4.
whose Minister he is, auenger of wrath on them that do evil. For them the
Jews Law runs thus; There shall be eye for eye, tooth for tooth; the damage
done or intended to the innocent, must be turned upon the injurious. Of
private persons the case is other: of them the precept holds generally, Romans
12.19.
Avenge not your selves. Resist not evil; rather suffer a double, then think
of returning a single injury. Reasons, If any man ask them, are these. First,
Vengeance is Gods: they intrude upon Gods Prerogative Royal, that without
warrant from him, presume to avenge themselves. Secondly, His promise is to
repay it: but, hac lege, says Augustine, that we wait his leisure, and
preoccupate not his executions. To tell how conscionable Gods Saints have been
this way, were long. Of David the Story is known, in the railing of Shimei.
And howsoever we read of his vow of vengeance in heat of blood; yet how 1.
Sam. 25.32
blesses he the Lord that kept him from shedding blood? 1. Pet. 2.23.
Our Savior says PETER, 1. Pet. 2.23.
Being reviled, he reviled not again, but committed the vengeance to him that
judges justly.

Anabaptists and men of that fury, wrest this and like Scriptures to overthrow
of Magistracy; permitting to none in the days of the New Testament to
undertake authority of defending the innocent; my purpose is not to be long in
confutation. Even now they are Romans 13.4.
Ministers of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil. Of Peter we read,
how he by special instinct was instrument of Gods vengeance on ANANIAS: and
PAVL, on ELYMAS the Sorcerer. And I marvel, if fatherly Authority remain in
the Family for correction, as well as for instruction; if Ecclesiastical
Authority in the Church by power of the Keys, why not civil also in the
Commonwealth? besides that, the ends of Magistracy still remain; defense of
the innocent, repressing violence, etc. As Pharisees extended the commission of
Magistrates to private men; so these lay the restraints of private men, upon
Magistrates. How absurdly?

But generally ye shall see it true, they are not so narrow in their
restraint, but the custom of men is as large in the exercise of revenge.
Insomuch that the Pharisees Gloss still pleases and seems reasonable; eye
for eye, tooth for tooth; and he scarce seems worthy the name of a man, that
digests injury without revenge. It were long to set down all particulars of
their Plea. There be that think it a point of Policy, and best way to repress
the violence of an Adversary, to be as quick in returning, as others are in
offering wrong; As good as he brings, seems a sound Rule; and that is
pleasing of the Heathenish Politician, Veterem condonando iniuriam inuitas
nouam. Let us learn to be wise according to the Word of God; and think our
best Deuteronomy. 4.6.
wisdom to stand in obedience.

There is another sort, and they out of their manhood, and ambition in that
kind, alas, how much blood defile they their souls, and the whole Land
withal? A word of disgrace may not be digested without blood. The question of
single Combats I mean not to enter. That saying of Bernard I would commend to
all such men's remembrance; what ever the issue is in such case, their souls
are guilty of Murder. If thou dye in such fight, Bern. ad milites Templi. c.
1.
moreris homicida: If thou live, viuis homicida. And it is infoelix victoria,
vbi superans virum succumbis vitio.

Labor we to possess our souls with Patience and Meekness; that no
provocation of any Adversary, may make us Usurpers of the Lords Authority. To
this end consider, what Tertullian has truly: Tertull. de patientia.
Betwixt the offerer and requiter of wrong, there is this ods only. First, One
gones before, the other follows to evil. Ambo nequam. Secondly, Remember
whose 2. Sam. 16.10.
providence swayes and directs the malice of the injurious. Thirdly, In
Patience, expect some good for that evil. Fourthly, At least, hinder not a
possible reconcilement.

The second branch of the prescript follows; Ever follow that which is good.
Wherein are First, The duty. Follow that which is good. Secondly, The extent
respects First, Time; ever. Secondly, Persons, toward your selves and to all
men.

So runs the Precept peremptory; Bless them that curse; Mat. 5 44.
do good to them that hurt you. Rom 12.20.
If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. Excitements we
have many. First, our heavenly Fathers example; not only bearing with long
patience those that provoke him, but heaping his benefits upon them, so long,
says Tertullian, till he suffer man to detract from his glory: and begin to
think there is no providence of God, taking notice of men's sins. Thus the
great God of Heaven and Earth, whose Children we are, if we follow his steps.
And of whose Father-hood we can have no assurance, except in this point we
strive to resemble him. The Saints of God have herein gone before us. That of
Moses is remarkable; so soon forgotten by a froward people, sometimes ready
to stone him, yet Exodus 32.32.
how carefully interposeth he himself twixt Gods wrath and them? Like read we
of David toward his enemies; Acts 7.60.
Stephen to his Persecutors. If these Reasons suffice not; consider, our
Savior being Judge; we cannot be assured that we have in Charity any thing
supernatural, until we come to this strain. To do good for good, is common
even among Publicans: to abstain from evil doing, when we suffer evil,
perhaps, or without perhaps, we shall find in some Heathen. Seneca could say,
As his Adversary had learnd to rail, so he to contemn. He has nothing in
Charity supernatural, that comes not to this height, that he is ready to
requite evil with good.

Moreover, says Paul, it is the only way to overcome the malice of an
Adversary, and to meeken his rancor: Romans 12.10.
Thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. The meaning is not, that we shall
increase Gods vengeance on him; that were to give way to private revenge: but
these coals of fire are, says AUGUSTINE, August. de doctrine. Christ. lib. 3.
cap. 16.
Vrentes poenitentiae gemitus; wherewith the malice of an Adversary is cured;
when he is brought to mourn, that ever he was enemy to him, by whom his
wants have been relieved. See instance 1. Sam. 24.16
in Saul.

The circumstances of extent follow. Ever follow that which his good. So that
our patience, yea, our beneficence must be as large as an enemies malice. As
our Savior to Peter, of the point of forgiveness; so here must be a toties
quoties. Says TERTVLLIAN, Fatigetur improbitas patientia tua. PAVL; Vincatur
malitia bonitate tua. As Bernard inquiring the measure of our love to GOD; the
modus, says he, is sine modo; so the time of beneficence is without limit.

Ask you to whom? Not only to your selves, he means that are members of the
Church, but to men also out of the Church, and so for the present, enemies to
God. See if that be not our Saviors meaning: Mat. 5.44.
Bless them that curse you: so I think will none do to Gods Children, but
enemies; not to their persons only, but to their cause, Pray for them that
persecute you. These are sure Aliens, if not from profession, yet from the life
and power of Piety. We have seen the duty, and the extent of it. No duty, say
Papists; but matter of counsel, thus to love an enemy. It is well if it be
so: yet no sin if it be omitted. Do it, thou have more reward: omit it, thou
have no punishment. See whether, in likelihood, the Text will bear it. First,
in one tenor run both prescripts; what should warrant to conceive one as
matter of precept, the other only as matter of advice? Secondly, See that none
render evil; see that ye follow good. Such special caveat he would not have
given, had it been a matter left to our choice. Thirdly, None may render
evil. Every one must follow good. Precepts bind all: so do not counsels: they
are paucorum. Fourthly, See the purpose of our Savior; and ye shall find it
but this, to restore the Law to his full sense, wherein it had been scanted by
the Pharisees. Belike then, the love of enemies was comprised in the Law: and
therefore is no matter of Evangelical counsel. Fifthly, Me thinks it a
matter of necessity; in Charity to go Luk 6.34, 35.
one step beyond Publicans and sinners. Except we reach this strain, to love
even enemies, Publicans, Sinners, Heathens in Charity have equalled
Christians. But leave them. The prescript is apparently touching matter of
duty.

It is, I confess, a Lesson harsh to flesh and blood, thus lovingly to require
an enemies evil with goodness; but the more difficult it is to Nature, the
more earnest should be our gracious endeavors: and I dare say, the more
comfortable shall be the practice. And let me exhort all GODS people to
strive for this perfection in their Charity. Excitements we have heard many;
let this be added: The experience our selves have had of Gods bounty toward
us, even while we were enemies unto God. Even Romans 5.8, 10.
when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son.
He spared not his own Son, but gave him to dye for us that were enemies
unto him. To speak of his other inferior favors, in bearing our
frowardness, and daily prouocations, yea, Lam. 3.23.
renewing his mercies upon us, which every morning were infinite: This only I
say, If GOD so loved us, we ought also so to love one another.

But where may the man be found amongst a thousand, that thus far proceeds
in Charity? They are prime Christians in their own opinion, that ascend to
Saul's measure; I will do thee no more harm; and they have gone exceeding
far, that have gotten so much power over their wrathful affections, that
they break not out to retayling of wrongs. They are generally of opinion, this
measure of Charity is as much as Angelical; not here to be attained while
we carry about us flesh and blood; till in Heaven we be made like and equal
to Angels. Now, I confess, in degree of loving, there will be imperfection,
while we live in this World. Yet this, I am sure, may be obtained in this
life; Charity may be perfect extensiue; and except it be so, there is no
truth of love in us.

Let us be exhorted to endeavor it. To former Reasons add these:

First, There is something in worst men and most malicious, that is amiable;
and should draw not our beneficence only, but our loving affection: the Nature
of man, endued perhaps with some special gifts, of Wit, Fortitude or the like:
let these be cherished.

Secondly, Consider, their possibility of returning to better state. Strange
alterations we have read, and seen, Gods grace to have made in many. Paul was
taken out of heat of persecution, and became a Preacher of that truth, which
before he persecuted; as Austine thinks by Stephens Prayer as one mean. Si
Sanctus STEPHANAS non sic orasset, Ecclesia PAVLVM non haberet.

Lastly, what ever the issue of our kindness is in them, to us we are sure it
shall be comfortable: and no question find reward with God. Psalm. 35.13.
I wept, says DAVID, and prayed, and fasted in their adversity; no benefit
came to them in their amendment: but my Prayer shall turn into mine own
bosom.

VERSE. 16. Rejoice evermore.


WE have here two things; First, The act or duty, Rejoice. Secondly, The
continuance of the duty, evermore.

Of joy, we find four sorts, according to the several grounds and manners
of rejoicing.

First, Joy Natural; arising from presence and fruition of something good to
Nature; as health, strength, cheerfulness and the like.

The second, they call secular or worldly joy; such as rises from presence of
things good according to the state and esteem of the World; such as David
intimates, When Psalm. 4.7.
Corn and Wine and Oil are increased. As Esaias, Esaias 9.3.
The joy of Harvest.

The third is, as some call it, Criminal Joy; which David taxes in the
wicked, as a mark of a hellish disposition; They Pro. 2.14.
rejoice in doing evil; and as SOLOMON; Delight in the frowardness of the
wicked.

The fourth is, that which is called holy or spiritual joy; in Paul's phrase,
The Romans 14.17.
Joy of the Holy Ghost. It differs from the former, in two things especially.
First, In the ground or matter of rejoicing; which in spiritual Joy, is the
favor of God; and the fruits and pledges thereof, in pardon of sins,
Sanctification, hope of Glory.

Secondly, In the manner of rejoicing, in things natural or secular. (For
sins are grief to the Spirit of God.) In these things there may be a kind of
holy and spiritual rejoicing; as when we joy in them, not simply as good to
Nature, and state of this life; but as pledges of Gods favor, and furtherances
of a better life. So were the Israelites commanded, to Leuit. 23.40.
rejoice before the Lord, in all they put their hand unto. And had their
annual Festiuities, to procure and manifest their rejoicing in Gods favor,
testified even in temporal blessings.

The Text must be understood of this holy and spiritual Joy, which the same
Apostle calls, Philip. 4.4.
rejoicing in the Lord; that we have him gracious and good unto us, and
testifying his favor by temporal or spiritual blessings.

Is there not Eccles. 3.4.
a time to mourn?

also may be added; to Gods children demeaning themselves, as his children.
That yielded, the answers are various. Always: that is to say, say some, in
all States, adverse or prosperous; whatsoever condition God is pleased to place
them in, they have constant cause of joy and rejoicing.

There be that thus interpret; Rejoice evermore; Si non actu, saltem habitu.
I must confess, Caietan.
that distinction in this c^se, is to me a riddle: except perhaps they would so
be understood, that we should always have a disposition to rejoicing.

A third thus, Rejoice evermore; that is, have always matter of rejoicing; so
demean your selves, that you may have continual joy of the holy Ghost,
through sense and assurance of Gods favor.

Sure it is, Gods children always have, or may have cause of rejoicing. The
promise is, Their Ioh. 16.22.
joy none shall take from them; to this end is the Comforter given, to abide
with them for ever; amongst the plenty of fruits he brings with him, Gal. 5.22.
joy has not the meanest place.

The constant causes of their joy, Bernard referres to these two heads. First,
exhibita. Secondly, promissa.

Things exhibited, and already given; Bernard.
as the writing of our names in Gods Book of life; by so unchangeable a
Decree, that it is as possible for God to cease to be God, as to alter his
Decree of Election. To which add those other blessings appendent: pardon of
sins in justification; the continual supply of his Spirit, to sanctify and
renew us. These and the like, are blessings already exhibited; affecting Paul
with joy no less then Romans 8.37, 38
triumphant in the midst of tribulation.

may Psalm. 51.12.
be lost.

make supply. Believing above, yea against sense, that Psalm. 73.1.
yet God is good to Israel, and to such as are of a clean heart. They are
sound conclusions; Whom the Lord once loves, he ever loves: and his Romans 11.29.
gifts and calling are without repentance. God sometimes withdrawes the sense
of his favor, whether for chastisement; or for trial; or for prevention;
always in love to his children. From David, for chastisement; yet (...) love,
and fatherly care, lest he should perish in his sin through impenitencie:
from Job, for trial; yet in love, of purpose to justify his sincerity,
against the imputation of mercenarinesse charged on him by the Devil. From
Paul, for prevention; that he should not be 2. Cor. 12.7.
puffed up through abundance of Heavenly Revelations.

But if in things exhibited, perhaps our joy may fail us; yet in things
promised, we have constant cause of rejoicing. The blessings promised, and not
yet reached unto us, Hope especially has eye unto; and that fills the heart
with joy unspeakable and glorious, amids never so seeming causes of sorrow. Be
it, that the Lord has with-drawne the sense of his favor; yet hope there is,
such as makes not ashamed, that he will yet lift up the Light of his
countenance upon us. Be it, that he permits us in some particulars to fall; yet
hope there is, that Psalm. 37.24.
he will put under his hand. Suppose we feel a rebellious nature, resisting
against the power of Gods Grace: Hope we have, built on Gods promise, that a
day shall come, when the whole body of sin shall be destroyed; and in the
interim, that Romans 8.35.
nothing shall separate. In a word; against all evils that may assail us;
three things there are, that we may with joy behold in the promise. First,
protection. Secondly, restitution. Thirdly, deliverance. In defects of good
things, and the small measures thereof; First, preservation. Secondly, growth.
Thirdly, perfection of Grace and Glory.

Does the Lord permit us to temptation? His 2. Cor. 12.9.
grace is sufficient to support us. Does he suffer us to be overcome in
temptation? Yet promises he restitution, by a new act of grace raising us: And
at length, to set us out of the reach of all temptations.

Enjoy we any good grace of God, though in never so weak measure? First, he
assures us, that little is 2. Cor. 1.22.
a pledge of more. Secondly, even that little, he will enable Reave. 3.8.
to get final victory. Thirdly, and to perfect it to the day of the Lord
Jesus: and after this life, to make us pure, as he is pure; perfect, as our
heavenly Father is perfect. So many causes of constant joy, are there to all
Gods children.

Where are they then, that charge on Gods Spirit, such a depth of sorrow, and
sadnesse-working in the hearts of his children? and for this draw back from
entering Religious courses; because their joy, which as Epicures, they make
their Idol, they think all lost; applying that prouerbiall scomme taken up, I
think amongst the cups of Germany, to Gods Spirit; Spiritus Caluinianus est
spiritus melancholicus. What do they less then blaspheme, while they thus
speak? What? when Gods Spirit promises 1. Pet. 1.8.
joy unspeakable and glorious: when Christ tells us, of Ioh. 16.22.
joy that shall never be taken away: PAVL, that as well joy, as holiness is
the Gal. 5.22.
fruit of the Spirit, shall we dare thus to speak?

And is it no joy that Gods children feel in pardon of sins, peace of
Conscience, hope of glory? See them Romans 5.3.
ioying in afflictions; triumphing in death; professing more Psalm. 4.7.
sweetness in experience of Gods favor, then Epicures find in all pleasures
the world can afford them.

This I add more: A profane Epicures heart is never free from sorrow, either
in sense, or expectation, or in the cause. Solomon said not for nothing, Prou.
14.13.
In the midst of laughter the heart is heavy. Suddenly they are surprised
with the Dan. 5.6.
terrors of death, and judgment: or if they feel not, yet they fear: or if
any have so put from him all sense, and fear of evil; so much the more cause
of sorrow and lamentation has he; because God has hardened his heart, that he
may destroy him.

I say as DAVID. Psalm. 34.8.
Oh taste and see how gracious the Lord is; make experiment but a while, in
holy and Religious courses; I am deceived, if thou change not thy mind, and say
as SOLOMON, Of all other laughter and joy, Eccl 2.2.
it is madness. Sure it is, the joy of Gods Spirit is not known but by
experience; which made Paul say, Phil. 4.7.
It passes all understanding; none but he that feels it, knows the comfort
of it. Something wicked men imagine thereof, partly by that they see in Gods
children, partly by sense of the contrary in themselves; which made BALAAM Number.
23.10.
wish to die the death of the Righteous. But the through understanding of it, is
not gotten but by experience. I beseech you seriously think of it, and let not
Satan by this idle suggestion, deprive you of salvation. It is a true saying of
that Ancient: Religio is lata, though not dissoluta: And as true, that by
changing our courses, we lose not our joys, but exchange them; Transitory,
fading, earthly joys, for 1. Pet. 1.8.
joy unspeakable, glorious, and that fades not away.

Or if this move not, think of him that said; A time will come when they must
Luke 6.25.
wail and weep, that feared not before the Lord; and what Job has, The Job
20.5.
rejoicing of the Hypocrite is but short: they spend their days in wealth and
iollitie; and Job 21.13.
in a moment go down to Hell. What weeping and wailing shall there be amongst
Epicures at the last day? when they shall see ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB, and all
the Prophets and righteous men Luke 13.28.
admitted into Gods Kingdom, and themselves shut out of doors.

Secondly, As it serves to animate Gods children to continue their holy
courses, attended with ineffable joy; so withal, to check, their needless
framing of grief and perplexity to themselves; after a sort willingly putting
from them that fruit of the Spirit, joy in the favor and free grace of God:
That though the Lord has done wonderful things for their souls; delivered
them from power of darkness; mortified their corruptions; sanctified them by
his Spirit; yet macerate their souls with sorrows, and pine away in perplexed
fears of the wrath of God, from which they are delivered.

What is it that should thus perplexe a Child of God, truly fearing his Name,
and desiring in all things to live honestly? Is it their past sins? they are
no sooner repented, but they are forgiven; and so esteemed, as if they had
never bin committed. Is it their present imperfections? They are covered with
the perfection of Christ's obedience. Is it the rebellion of their hearts? That
issues not from them, but from Romans 7.20.
sin dwelling in them. Is it doubt of perseverance? That is founded, on how
many pillars, that shall never be shaken? Gods John 10.29.
power and promise; Christ's merit and intercession: Gods Spirits virtue, and
continual subministration. Is it afflictions? They Romans 8.28.
work to our good. Is it Death? Heb. 2.14.
Christ has overcome it. Is it Judgment? It is Romans 8.33.
God that justifies. Is it Damnation? There is none to them that are in Christ.

To conclude, thou can think of nothing that can be true cause of sorrow to
thee, being in Christ; not walking after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Psalm. 43.5.
Why art thou then cast down, my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within
me? Trust in the Lord, he is the help of thy countenance, and thy God. Phil.
4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. He is not thoroughly
thankful for Gods favors, whom they affect not unto rejoicing.

And let that be a second point of notice from this Text; that Gods favors
ought to affect us even to rejoicing. So is the Precept. Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, Rejoice: he doubles the mandate, to
show the necessity of the duty. The end of Leuiticall Festiuities was this:

It is in truth the top of Thankfulness; arguing not only our sense of Gods
favor, but our right prizing and valuation of his blessings. Who feels
himself affected with Joy, for a benefit of no esteem with him? And who, but
a man conceiving some singular sweetness in the favors of God, can be
affected with them unto rejoicing? Therefore the Lord sometimes permits us to
sense of the want of them, that in the restoring we might find fuller comfort.
Ber. in Cantic. Sermon. 68.
Sweetly said BERNARD, Placet cunctis securitas, sed ei magis qui timuit,
lucunda omnibus lux, sed euadenti de potestate tenebrarum iucundior. Transsisse
de morte ad vitam, vitae gratiam duplicat. It is his opinion; that though
Angels in Heaven have their Joy, in that God was pleased to preserve them in
the state of Blessedness; yet more full is the Joy of Gods Children, the
sons of men; that once fell from their happiness, and are again restored by
the death of Christ.

Lamentable is the coldness of our affections in enjoying the favors of God;
that howsoever we can sometimes say, God a thank, yet even his prime favors,
such as accompany Salvation, few are so far affected withal, as to rejoice
in them; It were well we did not sometimes murmr against him, for the small
measures of Grace bestowed on us. It seems little to us, to Mark 9.24.
see our infidelity, and strive against it; though that argue the presence of
Faith; except we obtain full victory against all doubtings. Little we think
it, that we have a Nehem. 1.11.
desire to fear Gods Name; though even for that, Nehemiah lays claim to the
promise of God, except we be quite rid of all security, and even seruilitie
in our fear. Little, that we have received a desire in all things to live
honestly; though that, in Paul's acknowledgement, be the Heb. 13.18.
mark of a good Conscience; except also our abilities to do good, be
answerable to our will. Oh, Brethren, consider; These little gifts are great
favors, if we consider our no merits at the Giuers hands; yea, our deseruings
of the contrary. Be admonished to acknowledge them according to their worth;
and to make even the lest testimonies of Gods favor, occasions to thee of
rejoicing. Mat. 25.23.
He shall never be ruler over much, that is not faithful in his little.
Never let him look for perfection, that rightly prizeth not the beginnings of
Grace in his heart.

But much more damnable is that coffeehouse at sundry prime blessings,
tending to life and godliness, to be seen in our multitude. It was in Paul's
esteem a chief Blessing granted unto Jews, that to Romans 3.2.
them were committed the Oracles of God. A special favor God promises it to
his Church; To Ier. 3.15.
give them Pastors after his own heart, to feed them with knowledge and
understanding. Says the Evangelist of it vouchsafed to ZABVLON and NEPHTHALI;
It is Mat. 4.16.
as light to them that have long sitten in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. O wretched Miscreants they, that cry out upon this blessing and favor
of God; as of some great vengeance; and as Gadarens, prefer their swinish
affections, and brutish pleasures, before the sacred Word of God, that should
be to us, as to JEREMY, Jer. 15.16.
The very joy and rejoicing of our hearts! Wonderful is Gods patience in men's
provocation; I should else wonder, that he had not long since sent upon us
Amos 8.11.
that famine in the Prophet; not of bread, and water, but of hearing the Word
of God.





Obedience, constant and uninterrupted, qualifies us after a sort, to receive
the Promises; and as an evidence furthers us in expectation of the Blessings.
Neither Faith, nor Hope are founded on our Obedience; but the exercise of both
is furthered by Obedience; in such sort, that longer then thou holdst on
conscionably thy course of holy Obedience, thou can neither be assured of
Gods Favor; nor on any sound evidence, except his Blessings promised. Bernard.
de Verb. Apost. non est Regnum Dei, etc. ser. 2.
Sic fatui filij ADAM, and praecipiti saltu iustitiam transilientes and pacem,
rem finalem in principium conuertere and peruertere vultis? Nemo enim est qui
gaudere non velit. Non stabit and non erit istud, quia sicut non est pax
impijs, sic nec gaudere impijs. Non sic impij, non sic. Prius est iustitiam,
facere, inquirere pacem, and prosequi eam, and sic demum apprehendere gaudium,
imo a gaudio comprehendi.

VERSE. 17. Pray continually.


THis Precept and those that follow, are subordinate to the former, tending to
procure and preserve that spiritual joy and rejoicing in the Lord, whereof
before. In it are considerable, First, the duty, Pray. Secondly, the
continuance of the duty, indefinenter. Let us inquire the sense. There were
about the days of Constantine a kind of Heretics, called Euchitae; they had
their name of praying, as you would say, The praying Heretics. Their Heresy
was this, Augustine. ad Quodvult. Haer. 57.
as appears in Augustine, Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others. All other
exercises of Religion, and employments in callings ordinary, they held vain
and frivolous: the whole of Man, they conceited to stand in Prayer: and
therefore, what time they could spare from sleep, they spent in Prayer;
vilifying, Sacraments, Preaching, every thing; upon this ground, says
Augustine, because our Savior said, Luke 18.1.
Pray always, and the Apostle here, Pray without ceasing.

Length of confutation were ill bestowed on an opinion so fantastical. This
once we know; Gods Precepts fight not, but are subordinate, and may, yea must
be so sorted to their seasons, that none may exclude another. He that said,
Pray continually; said also, 2. Tim. 4.2.
Be instant in Preaching: frequent in Meditation: and to the people, Despise
not prophecyings. Ephesians. 4.28.
Labor with your hands the thing that is good: he that walks otherwise, 2.
These. 3.11.
walks inordinately; violates that wholesome and holy Order, God has
stablished in his Church.

Yea, see, how as other things, so these also of Religion, the Lord has sorted
to their seasons; insomuch that he blames the people Nehem. 8.9.
for mourning, in a time when he called them to rejoicing. And that place in
Solomon is known: He Pro. 28.9,
that turns his ear from hearing the Law, what ever his pretenses are for
other devotions, his very prayer shall be abominable.

The Expositions here are various: First, Prayer, some Vitalis: thus it is
explaned, A continued good life is a continued prayer; Semper orat, qui semper
bona facit, says the ordinary Gloss. Good works, are prayers vertually;
because as prayers, so these are means to procure Gods blessings. And as some
sins are said to cry, as that, vox sanguinis and Sodomorum; so good works of
Gods Children have their voice, and importunate cry in the ears of the Lord:
but the Apostle would apparently be understood of prayers, properly so called.

Secondly, The desire has with God the esteem of a if the desire be
continual, the Prayer is continual, says Augustine; the same Augustine in
his Epistle to Proba, August. in Psalm. 37.
Pray continually, that is, at all times, in all actions let thy desires
continually join thy mind with GOD.

August. Haeres. 57.
It is the soundest exposition, in Austins judgment, Vt nullo die
intermittantur certa tempora orandi.

redeem some time from other employments, to be spent in this high part of
devotion.

Luke 18.1.
without fainting; that though the Lord be not presently entreated, yet may we
not so give over our suite, but labor to overcome him with importunity.

Austin reports, the custom of the Egyptian Churches, Crebras quidem habere
Orationes, sed eas tamen breuissimas, and raptim quodammodo iaculatas. In which
kind, whose prayers may not be continual in Labor, Hearing, use of
Sacraments, without any interruption of our intentions otherwise.

In all this diversity of Expositions, there is no contrariety. Two of the
latter I choose to insist on; that our prayers should be, First, frequent; and,
Secondly, without fainting. Touching frequencie: The practice of Saints
commended to our imitation, is known. DANIEL Dan. 6.10.
thrice a day. DAVID seven times a day: of Anna it is said, She served the
Lord with fastings Luke 2.37.
and prayers night and day. Our Savior often withdrew himself into the
Mount, spending whole nights in prayer, beside his ordinary every
dayes-deuotion. Reasons how plentiful does our own estate, considered with
the Ordinance of God, afford us? Our wants are continual, as well in
spiritual, as in temporal things: And Gods Ordinance, we know to have tied
the grant of all blessings, as they are blessings, to the condition Matthew. 7.7.
of prayer.

Take view of some few particulars for instance. Be our strength of body never
so great for labor; how soon can the Lord turn it into weakness? see 1.
King. 13.4.
Jeroboam. Our wit and wisdom able to manage Kingdoms; how can the Lord in a
moment turn it into brutish madness and folly? see Dan. 4.33.
Nabucadnezzar. Our wealth never so abundant; if the Lord but blow upon it, how
soon is it consumed? briefly, in greatest abundance of secular or natural
blessings, how many causes have we of continual prayer? First, the virtue and
power of all things depends on Gods blessing: there is Ezech. 4.16.
a staff of bread, which the Prophet speaks of: a nourishing virtue which the
Lord must give to make it comfortable. A man may eat and Hos. 4.10.
not feel satietie, or if satietie, yet not strength. Secondly, plenty of all
good blessings easily vanishes into abuse, and becomes fuel for corruption to
feed upon; except the Lord be pleased to sanctify them unto us, Wit,
Learning, Strength, Riches, or if there be any other good thing of Nature, Art,
or Fortune, as they are termed, what do they but make us fitter instruments of
the Devil? except the Giver be pleased to give with the blessings, holy hearts
to use them.

For spiritual blessings, though what we enjoy be somewhat; yet, first, How
great are our wants? Secondly, the use of Graces received may be interrupted.
Thirdly, growth is required to perfection. Fourthly, Perseverance, though
certain in Gods promise, yet must be furthered by prayer. And if we consider
other means that God has sanctified, Hearing, Study, Sacraments, etc. all
have their virtue and life, as it were, from prayer. PAVL plants, APOLLO
waters, the 1. Cor. 3.6.
increase is of GOD: there were many Auditors with Lydia; we read of no more
that attended with profit, Act. 16.14.
because her heart only the Lord opened.

To say in a word; there are 1. Tim. 2.1.
three sorts of Petitions, as Paul seems to distinguish them: there is no part
of man's life, wherein one or all have not their place. The first he calls,
Apprecations; prayers for blessings wanting. The second, Deprecations; prayers
for remouall of evils felt, or feared. Thirdly, Intercessions, prayers that we
make in behalf of others. There is no day, or hour, or moment of life, that
has not necessary use of some one of these: Want thou wisdom? Iam. 1.5.
Ask it of God. Have thou wisdom? Pray God to sanctify, increase, continue
it. Art thou filled with good things? yet is there on earth no mecum bonum, but
has a mixture of evils to be deprecated. Has God cleansed thee from secret
sins? yet may thou deprecate Psalm. 19.13.
sins presumptuous. Feel thou no temptation? thou have cause to fear it,
and to watch and pray, Matthew. 26.41
that thou enter not into it. Finally, suppose thy self perfect in all grace,
set far from sense and fear of evil: How many weaklings are there in the
body of Christ, that need aid of thy intercessions? How many elected, yet
uncalled? How many under the Cross? feeble-minded, comfortless? etc. Gods
grace has honored us so far, as to make us Iam. 5.16.
Intercessors for our Brethren; Compassion must teach us to use that privilege
for their benefit.

David describes unto us, with the brand of Atheists, Psalm. 14.4.
They have not called upon the Lord: swarms of such Atheists, every
Congregation is full of; that have no other thought of God, or his dreadful
Name, except to blaspheme it. What marvel, if all blessings of God turn unto
them to curses? and the very means of salvation, become occasion of their
greater hardness, and deeper condemnation?

A second sort there are, not sticking to dispute against the necessity of
this duty: and to oppose principles of Doctrine, against precepts of duty.
So some write of Maximus Tyrius, a Philosopher; that he thus reasoned
desperately against this precept of the Holy Ghost. Gods providence and
appointments are immutable; prayer cannot alter them; what he intends to give,
he will give, though we pray not. What he will not give, no importunity of
prayer shall obtain. This devotion therefore utterly unnecessary.

For answer, consider Gods ordinary providence, and the appointments thereof
shall not out, but include second causes. And therein are disposed, not only
what effects shall be produced, but by what causes, and in what order they shall
have their producement. His will and eternal appointment has freely linked
together, and subordinated the creatures to the execution of his purposes; so
see we in the generation of the fruits of the earth, there is an ordinary
concurrence of Stars influence, heat of Sun, distilling of Showers, etc. And
this knitting together of second causes with the first, is so indissoluable in
the purpose and appointment of God, that without them the effects ordinarily
follow not: so must we conceive prayer for Gods blessings to be, though no
cause natural, yet a means appointed by the will of God, to obtain them.
They err, that think his appointments absolute, without respect to second
causes, as means of their accomplishment. Gregor. lib. 1. Dialog.
Ipsa regni aeterni praedestinatio ita est ab omnipotenti Deo disposita, says
GREGORY, quatenus ad hoc electi ex labor perueniant; vt ipsi orando mercantur
accipere, quod eis omnipotens Deus ante saecula disposuit dare. Neither pray we
to alter Gods disposition; but to obtain, what he has disposed and ordered
to be obtained by the prayers of his Saints.

Besides this; In the significations of Gods secret will, from which we gather
the order thereof, we have promises and precepts joined together; yea, nothing
promised without a prescript of duty to obtain the promise; and that so
required, that if the duty commanded be neglected, the blessing promised is
not obtained. And shall we now say, Prayers are unnecessary, which by his
precept we gather to be included in his secret appointments? God forbid. The
Saints we find, where they had greatest certainty of obtaining, most instant
and fervent in praying. To Isaac was the promise of a blessed seed renewed;
yet Genesis 25.21.
prays he God instantly, to remove the barrenness of his wife REBECCA. To
Elias God had reueiled his purpose of sending rain, after so long drought in
Israel; yet how 1. Kin. 18.42.
buckles he himself in instance to obtain it? Nimirum sciebat, says
Gregory, that God so promises his blessings, that he will have them obtained
by prayer. Wherefore also it is said; Iam. 4.2.
Ye have not, because ye ask not.

There is a third sort; and they pressed with conscience of their own vileness
and unworthiness, out of a nimium of humility, and a kind of mannerly
profaneness, neglect the duty; who are we that we should dare press into
Gods presence, or presume to beg any blessing of him? Unworthy, I confess,
we are all of so high a favor, if we respect our selves. But if God have
vouchsafed us this honor, to be his orators; and in his mercy demitted
himself so low, as to afford us, base creatures, audience; let us take heed,
least this show of humility, as Paul calls it, make us guilty of
unthankfulness or disobedience. Besides, our custom is not to present our
prayers unto God in our own righteousness or worth: but in confidence of his
Dan. 9.18.
unspeakable mercy, and benignity; and though it be true, as Bernard has it,
great is our iniquity, yet greater, O Lord, is thy pious love and benignity.
Lastly, for this cause has the Lord provided us a Mediator, his own Son
Jesus; in whom he has promised to be well pleased with our persons, and to
accept our prayers.

The last sort is of them, that for their weakness and coldness in prayers
choose to omit it. They want words, they say to express their desires, etc.

Ans. In prayer, the best Rethorike is passionate Romans 8.26.
groans and sighs of the heart. It is well said of Austin, God respects not so
much eloquence of words, as feruency of spirit: he bears with Solaecismes and
Barbarismes in our Petitions. Let us choose rather to violate Rules of Grammar
and Rhethorique, then this so precise a Canon of the holy Ghost. Secondly,
remember what has often been taught; Better is weak performance, then whole
omission: far safer to pray weakly, then not to pray at all. First, we know
not how God may please to quicken our dull affections, in the proceedings of
our prayers. Secondly, and we know, 1. John 2.1.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, propitiating,
as for other our sins, so for our weaknesses, and Reave. 8.3, 4.
imperfections in Prayer.

Motives to this duty. First, our frequent and daily necessities: our lives
never free from wants of good things; nor fears, or feelings of evil.
Secondly, nothing 1. Tim. 4.5.
sanctified to us, without this mean. Thirdly, Romans 8.26. Zach. 12.10.
assurance of Adoption, depends much on the frequent and delightful use of
prayer. Fourthly, worthy encouragements we 1. Ioh. 5.14.
have, promise of audience, in what we pray according to Gods will: Of 1.
King. 8.26, 34.
Gods Spirit to help our infirmities: Of Christ's intercession, to present and
commend our selves unto his Father. Fifthly, the honor God has vouchsafed us
herein, should not a little move us. Considera, says CHRYSOSTOM, quanta tibi
est concessa foelicitas; quanta collata gloria, fabulari cum Deo; cum Christo
miscere colloquia; optare quod velis, quod desideras postulare. And of
frequencie in prayer, thus

It is next to be considered; that, In praying, the Lord requires not only
frequency; but even unwearied opportunity; that though after long suite we
obtain not, yet so we give not over; to this scope aims the Parable of the
poor Widow, and unrighteous Judge. Examples are frequent: 2. Cor. 12.8, 9
PAVL prays thrice, that is, often, though at length all he obtaines is, not
deliverance, but sustentation. The Mat. 15.25, 27.
woman of Canaan is not discouraged, neither with reasons, nor with reproaches.
Mark. 10.48.
The blind man checked for his clamorousnesse, cries with more instance. DAVID'S
eyes fail with waiting, yet renewes he his devotion. Moses after a sort
forces the Lord; insomuch, that he craves dimission, Exodus 32.10.
Let me alone. Domine quis tenet te? says a Father. Surely Moses his instance
and importunity. JACOB wrestles with the Angel, and professes his resolution,
Genesis 32.26.
not to let him go, until he bless him. That wrestling Hoshea seems to Hosh.
12.4.
interpret of Prayer.

This precept oppose we against that temptation, which sometimes Satan,
sometimes our own weakness, suggests to make us weary of praying: because
we presently obtain not, what we pray for. A temptatition frequent, and with
many preualent, to hinder instance in praying blessings most excellent, and
necessary to salvation. I say, as Bernard; Bernard. de Quadrages. ser. 5.
Though God delay his grant, yet let no man slightly esteem his prayers; for
I tell you, he whom we pray unto, does not lightly esteem them. This once
we have assurance, that God will grant us, either what we pray for: or what
he, in more wisdom, sees more expedient for us, if we faint not.

To this end consider we, First, the causes, why our prayers have not present
audience; they are some in our selves ^^d manner of praying; some in the matter
of our petiti^^s: some in the Lord, that denies us audience.

causes delay of the blessing. It may be, we are not humbled sufficiently,
under conscience of our infirmity, and unworthiness: perhaps our coldness of
affections is the impediment; we pray not with that feeling of wants, or
feruencie of desire that is convenient.

Secondly, It may be the things we pray for, are such nimis ardenter, says
Austine, as temporalties. A discreet Father, Paruulo quaerenti panem, Bernard.
quae supra.
libenter porrigit; quaerenti cultellum non consentit, BERNARD.

Thirdly, Perhaps the Lord would hereby try our patience; or exercise our
faith; or set a price upon his blessings;

Secondly, it would be considered, that the Lord sometimes in bestowing his
blessings at our request, deals by way of exchange and commutation. Denies he
wealth? he gives contentment. Peace? he gives patience. Deliverance? he gives
grace to support. Augustine. epist. 34.
Bonus Dominus qui non tribuit saepe quod volumus, vt quod malimus attribuat.
God never denies the request of his Saints, made according to his Will; though
he often delays the grant for causes forementioned. It is Gods mercy to
withhold what he sees in expedient for us to have; and to delay the grant, of
what is not convenient for us, so soon to obtain: Nos quid oremus sicut
oportet nescimus: Bernard. qua supra.
sed miseretur ille super ignorantiam nostram; and orationem benign
suscipiens, quod nobis aut omnino non est vtile, aut non tam cito dari necesse
est, minime tribuit: oration tamen infructuosa non erit.

Means to prevent fainting in prayer. First, seriously consider, first, the
misery of the want; secondly, as duly weigh the excellency and worth of the
blessing prayed for. Suppose for instance it be pardon of sin, peace of
Conscience.

Secondly, Remember, how often the Job 33.14.
Lord has called, and thou have refused to hear: think not much, if he by
delaying audience, chasten thy former rebellion, and turning the deaf ear to
his call.

Thirdly, To this add, meditation of thy no merits of the least blessing; thy
deseruings of the contrary: Romans 11.35.
Who has given him first, and it shall be recompensed him? Yea, who has not by
unthankfulness, and abuse of Gods favors, wilfully stopped the fountain and
current of the Lords beneficence toward him?

VERSE. 18. In every thing give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus, concerning you.


A Second precept we have here, subordinate to preservation of spiritual joy.
Wherein are three things considerable. First, the duty, Give thanks.
Secondly, the extent of the duty; In every thing. Thirdly, the reason or
inducement to the duty. For this is the Will of God in Christ.

In all things; that is, say some, in all estates, adverse and prosperous; for
all accidents, never so full of affliction, or calamity; as our vulgus: thank
God they must for all, even for punishments, that come from him, as from an
angry Judge. And amongst Learned, it goes for current Divinity, without
distinction: that for afflictions we must be thankful: for they work to
our good. But why not then for our sins also, since they also work after a
sort to good, by the ouerruling power and providence of God? August. de cor.
and great. cap. 9.
All things work together for good: Vsque adeo omnia, says AUSTIN, vt etiamsi
qui eorum deuiant and exorbitant, etiam hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in
bonum, quia humiliores redeunt atque doctiores.

The old distinction must here be remembered. Afflictions, some are (...):
punishments properly so called: they are such as proceed from Gods wrath, and
are inflicted in the Nature of Vengeances. May we think these matter of
thankfulness? and not rather of trembling and humiliation?

Some are (...): chastisements, or fatherly corrections. They differ from the
former, not so much in their matter; as First, in the Fountain. Secondly,
Measure. Thirdly, end of inflicting and issue. They issue out of GODS love, and
fatherly care, willing thereby to reclayme us. They have their Esaias 27.8.
temper and mitigation according to our strength. They tend to make partakers
of the Heb. 12.11.
quiet fruit of righteousness. In afflictions of this Nature, if we respect
the use and fruit, there is cause of thankfulness.

Some are (...): preservatives against sin; as PAVLS 2. Cor. 12.7.
buffeting by Satan.

Last are (...): trials of faith; whether by Satan; as those of Job: or by men
that persecute for righteousness sake. In this last sort, we find great
cause of thankfulness, and rejoicing. Paul calls his Cross, his Phil. 1.7.
Grace: PETER and his fellows rejoice therein, as in Acts 5.41.
a great dignity.

The sum is: Afflictions simply considered, are no matter of thanksgiving;
their use and fruit is a blessing of God; but that comes from them by accident
only; is not wrought out of the Nature of misery.

The extent of the duty is best measured, by comparing it with the former:
what we may pray for; for that we must give thanks; and whatsoever is no fit
matter of Prayer, is as unfit for thanksgiving. That we may pray for
afflictions, I find not warranted unto any; nor by any practiced; For Job 6.11.
what is our strength that we should endure?

By which rule also, the profane guize of many is excluded; even for their
sins, and thriuing therein, profanely praising God, and giving thanks to
him. The Thief for his Spoil; the Adulterer for his unclean Dalliance; the
vain Gamester for his good Fortune. Gratitude, says Bernard, is or should be
pudica. Abominable to God is that thank, that ascribes to him the operation,
of what he professes to abhor, and threatens to punish; as he does all
iniquity. The sense then thus conceive: Inioying the blessings of God, be as
careful to render thanks, as in the want thou wast instant in Prayer to
obtain them. Let no favor of God, be it never so mean, be ouer-passed
without thanksgiving. Amongst Jews, were as many Thankes-offerings; as
Offerings of expiation and atonement; to teach us, to be as thankful for
blessings received, as in our wants we are importunate to obtain them. And
hereto tended their solemn Festiuities, as to one end, to testify their
thankfulness, and rejoicing in Gods Mercy, and the Blessings bestowed on them
in temporal and spiritual things. The Saints of God were careful in this
kind: in David, the man after Gods own heart, it is specially obseruable; his
Psalms of thanksgiving double in number to those spent in Doctrine, History,
or Petition.

Motives here: First, The excellency of this service would be considered.
First, Preferred by the Psalm. 50.23.
Lord before all Sacrifices. Secondly, Peculiar to Saints. Thirdly, The service
of the life to come, when all other almost cease.

Secondly, It is all we are able to render unto the Lord for all the benefits
he has done unto us: in a sense, Psalm. 116.12, 13.
all the Lord requires of us: how justly, judge by that no obligation of the
Lord unto us; For Romans 11.35.
who has given him first? We receive them, says BERNARD, Dupliciter gratis;
sine merito, sine labor nostro.

Thirdly, Unthankfulness, says Bernard, is that ventus vrens and exiccans,
that dryes up fluenta gratiae. For it, God is wonted to deprive of his
Blessings, and to turn them into Curses. Because Romans 1.21, 22
Gentiles were unthankful, the Lord infatuated their understanding. Or if the
Blessings be continued, yet not in the Nature of blessings: but as occasions
of hard-heartednesse, Romans 2.5.
and preparatiues to greater judgment. Thus of the duty; join thereto the
extent of it: In every blessing of God. They are of three sorts. First,
Natural, that tend to our being, or wel-being in Nature. Secondly, Political,
tending to our being, or wel-being in civil society. Thirdly, Spiritual,
serving to our being, or wel-being in Grace. Every of these require their
special thanksgiving. And in every of them must be considered, First, The
blessings themselves. Secondly, The use. Thirdly, The continuance. Fourthly,
The increase of the Blessings. That Acts 17.28.
we live, move, have our being, is Gods mercy toward us; that he gives us
things necessary for sustenance of life, and hearts to use them, is his
Blessing, not without thankfulness to be acknowledged. There be, says
Solomon, that have them in abundance, and yet Prou. 5.13.
want hearts to take comfort of them. The habit of Faith, is Gods Gift; the use
of Faith, his Gift; the continuance, his Gift; the increase, his Gift; they
fail in this duty, that pass by any of these without their special
thanksgiving.

Sins contrary hereto. First, Ingratitude: the sin so detestable unto God,
so odious, I say not to Saints only, but to all men. Ingratum dixeris, omnia
dixeris, says, Mimus Publianus. And if on any people it may be charged, most
on us, to whom GOD has been richest in bountiful bestowing of his Favors.

Degrees of this sin, Ancients have thus noted.

First, To pass by the Favors of GOD without notice-taking of them, at least
in the Nature of Favors; in this degree who stands not culpable of Ingratitude
before God? How Lam. 3.23.
many mercies are with every morning renewed upon us? which through commonnesse,
not only lose of their worth in our esteem, but their very notice and
observation.

Secondly, Not to requite or recompense the benefit to the bestower, according
to opportunity: may some say, Can any recompense to the Lord his Kindness?
Behold, our Psalm. 16.2.
well-doing extends not to him; and Job 22.3.
what is it to God that we are righteous? Yet are there certain duties, which
he is pleased to interpret, after a sort, as thankful rendrings, and
retributions made to his bounty, as, when we use his gifts to the glory of the
bestower. Secondly, To the comfort of his Children, whom he has pleased to
appoint receivers of his Tribute, and accepts things done to them, Mat. 25.40.
as done to himself.

Thirdly, To render evil for good. A high degree of Ingratitude. I could wish
we could wash our hands of it. His Patience and Bountifulness how many abuse
to licentiousness? his wonderful Mercy in the work of Redemption, how many
make the greatest excitement to disobedience? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O people, foolish and unwise?

Fourthly, To diminish the worth of the Blessings; as Israelires Psalm. 106.24.
despised the good and pleasant Land: As many of our people, the great favors
of God, in the seeds and beginnings of Grace.

Fifthly, To account Blessings Curses. Wonderful favor God vouchsafed to
Israel in their deliverance from bondage in Egypt; and such as while they felt,
they Exodus 2.23.
cried after; yet no sooner appears the least danger, but they Exodus 16.3.
esteem better, death in Egypt, then life in the Wilderness under Gods
protection. By Miracle GOD feeds them with Manna from Heaven; and while it is
now, they admire it; incontinently they murmr at that pleasant meat, and the
Fleshpots and Garlike of Egypt seems better food. What a gracious blessing
has God bestowed on us in liberty of his worship, and plenty of his Word?
But oh cursed unthankfulness of men, crying out of this blessing, as of some
direful Curse, because it is crossing to their fleshly affections.

Secondly, To this may be added formalitie in thankfulness; thanksgiving
being usually no more but lip-labor; we can say God a thank; but he is a rare
man, whose heart is affected with rejoicing in Gods Mercy; and that feelingly
acknowledges Gods favor in his blessings. Or that diuerts not the praise in
part, to himself, as the Luke 18.11.
Pharise; and is ready Hab. 1.16.
to sacrifice to his Nets.

That our hearts may be stirred up to this duty, take notice of these as
means auayleable.

First, Consider our no Merits of any the Lords Mercies; Genesis 32.10.
Lord, I am less then the least of all thy Mercies, and loving kindnesses thou
have shown me? what were our Merits? except such, as Austine speaks of,
Meritamala. See Paul and David from this ground, more then once exciting their
hearts to thankfulness.

Secondly, Meditate the misery of wanting the blessings Carendo, magis quam
fruendo. The Lord for this cause is pleased to leave us many, as spectacles of
his wrath; that seeing their misery we might be provoked to praise his
Mercy: And sometimes to withdraw them from his own Children, that we might
learn to set better price on them. Psalm. 32.1.
See David.

Thirdly, Set our selves apart to serious view of their

Fourthly, Consider the preferment God has given us Psalm. 147.19, 20.
David thought no small motive to thanksgiving. See also Exodus 19.
Deutronomie 5.3. Matthew 13.17.

God has in one kind or other made him a superior to his Brethren. Comparison
with those behind us, as it restraines Envy, so prouokes thankfulness.



The reason pressing it follows. For this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
toward you: that is, It is that the Lord by his Son Christ has signified to
be his will; and after a sort the whole, he requires of us for all the good
things he has done to our souls: other Expositions there are many, this
seems most congruous. The observation made to the fourth Chapter and third
Verse, here again offers it self: Thither I remit the Reader; wishing only
we had all Wisdom to captiuate our thoughts to the obedience of Christ; and
not to allow disputes against the significations of Gods will; what the LORD
speaks to Ioshuah, should, me thinks, be sufficient excitement to obedience.
Josh. 1.9.
Have not I commanded thee? It is that, I am sure, that forms our obedience to
sincerity; and chiefly puts difference betwixt the integrity of Gods Children
and the formalitie of Hypocrites, and mercenary affection of Hyrelings.
Glorious things we find written of Formalists; and such, as for substance of
the action, are scarce exceeded by the most upright in heart: Yet cannot find
testimony given to any Hypocrite, that he made the Commandment his motive.
If that were the ground of well-doing, how is it we find them so halting in
their Obedience? how, that where is the same ground of doing, there is not like
performance? He that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said also, Thou
shall not kill. He that said to IEHV, He should destroy BAAL, the Idol of
ACHAB, signified also dislike of the Calves of JEROBOAM. If therefore he
destroyed Baal, because the Lord so commanded: wherefore departs he not from
the sin of Jeroboam, which God had so severely punished by rooting out his
posterity? It shall ever be the privilege of the upright in heart, to do
what God wills, therefore because he wills it.

VERSE. 19. Quench not the Spirit.


THe third Precept subordinate to preservation of Christian joy: where the
question is usual, whether Gods Spirit may possibly be quenched in the hearts
of his Children: For resolution, I refer the Reader to what has been largely
treated by others; Amongst the rest to my reverend, and neuer-enough commended
Colleague, Master Samuel Hieron of blessed memory; to whose elegancies and
judicious resolution, I presume to add nothing, except perhaps distinctnesse
of explication.

The terms are thus explaned: Gods Spirit in Scripture has a threefold
notion, under that name comes, First, the person of the Spirit, the third in
the blessed Trinity. Secondly, the gifts and gracious endowments of the
Spirit. Thirdly, the 1. Cor. 12.3.
motions of the Spirit. The gifts and motions of the holy Ghost are here
understood.

Quenching, in property of speech, belongs unto fire; whose heat and light
when it is put out, it is said to be quenched. Thence it is translated, to
signify the quelling or abolishing of the gifts and motions of the holy Ghost,
whereof the Scripture notes two degrees. First, called by Paul the Ephesians. 4.30.
grieuing of the holy Spirit of God, when by any our misdemeanour, or
negligence, we cause him to abate the life and vigor of his operations in us.
Secondly, the other is, the utter loss and abolishment of his gifts or
excitements.

particular callings and functions; as were 1. Cor. 12.4, 5.
those extraordinary in the Primitive Church; as that of Saul, 1. Sam. 10.6.
his fortitude, wisdom, Kingly magnanimity fitting him to manage the
affairs of his Kingdom, the possible loss of such gifts, Saul's example gives
testimony unto, 1. Sam. 16.14
The Spirit of the Lord departed from SAVL.

Heb. 6.4, 5.
tasting the good Word of God, and powers of the World to come: The loss of
these, or if there be any like dispositions, as we may call them, toward Gods
Kingdom, is not questioned. HYMENaeVS and ALEXANDER made 1. Tim. 1.19.20
shipwreck of Faith; and some receiving the Word with joy, Luke 8.13.
in time of temptation go away.

Matthew. 16.18.
Gates of Hell cannot prevail to overthrow.

Howbeit here must be distinguished, First, the Gifts themselves. Secondly, the
use of the gifts. Thirdly, the degrees and measures of them. The exercise and
use of the gifts admit, though not utter loss, yet intermission. In the
murder of Vrijah, in Bernards judgment, Bernard. de Natura and Dignitate
amor. divine. cap. 6.
David lost not the gift, but left the exercise of Charity: Charitatis in eo
facta est quaedam quasi separatio, non tamen abolitio: as in sleep, we lose
not the faculty, but the use of sense; as a man in his drink, or ouercarryed
with violent passion, loses not the faculty, but the use of Reason.

Like think of the fervor of Gods Spirit; the life and vigor of his
operations admit their abatement. That made Paul remember Timothy, to 2. Tim.
1.6.
stir up the gift that was in him. It should seem he perceived decay of
wonted fervor. The Angel of Ephesus left Revel. 2.4.
his first love; not the habit, nor wholly the exercise was lost; but the
vigor and heat of love that once showed in him, began to be abated. The
sum is this: First, Habitus non amittitur. Secondly, Actus intermittitur.
Thirdly, Gradus remittitur.

Lastly, there are certain motions of Gods Spirit, excitements perhaps, as we
may term them, whereby he is pleased to direct, and provoke us to holy
duties. It may be these are the voice, ISAY says, we shall hear behind us,
saying, Isay 30.21.
This is the way, Walk ye in it. Not only GODS Chosen, but Cast-awayes may
hear it. Though I cannot think that auxilium excitans, so universal, that
there is no particular of the sons of Adam, to whom it is not sometime
vouchsafed: yet it is my persuasion, there are few in the Church of God, but
feel secret suggestions of holiness, and excitements to Faith and Repentance.
That compunction and remorce they are smitten withal, the vanishing flashes of
goodness they feel, are the good motions of the Spirit of God; vouchsafed to
Cast-awayes, to make them more inexcusable, to aggrauate their condemnation.
Take instance in SAVL, 1. Sam. 26.21
vowing to do DAVID no more harm, and relenting, as overcome with kindness.

If of such motions the question be, whether they may be quenched: it is out of
question they may be, and are in Cast-awayes; would God not too often in GODS
dearest Children.

The whole amounts to this sum. First, gifts qualifying to particular
callings. Secondly, disposing to sanctification may be lost. Thirdly, exercise
of gifts habited may be intermitted. Fourthly, fervor of all gifts in measure
abated. Fifthly, suggestions and particular motions repelled; though the habits
of holiness are not utterly extinct in men truly regenerate.



The gifts of Gods Spirit, with all his holy motions and operations, must be by
all means cherished in our hearts: All endeavor given, that the Graces we have
received, may be preserved in their fullest fervor, without any the least
abatement.

Therefore Paul exhorts his Timothy, to 2. Tim. 1.6.
stir up the gift in him; and to Ephesians permits not so much as to Ephesians.
4.30.
grieve the Spirit of God; to give him any occasion of withdrawing the
liuelihood and vigor of his operation in them.

His reason, me thinks, is forcible; because by him, we are sealed to the day
of Redemption; as Theophylact expounds; he is to us Gods Character and mark,
set on us, and seizing us for his own; assuring us thereby, that that day of
Judgment shall be to us no day of Wrath, but the day of plenarie and full
Redemption. q. d. As you desire to retain assurance of your deliverance from
the wrath to come; that the Lord shall take notice of you for His, in the Day
of that dreadful separation: so by all means cherish in you the gifts, and
operations of his holy Spirit: It is the only evidence we have of our freedom
from condemnation. If that move not, hear then the Apostles Paul and Peter
thundering to awake us, out of our neglect of so great salvation.

The loss of Gods Spirit, the resisting of his motions; if it be but want of
care to cherish his gifts and operations in us, to Heb. 6.6. and 10.25, 26.
how fearful and hopeless estate does it hazard us? In case of loss, the
recovery for ever becomes impossible; No hope left, in that case, to be
renewed to repentance; nor expectation of any thing from God, but sorest
vengeance, and violent fire to devour. The 2. Pet. 2.20.
last end of men so ungracious, becomes worse then their beginning.

Let no weakling mistake in this Argument; as if the suppressing of every good
motion, or the abatement of the Spirits fervor, or the interruption of his
sensible operation in us, should cast us into this irrecouerable condition. The
sin is fearful, and discomfortable, to resist any his gracious suggestions;
but the Apostle apparently speaks of a total loss, not only of the exercise,
but of the gifts of the holy Ghost; to which he intimates, neglect to cherish
them, may endanger us. The Precept has been thus explaned and proved.

Sinners against it, are, First, Reuolters from the grace of God; such as set
themselves wilfully to quench, or by willing negligence, suffer the worthy
gifts of Gods Spirit to be extinct in them. A cursed generation of men and
women; with whom when the Lord has pleased to deal so graciously, as to give
them sense of their misery in Nature, Number. 23.10.
sight, as to BALAAM; it may be, taste also of the blessed state of his
Children; yea after a sort, to 2. Pet. 2.20.
wash them from their old sins, if not in affection, yet in practice; they
turn back from the holy Commandment given unto them; either entangled in the
world, as Demas: or besorted with pleasures, as those Epicure women; or as
temporaries, deterred with afflictions. Oh miserable state of such men's souls,
if they had hearts to consider it! of whom may it not be said, as Paul in
another sense of voluptuous women; They 1. Tim. 5.6.
are dead while they are alive; and as our Savior, They Ioh. 3.18.
are condemned already? For such, if for any, is that Isai. 30.33.
Tophet prepared, the burning whereof is fire and much wood, which the breath
of the Lord as a stream of brimstone kindles, and for ever keeps burning.

Secondly, To these are added, those that, as Stephen speaks of Jews, always
Act. 7.51.
resist the holy Ghost, and labor to suppress the holy motions suggested by
him. How often do I persuade my self, the worst men under our Ministry, hear
that voice behind them, This is the way, walk ye in it? and as Agrippa, are
Act. 26.28.
almost persuaded to become Christians. But see the cursed unthankfulness of
men, wilfully setting themselves to repel such motions: those sweet
inspirements of Gods holy Spirit, they call, I would I might say, ignorantly,
fits of melancholy; I am sure, profanely, qualmes of devotion. And then, haste
to their cursed company, and no less then abominable courses, to chase away
those qualmes of conscience. Oh wonderful mercy of God offered to such men's
souls, had they grace to consider and accept it! How justly may the Lord say
to them, as he speaks to Israel; Hosh. 13.9.
Your destruction is of your selves; and as to Jerusalem, Isai. 5.4.
What should he have done more that he has not done? Teaching them by his
Word, wakening them by his Rod, inuiting them by his bounty, offering himself
to them by his Spirit; whiles they desperately forsake their own mercy. The
issues usual of such men are, First, that their hearts grow thereby more
obdurate. Secondly, the life more brutish and abominable. Thirdly, else fall
they into agonies of conscience, such as wherein they perish through everlasting
despair.

Thirdly, A third sort there are, and they are much amongst us; men that under
pretense of discretion, and seeing more into the state of Religion then at
first entrance they could see, abate of their fervor, and, as they now term
it, violence of gracious affections; seeming to conceit, there may be a nimium
of devotion; men may be ouer-forward and zealous; A Sermon now and then does
well; every weeks hearing is not so necessary; study of Scriptures is good at
leisure times, as it were for recreation; we be not Angels, but Men; and there
is a reason in all things, even in religiousnesse, if men could hit on it. I
confess there is a kind of devotion, wherein men may be too fervent; but that
devotion is superstition; a kind of zeal whereof may be a nimium; but that is
Romans 10.2.
zeal not according to knowledge: yet beware, I beseech you, you give not the
Lord the least occasion to complain of you, as of the Angel of Ephesus, that
you have left your first love: and take heed, this temperatenesse and
discretion, as it is called, degenerate not into Revel. 3.16.
luke-warmenesse, the worst temper, that can be, of our Religious affections.
Fear to be noted of backe-sliding; Tremble to lose the least measure of Gods
gracious gifts; to abate any thing of the heat and fervor of sanctified
affections. It is a step toward quenching, but to slake the fire of Gods
Spirit in our hearts.

Means of cherishing and keeping in life, our spiritual gifts. First,
exercise and employment. Secondly, 1. Tim. 1.19.
Good Conscience and holy obedience; which while some neglect, they make
shipwreck of faith. Thirdly, humility, in Bernards judgment, is,
conseruatrix virtutum. Fourthly, Heb. 10.25.
Forsake not assemblies of Saints; neglect no means sanctified to work
establishment.

How may the motions of Gods Spirit be distinguished from Diabolical
delusions? Satanicall suggestions are often subtly contrived, cunningly
colored; that lying spirit sometimes dares counterfeit the Spirit of truth.
Scarce ever was heretic so fantastical or impudent, but pretended guidance
by the Spirit of God. Anabaptists, teaching to despise Authority, to vilify
all other ordinances of God, pretend I know not what instincts and revelations
from the Spirit of God. Montanus tells of a strange Paraclete, that inspired
him; and guided to publish his damned errors.

Means of discerning. First, Isai his watchword let it be our rule: Isai.
8.20. Deuteronomy. 13.2, 3.
To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is evidence that there is no light in them.

Secondly, The gift of Prophecy, as of miracles, is now ceased in the Church:
God deals not now, as in former times, by extraordinary instinct or
inspiratio^. His charge is, To Revel. 22.11.
add nothing to the words of JOHN'S Prophecy, under pain of addition to be
made to our plagues.

Thirdly, If the matter of the suggestion be evil, either in the whole kind,
or by circumstance; it is no Divine motion; but either a Iam. 1.14.
concupiscentiall fantasy, or a Job. 13 2.
Diabolical delusion.

Fourthly, Ever be jealous of all motions, leading thee beyond thy calling, or
measure of gifts. The rules are, Romans 12.6.
Sapere ad sobrietatem: and Psalm. 131.1.
not to meddle with things too high. It is glorious to exercise the Ministry;
but examine thy gifts. Excitements to enter that function without gifts, thou
may well think are but suggestions of pride.

VERSE. 20. Despise not Prophecyings.


THe duty he prescribed, tends in the holy practice of it, to preserve the
life and vigor of Gods Spirit in us. The sense conceive thus:

Of Prophecy we find two sorts. First, Extraordinary, that stood partly in
foretelling things to come, by immediate revelation; partly, in interpreting
Scriptures, with unerring spirit: In regard of which function, those whom the
Lord extraordinarily stirred up in the old Testament, some also in the New,
were called Prophets. Of which sort if now were any, they ought to have their
extraordinary respect. There are, I know, that arrogate such a lumen
Propheticum; and reckon it amongst the marks of their Church. But if Reave.
22.18.
nothing may be added to the Prophecy of John's Book, it should seem the Lord
has therein fully reueiled, whatsoever is necessary to be known touching
state of the Church, to the end of the world; and then what needs a new light
of Prophecy?

Secondly, Another ordinary; intimated by the Apostle; with whom, to Prophecy
in this kind, is 1. Cor. 14.2.
to speak unto men to Edification, Exhortation, Comfort. In our usual
language, we call it Preaching. Therefore termed by PAVL Prophesying, perhaps,
because the matter of preaching in those days, was the Scriptures in MOSES and
Prophets; in opening and applying whereof the servants of God were then
conversant. And of such prophecyings would Paul be understood.

His prescript in respect of preaching is, not to despise it. That (...)
implies highest reverence and esteem; most conscionable attendance due to this
ordinance of God. In pressing that duty I have been forestalled by the
pains of my reverend Symmysta, whom I have erst named honoris causa, and
cannot sine planctu remember: Only so much as circumstances may occasion
further to notice, I insist on. Call to mind with me the commendation given by
the Apostle to this people; how he professes undoubtful persuasion of their
election, in regard of their rich measure of faith, patience, sanctity, become
famous through the world; exemplary to neighbor Churches, and how to this
people, so every way gracious beyond comparison, he presses necessity of
attending to prophecy; the note thus kindly flows.

What ever our measures of Grace may be, how rich soever we be in faith and
charity, our duty still is to attend to preaching. DAVID, a man of
Prophetical gifts and spirit, Psalm. 84.2.
yet longs after Gods presence in the Tabernacle; persuaded in all likelihood,
that though the Lord might work mightily in his heart by his private
Meditations, when not contempt, but necessity detained him from the
Congregation; Yet that viua vox of the Prophets, had in it aliquid latentis
energiae. MARIE, long after her conversion, Luke 10.39, 41.
sits at our Saviors feet, to hear the gracious words proceeded from his
mouth: Where Martha her sister receives her check, for not attending this vnum
necessarium. Take view of the uses it has to men most enlightened and
sanctified, it will appear without controversy.

aliquid amputandum, something to be cut off and mortified. We err, says
Bernard, Bernard. super Cantic. ser. 58.
how much soever we have profited in mortification, if we think our sins
quite dead, and not rather suppressed. Velis nolis, habitabit intra fines tuos
Iebusaeus; subiugari potest, sed non exterminari. The Apostle complains him
heavily of Romans 7.20.
sin dwelling in him: ever fighting, sometimes prevailing against grace. And
though it be true, our private helps of Fasting, Prayer, Divine Meditation,
etc. are of some force to abate the fury of Concupiscence; yet in mortifying
corruption, this lively Heb. 4.12.
two-edged sword of the Spirit, the Word of God in the mouths of his
Ministers, has the preeminence of efficacy.

Iere. 17.9.
heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? There are secret
corners therein many, wherein wickedness lies lurking. Psalm. 19.12.
Who can tell how often he offends? Oh cleanse me, says DAVID, from my secret,
from my unknown sins. If this were true of David, a man of so excellent
spirit, such a diligent examiner of his heart upon his bed; who of us may say,
he sees every corrupt propension of his heart, and needs not daily profit in
knowledge and discovery of his corruptions? whereto though private looking into
the Iam. 1.25.
perfect law of liberty, be much available; yet the lively 1. Cor. 14.25.
discouerer is Prophecy, that is it that vnbowels corruption, and best
displayes the hidden nakedness of the old Adam.

In James 3.2.
many things we sin all. Fac vt non corruerim, said HIEROME, Hieron.
Certe offendi, and non in vno, sed in pluribus. God has indeed sanctified
afflictions, to this end, to reduce us from our wanderings: and has given us
every one into our bosoms, Conscience, to be a remembrancer of our doings
amiss; yet neither crosses, nor conscience, have power comparable with
preaching, to procure our reuocation. So many uses has it to Gods children in
respect of the remanents of corruption. See if not as many for behoof of grace
received.

As first for establishment and confirmation of our gracious to 1. Cor. 1.8.
to confirm us blameless unto the end; And his free Psalm. 51.12.
Spirit be the principal stablisher of us in grace; yet his mean and
instrument is this of Prophecy especially. That was the reason, Apostles,
where they had planted Churches, returned in person, Act. 14.22.
to confirm the Disciples hearts; not resting contented to deal by letters.

Secondly, Besides, though the Spirit of sanctification was persuaded of
Hebrews, such things Heb. 5.9.
as accompanied salvation; yet complains of dullness, grown upon them in
hearing. And that Timothy, to whom he gives so excellent commendation, yet had
need of a remembrancer 2. Tim. 1.6.
to stir up his gift. Reading has his force this way; yet the quickener
indeed is the lively voice of a Preacher.

Thirdly, Certain abatements of the measures of left his Revel. 2 4.
first love; we also admit our decaies and declinations. For this end has God
ordained the Ministry, Not only for gathering of the Saints, but for Ephesians.
4.12.
repare of those breaches, tentation has made upon his Church.

he has attained perfection; when so Philip. 3.13.
great an Apostle professedly disclaymes it. In the easiest part of
Christianity, that stands in knowledge and understanding, who dare claim
perfection? when David after so long daily study of the Law of GOD, professes
to Psalm. 19.18.
see wonders past his comprehension; and Paul proclaymes of all men, himself
not excepted, they know 1. Cor. 13.9.
but in part. In matter of practice, how far shorter come we? when the most
we dare profess is, that Romans 17.18.
to will is present with us. Feign we would trust 1. Pet. 1.13.
perfectly on the Grace of God; but our incredulous hearts, withheld by
Satan, permit it not. Feign cast off the sin Heb. 12.1.
that hangs on fast, and presses down sore, that we might run with joy
the race that is set before us: but such a mass of coruption we feel
clogging us, that we can scarce hold on a Snayles pace to the Kingdom of
Heaven. So then, whether we respect the sin that dwells in us, or the Grace we
have received; we see there is necessary, continual attendance to prophecy,
even for the greatest amongst the Saints of God, First, for discovery of secret
and unknown sins. Secondly, For increase of Mortification. Thirdly, For
Reuocation and renewing our Repentance after our falls.

And in Grace. First, That our weakness may be confirmed. Secondly, Our
dullness excited. Thirdly, Our decays repaired. Fourthly, Our wants supplied,
till we become perfect men in Christ Jesus. whereto this the help most
auayleable, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
PAVL and 1. Pet. 2 2.
PETER being witnesses.

Opposite to this Doctrine and Duty, we find sundry ranks of men.

First, Anabaptists, and such like fantastical

a dead Letter, Inkie Divinity. Sacraments, empty Pageants, and
representations of the death of Christ, without likelihood. The Spirit is he
that quickens.

heart Acts 16.14.
Gods Spirit opened to attend; the rest attend not, because he opens not. Yet,
First, has it by Gods Ordinance a fitness to work 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
mightily; it is lively and Heb. 4.12.
mighty in operation. As Ier 2^.9.
the Hammer that breaks the stone; and no less then fire, operative.
Secondly, Yea, ordinarily the Spirit works not, but by this instrument;
wherefore Paul sticks not to call Ministers, Cooperarios 1 Cor. 3.9.
Dei, and we are said to 1. Tim. 4.16.
save them that hear us. Thirdly, And what should be the reason, the Lord in
the Covenant is pleased to join together his Spirit Esaias 59.21.
and his Word? Save only to signify, that the ordinary operations of his
Spirit are See Acts 10.44. Gal 3.2.
by this instrument. And howsoever he may be pleased sometimes to work above
his order: yet not at all on such as despise this Ordinance. So that, what ever
pretenses they make of the Spirit, who despise Prophecy, it is not the Spirit
of GOD whereby they are inspired; but the Spirit of the World, by which they
are deluded.



Answ. How was Deuteronomy. 9.9.
MOSES and 1. King. 19.8.
ELIAS preserved without food, forty days and forty nights? It was by an
extraordinary work of Gods Power, showing himself able to work without, and
above means. And so, it may be God dealt with his Children, living in times
of Popish darkness; he wrought above his ordinary. But should we not think
him mad, that expecting extraordinary preservation without food, after the
example of Moses and Elias, would attempt a Fast so extraordinary? Like think
here. This once we know for truth; where God gives means ordinary for
Salvation, he violates Act. 8.29. and 9.6, 11.
not his order. They tempt God to their own destruction, that neglecting the
means, expect a work extraordinary in their Salvation.

Thirdly, There is yet a third sort, and they are much amongst us: so profane
and godless, that they stick not to blaspheme this sacred Ordinance of God;
and therefore to contemn it, because it is, they say, occasion of dissension
and strife; and none worse then they, that run after Sermons. Oh, I beseech
you, Brethren, tremble at such Blasphemies, as to think the Word of God, the
Gospel of Peace; the Word of God, so pure, that thereby we John 17.17.
are sanctified, should of it own Nature, breed either Discord, or
Disobedience; the Nature of it is, to meeken savage affections; and it is 2.
Cor. 10.5.
mighty through God to subdue every vile thought to the obedience of Christ.
And where it takes place in hearts of men, None are more either James 3.17.
pure, or peaceable.

It is true, there follow it often strifes and dissensions, where it is
powerfully taught: but where is the Reason? In the Nature of the Word? or was
ever any heard exhorting to discords, or profaneness? The Cause, are the
turbulent spirits, and profane hearts, and Hypocrisy of Hearers. When Paul
came to Ephesus to preach the Gospel, All the Act. 19.25, 29
City was in an uproar; but was the fault in the Apostles preaching? Or rather
in the peoples superstition, and cursed Covetousness.

And though it be true, there are that make Religion it self* Cloak for
Villainy; shall Gods Ordinance be bl^^^^d, that co^demnes Hypocrisy? Rather
the deuillish dissembling of men, that m^king show of godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5.
deny the power there (...) their lives.

Fourthly, To these succeed, such as having received forsake they the
Assemblies, and are betaken to their private Meditations and devotions.

And yet said PAVL, 1 Cor. 14.22.
Prophecy is for them that believe; and the Ministry ordained, not only to
gather the Church, but to build it Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
to perfection; and whosoever forsakes Heb. 10.25, 26.
the Assemblies, let him beware he prove not an Apostate. Grievous have been
the falls of many by this occasion; such as a man may tremble to think of; and
let their harms be our warnings.

Lastly, if for men of best gifts it be so necessary, how much more for
Nouices, Weaklings, Aliens? If a people so eminent, and eximious in Faith, and
Sanctity, may not neglect Prophecy; how should the ignorant, and unsanctified
depend on it, that they may partake the lively power thereof to Salvation? Such
Idiots wonder at men of knowledge, they are frequent in hearing. The saying is,
Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. In experience, the more ignorant
and graceless, the more contemptuous toward preaching; poor souls, that see
not, how miserable and bitter a thing it is, to live in state 2. These. 1.8.
of ignorance and disobedience! The Lord in mercy give them eyes to see, hearts
to use means to 2. Tim. 2.26.
come out of the snare of the Devil.

To close up all, let me add a reason or two, to set edge on the exhortation.
First, consider how the contempt of this ordinance, makes all other our service
of God abominable; yea, curses all other means unto us: Whosoever turns his
ear from hearing the Law, Pro. 28.9.
even his prayer shall be abominable. Secondly, let not that censure passed by
our Savior upon Contemners, be forgotten; equalling this sin with the crying
sins of Sodom, and protesting, that the damnation of Matthew. 10.15.
Sodomites shall be more tolerable, then that of desperate contemners. Thirdly,
remember that sweet reason of Saint James, exhorting to receive the Word with
meekness; It is Iam. 1.21.
able, he says, to save your souls. I add more out of Paul, it is Romans 10.14.
necessary to the saving of your souls; so necessary, that without it, none
are ordinarily saved.

VERSE. 21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.


THe former Precept enjoined diligence in hearing: here are prescribed, First,
discretion in judging. Secondly, constancy in retayning what upon trial shall
be found current.

Prove all things. The question here is, whom this Prescript concerns;
Bellarm. de Laicis, lib. 3. cap. 21.
there be that limit it to Bishops and Pastors of the Church: and such only, as
they shall for that purpose associate to themselves. We may not think this
Prescript extended to Laics, as if the Apostle would permit to every Cobbler,
trial and examination of his Pastors doctrine.

Truth is, God has not made the people Vmpires of our doctrine; nor given them
supreme arbitrament of our gifts or teaching; their Romans 10.17.
faith comes by hearing, and what ever knowledge they have, they have by the
Ministry. It is their saucy arrogancy, that assume power determinatiue; and
take liberty in conuenticles, of themselves to pass sentence definitive of
Truth, or falsehood in their Pastors doctrine. A course more Christian were, in
matters of doubt to crave cleerer evidence of the Minister; at least to advise
with other more judicious of that calling, that still 1. Cor. 14.32.
the spirits of Prophets might be subject to Prophets.

Howbeit, they incroach too far upon the peoples liberty, that deny them
all power of examination; which circumstances of this Text, and other passages
of Scripture clearly afford them. For, first, to whom belong those other
Prescripts of praying, and praising God, of attending to prophecy? belong not
these to the people? how then may we imagine, this Prescript only cut off
from the rest, and limited to Pastors of the Church? Secondly, speaks John to
Pastors only, when he commands to 1. Ioh 4.1.
try the Spirits whether they be of God? Thirdly, the Nobles of Beraea are
Act. 17.11.
commended for this prudence. Fourthly, Paul prays for this grace amongst
others to the people, that they may be Phil. ^.9, 10.
able to discern the things that differ. Vainly is the ability desired, if
there be no liberty permitted to use it. Think it therefore spoken to you
also the people of God; and thence learn,

Unto diligence in hearing to add prudence in discerning; so John also
advised, not to believe every spirit, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
but to try the spirits if they be of God: wherefore to Jews the Lord
prescribed Deuteronomy. 13.2, 3.18.2, 22.
rules to judge Prophets by, and caused his Word to be written, to be the Canon
and measure of all, that under pretense of truth, is delivered to the Church of
God.

Necessity of the duty Scriptures press by Reasons. 2. Pet. 2.1. 1. Ioh.
4.1.
pestered with false teachers. By Jeremy the Lord complaynes him of false
prophets, Jer. 23.16.
that published the visions of their own brain; by Micah, of some Mic. 2.11.
walking in the spirit, but lying falsely. PAVL, of false apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. Saint John, of
Antichrists, many petty Antichrists, even then gone out into the world. In
aftertimes, flowed into the Church, a stream of Heretics; All Ages groned
under the burden of them; till at length rose up that grand Antichrist,
framing us a faith, made up of nothing, but fragments and scraps of ancient
Heresies. And have not our own eyes seen sprung up, perverse men teaching
perverse things? I would I might not say perverting the faith of some; through
want of prudence here prescribed, and skill to try the Spirits. Saint Paul
gives reason of that provident, whether appointment, or permission of God; that
the approved amongst us may be known. Saint Austin observed another benefit
hence ensuing, August. de Genesi cont. Manich.
would God it had place amongst us: Vt cum insultant nobis, and interrogant nos
ea quae nescimus, vel sic excutiamus pigritiam, and diuinas Scripturas nosse
cupiamus: how-euer, this prudence it should force upon us, to consider our
steps, and not, as the Fool in SOLOMON, to give credence to every thing,
published under the name of Truth.

2. Cor. 11.3.
corrupt our minds from the simplicity of the Gospel. Prophets and Apostles
only excepted, there scarce ever was Teacher in the Church, so venerable for
learning or sanctity, but had his errors, as naeues, observed in him. Saint
Augustine, reckoned the most judicious amongst the Ancients, has his errors
observed, both in judgment and practice, his mistake it was, that Christ
pressing necessity of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, intended the
Sacramental eating; thence grew his error, of Infants admittance to the
Sacrament of the Supper: and how devoutly prayed he for his Mother Monica
deceased? Cyprian, a blessed Martyr, yet held a nullitie of Heretics
baptism, maintained stiffly rebaptization. Saint Hieromes learning, who reads
him, but admires! yet how contemptuously speaks he of the Marriage bed? how
dotes he on the merit of Virginity? To say in a word: Saint Augustine freely
confesses his errors and frailty; his second thoughts wiser, uttered his
retractations; his conscience of weakness permits to his Reader, liberty
of judgment. It will ever be true, Romans 3.4.
Every man is a Liar: Ever the privilege of Apostles and Prophets, to be
guided by an infallible and unerring Spirit. Let no man's learning or sanctity
so far forestall us, as without trial to admit whatsoever he speaks,
therefore because he speaks it.

Thirdly, It is a rule in the Apostle, Our Faith may not the prime object of
Faith, is, Veritas prima; and whosoever has no other ground to rest on in
believing, save the authority of men, has no faith, but merely humane.

We have heard the duty and necessity of it, the limits and cautions in
performance are these: First, that principles must rather be maintained, then
examined or disputed; there are truths clear and evident by their own light;
of which it were madness to make inquiry: Qui credente mundo, ipse non
credit, Augustine. de Ciuitat. Dei.
magnum est ipse prodigium. In Gods Church gathered by the doctrine of the
Scriptures, to examine whether Scriptures be the Word of God, what were it, but
to question principles? and to make our selves prodigious in absurdity. And
when we feel sensibly the effects of sin original, who but a Monster, as
Pelagius, would question Natures deprauation? Secondly, presume not to search
beyond revelations; Paul's rule is, Romans 12.4.
to be wise to sobriety; MOSES conclusion, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
that only things reueiled belong to us: that made PAVL Romans 11.33.
admire, what he was not able to comprehend; whose prudent humility, if it
were entertained, would put end to most Arminian and Vorstian conceits. These
and like cautions observed, the people are permitted, yea enjoined to examine
what is doctrinally propounded to them.

caecam fidem; and after determination of the Church once passed definitiuely,
allowing no examination of whatsoever they propound to be believed, or obeyed:
wherein, see if they arrogate not more then ever did Apostles or Prophets: yea,
or the Ioh. 5.39.
Arch-Shepherd of our souls. ISAY calls the people Isai. 8.20.
to the Law and Testimony. Saint Peter commends their prudent 2. Pet. 1.19.
attendance to the word of Prophets; our Savior permits himself and his
doctrine Ioh. 5.39.
to trial by Scriptures: This is the prerogative of the Church of Rome only,
as was that of Pythagoras, to be believed upon their bare word, Dixit Ecclesia,
and there must all inquiries of Gods people rest. A man would wonder else, to
see so many prodigies of Error go current amongst the people, so utterly
against Scripture and common sense. They are wise in their generation,
forestalling the minds of the people with that prejudice; it is unlawful to
dispute the determinate conclusions of the Church: Laying that also for a
ground, that they are the only true Church of God upon earth, what marvel if
incestuous Marriages, murder of Princes, or if there be any other Monster of
opinion, or practice contrary to wholesome doctrine, which is according to
Godliness, pass current with the people, in esteem, legitimate?

No less defective in this duty are our credulous multitude, Ezechiels
proclamation; the blood of them that perish by default of the Watchman, God
shall require at his hands; Ezech. 3.18.
yet die the people in their sins? and that of our Savior, When the blind
leads the blind, blind Pastor, blind People, not Matt. 15.14.
the Guide only, but the people fall into the pit.

Another sort there are: And they ouercarried with reverence persons they have
in admiration: a Rule current they think it for judgment and conscience, that
thus thinks such a reverend Minister: thus therefore they believe and practice.
In matter of ceremony, I am sure the bare opinion of some Ministers, to whom
our irregulars have enclosed sincerity, out-faceth Authority; and bears
down Reason, without reason before it. Alas that reasonable men should be so
unreasonable, and pretended conscience so blind, as to warrant it self upon
the erroneous judgment of men; and that Sic dicit homo, should sway us in
these things without, or against, Sic dicit Dominus.

Our wisdom it shall be, to make use of the liberty God has given us, that
we err not by too much credulity; nor reject Truth, through overmuch
prejudice and stiffenesse in opinion.

The rule of trial demanded, Papists assign us the Churches determinations.
But, First, if they also be subject to trialls, as we see by our Matthew. 5.27.
and 15.4, 5.
Saviors practice, how may we think them the rule and measure of Truth?
Regula is not regulatum. Secondly, if Counsels be not privileged from
possible errors, and have erred de facto, as Divines have fully euidenced: how
may we think their sentence authentic, and so selfe-credible, as thither
vltimately to resolve our faith?

What then may more safely be made our rule, then that which Peter calls, the
2. Pet. 1.19.
most sure word of Prophets? so was Job. 5.39.
Christ's Precept, so Act. 17.11.
Beraeans practice, so Constantine at the Council of Nice, will have all other
preiudices and authorities set apart, and calls for that Codex Dei, to be the
vmpire of all their controversies. I enter not the question, who shall be the
Interpreter: The Scripture, I know, as it came not from a private spirit, so is
2. Pet. 1.20, 21
not of any private interpretation. It self is Text and Gloss; in matters
necessary, opening it own obscurities. These few rules only collected thence,
I commend to GODS people to guide their examinations.

Ephesians. 1.12.
glory of his rich Grace; the Romans 3.27.
abasing of man's pride. In the course of salvation, what doctrine crosses
those ends, doubtless is not of God.

Romans 5.1.
solid peace, through assurance of Gods love; suspect those doctrines as not
Evangelical, that hold Conscience on the rack, and prescribe not right means
of peace with God.

teaches Tit. 2.12.
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; to walk soberly, justly, godly, in
this present world. Be jealous of all doctrines leading to carnal liberty;
they are not of God, that are enemies to sanctity.

Follows the next branch of duty. Hold fast that which is good. The order of
these prescripts deserves our notice, affoording, me thinks, kindly this
Conclusion: That prudent examination must order our resolutions; neither may we
ever peremptorily settle our resolutions, before we see our warrant whereon to
resolve. Paul has like exhortation to the Romans, to cleave to that which is
good; yet before advises, to Romans 12.2, 9.
prove what the good and acceptable Will of the Lord is.

A point worthy our notice in this headlong and headstrong generation,
abounding with so many peremptory and pertinacious spirits; pitching their
resolutions without care of information; and in matters most disputable,
impatient of dispute, or contradiction. I would have them, first, consider of
what spirit it savors to be thus (...), 2. Pet. 2.10.
selfe-willed. It is Gods mercy to such men, in weightiest matters to give them
sound Judgment: whither else might their stiffenesse carry them? Secondly,
withal, to remember what Paul observed: that to the 1. Cor. 14.30.
sitter by, may be granted the clearer revelation. Thirdly, and what he
advises; in meekness of wisdom to Phil. 2.3.
think another better then our selves. This obiter only. The substance of
duty; constantly to hold and maintain, what upon trial shall be found good:
so are the precepts frequent. Romans 12.9.
Cleave unto that which is good; be in a sort glued thereto. Heb. 10.23.
Hold fast the profession of your hope, without any so much as wavering.

The constancy required, suppose to be, First, in Judgment: that it waver
not, or be unsettled; Ephesians. 4.14.
It is childish, says Saint PAVL, to be carried about with every blast of
vain doctrine.

Secondly, in affection; that our love claspe close to truth, and goodness,
without separation. Therefore said SOLOMON, Prou. 23.23.
Buy the truth, and sell it not.

Thirdly, in practice; that we hold our course of holiness, settledly and
unaltered: It is discomfortable Gal. 5.7.
to have run well, and to surcease obedience of the truth.

First, Preuaricators in this point of duty, are, first, Academikes, Bernard
well resembles them, in matter of Faith and Religion: men that love to be
questionists in all things, resolved of nothing. How many of that humor are
amongst us? after so clear light and revelation of the Gospel, yet to choose
their Religion; not resolved whether Baal, or Jehovah be God: whether
Protestancie or Popery be truth. Their pretense is, the many controversies
undetermined in the Church: Sects so various, that they know not which way to
take. It were well we would once agree amongst our selves.

Now blessed be God, that has given us well-nigh perfect Harmony, and concent
in all points fundamental; so that in no matter of foundation, is to be found
dissonance in all Churches reformed. Some petite differences there are about
Ceremonies, and matter of Discipline: in substance of faith and worship none at
all.

But what when all is granted, that there were as many Sects, as men in the
world? First, truth is but one, though error be various and manifold.
Secondly, 2. Pet. 1.19.
A most sure word of Prophets and Apostles, God has left us to be touchstone
of truth: Thirdly, made gracious promise, that they Ioh. 6.45.
shall all be taught of God, Job. 16, 13.
led into all necessary truth, that in humility and love follow after the
truth. Fourthly, ordained knowledge, obedience, resolved faith of truth,
absolutely necessary to salvation.

Contra. First, then said Peter falsely; There is Act. 4.12.
no name given under Heaven, whereby we may be saved, but the Name of Jesus.
Secondly, and what was the Romans 3.2.
preferment of Jews so great above Gentiles, that to them were committed the
Oracles of God? Thirdly, and how were the Gentiles Ephe. 2.25.
without hope; till days of New Testament?

wherried about with every blast of vain Doctrine; no weathercocke more wauing
or wavering then they. Athenians right in Religion, to whom novelty is far
more pleasing, then truth or goodness. And no point of novelty so strange, or
singular, but they are as ready to embrace, as any Phantasticke is to propound.
Heb. 13.9.
It is good, said the Apostle, that the heart be established; to be rooted and
grounded in love of the truth. It argues childishness, to be so unsettled;
won or lost with rattles.

Fourthly, There are are also Aguish Christians, whose Gal. 4.18.
It is good to be zealous always in a good matter, fearful that the Lord
notes of Israel; Their righteousness is as Hosh. 6.4.
the Morning Dew.

Fifthly, Deepliest guilty of transgressing this precept, Reuolters from the
Grace of God; that having known the way of truth, and quite escaped from those
that are in error, are again entangled, to their certain and most fearful
destruction. Of these often before.

First, Means helpful to steddie holding truth and I know that ye 2. Pet.
1.12.
have knowledge, and ^re established in the present truth; stabilitie there is
none, without knowledge. There be that take their faith and Religion on trust
from their Teachers; having no other reason of faith or practice, save the
judgment of men: Inde ver. 12.
Clouds without water, says Jude; no marvel, if they be carried about with
the wind.

Secondly, His hold-fast is sure, whose love fastens on the Those many seduced
by Antichrist, are such as received not the 2. These. 2.10.
love of the truth. Knowledge perhaps of truth, they have so clear, that they
cannot but acknowledge it; and give way to it in Judgment. Their breakenecke
it is, that they Ioh. 3.19.
love not the light; nor know how to value that Mat. 13.46.
Pearl of the Gospel. The blood of Martyrs, that has sealed this truth,
issued from that high estimate their love set on it. The Apostasy of so many
from Christ to Antichrist, proceeds from want, if not of knowledge, yet of love
to the truth.

2. Pet. 5.3.
Join to faith virtue; to science, conscience. Apostasy begins in practice.
Conscience is first neglected; next affection ali^ned: till at length very
judgment is blinded, and the mind infatuated. Therefore made those Heretics
shipwreck of faith, because they 1. Tim. 1.19.
put away good Conscience.

Heb. 10.25.
Forsake not the gatherings together of Saints; as the manner of some is. There
is but a step betwixt them and death. The words of the wise are as Goades, and
Eccl. 12.11.
nails fastened by the masters of the Assemblies.

VERSE. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.


_(...), there be that take Logically, and thus render: From every sort or kind
of evil. Evils are various and manifold; who can discover them? Sins in every
thing, offer themselves unto us; some palpable, so as we may feel them; some
of a finer thread: it is hard to discern them. Sins open, sins disguised.
Sins on the right hand, as superstitious scrupulousness; on the left hand,
as open profaneness, of what sort soever, abstain from Evil. He makes
conscience of no sin, that makes not conscience of all. And he is in danger
of the greatest, that bears himself in the least. But why are we nouellous?
There are malae res, and malae pariter species, says Bernard; Bernard. de
considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 3.
some things really evil, others in show and appearance only; we must avoid
not only the realties, but even the shows of evil; and not think lawful
for us, to use BERNARDS phrase, Quicquid male fuerit coloratum.

There be, that limit such abstinence to matter of Doctrine only; dependence of
the Text favors that limitation: yet it is good, they say, ampliare praecepta,
our duty to keep aloof from evil in manners, as well as in Doctrine: think
the precept to concern as well mores, as dogmata; so Theodoret observed. That
the fullest sense may be this, Gods people must be so abhorrent from evil,
both in Doctrine and manners, that the very shows of both should be avoided.

For fuller explication, understand there is a twofold malice or euilnesse
real; one they call genericam; the other ex circumstantia. Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Idolatry, etc. are in their whole kind evil. Circumstances
aggrauate their haynousnesse, alter not their nature. Swearing by the Name of
God, is not simply evil; yet may become evil by neglect of due circumstances.

Besides these realties of evil, there are shows and appearances of evil. To
sit at meat in an Idols temple, is not simply evil; yet carries a shrewd show
of evil: and gives occasion to the beholder, to suspect our ioining with
Idolaters in their Idoll-worship: And such shows of evils must our care be to
avoid. On which ground Paul refuses maintenance at Corinth, to avoid suspicion
of mercenarie, or covetous affection in Preaching: And in the abundance of
Ministration, desires association of others for conueiance, that he might
procure things honest, 2. Cor. 8.21.
not only in the sight of God, but of all men. So also gives the precept, Romans
12.17.

Bernards reason to Eugenius is good: by shunning evil things, we provide for
conscience; by avoiding ill shows, we safe-gard our fame. It is true that Paul
has, 2. Cor. 6.8.
Through good report, and ill report, lies our passage to Heaven. Howbeit, that
Jewel of a good name must be provided for: Phil. 4.8.
We must follow the things that are of good report. The rather, because the
credit of the Gospel, much-what depends on the credit of those that preach and
profess it; and through their sides, is the glorious Gospel wounded: It makes
not much difference whether our facts be evil, or bear show of evil;
blasphemy of the truth flows equally from the mouths of enemies, that hunt
for occasion of speaking evil.



real: which the fact it self affords; secondly, some imaginary only;
fancied, and framed out of the prejudice, and causlesse jealousy of the
beholder. Our Saviors fact in curing the diseased on Sabbaths, had show of
evil; but show, rather fancied by their ignorance, then affoorded by his fact.
Ever it was lawful to show mercy on the Sabbath.

Secondly, Exceptions and limitations are put to this precept, such as in
matter of scandal, whither it belongs, are usual. As first, no necessary
duty may be omitted, for a show of evil connexed with the doing: The triple
verity of life, Hieron. in gloss. ordinar. ad Mat. 15.
Justice, and Doctrine, must ever be kept safe and inuiolate. Though Romans 3.8.
evil may not be done, that good may come of it; yet must good be done, though
evil by accident come of it, much more when show of evil only is annexed
unto it. Secondly, in case we be nostri iuris, left to our own free liberty
and disposing; higher powers restrain use of liberty, and determine us justly
ad vnum. Thirdly, in 1. Cor. 10.28.
places where things otherwise lawful bear show of evil. PAVL Act. 16.3.
yields to Jewish ceremonies, where they showed not ill; Gal. 2.14.
yet blames PETER for like practice, where they bare show of evil.

After which explication, I wonder how the arraignement of our Ceremonies at
the bar of this precept, and their condemnation will be found legitimate?
For, first, carries their use appearance of evil? I wonder of what evil? In
the point of kneeling, let that be the instance, of what evil is the show?
They say of Idolatry. Why of Idolatry? Forsooth we kneel before a Creature.
But first is it a cursed creature, as are Images; or a creature sanctified, as
the Arc and Mercie-seat? Secondly, Kneel we with opinion of Divine
excellency dwelling in the Sacrament; or with intention to give it Divine
worship? If not so, what show of Idolatry affoords the gesture, except what
man's uncharitable prejudice fancieth in it? which how much more might have
been conceived in the High Priests adoration, and offering Incense before the
Propitatory?

Secondly, Is it amongst us a show of evil? who, reading what we teach
against the Carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, can think we direct
our worship to the Sacrament? Let it be therefore at Rome an Idolatrous
gesture; Amongst rigid Lutherans a show of Idolatry; In England, who but an
Idiot can so conceit it? where Elements are taught to admit no change in
substance, but in use only by consecration; where also the doctrine of
Vbiquitie is reputed a monstrous Deifying of the flesh of Christ?

Thirdly, Suppose the gesture to bear show of evil. Is it a duty to receive
the Sacrament? who may dare violate the verity of life, to omit an office so
necessary and comfortable, for a show of evil, in a circumstance connexed with
the performance? As if I should ask, who may be so bold as to sin against
God by omitting duty, to avoid a bare show and appearance of evil? And of
the Precept and sense of it thus far:

First, Apply it to reproof of that venterous and

To run with the Drunkard to excess of Riot, Example.
they think unlawful; to be Companions with Drunkards, and of their intimous
Familiars, seems warrantable. Ate not our Savior with Publicans and Sinners?
To join with Idolaters in the worship of Idols, is thought abominable;
Friendliest conversation with Idolaters, what evil implies it? they may
perhaps gain them to truth of Religion. Pride they protest to loathe; but to
go costly attyred, above ability and calling, the heart being lowly, they
think may well become women professing the fear of God.

First, As if the Apostle had said in vain, Abstain from all appearance of
evil. Secondly, And may not things lawful, by neglect of due circumstances,
become sinful in the doer? To converse with evil men, is not simply to all
men, in all sorts sinful. Then had our Mat. 9.11.
Savior erred; then 1. Cor. 5.10.
must we go out of the World. But familiarly to use such, what is it, but
First, to harden them in evil? Secondly, Without calling to frequent their
company, is to hazard thy self to infection. Thirdly, To wound fame at least
by this show of evil; occasioning beholders to censure us as favorers of
their lewd courses.

Costly and gorgeous attire is not to all men, at all times unlawful. The High
Priest amongst Jews had his Vestiments of the costlyest; and our Savior
blames not SOLOMON, Mat. 6.29.
for his clothing in Royalty. But, beyond compass of ability to array our
selves, is Prodigality; above our Calling, no less then Pride; at least a
shrewd species and appearance of it. I cannot often enough repeat that Canon of
Bernard, so much use has it in the life of a Christian. All our actions and
intendements should be prevented with this triple consideration: First, An
liceat? Secondly, An deceat? Thirdly, An expediat? Things lawful in themselves
may be unseemly for our state and calling; vnbehooueful also to benefit of
others; Think unlawful for thee, whatsoever implies either inexpediencie or
indecorum.

Secondly, And must the shows of evil be avoided? power and life of
Godliness. Let them not seem profane; they Titus 1.16.
will be abominable, disobedient, and to every good work as reprobate. But is
it evil to seem evil? much more to be so. By seeming evil thou woundest
Fame; by being evil thou piercest Conscience, and exposest thy soul to the
wrath of God.

Thirdly, From all appearance, Greater or less: Therefore Mat. 5.19.
The breach of the least Commandment makes us less then nothing in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Thirdly, Little sins have often great consequences; draw
after them greater, in case they be neglected. Nemo repent fit pessimus.
Fourthly, At least by their multitude, they prove pernicious. AUGUSTINE. Aug.
in Joan. Item in Psa. ^29 Bernard. Tunc leave dixeris, etc.
Minutae sunt guttae quae flumina implent: minuta sunt grana arenae; sed si
multa arena imponatur, premit atque opprimit. Hoc facit sentina neglecta, quod
facit fluctus irruens: paulatim per sentinam intrat; sed diu intrando, and non
exhauriendo, mergit nauim. Fifthly; And can we call it little wherewith Christ
is offended? for which we must be brought to Gods Judgment Seat; when it is
so fearful to fall into the hands of the living God? Let us all be exhorted,
Heb. 12.13.
to make straight steps to our feet, to walk accurately and Ephesians. 5.15.
exactly according to our rule; to hate Jude 23.
the garment spotted of the flesh: Providing for Conscience, by eschewing
evil; for Fame, by avoiding the shows of evil. And of the matter and
substance of the Epistle, hitherto.

VERSE. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God, your
whole spirit, and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the Coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.


THE Conclusion of the Epistle remaynes. Wherein we have first a Petition put
up unto GOD on behalf of this people; wherein summarily, the Apostle prays
God to work in them what he had exhorted unto; progress and perseverance in
Sanctity.

The points obseruable are, First, That he prays. Secondly, What he prays.
His fact, and the matter of it.

From his fact praying God to effect what he had exhorted unto, we learn,
That the virtue and power of all exhortation, of the whole Ministry, depends
on the blessing of God. PAVL planteth, APOLLO waters: It is 1. Cor. 3.6.
God that gives the increase.

amendment? and either hardens others, or at least amends them not? Why Acts
16.14.
Lydia alone, amongst that multitude, believes the preaching of Paul? Why Esaias
6.13.
a tenth only returns at Esaias his preaching, the rest are hardened? Is it man's
will only that puts this difference? or rather the grant or denial of the
Grace of God? In Lydiaes case, Luke gives the reason of her attention; God
opened her heart. In the Disciples, our Savior; Mat. 11.25.
God hid those things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto Babes.

Secondly, If nothing else, this yet is sufficient evidence: Paul has, God
chooses the 1. Cor. 1.27.
weak and foolish things of the World, to confound the wiser and more mighty.

Thirdly, And the weakest kind of preaching, most Cor. 1.21.
the foolishness of preaching, has had greatest virtue in the hearts of the
people. In all experience, the preaching most admired for depth and
profoundnesse, has been respectively most barren; for this end I think, That
the 2. Cor. 4.7.
power might be known to be of God. The weaker the instrument, the more
evident is the power of the principal worker. More evidently appeared God
Author of victory to Gideon, in that with a Judge. 7.20, 21
few Pitchers and Lamps, he discomfited the Host of Midian, then if the
Armies of Israel had accompanied him to the Battle. A man might easily see it
was another breath, then Josh. 6.20.
that of Rams Horns, which overthrew the walls of Jericho, by the silliness
of the means used to that purpose.

that God of all grace whose sole work it is. What is Paul, what Apollos, what
the best gifted Minister, but 1. Cor. 3.5.
A Minister by whom we have believed? and that, as the Lord gave to every man.
The fault of Corinthians is noted in this kind; neglecting praise of the Grace
of God, they fell to admire the gifts of their Teachers; I would it were theirs
only, and that our people had not persons of men in too much admiration; so
that the same Word of GOD, uttered in like power and sincerity of affection,
through prejudice, seems not the same, in diverse men's mouths. But whiles we
stay thus on view and admiration of our Teachers gifts, we detayne from God the
glory of his rich Grace. I say then as Peter to the men of Israel; Why Acts
3.12.
lock ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power and holiness we
have made you whole? the weapons of our warfare are mighty, but 2. Cor. 10.5.
through God: And this blessing it is only, that makes the Gospel in our
mouths, Gods power to our Salvation.

To join to our hearing and exhortation, Prayer for Gods blessing.

First, The complaint of Ministers is as was that of ESAIAS; They Esaias 49.4.
have labored in vain and spent their strength. See now success or fruit of
their labors, in longest instance of preaching. It may be, the reason sticks
in the people. God sometimes sends us, not so much to convert, as to harden. In
that case we have no cause of discouragement. First, God is glorified as well
in the Just hardening of Reprobates, as in the Salvation of his Chosen.
Secondly, And we are in both, a 2. Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor to God. But take heed, the fault stick not in our selves; that
though perhaps we have been instant in preaching; yet our dissoluteness has
been too palpable, in praying GODS blessing upon our endeavors.

Secondly, Amongst people also the course is usual, to derive the blame of
their Non-proficiency from themselves to their Teacher. Either he is too
profound, or too plain; too cold, or too hot; too dissolute, or too exact;
one way or other, the fault must be the Ministers, that the people are not
bettered: When as all this while the blame rests in themselves; that they have
been negligent in preparation; forgetting to pray Gods blessing upon their
attention. God will ever be known to be giver of all Grace: And has
therefore ordained the use of Prayer in his Church, not as a means to inform
him of our wants; but as an acknowledgement, and testification of that
Principle of Saint JAMES; James 1.17.
That every good giving and every perfect gift comes down from above,
descending from the Father of Lights. To excite to this duty, let that be
considered, Gods Word has ever his Work. If it mollify not, it hardens; if
it convert not, it will one day confound.

The matter of Paul's Petition is, First, their Sanctification. Secondly, Their
preservation. Both amplyfied by their extent, both in the subject, and in time.

I pray God sanctify you throughout. The work of Sanctification, the Lord had
graciously begun in this people, so much euinceth Paul's plentiful
commendation given them for most parts of Sanctity; so that apparently he
beggeth of God, what he had exhorted unto: Their progress and preservation in
the state of Grace. Whence is the note:

Not beginnings only, but increase and continuance in Sanctity is the Work of
God. He that begins the good work, the Philip. 1.6.
same perfects. God is the Author of all Grace; it is he that calls, 1. Pet.
5.10.
makes perfect, stablisheth, strengthens, settleth us.

Whether merely, or mixtly is the question. Pelagians anciently, saw no
necessity of GODS gracious work in us. Sufficient they esteemed it for GOD,
to command and show what is to be done; that vouchsafed, it rested in the power
of man's Nature to do what God prescribes. To mere Nature, they thought
possible duties supernatural: as to us, in this state, seem, Faith and
Repentance. Contra. John 6.44.
No man can come to me, says our Savior, except my Father which sent me
draw him. Christ charge on Nature, not unwillingness only, but impotencie
to believe in him; Paul not want only of knowledge, but 1. Cor. 2.14.
disabilitie to know things of the Spirit of God. In a word. Is Nature strong
enough? Why then pray Saints aid of Gods Grace? Pray they necessarily
assistance of Grace? Nature then is insufficient.

There be that part stakes betwixt Grace and Nature; Nature is weak, and must
be assisted: wounded, but not to death. As Christ of the Damsel, so these of
Nature, Mat. 9.24.
She is not dead, but sleeps. Excite Nature, it works with Grace, to the
first Conversion; perhaps without it, to the increase of Sanctity: yet First,
saw the Lord in man's heart natural, no propension Genesis 6.5.
save only to evil. Secondly, Paul nothing but Gal. 5.17.
reluctation against Grace, in men sanctified. Thirdly, Leave holiest men to
themselves, as the Lord did Chron. 32.31.
Hezekiah, etc. What show they but profaneness and vanity? Fourthly, And
said not Paul of himself now sanctified, that Romans 7.18.
in his flesh, that is, in that which remained Natural in him, dwelt no good
thing? how then ability to cooperate with Grace?

It is true, we are Operis quodammodo socij per consensum, audacti agimus; but
as instruments only in virtue of the principal Agent. It is man's will that
prosecutes; his mind that understands the things of the Spirit of God; but the
principle moving both, is supernatural; the ability to move to any thing
pleasing God, merely from his Grace.

Paul's inference is, Philip. 2.12, 13.
With fear and trembling to Presumptuous above measure is man's confidence in
abilities received; First, aduenturing upon the most dangerous occasions, if
not of Apostasy, yet of declinings in holy practice; the most leprous company
is not feared for infection. The Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4.
nearest society with Idolaters, against which God especially gives us caveat,
lest they withdraw us from God, how many dare venture upon?

First, Said Solomon in vain, Walk not in the way with Sinners? Their attempt
is to Pro. 4.14, 16.
cause us to fall. Secondly, We have seen foul faultings of great Saints by
that occasion. That of Nehem. 13.26
SOLOMON, whom may it not make tremble? Thirdly, And though we have promise to
be preserved from evil; yet is that protection Psalm. 91.11.
in vijs only, not in praecipitijs. Fourthly, And if Nature of it self be
prone to evil, how dare we by occasion help forward that propension?

Secondly, No less is their pride and tempting of God, that after some
smattering knowledge and seeds of Grace received, despise means sanctified,
of their growth and establishment; and will needs be their own keepers. Paul
speaks not, but thunders against such Heb. 10.25.
as forsake the Assemblies of Saints.

Secondly, How should this restrain contemptuous 1. Cor. 4.7.
Who is it that discernes us? or what have we that we have not received? And
if received, why boast we? In Gods discriminating us from others in the
measure of gifts, cause we have of thankfulness; none of pride; when
beginnings, increase, continuance of Sanctity are merely of God. Secondly, Our
merits of Grace, no more then theirs; of us it is true, as of any, We were in
times Titus 3.3.
past disobedient, served lusts and diverse pleasures. Thirdly, In Nature, as
incapable of all holy instincts, as any. Fourthly, Our infirmities in first
entrance as great, as others. Fifthly, And our hinderlings happily may overtake,
and outstrip us in holy practice.

There remaynes the extent of Sanctification, which is prayed to the whole of
man, and whatsoever faculty or part God has allotted to the entyrenesse of his
Nature. Thus sorted by the Apostle; The Spirit, Soul, and Body. The Spirit,
understand the intellectual part of the Soul; Paul calls it elsewhere, The
spirit of our mind: the Soul, the appetite and sensual faculties common to
us with brutes; the Body, the outward man, the instrument and organ of the
Soul: To these all, and the whole of them, Paul prays increase and
preservation in Sanctity.

The points intended to our notice are two.

First, There is no part or faculty of man's Body or Soul, not that which may
seem most pure and excellent, but needs to be sanctified. Therefore is Paul's
exhortation, To be renewed in the Ephesians. 4.23.
Spirit of our mind; in the most pure and spiritual part of the Soul. And if
it also have been depraved by the Fall of Adam, how needs it not restoring by
the Grace of Christ? Defects in the understanding are noted four principal.
Ephesians. 4.17, 18
First, Ignorance, grossest ignorance in things that concern Gods Kingdom.
Secondly, Vanity, and no less then dotage about things that cannot profit. 1.
Cor. 12.14.
Thirdly, Impotencie, to know the things of the Spirit of God. Fourthly, Romans
8.7.
Enmity against the Law of God; professed quarrelling against the Gospel; and
profane befooling of Gods Wisdom in choice of means for man's Salvation. And
if the mind have so far degenerated, how may the will be thought to keep
her first integrity? so that Grace shall not need to alter, but only to
excite or assist it? That Cordurum in the Prophet, which he calls not plumbeum,
or ferreum, Ezech. 36.26.
but lapideum: it is nothing else to Austine, but man's will obstinate in evil,
obdurate against all goodness.

There were that taught, the corruption derived from Adam to stay only in the
inferior parts of the soul; the appetite and sensuality. Mentior, if I
think not Papists most of that mind; so Philosophically conceit they the
Combat betwixt flesh and Spirit, to import little more, then that conflict
Heathens observed betwixt Reason and Appetite. Generally it goes current, that
the higher faculties are infeebled only; Grace alters not their quality, but
assists their infirmity. Contra. First, Why then prays Paul, Sanctification
to the spirit of man? Secondly, How persuades he endeavor of Renouation in the
spirit of our mind? Thirdly, Notes Enmity in Natures Wisdom against Gods
Law? Fourthly, And places something Gal. 5.20.
fleshly in the understanding? The purest part must be sanctified; is therefore
depraved in the quality and constitution of it.

The second point offered to our observation is; that where truth of
Sanctification is vouchsafed, the whole of man partakes it: no part or power of
Body or Soul, but feels virtue of Gods Spirit purging corruption, fastening
impressions of holy Qualities. Old things are passed away; 2. Cor. 5.17.
Behold, all things in the new Creature, are become new. And sure it is, The
Grace of Christ is every whit as large, as the sin of Adam; what it has
wounded, Christ's Grace has salued; that his power may appear as great to
save, as Adams was to destroy.

It may be, this power of Gods sanctifying Spirit appears not alike evidently
in every part, yet has every particle his seasoning with Sanctity.

Whereby true Sanctity is discerned, First, from that Mocke-grace-Ciuilitie:
harboring in the mind grossest Ignorance and Vanity; tolerating Mat. 5.21,
27.
lascivious, wrathful, profane affections; Careful of nothing, save of
plausible outward carriage and demeanor in the eyes of men.

Secondly, From halting Hypocrisy; rigorously handling sins it cares not
for; Mark. 6.11, 20.
tendering their dearling, and with wantonnest indulgence cockering it.

Thirdly, From pretended purity of heart; while the tongue runs riot in
filthiness, railing, blasphemy; the eyes are full of adultery; the hands of
rapine and violence, etc. May we think the fountain clean that streams out
such filthiness? or any these party-Deuils, to be perfect Saints? By Paul's
rule, he is no Saint, that is not wholly sanctified; he has sanctity in no
part, that is not sanctified in every part.

VERSE. 24. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it.


THe second part of the Conclusion, delivering sweet consolation; assuring them
of obtaining the blessings prayed for; the parts are two. First, an assertion,
God will do it. Secondly, confirmation of the auouchment, by a double reason:
First, from the property of God, he is faithful; which implies his promise.
Secondly, from the action of GOD begun and continued; in Paul's apprehension a
pledge of Gods purpose to perfect and preserve them; because he calls them.

Prays Paul for that which he is assured the Lord will do? Belike then,
Gods promises and purposes that are of surest accomplishment, must be furthered
to accomplishment by prayer, and such like means as God has sanctified. Luke
24.26.
What more certain, then Christ's return to his glory, his humiliation being
finished? yet with what instance Ioh. 17.5.
prays he of his Father, his own and his Churches glory? The Revel. 22.17,
20.
Spirit and the Bride say, Come, though Amen has testified, that he will come
quickly.

No man can think it strange that viewes. First, the God has chosen us to
salvation, shall we say as those desperate, howsoever we live? In no sort, but
2. These. 2.13.
through sanctification of the Spirit and Faith of the Truth. Thence is that
reasoning of the Apostle; from Gods purpose touching the end, to our necessary
use and application of the means. The Gentiles God decrees to save. No matter,
would a miscreant say, though the Gospel be never preached unto them; Paul
otherwise, Romans 10.13, 14.
Therefore to them also must the Gospel be preached. See also 1. Tim. 2.

The same, evidence the significations of GODS will forgive their sins;
withal gives us command, Act. 3.19.
to repent and believe, that our sins may be done away when the time of
refreshing shall come: his promise is to save his Children; their duty yet,
Act. 2.40.
to save themselves from the untoward generation. I forbear much proof,
rather apply it to use. Reproving, not without indignation, the profane opinion
and practice of men, that turn the grace of God into wantonness: and in a
desperate resolution, upon a mistaken ground, neglect all holy means of
furthering Gods gracious purposes to their execution. If God will save them, he
will save them; what needs such niceness in matter of obedience? If he will
sanctify them, he will sanctify them, though means of sanctification be
neglected.

How strange and profane is this abuse of the grace of God; that what he
propounds to encourage us to use the means he has sanctified, we should so
far pervert, as to make our chief excitement to contemn them? How should it
encourage us to labor for the meat that perishes not, to know, our labor
shall not 1. Cor. 15.58.
be in vain in the Lord? How animate us, to Heb. 12.1.
run with joy the race that is set before us? because we run not on 1. Cor.
9.26.
uncertainties. In things of this life, nothing so much excites our industry,
as assurance of good issue: How falls it, that in matters of salvation, it
should dull our endeavors?

We cannot pass doom on any during this life, nor sentence the vilest
miscreants as Reprobates: howbeit, of men thus reasoning we may safely say,
They have yet no evidence of their election to Life.

Let Gods people all be admonished, to beware how they admit thought of
sundring, what God would have joined together. Let this ever be noted one
difference betwixt Faith and Presumption: Faith, having promise of a blessing,
uses with precisest care, means ordered to obtain it. Presumption, so builds
on the promise, that it regards not means of accomplishment. See Act. 27.25,
31.

The substance of the Consolation, God will do it, that is, will sanctify you
throughout, and preserve you blameless in that gracious estate. The Conclusion
here affoorded us, is, Whom God begins to sanctify, he continues to
sanctify, and preserues ever in the state of sanctity.

The collection, say some, is naught, except we limit it to the Elect. Belike
then, it is possible for Reprobates to be sanctified. Let that Conclusion be
examined. First, Ephesians. 1.4.
Sanctification, we find Scriptures to make as properly a fruit of election,
as salvation. Secondly, so to appropriate it to Gods Chosen, that it is made
the undoubtful 2. Pet. 1.10.
mark of election: How is it sign of election, if incident into a Reprobate?
Thirdly, the Spirit of sanctification, promised only to the Elect: the Joh.
14.17.
world cannot receive him. Fourthly, the heavenly inheritance appropriated to
Gods Chosen, yet extended to Act. 20.32.
all that are sanctified. Fifthly, And I wonder, by what mean is this blessing
procured to Cast-awayes? Not by their own merit: for who gives God first?
Neither may we think the Lord so prodigal of this favor, as to cast it
away, on them whom he has cast from his Love: As for Christ's merit and
intercession, by which alone it is purchased to the Elect, therein has the 2.
Ioh. 17.9.
world no portion. What place then for such limitation? We resume the
Conclusion propounded, in largest sense; and thus make good the truth of it.
Phil. 1.6.
He that begins the good work, will perfect it to the day of Jesus. The Lord
will 1. Cor. 1.8.
confirm you to be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.

For our fuller comfort, we have Gods promise: his Faithfulness and Truth
laid to pawn, shall we doubt of his faithfulness? What promise of GOD made to
the Church, seemed it never so Romans 4.17.18
improbable or impossible in the eye of Reason, ever failed of due
accomplishment?

is faithful and true, so we be not unfaithful.

God is true, though Romans 3.4.
every man be in part unfaithful. The unfaithfulness of men does not abrogate
the Truth of God. Secondly, God promises not only the main blessings, but the
mean graces; promises to enable us to perform, what he requires to be
performed of us: he commands to walk in his fear; promises so Ier. 32.40.
to put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him: commands
to pray, and make known our wants unto him: promises to power upon us Zach.
12.10.
the Spirit of grace and deprecation: Commands to keep his Commandments:
promises, to Ezech. 36.27.
cause us to walk in his Statutes. So forcibly flows our Consolation from the
faithfulness of the Promiser.

See if from the fact of God, mentioned by the Apostle, it runs not as
fluent. He calls you; therefore will do it. God calls three ways. First,
Operando. Secondly, Loquendo. Thirdly, Spirando. By his Works, his Word, and
his Spirit. First, by his works of Creation and Providence, he calls alowd to
the sins of men, that they should Act. 17.27, 28.
seek after and acknowledge that God that made the world, and the fullness
thereof for the use of men; that Act. 14.15, 16, 17.
gives rain and fruitful seasons, and fills our hearts with joy and
gladness. The issues and effect of this calling, is only to deprive of excuse.

Secondly, To this therefore has he added in his Church, his Word and
Ministry thereof; therein inuiting all that hear it, to Repentance and
Salvation: withal, showing the way and means of reconciliation, and man's
hardness Heb. 4.2.
and infidelity, ineffectuall to save.

Inuitement has place in many cast-awayes; children of perdition have their
holy motions, and hear that voice behind them: Isai. 30.21.
Here is the way, walk ye in it. Wretched caytiffes that quench Gods Spirit,
resist the Holy Ghost, and smother violently the sweet motions and instincts
wherewith he inspires them.

Hereto therefore he ads, in those whom he purposes to save, effectual
persuasion; preuayling with their hearts to entertain the Grace offered, and
framing them to the obedience of the Will of God. Of this calling it is truly
said, it is pledge to us of our profection, and preservation in Grace.
Therefore makes Peter no question, but making 2. Pet. 1.10.
our calling sure, we make our election and salvation sure: and Paul delivering
us like consolation elsewhere, buildes on the same grounds. 1. Cor. 1.8, 9.
First, God is faithful. Secondly, That has called you to the fellowship of
his Son Jesus Christ. The Text explained, has fully proved the conclusion.

I mean not on this occasion to make long stay in confuting the Doctrine of
the possible Apostasy of the Saints. The heads of Reasons brought to maintain
it, I touch only. First, Cautions many we have given us, to look to 1. Cor.
10.12.
our standing; to fear, to beware how Heb. 3.12.
we fall from the Grace of God. Answ. First, these show a possibility of
reuolting in respect of our weakness, and the power of means assaulting us:
tend to admonish, not to presume of our own strength, but to rely on the
power and promise of God. This hinders not our resting securely on the
faithfulness and power of the promiser: whereon depends our stablenesse in
Grace. See 1. Pet. 1.5 Secondly, they imply a possibility conditionate only,
not absolute: suppose thus; it is possible to fall from Grace, except our care
be to stand. But this cautionatenesse in Gods children, is as certain in their
performance, as the iniunction is in the precept. Whosoever is borne of God, 1.
Ioh. 5.18.
keeps himself; and that evil one touches him not. 1. Ioh. 5.18. Thirdly,
they are means effectual to work, what they prescribe: Humility: fear and
trembling, to depart from the living God.

Paul intimates; experience testifies some Sanctified to have fallen away.

Sacramentaliter; so all Heb. 10.29.
Baptized, are said to be Sanctified, because of their Tit. 3.5.
washing in that lauer of Regeneration: and their consecration in Baptism to
the Service of God. Secondly, some (...); that receive some parts material of
Sanctification, 2. Pet. 2.18.
Illumination, outward Reformation, etc. Thirdly, some (...), by way of
disposition; as those that are said to Heb. 6.4, 5.
taste the heavenly gift, and powers of the world to come. Fourthly, some
(...); in the opinion and 2. Pet. 2.1.
charitable Judgment of men. Fifthly, some (...); In truth receiueng the
habited gifts of Sanctity: of these only is our conclusion; of others, the
testimonies and experiences alleged, understood.





How full of sweet comfort and consolation is it unto Gods Saints, wrestling
with corruption, and many a vile thought, headstrong in rebellion? incountred
with principalities and powers; seeing in themselves nothing but weakness,
and frailest infirmity? Know all such to their comfort, God is faithful; and
his promise is, to Act. 20.32.
build further, to preserve blameless, to give the inheritance to all them
that are sanctified. Has God begun his good work? He Phil. 1.6.
will perfect it to the day of Christ. Here also has place that saying of
MOSES, Perfecta sunt opera Dei. This only have we eye unto, that our evidence
be sound for the beginnings; we are assured of our progress, and preservation.
For evidence we need not wander beyond the Text, so fully it affords them.

propense Romans 7.18.
beyond ability to obedience: The eyes, that before wandered after vanity;
pry now for occasions to glorify God: The untamed tongue, set on fire on
hell, to lie, and rail, and curse, and blaspheme; is now restrained from so
rotten communication; inures it self to gracious speech, such as Ephe. 4.29.
may minister grace to the hearer, etc. The whole spirit, and soul, and body,
is now so altered and renewed, that a man becomes a marvel to himself: a 1.
Pet. 4.4.
wonderment to the world, with whom he erst ran to the same excess of riot.

Beloved Christians, thus if it be with us, we have more then civility; we
have that sanctity, that seals us to the day of Redemption. Let every man
enter new search of his heart; ransacke it to the bottom; anatomize the whole
man, take suruiew of his whole spirit, and soul, and body: that if any corner
he find corruption reigning, he may strive to mortify it. Vainly shall we
flatter our selves in opinion of sanctity, except we be in measure 2. Cor.
7.1.
purged from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.

A second evidence pointed at by the Text, is our calling; The act is continued
as Paul's word imports. God calls continually, those whom he sanctifies;
blesses all holy means unto them, so that they every day more and more are
delivered from bondage to corruption. Sure it is, sanctification is not
perfited in an instant: as sure, that by what means it is begun, by the same
it is increased and continued: so that the man truly sanctified, finds a
continual blessing upon his hearing, meditation, Praying, Conference,
Contemplation of the Creatures, Afflictions; or if there be any other means,
that God has sanctified, to call us into his marvelous light.

Make it the touchstone of our seeming sanctity; we have many of us been of
long standing in holy profession, we are daily hearers of the Word of God:
frequent in use of that Sacrament. It shall behooue us to provide, that our
proceedings be answerable to our means; that the more we hear, the more we
grow out of ignorance; get more power over our corruptions. I dare not say, but
Gods children truly sanctified, may have their pauses, yea also their
declinatio^s: But sure it is true for the ordinary, They that are planted in
the house of God, are fat and flourishing; and Psalm. 92.13, 14.
bring forth more fruit in their Age. Now God be merciful to this declining
Age, this slowbacke, or rather backe-sliding generation. How many gracious
Sermons have we heard, the fruit whereof we never yet tasted? And where is the
man amongst many, that can say, his proceedings are answerable to his time and
standing in Grace? and thinks it not well with him, that he holds what he
first received, in knowledge and obedience? How many are of the mind to befoole
themselves, for their ancient zeal and strictness in holy practices? Yea,
which a man's heart would bleed to think on, how many carried away with the
error of the wicked, have fallen from their wonted steadfastness? Enlarging
their Conscience, to swallow up such sins in common practice, the thought
whereof they once trembled to admit? Seriously and betimes think of these
things. Revel. 2.5.
Remember whence ye are fallen, and do your first works. Jealousy of our
gracious estate, it is just enough, that arises from our pawsings; more, that
issues from our declinings. The man truly sanctified, God calls continually
out of the power of darkness.

Thirdly, To these add, continued careful use of means, that God has
sanctified to work growth and continuance in Grace; Word, Sacraments, Prayer;
exemplified in the Act. 2.42.
Conuerts of Jerusalem, David, etc. See also 1. Pet. 2.1. Prou. 8.34.

They are dangerous conclusions taken up by some, I hope it is through their
ignorance. Suppose: hearing is good at all times; not so necessary, after a man
has felt the power of the Word to convert him; such an one, by private study
may sufficiently further his progress in sanctity, though public means be
neglected.

A proud and cursed conclusion; The Heb. 10.25, 26
highway in the practice of it to Apostasy: had these men wisdom, without
flattery to examine their own state, how sensibly might they perceive, that if
they lose not what they had received, yet they grow not as others, that wait at
the gates of wisdom? They have cause to be jealous of their soundness in
sanctity, who are thus indifferently affected to public Ministry.

VERSE. 25. Brethren, Pray for us.


THe third particle of the conclusion: wherein the Apostle prays the help and
comfort of the peoples Prayers. In it observe, first, Paul's modesty, secondly,
the peoples duty.

Paul's modesty, in that being so worthy an Apostle, so excellently gifted above
the ordinary, yet requires the assistance of the peoples Prayers. Where we may
notice, How men of greatest gifts, may yet reap comfort by the Prayers of
meanest Saints. For which cause, is Paul's so often entreaty of that favor from
Gods people. See Ephe. 6.19.

And if we consider, First, how impartial the Lords respect is to all his
Saints. Secondly, how he delights, to oblige us each to other in the body of
Christ. Thirdly, How much he rejoices to have thanks for his blessings,
returned from many. Fourthly, what coldness may overtake the greatest, when
there is fervor in the meanest; this will easily appear.

First, Psalm. 145.18
God is rich in mercy to all that call upon as soon to the meanest, as to the
greatest, Iam. 1.5.
without exprobration. It is an opinion arguing too much ignorance of GODS
Nature and Love; to think Prayers receive their value, from the excellency of
our Gifts. The cause of audience is no gift in us; but First, the Mercy and
Promise of God. Secondly, The merit and intercession of Christ; which equally
belong to all the Lords people. Neither may we think the Lord takes pleasure
in fluent speech, or Rhetorical ornaments of Prayers. Firmness of believing,
feruencie of affection, much more please God, then all other adiuments and
helps whatsoever: which may be as great, in men otherwise meanly gifted, as in
those, whom, in other indowments, the Lord has preferred before many.

Secondly, Besides, the Lord delights by all means to make us each beholden to
other. What Paul speaks of the body Natural, is as true of the Mystical. The
head cannot say to the foot, 1. Cor. 12.21, 22.
I have no need of thee; Nor the principal members in Christ's Body, that are
as Hands or Eyes to the Church, to those that are as low as the feet, I have
no need of you. So has God dispensed his gifts in all kinds, that every one
has in some respects his preeminence above another. Which made Paul say, We
should every man think another Philip. 2.3.
better then himself, Non minus vere quam humiliter as Bernard glosseth;
because in some gift or other, at least in the measure or use, another may be a
better to us. One perhaps prays in better terms; another, with more faith to
be heard; a third, with more sense of wants, and ardencie of desire. If none
of these, yet may the Lord of purpose deny that to the Superior, which he
grants to the Prayer of the Meaner; that by all means, he may cherish a
loving respect in the greatest, toward the meanest of his Saints.

Thirdly, Moreover; It is that the Lord much rejoices, to have the praise of
his mercy celebrated by the mouths of many Saints. Blessings intended to
singulars, he will have begged by many, that for the bestowing he may reap
thanks from many. That made Paul desirous to have his deliverance obtained by
the Prayers of many, That as it is procured by many 2. Cor. 1.11.
so thanks may be returned from many to God, the Author of the blessing;
whilst even in single blessings bestowed on singular persons, many yet may see
the loving kindness of the Lord, in attending to their Prayers.

Fourthly, Finally; The greatest of Gods Servants often feel remissness of
their fervor, as in other Offices religious, so in this of Prayer. The Lord
withdrawing the lively vigor of his Grace; whether to prevent or chasten
Pride; or to correct Ingratitude and Licentiousness: for what cause soever,
The greatest may observe, their devotions keep not always the same pitch of
fervor; sometimes prosperity distracteth: sometimes extremity of anguish
ouer-chargeth affection; perhaps, as befell David, in particulars of gross
sin we are overtaken, to the grieuance of Gods Spirit of Grace, and
deprecation in the greatest; whereas in the meaner, where is more fear and
humility, through conscience of infirmity, they abide in their ancient
vigor. In which case, who sees not how helpful to the greatest, the Prayers
of the meanest may be?

And it gives just occasion to notice that cursed policy color of long
Prayers, as Christ spoke of Pharisees, Mat. 23.14.
they devoured Widows houses.

Now suppose them men so eminently gifted, above the ordinary rank of Gods
people; must therefore their Prayers find more acceptance with God? or might
not Prayers of the people, be all out as helpful to them? The greatest of Gods
Saints may reap comfort by Prayers of the meanest; perhaps as much, as they by
men of most eminent gifts and calling.

Let us be admonished what-euer our gifts be, not to despise the meanest
amongst Gods Saints: There is none so mean in the Church of GOD, but may in
spiritual things be helpful unto us; either by their example; or holy
monitions; or experienced consolations; at least, by their Prayers to God for
us.

Too ordinary is our base esteem and contemptuous carriage toward the meaner
rank of Brethren; occasioned often by Pride, and ouer-weening conceit of our
eminent gifts; sometimes by disparitie of their outward estate; though
otherwise in spiritual indowments, they be no-whit our inferiors. Saint
James observed such partiality, as a fault in his time; and by reasons, me
thinks, weighty, labors to reform it; sending us to consider, First, How
these poor of the World God Iam. 2.5.
has chosen, and in his love preferred them before many, perhaps Kings and
Monarchs, in his election to life. Secondly, Many of them he has made rich in
faith; recompensed with abundance of spiritual blessings, as it were to make
amends for their outward poverty. Thirdly, Even these he has made co-heires
with the greatest of the Kingdom which he has promised. Fourthly, If no other
reason, yet this may sway us to loving respect of them; that by their Prayers
they may be helpful unto us.

Pray for us. Inferences of Papists hence are these: First, that if without
impeachment of Christ's mediation, we may crave Prayers of the living, why not
also of Saints departed? Secondly, If the Prayers of Saints living compassed
with infirmities, be so accepted with God, much more they of Saints glorified.
By all means, this must afford them one argument, for invocation of Saints
departed.

Answ. But how follows it, that if we may crave the Prayers of the living,
then also of the dead? For the first we have Gods Precept, and Promise to
assure us; Saints practice to warrant that acceptable unto God; can they show
us the like for invocation of Saints deceased? Secondly, We have means to
signify, and make known to them our desires; not so to Saints departed. They
tell us indeed of a Glass of the Trinity, wherein, by I know not what
reflection, they see, belike, whatsoever God himself knows. But, First, no
mention find we in Scripture of such a speculum Trinitatis. Secondly, Angels,
that Mat. 18.10.
continually behold the face of our Father in Heaven, yet Mat. 24.36.
are ignorant of the Day of Judgment; And the wisdom of God in the work of
Redemption, and gathering the Church of the Gentiles, Angels know, not by
beholding Gods essence, but by Ephesians. 3.10.
observing his dispensations in the Church.

If perhaps they say, It is not speculum natural, but voluntarium; and so
exhibits no more then God sees expedient for them to know: yet must they be
able to prove, that these are amongst those expediencies, which the Lord has
revealed himself willing to make known to his Saints and Angels.

Besides, what infinite odds? betwixt requesting the Sociall help of our
Brethrens Prayers; and the prostrating of bodies and souls to Saints departed,
out of a supposed power they have, to know our hearts; and a conceit of more
mercy in them, then in our GOD the 2. Cor. 1.3.
Father of tender Mercies; or in his Christ our merciful Mediator and High
Priest; that by Heb. 4.15.
experience of sorrows, learnt commiseration. I say as that Ancient, Tut^us
loquor ad meum Iesum; quam ad quemuis Sanctorum Spirituum.

Pray for us. The peoples duty is withal here intimated; To pray for their
Ministers. So is Ephesians. 6.19.
PAVLS frequent exhortation; so was Saints Act. 12.5.
practice.

Gods Spirit we have, directing what are the specialties to be prayed for
unto them; thus ye may range them: First, Some respect our Office. Secondly,
Some our Persons.

As touching our Office, Three things especially are pointed at to be
remembered in the peoples Prayers. First, Our abilities. Secondly, Right use of
abilities. Thirdly, Fruit and success of labors.

First, To the first, I think must be referred that of MOSES. Deuteronomy. 33.8.
Let thine Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy Holy one; said Moses, praying for
the Tribe of Leui. They are usually rendered light and perfection; that,
referred to our knowledge; this, to our life, as is the common conjecture; q.
d. Forasmuch as thou have separated Levites to minister before thee in behalf
of the people, and have made them their Guides in the way to life, Lord give
them Knowledge and Conscience; that they may be Guides to the Blind, Lights
to them that sit in Darkness: Instructors of the Ignorant, Types and Patterns
to the Flock, over which thou have made them Ouer-seers.

How necessary Prayers for this blessing upon Ministers is, appears easily, if
we consider, either the mischiefs flowing into Gods Church by the Ignorance,
Error or Profaneness of the Minister; or that Ordinance of God, in choosing
them to be his Instruments, and as it were hands, whereby to reach unto you all
saving Grace and Knowledge.

Like Priest, like people; How lamentable is the Ignorance, Superstition,
Profaneness of the people? such, that there is scarce to be found amongst
them knowledge of God, so much as Heathens gathered by light of Nature; and the
little that is, so depraved with Superstition, or corrupted by Profaneness
and Disobedience; that in them is to be found, of Christians scarce any thing,
besides the Name: nor almost of men, beside the shape; so sottish are they in
their understanding, so never a whit less then brutish in their lives. No
marvel; in want of able Pastors to feed them with knowledge and understanding.

Secondly, Them has God made Mat. 5.14.
The Lights of the by whom to scatter the bright beams of his Truth; and to
convey all saving Grace into the hearts of his people. That though perhaps
speculatiue Knowledge and Morality may be obtained by private contemplation;
yet saving Knowledge, and Faith, and Conversion is not ordinarily bestowed on
any but by the Ministry.

Pray therefore with Moses, that God will put his Vrim and Thummim upon his
holy ones; If Mat. 6.23.
the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that darkness?

A second particular to be prayed respecting our office, is the exercise of
gifts of Knowledge and Sanctity. In that sort, that may be most behoouefull
for the glory of the bestower, and benefit of his people. As Paul; Ephesians. 6.19.
That a door of utterance may be opened, to speak the Word boldly as we
ought to speak. We cannot be ignorant, what falls out in the event to many;
what may befall us in the Ministers God sets over us.

How many have we seen of worthy gifts in the Church of God? men, as a man
would think, fashioned for the work of the Ministry; either through lack of
Conscience, or love of ease, or ouer-taken with love of the World, or dismayed
with sense or fear of afflictions, or dis-heartened with lack of success,
become utterly unprofitable to the Church of GOD; suffering their worthy gifts
to just, without any profit to the people of God. And amongst them that tremble
so to bury their Talent, yet coldness, and fear, or imprudence,
disaduantaging, (Lord, how much?) the preuayling of their Ministry. Thus
think; we are as James said of ELIAS, Men of like mould, Iam. 5.17.
subject to like infirmity and passions; Pray therefore, oh pray God, to
excite us, to use; to direct us, aright to use our gifts to his Names Glory,
and his Churches Salvation.

The third specialtie respects success of our labors; That the 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
Word of God may have free passage, and be glorified. Need I press it by
Reasons; these are, me thinks, preualent. First, The great discouragement may
come to Ministers, through lack of success and blessing upon their endeavors;
when they shall be forced to cry out as ESAIAS, Esaias 49.4.
We have labored in vain and spent our strength. With Jeremy, it prevailed
so far, that he resolves to Ier. 20.9.
speak no more in the Name of the Lord; with Paul, so that he Acts 13.51.
shakes off the dust of his feet for testimony against the people. Secondly,
To this add, that hereupon depends in part the hastening of our perfect and
consummate felicity; deferred for no other cause, but that 2. Pet. 3.9.
the number of the Elect is not yet accomplished.

Thus many respects there are, pressing on the people as Duty, Prayer for
their Ministers in regard of their Office. And is this a Duty?

How cursed a generation then are we fallen into? wherein, what should be
prayed as a principal blessing of God, is so repined at, as if it were some
heavy plague, or Judgment God has sent upon the World; in giving us Pastors
after his own heart to feed us with Knowledge and Understanding? First, How
frequent is that outcry of the people? Never was merry World, since preaching
came up in such plenty.

To men so esteeming this blessing, I dare say, it is, as they esteem it; a
Curse, a Plague, a Judgment; sent to them only as a testimony, to make their
disobedience more inexcusable; their damnation, more intolerable in the Day of
Judgment. And a day may come, when they may wish and wander to hear a Sermon,
to ease the agonies they are perplexed withal; but shall find no opportunity.

Secondly, Another sort there is of Hellish people; to whom, in our Ministry
nothing is so great a Corrasiue, as the blessing and success GOD in mercy
gives it amongst his people. That which Saints and Luke 15.10.
Angels rejoice in; none but Devils and damned Hel-hounds are tormented with;
These men count their torture; as the Pharisees; See John 12.19.
ye not that we prevail nothing, but all the World runs after him?

I^ this thy grief, that God is pleased to glorify his Word; to make it
powerful to rescue his people out of the snare of the Devil? Of all marks of
a graceless heart, I know none more certain; then to grieve at the success
of the Gospel; to envy at the enlargement of Gods Church. Thus of the things
to be prayed regarding our Office.

To our persons, must be prayed protection and deliverance; 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
That we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men that have not
faith. Necessity of it appears to any man, considering either the enmity of
the World, or the infirmity of our persons.

First, As God has Genesis 3.15.
put enmity betwixt the two seeds never to be reconciled; so against none is
the malice of Satan, or his seed with more eagerness carried, then against
Ministers; whom, he knows GOD has made his chief instruments of ruining his
Kingdom. Thence have hotest Persecutions, violentest temptations been
directed to them; and still the more profitable the Minister, the more felt he
Satan's malice: PAVLS 1. Cor. 15.10.
labors were more then all: so 2. Cor. 11.23.
were his persecutions. The Saints are all tempted. Luke 22.31.
Apostles sifted and winnowed with temptation.

Secondly, To this add consideration of humane infirmity; from which who may
exempt himself? Elias a great Servant of God, yet grows weary of Ministry
and life also, through his continual vexations by Iezebel; And under Julian,
how many great Lights of the Church were eclipsed? drawn down from Heaven
with the baytes of preferments, laid for them by that cursed Apostata. Insomuch
that it is thought, the hottest Persecution prevailed not so much to work
revolt to Paganish Idolatry; as that policy of Julian, in promising
aduancements to honor.

Beloved Christians, we also are men subject to like infirmity; through
infirmity they fell; by Grace we stand: as it instructs us, not to be
high-minded, but to fear; so admonishes you to beg with instance at Gods
hand, deliverance from like temptations; or more strength of Grace to resist
them. The rather, because ye cannot be ignorant, how perilous for infection,
are the falls of Ministers eminent in the Church of God. Their falls are as
that of the great Dragon, Revel. 12.4.
drawing after him to the Earth the third part of the Stars of Heaven.

Wherefore be exhorted, amongst other Offices of Love and Thankfulness, not
to forget this of Prayer to God for our deliverance and preservation. Think it
not enough that ye yield us audience, or reverence, or maintenance; except
this Office of Love be added, to pray for our standing amids the many assaults
of Satan; and vexations from absurd and faithless men. Remember who said, I
Mat. 26.31.
will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. The distractions
of many Churches by that occasion, if we see not, we are blind; if we lament
not, we want bowels of compassion.

VERSE. 26. Greet all the Brethren with a holy kiss.


THe fourth branch of the conclusion. Paul's greeting or salutation, which he
desires in his Name to be remembered to the Saints. Wherein is, first the Act;
Salute. Secondly, the object or persons. First, the Brethren. Secondly, all the
Brethren. Thirdly, the rite or Ceremony, with a kiss, whose qualification is
expressed; it must be Holy.

Greet or salute. Not much unlike is that custom amongst us, to send
commendations to those we wish well unto; thereby signifying our loving
remembrance, and heartiest well-wishing to those that are dear unto us.

From Paul's fact desiring by such courtesy to have his love manifested to the
people of God, we learn; that, In Christian love it suffices not that the
heart be kindly affected, except we give due testimony of our well-wishing to
the Saints of God. What James speaks of faith, think spoken of love; Show me
thy Faith, thy love by thy Works. SOLOMON requires to show our selves
friendly. Christians of old time were careful in this kind; whence in Church
Primitive grew their Jude 12.
loue-feasts, as well to testify, as to procure love: and hence the ceremony
here mentioned, to salute with a kiss; continued till days of Iustine
Martyr, Justin. Martyr Apolog. 2.
in customarie use before their approaching to the Lords Table: thereby to
testify their heartiest and unfeigned well-wishing, and reconcilement each to
other. Tertullian de oratione.
Tertullian blames the omission of that rite grown upon the Church in times of
their solemn fastings and Prayers: then they withdrew that Osculum pacis, when
in Tertullians judgment, it was most convenient and necessary.

Truth is, the Nature of this affection, is, as of fire, it can by no means be
conceiled, but breaks out, and will find vent.

There is a kind of love, which Solomon calls, Prou. 27.5.
secret; open rebuke he preferres before it. When men pretending, I know not
what, feruency of affection to the Saints of God, live yet as strangers each to
other; And as men ashamed of that Cognizance of Christians, content themselves
to wish well, and pray good to the Church of God; society and friendly
familiarity, so every where commended, as available to cherish Grace, they
purposely decline.

Consider, First, how nearly it concerns us to preserve reputation of
Christians, to give testimony of our love, and hearty well-wishing to the
Saints. Hereby, says our Savior, Ioh. 13.35.
all men shall know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Means he only of inward affection? How can that manifest us to the eyes of
the world? Except there be added visible testimonies of our beneuolent
affection.

Secondly, We cannot be ignorant, how much discouragement it brings to Nouices
in Grace, to see themselves slighted by such as profess the faith. The Act.
6.1.
Grecians seeing their widows neglected grew to murmuring.

Thirdly, If none of these move, yet let the practice of worst men in their
carnal affections sway us. How willing are they the world should notice their
brotherhood and consent in evil? It is the shame of Christians, to secret
their love to the children of God.

The persons are the Brethren, the Saints of God; to these he desires the
testimonies of his intimous love limited: to these all extended. The points are
two.

Though love in some offices must be extended to all, yet are there offices to
be limited to the Saints. In love are four things. First, Benevolence.
Secondly, Beneficence. Thirdly, Complacentia. Fourthly, Familiarity. From our
benevolence and well-wishing, may none be excluded; seem they, for the
present, never so vile. 1. Tim. ^.1.
Prayers must be made for all even for enemies of the Church. And for
Beneficence, the charge runs generally; Do good to all. Gal. 6.10.
A Specialtie in these must be reserved to Saints: yet may none be simply
excluded from them.

As touching that Complacentia, contentment and pleasance taken in men, and
that which flows from it, Familiarity; they are so peculiar to Saints, that
they cannot without suspicion of unsoundness be extended to Aliens. David's
protestation. Psalm. 16.3.
All my delight is in the Saints on earth, and in such as excel in virtue.
And, I am Psalm. 119.63.
a companion of all that fear thee, and keep thy Statutes. And, I have not
haunted Psalm. 26.4.
with vain persons; nor sat in the assembly of mockers. The charge is: With
such eat not: 2. Cor. 6.17.
separate your selves, etc.

And that nearest love and testimonies thereof should thus be limited to
Saints: euinceth, First, our nearest conjunction with them in the body of
Christ, by the bond of the Spirit. There are neighbors in Nature; by
Cohabitation: in Affection: in Grace. Besides that, most of these proximities
may have place in the Saints of God, how nearly has the Lord combined us in
the body of Christ, under one head? and quickened us by the same Spirit?
Secondly, though enemies may not be excluded from our love, yet who makes
question, but friends must be preferred in the measure of loving? To SAVL an
enemy, DAVID showed kindness. But his soul 1. Sam. 18.13.
claue to the soul of JONATHAN. Men in nature are enemies: only Saints are
friends to Saints. Thirdly, their merits of us are far greater then any can be
of Aliens. By their Prayers, and spiritual gifts, and holy example, they may be
furtherances to us in the way to life.

Justifiable therefore against all cauils of graceless and malicious men, is
this prudence in Charity. Generally, we see men, that most hate society with
the Saints of God, are first that find fault with their strangeness in matter
of familiar conversation; Reason they think they have sufficient, to hate
their holy faith and profession, that they see them so partial in their
affections.

How could I wish, they were such, as with whom Gods children might with
comfort converse? But first, if that be a precept of Gods Spirit, Not 1. Cor.
5.11.
to eat with that brother, that is a fornicatour, or otherwise scandalous.
Secondly, if Paul's charge be, 2. These. 3.6.
to withdraw from every Brother that walks inordinately: Thirdly, If David and
Jeremy held it part of their righteousness, Iere. 15.17.
Not to sit in the assembly of mockers, with what warrant may Gods children
make such their familiars? Fourthly, and alas, what may a man expect to hear,
or see in such society, other then Lot in Sodom? Only what may 2. Pet. 2.8.
vex a Righteous soul? Fifthly, it is not for nothing, Solomon advises to be
so charie of our company. Lewd examples are infectious. Lewd men's endeavor,
Pro. 4.16.
to draw Gods people to their own excess of riot. Lastly, Gods precept,
Saints practice, call us always to Gal. 6.10.
limit the specialtie of our love, the testimonies of our entire affection to
the household of faith.

Reproueable rather is that promiscuous charity, as it is pretended to be, in
too frequent use amongst men professing the fear of God; whose friendliest
kindnesses run without difference to all as well Aliens, as Brethren: that know
no odds betwixt the Church of God, and the Synagogue of Satan; Christians, and
Antichristians; friends, and enemies of God, and all goodness have like
friendly welcome to our familiarity; and equally partake all testimonies and
significations of amity. First, Have we forgotten that God has called us out
of the world to be Tit. 2.14.
a peculiar people to himself? Out of the world understand, not only out of
the Gal. 1.4.
state of the world; and from the Romans 12.2.
manners of the world; but from the friendly society and familiar acquaintance
of men of this world. Secondly, And can we think it is for nothing, we are so
often commanded to beware their company; lest we be corrupted with their
manners? He knows not the corruption of his heart, nor is acquainted with the
measure of its natural deprauation, that sees not how easily any occasion
entiseth to liking and practice of evil. Thirdly, What the Lord speaks to
Jeremy, should be in our measure performed of us, Iere. 15.19.
to discern the precious from the vile; as to prosecute with honor and
louingest respect such as fear God, so to Psalm. 15.4.
contemn vile persons, and to hold them despicable.

All the Brethren. As his special kindness is limited to Brethren; so to all
Brethren it is extended. So then, Christian love imbraceth all Gods children
without partiality: In Colossians Paul commends it, that as they had faith
toward God, so Col. 1.4.
love to all Saints: first, so impartial is Gods love to his chosen, whether
Grecian or Barbarian, bond or free, Colos. 3.11.
all are one in Christ Jesus: Gods favors for salvation are equally extended
to all, how-euer different amongst themselves, by nation, state, sex, calling,
all equally chosen to salvation; alike redeemed by the blood of Christ,
sanctified by his Spirit, preserved and protected by his grace and providence.
Secondly, the ground of love is the same in all, the Image of God, the
Loade-stone of gracious affections.

Cautions there are. First, the case may so fall, that some testimonies of love
may be withdrawn from Gods children. The Apostle that commends to us love of
brotherly fellowship, yet commands to 2. These. 3.6.
withdraw from every Brother that walks inordinately, that he may be ashamed,
and brought to repentance. Secondly, According to diverse measures of Grace, so
may the measures of love and significations thereof be proportioned; we read
of love, and 1. These. 5.13.
singular love, and though Paul's 2. Cor. 11.28.
care was for all the Churches, yet was his love more 2. Cor. 2.4.
abundant to that at Corinth.

Criminous therefore is partiality in our affections owards the children of
God. It is that which in point of reverence S. James so largely deals against,
and is as justly taxable in the exercise of love. First, one sort there are,
their love and testimonies thereof is limited to men of place, and outward
eminence in the Church of God. They must be men of their own rank, that
partake their company, to whom familiar greetings are vouchsafed; the poorer
sort, though never so rich in faith, are scarce deigned a kind look or
salutation, are thought meet Job 30.1.
mates for the dogs of our flock. I say as Paul, 1. Cor. 11.22.
Despise ye the Church of God? and shame them that have not? What is this, but
to add affliction to them whom God has wounded?

Another sort there are, and their limit is, to such as excel in virtue; If
any be eximious in the Church of God, whose gifts have made him venerable above
the ordinary, to him run our affections in full stream: If to any the Lord
has more sparely dispensed his Grace, those we contemn as Nouices and
weakelings. Now harken, my beloved Brethren, has not God made all of them
members of Christ's body? sanctified and sealed them to the day of redemption?
2. And said Paul, Him Romans 14.1.
that is weak in faith, we must assume, not contemn. 3. The charge of Christ
was for the least Math. 18.6.
of those little ones that believe in him. 4. Verse 10.
Angels, those glorious creatures, scorn not their meandness, but with a
specialtie of care watch over them for their protection. 5. We also had our
beginnings, and may remember the time when our gifts were clouded with
infirmities. 6. God is Romans 14.4.
able to strengthen the weakest, to make him not thine equal only, but thy
superior in Grace. 7. As in the body natural, 1. Cor. 12.22.
the feeblest members are necessary, so the meanest in Christ's body are
some-way helpful to the Church of God.

Be we exhorted without partiality to entertain Saints into our love,
considering it is best evidence of our sincerity in loving, it is surest sign
of true gracious love, when it is thus impartial to all the Brethren, when,
wheresoever we see Grace, thither our affections are drawn.

With a kiss; The ceremony or rite to express love: thereof see what is
abouesayd out of Iustine Martyr, and Tertullian. A ceremony of civility it
was in Eastern Countries, traduced afterward to be a rite something religious.

In prescripts of this nature this is that we must hold, first, they bind not
simply to the particular, but to the proportional. Secondly, rather to the
thing they signified, then to the ceremony.

A rule of some use, Example.
for understanding like injunctions in the word of God.

In Widows to be chosen to service of the Church, this qualification is
required, she must be one that had 1. Tim. 5.10.
washed Saints feet; In case our Times had use of such, may we think the rule
binds after the letter? not for the rite, but for the thing signified, viz.
kind entertainment of the Saints of God. Our Savior by his precept and
example commends to his Disciples John 13.14, 15.
washing each others feet. Are we bound to the ceremony? Not at all, but to
the matter of the ceremony, humility, and lowliest serviceableness toward
one another.

So that they are too blame, that would tie us to all ceremonious traditions of
Apostles according to the letter, allowing no Church liberty to swerve
therefrom: be like then it is a duty still to gird with a Towell before the
Sacrament, and to wash feet of communicants, for so did Christ John 13.4, 5.
practice and command. And in our meetings civil and religious, we must greet
with a kiss of love, for so practiced and 1. Pet. 5.14.
prescribed Apostles.

Of their injunctions, first, some were of moral and substantial duties, such
bind all places and Times. Secondly, Some of circu^stancial rites, as that of
washing Saints feet, greeting with a kiss, etc. These sorted by the Apostles
to particular times and places, are variable according to use and discretion of
the Church. They bind not to the rite, but to the proportional, or matter
signified thereby.

A holy kiss. The qualification of this ceremony of greeting: So must every
action, even of common life, have a relish of holiness. Not Greetings, nor
those of common courtesy excepted. Hence Paul is so careful, to order our
ordinary communication, apparel, and such like outward things: Col. 4.6.
Our speech must be gracious; our apparel such as 1. Tim. 2.9, 10
becomes those that profess the Gospel.

Our people have pent up holiness all in Temples. Holiness becomes Gods
house. There sit they with greatest demureness, as those Ezech. 33.31, 32.
Hypocrites before EZECHIEL: Their ordinary speech is spent, I would I might
say only in impertinencies and vanity, and not in filthiness, railing, etc.
are fit for nothing but to 1. Cor. 15.33.
corrupt good manners: except also to manifest the Mat. 12.35.
ill treasure of the heart, out of whose abundance the mouth speaks. Ephe.
5.3.
Is this seemly for Saints? Common courtesies Paul desires to be seasoned
with holiness; Their kiss of love and peace must truly signify what it
makes show of; that neither treachery, nor cruelty, nor lust, may insinuate it
self into such a Symbolum of holy love.

VERSE. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the holy
brethren.


THe fifth part of the conclusion: containing charge for publishing this Epistle
to the notice of that whole Church. Wherein considerable are, first the manner
of propounding; with adiuration. Secondly, the matter or substance of the
charge, that this Epistle be read. Thirdly, and that to all the holy Brethren.

The form or manner is with adiuration; I adjure you. The word in common use
signifies one of the two. First, either to impose an oath; as when Abraham
adjured his servant to obey his directions in choosing a wife for his son
Isaac. Secondly, or else to charge with denuntiation of Gods vengeance, except
what is so imposed be performed. As when the high Priest adiures our Savior to
tell whether he were that Christ. In which kind, adiurations we find none in
use of Gods servants, save when some duty of weight is charged upon the
adjured. Thus it is here used: and occasions us to notice; of how great
necessity and use to Gods people is, the reading of Scriptures in the
Congregation. Such, that Paul adiures to performance of it. If any would limit
it to this Epistle only, because so run the terms; Let him know; First, that
all Scriptures have the same Author; are of same use to the Church of God.
Secondly, that like charge is given elsewhere Col. 4.16.
for other Scriptures. Thirdly, It is probably thought, this was the first
Scripture of the New Testament, excepting only that brief Epistle sent from
Act. 15.32.
the Council at Jerusalem. It may be, for this the charge is specially given,
that the Churches might know, they were to receive with like faith and
reverence the Scriptures of the New, as of the Old Testament.

The conclusion we shall easily make good for the general; Considering, First,
the use of the Church in all ages. Nehe. 8.8.
To Jewish Church NEHEMIAH gives testimony for his time; we make no question,
but aftertimes continued it. Josephus against APPION. In vnaquaque Septimana
ad lege^ audie^da^ co^ueniunt vniuersi: Every week they all come together to
hear the Law. The fruit of it, he adds; that they could as easily render it
as their names. Nostroru^ quilibet de legibus interrogatus, facilius quam nomen
suum recitat. Compare Act. 15.21. To aftertimes, Stories give witness; Socrates
of the Church at Alexandria. Once or twice a week the Scriptures are read in
the assembly, and interpreted by the teachers. So necessary they thought it,
that at length they ordained an order of Readers, who had to that function
their solemn Consecration; So was Julian, after the Apostata, ordained a
reader in the Church at Nicomedia.

Secondly, no marvel, the first use, and secondly power of it being so great,
and behoofefull to the Church of God. First, Phil. 1.10.
For discerning things that differ, and trial of Doctrines, taught by the
Teachers; to which end Esaias calls to the Law and Testimony. Beraeans practiced
it not without commendation. Secondly, the peoples better acquaintance with the
letter of Scripture, and language of the holy Ghost. Which how much avail
brings it to understanding of what is delivered by their Teachers? Whereas by
their careless attendance to public and private reading, the most usual
terms of Scripture, wherein the mystery of salvation is delivered, are unto
them, as the terms of some strange and foreign language.

Secondly, the power of it is exceeding great. First, to work knowledge; a
comfortable measure whereof may be by reading attained; so has God in things
necessary, demitted himself to the Prou. 18.9.
capacity of the meanest. Secondly, To confirm faith, when thereby we see the
Doctrine of the Teacher Act. 17.11.
approved by Scripture. Thirdly, yea, often has it proved a strong
preparatiue to saving faith and conversion; as to Austine was the obeying of
that voice from heaven, Toll; lege. To Iunius the reading of S. John's Gospel.
Fourthly, A marvelous power it has to excite and quicken Grace, quelled in
the heart; as in Josiah, the reading of the Law, 2. King. 22.20
what remorce and compunction wrought it? And of his Epistle Paul testifies, it
thus wrought in Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7.8, 9.
Godly sorrow to repentance. Of such necessity, and avail to Gods people, is
the naked reading of Scriptures in the Congregation.

And it instructs us to beware, how in our Judgment or practice we vilify
this so holy and wholesome an Ordinance of God. It is as much Gods Ordniance
that Scriptures be read, as that they be interpreted and applied to the people.

The policy of Satan would here be noticed. Gladly he would make us all
profane Anabaptists, to contemn all Gods Ordinances. Thereof when he sees us
scrupulous, some one he permits to admire, that the rest may be despicable in
our eyes. Prayer, amongst Romanists we see half idolized; Preaching too
profanely scoffed at. In our people, reverence of the Sacrament no less then
superstitious; of other Ordinances, prophanest contempt. Reading, there are
that most magnify. There are of another strain, desirous to turn our whole
Lyturgie, after the French Scomme, into a mere preach.

Know we not, these all are holy Ordinances of God, necessary, useful,
powerful to their ends assigned? of them all may we not say, as Paul of
superior Powers, They Romans 13.1, 2.
are ordained of God? and they that contemn, shall receive their condemnation?
who except prejudice or vnpreparednesse have fore-stalled his profit, has not
felt Gods Spirit by reading, to enlighten, admonish, excite, mortify, etc? or
can think God has in vain, with such adiuration, enjoined it to those that
are Guides of the Congregations? I say as our Savior of the Commandments;
Mat. 5.19.
Who so contemnes the least of these Ordinances, and teaches men so, he shall
be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The persons to whom by reading it must be imparted; are all the Brethren:
that whole Church of God. The inference, me thinks, is current. That to
knowledge of Laickes God will have Scriptures communicated; First, So, for the
Law, is the charge, to read and Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8.9.
rehearse the words thereof in the audience of Jewish children; To Deuteronomy. 17.18,
19.
the King must be transcribed a Copy of the Law, that by daily reading and
meditation therein, he may learn to fear the Lord. Secondly, To Saints of
the New Testament, commendation is in that behalf given; Peter, to them that
attended to Prophetical Scriptures; 2. Pet. 1.19.
Ye do well. PAVL records two Timothies praise, That of 2. Tim. 3.15.
a child little, he had known the Scriptures.

CHRYSOSTOM ad Colos. 3.16. Audite Seculares, Comparate vobis Biblia, Animae
Pharmaca.

Augustine to Volusian urges study of Scriptures upon learned and unlearned:
assuring them, that therein the Lord speaks, Ad cor indoctorum pariter ac
doctorum. Sparing infinite testimonies, consider Reasons.

1. John 4.1.
Trial of Spirits. Secondly, 1. Pet. 3.15.
Making Apology for the Faith. Thirdly, Romans 12.2.
Proouing in all things, what that good and acceptable will of the Lord is.

Romans 15.4.
Instruction. Secondly, Consolation.

that Covenant which God made with man. Secondly, People also are called to the
Ephesians. 6.13, 17
spiritual warfare, and have need of this Armor.

The more accursed is that practice of Rome, seizing Scriptures to the Clergy,
as their privilege and prerogative, interdicting the people acquaintance with
them. The questions between us are two; First, Whether Scriptures must be
permitted to Laickes in a known Tongue. Secondly, Whether their public
reading must be in a Language understood of the people.

To the first they answer; Their Prohibition is not absolute to all Laickes;
To men that can soberly use them, faculty being obtained of the Ordinary,
Scriptures are permitted in a known Tongue. Whether they should promiscuously
lie open to all the Laity is the question? But at no hand may they be publicly
read in a vulgar Tongue.

Contra. First, Me thinks, the state of the Church Christian should not seem
any whit inferior to that of Jews; if to Jews their reading was
promiscuously, not permitted only, but enjoined, why not rather to people
Christian? Secondly, To people is that Iniunction universal, That the Col.
3.16, 17.
Word of God dwell in them plenteously. Will they say, perhaps, in a strange
Tongue? What means the Precept subioyned, of teaching and admonishing one
another? Thirdly, What else was Gods aim in that gift of Tongues, what time he
meant to set open to Gentiles the door of Faith, but that Act. 2.8, 11.
every one might hear in that Tongue wherein he was borne, the wonderful
works of God? Fourthly, And to what purpose was that pains of Ancients,
translating Scriptures into vulgar Languages? as Hieromes, into the Dalmatian;
Chrysostom into the Armenian Tongue. Vulphilas into the Language of Goths. In
Bedes time, were extant Translations into six several Languages for the use
of the people of this Island. Vainly, except to people also their use was freely
intended.

And that especially their public reading in the Assemblies should be in a
Language understood of the people, euinceth; First, the charge given for
reading this Epistle in the Tongue wherein it was written, the Native Language
of Thessalonians. Secondly, The custom of the Jewish Church. Thirdly, The
ground of the Apostle, That all be done 1. Cor. 14.26.
to edifying. Fourthly, The end of reading, that the people may learn to fear
the Lord. Fifthly, Practice of ancient Church Christian, recorded by their own
Lyra and Caietane.

Let all Gods people be exhorted, since God has pleased so every way graciously
to tender us the knowledge of himself, to make use of his bounty; Count we it
our shame, to be strangers in the Doctrines, and Language of the Scripture.
Reasons persuading their daily study. First, Here only is revealed the saving
knowledge of God in Jesus Christ; there is no other Learning that 2. Tim. 3.15.
can make us wise to salvation. God has indeed by the Creatures made known
himself to the World; so that, whosoever runs may read in them, the Majesty,
Power, Wisdom, Goodness, of the Creator. Howbeit by all 1. Cor. 1.21.
the Wisdom that shines in the Creatures, the wisest Heathens could not know
God aright; but perished everlastingly in ignorance of the Mediator. All they
could thence learn, was but what might Romans 1.20.
make them inexcusable. But here have we revealed, and made known unto us,
the way to life, Romans 1.17.
The righteousness of God from Faith to Faith.

Secondly, No other knowledge was ever able, First, to convert the Soul, or
Secondly, comfort the Conscience distressed. LACTANTIVS comparing the Word of
God with Philosophy, and the best Moral Precepts tending to reform the life;
shows excellently by confessions of the chief Masters of manners amongst the
Heathen, how unable their Moral Wisdom was to kill and subdue corruption:
insomuch that after all their strictest Discipline, and hardest labor, they
are forced to confess, plus valere Naturam. And that after strength wasted in
study of Philosophy, neither themselves, nor others are made better, if
Natural Propensions oppose their Precepts. All their wisdom, where it most
preuayles, Non exscindit vitia, sed abscondit. But the few Precepts of the Word
of God, so alter and change the whole man, and that in a moment, that we can
scarce know him to be the same. Da mihi virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus,
effraenatus, etc. paucissimis Dei verbis tam placidum quam ouem reddam, etc. So
still is it the privilege of the Word of God Psalm. 19.7.
to convert the Soul. Secondly, To settle the Mind and Conscience in a state
of tranquillity and peace, the travel of wisest Heathen was great; yet all in
vain: whiles they were ignorant of him, whom Scripture alone reueales to 1.
Tim. 2.5.
be the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, the Isai. 9.6.
Prince of our pease, Author of reconciling sinners to the Majesty of God.

To draw toward conclusion; marvelous has been Gods mercy to us in this
behalf, above that he vouchsafed to former ages. Amongst Jews under
Antiochus, it was made Capital to have the Book of the Law. No less
dangerous to our forefathers in days of Popery, to be familiar with the
Scripture: more mercifully has the Lord dealt with us, granting means of all
sorts, to know, and be acquainted with his Word; liberty to read, hear, know,
profess it. How sweet is the comfort of it, to them that take benefit of this
favor of God? How just and intolerable shall be the condemnation of this
generation, at the day of Judgment; for willing or rather wilful ignorance of
the Scriptures?

Beloved Brethren, consider seriously this favor of God; despise not so great
salvation; know it for certain, 2. These. 1.8.
They perish everlastingly that know not God, and disobey the Gospel; and they
know him not aright, that know him not by his Word. The Gentiles that knew so
much of Gods nature and properties, are said for all that not to know him;
because they knew him not aright. Truly said David, Psalm. 76.1.
In Iewry was God known; there only aright, because to Jews only were Romans
3.2.
committed the Oracles of God. To us it is given in the means, to know him: The
price is put into our hands to get knowledge; But, fools as we are, we have
no heart. Scripture knowledge we think is for Churchmen, and those that have
little else to do. As in Chrysostomes time the excuse was rise; Non sum
Monachus. I am no Churchman. Yea, but thou art a Christian; else in worse case
then a Pagan, or Ethnicke. And as that father observed, if for any men,
Scripture-studie and knowledge be necessary; in some respect, most for
seculars: whose employments are most in things of this life. Vulnus super
vulnus quotidie accipiunt; and therefore potius indigent medicamine; wound they
take upon wound in dealing with the world; the more is their need of Medicine
from the Word.

I beseech you be exhorted, since the Lord desires thus by all means to impart
the knowledge of himself unto you, Despise not so great salvation. Know that a
day will come, when one dram of Divine knowledge learnt from the Scriptures,
shall do thee more stead, then all the gold of Ophir, or the deep learning and
wisdom of the Egyptians. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 8. line 33. for (...) r. (...). p. 9. l. 4. for creature r. nature. l.
31. (...). p. 13. l. 29. actuous. p. 14. l. 3 the lot. p. 20. put out question
in the margin. so p. 22. etc. p. 14. l. 16. r. mirabilarius, p. 26. l. 8. for
parties r. petties. p. 27. l 22. put out, that. p. 31. l. 9. for no, r. in
gifts. p. 35. l. 28. for cast r. eat. p. 41. l. 3. for some r. the same. l. 4.
put out, if. p. 50. l. 13. put out secondly. p. 51. l. 25. r. to prove them, p.
53. l. 30. put out, first. p. 57. l. 2, 3. for persecution r. prosecution, l.
26. for they, r. we. p. 60. l. 10. for warned r. warmed. p. 63. l. 2. for
Deboras, r. dolorous, l. 28. for or r. our. p. 64. l. 19. for motion r. mention
p. 65. l. 3 ^. for expound r, propound. p. 60. l. 2. for excellently, r. in
excellency, l. 4. for elatis r. electis, l. 18. for both r. loath. l. 29. for
praeariseth r. prefaceth, p. 67. l. 4. for best r. lest. p. 7^ l. 10. for
miserum and r. miserum est. p. 73. l. 26. insatiably. p. 74. l. 21. put out,
in. p. 77. l. ^. r. on whom. p. 89. l. 35. for place is, r. Christ is. p. 90.
l. 22. for exact r. expect. p. 16. l. 30. for abased r. abated. p 112. put out
Quest. and so in the rest, p. 116. l. 33. for nimio r. minio. p. 117. l. 12.
for inventions r. intentions. p. 118. l. 31. for instructed r. entrusted. p.
126. l. 9. r. unto God. p. 129. l. 16. for specially. r. specialty. l. 30. put
out, from or. p. 131. l. 9. for factions r. actions. p. 134. l. 19. for
understood r. understand. p. 144. l. 29. put out, as. p. 141. put out Object.
and so in the rest. p. 146. l. 8. for doubted r. doubled. p. 159. l. 2. for
slake r. slack, p. 160. l. 24. for impart r. impair. l. 31. for me r. no. p.
165. l. 13. for operation r. option. l. 26. put out, and. p. 172. l. 30. for
quid r. quod. p. 177. l. 15. put out, and participation. p. 179. l. 2. r. in
other terms. p. 194. l. 16. for proof r. people. l. 19. for thee r. them. p.
195. l. 2. Lo me. p. 198. l. 15. for Christ r. thirst. p. 206 l. 30. for mild
r. mill. p. 216. l. 22. for expounding r. propounding, p. 220. put out,
Object. Answ. p. 228. l. 31. for some, r. sow. p. ^38. l. 18. ambitious.


