Common places of scripture ordrely and after a co^pendious form of teaching,
set forth with no little labor, to the great profit and help of all such
students in gods word as have not had long exercise in the same, by the
right excellent clerk Erasmus Sarcerius.

Translated in to Englysh by Rychard Tauerner.

John^ Byddell.



TO THE MOST HIGH, and most excellent prince HENRY the.VII^. by the grace of
god king of England and of France, defensor of the faith: Lord of Irlande,
and in earth supreme heed immediatlye under Christ of the church of England,
his most humble subject and servant RICHARD TAVERNER wissheth all felicite
and health.
OYuers mortal me^ which either knew not, or of weyknes perfectly co^sidred not
Christ (most drad ^ most gracious soueraygne lord) have deuerslye labored to
seek them immortal name and memory: Of which some because they could not atteyn
it by their worthy acts, have sought the same by unworthy and most heinous
crimes, as Pausan^as, which only to get him a perpetual name, slew the mighty
and victorious king Philip of Macedonia, as also he which for the same intent
purposed to have set on fire the most famous temple of Diana in Ephesus. Others
there have been, and at this day be, men of excellent litterature and
eloquence, which with their pen have ^ought this ^gular fame among whom even
they also which have most of all dispraysed and sharply rebuked in others this
ambicion of name, yet to their own works wherein they have to veheme^t^y
reprehended other, could not tempre ne stey themselves from prefixing their
own names. So impotent a thing, ^o unquenchable is this thurst, this desire
or glory.

Again, other some there have been, men of most noble heart and high courage,
which have labored to win them renown and ^ame, either by feats of arms,
or by prudently counsellyng and administrating commonweals: as Philip king
of Macedonie, Alexandre the great, Themistocles, Phocio^, the two Scipions,
Pompey, Iullius Caesar, Lue us Sill^, Cicero, Lygurgus, with in^^ite other.

Socrates (although he knew not Christ, yet for his great sanctimony and
pureness of life a m^n more worthy to be reputed a^aynt the^ many of our ^omysh
saints) being demanded by what ways a man might wyn an honest fame,
answered: If thou shall apply thyselfe to be such one in deed as thou de^^^est
to be counted, as who should say: wylt thou be counted a furtherer of iullyce,
a good prince, a good coun^e^er: Then endeavor thy self to be such in deed. For
undoubtedly like as the shadow follows the body, as a co^paignion
inseparable, eue^ to does glory, renown, and fame accompany excele^t veues,
worthy gestes, and noble qualityes, and that so much the rather, if the same
be unlooked ^or. Of which thing, albeit there want no goodly exemples every
where as well in profane hystoryes as in the holy scryptures, yet this one
act of a woman and that a famous sinner shall at this time suffyce. Mary
Magdaleyne to whom because she loved much, was much forgyuen, at a souper in
which Christ was present, while her sister minystred at the table before all
the gestes, of an exceeding zele and love she bare to Christ annoyted with a
right precious oyntement his feet, and with the very hear of her heed dried
them again. Here I dare boldly say this Magdaleyne looked for no fame by this
fact, yet what answered Christ to such as murmured against her and said, this
oyntme^t might have been sold for much money and given to the poor Uerely
(says Christ) I say unto you, where so ever this gospel shall be preached
throughout all the world, this also that she has done shall be told for a
remembrance of her.

But now to reflycte my oracyon unto your most royal majesty, surely I can
not but be thoroughly persuaded as well by the conty^uall procedynges, as by the
success of things, that not only your graces most delyberate prouydence,
but also the prudente counsels of certain of your majesty's faithful
counseylours, have not proceeded of any ambicio^ of name, but of a mere zele and
ardent love toward the publyque weal, and furtherau^ce o^ gods sacred
troth. Wherefore where lo ever throughout the world the abolyshment of the
bishop of Romes usurped power shall be bruted or cronicled, there also shall be
reaported the most glorious acts of Henry the eight king or England, as
chief furderer and worker of the fame. And se^blably where so ever his
majesty's noble acts shall be bruted there also shall not be forgotten the
memory of certain his counselors, namely of the lord Crumwell, so worthy a
counselloure of so worthy a prince.

But again like as renown follows excellent virtues, so envy pursues high
renown. I say, it is not possible but such as have the governance of
things, and be in great authority shall be hated, maligned, enuyed, evil
spoken of among the multitude. Alexa^dre the great when it was showed him
that a certain lend person had spoken many delyyteful words of him, answered
to such as were about him, Surely I tell you, it is princely and a thing
appropryed to a great and noble man, that when he has done well, he shall be
reaported evil. So erronyous is the judgment of the people, so pestyferous is
the envy of malycious and despytefull persons. P^ocion the Atheniense was a
cou^sellour much more profitable then pleasant. Demosthenes contraryly was
rather a pleasant counselor then profitable. This studied much to follow
thaffections of ye people the other egrely resysted the same with his wholesome
counsels, when on a time they met together, Demosthenes thus greted Phocio^.
By the gods imortal, Phocyon, if the people of Athens begin ones to rage,
they will surely kill the. Troth, said Phocion, they will kill me in their
rage, but the will they kyl, when they come to their right wyites. Doubteles
(most mighty and redoubted prince) it can not be dyssembled, but as certain
or your graces counseyl be highly praised, extolled, and magnityed of many: So
again on the contrary part, they be enuyed, malygned, and hated of others,
namelye of such as either have envy at their vocacion, or be yet still roted
in their popyishe superstycion* Or these some perchance in their turyous rage,
would desire their death.

But again the same if at any time they shall return to their right wits,
will rather wysshe (as not a few already have done) the contu^ion of such, as
have meynteyned them in their rebellyous supersticio^. I mean the bishop of
Romes privy adherentes, who without questyon do hate all things that tend to
the advancement of gods honor, and detection of their cloked hypocresye.

But as the lord of hoostes has hythervnto protected and directed your
excellent majesty and certain of your most faithful counsayllours against
the most ungodly and pestilent conspiracyes of your enemies in all your
affairs: so I beseech him in such wise to pour out his grace upon the rest
of your graces loving subject, as we all together with one accord, tolowynge
your highness as our heed and mighty shepeherde may utterly vomit out of us all
papisticall venym, and hertely at last imbrase the pure and sincere verite of
gods most holy word. To the illustracyon and setting forth whereof, as it is
not unknown, how much your most faithful counseyllour mine old master
and synguler good lord, my lord privy seal has conferred and helped, so of
his studyous procedynges and circumspecte perseueraunce in the same, this only
thing sufficiently declares, that now of late he has impelled me to
translate in to English this bake of Erasmus Sarcerius, a treasure
inestimable unto christen men, in which book he has so compendiously, so
absolutely and frutfully handeled all the common places of the christen
religyon, as never before this time has been done of any, namely in such form.

A dangerous piece of work doubteles, and full of diffycultie it is, so to
handle these matters as shall in all points satisfy the expectacio^ of the
readers, as declares eloquently wrytinge to your most redoubted majesty, the
excellent clerk Philip Melanchthon in his epistle before his common places,
whose judgment this Sarcerius follows welnere in all things. Only in this
they differ, that Melanchthon dyrecteth his style to the understanding only of
the learned persons well exercysed in scriptures. This tempereth his pen also
to the capacity of young student^ of scripture and such as have not had much
exercise in the same.

Now it has been an old proverb and not without cause celebrate of all ages.
Quot capita, to^sensus, so many hedes, so many myttes, I grant the godly and
learned men in the pryncipall articles of our faith do not varye, but do
constauntly sing all one note, yet nevertheless in other dysputable mattiers
(in which it is not mete for every man to wade) as predestynacyon,
contyngencye, frewyll, and such like, there has been always, and yet is some
dissencion, so that what one aloweth an other disprayseth, what one disperueth,
an other approves. And yet it can not be denied but there is one simple
infallible troth who so can attain it.

The cause of this blindness is, that since the fall of Adam, at which time
mankind was depryued of the similitude of god, unto which he was first
create, man's wit has been so darkened and his nature so spotted and cankred
with the original vice, that he can not but be wrapped in infinite errors.
Only god has perfect intellygence, and is true in his words. Omnis autem
homo mendax. There is no man but he lies, but he erreth, but he both
disceyueth and is disceyued. Best is he that erreth leest. Saint Augustyn wrote
very much, but again he retracted much. It is not possible for one man both
to write much, and to write al things true that shall need no reprehensyon.
In a long work (says the poet Horace) a man may other whiles lawfully
slombre. Neither do I speak this because I know any notable error in
Sarcerius.

But forasmoche as the judgments of men be variable, and namely in this kind
of writing, it is very hard to satisfye all men's minds: Therefore if either
this excellent clerk Erasmus Sarcerius in his writings, or I in my
translacion shall not thoroughly answer is your majesty's and other men's
expectacion: It shall apperteyne to a christian modesty to interpret all
things unto the best part.

As for exemple: It is not unknown what great alteracion has lately ben
among learned men concerning frewyl. Some have put frewyll in no things,
some on the contrary part have gone about to meyntayne frewyll in all
things. Again other going in the mean between both these extremes, as
Melanchthou and this Sa^cerius, with many other excellent clerks, have denied
frewyl only in spiritual mocyons and that also in such persons as be not yet
regenerate and renewed by the holy ghost, and yet in the mean season they take
it not so away, but they leave them also in spiritual mocions a certain
endeavor or willing, which endeavor nevertheless can fyni^she nothing, onles
it be helped by the holy ghost. This (after my pore judgment) is the ryghtest
and truest way.

But now, if according to the variety of man's judgment, the same shall not
forthwt appear to others, set them not incontinuently damn and give sentence
of other men's writings, but diligently enserche the scripture, which is the
only rule and touch stone, wherewith we ought to try the truth from the
untruth, the pure and sincere doctrine from the corrupt and hypocritical. If
they shall find any thing ryghter or better then this doctrine let them
louyngly imparte and communicate their way unto us, if not, let them use this
way with us.

But what so ever this book is (for to your graces most exact judgment I
refer it) like as by the i^pulsion and commandment of my said old master my
iord privy seal, I have translated it i^ to oue vulgar tongue: So his lordship
has willed me (where as else I would not have been so bold) to offer and dedicate
the same unto your most noble and redoubted majesty, to the intent that where
as he did lately p^fer me unto your graces service in ye office of ye signet
(for what qualities he espied in me I can not tell) I might at lest testify and
declare unto your highness my pro^pt and redye mind to do your grace such pore
service as to my habilite may extend. And so consequently that this book under
your majesty's protection and patrocinie may the more plausibly and gredyly be
devoured of the people, for whose only cause and edificacion your hyghnes and
such as be your most prudent counsaylers have provided diverse wholesome books
to be set forth in english.

In dilatyng of which right excedyng and high benefyte with infinyte other
wrought to the inestimable utility of the people, I will not further at this
present proceed, only I beseech our lord, that like as your hyghnes has
hither unto with most prudent, godly and gracyous means, wonderfullye helped
the state and publyke weal of your graces most flourishing realm, so your
majesty may proceed, and to the end perceuerin ye same, to the glory of god,
your highness honor, unity of your subjects, welthe of your realm,
de^ogacio^ of the bishop of Romes usurped power, rejoice of your welwillers,
confusion of your graces adversaries. Thus most mighty, most high, and most
gracious soueraygne lord I commit your hyghnes to the holy Trinite, to whom
be all honor, praise, and glory for evermore. Amen.

DOMINE SALVVM FAC REGEM.

A COMPENDIOUS FORM of teaching or discipline, declaring the common and
pryncipal places of our chrireligio^, wonderful necessary to all such as be
desirous to know gods troth, and his sacred word.
Of God. CAPI. I.
GOD is one certain divine being or essencie, What god is.
co^sistyng of three persons: that is to wete, god ye father, the son, and holy
ghost.

This diffinition is approved of holy scripture, Aprobacion.
which by ye name of godheed, calls these three persons, as more plainly shall
appear in the particular entreating of each person.

By the determinacion of the counsel of Nice. What god is by the counsel of
Nyce.
God is one divine being or essencie, which both is called, and also is god,
eternal, vnbodily, vnprotable, animmense power, wisdom, goodness the maker and
preserver of all things, both visible and invisible, and yet three persons of
al one being, and power everlasting: the father, son, and holy ghost.

God is not divided in pertes, No parts of god. Deuteronomy. vi.
for there ^s but one god. Herke, o Israel, (says ye scripture) the lord thy
god is one lord. But forasmoch as holy scripture assigns divine essentie to
three, therefore ye fathers have found out the name of person, to avoid many
errors. Now, by the name of parson is me^t a substance indivisible, Of god no
cause.
understanding. etc.

Forasmoche as god him self is the creator and maker of all, Rom^ ^. xi. d
therefore he has no cause of his being. For as Paul says: who has given unto
him first, that he might be recompensed again? So that god (as witnesses also
Gregory) is only cause of causes.

Theffectes and works of god be these: The effects of god. Roma. ^. b
to creat and maynteyn yt he has created. For the power and divinity of god
(says Paul) is everlasting. Now, the power and divinity of god to be
everlasting, is naught else, but yt god creates governs and mainteyneth his
creatures ever lasti^gly. In hi^ (as it is said in yt acts) we live, Act. ^
vii. Psalm. cxlv^.
we move, and we have our being. He gives (says ye prophet) esca^ oi^ carni,
meat to every creature. Also his effects be: To love his creatures because he
maynteyneth the^. Exodi. xx. Roma. ij. Psalm. cxlij.
To be merciful pacie^t, piteful. To hear his humble suitors, for: Prope est
deus inuoca^tibus eu^: God is at hand to the^ y^ call upon him. To forgive
sin^es, for only god by him self is rightous. To punish sins, Nume. xliii. 1.
Reg. ii. Deuteronomy. xxxii.
for he visits ye wickedness of ye fathers upon their children (as Moses
says) in to the third and fourth generation. To bring down to the grave, and
to fetch up again. To kill and make alive again. These works and effects of
god be not casual or accidental, but naturally appropriate to god and
everlasting.

Contrary to god, Contraryes to god.
is what so ever is repugnaunt to him and his nature, as: To deny with the
Symonians that god made the world. To grant with Basilides that god is a
created mind. To grant with Colobarsus and others, yt beside one true god,
there is yet an other furious god, which is also maker of the world. To grant
with the Gnostickes, ye nature of god to be a substance of souls. To grant with
the Appellites, yt there is one god good, and an other bad, made of y^ good. To
grant with the Anthropomorpihtes, god to be an image of a corruptible man. To
grant with the Manichees two gods. To grant with the Epicurians, that god
regards not men's matters. To grant that god knows not some things. To bynd
god to any certain place. For in ye book of Deuteronomie thou shalt read thus:
Deuteronomy. (...)
Understand therefore, and turn in to thy heart that the lord he is god in heaven
above, and in earth beneth. To grant with the philosophers, that god is an
element. To grant with some philolophers, that god had beginning. To grant y^
god any other way may be learned and understand then by his word.

Of god the father. CA. II.
GOd the father, What god the ^ather is.
is first parson in Trinite, first cause of our salvation, which has blessed
us with all manner spiritual blessyng in heavenly things by Christ, and which
has chose^ us before the fou^dacion of the world y^ we should he holy and
without blame before him, and which has predestinate and ordained us to be
his children of adopcion, through Christ Jesus.

This difinitio^ is certain, Probacion. Ephe. i. a. No cause of the father.
taken forth of saint Paul's epistle to y^ Ephesia^s.

The father has no former causes, but is him self the cause of all.

This affirms ^. Austin in his book Detrinitate and vnitate dei. ca. ij.
saying: the father has given to all yt be, ye cause of their being, No
division of the father.
and him self has received the cause of his being of none other.

God the father is one only person, ^ not the father, son and holy ghost
together, as certain heretics have taught. Theffectes of the father.
The effects of God the father be after a worldly manner gathered of the
fatherly affections and circu^staunces which be incident to an erthly father,
to the intent that we mortal men may the better understand y^ workings and
propertyes of god the father, as, To love. To cherysshe his. To have care of
his. To chasten his, that he may save them. To nourysh his. These offycies or
works of the father be eternal, eue^ as he is eternal. More offycies or
effects every where in scripture do appear, where mention is made of the
loving kyndenes toward man of god the father. And hereunto may also be added
the works a little before attributed to god, for ye scripture calls ye father
by his own propre name god. But albeit after thexa^ple of an humane father, y^
properties of god y^ father be set forth, yet he exercyseth the^ not after ma^s
fassyo^, for god was other wise affected than is man. A worldly father may
promise his son a thing, and afterward not fulfill the same. But god y^ heavenly
father deceives not, but keeps promise: according to the words of Bala^ y^
prophet where he says. God is not as a man yt be can lie, nor as ye son of man
y^ he ca^ be changed. Also it many times chau^ceth y^ the worldly father
regards not his son, but god our spiritual father can not forget his
children. Contraryes or heresies.
It is repugnau^t to this doctrine, To deny god the father to be y^ first cause
of oue salvation. To grau^^ god the father to have had beginning. To grant with
the Archontikes, yt the god of the law and of the prophets is not ye father of
christ To giau^t with the Sabellians, y^ the self father is the son and the
holy ghost. Also that ye father suffered. To grant with the Metangismonites,
that the son is in the father, as one vessel in an other: which error at this
day the folysshe annabaptistes have renewed. To grant that the officies or
works of god the father shall at any time cease.

Of god the Son. CA. III.
GOd the son Jesus Christ, what god the son is.
second parso^ in Trinite, is the express and sufficient image of ye
invisible god wherein the will of god y^ father shines apparau^tly, and wherein
man as it were i^ a glass may behold what thing he ought to do y^ might please
god the father.

The Christ is ye express image of ye father, Probacions of this diffinition.
is proved by the epistle to the Habrues where it is written thus, Ebre. (...)
which son being ye bryghtnes of his glory, and express image of his
substance. etc. Also that he is thymage of the iuinsible god, is confyrmed by
S. Paul to the Coll. Coll os. i. e
sayng which is the image of ye iu^^sible god, first begotten of al creatures.
ii. Cor. iiii. (...)
Of the shynyng of the father i^ Christ speaks P^ where he says. For it is
god yt commanded the light to shine out of darkness, who has shyned i^ your
hertes to give light of the knowledge of the glory of god in the face of Jesus
Christ. i. Pet. ii. d
Finally i^ the.j. epis. of S. Pe. Christ is propowned unto us an exe^ple who^
we should follow Christ is the very and the only son of god, An other
diffinitio^ of god the son.
begotten without beginyng of god y^ father, very god, not made, but which has been at ye beginyng, ^gal to the father, promised of the father unto Ada^braham,
and other holy fathers, to reden mankind lost by the fall of the first pre^tes,
very man, born of the virgin ^^ry, which to take away the synes of the hole
world suffered, and was crucified, which the third day rose again to life
sytti^g now on the right ha^^ of god the father. a mediator for all yt believe
i^ him fro^whens also he shall ons com to judge the quycke and deed.

Probacions of this diffinicion.
Thou art my son, Psalm. ii.
I have this day begotten y^. And again: I shall be father unto him, and he shall
be my son. Also in the gospel. Math. ii.
Out of Egypt have I called my son. The father also said him self. This is my
well beloved son. Math. iii.
Undoubtedlye Christ is the very son of god (that is to wete) ye natural son,
begotten of the father, eue^ as light of light, but without begi^nyng, none
otherwise the^ words are begotten of things. Johan. i. a
As John^ in the.i. cha. says. And the word was god. Tho was also cried wha^
he felt his masters sides. Roma. ix.
My god. Moreover Paul calls Christ god. Collos. ii. c
And to y^ Collossia^s he writes, y^ in him dwells all ye fulness of yt
godhed corporally. But ye shall under stand that Christ is in such wise god and
ye son, as he is not after man's manner begotten, Johan. i. a
nor as a treasure made. For S. John^ in his gospel begins thus of y^ second
parson, saying. In the beginning was y^ word. etc. whereunto Paul agrees in his
epistle to y^ Philippia^s, Philip. ii.
where he writes: which when he was egal to god. ^o here he makes the son
egal with the father. Also Christ says him self I and my father be one. Now, to
Ada^ promise was made of Christ in.gene. iij. To abraham in.ge^. xii. and.
xvij. To the other holy fathers the promises made be spread in sundry places of
scriptur. The end of the promyses is the redempcio^ of mankind genesis iij. Ipsum
conterer caput tuu^, Gene. iii.
that is to say: That sede (meani^g Christ) shall tread the on thy heed. Gene.
xvii
In genesis xvij. to Abraham he said: In thy sede al nations shall be blessed. The
occasion of the redemption was the da^pnacio^ gotten by y^ fall of the first
pare^tes. Of the manhood of Christ teaches us the prophet esaias, saying: Lo a
vyrgyn shall conceive. Esaie. vij.
Also ye epist. Ebre. ij. d
to the. Hebr. where it says, In all things it became hi^ to be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be merciful The common Creed says: Borne of
yt virgyn Mary, which proves also the rest, how Christ suffered, and was
crucyfyed. Also how he rose ageyn which was for this only purpose to take away
the sines of ye hole world. This was long before prophesied of esaias which
says. Esaie. liii. a
But he was wounded for our wickedness, he was smytte^ for our offenses. And
John^ in his epi. i. Johan. ij. d
says for the sins of ye hole world. And lest we should think ye Christ
has now fully executed his office and has nothing a do, ye shall understand
that he sits on yt right hand of God ye father making intercession for us.
Ro^a. viii. f.
This testefyeth S. Paul saying. which also is on ye right hand of god and
which makes intercession for us. And at last he shall com at his second coming
to declare him self the son of god in majesty yt ye good may be glorified and
the wicked destroyed as witness the creed or simbol Apostilique and ye. xxv.
chap. of theuangelist Matthew.

AS touching creation or being, No causes of Christ.
Christ has no cause for he neither was creted nor had his begi^ning of any
other, but was from ye begi^ning to gither with ye father as S. John^ writes.
Ioh. ii. a
In the beginning was ye word and ye word was with god. But forasmoch as y^
scriptur calls Christ ye son, After a manner of the father is cause of the son.
therefore in respect of ye father to discern the persons and their officies
(after y^ usage of scriptur) we make ye father cause of ye son, No division. of
Christ.
al humane cogitacio^ laid away Christ is one, one person in t^inite made man
being him self god for our cause not yt he is two or diverse things but is very
god and man, neither so yt he is severally pressed, and king, pressed in the
spiritual kingdom and king in the kingdom of ye world but is together pressed
and king in the spiritual Psalm. (...).
kingdom for evermore.

THE works or officies of Christ ought to be gathered of the hole Christ
Theffectes or works of Christ.
which now sits on ye right hand of god the father very god and man, the
works of his ma^hod, as to eat, dri^ke, sleep, wake, and such like, now yt he
is glorified be ceased, neither came christ to y^ purpose y^ he should exercise
the^ perpetually. But besides those effects and works of the manhood there be
yet other apperteyning chefly to our salvation which shall i^dure perpetualli
as. To save the people from their sins. To take away the sines of the world /
as John^ baptist witnesses saing, behold the la^be of god which takes away
ye sins of y^ world. To justify, as y^ Apostle Paul records sayi^g. Being
the^ justified of faith by Jesus Christ. Roma. v^ Esaie. lui.
To satisfy for our sins. i. Johan. j. a
To be a mercystocke for our synes, as John^ thapostle writes in his epistle.
To be our mediator and peax maker, Gala. ii*
to become ye pressed and bishop for evermore, Timo. ii.
as in the.cix. psalm app^reth. Psul cix.
And y^ because of intercession as witnesses Paul to the Roma. Roma. viii.
saying. which also makes intercession for us. Also thapostle John^ where he
says. i. Johan. ii.
Because we have Christ our spokesma^ or advocate with the father. To be king and
captain. To be lord over the people of god Iere. Hiere. xi. Hiere. xv. Eze.
xxxii ii. e
xv. To be ye only shepherd and bishop of his chutche as ezechiel. did
prophecye saying I will raise up unto them (says god) one only shepherd eue^
my servant David he shall feed the^ and he shall be their shepherd. By David is
understand christ coming of the stock of David. Iere. xxiii. b
I the lord will be their lord and my servant David shall be their prince. To this
accords the prophet Jeremy, sayi^g. Behold the time comes (says the lord)
that I will raise up the rightous branch of David which shall rule. i. Pet.
i. d
And S. Peter where he says, ye were as sheep going astray, but now ye are
converted unto the shepherd and bishop of your souls. To be ye head of his
church. Collos. i^
And he is y^ heed says s. Paul of y^ body of ye church. Ephesians. i.
And to the Ephesians. he says. And he has given hi^ to be head over al unto ye
church. Also to the Colossia^s. Collos ii. d
Not obteyning the head whereof all the body by iointes and couples receiving
nourisshme^t and being co^pacte and kny^ together encreseth with ye increace of
god. i. Pet. ii.
To be ye head corner stone elected and precious. Ecce pono in Sio^ lapi^e^. Lo
I put in Ston a stone. Esaie. xxviii.
etc. To be the fou^dacio^ of al saints as Paul says. Builded upon the
foundation of thapostles and prophets. Ephe. ii.
These and semblable effects or officies of Christ appear in holy scriptur,
of which many ye bishop of Rome does fo^dly and folisshly challenge unto him
contrary to ye eternal shepherd ship and bysshoperich of Christ. But in
gatherynge these officies and propertyes of Christ, ye must take good head
leest because of his.ij. natures ye chance to fall in error. For when we
speak of ye officies and works of Christ, we speak of the hole Christ as he
now sits on the right hand of god, very god and man. Contraryes or heresies.
Because Christ Jesus the son of god is one, for whose cause we be reputed
rightous and do please god. Therefore there haueben many which by y^ institucio^
of Satan, have studied to take away, diminish and pluck from us this Christ.
And al ye herisyes against Christ do co^siste for ye most part in ye
diminisshing and derogatio^ either of ye parson or of ye works of Christ as.
To grant with ye Arrians that Christ is not naturally god albeit they grant ye
(word) to be person. To giu^te with Paul Samosatensis yt the word or (as it is
called in greek) Logos, That which is verbu^, y^ is to say word in the latin
translacion is in Greek (in which tongue ^. Iohu^ wrote his Gospel) logos,
which signifies indifferently ^ word, and a thought of mind.
is not a person but only ye thought or knowledge of ye father all one with the
father. To grant with Seruetus that ye (word) was no parson before it took ma^s
nature. To grant with ye Sabellians and priscillanistes ye Christ is the same
yt the father is To grant with the Donatistes ye Christ ye son is of less power
tha^ ye father. To grant with the Meta^gismonites y^ Christ ye son did (...) in
to the father as a less vessel in to a greter vessel. To grant with the
Appol^ linaristes, that the flesh of Christ and the word have al one
substance. To grant with certain Origenia^s that Christ is a creature. To
grant with certain other Origenians that Christ it he be compared with other
holy me^ is the troth self but if he be compared to ye father, so is he a lie
or lesing, and that Christ does so much differ from the father as thapostles do
from Christ. To grant with the Necians that the self Christ is father and holy
ghost. To grant with the Sethians that Christ is the son of Noye. To grant
with the Carpocratians ye Jesus was but man and naturally born of father and
mother and received a soul which knew those things that were heavenly. To
grant with the Symonians y^ Christ did neither come nor suff^e any thing of the
Jews, but that one Simo^ in the time of Tiberius came to the peoples thinking
in the parson of the son. To grant with the Ualentinia^s ye Christ sent of the
father brought with him a spiritual and heavenly body and that he took nothing
of Mary but passed by her only as through a pipe of a co^dite or conueyau^ce.
This heresy one Pelli^ica^^ us at this day has renewed. To grant with the
Archontikes y^ Christ was not born of woman neither had any flesh in deed or
dyed or suffered any thing, but y^ be feigned his passion. To grant with y^
Appellites yt Christ neither brought his flesh with him from heaven neither took
^t of Mary, but gat it of the eleme^tes of the world which he rendered again to
ye world ascending again without flesh in to heaven. To grant with ye
Paulines that Christ was not ever, but yt he took his beginning of Mary and
that he was a pure man. To grant with the Manichees yt Christ came only to
deliver men's soul and not the bodies. And yt Christ was not in very flesh but
showed to our se^ses a counterfeit shape of flesh, and neither dyed ne rose
again. To grant with certain heretics that Christ was always, but not always
the son, which name (they say) he first received when he was born. To grant
with one Marcus yt Christ not verily but opinatiuely suffered. Opinatiuely, is
to our thinking opinion.
To grant with certain olde^ heretics that ye godhede of Christ suffered when
his flesh was hanged on the cross. To grant with ye Seleucians that Christ
sits not in flesh at the right hand of god the father but has put it of and
laid it in the son, taking occacion of the ps^lme y^ says. In sole pasuit
tabeenaculum suum. yt is he has put his tabernacle in the son. O gross
heretics. The heresye of the papistees
To grant with some y^ y^ hole Christ sits not on ye right hand of god the
father. To grant that the for said officies of Christ be executed only in
heaven of him, and that the same are to be excercysed here in earth of the pope,
contrary to the place of ye psalm before remembered. Tues sacerdos in eternu^.
Thou art the pressed for evermore, And contrary to ye eternal bisshoprych of
Christ. To grant yt there is an other mercymaker, The herysie of sayntmen.
mediator and itercessour for our sines the^ Christ as they do, which set up
saints by works i^ place of Christ. To say yt Christ only merited or deserved
unto us ye first grace only inclyning us to love god, but yt we be saved by our
works. To say with the Nazereis and diverse other false Apostles yt the rites
and ceremonies of the old law^ be necessary to Christen men.

Of the holy ghost. CA. iiii.
THe holy ghost is the third person in trinity, what the holy ghost is.
very god, not made nor created nether begotten, but procedi^g of the father
and son and flowyng from the father and son together substancially to thiute^^
he might lead us into al troth illuminate and ballowe us to the troth, and
keep us i^ ye same, expownyng, declarynge and glorifienge Christ, confermyng
the inherytau^ce received in Christ for which he is also put as a pledge or
ernest by god the father.

THAT the holy ghost is ye third person in trinity and very god, Probecions of
this distinition.
the places and texces of scripture folowi^g do prove. Mat. xxviii. b
In ye gospel of Mat. Christ commands his disciples to baptize al nations i^
ye name of ye father ye son and tholy ghost. This proves tholi ghost to be ye
third and also a distinct person, i. Johan. v. b.
S. Ioha^ also in his epistle proves the same, sayng. The father, son, and
holy ghost these.iij. be one. In Genesis Gene. i. a
the first chap. also is wryte^. that the spirit of the lord was born upon the
waters. Ite^ in the spal. Cxxxix. whither shall I go from thy spirit. Psalm.
cxxxix. b Johan. i. e
Also in Io. i, And I saw the spirit of the lord as a dove. Now, the holy
ghost is therefore god, forasmoch as he quickneth, halloweth and co^for^eth the
inward minds which work? ca^ not be but appropered to ye godhed. Moreover sith
scriptur assineth these works to the holy ghost it will have us trust suerly to
tholy ghost, yt he both will and may perform y^ same. But to trust, is a
worship a^nexed to god only. The article of our faith techeth the same, I
believe i^ ye holy ghost. Furthermore were we said y^ tholi ghost is not made
nether created this we added for thauoidi^ge of the name of creature. Gendred
or begotten he is not, for the scripture uses the word ofprocedi^g, For tholy
ghost is said to proceed of the father and so^^e, as christ him self says in
the gospel of Io. Johan. xv. d
when yt cou^fortour comes whom I shall se^d you. etc. which proceeds of my
father, he shall beat witness of me. Loo here ye se yt ye holy ghost is sent
of Christ and proceeds of ye rather, and that the father and the sone be
discerned from tholy ghost. That substa^cially tholy ghost flows of the
father and son is added leest y^ sholdest think tholy ghost is ifetiour to the
other two persons. saint Augustyne^
For as s. Augu. in his.vi. book dec^^ni. says. Tholy ghost is so^what common
(as much as it is) to ye father and son, but this co^me^nesse is
co^substa^ciall and coeternall. The other part of the diffinicyon is clear and
proved by the.xiii^. xv. xvi. chap. of the euage. Io. where the said work? and
offycies of tholye ghost be descrybed. That finally tholy ghost is an etnest
or pledge given us of god, ii. Cort^. l. Ep^e. i. Roma. viii. b
it is red in diverse places of Paul's apys^i^es.

Tholt ghost i^ respect of his being has no cause since at the begi^ning he is
with the father and son, No causes of tholy ghostes being.
everlasting god. But in respect of proceeding, the father and son be in manner
as causes. For as before is showed, tholy ghost is said to proceed of ye father
and therefore sometime in scripture he is called y^ spirit of y^ father, as
Christ says. Iohu^. xv. d
It is not you that speak but the spirit of your father. And other whiles he
is said to be ye spirit of y^ son as where thapostle says. Math. x. c.
God has sent y^ spirit of his son into your hertes. And in an other place.
Roma. viii. b.
He that has not ye spirit of Christ, ye same is none of his. Tholy ghost is
one, No parts of thoiy ghost.
and the third person in trinite called by sundry names i^ scripture as in ye
psalm, Iohu^. ii. c. d
and in ye epistle of Iohu^ y^ is called an vnctio^ or an anointi^g. Psalm.
xliui. b
I^ y^ gospel of John^ a co^for^our. Iohu^. x vi. b.
Paul calls him the ernest of our inheritance. Ephe. i. b.
Otherwhiles this word spiritus (in englisshe
spirit) is taken very largely, The significations of spiritus.
for a styrring, a moving nature or power, for the wind, for life, for mocio^s
or passions created in me^, as well good as evil. Genesis viii. a Johan. iiii. e
Iohu^. iiii. c
But i^ this place it sinifieth a spritual nature for as Christ testifyeth god
is a spirit. Theffectes or offices of tholy ghost may be no^bred these^
Tgeffectes of the holy ghost.
To lead into al troth To call, to lighte^ unto the troth: This he works by
ye word preached. Iohu^. xvi.
To hallow, to preserve in troth. These workings appear every where in
scriptur. To expound, to declare, Iohu^. xiiii. xv. and.xvi.
to gloryfy Christ To reprove the world of justice, of syn, and of judgment.
Johan. xvi. b Roma. viii.
To comfort, whereby he is called a co^fortour. To confirm the consciences upon
the troth of the word, and upon thinheritau^ce received in Christ. To endow
the church with all manner of gifts. i. Corint. xii. Roma. xii. Acts.ii. a.
To give that we may speak with fyered tongues, that is, that mightily and
boldly we may confess ye word. To make new the hole mind of man,
from whence afterward do proceed spiritual fruits true faith, Gala. v.
true awe of god, charity and such like, for ye law can not truly be done
enlesse first ye holy ghost be received, who^ Christ gives.
To prospere and further the word preached yt it may spedyly go forward. And
for this cause thapostle wissheth oftentimes ye holy ghost to be given to ye
churches. To. viii. d. Roma. viii. i. Corin. xii Lu^. xii.
To help our infirmities. To pray for ye weak. To search ye depthes of god. To
reche what to answer persecutours. To be a toke^ of ye true liberty and
e^frau^cheme^t from the curse of the law according to Paul yt says. Where ye
spirit of ye lord is, there is lidertie. Now, tholy ghost is called ye sprite
of ye lord because ye lord sends and gives it. Of these works or officies
of ye holy ghost,
some tholy ghost works by the word, and other some by inward operacion
wtoute the word preached. And albeit ye outward preaching of the word shall
ones cease, yet such officies of tholy ghost shall not cease as be everlasting,
like as him self is everlasting, and works by the everlasting and
vnperishable word. Moreover the holy ghost is come to execute ye said officies,
not of him self, but sent of god the father, and given of Christ the son.
Wherefore also tholy ghost can not be present without Christ.

TO this doctrine, and to the nature of ye holy ghost is contrary: Contraries
or heresies.
To say, after thopinion of the Greeks, ye tholy ghost proceeds not of the
father and son jointly, but only of the father. To grant with certain
Origenians, ye tholy ghost is a creature. To say with the Macedonia^s tholy ghost
is not of the same substance or being, of which god ye father and ye son is
but a creature. To say at this time with Ca^pan^ yt the holygost is not y^.iij.
Campanu^.
person in Trinite. To hold with the Noecians tholy ghost is unlike to the
father. To grant with the Donatistes ye tholy ghost is inferior to the
father and son. To say with certain heretics, yt the self holy ghost is not
given, but only his gifts which is not tholy ghost own self. Against who^
disputes s. Ang. Augstine libro.xv. detrinitate
To grant with certain Anabapti^es yt tholy ghost is not a person of y^ trinite,
but only a dove which god myraculously did send ones or twice. Anabaptists
To grant with other Anabaptists, tholy ghost is only a power of ye father and
son, and not a god or a parso^ of him self. To say against ye open text in the
acts of ye apostles, Acts. ii. ^ Joel. i. g.
the promise made of tholy ghost unto the apostles, was first fulfilled in
certain heretics named ye Cataphriges and the Manichees. To grant a man may
atteyn to ye knowledge of the troth or word without tholy ghost. To grant y^ any
man may continue in ye troth which he has professed without the assiste^ce of
tholy ghost. To grant any person may be borne again in to a new life and
works allowed of god without tholy ghost. To grant with the folish papists, The
heresy of papists.
y^ the pope is here in earth the executer of the holy ghost,
he to declare and expound the will of Christ. To grant and defend to the
blasphemous reproach of the holy ghost, yt all papisticall counsels, O
intolerable a^tichristes.
yea though they be repugnaunt to the open word and glory of Christ have
proceeded, and he confyrmed of the holy ghost.

Of predestination. CA. V.
Predestination is ye sure p^ordinau^ce of god, The definition of
predestonation.
whereby all things come to pass, as well inward, as outward works and
thoughts, i^ al creatures according to ye appoyntme^t of his will.

THIS diffinitio^ to be good, probation of the definicio^ Ephesi. i. Math. x. c.
is proved by s. Paul, where he says, god works al things according to the
counsel of his will. Also our savior Christ says. Are not.ij. sparows sold for
a farthing, and none of the^ falls on the ground without your father. To this
agrees Salomo^ in his proverbs saying. Pro. xvi. a.
The lord works al things for him self, yea and the wicked also to the evil
day. Paul to ye Ephesi. Ephesi. i. b. ii. Timo. ^. c
according to ye pleasure of his will. Also to Timothe. According to his purpose
and grace. But forasmoche as al creatures ha^g of thordinau^ce of nature,
which god of his fre will has ordained, therefore all things do not follow ne
come to pass of mere and simple necessity, but by the process and course of
nature so of good ordained. Yea and also in men's thoughts and wings there is
a fre choice, and therefore sins do proceed and have therefore proceeded of the
free choice of man. But to chintent a ma^s conscience may be defended and armed
from despair, if we will wisely speak of predestinacion, we must fetch our
beginni^g at the gospel, which is an universal promise. And we must evermore
have recourse to predestinacion of condition, whereof we shall speak hereafter,
as for exe^ple: If the children of Israel shall walk in my commandments,
they shall be saved. If you shall receive the gospel, thou shall be saved.
Augustine de p^destinatio^e capi* ^*
Wherefore s. Austin also agrees, saying. God did predestinate man to be
obedient unto him, and to absteyn from tas^ing of the apple yt was forbodden
him: but if he would be disobedient, to dye. Such is the end of the hole
predestinacion (as farforth as apperteyneth to me^) yt we should know we be
predestinate upon this condition, yt if we receive ye word, we shall be the
children of god, whom god has chosen, to make us his children by adopcion,
Ephesians. i ^
as s. Paul writing to the Ephesians declares. And this condition is proved by
the universal promise of y^ gospel. Now ye some of us be damned, this is
because we believe not ^he pospel. Wherefore also thapostle says: ii. Timo ii. d
If a man will purge self from such (meaning wicked doctrines, for of the^ he
spoke a little before) he shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor, mete for the
lord, and prepared unto all good works. Also hereunto perteyne such places of
scripture as do promise an universal grace, whereby a man's conscience ought to
lift it self up against such assaults as his reason makes of predestinacio^,
as this universal promise. God wills all men to be saved. i. Timo. ii. ^ Eze.
xxxiii. ^ Math. xi. d
God wills not the death of the sinner, but yt he turn and do repentance.
Also: Come unto me (says Christ) al ye y^ labor and are laden, and I shall
refresh you. Undoubtedly it is an extreme madness a man to vex his mind with
vnfrutful questions co^cerni^g p^destinacio^, where as he may comfort him self
with the general promise of grace, and with sure tokens yt he is chosen to be saved
as be these tokens: to give credit to the gospel, Tokens of elections.
to desire and to receive mercy offered by the gospel, to endure in faith to the
last end. It is great folly to doubt whether you be predestinat unto salvation,
when thou hear the word, when you bileu^st the word, wh^^ thou deli^est in
y^ word. It is an other manner of thing with the wicked persons, which can not but
be uncertain and ever in doubt, because they lack the word which who so ever
has not, must needs be utterly destitute of all solace, yea such be
constrained to despair and to think al evil of p^destinacion. Wonder it is y^
p^destinatio^ does so torment men's minds sithe^s nothing is more certain then
yt the same is set forth unto us to our comfort, Roma. viii. f.
so yt by patience and consolacion of scriptures we might have hope. And no
doubt if y^ most diligeht apostle s. Paul had wist predestinacion should have
hindered the co^fortes of godly persons, he would not so often have made mention
of it in his epistles.

BUT forasmoch as some me^ receive not the gospel, and therefore consequently do
perish, it is now to be seen how they deserve there da^nacio^ if p^destinacion
takes away y^ liberty of our will (as valla and others have thought) I se not
how Ualla.
god can be excused yt he is not causer of sins, Augustyne. quest. xxiii.
wherefore S. Aug. seems very rightly to say in this wise. It is very folyshly
spoken yt the p^destinatio^ of god works i^ al me^, whether it be to good or
to evil, so yt to either of the^ me^ be of a certain necessity compelled,
since in the good men a will is to be understand not without grace, and in the
evil men a will is also to be understand without grace, which words of Aug.
may thus be declared. In y^ we receive the good, bileue the word, and keep it
to thend, this proceeds of grace, which prepares our will, which our will
afterward does bileue the word and desires and receives y^ promise offered by
y^ word. On y^ contrary part, in yt the evil men receive not yt is good, nor
bileue the word, yea and if they bileue it, do again forsake it to their
da^nacion, this comes of their frewil in which they stand evil and wicked
persons forsaken of god, who^ god may justly forsake, as it shall be seen unto
him.

An other diffinition of predestination against ye assaults of reason subtelly
disputing in men's consciences upon predestination.
PRedestinacion is a sure election by which god has elected us in hi^ self
before y^ creacion of the world, Another diffinicion.
to thend we might be holy and fautles before him by charity, to make us his
sons through Jesus Christ in him self, according to y^ pleasure of his will.

The probacio^ of this diffinition.
THIS hole diffinitio^ is taken forth of Ephe. i. a
Paul. The person y^ choseth is god. And where as we said in hi^, and before ye
creation of the world, by this we exclude y^ merits of our works, as the
exemple of Jacob and Esau brought in of Paul in his epistle to y^ Romans
declares. The final cause of predestination, Roma. ix.
is yt we might be holy. etc. by Jesus Christ which words also take away
merit. The cause efficient of predestinacion, is the pleasure of gods will.

Now, yt predestination is not our defert, The causes of predestinacyon.
and that of it no cause rests in us against the scholeme^ openly appears by
the open places of scripture, as in the text before remembered of Paul, Ephe. i.
b
according to y^ pleasure of his will. Also in y^ late^ epistle to Timo, ii.
Timoth. i. ^
where he says, which has saved us, and called by an holy vocacion, not
according to our deeds, but according to his own purpose and grace.
Furthermore writing to the Romans, he makes the mercy of god the cause of
election, where he concludes saying. It lies not in man's will or running,
Roma. ix. c
but in the mercy of god. S. Augustyn
To this agrees Aug. saying. Elegit deus quos voluit gratuitami^a. God has
chosen who^ he would of his free mercy. Also in an other place he says:
Predestinatio est divine volu^tatis per gratia^ electio. That is, p^destinacio^
is the election of gods will by grace.

OF predestination there may be.ij. parts. The parts of predestinacion.
The one is called predestination of alligacion, and the other predestination
of co^dicio^, according to the division of Aug. in his book of predestinacio^.
Predestinacion of alligacion.
Alligacion is the necessite of things present, as when a thing is seen to be
present by gods foresyght, yt same must needs be, although it has no necessite
of nature as yt all men be mortal, it is necessary, god so prouydyng.
Predestinacion of condition.
Predestination of condition, is: as if Adam eat of this apple he shall dye. If
Israel shall walk in the way of the lord, and shall keep his commandments, he
shall be saved. If you recyuest the gospel and styckest fast thereunto to y^ end
of thy life, you shall be saved, but if you receyuest it not, you shall be damned.
In this part of predestination we ought to comfort our conscience, when we be
vexed with the judgment of reason, contrary to the universal promise of the
gospel. But of these parts we shalll speak more in the title of co^tinge^cie
or chance, which chance because the ancient fathers of y^ church would not
take away, they seem to have inverted the foresaid parts.

THE principal effect of p^destinatio^ is set forth in scripture to be
justification, which is greatly in y^ matter of p^destinatio^ to be considered,
The effects of predestinacion.
if we covet to save our conscience that it be not stricken down with the throng
of infinite questions. And thus comes p^destinatio^ to be esteemed by his
effect, if we compare it with justification as with the final cause. For god has
chosen us to justify us, to adopte us to his children, and to reward us with the
everlasting kingdom, according to the saying of Paul in his epistle to the
Ephesians. Ephe. i.
Also according to y^ saying of Christ him self in y^ gospel of Mat. where he
says: Come ye blessed children of my father, Math. xxv. f
inherit ye the kingdom p^pared for you from the beginning of y^ world.
Furthermore iustificacio^ is the principal effect or work of the gospel but
the gospel is a universal promise, wherefore by the universal promise must
p^destinatio^ be judged, and if we do so, no occasion shall any more remayn to
vex y^ mind with any perticularite. But to make al things y^ clerer these
arguments following shall be here right necessary to be retained.

The gospel is a universal promise. Ergo iustificacio^ (which is theffect there
An argument.
of) must needs be a universal promise. The former part of my argument called
the antecede^t is plain, for ye gospel is not bound unto circu^stau^ces, yea
and many places of scripture of the universal promise prove ye same, as ye text
of Christ. Come unto me al ye that labor and are laden, Math. xl. d
and I will refresh you. Also the saying of Paul. Deus vultoe^s homines
saluos fieri. i. Timo. ii. a.
God wills al men to be saved. The argument holds from the cause to
theffect. An other argument.

Iustificacion is universal. An other argument.


Ergo p^destinacion also (which is the cause of iustificacio^) is universal.
This iustificacio^, which is y^ work and theffect of p^destinacion has his
sure fou^dacio^ in scripture, where so ever mention is made of the final cause
of our calling as i^ the place above me^cioned of Paul to the Ephesia^s. Ephe.
i. Roma. xv. a i. Corin. i b
Also to the Romans whom he has called, the same he has also justified. Ite^
in the first epistle to the Corinth. God is faithful by whom ye be called in to
the feliship of his son Jesus Christ our lord. These and semblable sentences,
are circumlocucions of iustificacion.

OF iustificacion the work of p^destinacio^ proceed also other effects, as to
be assured yt we please god. To know yt we be the sons of god. To know that
we can not be plucked from Christ, for, who^ god the father has given to his
son, no man can take from him. To know yt we beglorified, according to y^
saying of Paul, who^ he has justified, them also he has glorified. To know yt
we have everlasting life. For to this effect we be justified. To know yt we be
governed and defended of god. These and like effects of predestinacion well
known, it appears that holy scripture speak not in vain of predestination,
Predestina^ion well considered is a great solace and comfort to good men.
either to make us afraid, or to drive us to despair, yea, I dare boldly say,
if predestinacion be with her effects well considered and dryue^ in to the heart,
there is nothing stronger then it to pluck up a ma^s conscience, but
contrarily where predestinacion nakedly without her effects is considered by y^
judgment of reason so there is nothing more ready to destroy the conscience,
then is predestinacion: wherefore when we be vexed about p^destination, it is
our own blame which do not measure it by the word of god, but by reason of man
which reason sithe^s every where it is bli^d in matters of god, why should it
here se any thing?

THE aficie^t father also of y^ church do confirm and ratify the foresaid
effects of predestinacio^. S. Austyne.
S. Aug. in his book Debono perseuerantie, calls the effect of
p^destinacion, the apposition of grace. Also Oigen upon the.viij. chap. to the
Romans has these words, Origene.
he yt is justified, seems therefore to be justified because he is predestinate.

Contrary to p^destinacion. Co^traries to predestination
To grant y^ predestinacio^ is to be judged of reason law, or of our
worthynes. To grant predestinacion to be particular* which error disturbeth
y^ conscience, makes incerteyn y^ promise, ouerwelmeth faith. To deny the
p^destination of co^dicio^. To hold with the scholeme^, yt there is some cause in
us of p^destinacion. To say predestination takes away to^tinge^cie or chance.
To hold because al things chance by p^destinacio^, y^ god therefore is cause
of syn, from which error the grau^tyng of contingencie does deliver us, which
teaches yt man synneth of his frewyl, as hereafter more plainly shall be
declared. The error of Laur. Ualla.
To grant with Ualla and others to be no liberty of will, because of
p^destination. To grant with the scholemen, yt our worthiness and merits be the
cause of p^destinacion unto iustificacion and everlasting life. To grant any
other final effect of p^destinacio^ tha^ iustificacion. To deny with the
Epicuria^s the divine p^destinacio^, The Epicures.
saying, god has no care of his things created, and forsakes them. To
disturb the conscience of man with the supersticious inquiry of p^destinacion.

Of contingencie or chance. CAPI. VI.
COntinge^cie or chance seems at the first face to be wiped away of
p^destinacion. Therefore now let us se how both may be saved. This shall be if
we grant to reasonable cratures some choice and liberty in such things as
be subject to the judgment of reason

Co^tinge^cie therefore is whereby things created in matters subject to reason be
now changed, what contingencie is.
altered and fall i^ to these and those doings and chau^ges, by reason of the
choice and liberty granted the^ of god at their creacion.

We say i^ matters subject to reason lest ye should think all things happen by
chance and co^tingently. The proof hereof.
Of fre choice rereceyued in creation which such things as be creat have in
affairs subject to y^ judgment of reason, doubts no man. For albeit god
makes and keeps things, forseeth and determines things yt happen or
chance, yet he has create and made them reasonable creatures (yt is which be
led with fre will and choice i^ such things as be under the judgment of reason.
Al which things shall be more apparaunt when we shall begin to entreat of
frewil.

THE cause of chance is the fre will which things created take in matters The
cause of chance.
subject to reason, wherefore since nature was ordained with the fra^ke and fre will
of god, the natural also necessity is not merely and symplely necessary, but
for because it was so appointed and ordained. Also in men's affairs and doings
frewil is cause of chance or co^tingencie. Therefore sin comes and has
come of the frewyll of the denyl and of man, as further shall be declared in the
title of sin. And because it is a blasphemyng of god to say god is the causer
and author of sin, therefore contingencie may not be denied, to the intent we
may impute to the devil and to man that thing which blasphemously should
else be imputed and put upon god. Augustyne has a pretye saying where he
says. A saying of Austyne.
Fieri non potest vt per quem a malis surgitur per eu^ in mala decidatur. That
is, it can not be yt by whom we rise from evils, by him we should fall down in
to euyls.

Co^tingencie is not divided proprely in to parts, The pertes of contingentie.
but yet y^ it may be the better understand, the distinction folowi^g is
necessary. Necessite absolute.
Of necessities some be absolute or unchangeable, as it is necessary y^ god is
good, rightous, true, wise etc. And some necessities be not absolute, but
because y^ things to so follow, and this is called the necessity of
consequencie, Necessite of consequence.
as: it is necessary yt Jerusalem be destroyed, it is necessary yt the kingdom
of Israel perish, and such like. These be not of their own nature necessary,
but after yt they be ones determined and appointed so to be, then they must
needs come to pass, or because they follow of some former causes as it is
necessary yt heresies may be, because ye devil hates god and the gospel. These
of their self nature (I say) be not necessary, but co^tinge^t and chaunsing.
For this co^seque^ce or following, takes not away y^ liberty of will.
Mela^chthon in his common places.
But of this matter ye may se more i^ the common places of Philip Melanchthon,
and in his co^mentaryes upon the epistle to the Romans.

BUT forasmoch as Aug. seems to declare these pertes of co^tingencie or
chau^sing, August. que^^ xxiii. capi. iiii.
I think it good to show forth his division, who writes in this wise.

There be two necessities, Necessite simple.
the one simple, as it is a necessity yt al men be mortal. The other of
condition, Necessite of condition.
as if a man know y^ one does walk, it is necessite yt he walks. For yt a
man assuredly knows, it can be none otherwise then he knows. But this
necessity draws not with it yt simple necessity. For this necessity which I
call of condition, is not made of the propre nature. But of the putting to of y^
condition. For no necessity dryueth him y^ walks with his will, to walk,
although then when he walks it is necessary yt he walks. Se^blably if a man
se a thing present through the prouydence of god, the same is of necessity,
albeit it has no necessity of nature. etc.

THE effects or works of co^tinge^cie be in things subject to reason al fre
doings, Theffectes of contingentie*
but yet not without the foreknowlege of god, as to be altered: to be changed: to
do this or yt. Things creat to fall in to this or yt chance, not of an
absosute necessity, but because they be so create and or deyned, which
nevertheless god may at his pleasure otherwise change, alter, and led in to
other doings and actions. But those creatures left to their fre will may altre
the^ self do this or that, and fall in to this or that chance and all this i^
things subject to reason by gods permission, but not by gods impulsio^, as
saint August. says.

Contrary opinions hereunto be. Contraries.
To grant yt there is no chance because of p^destinatio^. To deny chance
because of the loss of liberte, which man fully had before the fall. To say al
things be moved and done of absolute necessity after y^ opinion of the
Stoickes, as the servant of Zeno was wo^t to reason y^ matter with his master,
yt he ought not to be beaten because by desteny he was constrained to sin and
do amys. To grant any chance in god, or in ye nature of god. To grant that
because of liberty which is cause of co^tinge^cie, it lies in our power to
please god, to believe in god, and so forth* although not with sta^dyng a man to
do his devour for y^ word, to desire and receive it after a manner, lies in his
will, according to the saying of Paul. No^ est volentis neque currentis, sed
misere^tis dei. i. it is not in the power of ye willer nor of the runner, but
of god the shewer of mercy, where y^ apostle yet leueth unto us to will and to
run of which thing we shall more copiously entreat in y^ title of fre will. To
set the natural fate or desteny against co^tingencie, and therefore to deny it.
For natural desteny (as says that right excellent man Philip Melanchthon
brings not necessite unto humane affairs or things and it is particular and
only to be understand of astrological desteny.

Of creation. CA. VII.
Creation is a maki^g by which god did creat the spirits and al bodily The
defini^^on of creacio^
nature of naught by the word to p^serue a susteyn the same.

AS in the very beginni^g of Genesis ye read. Probations^
In ye beginni^g created god heaven and earth, yt is al creatures. In ye
begynni^g that is to say what time there were no creatures. Of ye creation of
spirits testifies the prophet, Psalm C. iii. a Ebre. i. b.
saying you make thine angels spirits, and thy ministers ^^a^bes of fire.
Furthermore the spirytes are thought to be the first creatures according to the
saying of Job, he is the beginning of the ways of god. Job. xl.


Now, yt by the word al things were create, the beginning of the gospel of
John^ declares where he says: John^. i. ^.
al things were made by it, and without it nothing was made. Ebre. i. a.
Also in the epistle to the Ebrues, where it is said: by who^ he has also
create the worlds. Psalm. xxx.
The prophet David recorded the same, saying: by y^ word of the lord the
heue^s were fixed, and by the spirit of his mouth all the virtue of the^. And
anon after it follows: he said, and they were made, he commanded, and they
were created. These sayings also prove yt of naught y^ creatures were create
by the word. And by yt they were create of naught is excluded any matter to have been laid before.

The last perte of the diffinitio^, which is to y^ saving and mainteini^g of
their natures, Act. xvii. ^
is proved first by the place i^ the acts where it is said, by hi^ we live, we
move and have our being, yt is, in yt we live and perish not, it comes of y^
benefit of god. Also by the prophet. Psalm. Ciii. d
Oi^a a te expecta^t vedes illis esca^, that is, they wayt al upon the, Psalm.
xxxv.
that you may give them meat i^ due season. Ite^ in an other place, me^ and
beasts thou shall save lord. These textes and other like, teach yt god keeps
and maynteyneth his creatures.

GOD the father is cause of creation, The causes of creation.
because he has creat, and does creat. The word, yt is the son, is the mean
whereby and with who^ al things were create and yet be create, John^. i. a^
Johan witnessynge the same, all things were made by it. The holy ghost is the
halower quyckener of the creation.

Creation (where of we here speak) of it self is not divided in pertes, onles a
man Parts.
according to the diversity of creatures will say ye some creation concerns
spirits some humane creatures and reasonable, other some unreasonable.

THE propre and pryncypall works of creation, Theffectes of creation
be to preserve and maynteyne his creatures, which works I have before
declared.

The mean whereby god maynteyneth is y^ word, by power of which (as to y^ Ebrues
it is said) god y^ father does moderate and bear up al things. Ebru. i. ^
Right excelle^tly and full well we be advertised here of Philip Mela^chthon, yt
other workmen or makers after they have ons finished and made their work,
deperte and betake the same to fortune and to the ensuing chaunses, but god
departs not from the works yt he makes, but perpetually keeps up and
maynteyneth the same, and this keeping up and mayntenau^ce is called y^ general
or universal sustentacion.

Co^traries to creation be. To grant with Symo^ Magus the world was creat of his
angels, Contraries and heresies.
but yt he him self is ye high power, which is god. To grant with Saturninus.
Saturninus
that the word and also man was made of inferior angels. To grant with the
Sethia^s, that two me^, The sethianes
that is to wete, Cayn and Abel, were first create of angels, of whom
afterward the rest of me^ proceeded. Carpocrates
To grant with Carpocrates, that there is one principal virtue in things
superior, and that y^ world was creat of angels. The same thing also taught
Cerinthus. To grant with the Uale^tinia^s that Bythos, Uale^tinians
that is to say depenes and silence were first of all, of who^ came seed,
mind, and troth: of who^ brasted forth the word and life, of whom was creat
man and the church. Cerdon.
To grant with Cerdo^.ij. gods, one good, an other cruel, y^ good maker of y^
upper world and the cruel maker of this world. To grant with Basilides,
Basilides.
that the hye god named Abraxaen, whom he calls a created mind created the
word, of whom afterward proceeded providence, virtue and wisdom, of these
were made afterward principates, potestates and angels and then were made
infinite creatio^s of angels, of which angels were institute and ordained
three.C.lxxv. heuens, and in the lowest heuens be aungelles, which made this
world. To grant with the Manichees five eleme^tes of which all things were
gendred, Manichees.
and these eleme^tes they called by these names, smoke darkness, fire, water,
and wind, in the smoke they held opinion that beestes of two fete were borne,
out of which also they affirm that me^ proceeded. In darkness crepynge beestes.
In the fire, the four foted beasts: in the water the swymmynge creatures: in
the wind fowls that fly. To grant with certain philosophers any matter
aforesaid. Philosophers. Epicurians.
To contend with the Epicuria^s that god cares not for the creatures, which
folish opinion the poet Uirgill is against, Uergill.
setting forth most elega^tly the contrary and right sentence in the.vj book of
Eneis, Principio celum ac tertas camposque liquentes. etc. To hold that the
Gentyles and Heythen persons know not the effects and works of creacyon,
that god preserves, keeps, fedeth, nouryssheth, and bears up all things,
Roma. i. C.
contrary to the apostle where he says, all that might be known of god, the
same is manifest among them, for god did show it unto the^, so that his
i^uisible things, y^ is his ever lasting power and godhed, are understand and
seen by the works even from the creation of the world.

Of creatures. CA. VIII.
A Creature is y^ hole work of god as well of spiritual things create as of
other things and bodily natures made to this purpose of god, to show yt god
is, and not only yt there is god nakedly, but also y^ he is eternal, mighty,
divine, and wonderful, y^ is, which creates, governs and steyeth al things,
by knowledge of which things god yt creator might be glorified, magnified and
worthily thanked.

Probation of this diffinitio^s.
GOD created heaven and earth, Gene. i. ^.
that is to say, al creatures both i^ heaven and earth. Of the creacio^ of
angels witnesses the prophet, Psalm. Ciii. Ebre. i. c.
and also the epistle to the Ebrues: And leest ye should think yt all spirits
were created, I put this word created, for god is also a spirit, but uncreated.
Now the use of creatures and wherefore they serve techeth s. Paul, Roma. i. e
saying y^ god showed unto the world y^ which might be known of him, and is
manifest among the^, so y^ his invisible things, that is to say his eternal
power and godhed are understand and seen by the works sithe^s the crcatio^ of
the world. To this agrees the book of wysdom, where it is said: S^pi. xiii ^
Uayne are al men which have not the knowledge of god, as were they y^ out of
the good things which are seen have not acknowleged him y^ is of him self
everlasting, neither taking head to the works y^ are made, acknowleged not the
worker of them, and so forth read the hole chap. for it sets forth the use
of the crea^ures of god very excellently. But because it is not enough to know
god, therefore we added, that god might thereby be glorified. For thapostle in y^
place before remembered, shows yt the Gentiles knew god, but he accuses the^
that after they had known him, they would not glorify him nor render loui^g
thanks unto him. what is to glorifye god.
Now to glorify god, is to give unto god the glory of a creator and governor,
that is, to think god not to be idle, but to have cure of his creatures. To
give thanks, is steadfastly to think y^ god takes charge of us, y^ we take
life and other good things of his hands, and furthermore to look for helt^
and defense of him. Finaly, the.cxlviij. and cl. psalms of David, do monisshe
us what it is to gloryfy god, and to be tha^^full unto him, after we have
known him by his creatures.

THE causes of the creatures be, The cau^ers of creatures.
god the father, which is the maker. The word whereby and where with they be
creat. Also whereby they be maintained, and the holy ghost the sanctifier and
preserver of the creatures: Eternity, power, divinity, and al other things,
which be appropriate to god, as goodness, wisdom justice, and so forth, declare
yt god both might and yet may creat and defend his creatures.

Creatures according to the diversity and variete of the^ be, The particio^ of
creatures.
some spirits, some reasonable and humane, and other some unreasonable. The
sp^^al or gostly creatures, which be good as be the angels were create to
serve and ministre as well unto god as men, and therefore the epistle to y^
Ebrues calls the^ serving or ministratorious spirits. The rest of creatures
created to the use of man, be al subject to man for his cause which has made
them subject. Roma. i. Gene. i. d. Theffectes of creatures


THE works and effects of creatures be these. To declare there is god y^
creates governs and keeps all things. For if we would feel and search hi^
by his creatures, Roma. i.
we should find him, sithe^s he is not far from every one of us, as Paul most
eloque^tly declares i^ his preachi^g to y^ me^ of Athe^s. Acts. xvii. ^.
To serve for the profit of man, forasmoche as to the use of man all creatures
be creat, but yet only to the use of y^ faithful, i. timot. iiii. a.
according to y^ saying of Paul where he says yt god created the^ to be
received with thanks gyuing of such as bileue and know the truth, for all the
creatures of god are good. etc. But the infidels and wicked without al right do
use y^ creatures of god, or rather abuse the^, To. viii. d.
wherefore also the very creatures do fervently wayt when the sons of god
shall appear, to the intent they may be delivered from the bondage of corruption
in to the glorious liberty of the sons of god. ii. Petri. iii. d
Also s. Peter in his latter epistle says, we look for a new heaven and a new
earth, in who^ remayn rightousnesse. On the contrary part, scripture seems to
threten the ungodly, to be reue^ged of the creatures who^ they have abused,
Sapien. v. e.
as in y^ book of wysdom is said that the gelousy of god shall take harness,
and shall arm the creature to be aue^ged of the enemies. Ecc^. xxxix.
And Jesus the son of Syrach says. All things necessary for the life of man,
are created from the beginning: water, fire, yro^ and sal^, mele whete and
honye, milk and wine, and clothyng. All these thing are created for the best
to the faithful, but to y^ ungodly, shall al these things be turned to their
hurt and harm, Ge^e^^s. i. d.
To be iubiect to the rule of man, according to y^ word of god spoken to Adam
and Eve: Dn^amini proiscibus maris, that is, have ye dominion over y^ fisshes
of the sea. etc. And according to the saying of Paul. Roma. viii. d
The creature is subdued to vanite not willingly, but for his cause which
subdued it under hope. There may be other effects also reckened up of
creatures, as y^ god might be glorified and praised by them, and in the^, which
effects be expressed in the. ii. psalms aforemencioned. cxlviij. and. cl.
Also yt the self creatures might glorifye and praise god. The fathers co^fyrme
these same effects, Austyn upon Johan.
as s. Aug. Of the perpetuite of creatures (says he) is understand y^ creator
and maker to be eternal, of the greatness he is understand almighty, of y^ order
and disposicio^ wife, of his governance good.

Also the same S. Aug. in an other place says. Austin i^ lib. supputacionu^
It is mete y^ the creature should praise god his creator, for to y^ same
purpose he has create him, yt he might be praised, not nedi^g any of our
praise wherefore let the mind love, the tongue sing, the hand write. etc.

Co^traryes Contraryes
to these. To grant yt the hole workma^ship of creatures has always ben, and
began by creation. To deny yt the spirits, as well the good angels as the bad
were create. To deny god may be known by the creatures, and that he does
creat, govern and mainteyn al things. To grant yt the knowledge of god of y^
creatures suffyseth to perfection without the word. To auau^ce the creatures
above the creatoure, as they do which worship saints, gold and silver, Psalm.
Cxii^^ Sapi. xiii. b Baru^. v. a. ^
against whom the prophet very ernestly speaks, and the book of wisdom. Also
the prophet Baruch. To abuse y^ creatures after a ma^s lust unto vanite Not to
gloryfy god by his creatures and in his creatures. Not to attend to the
creatures, to the intent yt out of them y^ may learn the goodness and presence
of god. Not to give thanks to god when y^ do use his creatures. To say with
the Epicuria^s yt god regards not creatures. To graut y^ the study of natural
philosophy, which sta^deh in the knowledge of natural things is hurtful to
christianity, which without doubt is not hurtful, so y^ the same be governed
by y^ doctrine of christianity.

Of Aungelles or good spirits. CA. IX.
Angels or good spirits be serui^g spirits of a fyry nature, creat to y^
ministry of god and of y^ godly, to thinte^t to serve god and to be assistent
to the godly, and to keep them.

Profes of this diffinition.
HE makes his angels spirits and his ministers flames of fire, Ebre. l. ^
yt is to say of a fiery nature. Psalm. c. iii. a.
And the angels be called serving or ministering spirits of their office y^
god uses the^ as ministers, but not but for our cause: gene. xxviii. b
So Jacob flei^g Esau is protected of the angels. Also i^ the book of Exodus
the lord says: behold I send mine au^gel before to keep the in the way, Exo.
xxiii. d.
and to bring the in to the place which I have p^pared, beware of hi^, Iodith.
xiii. c
and hear his voice. Also Judith says: the lord lives, for his au^gel has
kept me. Math. i. ^.
In the gospel of Math thau^gel comforts Joseph against the offense of his
mind concerning the birth of Christ. God also uses the service of angels i^
reue^ging of sinners, an exe^ple of He^ode, whom the au^gel of the lord
strikes. Also in the book of Iosue, Iosue. v. d^
where ye aungel of the lord appears with a naked sword drawn in his hand to
defend Israel. He uses also his angels in other ministeries. Luc. i. c
Acts. vii. e.
The au^gel Gabriel is sent unto Mary. The law (as it is recorded in the acts)
was given by thau^gels. I added in the diffinitio^, to the ministerye of the
godly, to the intent ye should know yt angels were create and made to the use
and service of the good and godly only, and not of others, as witnesses
the.xix. psalm of the prophet, in which psalm god promiset^ aid and defense
by his angels unto such as love his holy word. For that psalm co^teyneth y^
praises and co^mendacio^s of gods word, promising to the byleuers sauetye and
defense by thexemple of Christ from all euyls.

THE causes of good angels be: The causes of Angels
God the father, the father and maker of them. And the word is the mean
whereby and wherewith thaungels were creat. The holy ghost is the quyckener and
sanctifyer. That these fell not as other did, they may thank the mercy of
God. For in that that god forsook them not they were saved and preserved, and
when he forsook the rest and left them to their free will given them at their
creation, they sinned, and so were thrust down in to the helles. By reason
whereof god is not cause of the fall of the wicked spirits, but their own
frewil is in cause, by which they might as easyly have chosen the good as the
bad. Now, god may freely forsake, sithe^s he is fra^ke and fre, to do what his
pleasure is, and no man can ne ought control him, ne prescribe or appoint him
any law. Shall the work (says s. Paul) say unto the workma^, (...)
why have y^ made me on this facion? But of these things how the evil
spyrites fell of their own choice and will, shall be hereafttr more at large
spoken.

GOOD angels be of one order. No denision of Angels
Neither is it to be thought yt there is any p^rogatiue or p^emine^ce among
thau^gels as they have feined, which have divided angels in to Hierarchies
without the open word of god.

THE works or effects of good spirits be these: Theffectes of Angels
To ministre and do service unto god, and to execute his co^miss^ons, as
Nu.xxij. An au^gel is sent of god to stop Balaams ass, Iudi. xiii. a ^^e. i.
c. (...). xxxiii. a.
which commandment he executes. In y^ book of Judges an au^gel is sent to
Sampsons mother for the co^ceyuing of Sa^pson. In the gospel of Luke the au^gel
Gabriel is sent i^ embassade unto the virgyn Marye for Exo. xxxiiii. a.
the co^ceyui^g of Christ. To be protector of the godly, as appears in
thexemple of Jacob. Genesis xxii.
Also in thexe^ple of Moses, to who^ the lord says.
And I will send before the my angel. To comfort and encourage the godly, as i^
thexe^ple of Ge^o^, in thexe^ple of Joseph ye husband of Mary. Iudi. vi. c.
Math. i. d. Dani. iii. c. and vi.
Also in thexe^ple of the.iij. children, Ananias, Misael, and Asarias, which
were put in to a burning oven. To forsee yt the godly be not hurt ne miscary,
by thexe^ple of christ, ps. xc. Also where after he had fasted forty days the
angels ministered unto him. Mat. iiii. ^.
Se^blable effects yet many be gathered of the office of angels: neither do
the fathers and doctors of ye church disse^t from these effects. Hierom upon
s. Math. writes on this wise. Hiero^
The worthiness of souls no doubt, is great, forasmoch as every one has his
au^gel appointed unto him for his keeper eue^ from his nativity.

Bernard in his sermon of angels: Barnard
Let us be, says he, devout, let us be loving and kind to so worthy kepers,
let us love them again. etc.

Origene in his.lxxj. homel. Origin
There is at hand to every one of us, yea eue^ to ye left of us al, which be in
the church of god a good au^gel, the messe^ger of the lord to rule us, to
monish us, to govern us which sees daily the face of the heavenly father for
the amedeme^t of our deeds and obteyning of mercy.

Greg. also says. Gregorle
Every one of us have one peculier and propre aungel appointed to his custody,
and one other evil aungel to his exercise.

Contraries to good spirits.
TO grant with certain heretics that the good angels made this world, is to
this lerning and to our religion contrary. Item to grant and admit
Hierarchies and p^lacies of angels, the.ix. ordres of angels. be not grounded
i^ ^criptur
which they diuid^ beside gods word, in to angels archau^gels, thrones,
dominations, principates potestates, cheruhyn, seraphin, and verrues. Also to
hold yt angels receyue^ not in their creation frewil. S. Hierom de^i^io
prodigo.
Against whom disputes S. Hierom, where he says. Solus deus est in
que^^peccatum cadere non potest, that is: Upon only god sin can not fall. The
rest be of their free choice, and may be bowed in to either parties. To
affirm with the scholasticall men, that the angels deserve now their constancy
and confirmacion, as no more to fall in to syn. To deny y^ angels unto as many
as have y^ word be given to keep and ministre unto the^.

Of evil spirytes o^ Angels. CA. X.
Evil angels be spirits which were first ordained and created in verity
good, which of their free will swarued from the truth to lie in awayt of all the creatures of god by his sufferaunce.

THAT evil angels be spirits is testified every where in scripture. The proof
of the definicio^.
Ebru. i^. which makes his angels spirits and his ministers flames of fire.
For certeynly the devils were first created good angels. Ephe. vi. ^.
Paul also to the Ephe. witnesses the same saying: we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against rule, against power, and against worldly rulers of
ye darkness of this world, against spu^all wickedness for heavenly things.
Christ witnesses the same, saying yt the deuy^ was a ma^queller from the
beginning (yt is to were of his fall) and abode not in the troth: John. viii.
^.
whereby it is apparau^t yt he was set and create in troth good as the rest
were.

Concerning frewil, yt it was the cause of the fall of the evil spirits,
there is no question. For god in the liberty of will created his creatures.

OF the effects and works of devils we be sufficiently taught of Peter where
he says. 1, Petri. v. c.
Be sobre and watch for your adversary the devil as a roaring lyo^ walks about
seeking whom he may devour. This effect is of the persons. Of their awaytes
and sleyghtes against al creatures to hurt the same to the hynderau^ce of man,
we shall need no far fetched proves. For i^ the place a little tofore remembered
of Paul, Ephe. vi. b.
the evil spirits be called rulers of the world, ergo they be also rulers of
such things as be in the world which to destroy, to infect, to falsefy and
make troublesome, yt is to make al in a ^ourly bourly, the devil has power to
thinte^t he may tempt and lie in awayt of me^. How be it these effects of him
self he can not do, but by ye suffrau^ce of god as appears by ye words of
the prophet Micheas, ii. pera. xviii. d.
where he fayneth yt the devil says, I will go forth and be a lyenge spirit in
the mouth of all the prophets, to who^ the lord said: thou shall disceiue and
p^uaile. Job. ii. b.
In likewise i^ the book of Job. God said to the devil. Thou have moved me
against Job, yt I should trouble and vex him. Job. i. b
Also: Lo (says the Lord) he is in thy power, but yet stretche not thy hand
upon his parson.

An other diffinition of the power of the evil spirits.
Evil spirits be rulers powers, lords of the world, guyders of the darkness
of ye world, spu^al mischiefs, subtelties and frauds against heavenly things.
Ephe. vi, ^
I call the^ spiritual mischiefs and subtelt^es, by reason of ye great excess
and abundance of mischief, fraud, subteltie and disceyt yt is in them. And
the deuyls be called spu^al frauds, not only because them selves be such, but
also because they exercise and practice such spiritual engines sleyghtes and
frauds upon others.

THE cause of evil spirits is their frewil, The causers of evil spirits
i^ which at ye begi^ning god created al angels. This frewil because it rather
bowed to evil the^ to good, caused certain spirits first to swerve from ye
troth and rightousnes which were create and made i^ troth good. The learned
fathers of the church assign the cause of thau^gels fall some to pride, some
to envy, which vices be theffectes of the will declined to evil.

THE evil spirits can not be divided in to pertes, No deuysion of deuyls.
or certain ordres, albeit that some of the^ for the accustomablenes and power
of hurting seem to be called princes: Mar. iii. c.
as Beelzebub in ye eua^gel of Mark is named prince of devils.

The effects operacio^s or workinges of the^ be these: To lie in awayt upon
the good and godly persons night and day eue^ as the good angels continually
do keep Theffectes of evil spirits
the godly. And this effect is general, of which those yt follow be
especialties, and in manner means by which the evil spirits lie in await upon
the godly, and stop the wicked that they can not atteyn to godlynes. To lie and
to tempt and entice unto lies, for he is the father of lies, as Christ says:
John^. ii. ^
when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is a liar and
father thereof. So he lied unto our first mother Eve, as appears in Gene.iij.
Also Satan (as it is red acts fyth) tempted Ananias to cause him to lie unto
the holy ghost. To trouble and punish the godly, an exemple of Job and all the
godly. To take away the good sede, which is the word of god, out of the hertes
of men, lest they should bileue be saved. Luc. viii. b
To corrupt and falsefye the word of god with wicked doctrine, as in the
parable of y^ sower of good seed and of the devil which sow among Math.
xiii. d
it darnell. i. pet. v. c ii. Cornth. x.
To allege and cite scriptures crokedly and peruersly, as Math.iiij. where as
ye devil alleged a place out of y^.xc. psalm. To seek busyly who^ to devour.
To transfygure him self in to the aungel of light to the intent to disceyue,
Luc. xxii. ^
that is under the cloak of devotion to stir men to ungodliness. To sift the
godly as me^ sift whete, according to that: Lo Satan has sought you to syft
you as men syft where, but I have prayed for the. To rule and to draw the
wicked at their pleasure to all euyls, Ephe. vi. ^*
according to that of Paul. The devil is strong in the unfaithful. To
replenysh the world with all evils, setting all things in a rore. For this
cause Paul calls evil spirits rulers of the world. To promise and to give
all manner of promocyons, that the world might be kept still in blyndnesse and
wickedness, Math. iiii. ^.
for all the kingdoms of the world and glory of the same the devil bosteth
to be in his power, according to this: All these things I will give the, if
thou wylt fall down and worship me. Now he that will give, he shows yt he
has to give. To confirm ye ungodly i^ their ungodliness with singnes and wonders
which he shows by his subjects and lymmes the false prophets, as appears.
Mat.xxiiij. And by enchau^ters, as in Exo. the.iiij. and.v. chap. is declared,
wherefore also it is not impossible yt the devil may by art magyk work many
things. For if wytchecraftes, sorceryes and enchau^tmentes were not made, or
could not be done, Moses would not have forbidden the^. Neither is it any
hard thing to enchau^ters to make their works of effi^cacie and strength, since
Satan (as says Paul) is strong in the unfaithful, which where as he
utters in the false prophets signs and wonders. Why is not he of power to
do the same in iugglers co^iurers, sothsayers, enchau^ters, and such like. i.
regum. 28. b.
It is red in scripture, how a woman yt was an enchau^tres, raised up the
spirit of Samuel by her wytchcraft, or rather the devil in the likeness of
Samuel, to enfect and disturb the creatures for the hatred and envy of man,
therefore he is the lord of the universal world, and therefore he has in his
power al things of the world. But as I said these effects of evil spirits
be not of force unless god suffers the^. But why god suffers Satan to have
so great power the causes be known to god, which nevertheless be also in
seriptures in sundry places disclosed. Remedies against the effects of evil
spirits unto ye godly p^scribeth the apostle to the Ephesians. the sixth chap. Also
Peter in his first epistle cap. v. The world, because it neither regards nor
has these remedies, therefore it can not resist these soresaid effects.

The minds of the fathers concerning the effects of evil spirits.
AVG. says: Austyne in sermonibus.
all the evils of ye world be committed by the falsehod of the devil which has
set war in heaven, in paradise disceit, hatred among our first brethren and in all our warkes has sowe^ darnels. Grego. Gregor. lib. ii. moralium.
writes. The will of Satan is always wicked, but his power is never vnrightous,
for of him self he has his will, but his power he has of god. I thought it
good also to add the saying of Lacta^tius, Lacta^cius.li.v. diu^^usti.
which writes i^ this wise. There is a certain wicked and disceytful spirit,
which is the enemy of man, and foo of justice, this spirit lies in away of
all mankind. And those y^ know not god, he entangleth in errou^ in folly
drowneth, in darkness ouershadoweth. etc.

The contraries of evil spirits.
TO grant the evil spirits were crea^ in malice as they be now, against which
heresye disputed s. Aug. very lernedly. Aust. sup. genesis
To hold yt the evil spirits are not to be blamed yt they fell, because they
could none otherwise do without grace. To hold yt the wicked spirits did fall,
not of their own propre will, but at the enforcement of god. A folyshe opinion.
Zo make orders among ye evil spirits. To drive the evil spirits or their
habitacion to Island or to ye further borders of Norwey, about which certain
trifelers hold opinion yt the sou^es of great men fleing to helward, be herd
weping and lame^ting, which opinion seems to have proceeded by th^ccasio^ of
certain hills, which in those parties oftentimes do cast forth brymstone and
otherwhiles flakes of fire. To dispute supersticiously of the habitacion of
evil spirits, or not by the word of god, ii. pe. ii. ^
which calls it Tatarus or hell, according to ye of s. Peter. For if god
spared not the angels y^ finned, but cast the^ down in to Tartare or hell,
and delivered the^ to chains of darkness to be kept unto judgment. etc. To
affirm of troth yt there be certain p^lacies and preemine^cies among the
evil spirits, so yt one should rule in one province, an other in one man, the
third in two or.iij. To hold for an undoubted troth yt those evil spirits
which ons be vaynquisshed of any of ye sai^tes do no more approach to him y^
has overcome the^. To grant yt no mo men in no^bre shall be saved, the^ as
many as there were angels ye did perysshe, of which error some accuse Austin.
To grant yt the evil spirits shall in time coming be saved, which is Origens
error, and at this day is renewed of the Anabaptists by auctorite of the cii.
psalm, where it is red. The lord will not keep his anger for ever. To deny yt
the evil spirits do together lie i^ a wayt of all the creatures of god. To deny
ye withcraft is of any strength by y^ power of the de^yll.

Of man. CA. XI.
MAN after angels is of al creatures most noble, The description of man.
created i^ fre will to thymage of god, yt is to wete, partaker of the divine
nature, wise, just, good, true, and so forth, which by sinning of his fre will
again lost all those things, made of a pertaker of ye godly nature, pertaker
of the deuellish nature, of wise unwise, of rightous vnrightous, of good evil,
of true a lier, and to be short such as utterly understands no more i^
things apperteini^g to god, so yt now man is the creature, yea the very
bondma^ of y^ devil, who through gods suffra^ce or for saki^g inforceth him at
his lust to what evils he will, and also continues such a bondma^ and thral,
unless he be delivered by Christ, in whom the ryghtousnesse lost returns
again to our health and salvation.

MAN is ye noblest creature after angels, The proves.
for yt he is endowed with reason. That man was creat in frewil can not be
denied, as shall appear i^ yt place of frewil. To the image of god yt man was
create is witnessed in the book of Genesis Genesis i. d
And yt by y^ image of god is signified the nature of god, yt is to wete,
rightousnes, goodness, wisdom, troth and such like y^ place of Paul to the
Collos. Collo. iii. b.
declares. Lie not (says s. Paul) one to an other, now yt ye have put of the
old man with his works and have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge
after y^ image of him yt made him. And to this sense Ambrose and Ireneus do
interp^te image. But again, y^ man by sinning of his own fre will, lost again
the image of god is sufficiently declared by the.xlviij. psalm of David where
it is said. Psalm. 48. ^
when man was i^ honor, he understood not he was made like to a brute be,
as who should say man in y^ stead of the nature of god was made pertaker of y^
devils nature, i^stede of rightous vnrightous, which of him self understands
nothing any more i^ spiritul things, according to the saying of Paul. A
natural witted man perceives not such things as belong to ye spirit. The
prophet calls honor ye very image of god, whereunto man was created, and all
those good things which be appropred to y^ nature of god. He calls him a
brute be now y^ he is spoiled of y^ image of god and of al those good
things apperteini^g to y^ nature of god. That man is ye thrall of the devil
s. John^ shows where he says: he yt commits syn is the servant of Satan,
which is the father and author of syn. Also thapostle says. The devil is
strong in the unfaithful, that is in natural men, and undoubtedly such be al
men which be not yet borne again neither enfrau^chesed by Christ. The devil
draws me^ as his own propre slaves unto al manner of noughtines yt him lusts
not only perforce and violently, but as his own propre loving children which do
study and endeavor the^ self to obey the desires of their father, as
witnesses Christ him self, saying. John^. viii. ^
Ye be of your father the devil, and ye will obey the desires of your father.
The rest be apparau^t enough by the words of Paul to the Romans which says:
Roma. v. d.
Likewise as by the syn of one, co^demnatio^ came on all men, eue^ so by the
justifying of one, comes ye rightousnesse yt brings life upon al me^.
Finally I added this clause (to our health) in the diffinition, to disprove
thopinion of the Anabaptists, which say, yt by Christ me^ have so recovered
the ryghtousnes yt was lost, that they now may of them selves satisfy y^ law
for their syn, with a perfyte rightousnesse.

THE causer of man is god which created hi^ of the mould of ye earth. Gene. i.
The cause of man. The parts of man.


MAN by reason of ye fall of our fore father Ada^, is divided after the lerning
of christ me^, in to y^ old man and the new. There is also an other division
of the hole man right necessary where scripture perteth hi^ in to the spirit,
the soul and the body. The spirit is which speaks to god, which catches
the word of god and faith. The soul is whereby we live, and by which our body
is quickened. The body is y^ outward and hole lomp of me^bres. Of this perticion
makes me^cio^ thapostle to the Thessal. saying. i. thessa. v. d
The very god of peax sa^ctify you holly, and your hole spirit, soul and body
be kept taulties unto the coming of our lord Jesus Christ.

Of the old man. CA. XII.
THE old man is yt hole fleshly man by y^ fall of Adam lost and damned before
y^ knowledge of y^ gospel or of Christ, and before regeneration made by y^ word
through tholy ghost, which old man is daily corrupted, according to the
concupyscences of error unto all noughtynes.

The probatio^ of this diffinitio^.
FORASMOCH as y^ scripture byddeth us put on a new man, which according to
thymage and likeness of god must be created in ryghtousnesse, holiness and
truth. And also wylleth us to be renewed by tholy ghost which thing can not
be done, Ephesians. iiii. ^ Collo. iii. ^
but by the word and faith in Christ, which afterward grau^teth the holy
ghost. Therefore of necessity there is an old man, neither ca^ he be made new
but by ye word known of Christ and by faith in Christ, in who^ is restored
the loss and da^natio^ of y^ old man. R. v. d
The corruption according to the co^cupisce^ce of error is the general effect
of the old man put sithe^s the fall in ma^s nature, which declares yt the old
man can do none other thing then lust after errors and all evils. By theffect
of co^cupisce^ce or lust is marked and signified the vice that cleueth in
nature, Gene, vi. ^.
for the hole thought of man is bent unto evil at all times.

THE cause of y^ old man is Satan, causes of the old man
by whose persuasion and entiseme^t ye first man was made old, and al we were
in hi^ made old, as testifies s. Paul in the.v. chap. to the Romans This Satan
rules and leads the old man as his own propre thral and captive unto al
evils. Wherefore also we pray that the kingdom of god may come unto us and that
we may be delivered from the raygne or tyranny rather of the devil, in which
all old me^ be subject under the tyrant Satan. The cause also of the old
man, is the free will of man, by which the first man ran hedlynge in to
sin whereof all we be made pertakers yea although we have not sinned to the
similitude of the trangression of Adam, so that now no free will in manner
remains unto us to take and do such things as be good and spiritual the
devil so holds captyue our nature and inforceth us to sun dry sins yea
and such as be outward and notoryous crimes. Of which thing also thapostle
co^playneth where he says. Evil that I will not do, but good that I would do,
that I do not. Roma. vii. ^


The parts.
When we speak of the old man we understand not certain parts only of man
as some which by the name of old man understand only the oldnes of flesh. But
the old man signifies here y^ hole natural man and all the natural powers of
man. So scripture takes the old man and so uses Paul the name of old man, as
to y^ Corinchia^s where he says. The natural witted man receive not things of
the spirit. This man scripture otherwhiles calls the outward man other
whiles the erthely otherwhyles y^ old man.

THE effects of y^ old man be of two sorts. The effects of thold man
Some do spring of the corrupt nature according to the inward lusts and these
be inward effects. Other some be the fruits of the inward effecttes of y^
old man, and these be the outward. For he that has a wicked heart can not
want outward sins. For where the causes be there must needs follow the
effects. Now, Ephesians. 4, d and ^
the inward effects of the old man be these. To be corrupted according to
the concupiscence of error. This effect is general or the cause of the test
ensuing. And this effect sticks in nature. Naturally to be ignorant of god.
Not to fear god, To despise god. Not to trust in god. To hate the judgment of
god. To flee the rightful judgment of god. To be angry with god. To despair
of grace. To have confidence in things present. To have a crooked heart and
bent to myschiefes. genesis vi. and. viii. To have a crooked and unsearchable heart
as witnesses the prophet Hieremy saying Hieremi. 27.
Crooked is the heart of man and who shall search it? 1. Corith. 2 d
Not to perceive the things that be of the spieite of god according to Paul's
saying. The natural man perceyueth not those things that be of the spirit
of god. To sauer of erthlye things according to that of S. Paul The first man
of earth, erthlye. These effects stick in the heart of man naturally. The
outward effects of the old man be the outward works or fruits of the
corrupt nature and wicked mind. A rablement of them Paul heapeth up in y^
first chap. to y^ Romans, after he ones had rebuked them for their ungodliness
be gathers the fruits of ungodliness as these, unrighteousness, horedome,
adultetie, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes, envy and so forth.

Of the new man.
THe new man is whom the holy ghost rege^oreth by the word and faith unto
trghtousnes holiness and truth.

Probacions of this diffinicion.
The holy ghost to be a regeneratour witnessith Paul, sayi^g. Tit. 3. ^
But according to his mercy he has saved us by ye has of regeneracio^ and
renewing of tholy ghost. The word is ye mean whereby tholy ghost renueth. For then
we be renewed and regenerate when we here y^ word, so of y^ word spri^geth
faith, by faith we take hold of Christ y^ reparer of ye true ryghtousnes
which gives tholy ghost, he burns up i^ us ye old vices of ye old man, as
these, ye ignorance of god, ye dispising of god, ye distrust of god, and
semblable, and creates in us new mocions, as the knowledge of god, awe of god,
trust in god, and so ^orth. Such virtues or good works the apostle names the
fruits of the spirit, Galle. 5. a
by reason of tholy ghost or spirit the worker of them. An all these trutes be
comprised of the said apostle under these three names, rightousnes, Ephe. 4. ^.
holiness, and troth. For unto these virtues we be regenerate yt we might
receive in Christ the lost rightousnes, and might work holy and true works,
and not hipocriti call or feyned.

THE cause of the new man is tholye ghost as affirms Paul, The cause of the
new man
which says yt by ye renewing of tholy ghost we were saved. etc. The means of
regeneracion the scripture puts to be the word and faith, Tit. z. ^
y^ word as cause, and faith as theffecte, For faith (says Paul) is by
heari^g, Roma. 10 d
beari^g, by ye word of god. Baptime is a sign of y^ inward renewing, and of
gods will toward us y^ we be new men. Of these causes properly speaks the
gospel, in which the holy ghost is promised / faith required and baptism e
instituted.

EVEN as the old man signifies ye hole man, so also the new man is taken for
him that is holy regenerate and renewed. Parts.
But how this thing is done we shall bear after declare in the effects.

Theffectes of the new man be gathered by the contrary of the effects of the
old man. Theffectes of the new man
as: To know god. To magnifye god. To love god. To trust in god. To put y^ hole
trust and hope in god, Furthermore as the effects of the old man be of two
sorts, so also be ye effects of the new man of two sorts that is to wete,
inward effects which be of the mind, and outward, which be of outward good
works, Now, ye effects of ye new men differ from the effects of hipocrites.
countertayting regeneracion or renewing in asmoch as they be truly done and of
a pure heart as Paul writeh to Timothe, 1. timoth. 1. b
where he says. The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart
and good conscience and faith not feigned. For this cause also the works of new
men be called the fruits of the spirit, both because that the spirit works
them, and because they be done spiritually, that is to say, truly with a
willing and conse^ting mind. And heap of works of a new man thou shall find
in the epistle of Paul to the Galathia^s the.v. chapter. Howbeit the foresaid
effects do not so return again by regeneracion or new birth which is made by
y^ holy ghost but yt they always remain entangled with a wonderful weakness
which new birth nevertheless being thus impe^^te and weak god takes in good
part in such persons as be received in Christ acordinge to the sainge of
Paul There is no condempnacion now unto Roma. viii. a.
them which walk in Christ, Also, ye be not under the law, but under grace,
that is to say, albeit yt fulfill not the law, yet it accuses not you because
ye be the sons of god.

Contraryes to the hole man.
Contearyes to this right doctrine concerning man be these: To grant with
certain heretics that man always has been, Thopino^ of the anabaptists
and yt he was not created. To grant with the Anabaptists, that man did not
utterly in the fall lose the nature of god but only that it was darkened, like
as the flame of fire is wont to lie hide in ye ashes, or as silver i8 hid in
the drosses. But that in Christ it is come again with such persecucion that a
man may now allege and plede his rightousnes against the wrath of god for
sins. To affirm with Saturninus that man was create of angels. To grant
that the old man can do ought of him self in things of god. To hold that
tholde man can work any good thing that ca^ please god contrary to the
saying of Paul. What so ever is not of faith, is sin. To deny that the old
man is y^ servant and slave of Satan against that place. The devil works
in the unfaithful. To say that the flesh only of man now after the fall
understands not god, trusts not to god, and so forth. but the soul or
mind of it self may, although it be not born a new. To hold that a man may
be borne again new without preaching of the word, without faith, and without
tholy ghost. To grant that the new man received in Christ a part of
rightousnes, yt is to wete, a general rightousnes, but that he may be saved,
he needs olso a special rightousnes which is gotten by good works. To
grant that the new man receives such a free choice and election in the
renewing, that of his free and frank will be may satisfy the law concerning
rightousnes which may suffice before god.

Of free will. CA. xiii.
FRe will, by the way of teachi^g, A division of fre will
may be thus divided into fre will before the fall or free will profit, and into
fre will after the fall or impertite. And this also is of two sorts, y^ one in
spiritual things, the other in outward things subject to reason.

Of free will before the fall.
Fre will before y^ fall was a full liberte to inbrase as well good things as badde
to keep the commandments of god as not to keep the^, at his frank and free
will given in creacion of God.

This hole diffinicion is set forth in Eccles. Probations of this diffinition.
the.xv. chapter. where it is written in this wise.

God made man at the beginning and left him in the hand of his counsel he
gave him his commandments and precepts, If thou will observe the
commandments and keep acceptable faithfulness for ever, they shall preserve
the, he has set water and fire before the, reach out thy hand unto which thou
will. Before man is life and death, good and evil look what him likes shall be
given him. These words were spoken of y^ author of the same book of Jesus y^
son of Syrach of the liberty of man which indifferently and a like freely
might embrace good and evil, neither was it any marvel, sithe^s he was the
image of god and partaker of the nature of god. And undoubtedly such was that
liberty before the fall of man, as yet at this day the holy angels have.
But after that the ^mage of god was lost and the partaki^g of the godly nature
because of sin then was the lybertye of imbrasing good spituall things taken
away according to y^ foresaid sainge of Paul. The natural man perceyueth not
such things as be o^ the spirit. Yea and in outward things the lybertye is
corrupted for not so much as in them the will is so free but that it may be
let of the devil.

The causes of free will before the fall.
THE cause of this fre will is god y^ cretoure which in creation gave y^
liberty of (...) to his creatoures. The instrument or means of exercisinge
this lybertye be reason and will. Reason judges, y^ will obeys or repugneth
to y^ judgment or reason and rules the lower powers, y^ lower powers be the
senses and the appetites of ye senses or affection. Wherefore free will is
defined of the philosophers to be the will joined with reason. The scoleme^
The master in the sentencies and the rest of schole men setting aside reason
do gather fre choice or fre will only of the will whereas they write that free
will is called as touchi^g the will because voluntary it may be moved and with
a willing appetite carried to such things as it judges or will judge good or
evil. Now, upon ye permissio^ of reason and will as ye causes or fre will, it is
apaparau^t yt the fall of Ada^ chanced not of any necessity. For where
necessity is, there is not liberty. But where is not lybertye, there can
neither be will, wherefore unto the will of man sin is rightly imputed because
of ye presence of liberti in which man at his creacio^ lived. ^o perticion.


This free choice in creatures of chosing good and evil, is not divided. In god
is frewil but not as was in man. For god by his frewil can not be bowed unto
euylles, for asmoch as he can not put of his nature.

Theffectes of free will before the fall were these. Theffectes of fre will.
before the fall
To have power to love god and to hate him. To trust in god and not to trust.
To keep the commandment of god and not to keep. To enbrace god and not to
e^brace. To receive evil and not to receive and such like. These effects are
so to be understand y^ they might have proceeded of y^ frank lybertye no
necessite co^pelling to the same. And these effects be of free will, because
they might have proceeded of free will which might have been bowed, indifferently
as well to good as to evil. Wherefore Adam by that lybertye might have done both
well and evil. So also unto thaungelles by that lybertye it was granted both
to receive evil and not to receive, which when they took evil they fell.

Of free will or choice after the fall.
FRE choice after the fall in spiritual things is nothing else but a will
desiring good or spiritual things, which yet can not atteyn ne bring to
pass, unless the holy ghost comes and helps our will and endeavors. As
perteyuyng to outward things fre choice is a will, in a manner of efficacy and
strength of outward things without the renuynge of the spirit, which
notwithstanding may be let of the devil.

The proves of this diffinicion.
THIS diffinicio^ is sufficiently proved by Paul, where he says. Roma. vii. d
The thing that I allow not, and that I will not, I do, and that I hate, I do,
Here thou ^eest a certain desire, will, endeavor and study of good, Also
thou see that the effects which ought to be done do not answer to the
will of desire endeavor and study. And in an other place the said Paul says.
Roma. i^.
It is not of y^ ^u^ner nor of y^ willer but of god y^ hauer of mercy. Here
thapostle yet leueth unto our will, to run and to will, Prouet. 16. b
and yet he ascrybeth all things to the mercy of god. Solomon in his
proverbs does attribute to the heart of man the thynking of his way, and
forthwith he adds Et dominus di^igit gressus suos. The lord directs his
goynges. Ye will ask then what is left unto our free will i^ things
spiritual? I answer in few words: A certain desire of things or goods
spiritual, a will, an atte^ptate, a study, a ru^nyng, a thi^kyng, all which
nevertheless be nothing neither to at tayne thy desire, neither to perform
the same. Therefore the apostle always praeth for the churches, to which he
writes that god will perform the good that he has begone in them, as to the
Philippi. cap. i. knowing this thing certeynly, that be which has begone in
you a good work, shall perform the same. It is therefore to be thought
universally that our desire and endeavors unto spiritual goods can do nothing
onles first the holy ghost approaches and helps our desire and longinges,
which helped so, they shall ensue those effects i^ receyuyng and perfourmi^g
ye said spiritual things. Roma. ^. ^
For as Pau. says, they which be led with y^ spirit of god, be ye sons of
god that is to say, they yt have tholye ghost may perform yt thing which
besemeth sons to do. Now, it besemeth the sons of god with joy to receive and
execute the commandments of their father. Ite^ where y^ spirit of yt lord
is, there is liberty, yt is, there is truly done the will of god, there our
endeavors be truly made free, where tholy ghost is helper, which is called y^
spirit of y^ lord, forasmoch as our lord Christ gives him, and without Christ
he is not resident, for who so has not Christ, ye same can not have tholi
ghost, And co^trarili who has not tholy ghost y^ same is none of Christ's man.
Now to be Christ's man. is nothing else, but to receive his word, and believe hi^
which to do, you have need of tholy ghost to give the light to y^ word, ye
works faith. Howbeit, although by tholy ghost our desire is made effectual,
for ye receyuyng and performyng of things spiritual, yet it is not so
effectual and free, that such works as be done by the same, ca^ be pleded for
true ryghtwysnes, against y^ ire of god. Wherefore our will yt was lost does so
return effctuall by tholy ghost unto spiritual things to be done and
performed that yet we be justified in Christ yea in that is our will made
effectual by tholy ghost, yt we may receive ye word of Christ, to thin^e^^ we
might be justified by him, and not to the intent that by our effectual will we
might ouerwelme the ryghtwysnes of Christ, in whose place who so ever does
substytute and set his own justice, has neither tholy ghost, nor a will of
any strength, For the holy ghost does therefore help our will and endeavor,
that we might receive Christ, and that by him, our will might remain
effectual, the holy ghost workynge together with us, which first helps our
endeavors and makes ye same of efficacy. whereby we may receive Christ and
afterward given unto us of Christ keeps our will mighty unto all good things
to be retained and done.

AS touching fre will i^ outward things there is no doubt. For so long as reason
and will abide i^ me^ (which shall abide so long as me^ be me^) fre will shall not
cease i^ outward things to be done of me^ but so yet while it be granted of
reason and will as unto causes to work. For ye devil may let those causes i^
their cou^s which being ^etted ye outward actions ca^ not follow. Parts of fre
will after the fall.


FRE choice after ye fall is divided into fre will in things spirytual and i^to
fre will in things outward. Fre will i^ things spiritual wat it is and wat it
can do I have declared before. Fre will in things outward is truly fre, so it
be not let of ye devil and to this is not required tholy ghost or any
renuau^ce by tholy ghost.

THE cause of frewyll in things spiritual The cause of fre will
either to be accepted or performed is the holy ghost wose office is to give
light unto ye beleuyng of ye word, so in ye word believed is found Christ for
wose sake tholy ghost makes our endeavors frank. Also tholy ghost keeps ^yl
the same in force to y^ performau^ce of good things. The cause of our desire
and endeavors in things spiritual be, reso^ and will, reason judges by ye law
of nature (after a manner) of things sptrytuall. The will obeys but to no
effect accordying ^o the saying of Paul, that which I allow and would I do
not, and that I hate I do, Of fre will in outewarde things the causes be
reason and will which both twain the devil may let so yt thou shall not
allow those things which thy reso^ aloweth nor will those things yt be allowed
of reason. Albeit in y^ mean season the judgment accusyng thy conscience
remains and g^aweth y^ same continually. Now if the in ward causes be let,
it is not possible that the outward effects can follow. also it may be that
thou alowest things allowed of reason and also ye wol^est the same yet ye
devil may let the outward effects, as every man in him self has experyenc
daily hereof, and thexemples of very good and godly men teach also the same,
which purpose one thing and do an other, Now free will in outward things may be
effectual without the holy ghost or renuaunce made by the holy ghost.

Theffectes of free will after the fall in things spiritual may be recounted
these. Theffectes of fre will. after the fall.
To will good or spiritual things To. vij. That I do I allow not, and that I
would not yt I do. Prouerb^. 16.
To think to do good. To endeavor, to will, to tu^ne for things good or
spiritual, Rom^, ix. To take hold after a manner of the promise after a manner
to do ye outward works of y^ law, these effects must always so be
understand. if they be not let of the devil, and without doubt these
effects be nothing without the holy ghost which approchynge near does
lyghten y^ heart to believe, does quycke^ our endeavors to believe hertely in
god, hertely to serve god hertely to love god, nevertheless all these things
we do so. that yet always they be covered with some infirmity, which god gladly
winketh at because of his Christ the restorer of our lost justice.

Theffectes of fre will after the fall in outward things be these: Theffectes
of fre choice after the fa^^^
To eat, not to eat. To sleep, not to sleep, To drink not to drink. To
cloth him self with this or that garment. To do this or that or not to do the
same, and such like. These effects although they seem to be of the most
frank fre will (as they be in deed) yet this fre will is imperfite and bond
and which may be let of the devil by the sufferaunce of god, as manyfestly
we have declared heretofore.

Contraryes to free will in a generality be these. Contrarye^ to fre will
generally.
To deny that man was creat in fre will. To deny reason and will to be as
means and instruments whereby free will was exercyced before the fall and yet
is exercysed in things subject to reason. To grant that God has such a
free choice as man had before the fall, by which Adam might inclyne both to
good, and evil. To deny that man had such a fre will as yet the holy angels
have. To grant with the Mantchees, that orygynall sin is not imputable to
the free will of man. To saye^ man is inclyned to evil, not of his free will,
but of necessity constrayning to the same. These persons understand not what
is liberty, for if it were enforced of necessity it were no lyberty, wherefore
either we must believe that man embraced evil of fre will, or we must deny the
lyberty in which man was create. But S. Augustyne says. August in Enchiridion.
Homo male vtens liber^ arbitito et se perdit et ip^m quia peeditum est per
peccatu^, non a necessitate, sed a peccato, qui enim facit peccatum, seruus est
peccati. That is to say man by evil vsinge of fre will lost both him self and
it, for it was lost through sin, not of necessity, but of sin, for he that
commits sin, is the servant of sin. ^au. vall^.
To grant with Ualla and other that there is no lybertye of man by cause all
things be done by gods ordinance. In this error Ualla considered not that
the creatures were ereate reasonable, which be led with choice or election in
such things and affairs as be subject to the judgment of reason. To grant
with certain to much spiritual persons, ^imium spirituales
that there is no desire good will attemptace he study in us for good things
or spiritual. This error we have sufficiently debated before. To grant
with the Pelagians that man of his fre Pelagian^
will may keep all the commandments of god yea and without grace also.
Against whom disputes at large saint Augustine. Scole men.
To grant with the schole men that albeit free will is helped of y^ holy
ghost or of grace yet it is in our free will to deserve rightousnes. But grace
in this place is taken not only for the aid of the holy ghost but for ye self
fre imputacion and acceptaunce of rightousnes. To grant with the Annabaptistes
Anabaptists
that after the death of Christ returned fully unto all men a like, such free
will as was lost so that now it is in our powers as easily as before to embrace
good an evil. To meynteyn and dyspute after this wise. God has no commanded
things impossible, Ergo it is in our power to keep the commandments of god.
To grant that our will is of strength without the holy ghost in things
spiritual against which error Saint Augustine disputes in this wise For Adam
to go into sin sufficed free will by which bespotted him self.

But that he may be strong unto rightousnes he needs a Phision for he that
is not sound, needs a quyckener because he is deed. etc. To grant that fre
will is other wise helped of the holy ghost than be lighteninge to believe the
gospel or Christ for whose only sake y^ holy ghost helps our endeavors. To
deny free will in outward things. To reason thus we have fre will in outward
things without the renuaunce of the holy ghost, Ergo in things spiritual
also. To grant that God requires no more of us but our endeavors and our
own powers. To deny that our endeavors as well in things spiritual as outward
may be let of the devil.

Of sin. CA. XV.
Sin is a perpetual vice sticking in nature against the law of god which
utters it self now and then among with outward word and deed and y^
necessaryly.

Proves of this diffinicion.
THE thoughts of ma^s heart is evil Genesis viii. d
from his chyldehode. Also Jeremy says. Crooked is the heart of man and
unsearchable. The prophet also says. Psalm. xiii. a. Psalm. c. xv. a
There is none that does good. And in an other place. Every man is a liar. Paul
to the Romans witnesses the same saying goodness dwells not i^ my flesh:
Roma. vii. d.
where he shows also that this vice wrestleth with the law of god and
therefore he adds. The law delyteth me according to the inward man but I se
an other law in my me^bres rebellynge against y^ law of my mind. etc. Outward
sayings and factes be the fruits of that vice that sticks in nature, which
fruits never fail whersoeuer inward ungodliness is at hand which thing
clearly appears of thordre of Paul's chidinge to y^ Romans the first
chapter, where first of al, thapostle treats of the wickedness of heart which
he rebuked in the ge^tyles and afterward sets forth the effects of
wickedness even the very outward vices, saying: wherefore god has given them up
into lusts of reproach.

Causes of sin.
The devil is cause of sin by whose impulsion the first parent Ada^ was
entised John^. viii. ^
to sin. And Christ him self calls Satan the father of lies that is to say
which ge^dreth and works lies in men. The cause also of sin is the choice
of the first man by which he assented to the devil, prouokinge him to the
same. And forasmoch as in man's thoughts and affairs his will is yet fre,
therefore sins do proceed and have proceeded of y^ fra^ke will of man but
hereof more copyously we have disputed in the tytles of predestinacion and
contingency.

Sin is one, Parts.
even the sin of birth (which they call original syn) cleuinge in the nature
of man, the fruits whereof be all thoughts, words and deeds against the law
of god. The fathers of the church divide sin (for the playnenesse Diuison.
of teachinge) into sin orygynall and sin actual. To these may be added
the third, the sin against the holy ghost.

Of orygynall sin.
Sin original is a corrupcion of nature of man, which causes that me^ he
borne y^ children of wrath and sinners in so much that they can not truly
obey the law of god nor be without sin.

Proves of this diffinition.
We were of nature the children of ire. Ephe. ii.
Also psalm. 50. Lo I was conceived in wickedness. Gene. vi. a
Itm^. The thought of man's heart is evil from his chyldhode. More auctorytyes
of scripture thou shalt find before in the diffinition of the general sin.
The residue of the diffinion is declared by the words of Paul, where he says.
Roma. vii. d ^. John^. i.
I find an other law in my me^bres. Also John^ in his epistle saying. If we
say we have not syn, we make him a liar. Now how can man be without sin,
since of nature he is both a sinner and also conceived in syn we added,
truly to obey, to note ye diversity between true obedience and rayned. The
true obedience by reason of corrupcion of nature is taken from us, but the
feigned or imperfyte obedyence is after some manner i^ our powers. Hereunto
appertain such places of scripture as disseuer ye true obedience of Gods law
from y^ feyned. Also y^ true worship of god from ye hipocritical as be these,
thou shall love thy lord god Deuteronomy. vi. b*
with al thy hole heart* also in an other place put these my words in your
hertes and minds. Moreover the Lord in deutero, takes away from men the
understanding of the law and true obedience. For he says who can give that
they ca^ have Deuteronomy. v.
such a mind that they may fear me and keep my commandments. Esaias. xxix.
Also by the prophet Esaias he says. This people approaches to me with their
mouth but their heart is far fro me. etc. Where he discerns the false
obedience and worship which colourably is done and the true obedience and
worship which ought to be done. Saint Paul also requires unto the true
obedience of Gods law far greater things then be in our powers, where he
says. The end of the commandment is charity of a ^^ Timoth. i.
pure heart and good conscience and faith unfeigned. Of which end of the law who
ca^ glory beside Christ, which alone was appointed of god t^ this true
obedience of the law as witnesses him self of his office in this behalf.
Mat. v. I came not to lose the law but to fullfyll it, wherefore forasmoch as
so great obedience toward the law of god is required we may justly and well
confess yt we can not be without sin.

The diffinition of original sin by doctors.
Augustine defyneth orygynall syn to be concupiscence, S. Augustyn
which have succeeded in place of rightousnes yt was lost. Other whiles
diffininge it in a general itie, he compriseth the inward corrupcion as cause
with the outward sins as effects, and says, that sin is that which is
spoken, done or coueted against the law of God.

Thomas says originanal sin is an hauour Thomas the scole man.
of the sick nature, that is (as he him self expouneth) an in ordinate
disposicio^ of y^ harmony of original justice. Hugo diffineth it to be the
ignorance in mind and just in flesh. Hugo.


The cause of original sin, Causes of original sy^.
is Satan the deceyuer of our first parents, and their fre will whereby they
assented to evil and despised the commandment of god, by this assent the
nature of our first parents Adam and Eve was corrupted, and even as the
parents then were such followed and were made afterward their children Roma. v.
by naturull contagion and propagacion as witnesses Paul. The doctors assign
the material cause of oryginall sin to be concupiscence. Parts.


Certain men without danger of y^ troth do divide original sin into sin
parsonall in Adam, Syn personal. Syn natural
and sin natural in others, howbeit this ought to be added that after the
fall that was also made in Adam natural which before y^ fall was not of Adams
nature. This particion makes also to the understanding of the true succession
and stretchyng forth of orygynall finne to thinte^t thou may know that by it
nature is infected and corrupted.

Theffectes of oryginall sin be taken theffectes of oigrinall syn.
forth of the perfection of Adams nature before the fall or forth of the first
right wysnes lost in Adam, and that by comparison of the contraryes, as these:
To be partaker of y^ deuylles nature, where as before the fall he was partaker
of the nature of god that is, he was wife, rightouse, good, Genesis ^.
true. And this was because he was create according, to the image of god
which again by sinninge he did put of. So for wise, he was made unwise, for
just iniust, for good evil. for true a liar. etc. To these be added for a
clearer declaracion, also these effects folowinge: Not to know god, to
disspise god, to be without fear and awe of god, without trust in god. To fle
god the judge, not to perceive such things as be of the spirit. To vate the
iugdement i. Corinth. ii.
of god. To be angry with god. To dyspayre of god and of his grace. To have
trust in temporal things. To strive against the law of god. To have wicked
thoughts of the heart even from the chyldehode. Not truly to obey the law of
god. For he that of nature is repugnaunt to the law of god, how can he truly
obey god? since thaffections and love of the flesh is emnitie against god
for it is not subject to y^ law of god no nor can not be. Romans viii. v
Also to cause yt we never can be without syn, for that which is natural we
can not utterly put of. These effects and se^blable be ascribed to original
si^, because they stick i^ nature or be the fruits of y^ corrupt nature, which
effects be oftentimes me^cyoned in scriptures, and ought always to be
understand of the corruption of nature, as, that every man is a liar, that is
to say, of nature. The prophet says. There is no ryghtwyse man, no not one,
understand of nature. There is none y^ has understanding, of nature. There
is none yt ensercheth god, of nature, vnryghtous, unwise, a liar, and semblable
words be often times red in scripture. and ought to be understand and
conferred with the nature of man before the fall. Moreover all the said effects
be deedly sins in ye wicked, forasmoche as death as a penalitie follows them,
for as Pau. says. Roma. vi. d. Roma. v. d
The wages of sine is death. Also in an other place he says. Through y^ fault
of one man si^ne entered in to the world, and by reason of sin, death. And
so upon all me^ death came, i^ asmoch as al we have si^ned wherefore in
co^syderacyo^ and of the penalty original sin has yet other effects as: To
bring death, for y^ stipende of si^ne (says Pau.) is death. Roma. vi. d. i.
corin. xv. g
Also, The darte of si^ne is death, yt is to were, which makes death, or of
which death does e^sue. Ite^, by sin entered death. To put under y^ tira^ny
Roma. viii. c.
of ye devil, as where it is said of god. I will put enmyties bitwene the and
Genesis iii. c
the woman, between thy sede and he sede. Ephe. vi. a.
etc. To make the children of wrath and of damnacion. To make an evil
conscience, for as witnesses Salomo^ i^ his proverbs, Pro. xviii. n
The wicked flees, no man pursuyng him. To these ought to be added also other
effects of oryginal sin in respect of the penalty, as concupiscence and
sin, which effects do cause all things which we do of nature before we be
regendred and borne anewe, be sins. For the pain of oryginall sin is
nothing else but to sin. For like as no man can put of, nature in other
things, though he never so sore struggeleth with it, eue^ so nature being
corrupted and punysshed with syn as with a penalty, can do none other thing
tha^ syn. And that syn is the punysshment of orygynall vice or wyckednes.
Thapostle Paul shows sufficiently, Roma. i. ^
where he reherseth in order the puni^shmentes of wyckednes, even the very
sins. Hereunto perteyneth the common and true saying. Deus punit peccatum
peccato. God punyssheth syn with syn. I would also here have put to the penal
effects of y^ utter fruits of this oryginal vice, but y^ I thought it best to
defer the^ unto theffectes of actual syn, for hither unto the scolemen have
only drawn them to outward acts and factes.

The contraryes of original syn.
The co^traryes of origynal syn spring chefly of the minishyng and setting at
lite and extenuacion of it, as. To grant that origynall syn is not a vice that
ha^geth in nature. To say orrigynall syn is only fomes (as they call it) that
is, Fomes peccati.
the kyndlynge or a quality of the body by which the body and not the mind
is enfected and to which we our selves man give a salve or medecyne. To say
orryginal syn betokens only an outward deed and not a contynuall and daily
disease. To say there be none other synes then outward deeds which error they
defend by these sainges of philosophers: Nature is good. Also every syn is
volu^tary,
which se^tences and such like be true among philosophers and in civil causes
but to bring y^ same to enlesson or diminysh y^ disease of origynall syn is
far out of y^ way. To grant concupiscence or just to be y^ punishment of
oryginall syn and not syn it self, S. Austy^
against S. Augustyn who diffinith origynal syn to be co^cupisce^ce. Also
against Paul who says, Roma. vii. ^
but I knew not sin but by y^ law. for I had not known lust or concupisence
onles y^ law had said. Thou shall not covet or lust. To grant yt this
kynlyng or fomes (as they call it) is a thing indifferent of it self, neither
good nor evil. Adiaphora.
But who ever durst call these things indifferent that knew any good vein of
scripture, to dout of ye ire of god to be angry with god and semblable
co^brau^ces of nature which be ye necessary fruits of original sin. To
extenuate and mynyshe origenall syn sayng, men be not let by it but that
they may keep of them selfs all ye precepts of god. To say origynall syn is
only a weakness in nature or incitme^t and kyndling and no syn that is to say
a thing of the self nature worthy death and damnacyon. Pelagians.
To grant with the Pelagians y^ orygenall syn came upon other men not by
natural corrupcyon and propagacyon but by imitation werfore the Pelagia^s will
not y^ by baptysme origynal sin is losed in i^fantes because they co^tende
that in birth there is none such original sin. Reatus
To say origynal sin is only a gylte or offense which is wyped away in
baptyme. The manithees
To grant with the Man^ches that fleshly lust werby the flesh lusts against
the spirit in us an infirmytye procedinge of the corrupt nature in the first
man but a contrary substance so stickynge in us that when we be delivered
Concupiscence
and purged it is severed from us. To grant that lust is the act of lustynge
and not the first vice gotten of Adam. Anabaptistis
To say with the Anabaptystes orygynall sin ceased and is quenshed in such
as be rebaptysed. To grant orygynall sin not to be a pure priuacion but
only a corrupt hauoure whose powers be of it self truly to acknowelege
gods trust in him. etc. To grant with the scole men that the punyshme^t of
orygynail syn is only concupiscence. Scolastickes
To deny that the punyshmentes of orygynal sins be besides concupiscence
also sin, death, the tyranny of the devil, dampnacyon. etc.

Of actual sin.
It is manifest that scole men do only call those actual sins which stand
in outewarde words or deeds, wherefore I thought good to treat of such
severally of my accustomed compendyous manner of teaching, to thentente I might
satysfye the reder which perchance as yet, is inta^gled with ye old diuisyon
of syn. Nevertheless I think A protestratio^
convenient to proteste and declare before unto you yt there is one only and
simple syn stickynge in the nature of man which accustomablye we call
orrigynall sin from which undoubtedly actual sin differs nothing but so
much as the cause and effect do differ: wherefore it had been enough to have
put actual sin among the effects of original sin but yt I feared their
judgments which account it a grievous offense in things yea not necessary
to depart and swerve from the ancient writers. But for asmoche as oryginall
syn is a vice sticking in nature from which proceed not only evil words and
deeds, but also noughty affections and thoughts which before god be the very
self sins. Also forasmoch as such affections and thoughts be the acts of
the vice styckynge in nature: Therefore actual sins must be understood not
only outward words and deeds but also inward affections and thoughts
wherefore in this wise owes actual sin to be defyned.

Actual sin, is every affection, every thought, The diffinition of actual
sins.
every word and deed against the law of god yea and what so ever is done
without faith. This syn issues forth of the corrupt nature of man and is the
effect of origynall sin.

The proves of this diffinicyon.
A wicked and evil mind of nature can not want actual syn, for the vice
original, which is cause of it, never plaieth, never keeps holy day. Now the
cause always working, theffectes can not but always ensue. Also a vicious and
corrupttre, can not but bring forth evil fruits. Out of the heart (says
Christ) proceed Math. xv. e.
evil thoughts, slaughters, aduotries. etc, And god oftimes scourges
wickedness with outward sin^es, while he suffers the wicked to run from one syn
to an other. Roma. ^
These sins where with god scourges and punissheth sins, the doctors also
call many times the punyshme^tes of syn, Gregorye
as s. Greg. writing thus. Syn y^ springs of syn is not only now a syn but it
is both syn and also y^ punishment of syn, because with a just judgment god
almighty ouershadoweth as it were with a cloud the heart of the sinner.

No man doubts but all actual sins may be referred to the inward thoughts
to outward spekinges and deeds. For thaffections and thoughts of the mind be
actual sins it is certain and clear enough, forasmoch as they be theffectes
of y^ original vice. Roma. vis.
And thapostle says. But syn by occasion engendered by y^ commandment in me,
all manner of concupisce^ce, as who should say syn espied and known by y^ law
makes afraid and furthermore moves the lust against god to ^^e the judgment
of god and be angry against god. Also Christ in the gospel of Mat. reherseth
the thoughts of y^ heart among theffectes of the corrupt heart of nature.
Math. xv. ^
For forth of the heart (says he) come wicked thoughts, slaughters murders.
etc.

Those sines which can not be referred either to thaffectio^s thoughts words
or deeds be comprised under yt general se^te^ce of Paul, Roma. ^iiii.
what so ever is done without faith, is syn, wherefore not only thaffectio^s and
thoughts, spekinges and ^^des which be evil be actual sins, but also honest
affections, thoughts, words and deeds be actual sins, not of the^ selves,
or because god would not honest affections and thoughts, honest sayings and
deeds to be had, or disaloweth or does not reacquite the same, but because the
persons of whom they be done please not god, and because they be done without
faith, Again such affections thoughts, words and deeds as be honest do please
god, and be not sins when they proceed of faith toward Christ, for whose
only sake all our works he pleasant unto god.

THE cause of actual syn is Satan, The cause of actual syn.
father of al sins. Our will, which is fre to evil, assenteth to Satan the
enge^derer and prouoker of sins. The less pri^cipall cause is the original
vice from whence as forth of a fou^teyn all actual sins do flow.

IT is an old division of actual syn in The parts of actual syn.
to syn mortal and venial. The scholemen about either of these sines do but
trifle very fondly and folishly, some think the^ called venial because they
obtein easily Venia^, yt is to say perdon or forgiveness and which may be
quenched and chased away either by holywa^, or other ceremonies Other some will
have the^ called venial sins, because after this life they receive pardon in
purgatory. Again other some say they be so called, having respect to sin yt
is irremissible, which is the syn against the holy ghost. But the wiser and
better learned scholeme do refer Scole me^
unto venial sins those disposicio^s of thoughts and affections which tend
to mortal sines: and undoubtedly al thoug^tes and noughty affections in holy
and good me^ be venial sins, with which daily y^ minds of the godly be
vexed, where as the flesh coueteth and lusts against the spirit. But by
cause the scripture damneth such affections and thoughts as be most grievous
sins in the eyes of god, and furthermore Paul aduertiseth ^s to mortifye with
the spirit such deeds of the flesh. Therefore those ye begin to be called
venial sins, be not lite sins as to distrust in god, to be angrye and
displeased with god. For undoubtedly these sins are become mortal sins in
the wicked persons, forasmoch as death as a punishment does ensue them, for the
wicked make no resistance by faith wherefore in respect of death as a penalty
and punishment. there be no venial sins in ye wicked. Albeit the same
affections and thoughts against gods law in the good persons be venial
sins, because they be forgiven the^. For the godly disalow such affections
and thoughts, and make resiste^ce against the^, so yt they fall not in to the
outward factes. Now, in such as make resiste^ce is yet faith, wherefore in the
mean season they be declared rightous. But on the contrary side al si^nes be
mortal yt be done against ye law of god, with a conscience which with stands not
by faith. For this cause affections and thoughts are now become deedly sins,
when no resiste^ce is made on our behalf against the^, but be allowed, till at
last also by our asse^t they brast forth in to our outward crimes and
noughtines. And such as thus do syn, be fallen from y^ grace of god, and be no
more co^pted for good, who^ also da^natio^ follows, unless they repent. But
of this matter look upon Mela^chton. Mela^chth^
in his places debating the thing more at large.

Thoccasio^ of this division of actual sins seems to have come hereof,
because the fathers of the church saw.ij. sorts of actual sines, some inward,
as affections and thoughts, some outward, as words and deeds. But forasmoch
as they were led of their own propre judgment, without counsel had with the
places of scripture, or persuaded with this common saying. God judges not
thaffectio^s, therefore they parted venial sins, as affections and thoughts
(by minisshi^g ye same) in the wicked also from the peyn of death. But the
division of actual sins shall be simple, A true division of actual sins.
sincere, and less peryllous if you wilt divide the^ in to sines which be
inward (as affections and thoughts which may be called venial in such as do
resist by faith, and therefore be yet counted rightous) and in to outward
sins, as words and deeds, in to which who so ever crasteth forth, be fallen
from grace, and be no more nombred among the rightous but yt as well the inward
as ye outward sines be deedly, unless y^ resist by faith. But in the wicked in
whom is no resistance, or which has not Christ can be no venial syunes,

Forasmoch as of actual sins some be affections and thoughts, Cheffectes of
actual sins
other some words and deeds, therefore double effects here of (yt is to wete)
of venial syn do arise, I mean of affections and thoughts in ye godly, and of
actual syn by it self, I mean as well of affections and thoughts as of outward
words and deeds in the wicked and in such as depart from grace. These double
effects serve for none other thing but to discern the venial in the godly
from the none venial, yt is from such as who so ever be entangled and roted
in, be no longer occompted rightous, to the intent we might know the difference
bitwene ye godly and ungodly which do syn in affections and thoughts. In the
wicked no sins can be venial, for all their affections and thoughts be made
without the holy ghost ye should govern, and faith ye should resist. In the godly
corrupt affections and thoughts against ye law of god be made venial sines,
because for Christ's and faythes sake they be perdoned and forgyuen, by which
faith they wrestle against such affections and wicked thoughts disalowing the
same, lest they should run in to outward vices, wherefore i^ so great
strugglinges and conflictes they be yet pronounced and recompted for good and
just persons by benefyte of their faith, not assenting to the temptacion of
syn. Now the effects of venial syn in the godly may be these. Theffectes of
venial sy^ne
To be tempted to ungodliness. To be tempted to despair to be angry with god, to
doubt whether god has respect of them: to be provoked against the hole law of
god, yt they should lust after wickedness, to thynk^ upon evils, and have their
minds occupied thereupon. Many like effects of venial sin may yet be fetched
hythe^ out of theffectes of original syn afor^ remembered. Also what theffectes
of v^nyall sin be, every man easyly hath^ experience with him self when his
spryte and flesh be at war together neither ought these effects to be
lytl^ regarded sythens the same be most grievous sins before god, and very
mortal in the wicked as perteynyng to the pain. Nevertheless they ^ yet
called venyall in the godly, because they be forgyuen and pardoned to such as
valia^tly resist by faith, or because they break not forth i^ to out ward
offenses. Also hereunto belong such places of scripture as teach y^ the life
of the godly is a warfare upon this earth as To. S.
If (says Paul) ye will mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. etc.
Truly the deeds of the body be here not only the words and deeds of the self
body, but also thaffections and deeds of the mind, and the body signifies
here not one perte of the body, as the flesh, but the hole body. Colloss. iii.
The said Paul in an other place says: Mortify therefore your erthly me^bres,
Roma. vi.
hordom uncleanness wa^to^nes, evil lust. etc. Item let not therefore syn reygne
in your mortal body, so yt you should obey it by the lusts of it. Also Job
accords to the same, Job. vii. ^
where he says. A warfare is the life of man upon ye earth. These places monish
us strongly to resyst syn, left we be vaynquisshed at last by it to the
committing of outward of fences and enormities, and so utterly to dye by the
same.

Hereby now it appears what actual sines be mortal, i^ respect of such as we
call venial i^ ye godly (yt is to wite) those which be done against the law of
god, with a conscience not repugnau^t, ne wtsta^ding by says, where as no
resiste^ce on our behalf is made against thaffectio^s mocio^s and thoughts,
til at last they rush forth i^to outward crimes and enormities. For such
sinners have assented to syn and be now gone from grace, and no longer can be
reputed good, yea and where such repent not, they be also damned.

Now these effects be of ye hole actual syn mortal, Theffectes of the hole
acte^ all sin mortal.
yt is, as well of affections and thoughts, as of words and deeds. Not to
repugne against the te^ptacio^ of syn by faith. To asse^t to syn ye tempts.
To approve those things which ye evil affections and thoughts do suggest and
purpose. To have delectacion and pleasure in sins. To glory in sins. To
desire and ymagin ydolatry, and to be made an idolatour. To desire and ymagin
any false worship of god, and to set up the same. To desire and ymagin murdre
and the same to execute. To desire and ymagin disobedience and with outward fact
to accomplish the same. To covet and ymgen aduontrye and the same to commit
i^dede and so of ye rest. But these effects are so to be taken ye forthwt they
be made mortal sins as soon as any asse^t is had to such corrupt affections
and thoughts, although ye outward deeds follow not, which nevertheless ye mind
can not want yt is fallen from grace. So Ada^ should have sinned mortally for
thassenting unto the wicked affections and thoughts, although he had never
eaten of the apple. So also in us affections and thoughts be made mortal
sins, yea although outward deeds do not ensue, eue^ as often as we make no
resiste^ce by faith against ye sins to te^pting us, but do give our ear and
assent to the same, as for exe^ple. Good me^ to be tempted, to wish and
compass murdre is a venial syn in such as strongly and valiau^tly make
resiste^ce by faith, but to assent unto thaffections and thoughts to obey the^
eu^e to the execution of the murder and not to repugne by faith, is now become a
deedly sin.

Wherefore to mortal sins actual perteyn al these sins, whereunto assent is
given, albeit they be not acco^plisshed by words and deeds. Ite^ all those
which be executed in word and deed. Hither perteyn such places of scripture as
co^tein heaps of actual sins worthy death, as. i. Corin. vi. Ephesians. v. Gala.
v. Romans 1. Certe^ly such effects be called mortal sines not because grace is
denied to such sinners as syn mortallye, like as it is to them which being deed
can not rise again, but because death as a punishment follows such effects.
But again where such sinners do change their life and do repentance they
may obteyn grace.

These also effects may be hereunto referred. Other effects of actual sy^
Of a wylfulnes or haultnes of mind, or for other causes not to acknowledge or
receive the gospel.

TO acknowledge or receive ye gospel and the same so acknowleged or received
slouthfully to regard. A man to neglect his office in his calling, or to do it
negligently, which sins at this day be most common in ye world. For some men
although they knew yt it is gods co^mau^ deme^t y^ they should acknowledge and
rereyue the gospel, yet they despise it and will none of it. Again, others
where as they promptly acknowledge and receive it yet they regard it
negligently. Cold^ gospelle^^.
Such now adays be many gospellers which now be waxen cold.

Common effects which follow all mortal sins.
TO bring death upon me^. Roma. v. ^. v^
TO put me^ under the tyranny and power of ye devil. For who so ever falls
from grace by sin, ca^ be under y^ power of none other tha^ of the devil,
sithe^s there be but two kingdoms the one of god the other of the devil. Therefore
also Christ makes the devil father of sins. Thapostle calls the devil
mighty in the unfaithful, and other whiles he calls devils the rulers and
princes of the world. Item, he y^ commits syn (says Christ) is of ye devil.
To bring everlasting da^natio^ to such as repent not, John^.xi.
according to ye saying of Christ Go ye cursed in to everlasting fire. Math.
xxv. d
etc. In which place Christ reckeneth up ye sins, for which everlasting
da^natio^ chau^seth. John^. viii. e Gall^. v. d. l. corint. vi. ^.
To make me^ servants of syn, for every one ye commits syn is the servant
of syn. To deprive me^ of ye kingdom of god, for they yt do such offenses shall
not i^herite ye kingdom of god. To make an evil conscience according to the
saying of the wise man. The wicked fle^th no man chasing him. Pro^e^. 28. a
To deserve ye syn be punisshed with syn, according to ye sentence of Paul, Roma.
i. d.
where as he says. For this cause god gave the^ up in to the lusts of
reproach, for even their women did change the natural use unto the unnatural,
and likewise also the me^ left the natural use of the woman, and bre^t i^ their
lusts one to an other. And man with man wrought filthynes and received in
themselves the reward of their error as apperteyned. etc. To susteyn reproach
and an evil name in this life, according to the se^te^ce of Salomo^. Proverb.
^8.
The wicked when he comes i^ to ye botom of sins is set at naught, and
reproach and sclau^dre do follow him. Nume. v
To bring also outward mischau^ces and curses upon such as commit the^, as god
him self witnesses saying. Because ye have tra^sgressed my commandments ye
shall not prosper. An exe^ple hereof is red in Eve. Genesis 3. ^
to whom god said: I shall multiply thy sorrows. Also i^ Ada^: Cursed be the
earth in thy work, hither perteyn the curses in the old testament against the
breakers of gods commandments. Also exemples, which testify ye sins were
punisshed with outward misfortunes and yet be punisshed,

Contraries to venial sin.
TO grant any venial sins in ye wieked.
To make but a trifle of venial sins, and count the^ for lyte offencen. To
say venial sins be queushed or chased away by holy water or by purgatory,
Holy water.
or other things. To say y^ the purging of venial sins needs not grace or
Christ. To say y^ thaffectio^s and thoughts, of which venial sines spri^g,
cannot be made mortal sins, if asse^t be had to the the same, although the
outward fact or word follow not. To say al affections and thoughts be evil,
because they be actual sins, but a distinction ought to be had bitwene
affections, for they be of.ii. sorts. Two sorts of affections
Some be clean contrary to ye law of god, as to covet other men's gooddes, to
envy other me^ for ye benefytes of god, to have distrust i^ god, to be angry with
god, and such like. These be proprely theffectes of original syn and merely
evil and vicious, worthy to be cast forth of the nature of man. Other
affections there be which be not repugnau^t with gods law, as to love a man's own
children, to love his wife and such like. To take these away, is to take away
ye mouyng and life of nature. But concerning this matter ye may se more in the
common places of Mela^chton. Mela^chthon
To deny venial sins in holy men.

Contraryes to mortal sins.
TO put but seven deedly sins. Mo then. vii mortal sin^es
To deny ye thaffectio^s and thoughts in the wicked, or in such as resist not
by faith be dedly sins. To grant yt such sins as be done against the
commandment of god be not dedly, although asse^t be had to the same, unless
ye outward factes do follow. To grant ye all mortal sins be not damnable. To
grant ye faith may stand with mortal syn. To hold ye mortal times can not be
forgyuen after baptism. To deny grace unto such as be in dedly syn. To make
it no mortal syn not to acknowledge or receive ye gospel or ye same received,
negligently to follow. Also of a p^su^ptio^ of mind to despise ye gospel, and
not to regard his calling or not to execute ye same as to his duty
apperteyneth. More (...) Contraryes to the hole sin. (...).


More general co^traries to ye hole sin be these. To grant thopinio^ of ye
Stoickes ye sins be egal, so yt there should be no difference bitwene Nero
synnyng much, and Pompeius Atti^cus synni^g less. To make god causer of syn,
because he determines al things. To grant with the Iouinianistes sins to be
egal, Iouinianists
and that man can not syn after he be ones regenerate or borne anew. To deny
grace to them y^ do syn after they have ones acknowleged the truth. To deny
yt the chief rewards of syn be death, the tyra^nye of Satan, and damnation. To
grant with the Pelagians yt the life of good men in this world has no
reward at all. Pelagian^.


Of sin against the holy ghost. CA. XIIII.
FOrasmoch as we be fallen in to the treaty of syn, we think it good to cast
hereunto ye sin of the holy ghost albeit it ought to have be^ reserved and put
else very well af^ ye title of gospel, because this syn springs of it, as out
of his propre object.

THE syn against the holy ghost is with an obstinate mind against the ^scie^ce to
damn the gospel and the works of it What sin against the holy ghost is.
which sin not acknowledged can not be forgyuen, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come, for which also it is not to be prayed.

THIS diffinitio^ appears certain of the The proves of this diffinition.
.xij. chap. of Math. where the phari^ees, being their consciences conui^ct with
ye very troth, many arguments brought of Christ to ye same purpose, yet
against their conscience they cried out ye Christ did cast forth the devil by
the power of the devil, wherefore consequently in that they condemned this work
of Christ, they also condemned tholy ghost, which was the cause and worker of
that work by whose power Christ did cast forth the devil. Now, and such a syn
can not be remitted neither in this nor in the next world, Christ expressly
declares in the fornamed chap. but yet if it be acknowleged, it may be
remytted. For to such as be living here in this world grace is not denied if
they repent and ask forgyuenes. Finally that we ought not to pray for such
teach s. John^ in his epistle. John^. v. b
For so long as this syn is obstinatly defended, it abides always unpardonable.

THE cause of this sin is the deui^l father and worker of al sins. The cause.
The cause also of this sin, is the will of man, which is fre unto evil, for man
being forsaken of god and left to his frewil, falls in to this sin,

The syn against the holy ghost has no pertes, No parts. The names of this
sin. i. John^. v. d
which syn otherwhiles y^ scripture calls Peccatu^ ad morte^ (yt is to say
syn unto death) as s. John^ in his epistle calls it. But the doctors call it
otherwhiles the syn of vnrepentaunce sometime an obduracion or hardness of heart,
sometime a stubburnnes, sometime a resistance against y^ troth, y^ against the
conscience, and sometime they name it the despair of grace: Gene. iiii. v
Such manner of sin committed Cayn, Marc. xv. a Mat. xxvii. a ^ Luc. xxiii.
a. John^.xviii. v.
where as he said: Greater is my wickedness then that I can deserve
forgynenesse. Item, the sin of Judas the betrayer of Christ.

Theffectes of the syn against the holy ghost.
Theffectes of the syn against tholy ghost be these: To damn the gospel and
the fruits of the same, after thexe^ple of the pharisees. Math xii. b.
To make ye syn irremmissible or vnperdonable in such as obstinatly and
stubburnly continue in da^nyng the gospel. Math.xii. v.
To bring death.i. Ioh.v. To crucify the son of god again, as thexe^ple to ye
Ebrues declares. Ebreos.vi. a.
To make ye son of god a laughing stock, as in the said epistle is showed. But
these effects are so to be understand and taken yt the syn against the holy
ghost if it be acknowleged Ebre. vi. a
i^ this life may be forgyue^. Hereunto also may be brought al such effects as
generally follow al mortal sins.

Co^traries to this doctrine be these: Contraryes.
To grant ye every syn which is committed after baptism is a syn against the
holy ghost, yea though it comes of a weiknes and not of any ^te^pt or
obstinacy. To grant yt the syn against tholy ghost can not be forgiven in this
life if the same be acknowleged, which erour co^futeth s. Aug. Augustyn.
upon the words of Christ. Mat.xij. To make a trifle of the sin against the
holy ghost, contrary to the words of Christ which extolleth this syn above
Math.xii. e
any syn committed against his own person.

Of the law. CA. XV.
THe law in a generalite is which techeth what is to be done and what is to be
left. Diffinition.


This diffinitio^ is undoubted, The proof.
taken forth of the propre officies of ye law, which be to teache command and
declare what is to be done, and what not.

OF laws some be natural, The parts.
some divine, some humane.

THE causes of laws be the makers and instituters. The causes.


Theffect of laws is to declare and commau^de what things we ought to do,
Theffectes.
and what to leave undone.

The law of nature,
THE law of nature is a certain notyce or knowledge of gods law, what ye law
of nature is.
imprynted and graven of god in the nature of man, ordained to know god and
love his neighbor, to the intent there might be kept in the minds of me^, an
occasion of religion and public quietie, peax, and teanquillitie of men
among them selves.

That the law of nature is a notice of gods law, Profes of this diffinition.
is evident by the first chapi^ to the Romans where ye apostle declares yt the
gentiles or hethe^ persons have knowledge of god, by the law of nature, and not
only a single knowledge, yt there is a god but also ye god does creat, does
govern and co^serue al things which to understand i^ god, is proprely to know
god. Howbeit this knowledge is wonderfully dimed, obscured and corrupted by the
fall of Adam as hereafter in theffectes we shall show, in which some perte of the
diffinitio^ shall be bet^ declared. Now to acknowledge god and love his
neighbor together with the rest be the final effects of the law of nature.

The cause of ye law of nature is god ye instituter, Cause
which gave his law indifferently in to the hertes of al me^.

THE law of nature is not divided of it self in to parts, Parts.
but forasmoche as some laws of nature perteyne to know god, some to love the
neighbor or to the co^seruacion of mankind, therefore let the variety, and
sundrinesse of natural laws suffice in place of a division.

Theffectes of natural laws be taken forth of ye very laws written in ye
minds of me^, Effe^es.
as: Roma. i. c.
To know god yt he is everlasting, mighty and godly (that is) yt he creates,
governs and ^serueth al things for yt is to know the eternity, power and
divinity of god. To worship one god. To glorify god. To be tha^kful to god the
maker and savor of al things. To call upon god. Roma. ^.
These later effects co^cerni^g ye worship of god, thapostle takes not away
from the very gentiles, but yt they have the^ by the law of nature, but he
accuses the^, y^ accordingly as they knew god, they gave hi^ not ye true
worship, wherefore while he says yt the ge^tyles paid not neither yielded unto
god who^ they knew, his true worship, he shows sufficiently yt they had a
knowledge of ye true worship.

Now,
yt the gentyles gave not the true worship to god, who^ by his creatures they
knew, ye wickedness of their mind was to blame, which by means of original
syn, would not obey the knowledge that they have of god, but is naturally void
of ye fear of god and trust i^ god, neither does it ask any help of god. etc.
Wherefore all ye foresaid effects be so in us corrupt and spotted sithe^s ye
fall of Ada^ yt we can not truly know god, truly obey him. etc. which things
nevertheless before the fall man could have done by ye law of nature.

There be yet other effects ofS y^ law of nature perteyning to the love of y^
neighbor, and to the co^seruatio^ of ma^kynd in the state of tra^quillite,
which be these. To hurt no man. To save the commodities of life. To have a
fellow i^ wedlok. To ge^dre issue. To nourish y^ same. To help an other. To keep
couenau^tes. To have and to use al things i^ common. To be born unto fredo^,
and such like. Of these effects or laws of nature, some nature has
corrected, as the law y^ al things be in common, and the law of fredom to
the intent it might keep and co^serue the hole policy of man in a state of
tra^quillite and eschew the corruption of the hole nature or perte, yet
nevertheless not wtsta^ding this correction those first natural laws be not
utterly extinct in the minds of man, The sentence Of M. Tulli Cicero.
Marcus Tullius Cicero witnessinge y^ same in the first book of his officies,
where he writes yt the law concerning the communion of al things is not
extinct, but according to the sentence of Plato, y^ man is borne to the use and
behoue of man, ye one should help and further an other in giving receiving. etc.
by which words Cicero calls us back again to the law of nature, which is
of great efficacy and strength through thinstinct of nature, which as a leder
or capiteyn, we ought to follow, to thinte^r ye common vtilities and profits
might be brought forth in to y^ mids among men by interchau^ging of
officies and duties of one to an other: So by the impulsio^ and consent of
nature the law co^cerninge liberty gave place to peril, Dispensacio^. of
nature.
leest y^ captives and such as were take prisoners i^ wars should be utterly
slain, for nature had rather give place here (as a man would say) unto nature
than with great inco^moditie utterly to perish, or not to do for the best.

YET in the mean season liberty which naturaly is graue^ in the mind of man
abides still, although outwardly for certain causes it be corrected, wherefore
it is to be granted y^ natural laws may be corrected and redressed for the
causes aforesaid of nature it self, which continually does nothing else but
labors to the co^seruacio^ of mankind, and that in an outward use of
things, to the intent y^ greater perils might be eschued which else would corrupt
y^ hold nature, or at lest a good part of it.
But y^ law of nature in such correction alwais yet remain hole and perpetual
with the mind. So with the mind is community of things still remaynyng,
although that things outwardly be private and vnco^mon. This co^munitie which
is the mind teaches y^ the neighbor having need, is to be helped. Therefore it
is to be learned here when the laws of nature may be corrected and how, y^ is
when for y^ said causes nature makes one law to give place to an other, when
one does mitigate another, y^ so nature might be kept, which out wardly
because of necessity or peril of ma^s society is compelled to give place.
Wisdom is to be had in judging the laws of nature.
Certes it is very profitable also in admitti^g the laws of nature to put some
difference and choice, lest we judge al manner of laws to be i^diffet re^tly
the laws of nature. For there be some which seem to be laws of nature and yet
be not, but rather be ^trary to nature, and to temporal or civil laws, for
civil or te^porall laws also have proceeded out of the self nature and were
first ordained to keep thordre of nature, and the society of ma^s life, of
which sort be these laws, Give and take, as the poet Hesiod us reherseth,
also this law: vi vi repellere licet, it is lauful to put of violence with
violence, and such like, which laws be sprung forth of the noughty affections
of our nature. Finally these also effects ought to be added, a quiet
conscience by y^ keeping of the law of nature. And an evil conscience by the
breach of the law of nature.

Contraryes to the law of nature be these. Contraries. to the law of nature
To grant yt the law of nature before the fall of Adam was not the true
knowledge of god, yt he creates governs and co^serueth al things. To grant
y^ the laws of nature may be corrected by the bishop of Rome or other rulers
without y^ violence and injury of nature.
To this error answers the emperor i^ his institucio^s, where as he says
yt the laws of nature be imutable, wherefore I answer thus, yt simplye no
laws of nature ca^ be corrected of any man, for y^ power of the^ remain
always in the hertes of me^ stable and sure. Also y^ laws of nature be in no
ma^s hands, wherefore no man can correct and change y^ which hi^ self have not
made. But forasmoch as we se certain laws be redressed and corrected. Note how
the correction of the laws first began.
Therefore now it is to be seen from whe^s y^ redress and correction proceeded,
undoubtedly natural laws be so long immutable, and not to be changed as no
danger of the polecy and ma^s society, or corruption of the hole nature, or
of any perte hereof moves the contrary. For truly unto the conseruacion of
these things co^seruacio^ of these things nature was creat, and consequently
al natural laws. Now because ye natural law concerning the co^munitie of
things should have hurted the co^seruacion of mankind and publyque peax:
Therefore came nature and made one law to give place to another yt the society
and fellowship of man should be ^serued, and the greater peril eschued. But how
y^ laws now corrected do yet stik still in the mind of man continually, I have
showed before. To grant y^ the law of nature can be taken forth of the minds
of me^, or utterly extinguisshed To which error we answered before. To grant
yt the law of nature has the same force and efficacy in knowing god and
giving the true worship unto him that it had before the fall of Ada^, which
error may be confuted by the.7. chap. to the Romans. To grant yt the laws
of nature, which concern the love of men, and the conseruacion of men's
fellowship or society can do as little in outward officies necessary to the
conseruacio^ of life as such laws of nature as concern ye knowledge of god and
the gyuing unto him of his true worship. To grant yt we ca^ satisfy y^ law of
nature ^cerni^g the knowing of god, and giving unto him true worship without the
holy ghost. To grant ye any man may transgress the law of nature without
danger or scruple of conscience. To dispe^ce litely in natural laws which
protein to the neighbor no such peril of extreme necessity as before is
declared co^pelling to the same.

Of the law of god. CA. XVI.
THe law of god in a generality is a commandment requyring profit The
definicion of godde^ law.
obedience toward god and co^demning such as perform not this perfyt
obedience. And since no man can perform the same, it was certain yt the law was
given to this purpose, yt it should led us to ye knowledge of our sin and of our
weiknes, which things known we might flethens unto Christ the performer of
profyt obedience, and so be made partakers of his obedience through faith unto
our iustificacion.

Proves of this diffinition.
That the law of god requires profit obedience it is open enough by many
places of Moses, as i^ Deu.vi. chap. Thou shall love him with al thy hole heart with
thy hole mind. Also in the.x. chapter the same sentence is red, where also we
be commanded to circu^cise y^ foreskyn of our heart. Iosue.xxii. a
Ite^ in y^ book of ^osue is red thus. And stik you unto him, and serve him i^
al your heart, Iosue.xxiiii. c
in all your mind. etc. Ite^ i^ an other place. Now therefore fear y^ lord and
serve him with a most profit and true heart: So the^ I call profit obedience,
which brings beside y^ outward works also a co^senting mind to y^ law of
god. Christ i^ the new testament requires the same profit obedience.
Math.xxii. d.
For when he was demanded of a doctor of law, what is ye greatest
commandment? He answered: y^ shall love thy lord god with thy hole heart. etc.
Also to this use and purpose he in^preteth the law in the.v. of Mat. to
thinte^t he would show, yt it is not enough to bring only outward works to the
fulfilling of the law, onles y^ bri^gest also a co^senting mind. The place in
Deuteronomy. ca. 17. testifies clearly y^ al those be condemned by the law which
perform not the profit obedience of the law toward god. For Moses says:
cursed is every one y^ shall not abide in all such things as is written in the
book of y^ law. But now again y^ no man keep the law unto the profit obedience
of the same, every man proves and feleth in him self sufficie^ty, and Christ
declares where he techeth yt his office is to fulfill the law, Math.v. b
and that he came to that intent. Roma.iii. c.
S. Paul also defines the law to be the knowledge of syn, y^ is, which
accuses, frayeth the conscience, and makes sins known. Item he says. The
law entered in by y^ way y^ syn might abou^de. Roma. ^. d
The rest of the diffini^ion appears in the third chap. to the Gala. where
the apostle expresses the use of the law given to the leding unto Christ:
Galath. iii. d
wherefore the law was our scholemaster or leder unto Christ, to the intent y^ by
faith we should be justified, and not by the works of the law.

OF gods laws, Diuisyon of gods law Causes
some be moral, some ceremonial, and some judicial.

THE cause of gods law is god ye instituter. The publissher and declarer was
Moses. The cause of enacti^g gods law was the frowardnes of the Israelites
which was to be chastised with a law, as it were by a scholemaster or leader,
Gala. iii. d
till the coming of Christ. Other occasions of the gyuynge of gods law be put
of Paul in the third chap. to the To. by these words, where he says: what
preferme^t has the Jew, or what helped circumcision. Surely very much. First
unto them was committed the spekinges of god (yt is to say) certain laws and
ceremonies unto a people certain, in which y^ promises made upon Christ should
be disclosed by the clear testimonye of god. The principal effects of the law
Paul puts in the.iij. and.vi. chap. to ye Romans Roma.iii. c Roma. v. b
Roma.vii. b
as these. To declare sins, for by the law comes y^ knowledge of syn. Also
the law entered in by the way ye sin might abound and be increased. But I knew
not syn (says Paul) but by the law, for I had not known ^cupisce^ce or lust,
onles the law had said: Give.iii.
you shall not lust. Also god says unto Ada^, who has showed the that you were
naked, but that you have eaten of the tree, of which you were commanded not to
eat. To accuse, to fear, to damn the conscience. To make the conscience
unquiet doubting, and incerteyn, because it espyeth yt it can not keep the law.
And on the contrary part the conscience is made quiet and certain, Roma.iiii.
when by thexe^ple of Abraham it considers only the promise. To keep me^
under awe, till the coming of Christ, as witnesses Paul. The law is a
scholemaster unto Christ. Gala.iii. d i. Timot. i. b
Item the law was given for the vnrightous persons, to teach the true works
yt please god, and with which we exercise our obedence toward god. To be a
doctrine about which and under which the promises of Christ be opened,
Roma.iii. a
as Paul to the Romans declares. For this is the end of the hole polecy yt was
institute among the Iues: Of these effects, some be only civil namely such as
monish and entreat of repressing the malice of man, and some perteyn only to
the conscience, as be all the rest, but these effects ought not only to be
reject and cast upon the Iues, but they endure i^ their full virtue and strength
still among all such as have not yet Christ, neither the holy ghost,
according to this saying: Where y^ spirit of the lord is, there is liberty, I
mean to be enfraunchised and fre from the law and tyranny of the same. Item to
the ryghtous man (says s. Paul) a law is not given, Timoth. ^.
that is to say to such as have not Christ, and be under grace, laws be not
made but to the vnrightous and disloyal or disobedient, I mean to such as yet
have not Christ, neither be led with the spirit of god. Romansviii.
For surely there is now no condemnacion to such as be planted in Christ
Jesus. Gala.iii. ^
Forasmoche as Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law while he was
made for us a curse.

THE co^traries of gods law I will not bring forth, till I have finisshed all the
parts of it.

Of moral laws. CA. XVII.
MOral laws be the.x. commandments, Moral laws what they be.
which expound and declare the laws of nature, and teach the works y^ be
pleasant to god.

OF the first perte of the diffinition y^ moral laws be the.x. Probatio^ of
the definicio^
commandments doubts no man. Math. v.
And forasmoche as Christ says yt he teaches not a doctrine strange from the
laws and prophets, and the law and prophets require faith and the love of
the neighbor: Therefore the moral laws undoubtedly does teach works y^
please god, for they command faith and love of the neighbor. Now the.x.
commandments may be referred and reduced holly to faith and to the love of
the neighbor. She first table of Moses
The first table of Moses fetteth forth and expounds these laws following
of nature. To know God: to worship god, to call on god, to obey god, to
gloryfye god, to be grate and loving to God. To know that God rewards the
ryghtous, and punyssheth the vnryghtous. Among these laws of nature some
concern the inward worship which is taught by the first commandment, some
concern the outward worship which is taught by ye second commandment, some
ceremonies declared by the third commandment. The second table expouneth and
sets forth these laws of nature folowinge. The second table.
To prohibit iniurye and to punysh the gyltye. To hurt no man. To preserve the
fellowship and co^iu^ction of wedlock. To use things in common. To norysh the
issue. To keep promise and couenauntes. To help an other, and such like. Of
these, the prohibicion of iniurye and punyshmente of offenses may be reherred
to the.iiii. precepte. To hurt no man and to norysshe the issue be referred to
the.v. The scocie tie of wedlock to the.vi. The community of things and to
help an other to the.vii. To keep couenau^tes to the.viii.

The institutor and maker of the motall laws is god. Causes.
The publysher and setter forth is Moses.

Of moral laws some perteine to god and some to the neighbor. Parts
God would the moral laws to be distributed and put i^ to two tables not
without a great mysterye which thing I have opened in an other place. And
albeit y^ forenamed effects which were ascribed to gods law generally, do
also agree to moral laws these that follow be more proprely annexed to moral
laws, that is to we^e To declare and expound the laws of nature. To teach
the true works that please god. Out of these also the new testament boroweth
his work wherwt the beleuers exercise their obedience toward god, not
because Moses techeth those works, but because nature also has taught the
same, wherefore to this effect of moral laws perteyne all the commandments
in y^ new testament co^cerni^g good manners as be i^ sundry places of Paul's
epist. namely. To.xii. Ephesians. ^iii. Balath. v. etc. Forlyke as the tables of
Moses which conteyne the.x. commandments do expound and set forth the
laws of nature. So such things as be commanded in the new testament
concerning manners declare the decalogy or.x. commandments. Also like as he
shall much better understand the laws of nature which has the knowledge of
the x. commau^deme^tes, so he like wise shall far better understand the
commandments concerning manners in ye new testament which can refer y^ same
to the two tables of Moses as to their propre and original fountaynes. Howbeit
this dlygently must be consydred where th scripture speaks of faith as of the
inward worship of god whereof y^ outewarde worship and where of ceremonies Also
it speaks of y^ manners of life.

Of laws judicial. XVIII.
Judicial laws be such as command of temporal polytyque or civil causes

This diffinicion is certain and appears even by y^ very nature of y^ word
Probacyo^
and temporal or civil causes perteyne to judgments.

Also of these laws god is y^ i^stitutor and Mases the publyssher and setter
forth. Causes.


Because y^ things be diverse of whithe judgments be given and debates arise:
Parts*
Therefore diverse also and sundry judicial laws were in the policy of Moses
made, which diversity of things shall here be put instead of parts. Surely
all the judicial laws of Moses may be reduced to these chief places and
hedes. Theft, murder, burti^g, of y^ pare^tes like for like called ^alio,
punyshmentes c^idinges, damage done, aduoutrye succession wedlock, lawful and
unlawful persons with whom contractes of matrymony may be made or not made.

Beside y^ effects which y^ judicial laws Effecte^
have in common with such effects as be ascribed to the hole law of God they
challenge vnot the^ proprely these.ii. To be signs and testimonies of the
profession of faith toward god. To re^reine men from outward iniuryes and
vices, And because this effect is merely polytike therefore theffectes politic
or cyuile laws may also bether be brought as be these. To drive away
iniuryes. To punysh the gyltye. To conserve the public honestye and such
like, whereof we shall speak herafter in y^ intreatinge of humane laws.

Of ceremonial laws. CA. XIX.
Laws ceremonial be such as be ordained co^cerni^g ceremonies and rites of the
church, Diffinition.
and such things and persons as belong to the perfourminge of the rites and
ceremonies.

This diffinition appears good even of the very nature of the word,
Probacion.
rite is a more general term and includes that which by the word of
ceremony might be happelye omitted, but whersoeuer eccliasticall rites and
ceremonies be there such things and persons be, required as be necessary to
thexecucion of the same. Causes


Thinstitutor and maker of these, is god and Moses the publisher.

The variety and su^drynes of ceremonial laws shall serve instead of the
parts. Parts
For ceremonial laws may be re^erred to these things ensuinge, that is to
were, to the temple to sacrifices to y^ garments of the prestes, to
expiacious, to consecracions of prestes, to eating, to holidays, to howes, and
the most part of these things may be reduced to the judicial presthode. Now
of these things chiefly treats the third book of Moses called Leuiticus.

Theffectes of ceremonial laws be, Effects.
y^ they were fygures and tipes of the spiritual presthode of Christ, as the
epistle to the Ebrues right excellentlye declares namely in the.ix. and.x.
chapiters, where it is written. Ebre. x. ^.
The law which has but the shadow of good things to come, and not the things
in their own fassio^ can never make the comers thereunto perfect with
sacrifices which the offer every year contynuallye. etc. Also co be signs and
testimonies of the profession of faith toward god. The effects properly
belong unto ceremonial laws, beside those that they have in common with y^
hole law of god.

Co^traryes to y^ hole law of god.
Contraryes to the hole laws of god be these. Co^traries to the hole law
A^^honti^es.
To despise or reject with y^ A^^ontickes the law or old testament. To
renounce and utterly damn the law with the Seuerians. Seuerians.
To say the law pertayne nothing to christen me^ so y^ among the^ no use ne
profit is of it, In which opinion some men do show y^ also S. Hierome.
I^rome weln^^e was. To say y^ by y^ law of god the natural weakness that is
to say co^cupisce^ce is not damned. To grant y^ we can satisfy the law of god
by our own outward works. Also by our own inward endeavor of will although
our co^cupisce^ce or lust be repugnaunt. To say y^ works of y^ law please god
without Christ and y^ holy ghost. To say after the recept of Christ man can so
satysfy the law that he is hable to allege and plead against y^ ire of God his
own justice gotten by his own propre works. To say the gentiles were
justified by the law of nature, ye fathers by ye law of Moses and we be
justified by y^ law of the gospel. To say that the perfect fulfilling of the
law unto iustifycacion before god has ever perteyned to us or ben in our
powers or yet pertayne to us or is in our powers. This error is agai^ste the
office of Christ which witnesses y^ his office is to fulfill the law who
indede Math. v. use
fulfilled the uttermost point of the true rightousnes, forasmoche as he
brought both the outward, works and also a consenting mind to the law as the
prophet Esaias openly teaches in y^ Esaie. liii. c
liii. chapter saying that he committed no wickedness neither was there any
gile in his mouth. To say the laws of god be counselles given only to the
perfect persons. But this is a peryllous error which teaches that god
chau^geth his eternal will for our infirmity. Thou therefore which felest thou
can not fulfill the law, tun to him that can. Neither is the law therefore
given y^ thou myghtest be hable to keep it. To grant that the law outwardly
kept iustyfyeth before god. To say beside the works of the moral laws there
may yet better be ordained and be al ready ordained which do plese god. To say
there be many works omytted in the moral laws which the pope has supplied.
To say y^ moral laws be not sufficient to thexercise of good works and to
the testificacion of faith before god. Therrour of papists.
To say y^ moral laws at lest way do justify a christian man before god
although neither y^ judicial laws ne y^ ceremonial laws ca^ do y^ same To
which error I answer that the moral laws should in deed iustyfye the
thristen man if it were in our powers perfectly to fulfill the same. To say the
moral laws bind us because Moses did publysh and promulgate them and not
because nature has taught the^ before Moses. To deny that al such things
as be commanded in the new testament concerning the true worship of god and
manners of life may be well referred to the decalogye of Moses containing the
(...) commandments. To bring again the judicial laws of Moses and to
bind the christen men to the same as now of late certain hertikes have gone
about namely Monetarius Pipetius and the Anabaptists. Monetarius Piperius
Anabaptist*
To reiecte rasshely such judicial laws as consent with the law of nature.
Such laws to abrogate and disanull is to do iniurye and force against nature
and to challenge to be free from nature. So certain me^ at this day under the
pretense of lyberty do attempt and go about to vngarnysshe nature of the
judicial laws and to garnysh or rather defoyle and contamynate her with
wickedness. To grant the ceremonial laws in y^ old testament justified before
god because they contained under the^ sacrifices for sins. To grant that
albeit in the new testament the sacrifices of Moses The error of them that
make ye mass a sacrifyce.
be no longer in their force and strength, yet that the new testament has
new sacrifices for sins institute and ordained of Christ him self, that is
to wete that in the mass Christ should be sacrificed. To say that christen
men be not free from all ceremonial laws which error may be thus
confuted, christen men must needs be free from all ceremonial laws because
the iudaical ceremones agree not with the law of nature also because in the new
testament sacrifyces made of beestes be no longer in strength and force ne y^
other ceremonies of Moses law but the spiritual works of the heart and
affections repurged by the holy ghost in the heart. Furthermore the kindome of
Christ is without al manner of obseruacion. Luce. xvii. ^


Of humane laws. CA. XX.
THe trety of laws by due order requires yt I should speak also here of ma^s
laws, though it were for none other thing, but because I have made me^cio^ of
the^ i^ ye division of law i^ a generalite. Diffynicyon.
Man's laws therefore be of which y^ authors and makers be princes or other
inferriour magistrates, ordained to y^ co^seruasio^ of peax and of the public
honestly in the world.

This diffinition appears true by y^ very nature of y^ word, Prove.
and I added therein feri^ur magistrate, lest a man should thynk y^ humane laws
made of such be not of force and strength.

The causes and the authors of man's laws be (as I said) the superior and
inferyour magistrates, Cause.
as emperouces kings, princes, common weith. cities, etc. But forasmoch as men
be here offended and grieved, thinkinge y^ they ought not to keep these laws
because they be but the ordynaunces of men: Therefore we must have respect to
the principal cause of the magistrate which is god as witnesses Paul, Roma.
xiii. ^.
So that god which has institute and ordained ye rulers to be his ministers
and vicars, does also consequently allow their laws: Therefore it were not
greatly amysse ne unprofitable to make god him self in manner y^ cause and
author of humane laws.
which laws god do publysh and promulgate by the^ as by his instruments and
means. Cicero.
Cicero in his.ii. book Delegibus, makes y^ laws of nature causes of huma^e
laws where he says. N^^^ aute^ videntur primu^ humane leges e legibus nature.
That is, men's laws seem first to have spronge out of the laws of nature.
wherefore men's laws be so tarforth honest and good as they be either to the
conseruacion or to the declaracion of the natural laws but if they be
repugnau^t to the law of nature, forth with they are to be judged un honest and
tyrannycall, and again they be wicked and ungodly, if they be against gods
law.

Me^nes laws be deuidedd into civil or te^porall laws, Parts.
and into ecclestasticall laws which heretofore have be^ called po^tyficyall
laws. I call ecclesiastical laws, such ordynaunces as concern the honest
ceremonies and rytes in y^ co^gregacyo^. Also such as concern priuilegies
revenues and stipendes of the ministers of the church, and such like, which
laws so long as they be not repu^gnau^t to chrystianitie and gods word are to
be observed, and kept not only because such laws and ordinances are in
effect civil laws and necessary to the right institucyo^ of a publyque weal,
but also because gods word commands us to noury^he y^ mynisters of y^
church, and that all thing be in the church semyngly and in order. Effects


The same effects and officies that be appointed to rulers may be assigned
also to their laws, for y^ ruler ought to exercise his office, to judge, and
defend, according to y^ laws, Now the officyes or effects of humane laws
by y^ word of god be these To defend y^ gilties, to punysshe y^ gyltie, to
drive away intu^ies To reueng iniutyes done to y^ subjects These offices
thapostle does assign to y^ rulers / and also saint Peter in his first
eppstle cap. Rom^. xiii. b
ii. Ite^, to co^serue y^ publyque honesty. To co^serue and mayntein a quiet
and peacible common wealth. Cicero lib. iii. delegibus.
For as Cicero testifyeth, such is y^ efficacye and strengeh of y^ laws, that
without them neither any house, neither city, neither nacyo^ca^ stand, neither
ye hole nature of things nor y^ world it self. Item to declare and expound
the laws of nature, to correct vices, to commend virtues.

THE co^traryes to humane laws be these. Contraryes
To say men's laws be not co^uenyent and mete for christen men to use. To
affirm that the gospel takes away humane laws and polytyque ordynaunces,
where as the gospel is a spirytual kingdom, John^. xviii. f
as witnesses Christ sayng, my ki^gdome is not of this world To deny that
humane laws made of any inferior magistrate are to be kept. To deny that
me^nes laws be violent and tyranny call, when they be repugnaunt to nature and
wicked and ungodly, when they be contrary to the law of god. To deny yt
ecclesiastical laws concerning honest ceremonies, stipendes and lyuynges of
the ministers of the church, and such like are to be kept, who so ever made
them so that the same be admytted and ratyfyed by the king and head rulers. To
deny y^ theffectes of humane laws may be taken forth of scripture as much as
pertayneth to the office of the rulers. Anabaptist^s


To forbydde with the Anabaptists the use or exercise of humane laws unto
Christen men. To condemn with the said Anabaptists all politic laws and
ordinances of man, and in their place to substitute and ordeyne the te^porall
laws of Moses. To affirm that temporal laws touch not the conscience
contrary to y^ doctryn of Pau. which says, we ought to obey not only for
fear of vengeance but also because of conscience. Rom^. xiii. ^
Yea the works of the polytyque life and kepinges of me^ns laws be good
works i^ y^ godly persons and a true worship of god. For by y^ same and all one
commandment we obey the rulers and keep their laws. For y^ self same god
which has bydd^ us to give honor unto the rulers has commanded us also to
keep their laws.

Of the gospel. CA XXI. Diffinicion

THe gospel is a preaching of repentance and ^orgeuenes of sins in
Christ's name.

This diffiuicyon is made of y^ parts Probacion
of the gospel and appears by the words of Christ where after his
resurrection be said to his disciples. Thus it is written and thus it behooved
Christ to suffer and to tyse again from death the.iii. day, and that repentance
and remissyo^ of sins should be preached in his name among al natyons. etc.
Christ is the person for whose sake repentance is preached and for who^
forgeuenes of synnts chances.

THE cause of the gospel disclosed is Cause.
y^ mercy of god by which god promised the^ glad tidings to ma^kynd
co^cerni^ge Christ. Ephe. i.
This cause y^ apostle otherwhies calls y^ acceptable pleasure of god,
otherwhyles grace. The promise also may be y^ cause of y^ gospel according to
the sayng of P. put a part to preach y^ gospel of god which he promised before,
etc. Roma. l. ^


Hither unto belong also such places of scripture as co^teyn the promise of y^
gospel which first was made to Ada^ and afterward to Abraham and so by little
and little of te^tymes afterward to the holy fathers. Genesis iii. Genesis xii. xvii.
and. xxii. The mean.
Christ is the mean or person i^ whom god has promised the gospel to
mankind, and in whom it was first reveled and disclosed at the time appointed
y^ god had set with himself and determined y^ thorough him in him and for him
should be offered to all y^ believe forgyuenes of sins which is the very
effect of the gospel. The holy ghost lightneth to the gospel which was
promised in Christ and now opened. The ill^minator to the^ Gospel. Thoccasion
of the promise*
Now man's nature oppressed. with syn and death for the fall of Adam was y^
occasion of y^ gospel first promised and afterward disclosed. This occasyon is
opened in the.iii. chap. of Genesis, where even in the very sins the gospel
is promised to Adam. The part of the gospel Luc. iiii. ^


There be.ii. parts of the gospel repentance and remyssyon of sins,
temyssyo^ of sins is the propre part of y^ gospel, repentance the mean and
entrance of remissyo^. For in repe^tau^ce is knoweleged the syn which known
the sinner is occasioned to fle to Christ as to a phisicio^ for whom sins be
forgyue^. And for this cause Christ begi^neth his preaching with puokyng me^ to
repentance as it is red in Math. Mathe. iiii. ^
From that time Jesus began to preach and say repent ye, the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. Also in Mark. Mat. (...)
The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of god is at hand repent ye and believe
the gospel. Not that it is the propre office of Christ to preach repentance
but he repeteth the doctrine of Johan concerning penance to thyntent he might
co^tyrme the same* and also that we might know that by the knowlegyng of our
sins which in repe^tau^ce does chance we have intraunce and access to
Christ.

Theffectes of the gospel be taken commonly out of ye parts and things
incide^t to the gospel, Theffectes of the gospel.
which follow remission of sins as y^ propre effects of y^ gospel which be
these. To preche repentance. This effect is certain of thexemple of Christ
which began his prechynge with repentance. Also of thexemple of John^ Baptyst
the messenger and runner before. This effect also must necessarily go before,
because without p^achyng of repentance, there is no occasyon to come to
remissy on of sins / for repentance is in manner y^ cause of faith, as here
after shall be declared. which obteyneth forgyuenes. Item to prech remission of
sin^es in Christ / for y^ promise of y^ gospel was made in Christ and disclosed
in Christ, for thobteyninge of remission of sins.

Also these effects. To preach iustifycacion in Christ, and that our
reconsiliacion with god the father is in Christ To preach that we be rightous
and well taken of god the father for Christ's sake. To preach the giuinge of
the holy ghost, and of the everlasting life in Christ. To teach that y^
conscience is in rest and quiet through Christ, as witnesses Paul, Roma. v
we have pear toward god by our Lord Jesus Christ. To teach y^ we please god
for no works or merits of our own, but only for Christ. And this is y^
very true lyberty of y^ gospel, The true liberty of the gospel.
to know yt we be reconcyled and made at one with god through Christ although we
satisfy not y^ law. Hither pertayne y^ places of y^ scripture which be
concerning the promise of y^ new couenaunte (...) testament as Jeremy. 31.
Ezechi. 35. etc. To teach y^ true worship of god true faith and fear which
worship was almost out of use and lost by reason of y^ humane and pharisaical
co^stitucions, as y^ prophets every where complain.

These effects be universal and frank even as the gospel is a frank promise
and uniuersall. But yt theffectes of y^ gospel chance not to al me^ is because
al me^ believe not. For faith is the mean whereby theffectes of the gospel be
purchased.

Co^traryes to y^ gospel be these. Contraries to the gospel
To a^fyrme that the promise of the gospel is particular which error is
reproved by many places of scripture as Math xi. ^. Tim^.ii. To say the
gospel was known to nature, Against which error Paul alone is sufficient
declaring that it was hid and at last releued and opened (...) god above. Ephe.
ii. ^. iii.
To affirm that the fathers in the old testement had an other gospel promised
than we have now which error may partly be confuted by the place of Paul.i.
Cor. x. where be says that all the fathers drank of the spiritual rock and
the rock was Christ If therefore the fathers drank of Christ Ergo they had
also y^ gospel known be ^ spir^te, i^ which Christ, was promised. To co^te^de
y^ y^ gentiles had y^ law of nature i^ stead of y^ gospel, y^ Iues y^ law of
Moses and christian me^ y^ gospel of Christ, but this error, isope^ since by
y^ testimonies of scripture it is evident y^ there has been always one and the
same gospel from the begi^ning to which who soever has given credit and faith
have been saved. To affirm that the gospel do promise forgiveness of sines unto
such also as doubt.

To say the gospel does promise forgiveness of sins, condicionallye if it be
purchased with works. To say the gospel promyseth remission of sins to idle
persons which without any true mocion of mind and without faith take it.
To grant that any man can be believe the gospel without the calling and
lyghteninge of the holy ghost. To deny the gospel to be a frank promise. To
deny theffectes of the gospel freely to chance without y^ and or respect of
works. To say theffectes of the gospel do chance partelye by faith partly
by our works. To say the promise of the gospel must be measured by
predestinacion and not of it self. To dream y^ the gospel is only preached
by the spirit in the heart and that there need not any outward preaching and
ministracion of the word contrary to the doctrine of thapostle. Roma. x. d
To say theffectes of the gospel do chance without faith. To preach one
part of the gospel without the other as repentance without remission of
sins, or on the contrary part. remyssion of sins without repentance to
make me^ idle and careless by ouermoch preachi^g of remission of sins not ones
touching repentance y^ other part of y^ gospel. To grant that without
preaching of repentance, the gospel may be rightly received. To affirm that
forgyuenes of sinnnes is had without penance. The true. diffinicion of penance
I call penance the true fearing or broosing of ye conscience and the
acknowleging of sines. For the conscience being thus made afraid and stricken
down to ye ground by the knowledge of sins takes first an occasion to draw
nere unto Christ by faith and to receive at his hands remyssion of sins Item
to say the gospel for this cause preaches penance that remyssion of sins
should be given for our works sake or for our own worthynes. This error I
have debated and refuted in the handlyng of ye parts of the gospel.

Of faith. CA. XXII.
Faith is an assured trust upon the promyses of Christ, Diffinicion of faith.
iustifienge al such persons before god by his acceptau^ce as have this faith
certain and undoubted In the epi. to ye Ebrues, Prove. Hebr. xi. a
faith is said to be an assurance of things which are hoped for, yt is to
say, a most certain knowledge without doubting. And this most certain knowledge
Paul expresses in Abraham with most lively terms, Roma. iiii. d
saying: which Abraham: contrary to hope byleued in hope, that he should be y^
father of many nations, according to that which was spoken. So shall thy sede
be. And he faynted not in the faith, nor yet co^sidred his own body which was
now deed, eue^ when he was almost an.^. year old, neither yet yt Sara his wife
was past child beringe yet he staggered not at y^ promise of god through
unbelieve, but was made strong in the faith, and gave honor to god, fully
asured y^ what he had promised, yt he was hable to make good, and therefore was
it reckened to him for rightousnes. Hitherunto we have rehearsed these words of
Paul. Now y^ faith is a trust or confidence upon the promyses of Christ is
declared by an other word of the said text in the epist. Hebre. xi. a
to y^ Ebrues, where as it is called a certen^y of things which are not seen.
Also in thexemple before remembered of Abraham where Paul said yt he staggered
not, Roma. iiii, d
ne wauered at the promise of god we se manefestly yt the promise is the propre
object or matter whereupon faith works, Christ is the person for whom y^
promise was made according to this sayi^g In thy sede all nations shall be
blessed This sede was Christ as witnesses Paul. Gene. xii. a Gal. iii. c
Now of theffecte and workyng of faith which is that it justifies, we be
certefied by Paul, who concludes saying. Arbitramur igitut ^ide iustifica^t
homine^ absque operibus legis. yt is to say Therefore we judge yt a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law Ite^, in y^.v. chap. he says.
Because therefore we are justified by faith. Roma. v. a
we are at peace with god, through our lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have a
bryngi^g in through faith unto this grace wit^^ we stand. I added (before god)
because I would seperat y^ ciuyle justice from the justice of y^ gospel. we be
justified by unpucacio^ or gods acceptannce.
Also Iaded (by acceptaunce) y^ is to say, by imputacyon, or imputatyuely,
because I would take away y^ opinion of our own merit or works For not
according to our merit or works faith iustifyeth but according to grace by
acceptaunce or imputacio / for as Paul says. Roma. iiii. a
To him y^ works is y^ reward not rekened of favor but of deuti, but to him
y^ works not but byleueth on him y^ iustifyeth y^ ungodly, is his faith
counted for rightwysnes. By these words thapostle puts as co^traryes
together merit and imputacio^. ^ene. xv. b Roma. iiii. u
Also in y^ exemple of Abraham y^ scripture says. Abraham believed god and it
was counted unto him for rightwysnes. Also David in his psalm says. psalm.
xxxi. ^
Blessed i^ y^ man to whom god shall not ^pute sin. Truly we have here an
exe^ple in Abraham of a sure and undoubted faith, which is y^ father of that
believe, y^ by thexe^ple of hi^ we might be justified by faith. THE causes of
faith be y^ holy ghost and the word. The causes of faith.
For y^ holy ghost by a mean that is general and appointed of god, moves
the hertes, neither does he give faith but by the word, Roma x. d
according to the saying of Paul. Faith is of hearing. and hearing by the
word of god. Furthermore the cause also of faith, is the holy ghost, for faith
is his gift, i. corinth. xil. ^
as affirms saint Paul. Also repentance in manner is a cause of faith, or at
leest a great occasion. For by repentance the sin is known, now the knowledge
of sin does ministre an occasion to haste unto Christ, which so sone as he is
caught by faith forgyueth sins, but because re^e^tau^ce is a part of the word
or gospel therefore this cause is comprised under y^ word nether shall we need
to sever it from y^ word Faith of which we speak here is not cloue^ into
parts: Parts
For it is one certain mocio^ of mi^de having a steadfast eye upon the promyses
of Christ and assentinge to him, but forasmoch as y^ scripture ^isce^neth the
true and lively faith from the feigned and deed faith, therefore faith may be
after a manner divided into the true faith and feigned faith, not y^ faith which
is true and justifies can be feigned or deed but that we might know y^ the
deed and feigned faith is unprofitable unto iustificacion and differs nothing
in deed from an opinion. The true faith from the feigned is discerned of Paul,
^timoth. i. b
y^ quick and lyuinge faith is dyuyded from the ded and ineffectual faith of
s. James in his epistle. Jacob. ii. d
But as touching to that division of faith which y^ scole men unto this day
have followed I will speak herafter.

One of the principal effectees of faith is iustifycacio^ of which all the rest
depe^de and proceed. Theffectes or works of faith.
This effect is confirmed by many places of scripture and also by sundry
exemples, as by the textes of Paul before remembered where he says, We judge
therefore y^ man is justified by faith Itm^, Roma. iiii. d Roma. v. a Abacuc.
ii. a Gala. iii. d
Justified therefore by faith we are at pe^x with god. etc. Also y^ prophet Abacuk
says. The rightous man shall live by faith. Ite^ to the gal. Paul writes. The
law was our scholemayster unto Christ yt we might be justified by faith. Gene.
xv. b Roma. iiii. a
Exemples prouinge the same be these, Abraba^ believed god and it was counted
unto him for rightousnes, Christ said to the sinful woman. Thy faith has saved
the. Math. ix. c Math. ix. d
Als^ to the blind man he said, look up thy faith has saved the.

Also these effects be of faith. To make the conscience quyete, Roma. v. a
accordiuge to the testimonye of Paul, Iustyfyed therefore by faith we are at
peax with god through our Lord Jesus Christ. To ascertayne us that we please
god, for without faith it is impossible to please god To make us certain of
gods promise To make us sure of everlasting life. Johan. iii. c Act. xv. v.
For he that believes in the son has life everlasting. To be a mean whereby
hertes be puryfyed. To make us the sons of god. Gala. iii. d
For ye be all the sons of God (says Paul) by the faith which is in Christ
Jesus. To make that our sines be not imputed unto us, psalm. xxxi. a
according to the psalm, blessed is the man to whom god shall not account sin.
To save the beleuers that they be not a shamed, Esa. xxviii. d. Roma. x. c
according to the scripture, who so ever believes in him shall not be ashamed.
To gendre in us a calling upon Christ. Roma. ^
For how (says thapostle) shall they call on him whom they believe not. To work
in us hope and love toward god according to y^ works of the prophet, let
them hope in the, which have known thy name. etc But y^ knowledge of god is
only by faith To bring to pass that al things may be possible unto us as
Christ him self records saying. ^ar. xl. ^
Have confidence in god verelye I say unto you whosoever euir shall say unto this
mountain take away thy self and cast thy self into the sea and shall not waver
in his heart but shall be leave those things which he says shall come to pass
what so ever he says shall be done to him. Thus the faith of Ezechias got a
right goodly victory against the Assitians. i. Reg. xvii.
By faith David adventured upon Golyath and slew him. By faith the children of
Israel believed God, and Phatao was drowned in the sea. Roma. x. b
To work in y^ faithful confession. To work true giui^g of thanks to god,
when we be ascertayned by faith that god is merciful unto us and that our
works do please him, the effects also of faith be all good works as fruits
of charity which y^ they please god our faith assures us after it knows y^
god is mercyful. And these effects be called testimonies of faith by which the
beleuers are known that the word is not the cause of faith, but. But yt there
may be a difference between the true workers that work by faith and
hypocrytes which pretend y^ same feynedly, we ought to judge by the word
which declares either of the^. A hepe of good works as fruits or effects of
faith y^ apostle rekeneth up To. xii. and Gala. v.

Contraryes to faith be these: Contraries
To grant that faith is only a knowledge of the hystory of Christ, how he was
conceived, borne, crucified, and dyed. To say scripture requires faith, y^ is
a qualite i^ us. and not that co^sydereh only the promyses of Christ. To say y^
wicked have all one says with the godly, which error is no error y^ faith
after y^ scholemen* Scholemen.
be but a knowledge of the bystorye of Christ. To affirm y^ faith is a
principle or a cause, bryngyng with it other virtues for which virtues we be
pronounsed rightwyse. The scolemen divide says in to says formata^
acquisita^, and infusam.
To divide faith with the scolemen into faith formed, acquyred and infu^ded, so
yt the wicked gentyles have formed faith although they lack y^ works of
charity, and yt the i^fu^ded faith does not iustifye, onles it be form with
charity. So at last, yt the acquyred faith suffiseth to iustificacio^. To
grant y^ the cause of faith is our love, which error comes of yt the causes
of faith be not known which be tholy ghost, the word and repe^tau^ce.
Anabapti^^^
To hold with the Anabaptists only tholy ghost, contrary to Paul's saying.
Faith is of hearing, hearing by y^ word of god, Hebionites.
To say with the Hebionites that the faith in prosecucyon ought to be denied and
kept in the heart. To say faith is but an opinion which dare not approach to
god by calling upon, or which wauereth. To deny that faith may be e^creased,
co^trari to the parable of yt mustarde sede. and many other exe^ples of
scripture. To call that a true faith, which good works do not follow a
witnesses of y^ same. To say faith iustifyeth not alone, but by yt help of
works, or y^ faith pryncipallye, and the works seco^darill do justify. This
error is suffcye^tly shaken and confuted by the words of Paul, which be,
without works, freely. To hold that faith pertayne to the knowledge of Christ,
and the works of charity to iustifycacyo^. To say faith cannot justify,
because faith is in y^ understanding, and just ice in the will. The solucyo^
of this error hangs of the manifold signifycacyo^ of this word faith,
which taken only for a knowledge is a quality: But when it is taken for an
assent of ye promise of Christ, so it is not a quodlite out a relacio^. To
grant yt our good works be accepted of god of themselves, and not for faithes.

A brefe treatise of faith, taken forth of the fathers and approved doctors,
which co^ferme y^ aforesaid doctrine of faith, The diffinicyon,
Faith, says, s. Augustyn, Aug. de p^dest, scto^rum.
is to think with an assent such things as perteyn to the chryste^ relygio^.
Here thou see that unto faith not only y^ knowledge of the historye is
required, but an asse^t. Now to the chryste^ relygyo^* perteyn chefly the
promyses of Christ, which believed make the chryste^ relygyo^. August. super
Iohe^m
The same s, Augustyn also says, what is faith but to believe that thou see
not? But the promyses of Christ be such things as be not seen but conceived by
faith. Also in his book de fide ad Petrum. Faith, says he, is y^ beginning of
man's salvation without which no man can come to the nombre of the children of
god, without which also all the loboure of man is vain Lo this place openly
testyfyeth of what faith Austyn speaks, of that no dout which makes us the
children of god. and that is, which conceyueth the promyses of Christ, and is
assured to please god for Christ. If Austyn had meant only of a knowledge it
should follow that al such were forth with y^ children of god as know the hystory
of Christ although they be led with no inward mocyo^ of mind.

Theffectes of faith by doctors.
August. Aug. quest. xxiiii.
where a steadfast faith is not there can be no ryghtwysenes. For the ryghtwyse
lives by faith.

ALSO he says. There is no riches, no treasure, no substance of this world
greter, than is the catholyque faith, which saves synful me^, lyghtneth ye
blind. ac.

ALSO in his book de natura and gracia he says. If christ dyed not freely, Ergo
all mankind can not be justified and redeemed from the most just pre of god
Also in an other place* faith is the first thing that make the soul subject
to god, afterward it gives precepts of living which kept our, hope is
confyrmed, charity nouryshed, and that thing begins to shine which before
only was believed.

Saint Ambrose, Ambros. de virginitate.
O faith more plentuous and rich then all treasures, more strong more saving
tha^ al physicyons. Chrysostom also said, Chrysostom. sup Math.
Faith is a lamp, for as a lamp lyghteneth the house, so faith the soul.

Causes of faith by fathers.
THE scholemen make charity y^ cause of faith, but y^ doctors and fathers of
the church be against it. For saint Austyn writes with open words, August.
de agone. ca.
y^ faith must go before charity. Also Gregory says. Greg. upon Ezechi^l.
Onles faith be first had, we can in no wise atteyne to y^ spritual love, for
charity goes not before faith, but faith before charity. No man ca^ love y^
thing yt he believes not, likewise as he ca^ not hope The pa^tes of faith. ^y
doctors.


THE most ancient fathers be all agreed that faith is one certain mocyon
which looks upon the promys^e of Christ and assenteth to the ^ame. It is but a
dream and a thing forged of scoleme^ to deuyde faith in fidem for matam
infusa^ et acquisita^, with their wicked opinions which they have hadded to y^
same.

Of iustifycation. CA. XXIII.
IUstifycacyon is a fre imputacyo^ of remyssyo^ of sins in Christ which is
purchased by faith to the possessynge or receyuynge of everlasting life.

THE first part of the diffinicyo^ is certain and proved by the third and
fourth Pro^e of (...) diffinicion
chapt. to the Roma. where the apostle says. But now with out the law the
ryghtwysnes of god is manifest. Ite^ they be justified freely by his grace. etc.
The i^heretau^ce is therefore given by faith yt it may be of grace. Ite^ a
reward is not i^puted of favor but of duty: etc. Ephesi^ns. ia. ye be saved
by grace thoroughe faith. Now the imputacion is free because it is accounted
of favor and not of duty, like as David declares the blessedness of man,
Roma. iiii. a.
unto whom god ascribes rightousnes without deeds. The addycyo^ of remissyon
of sins declares what is meant by iustificacyon, yt is to wit trmissyon of
sins. Now Christ is the person for whom such as believe are released of their
sins. Faith is y^ mean whereby to purchase iustifycacyo^ or forgyuenes of
sins because faith agrees to the promyses of Christ according to Pa. Roma.
iii. d
sayng, we judge therefore that a man is justified by faith. Everlasting life is
a thing incyde^t to iustifycacyo^ which necessarily follows ye justified
according to this text. He yt believes on hi^ has everlasting life. John^.
xvii. a
Also this, As thou have given him power of every flesh, y^ unto so many as
thou have given him he may give everlasting life.

THE causes of iustificacyo^ be, Causes.
ye fre al ^owau^ce i^putacyo^ through y^ mercy and favor of god, and faith
the obteyner of mercy. These causes are very fayrly seen and beholden in the
exemple of Abraham ^ was justified unto whom forasmoch as he gave credit to
the mercy, rightousnes was accounted. Roma. iiii. ^
These causes thapostle lays as co^traryes against duty, reward and merit,
which things the scholeme^ dreme to be the causes of iustificacion. Against
whom and against their p^decessours y^ Pelagia^s s. Aug. August. de natura et
gracia.
disputes very sharply, proving with many arguments y^ grace is not given for
our merits. Doubtless faith is y^ cause of iustificacio^, not because it is a
qualite or work in us, but because it receives y^ mercy promised in Christ.

Justification whereof we treat here, Nopartes of Iustificacio^,
is not divided in to pertes. For we speak here of iustificacion yt is of
valor before god, and that stands in remission of sins in the conscience.
The justice of the law apperteyneth to an other place, which only served in y^
polecy of Moses. Also the justice of reason perteyneth not to this place which
is wrought of reason by y^ fulfilling of honest works.

THE propre effects of iustificacio^ be remission of sins, Effects or
works of justification.
for hereunto we be justified, yt we might receive remission of sins. Also
tra^quillitie or peax of conscience because of the release of sins. For being
justified by faith, we are at peax with god. Roma. v. ^
Also to be sure we plese god, and that we be the children of god. To know yt
the holy ghost is given us. To know we have and shall have everlasting life. To
be certainly persuaded y^ god regards us. These and se^blable effects or
works of iustificacion appear openly in the Romans. For if we have peace when
we be justified by faith through our lord Jesus Christ, we ca^ not be but
certeynly persuaded yt we have god our mercyful and good lord, yt we please
god, that we be the sons of god, yt god cares for us, not only in time of
wealth but also in our very trouble and affliction. And therefore it follows i^
y^ same chapitre, we reioise in hope of the glory of god. Roma. v. a
Neither do we so only, but also we glory in tribulacio^. For we know y^
tribulacio^ bri^geth patience, patience trial, trial brings hope, and hope
makes not ashamed, yt is to say is not confounded or doubts, because the
love of god is shed abroad in our hertes by the holy ghost, which is given
unto us. etc. Ite^ a little before, but god sets forth his love yt he has
to us forasmoch as while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us much more the^
now since we are justified in his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through hi^.
For if when we were sinners we were made at one with god by ye death of his son,
much more now when we be made at one shall be p^serued by his life. Finaly it is
now y^ lowest effect of justification to work well. For we be justified to do
good works, as witnesses Paul to y^ Ephe. saying: By grace ar ye made safe
through faith, Ephe. ii. b
and that not of your selfs, for it is the gift of god and comes not of
works lest any man should boste hi^ self. For we be his workmanship created i^
Christ Jesus unto good works. Undoubtedly it were very profitable to drive this
effect full often i^ to the ears of y^ hearers of gods word, lest they be made
idle and careless, not declari^g with any good works yt they be justified. Truly
our good works please god, because they be done of y^ justified which ^ceiue
Christ by faith, which Christ only reco^cileth us to the father, and causes
that our works please god.

CONTRARYES to iustifycacion be these: Contraries to justification Scholemen.
To say with the scholemen, iustifycacyon signifies in us a quality or
virtue, or Infusionem habitus. To say iustifycacyon is partycular. To say the
causes of iustifycacyon be our merytes, works, or worthynesse. To say with
the Pelagia^s, iustificacio^ is given of our merits, and of nature. To say with
the scholeme^, Merito^ co^gruu^ et condignum.
y^ me^ deserve iustificacio^ ex merito co^gruo or co^digno. To say me^ deserve
iustificacion actu elicito, doing yt lies i^ the^. That is to say, when reason
being sorry for ye sin, fetches out an act of lou^g god or works well. To
defend with the scholeme^ and philosophers the rightousnes of reason against the
rightousnes of faith, Philosophers.
and to grant wtthe^ yt we be recounted ryghtous before god, for the
ryghtousnes of reason. To say the fathers were justified by the law of nature,
the Jews by the law of Moses, and that we christian me^ be justified by the law
of the gospel. To grant yt the iustificacion of reason of Moses and of the
gospel, do nothing differ. To grant yt contricion and charity, is enough to
get iustificacion. To interpret scripture falsely where it says we be
justified by faith, that is as certain lewd persons do interp^te by the hole
doctrine of the christen religion and so consequently by the law. To say yt
the conscience may be otherwise pacified then by fre iustificacion. To deny
feee iustificacion by gods imputacion, Roma. v. a
contrary to the fourth chap. of Paul to y^ Romans To glory of iustificacion and
nevertheless to utter no good works. To say iustificacio^ can stand or endure
without the sequel of good works. To deny yt the preaching of iustificacion
without ye final effect of good works, is rote of al mischief.

Of hope. CA. XXIIII. Diffinicion

HOpe is a certain undoubted awaytyng of the bileued salvation which is not
seen, through patience in faith.

BY hope says Paul, Probacions of the definicion.
we be saved, but hope if it be seen, is not hope, for yt a man sees, why
should he hope the same, but if the thing which we se not, Roma. viii. d
we hope, the^ do we with patience abide for it. These words of y^ apostle be a
sufficient prove of the diffinitio^, by which he will yt such as have byleued
the salvation set forth in Christ, should not doubt, but certeynly hope and
abide as a thing invisible with the fleshly eyes, and that by patience. I added
(in faith) that you sholdest not think yt hope can stand with out faith, for they
be things a^nexed, and the one ca^ not be severed from the other, i^ so much
y^ scripture co^fou^deth many times faith and hope together, as Psalm. 77. the
prophet says. The children yt shall be borne, shall show their children yt they
may put i^ god their hope. I pray you what other thing here is hope the^
faith. This alliau^ce of faith and hope is very well expressed i^ the epistle to
the Ebr. (...)
where faith is defined to be a sure co^fide^ce of things not hoped for and a
substance of things not seen. I added furthermore in the diffinitio^ these
words (certain and undoubted) to take away thopinio^ of such triflers as
think that hope may stand with a wavering mind. For like as faith can not be with
doubti^g as clearly appear by y^ words of Paul in thexe^ple of Abraham: So
likewise neither hope can be with doubtinge. For hoping is a sure persuasion that
you shall receive those things which you have by the word conceived by faith,
promised unto the. Finally under the word of salvation, I co^prise al those
things which be promised to such as believe in the word whether they be
spiritual or corporal goods, as well in this life, as after this life: Al which
things hope abides and looks for in faith certain and not doubting.

THE causes of hope be tholy ghost and faith. The causes of hope.
The holy ghost is cause forasmoch as it is his gift, and he enge^dreth it in us
witnessing Paul. Hope is not ashamed, because the love of god is shed abroad i^
our hertes by tholy ghost. Roma. v. a
Moreover ye holy ghost is the cause of hope, Roma. viii. d
forasmoch as he helps our hope. For thapostle after he has finished the
argument yt he makes of hope out of the formal cause of salvation, forth with
he adds likewise also y^ spirit helps our i^firmities. I make faith the
cause of hope, because of the great affinity biewene the^. Faith bileueth, hope
abides and waits for the things bileued, for the^ we hope y^ god will give
us such things as he has promised unto us by his word, when with a faith we
co^ceyue god and know yt he is merciful unto us in Christ.

THE object or matter whereupon hope works, is the promise of gods mercy i^ al
things promised. The prouoki^g cause to hope is the commandment of god. psa.
4. Offer ye a sacrifice of rightousnes, and hope ye in the lord. Ite^. psalm.
146 The lord is very well pleased with such as fear him, and in them which hope
upon his mercy.

There be no pertes of hope of which we here speak. No parts of hope.
For it in one certain mocio^ or affection of mind, which abides with a sure
trust for the things promised by the word, yet nevertheless hope has an eye
as well the corporal as to y^ spiritual promise, in yt we certeynly hope and
bileue yt we be the children of god, yt god will keep us i^ faith, yt he will
keep al his promises, and give us af^ this life, life everlasting. Also yt he
will norish defend and save us from al euis and perils.

Theffectes of hope chefly spring of y^ things promised and byleued by faith.
Theffectes of hope.
And because faith, iustificacion and hope be knit together the one to the other,
they borow diverse effects and works either of other. Now the promises be
of.ij. sundry things toward which hope also extends it self, and therefore
also double effects of hope may be gathered, some be gathered of the promise
of things spiritual, and other some of y^ promise of things temporal.
Effects proceeding of the promise of spiritual things may be these. Certeynly
to hope and be assured yt our sins be released in Christ. Certainly to hope
yt we be the sons of god. To hope certeynly y^ god is merciful unto us. To
hope verily y^ god will preserve us i^ faith, yt he will increase it unto us and
furnish the same with spiritual gifts: with sure hope to look after this life for
life everlasting. Therefore Paul and the rest of thapostles, yea and Christ him
self going about to comfort the godly persons against the slau^dres of the
cross uses none other argument the^ yt is taken forth of the hope of y^ life
to come. He yt shall continue (says Christ) until the end shall be saved. Paul
likewise says, we be saved by hope. Roma. viii^ Philip. iii.
Also every creature looks for deliuerau^ce. Item to the Philippia^s he says:
Our co^uersacion is in heaven from whens also we look for a savior. To be
short, godly persons can have no greater solace in all their afflictions the^
the hope of the life to come. The work also and effect of hope, is to stey the
godly persons yt they do not shrink from y^ troth according to the psalm. He
y^ trusts in y^ lord as y^ mount of Sio^, psalm. x. ^ Roma. v. d
shall not be removed for ever. Ite^ not to make ashamed according to Paul's
saying: hope makes not ashamed, that is, it suffers not a man to perish, ne
the conscience to doubt of the promise or favor of god. In tribulacio^ to lift
up the conscience yt it fall not i^ to despair, but rather glory in the cross
of Christ, Roma. v. a
according to Paul's saying, we glory in the hope of the praise yt shall be
given of god, neither do we so only, but also we glory in tribulacio^. To make
us in adversity cast our trust upon the lord only, according to the saying of
the prophet, Psalm. ^vi.
under y^ shadow of thy wi^ges I shall trust. To make me^ imortal, according to
the saying of the wise man, Sapien. iii.
the hope of the holy persons is full of imortalitie. To indow us with the true
fear of god. For they (says the prophet) yt fear y^ lord, shall trust i^ hi^.
To be a sure sign of salvation. To. v. By hope we be saved. To make us blessed
for blessed is he, psalm. xxxiii.
says David, which trusts in hi^. To make us fear the malice of me^. psalm.
55. I shall trust in god, and shall not fear what man do unto me. Now theffectes
of hope proceeding of the promise of temporal things be these. To hope surely
y^ god will te^dre us. To hope surely y^ god will govern us. To hope surely
that god will defend us against all evils, as well inward as outward. Se^blable
effects be yet many i^ scriptures, and they arise for the most perte of the
promises annexed to the first commandment wherein god promises to be our god.

Co^traries to hope, Contraries to hope and heresies. Thomas de Aquino.
be these. To say hope is of things p^se^t, against. Paul To. 8. Hope if it
be seen is not hope. To define with Thomas y^ scholema^, to be a certain
expectacio^ of the bless to come, co^mi^g of grace and our merits, which
diffinitio^ is ^trary to it self, for if hope be a sure expectation, ergo it
can not be of our merits, for they ca^ never make hope to be sure. Also if it
be of grace, then is it not of our merits. Ite^ to say hope ca^ stand with out
faith. To say hope can stand with doubting, against the nature of true faith,
which is the cause of hope. To grant yt true and certain hope is our own
propre work. To deny yt the propre busynes of hope is upon the promise of gods
mercy. Scole men.
To say with Thomas y^ scholema^ yt hope can not stand with out our merits ^ that
if the merits be away, it is not hope, but a p^su^ptio^. To say hope is no
commandment of god. This error makes me^ slouthful and negligent in hope.
To say hope can stand with out the true fear of god, against y^ prophet: They
y^ fear the lord shall trust in hi^. To say that hope justifies, because in
scriptures hope and faith be confounded. I grant they be confounded, but yet
with such a difference that faith remain as cause of hope, and whereunto the
scripture imputes instificacion, but hope is theffect, and a thing annexed
unto faith. To say the hope of the wicked shall ones be profitable and
auaylable unto the^, contrary to the saying of the wise man. Prou. x.
The hope of the wicked shall perish. Also in ye book of wi^do^, Prou. ^.
it is written. The hope of y^ ungodly is like a dry thistle flour, that is
blowe^ away with the wind, it is like thyn scome yt is scatred abroad with the
wind, and like the smoke which is dispersed here and there with wind and as the
remembrance of a stranger that taryeth for a day, and then departs. etc.

Of love toward god CA. XXV.
Love toward god, Diffinicion.
is whereby we love him again, which first laued us in his son.

John^ i^ his epistle allows this diffinitio^ with these words: Probacion. i.
Io. iiii. b
we love god because he loved us, and sent his son to be a sacrifice for our
sins.

THE causes of our love toward god be these, Causes.
tholy ghost whose gift it is, and which moves the heart to love god. Ite^ the
love of god with which god loved us first, and also faith, which conceived and
knows the love of god toward us which known forthwt spri^geth up our love
toward god.

This love is not divided in pertes, No parts.
for it is one certain mocion or zele toward god, whereby god is loved for him
self, as S. Augustine says.

Theffectes of this love be known by y^ ij. Theffects or works of love.
commandment, which treats of y^ outward worship of god, engendered of our
great zele charity and love yt we bear toward god, which of it self
pertains to the first commandment, wherein is required also the loving of
god as an inward worship. For beside faith, fear also and love be referred to
the first commau^deme^t: So then theffectes of love toward god be these: To
fear god for fear, faith and love, be things kny^ together, and can not well
be plucked one from an other. But this effect proceeds only of the first
commandment. The rest y^ follow come forth of the second commandment for
the most perte. Ite^ not to abuse y^ name of god. Desyrously to hear the word
of god. To call on god in necessity. To ask help of god. To preche his word.
To confess his name. To render thanks to god. To obey god To worship, to
magnify, to praise, to glorifye god. Also to be a sign of the knowledge of god,
according to y^ sayi^g of John^: i. Io. iiii. b
who so ever loves is born of god, and knows god. To work y^ love of y^
neighbor, for he yt loves god of his own accord also will his love
neighbor. To be a sign yt we have faith. For where so ever ye love of god
theffect is, there must needs be also faith the cause wherefore these and
se^blable effects toward god, belong to such only as believe, and have already
received and known god by faith, and which already have felt y^ mercy and love
of god. Iosue. xxiii.
Iosue af^ long rehearsal of the benefits of gods mercy and love, stereth the
people again on their behalf to love God: Eccl. lvii. b
So we read y^ David the king with his hole heart praised and loved hi^ that had
made hi^, and therefore he brasteth forth i^ to love, praises and tha^kesgiuing:
So also s. Paul, being assured of y^ love of god toward hi^, hops again
that he shall vaynquish al evils. For he says: Roma. viii. ^
In all these things we overcome strongly through his help that loved us, for I
am sure, that neither death, neither life, neither angels, neither rule,
neither power, neither things p^set, neither things to come, neither height,
neither lowth, neither any other creature, shall be hable to sever us from y^
love of god, which is in Christ Jesus our lord.

Co^traries to ye love toward god be these. Co^traries to the love toward
god*
To say our love toward god goes before his luoe toward us. For so some
men will, yt we should begin at our love, so that we by loui^g god, might again
be loved of him. To say charity can stand with out faith or knowledge of god
going before. To say our love toward god arises when we begin to do well,
although as yet we have not faith. To deny tholy ghost to be cause of our love
toward god. To say god ought to be loved of us for any other thing the^ for
hi^ felf, that is, for the love wherewt he first loved us. Forasmoch as y^ love
of god is the cause provoking us to love him again. To grant yt our love or
charity toward god justifies us, contrary to scripture, which assigns
iustificacion only to faith as propre cause of y^ same. To say yt in this
world we may have so great love toward god, as shall be sufficient to be
pleded and laid to the judgment of god for our sins. To say our love
toward god may stand with distrust or fear, contrary to the place of John^
the first epistle where he says Fear is not in love, Io. iiii. d
but perfyte love casts out al fear. For fear has vexacyon, he that fears
is not perfyte in love. Undoubtedly this fear may well be called a servile
fear, because it is not coupled with faith. To say the love toward god is
thexecutio^ of y^ law, and therefore justifies. To which error I answer.
Albeit love toward god is the execution of the law, it follows not therefore
it is in our power to fulfill this love in such sort yt it may satisfy the law.

Of love toward the neighbor. CA. XXVI.
Love toward the neighbor is whereby the neighbor is helped by ye
commandment of god, Diffinicyon.
and which is the fruit, ha^dmayde or alley to faith which ca^ not be away
where true faith is present.

That y^ neighbor is to be helped by gods commandment, Pro^acion
the very tables of y^ x. commandments prove sufficiently. And again how
greatly god is plesed with this love of the neighbor, of which he has also
given commandment, it may be esteemed by this, y^ oftentimes in scripture god
p^ferreth it before his own honor as by his prophet Esaie he declares exp^sly
unto us sayi^g. Esaie. i. d
Offer me no more oblacions, for it is but lost labor, I abhor your incense.
etc. Cease from doing of evils and violence, learn to do right apply your
selves to equity, deliver y^ oppressed, help the fatherles to his right,
defend the widow. Esaie. lviii. d
etc. Also the same prophet: Behold, when ye fast your lust remains still. For
ye do no less violence to your detters. etc. Should yt be called fasti^g, or a
day yt pleases ye lord. This fasti^g says the lord pleseth not me, till the
time be you lose hi^ out of bondage yt is in thy danger, til y^ break y^ oath
of wiched bargains, til you let the oppressed go fre, and take from the^ al
manner of burthe^s. Dele thy bred to the ho^gry, and bring the ^ore fatherles
home i^ to thy house, when y^ see the naked cover hi^. etc. To this accords
Christ saying, Math. v. d
wherefore when you offrest thy gift at the aultee, and there reme^brest that thy
brother has ought against the, leave there thy offering before the alter, and go
thy way, be first made at one with thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Now yt love is the fruit, hand maid and alley of faith it is plain by y^
mutual and necessary cleui^g together with which the causes and effects be
coupled with in the^ selves. Also because love pleases not god with out faith
which only causes our works to be well taken with god, according to Paul, Roma.
xiiii. d workeme^ or Iusticiaries
what so ever is not of faith is syn. Also it is i^possible to plese god with out
faith. Now it is not all one thing with the christians and with the hethens, whose
good works these unshamefast workme^ do object against us, ^e such as will be
justified by their works.
for y^ hethe^s person have works of charity without faith, the christian me^ with
faith, but how much the charity of the christians diffre from charity of the
hethe^s declares sufficiently Christ, where he discerns the love of gentiles
or infidels from the love of the christen bileuers, Math. v. s
which pleases god. For we can not love according to thexe^ple of the heuely
father, yt we may be his children and perfect persons, unless we have faith
which gets christ who afterward gives the holy ghost, he finally makes by
renuinge our hertes and creating in the^ new mocions us apt and mete to
perform such love as pleases god, and which makes us his so^^es and perfect,
like as he is perfect. Finally y^ love to the presence of faith is always
required this text of Paul teaches. ^. Corin. xiii. a
Although I had al faith so y^ I could move mountains out of their places and
yet had not charity I were nothing. Also this of James. Jacob. ii. c
Faith without works is deed. Many exemples also in scripture be setforth which
declare charity necessarily to follow faith. Math. ii. ^.
The wise men com from the east to Christ they worship him. This is a work of
faith. They open their treasures and offer unto him gift ^ gold, frankensence
and myrre, this is a work of charity or love. Math. viii. b.
Also after yt Peter's wives mother was restored again Mar. i. c,
by Christ unto her health (which Luc. iiii. ^
thing could not be done without faith) she began to ministre and to serve Christ
and his disciples, which thing proceeds of love.

THE causes of love toward y^ neybour Causes.
be the holy ghost and faith. The holy ghost, because it is his gift, for he
causes love to proceed of a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
i. corint. xii. (...)
For of this love we mean here. Furthermore healinge or sanacion is the gift
of the holy ghost, and therefore also charity toward the neighbor is the gift
of y^ holy ghost. For all gifts be given to the use and behoue of the
neighbor, which by a general term charity compriseth. Faith is cause of
love toward the neighbor in that it feleth Christ who being felt and
gotten by faith, gives the holy ghost, he creates in us new mocions of
heart mete and apt to exercise the true charity that pleases god. To these
two causes may be added also the love that we bear to god. For he that loves
God, can not but love his neybour: Also a prouoki^g cause to y^ love of y^
neighbor is yt we know it to be y^ commandment of god according to the
saying of Christ: I give unto you a new co^maundme^t y^ ye love together. Ie.
^iii. d. ^. Johan. i. d
Also his disciple John^ testifies y^ same saying: this is his commandment
y^ we believe on his son Jesus Christ, and love one an other as he gave
commandment. S. Aug. upon the said place of Christ, I give you a new
commandment writes thus. He y^ loves god, can not despise y^ commandment
y^ he should love his neighbor. Also Greg. writes: Greg. lib. vii. moral.
because there be.ij. commandments of charity, the one of god, the other of
the neighbor, by y^ love of god is ge^dred the love of y^ neybour, and by the
love of the neighbor is nourisshed the love of god. And he y^ regards not to
love god, y^ same can not perfitly love his neighbor. The formal cause of
loui^g y^ neighbor is set forth unto us by Christ, Math. v. s. Luc. vi. d
where he wills us to declare y^ works of charity upon our neighbor, without
any respect of the circumstances, as of the time, person, place, and such like,
according to thexe^ple of the heavenly father, which makes his sun to arise on
the evil, and on the good, y^ is to say, which indifferently disperseth his
benefits upon all, neither looks he for kindness on their behalfes to who^ he
do good unto. This cause of y^ true love is also expressed by Paul where he
says yt i. Timo^. i. ^
the end of the commandment is love that comes of a pure heart of a good
conscience and of faith unfeigned.

ONE single thing is this love yt we Parts
now treat of, eue^ a zele toward yt neighbor co^mi^g of a pure heart, with a
testimony or declaracion of outward works. Against this, scripture sets
feyned love forbidden to the godly, which is done without faith and styring of
tholy ghost and appropriate to disse^blers or hypocrites, which though it
outwardly glistereth with glorious works, yet without faith it pleases not god.

AN hepe of theffectes hereof recites Effects or offices of this charity.
Paul. 1. Cor. 13. and To. 12. that is to wete these: To be pacie^t, loving,
not enuyous, not foul mouthed, not hault, not p^sumptuous, not seking his
own, not ready to anger, not thinking evil, not rejoicing in wickedness, but
ioying i^ the troth, bearing all things, bileuing al things, hoping all
things. Item to edify and profyt the neighbor. 1. Cor. 8. To rule al gifts.
1. Cor. 12. Now forth of the.12. chap. to the To. be taken these works. To
p^uent one an other in gyuing honor. To help the necessities of the godly. To
be ready to harbor. To speak well of persecuters. To joy with them that joy. To
weep with them y^ weep. To lay down the hault mind. To make him self egal with
the^ of the lower sort. Not to reacquite evil for evil. These effects and
se^blable may be generally comprised under the text of Paul. Charity works
not evil. To the foresaid works, Roma. x. Gala. vi. a
these also may be added. To accomplish the law of christ, I mean of loui^g the
neighbor. To cover a multitude of sines. 1. Pe. 4. To be a toke^ of light
received. ^. Io. ii. b.
For he y^ says he is in light (says s. John^) and hates his brother, is
yet darkness, Jacob. ii. c.
but he y^ loves his brother continues in light. To be a witness of y^ true
faith. For charity as effect witnesses of faith y^ true cause. To be a sign
of iustificacio^ received. For to this purpose we be justified y^ we should do
good works, under which be co^prysed also the works of charity. Of this
effect speaks Jacob. ii. ^.
James, where ye says. Ca^ his faith save hi^? as who should say, iustificacio^
can not stand ne endure where theffectes of faith be lacking.

NOW al these said effects of charity must be directed to the form aforesaid,
of which I spoke in the causes of charity, yt is to wete, to exercise the^
according to thexe^ple of the heavenly father not only upon the christen persons
(which nevertheless ought chefly to be done according to Paul which says: Gal.
6. ^
while we have time let us work good toward al me^, but i^ especial toward
the^ which are of the household of faith) but rather indifferently, upon good
and evil, without al manner respect. The world because it exercises not the
works of charity and love, according to thexemple of the heavenly father,
therefore it never loves truly, so that the love of it can please god.

Contraryes to charit^ toward the Contraryes
neighbor be these. To grant y^ love of y^ neighbor is not a gift of tholy
ghost. To say faith spri^geth of charity, and not charity of faith. To say yt
true love of the neighbor may stand without faith. To say love of the neighbor
pleases god without faith. To hold that the works of charity which good me^ do
differ nothing from the works of charity which the evil me^ and hypocrites
do. I answer. They differ nothing as perteyning to the outward sight, but as
perteini^g to the causes of which y^ works of either proceed, they do not a
little diffre also i^ thaccepta^ce of god, i^ y^ god aloweth the one, and
disaloweth the other. To say yt the true love of y^ neighbor which proceeds of
a pure heart, good conscience and faith unfeigned, is our own work To hold y^ the
love of y^ neighbor spri^geth not so greatly of faith as of a continual use
and customablenes like as the other virtues do, as by oftentimes doing justly we
be made just persons, with often doing well we be made good. So with often loving,
we get us an habit or hauour of love. This error in things civil is to be
borne, but i^ the charity or love of the neighbor it is a mischeuous error,
forasmoch as it utterly ouerwhelmeth the causes of love toward the neighbor.
To say a respect is to be had of y^ circu^sta^ces, as of the places, persons,
time and so forth, and that y^ se upon whom y^ extendest thy charity, whether
upon thy friends or enemies, christe^s or not christe^s. This error is
contrary to y^ form of love toward the neighbor, Math. v. g. Luc. vi. c.
which ought to be directed according to thexe^ple of the heuenlye father, as
before is said. They be hethen sayings y^ bid us have discrecion and respect
in thexercyse of charitable works. Ite^ to say charity is a gift of nature,
and is therefore in our powers to exercise a perfect love and charity. To which
error I make this answer. Albeit it be the law of nature to love the
neighbor, yet it follows not yt the perfect and full execution of y^ same is
in our powers now after the fall of Ada^. For who dare at this day glory y^
such charity is i^ us as proceeds of a pure heart good conscience and faith
unfeigned. Ite^ to say y^ charity toward the neighbor is perfect, so yt the
outward deeds be p^sent, although pure affections and co^senting to the outward
deeds be not there. This error is against the form of charity ii Timoth. i. ^
y^ s. Paul p^scribeth where he says that charity or love is the end of the
commandment coming of a pure heart, of a good conscience and of faith
unfeigned. To hold y^ charity or love toward y^ neighbor does justify,
because Paul calls i. Timoth. i. ^
it the end of the commandment. This error is sone answered, for I grant
that charity is the end of the commandment, of which things no man doubts
But the co^trouersye and question at this day is whether y^ charity which is
the^d of the commandment be in our powers so that we can execute the same
perfectly that is, of a pure heart, good conscience and unfeigned faith, which
perfect execution of y^ law of charity, forasmoch as it is not in our powers,
as every ma^s conscience ca^beare witness, surely our charity can not
justify, which nevertheless should in deed justify us if we were hable truly
and perfectly to accomplish and perform y^ same. And therefore christ because
he performed it of a pure heart good conscience and faith unfeigned did satisfy
the law co^cerni^g charity eue^ to ryghtousnes. Renso^s that charity iustyfyeth
not.
Moreover these reasons ensuing do prove yt the charity of the neighbor
justifies not.



THE object of faith, y^ is to say, the mat whereupon faith works, is y^ mercy
or grace promised, but y^ object of charity is y^ neybour. Ergo charity because
of the contrary obiectes can not justify.

S. Paul where as in the epistie to the To. and also to the Cori^. he reckeneth
up i^ manner al theffectes of charity, yet makes no mention of iustificacio^,
which y^ papists appoint unto charity as her propre effect, Ergo. etc.

THE propre end of y^ works of charity is y^ good me^ by the^ should declare to
the world yt they be justified, and for y^ fra^ke and fre iustificacio^ should
again on their behalf show the^ selves loving and tha^keful, Ergo the end of
charity can not be iustificacion.

IT is also contrary to this doctrine: To maynteyne that the true faith can
stand or endure without charity, which error is very strongly impugned of
John^ in his epistle. i, Ioh. i. a. ^
To say the love of the neighbor does justify less pri^cipally, and faith
more principally.

Of good works. CA. XXVII.
GOOD works which god has commanded in the decalogie or.x. Diffynicyon
commandments, containing the true worship of god, set forth to glorify god,
and spread his glory abroad, and that by them such as bileue not, might be
allured to receive the word, and praise god.

THAT good works be only the precepts of the decalogie or ten
commandments, Proof of this diffinicion
no man can deny, as well because the decalogie is thordynaunce of god, as
because unto it all good works which please god may be reduced. And
forasmoch as there be of the decalogie two tables, the first teching what we
owe proprely to god, the second what to our neighbor, therefore of necessite
there be two manner of works, some be spiritual to wards god, and some outward
and politic toward y^ neighbor, these without the spu^al be nothing worth,
ne plesau^t to god. For the spiritual commandments of the former table, be
the causes for which the outward and civil work toward the neighbor do
please god, according to y^ of Paul, Roma xiiii. d
what so ever is not of faith is sin, wherefore it agrees very evil to say as
the papists say, Papists.
yt only the civil or outward works be good works sithe^s y^ same for the
displeasau^ce in the eyes of god be unacceptable and unthankful onles faith be
joined thereunto, which only makes our works well taken of god. Now the
p^ceptes of the decalogie or. why the precepts of the decalogie be called good
works.
.x commandments be called good works not because they iustifye, but because
they be done of the good, and of such as be justified, and because god has
ordained the^. Certes, the.x. commandments conteyne y^ true worship of god
because they tech as well the i^ward as the outward worship of god, and because
they be only acceptable to god. The p^ceptes of me^ i^ the matter of religion
we call not good works because they tech not ye true worship of god: Esaye.xxix.
^ Math. xv. ^ Mar. vii. a
wherefore also y^ prophet Esaie da^neth humane ordinances as to be taken for
the true worship of god where he says This people approaches unto me with their
mouth and worship me with their lips but their heart is far from me, but they
worship me in vayn, teching doctrines the commandments of me^. The reason
hereof is because men's ordinances be not y^ true worship of god, which
nevertheless the ypocrites held for the true worship of god, contrary to the
tables. And for this false worships sake which is appoi^ted by the
commandments and works of me^, eue^ sithe^s the beginning of the world
there have been debate bitwen the godly and ungodly persons. This false worship
of god was the cause why Abel was slain Gene. iiii. d
which with faith offered his sacrifices where as Cain did hang i^ the outward
sacrifice and work only. Also all the prophets for this false worships sake
suffered persecucion. For they called away the children of Israel from men's
ordinances and from the untrue worship of god unto the precepts of god, and
unto his true worship. Therefore also at this day it is no marvel though we
ca^ not be allowed ne brooked among these iustifyers of works in y^ we call
the^ away from the untrue worship of god which they set up of their own
authority wtoute gods word. The answer to an objection that might ^e mad^
But lest some of the^ would say yt the decalogie or tables of Moses perteyn not
to us christen men, but yt the works diuysed by bishops of Rome have succeeded
in their place to the true service and worship of god, let the^ hear what
Christ says. Math. v. ^
I came not (says he) to lose the law, y^ is, to teache other works commanded
in the law or any other worship of god, but to fulfill the law. Man.
Also when he was demanded of a young man concerni^g good works necessary for
thobteyni^g of everlasting life, he answered of works commanded by the law
which techeth the true worship of god forasmoch as it requires faith, fear,
and love of god, as an inward and spiritual worship like as god hi^ self is a
spirit. Theffectes of good works be every where set forth i^ ye scripture.
Esai says we be the pla^ting of the lord to glorify god. Psalm. xl. c
Also the prophet says: Offer to god the sacrifice of praise and call on me and
y^ shall glorify me. i. Pet. ii. ^
Also thapostle Peter says, Derely beloved I beseech you as strangers and
pylgrims absteyn from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul and se ye
have honest conuersacio^ among the heathen yt they which backbyte you as evil
doers, may se your good works and praise god in the day of visitacio^.
Finally, Christ says, so let your light shine before me^, that they may se
your good works and Math. v. b
glorify your father which is in heuens.

THE causes of good works be tholy ghost and faith. Causes of good works
To these may be added also y^ love toward god. For he that with faith
knows and loves god without doubt also will fear god, will magnify his name,
will gladly hear and learn his word, will love his neighbor, and in his need
help him.

Tholy ghost is cause of good works forasmoc^ as he moves ^ertes to good
works, and ge^dereth in the^ new mocio^s convenient to y^ doing of good
works y^ plese god. Faith is y^ cause of good works because before faith our
works be not well taken of god. For faith gets unto it christ for whose only
sake our works do plese god. And Christ thus gotten by faith gives tholy ghost
y^ renewerof our hertes to make our works accepted of god: Gala. ^. ^
for this cause good works be called of Paul the works of the spirit.

Mela^chton in his common places reh^^ seth.iiii. Gala. v. c. d Inuitatorious
or prouokinge.
provoking causes to good works. Necessite, because faith ought to increase in
us with continual exercises i^ prayer, in repentau^ces, i^ tribulacio^s.
Dignity, because our good works although they have much imperfection in the^
yet they pertein to y^ glory of god, and therefore in scripture they be called
sacrifices of praise. Authority, because tholy ghost is y^ author and worker of
the^ and whose gift they be, with which also he adourneth the church, to
the intent the glory of god might be the further spread abroad and known.
Rewards, because unto good works in the godly persons as well spiritual as
corporal rewards be setforth and promised.

THE formal cause of good works is fetched forth of faith without which our good
works, The formal causes of good works
neither can be truly done neither do please god. Christ i^ Matthew p^scribeth a
form of exercisynge good works with which the neighbor is helped, according to
thexe^ple of the heavenly father, Math. v. Luc. vi.
be you merciful even as your father is merciful.

According to y^ diversity and Parts of good works
su^drines of good works, some may be called of y^ first table, which do
execute y^ true worship of god as well inward as outward some be of the second
table which do execute outward and temporal works toward the neighbor.
But these cannot perfitly be done, on less the works of the first table go
before.

The final effects of good works, Effecte^
and princypal be these. To raise up, to exercise, to confirm faith, for
without thexercise of works, faith can not stand. ^yther perteyne such places
of scripture, as provoke us to go forward in good works, as Paul to the
Philippians. Philip. ^. ^.
This I desire, that your love may increase more and more in knowledge, and in all understanding. etc. Coloss. i. ^ Gala. vi, ^
Likewise to y^ collos. he writteth. Being frutful in all good works. Ice^ to
the Galath. he says. Let us not be weary of well doing. Ite^ neither
horemongers, neither worshippers of images. etc. shall enherite the kingdom of
god. Which places and seblable declared, that faith can not endure without
works, wherefore like as with ill works faith is quenched, so undoubtedly with
good works it is styred up, exercysed, and confyrmed. To be asigne of
iustyfycacion received. For this purpose we be iustyfyed, we should work well
as, testifies y^ hole sixth chapter to the Romans whereof the some is, that
now, since we be justified by faith, we should work well. To give thanks to
good works for the benefits received i^ Christ, for which cause also they be
called sacryfyces of laud. To stere other to believe the gospel, i. Pet. ii.
Math. v.
and gloryfye god. To gloryfy god, for as records the prophet Esaias, we be the
graf^inge of the lord to gloryfye god. Item psalm.xiix. offe^ to god a
sacrifice, of praise and call on me, and I shall deliver the and thou shalt
gloryfy me. To be testymonyes of the true faith, therefore James says. James.
ii. ^
Show me thy faith of thy deeds, and I will show the my faith by my deeds.
Also Christ says by their fruit ye shall know them, albeit this text seems
to go an other way. Iaco. ii. ^
To make y^ faith quick and lyeuely, for as James says faith without works is
deed. To be signs in our conscience that we be imperfyte workers, Luc. xvii.
according to the words of Christ, when ye have done altogether, yet say we
be unprofitable servants, y^ we ought to do, we have done. After these
effects of good works, there be yet other which be gathered of the rewards
y^ be promised i^ y^ scriptures for good works. And forasmoch as y^ rewards
premysed to good works be of two sorts ^^fore also theffectes which do arise
of them, be of two sorts, some perteyne to spiritual goods, some to
corporal. So some places of sc^iture promise to good works everlasting life,
as thapostle wssheth to the Cortinthians that god will yield them for their
alms which they bestowed, increase of spiritual gifts. Math. vi. v
Christ also promyseth a sure reward to alms which god shall ^endre openly.
Nyther perteine the manyfolde promyses in the law annexed to the
commandments. Leuit. xxvi*
If ye shall walk (says the lord) in my commandments, and shall keep my
ordynaunces, and (...) them, I shall give you rain in due seasons that the
earth may bring forth her fruit. etc. wherefore when we be ascerteyned of the
promyses of rewards made to good works, it rests now to se whether the
rewards of good works do chance by our deserts or by promysse, Certes, as
ferforth as I could ens^r^h the holy scripture. I ^inde always where me^cio^ is
made of rewards, yt it is done of some promise. This word merit I never find
added. Also (...) often as Christ in y^ new testament is asked (as i^ diverse
places he is) what is to be done for y^ receuyng of everlasting life, he
refers the^ to y^ works of ye t^^ commandments and adds. Do this and
thou shalt live, by which answer, I grant, Christ chale^geth to good works
everlasting life but not but to such as perfitly do the same. And because it
is not in our powers perfitlye to fulfill y^ works of the law, where as
nevertheless a pefite obedyence is required, therefore it follows that we ca^
not de serve everlasting life, unless we will say y^ everlasting life
chances unto us for our imperfection. Furthermore i^ scripture reward
signifies one thing and merit an other thing. Everlasting life as reward
is promised to good works as a reco^pensacion, because it ^eco^penseth the
afflictions of the rightous persons as in y^ reuelacion of Ihon^ it witnessed
where he speaks of life eternal which he calls a new heaven and a new life
and says. And god shall wipe away al tears from their eyes. ^poca. xxi. b
Esaias.xxv. c
Also the prophte Esaye, And death shall be devoured utterly and god shall wype
away every tare, Romans vi.
Item thapostle Paul calls everlasting life y^ gift of god by Christ Jesus
our lord. But merit is that which chau^ceth properly to a ma^s duty which he
may claim as his propre due. Wherefore either let y^ Papists deny the place
of Paul which calls everlasting life y^ gift of god, or else let the show that
merit and gift betoken all one thing if they will have their opinyon allowed.

Now this effect which they make of good works coming by merit or desert
they extend it yet further. For they be not content to ascrybe unto it
everlasting life but they assign also to it the reward of all things as well
spiritual as corporal even of propre duty, He confuteth the error of the
papists.
And therefore these papists these toly workeme^ believe yt by their good works
they deserve election to grace, gods love toward them, lighteninge to y^
gospel, says, forgyuenes of sins, iustificacio^ also the fear of god,
hope and love toward god and the neighbor, constauncy, pacyence, and finally
all as well spiritual as corporal goods, which said opinion for as much as
it is clean contrary to y^ word of god, and makes our hole relygio^ to be in
certain, therefore this effect of good works which they make to proceed of
merits is diligently to be co^sydered and debated. For o lord who dare be so
bold against y^ most clear and manifest authorityes of scripture to say y^ the
election to grace is our merit and deserte, Paul teaches contrary
Romans.ix. where he makes the cause of our election gods mercy. Of
deseruynge of gods love toward us who shall glory against thapostle where he
says god sets forth his love toward us when we were yet sinners and the
enemies of god. Romans v.v
Also against the sayi^g of John which says we love him because he loved us.
i. Io. iiii.d
Now ye lyghtening unto the gospel no honest and pure christian will attribute
to merits or which thus speaks ye word of god. Corin. iv
God is faithful by whom ye be called into ye felawship of his son our
lord Jesus Christ. Furthermore faith forgyuenes of sins, iustifycacion,
Roma. iiii.c
if these come of our desert the^ thapostles is a liar which says. Therefore of
faith is thinheritau^ce according to favor, that the promise might be suer.
Also be says if these which perteyn to yt law be heirs, the faith is made
void, Ephe. iv.
and the promise is made frustrate. Item to the ephesians. he writes. By grace ye
be saved through faith and yt not at your selfs, for it is the gift of god,
and proceeds not of works. Fere toward god, hope, and love, ca^ not be of
our merit for these, to gyther with faith remyssion of sins, iustifycacion,
everlasting life, and se^blable ought to be suer and certain since they
pertayne to the inward worship of god. For albeit hope has respect also to
the promise of outward things yet hope is rather and properly a sure
expectacion of health that is believed, by which we hope certainly and trust
that we be reconcyled to god by faith. As concerning love toward the
neighbor, co^stauncye, and patience in tribulacion, also ye rest of virtues
which eusue the said spiritual goods to gither also with the outward goods,
these if a man will ascribe to our merits and yt the good works of ye godly
persons do merit and deserve them and also thincrease or ye same, we will not
greatly strive with them forasmoch as we se that a mittigacion of temporal
pains do often times follow good works. Albete it pleases and satisfyeth we
abu^dauntlye to say generally that rewards both spiritual and temporal do
follow and e^ue good works of good me^, because they be promised unto the^ of
god. Truly by this doctrine no wickedness is taught unless perchance it be
counted a wickedness to auaunce the glory of god, and suppress our own,
neither shall this doctrine make me^ slouthful and neglygent to do good works
(as some me^ think) sithe^s we deny not the rewards of good works but say
only that those rewards proceed not of our desert, of promise.

NOW, these effects of good works following proceed of rewards. To have a
plentyfull reward in heaven as Math. v. Christ promyseth, if thou understand
here, (according to the common figure and manner of speakinge) heaven for the
kindome of heaven and so consequently for the congregation of the true beleuers)
as holy writers be wont to use for the most part this word heaven) so the
sense shall be plain that such as suffer tribulacion here in earth shall have
many consolations, but if you understand heaven for the life to come which
shall be a recompense of all affliction: tha^ the sense and meaning shall be that
such as suffer tribulacion i^ this world have a sure hope of everlasting life.
For i^ ye.v. chap. of mat. Christ our savior speaks of the beatitudes and
blysses in this life to the intent he would show that the judgment of the world
erreth which thinks that the true wealth or bliss of life stands in
outward pomp and magnyfycence. And everlasting life is called a reward
because it recompenceth, but not because that recompense is proprely due. Item
to receive a reward of god openly, as Christ promyseth of alms. Math. vi.a
Now, to receive a reward of god openly, is that in the sight of al men the
godly be increased in worldly goods and enriched in this life as well with
spiritual as with temporal gods and after this life to receive also other
everlasting benefits and all this by promys. To have annexed unto it
everlasting life by promys, that ye same may be iure for life everlasting is
the gift of god as witnesses Paul Roma. vi.

Contraries to good works be these Co^traryes to good works
To grant that beside the works of ye x. commandments, and such as be
commanded in scripture, there be yet other Good deeds devised and made by the
bisshoppes of Rome beside goods word be not good.
good works necessary to the practyse of godlynes. To say humayne works
invented of men is a part of the worship of god. To say humane works deuyied
by bisshops of Rome be egal to the works of the.x. commandments, under like
punisshmente to be kept, and like hope of reward. To grant that certain
humane works are to be prefered before certain works of the.x.
commandments. To say the cyuyle and outward The error of scholemen.
works which be commanded in the second table of Moses be only good works.
This is the error of the scholeme^ which have despised hither unto the
works of the first table or at least have not seen the^. To affirm yt ye
works of ye good and of ye bad be egal, because they be both blyssed of god.
This error is easly answered. For to ye wicked and evil persons there is no
promise made of spritual things To affirm with certain furyous prechers Furyous
prechers.
ye honest and excellent works i^ ye unfaithful or ungodly persons be ye
gifts of Satan where as Satan of his nature, wtoute doubt, admits no
honesty, since he is ye disturber, and distroyer of al honesty. Wherefore it is
to be thought ye honest works also in ye evil persons be y^ singular gifts of
god given for ye conseruacio^ and mayntenaunce of tranquylyty in ye world. To
say because in ye wicked ye noble and honest works be called ye gifts of god,
yt therefore they please god, and that they shall for the same receive
everlasting life. The answer hereof depends of faith, which is ye cause why
good works please god, and why in time co^mi^g everlasting life shall e^sue
such works by promise, made to the^ ye work well, and of faith. To grant yt
Christ in the new testament taught other works the^ be mencyoned i^ ye tables
of Moses, Math. v.^
contrary to his own saying, I am not come to break ye law, but to fulfill it
To grant yt Christ has left power to ye bishop of Rome as to his vycar
general Bishop of Rome.
here in earth to appoint and p^scrybe other good works strange and diverse
from the tables of Moses. To say good works be in our powers to do them
perfectlye, to the mynyshyng of tholy ghost, and of the power of Satan which
he has in lercyng good works. To say there is another form of fulfyllyng good
works of ye second table, tha^ that which Christ Luc. vi.vi^^
appoynteth by thexemple of his heavenly father, where he says. Be mercyful, as
your father which is in heaven is merciful. To hold that in ye executynge of
good works toward the neighbor, we ought to have respect of ye cyrcu^sta^ces
as of ye place, of the person, of ye time. To say good works of helping ye
neighbor be so necessary. yt he which can not perform the same, yea also of
necessyte, ca^ not be saved, which error thapostle soyleth ii. cor. (...)
where he says. Let eueri man do according as he has purposed i^ his heart
not grudgingly, or of necessite. To hold y^ good works deserve of their propre
duti all goodness as well spiritual as temporal which error I have before i^
theffectes of good works debated and confuted. To hold y^ good works do
therefore deserve everlasting life, because evil works deserve everlasting
conde^nacion. To say good works justify. This error also I have soluted
before in theffectes, Finally, contraryes to good works, be all evil works
done against gods commandments, as not to believe in god, to doubt of god,
not to fear god, not to love the neighbor, to commyt aduoutrye, theft murder,
and so forth. And these evil works have their propre effects contrary to
theffectes of good works. For like as good works do styre up, do exercise,
and confyrme faith: so on the contrary part, evil works do let and quench
faith. They deserve their of god, and everlasting conde^nacion, Math. xxv.d.
as witnesses Christ. Go ye cursed in to everlasting fire. etc. Also they
sklandre ye gospel, and the glory of god, as witnesses Paul sayng. The name
of god is through you evil spoken of among the he^the^. They deserve
induracion and to be made hard so that sins be punysshed with sins, and
evil works, Roma. i.c
with evil works as Paul to y^ To. declares. They deserve also temporal
punysshme^tes, as ye tyranny of ye devil. which provoke us to all kinds of
myschefe and of error.

Of fulfyllynge the law. CA. XXVIII.
THe fulfyllyng of the law, is a perfyte Diffinicion
satisfaction, whereby the law is satisfied both with a consenting heart, and also
with outward workees. But because no man could perform this, therefore came
Christ and accomplished fully yt the law for us unto ryghtousnes, enduryng for
ever, giuyng also tholy ghost yt we may truly fear god, believe in god love god
and our neighbor, though in great imperfection, which nevertheless god takes
i^ good part because of his Christ the hole and perfyte fulfyller of the law
in the name of all that believe.

I call y^ fulfyllyng of the law a perfect satisfaction, Probation of the
diffynicyon.
which stands in the consent of the mind, together with ye execucio^ of good
works. Now yt the law requires a co^sentynge mind, the words of Paul do
prove which says yt the law is spirytuall (yt is to say) requires
spyrytuall things. Also Christ throughout the hole.v. chap. of Mat. requires
to y^ fulfillyng of the law y^ affections and heart co^se^tyng to the same.
Likewise Pau i. Timo. i. requires to the fulfylli^g of ye law cha^^e of a pure
heart good conscience and faith unfeigned. Now* the old testament eueri where
requires love of the hole heart, of the hole mind, and of ye hole power.
Concerning the outward keeping of ye laws, there is no doubt. For the use
fulfylling the law, is of.ij. sorts ye one is inward, ye other outward.

THAT no man can kept the law the place i^ the acts of the apostles teaches
sufficiently where S. Pet. ^^. xviii.v
teaches these words, why te^pte ye god y^ yt will put a yoke on the disciples
necks which nether our fathers nor we were hable to bear. This is sure if we
had be^ hable perfytly to have kept the law. Math. v.c
Christ neded not to have come whose office (as he him self expreslye
declares) was to fulfill the law. But by cause the beleuers be justified unto
good works (witnessynge thapostle Ephesians. ij. created to good works. etc.)
therefore Christ gives tholy ghost to the beleuers which helps their
infyrmityes y^ after a manner they might bring a co^sentyng heart un to the
law, though it be weak and imperfyte, which nevertheless god accepts and
takes in good part because of Christ which has satisfied the law pefectly
unto the perfect rightousnes of ye same y^ is of force and strength before god
for evermore, accordi^ge to Pau, saing, which also (meaning Christ) makes
intercession Roma. viii.^
for us. Also of ye prophet. Thou art the everlasting prseste after the order
Melchisedech. Psalm. 109.^


There be two manners of fulfilynge ye law, The (...) of fulfyllyng the law.
the one i^ward the other outward which two conjoined together do perfectly
satisfye the law. But there was yet never man which perfectly either has
ever co^ioyned or could co^soyne these parts besides Christ, and therefore
only Christ is the perfect accomplysher of the law even to the full
perfection. who also unto us has deserved and purchased the gylte of
fulfyllynge the same after a manner so that we also may bring (through Christ
and grace of tholy ghost) to the outward fulfyllyng of the law a co^se^tyng
mind and may fear god truly, truli believe in god, refreyne our mind and
hand from slaughter and such like wyckednes. But yet under great weakness and
imperfection we do these things and therefore our fulfyllyng ca^ not be pleaded
ne laid against gods ire, neither is it done of us to that purpose that we
should be justified by the same, but to thyntent fyth we be all ready justified
of Christ the perfect executour of the law, we might declare and show by our
fulfyllyng such as it is, our kyndnes and love toward god for ye rightousnes
received through Christ, as I have heretofore declared the self thing in
theffectes of good works.

AS concerning the perfyte fulfyllyng of the law, The causes of
thacco^plishment and fulfyllinge of the Law.
which brought to the hole world a righttousnes which is of force before god
for evermore: Christ is the cause of fulfyllyng ye law, who perfytly has
satisfied the law, for which intent also, he was promised of ye father: as him
self testifyeth, sayng he came not to break or destroy the law but to fulfill
it.

Thoccasion that Christ had to fulfill the law toward us, Math. v.b.^
was our infirmite and weakness, by which we were not hable to satisfye the
law, the burden whereof (as Pe. i^ the acts declares) neither our Act. xv.d
fathers nor we could bear, Pau. testyfyenge ye same saing what ye law could
Roma. viii.a
not do in that it was weak because of the flesh, that performed god. and
sent his son in the similitude of sinful flesh and by sin, damned sin
in the flesh yt the ryghtousnes required of the law might be fulfilled in us,
that is to say that by Christ we might be rekened to have satisfied the law.

AS perteynyng to our fulfilling, which god requires of the justified, Christ
also together with tholy ghost is the cause. For Christ through his perfyte
fulfilling of the law, Mark wherefore the gift of our fufyllyng the law
serves.
merited and wan unto us the gift of the fulfylling the same, gyuynge us the
holy ghoost to help our weakness in ye fulfilli^g thereof not unto rightousnes
or that we might be justified thereby for to that purpose only serves the
fulfyllyng of Christ, but for ye declaracio^ of our loving and kind heart to
wards god for ye rightousnes and great benefits that we have received of his
hands in Christ. Certeynlye this holy ghost fasshyoneth and creates in us new
intentes and mocio^s of mind. which he co^uenyent (although in a great
i^perfection) to y^ true trusting in god to the true loving of god and of the
neighbor.

Forasmoch as y^ perfect fulfilli^g of ye Theffectis of of fulfyllyng the law.
law serves for rightousnes, and our imperfite fulfilli^g serve to declare
our kindness toward god for the rightousnes received i^ Christ therefore I think
it good to set forth.ii. manner of effects of fulfilling ye law, Theffectis of
Christ's perfect fulfilling
being also of two sorts.

Theffectes of y^ perfect fulfilling of the law which Christ performed for our
iustyfieng before god may be these. To satisfy ye law with a consenting heart and
mind together with outward works. This effect is suffycie^tly proved by ye
prophet Esaias Esaias. liii.c
where he describes yt i^nocency clennes and holiness of Christ with these
words, he did never violence ne vnrighte, neither has there ben any
disceitfulnes in his mouth also to perform perfyte obedyence, for a perfect
and everlasting rightousnes according to the said place of Paul. That the
law could not do in that it was weak because of the flesh Roma. viii.a
that performed god. etc. Sundry effects also may be gathered of the
commodydities which we have by Christ's fulfyllynge of the law as to deliver us
from the curse of the law as witnesses Paul Galath. iii.c
To deserve us a gift to fulfill after a manner the law to the declaracion and
vtteraunce or our kindness in that ye Christ has fullfylled the same to our
iustyfycation. To deserve and get us ye holy ghost which helps our weakness
and our imperfection yt we may truly keep y^ law. But we shall reke^ up moo
effects of y^ perfect fulfilling of Christ in y^ titles of abrogatio^ of ye
law and of ye christen liberty. Theffectes of our fulfyllyng.
Now theffectes of our fulfillyng which Christ has purchased for us and which
the holy ghost fourmeth and fasshioneth i^ us be these To have a co^se^ti^g
mind unto outward works. To fere god hertely. To believe god hertely. To
bridle the heart and the mind from slaughter. Not to steal actually and also to
have a mind repugnafit and striving with any such affections of plucki^g away
from other me^ their goods. These and semblable effects of our fulfyling
forasmoch as they be weak and imperfite, may not be pleaded for rightousnes
against god, yet nevertheless they please god by cause of Christ, and be unto
him most commendable and thankful sacrifices, yea and so they be called in
holy scripture. These effects of our fulfyllyng y^ law serve to none other
end but to give thanks by them for the rightousnes which Christ has
purchased unto us by his perfect fulfyllyng of the law and finally to provoke
others by our fulfylling to receive the gospel like as heretofore I have
declared in theffectes of good works.

Contraryes Co^traries or errors.
to the fulfyllynge of the law be these. To say the fulfyllynge of the law is
only an outward keeping of the same.

TO say the fullfillyng of the law for a rightousnes before god is and has been
always in ma^s power, To grant y^ these is made a perfect fulfyllyng of ye
law for rightousnes before god, if we do as much as lies in us. To say yt the^
y^ law is perfitli satisfied, when at lest our will by any manner of wise is
added to outward works albeit a pure consenting mind altogether be not had to
ye same, to deny yt the perfect fulfyllyng of ye law which is accepted before
god for rightousnes requires not a consentinge and pure heart beside
thexecucio^ of outward works. To hold that under the old testament was
required a pure and consenting mind, but in the new testament that god gave
place to our infirmytye and weakness. so yt now it is enough in the fulfillyng
of ye law only to keep outward works. The error of certain papists.
To say in the new testamente the commandments of god changed in to
counsels, and that it perteyneth not unto all men to satisfye the law with
consenting affections, but only to such as be of more perfection, and can do
the same. This error is contrary to y^ words of Christ. Math. v. where yet
still in the new testament (which Christ came to ordeyen) he calls them the
leest in the kingdom of ^euen, which break one of the leest commandments,
wherefore also through out all the hole chapter Christ requires pure
affections to the fulfilling of y^ law. beside the outward execucio^. Also
Christ commands there that the law of god be not destroyed and abrogate for
our infirmity. It is also an error to say that the conscience of men can
not be saved and kept from desperacion, oneles, we will snstre and permyte the
commandments of god to be turned into counsels and given only to men of
more perfection to be fulfilled. I answer. It would have besemed these
p^iudicatours of Christ (I call them so which run before ye judgment and
sentence of Christ, cou^ting the^ selves better clerks than he) which of
precepts have made counsels y^ when they saw yt ye perfect fulfilling of ye
law was not i^ our powers, to have sent rather our conscience unto Christ, who
has fulfilled the law for us to y^ exact and perfyte rightousnes, so that
thus they might have saved the conscience from despair. To deny that it was
only the office of Christ to fulfill the law unto perfect rightousnes, contrary
to the text of Mat. Math. v.
I am not come to destroy the law but to fulfill it. To hold that the law was
for this cause given, that it should be fulfilled of us to the perfect iustcie,
whereas this honor was appointed of the father unto Christ, as testify the
promises given of Christ long before y^ law. To say This error is at this day
maynteyned of some.
y^ Christ did ons satisfy the law only for all sins past, and that we now
ought to fulfill the law unto the perfect rightousnes to be infused by the same.
To argue by the place of paul, Collos. i.d
col. i. That ye fulfillyng of Christ is not perfect for rightousnes, but is
made perfect when our fulfylling is put thereunto. The words of ye apostle be
these. Now joy I in my sufferinges and fulfill again yt which is behind of y^
passions of christ i^ my flesh for his bodies sake which is the congregation.
This proves not that the passion of Christ was lacki^g or i^perfecte to our
salvation but it signifies that y^ passion of Christ and of his members is all
one passion and that we suffce for his sake since we have professed and are
appointed to suffce with Christ. To deny yt the fulfillyng of the law of Christ
indureth for evermore for all such as believe. To deny that Christ by his
perfect fulfilli^g of the law has deserved unto us the gift of fulfilling y^
law after a manner, not yt it should serve for a ryghtousnes before god which
as many of us as be justified have already i^ Christ but yt it should declare us
tha^kefull for Christ's fulfylling wherein we have found our perfect
rightousnes. To grant y^ the fulfylling of the law in such as be iustyfyed
which Christ has deserved unto us can be so perfect as it may be set against
gods vengeance. To deny that onr fulfilling of the law which was purchased
and deserve by Christ is always full of weakness and imperfection. To hold that
one fnlfilling of the law purchased unto unto us by Christ does therefore
please god because we do perform it and not rather because it proceeds of
faith in Christ. To deny that our fulfilli^g displesech god if the same de done
without faith. To deny that our fulfilli^g of y^ law is done for any other end
the^ yt we should declare and exhibit thankfulness and grauytie toward god
for the ryghtousnes received in Crhyste.

Of the abrogacyon of the law. CA. XXIX.
THrought the hole scripture in my opinion there is no harder place the^ is
this place or title of abrogacio^ of the law, not only because of it self it is
hard but because (onles it be well understand) it is the fou^tein and ground of
al error, and a very pestiferous occacio^ of y^ carnal liberty. Horrible
exe^ple hereof we have had lately in experience i^ our days in Monetarius
Piperiue and diverse other sedicius preachers going about and studie^g partly
to bring us back again under Moses, and partly to break and cut aso^der ^l
laws, as well gods as men's under the pretense of abragacion. An because I
trust easly under this brefe form of doctrine, to declare and open ye hole
difficulty concerning abrogacion of the law, therefore I thought good next unto
yt place of fulfylling of the law, which of it self also sufficiently declares
the use of Abrogacion to put to this place of abrogacio^ of the law, to
the intent that here by a several treatye it might more clearlye appear, which
done. I will add also an other title of Christen lyberty which.iii. tytles
treat in manner all one thing. For they becauses and effects together among
them selves as forthwith shall appear.

Abrogacion of the law therefore is a disanullyng an abolisshment or
extinguyshment of the curse of the law made The diffinicion of abrogacion.
by Christ so that now al such as believe in Christ be enfraunched and ryd from
the power of the law accusi^g contynually the conscience and damnyng it before
god for the imperfecte obedience.

Probacions of the diffinicion.
Christ, Gala. iii.c.
says Paul, has reduced us from the curse of the law while he was made for
us accursed. For it is written cursed is every one that ha^geth on tree, that
the blyssing of Abraham might come on the ge^tyles through Jesus Christ. etc.
Christ is the person by whom the law is disanulled promised i^ scripture to
that intent. Hither pertayne all the promyses i^ the prophets of that new
leagge or covenant, as Jeremy. 33. Ezech. xxxv. gen xxxix. deu. xviii. The
rest in the dyffynycion is proved by Paul where he says. Roma. viii.^
There is no condemnacion now to the^ which are in Christ Jesus which walk
not after the flesh but after the spirit. etc. But forasmoch as I said the
curse or power of y^ law is taken away I adds (to such as believe in Chrst
Jesus) lest perchance I might be thought to bold that olso the wicked be made
free from the curse of the law. For the law is ordained for the vnrightous,
that is, Note upon whom the law has still her power and operation.
for y^ unfaithful and such as be not yet under grace or by faith have take
hold of Christ neither received the holy ghost of whom they might beguyded,
Upon these I say the law still exeryseth her office now accusing now
condemni^g their conscience eue^ as it did in times past under Moses For no
doubt to such as believe not in Christ y^ law is not abrogate but shall be
still in her force, till y^ time they be converted to Christ according to Paul,
the law is our scholemaster till the coming of Christ. Gala. iii. d
I^e^ where the spirit of the lord is, ii. Cor. iii. d
there is freedom, as who should lay where the spirit of Christ is there
cease and is abrogate the tyranny power and curse of the law. I added the
cause of the accusing or condemnyng of the law that thou myghtest know that
such as believe in Christ be no longer accused and condemned by the law. Albeit
the keep not the law to the perfect obedience according to Paul. Roma. viii. a
There is no condemnacio^ now to such as be planted in christ Jesus. Roma. vi. c
An therefore the apostle calls to be under grace when the conscience is
delivered.

THE causes of the law abrogate be these the promise, Causes of a^brogation.
Christ, and our weakness The promise is cause* because god has promised this
intinguysment of y^ law to be in Christ. And to this cause belong such places
of scripture as treat of the new kingdom or couenaunte of grace Christ is
the cause that the law is abrogate, forasmoch as by him it was abrogate.
Finally our weakness is cause, for that it ministers an occacion that the law
should be abrogate.

FOR as witnesses Pet. Act. xv. ^.
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear it. Thus the commandment that
went before is disanulled Hebre. vii.
because of her weakness and unprofitableness. Hiere. xxxi.
Also the prophet Hieremie brings in this cause (that is to wite) y^ the
fathers keep not the old covenant or testament but brake it, Roma. viii. ^
and therefore a new was given, whereunto agrees Paul, sayng: what the law
could not do, in asmoch as it was weak because of the flesh, y^ performed
god, and sent his son. etc.

WE must think holly that the hole Parts of abrogacion b^ none
law is abrogate. For else he that will co^tende that but a part of the law
is disanulled, and saves a part vnabrogate is gyltye of the hole law, Gal*
v. ^.
according to Paul, who says. I testifye again to every man which is
circumcised that he is become dettour to keep the hole law. Yea moreover to
require a perte of y^ law as necessary to iustificacion after Christ is to make
Christ the ministre of syn, as witnesses the same Pau. sayng. Therefore we have
byleued on Jesus Christ, Gala. ii. ^
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ* and not by the deeds of the
law forasmoch as by the deeds of the law no flesh ca^ be justified. If the^
while we seek to be made ryghtous by Christ we our selves are found si^ners, is
not the^ christ y^ minister of syn? god forbid. Undoubtedly I can not deny but
y^ the gospel keeps still y^ part of the law which co^se^teth with nature, not
because of Moses, or because it teaches y^ men be justified therbi, but
because it would (if Moises never had be^) keep the laws of nature to the intent
there might be works to declare our gravity and kyndnes for the ^cedyng
benefytes received in Christ.

Theffectes of disanullynge the law, Theffectes or works of abrogation.
be fetched forth of y^ commodities which we have by the abrogacion, and be
these: To bring us a new testament or covenant of grace whereby we be made
fee^ from the tyranny and curse of the law, as witnesses the prophet Hiere.
saing. Loathe days shall come (says the lord) I shall stryke with the house of
Israel and the house of Judah a new bargayne, Herem. xxxi. f
not according to the covenant which I have couenau^ted with your fathers. etc.
The prophet understands by the couenaunte made with the fathers, that
covenant co^dicionall, by which was sought tyghtousnes upon condition, and yet
was not found, without the promise of the new covenant of grace, in which
freely sins be forgyuen without condicyon.

To bring a covenant of remission of sins without ceasyng, For y^ gospel is a
fre tidings of forgyuenes of sins. To make us fre from the hole law,
according to Pau. ii. Corin. iii. d Gala. v. a
where the spiryt of y^ lord is, there is liberty. Item he says. He y^ is
circumcised, is dettour of the hole law Ergo either the hole law ought to be
kept, or no part. Now we be made free from the hole law, as perteyneth to y^
purchase of ryghtousnes, which under this new covenant or testament is given
for no laws or works. To take a way the tyranny domynio^ power and curse of
y^ law accordi^ge to Pau. Gala. iii. ^
Christ has redeemed us from y^ curse of y^ law. To bring a sure iustificacyo^
which is of faith For iustificacio^ is therefore given by faith (says S. Paul
that it may be sure. Roma. iiii. ^
To translate us from under y^ law unto grace. To. vi. Roma. vi. ^
For ye be not under y^ law but under grace. Truli to be under gracis to please
god because of Christ, and to be fre from y^ law, to thynte^t y^ sholdest no
longer seek with an uncertain and doubt full conscience to be justified i^ the
law. To bring and give tholy ghost whereby y^ deleuers are quyckned, guyded,
and defended against the cruelty of the deuel, of death of syn, and of law,
laboryng to damn us, unto everlasting life according to that saing of the
abrogatour of the law. I will not leave you comfortles as orphans or
fatherles children. Johan. xiiii. c
To make y^ our fulfyllyng of the law whereby we testifye our thankfulness
toward god may please god because of Christ.

Co^traryes to thabrogacio^ of the law be these. Contraryes or errors.
To hold that thabrogacio^ of the law is only a disanullyng y^ letter of the
law. To say the disanullyng of the law is only an expyryng or
extynguyshement of Moses polycye or co^mo^welth. To say thabrogacyo^ of the
law was not spoken of before in the prophets which error spyngeth of not
merkyng the co^dicyo^ added to the law, as if ye shall keep my
commandments. etc. Also the places heretofore cyted in the prove of the
diffinicyo^ which be of the prophecies of prophets concerning a new kingdom
to be set up, teach the contrary of this error. To deny y^ our infyrmitye
gave occasion of abrogating the law. To hold yt the abrogacyo^ of the law
perteyneth also to such as believe not i^ Christ or have not the holy ghost. To
grant with the Cerynthyans y^ the hole law The heresye of the Cerynthians.
is so abrogate y^ no perte of the same is profitable to the Chry^tians. To say
with the Nazereys all things of the old law about Christ are to be kept.
Nazarees.
To grant with the Hebionites y^ the carnal commandments Nevyonyte^.
of the law as circu^cysion and such like are yet to be kept of the
Chrystians. The error of scholeme^.
To say only a part of the law is abrogate, y^ is to wyce, the iudicyall and
ceremonyall commandments To this error answers Pau. Ephe. ii. ^.
which says that the law of the commandments, which stand in decrees is
abrogate, in which place undoubtedly thapostle speaks of the hole law. More
over to say yt only a part of the law is abrogate by Christ a mynistre of
syn as Paul teaches to the Galathians. Gala. ii. d
In which epistle he teaches in diverse ^laces that even the hole law is
abrogate in so much also that he rebuked Peter which compelled the gentyles to
play the Iues, To hold that the law is in such wise abrogate as neither y^
two tables of Moses co^teyni^g the.x. commandments are to be kept among
chryste^ men. But for asmoche as y^ law of the.x. commandments e^pounde the
law of nature, yea and is al one with the law of nature and furthermore sets
forth with a certain goodly and siguler order the true worship of god and the
true works: Therefore it is convenient to keep the same, not for Moses sake but
by cause of the mutual consent and agreement of the law of nature and the two
tables. To say that only the ceremonyal and judicial laws be abrogate
because that for the multitude of the^ no man could keep them but that the
decalogie co^teynynge the.x. This error is papisticall.
commandments is not abrogate sithe^s the same is natural, and therefore easy
to be kept. To grant that some commandments of the law are to be kept
still because of the plenarye or full iustificacyon, as be the commandments
of sacryfices for sins. To affirm y^ even therefore the law of the.x.
commandments is not abrogate because it is yet kept of y^ Chrystya^s. To
which error I answer, y^ i^dede it is kept not as Moses law but as a law
consentyng with nature. Papisticall.
To hold y^ the law of the.x. commandments is kept among the Chrystyans
to iustifye them. This error is against the final effects of thabrogacyo^
of the law which dec^are the law to be therefore abrogate y^ we might be
justified freely by Christ and that for no laws or works. Iudicialles be such
laws as be for the conseruacyon of tranquylite in the common wealth
To say y^ the iudicialles or at lestway not all of the^ be abrogate because
some yet remayn among y^ Chrystya^s as of wedlock of distinction of dominions
and so forth, I answer. These judicials be therefore kept among christians,
because they agree with the laws of nature. To hold y^ instead of Moses laws
have succeeded popes laws, namely concerning ceremonies. This arrour shall be
brought to light better in the title of men's traditions. The heresye of
papystes.
To deny yt the chefest effect of abrogacion is y^ we be freely justified for
Christ. To say the law is abrobate with a co^dicio^ annexed or co^dicionaly, as
if we shall do this or yt. etc. To hold yt the curse and power of the law
ha^geth still as well upon the good as upon the bad. This error is confuted
sufficiently among theffectes of abrogacio^, and is directly against scripture.
To bring again with Storky, Storkie.
Monetary, Monetarie.
Pipery Piperie.
and other heretics y^ hole law of Moses. To dreme with the wretched
Anabaptists Anabaptists.
y^ the time shall ones come when the kingdom of Israel shall be restored again
with all the laws of the same. This error is all together Iudaical.

Of the christen liberty. CA. XXX.
NOw ensues the placeof y^ christian liberty, which is the most propre effect
of y^ abrogacio^. For to this purpose was the law anulled or abrogate y^ we
might be fre by Christ Jesus our consciences, and enfraunchised from all
outward things, like as Christ also says My kingdom comes not with marki^g or
observing (y^ is to wite) rightousnes is not given for any outward things, for
any works, for any co^dicio^, but freely for Christ. Of this fredo^ speaks
christ in the gospel of John^ where he says, John^. iii. a.
if the son shall make you fre, then ye shall truly be fre.

Wherefore the christian liberty is a fre claim Diffinycion.
i^ the spiritual kingdom through Jesus Christ, by which we be fre from the
bondage and curse of the law, from y^ power of syn and death, and to be short,
from the outward keeping of al things in the matter of iustificacio^ before god,
which fra^kly is given to al bileuers because of crist But forasmoch as we
forthwt dye not, after we be set i^ such liberty, but must yet live i^ this
world: therefore to thi^te^t good order and public tra^quilite might be kept,
we be bound still to keep outward ordinances in this world.

THE christian liberty takes his name Prove of the dyffinicion.
of christ y^ author, which caused and ordained this liberty, or because this
liberty apperteyn only to such as truly and in deed be christians I have added
(in the spsiall kingdom of Christ) y^ ye might know y^ the christen liberty
perteyneth not to the kingdom of the world, but consists in the delivery of
consciences, against certain frantike persons which make of the christian
liberty a certain carnal loosnes void of al honesty and godliness.

NOW what manner of thing the christen liberty is, and to what kingdom it
perteyneth theffectes of it do sufficiently declare, which show that we be fre
from the bondage and curse of the law, from the power of syn and death, and
finally from the outward keeping of things concerning the matter of
iustificacion before god, which frankly is given to such as bileue because of
Christ. Gal. iii. b. ^
For as Paul testifies, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
made for us a curse. Item to the Romans he says. Roma. viii. ^
The law of the spirit that brings life through Jesus Christ has delivered
me from the law of syn and death. Also. Luke. 17 The kingdom of god comes not
with waiting for, wherefore neither the christen liberty, which is the
pryncypall part or effect in the kingdom of god comes not with waytyng for
or observing.

This word frankly or freely excludes al manner condition of law. For the
christen liberty is against al obseruacio^s and co^dicions of law, by which
under the law ryghtousnes was sought but not found, so y^ now we be assured y^
ryghtousnes freely chau^ceth unto us, bicaus^ of Christ, yea thought we keep
not the law, Ioh. iii. b
so y^ we believe in Christ, y^ he has enfrau^chesed us and delivered us from
the bondage of the law, according to this, he y^ byleueth me, has everlasting
life. Now, if he has everlasting life, ergo he has rightousnesse, since the one
is incide^t to y^ other. Roma. iii. d
Paul also uses these terms freely without the works of the law. etc. Finally,
because the christian liberty has only respect to the conscience, therefore
forth of the conscience, it delivers not from outward ordinances, be they
temporal or eccliastical, ordained for y^ co^seruacio^ of good order and common
quiet, though we be fre also from these in ^sciee^re,
so y^ such ordinances as well civil as eccliastical in the matter of
iustificacio^ ca^ do nothing, as heretofore has be^ thought very wickedly,
namely concerning rites and ceremonies of the church, of which many be also
wicked.

THE self same causes may be of the Causes
christian liberty, which be of the abrogacion or of the fulfilling of the law.
For these three places be in manner all one, ^ have welnere y^ same effects,
taken forth of the profit and commodity, nevertheless I thought good
severally to handle the^e three places because of the great utility thereof.
Also because the common usage is severally to dispute of these three places what
the fulfilling of the law is, what thabrogacio^, what y^ christian liberty is.
Now the causes of y^ christian liberty be these: The promise of god ^cerning
this liberty. Christ, for he is the person y^ delyuereth, and for who^ we be
delivered, according to his own sayi^g, Ioh. viii. ^
if y^ son shall make you fre, you shall be i^ deed fre. Also according to this
of Paul. Roma. viii. ^
The law of the spirit of life thorugh Jesus Christ has made me fre. etc.
Finally our, weyknes in keeping the law is a cause of y^ christian liberty,
because it gave occasion of our delivery from y^ thraldo^ of y^ law, which
burden nether our fathers nor we (says Peter) could bear. Act. x v. ^ Hebr.
Vii* ^
For y^ commandment which went before is disanulled, because of the weyknes
and unprofitableness. Finally, the holy ghost may also be said a cause of this
liberty, forasmoch as he is the gouerner and p^seruer thereof.

THE christian fredo^ is one only thing not cut in to pertes, Pa^te^ of the
christen fredome be none.
, eue^ y^ whereby we be fre i^ our ^scie^ces from al outward things concerning
the matter of iustificacio^. Yet nevertheless this liberty has relacio^ to two
sundry effects, from which we be fre (y^ is to wite) from inward things,
which exercise their powers in the ^scie^ce, as be these: the curse, the
dominion, the power and execration of the law, the devil, syn, death, and so
forth. From outward things as be ceremonies, judicial laws, alme^s traditions
which we know to be in different, I mean which may be omitted in case of
necessity without sin. Beside this there is an other liberty which the
scripture reme^breth, Liberty of flesh.
called the liberty of flesh, and is ^trary to y^ christian liberty. Of this
speaks Paul writing to the Gala. Gala. v. c.
saying. Brethren ye were called in to liberty, only let not your liberty be an
occasion unto y^ flesh, but i^ love serve one an other. Truly y^ liberty of y^
flesh is by which we think any manner thing is la^ful for us to do. The author
hereof is Satan, the disturber of al honest and peasible ordinances.

Theffectes of the christian liberty be derived and fetched out of the
co^modityes, Theffectes of the christian liberty
which we receive by it. And they be of two sorts by reason of the two sundry
things of which they be formed. For we be fre, not only from inward things with
which the conscience is vexed, but also from outward things. And to these
things of two sundry sorts may be al such things aptly referred, as we be
delivered of by this christian fredom. Theffectes y^ proceed of y^ commodities
as well of things inward as outward be these. To have remission of sins
because of Christ by fre imputacio^ for no laws sake or condition sake or any
outward keeping sake, to the intent the promise (as Paul says) may be certain
and steadfast. Roma. iiii. ^.
To deliver the byleuers in Christ from the power of syn and of death. Roma.
viii.
To be delivered from the curse of the law. Gala. iii. c.
To be assured y^ god is pacified and merciful unto us through Christ. Roma. v.
To be under grace, as Paul records, that is no longer to be tossed with the
storms and curses of the law which they still do feel that be under the law.
To be endowed with the holy ghost, which quickens us to a new life, rules
and defends, after we be ones enfraunchesed by Christ. For Christ being
gotten by faith gives the holy ghost. To fulfill the law truly, because the
veil or covering is taken away by Christ under which in times past was cloked
so great fulfilling of the law in mere hypocresy: eue^ as yet at this day
fained and cloked y^ fulfilli^g of the law, by such as from whom the coueri^g
is not taken away by christ. To be delivered from the hole law of Moses, il.
Cor. iii. c. Ephe. ii. c.
according to Paul's saying. Abrogating the law of the co^mau^dements y^
stands in decrees. Certainly to think otherwise against this effect and to
say y^ we be delivered only from a part of the law, to make Christ the
ministre of syn the said Paul testifies to the Gal. Galathi. ii. d.
To be made fre from al laws, traditions, ordinances and outward obseruau^ces
i^ the matter of iustificacio^, by this effect yet is not taken away our
obedience toward such laws, traditions and ordinances as be not wicked, and
may be kept without sin because all things ought to be done in the church (as
s. s. Cor. xiiii. ^
Paul commands) semingly and in order. Furthermore, we ought to keep the
civil or temporal laws, to the intent tranquillity and public honesty might
be kept and conserved in the world.

Co^traries to y^ christian liberty be these Co^traries to the christen liberty.
To grant y^ the christian liberty is a iayle delivery and fre ryddaunce from
al manner obedience to which we were bound before the knowledge of the gospel.
To hold y^ the christian liberty is a delivery only from inward things, as
from y^ curse of the law, the power of syn and of death, and so forth, and a
binding unto good works whereby me^ deserve to be justified. To say the
christian liberty is an infraunchiseme^t from the law of Moses, but not from
the law of Christ co^cerni^g charity, which is reserved for iustificacio^. To
deny that the christian liberty is a fre enfrau^cheme^t as perteyneth to
iustificacio^ from al things. To grant that there is some cause in us of the
christian liberty. To say the christian liberty may be gotten by our deserts.
Anabaptists.
To hold y^ the christian liberty takes away obedience due to princes and
chau^geth common ordinances. This error caused in Germany about
.xij. years ago the great rising of y^ commons in which were slain above.xxx.
M. of the^. To hold with certain scholeme^, Scholemen
y^ albeit we be fre from y^ ceremonials and judicials of Moses, yet not fro
the law of the.x. commandments, called the moral laws, which as they say be
left for christian me^ for their plenary iustificacion To say the christian
liberty may stand with o^t faith in Christ. To say the wicked be pertakers of y^
christian liberty. To hold that y^ law may truly be kept, The causes of the
Cross ^. Peter. ii. Prouer. iii. Thoccasio^ of the Cross.
so that y^ may believe god, and love truly god, although y^ be not translated
i^ to this liberty by Christ. For without this liberty, the veil, y^ is to say
hypocresie, is not taken away i^ the fulfilling of the law, according to Paul.
2. Cor. 3. To say y^ christian liberty may stand without a new life. To grant y^
we be delivered from the laws of Moses, but y^ the popes traditions become in
their places unto rightousnes. The heresy of papists
To bynd men's ^sciences to the kepinges or obseruau^ces of outward things
under hope of iustificacio^, The heresy of obseruau^tes
or under dedly syn. To disturb under y^ p^tence of this liberty al temporal
and politic ordinances. Anabaptists
To disanul under cloak of this liberty the public nourture disciplyne and
obedience. To despise under the p^text of the christian liberty al honest
manners. To bind us again unto Moses law, save as farforth as the same agrees
with the law of nature.

Of the Cross. CA. XXXI.
THE Cross is any manner of affliction, The description of y^ cross of Christ.
be it inwardly in the mind, or outwardly in the body, which chau^seth by the
grace of god for y^ gospels sake or for Christ's name, y^ by it the faith of
the holy persons might be proved, the love of god known, and the godly
glorified and renowned, by a wonderful delivery before their persecuters.

EXEMPLES of the inward affliction appear euerywhere in the psalms, Probacions
of the definicion.
where David complayneth of sins, and of the horriblenes of death, as i^ the
vi. psalm, Psalm. vi. ^.
where he says. O lord rebuke me not in thy anger, chasten me not in thy heavy
displeasure. These inward afflictions and crosses we call commonly
tribulacions or anguysshes of mind.

EXEMPLES enough of the outward affliction or cross be neither at this day
lackyng, sithe^s the time y^ the pure word of god has of late spronge up
again, wherwt also came forth the cross, which is accounted to be always most
faithful co^panio^ of gods word. The grace of god is the cause of this cross,
according to the saying of Peter. i. Pet. ii. d.
For this is the grace of god, and i^ this we be called. etc. I added (for y^
gospel sake or name of Christ) lest a man should think here that it is the
cross to be punisshed as a murther^r, felon, blasphemour, heretyke. etc. i.
Peter. ii. d.
And so Peter disserneth the cross of y^ christian innoce^tes from the cross
of the^, which have deserved it by their wicked deeds. Also Christ says, ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Furthermore these words, for y^
gospel sake, or the name of Christ do exclude such crosses as be devised and
chose^ by man's wit, These be erouched friars. holy obseruauntes and such other
glorious hypocrytes.
which certain ioly work masters and iustifiers of the^ selves do lay upon the^
selves to merit by y^ same ever lasting life. For y^ true cross is a thing
annexed to the gospel, which who so ever receives, shall have no need to lay a
cross upon him self, sithe^s of the own accord it follows the profession of
the gospel. For if y^ be a right gospeller, yea a right christian man, for one
devil y^ shall receive infinite, for one persecuter a great multitude of
persecuters which shall lie in awayt of the continually.

Theffectes of the cross, which I have put in the diffinition shall be evident
by the places and exe^ples following.i. Pet. i. Salvation (says s. i. Peter. ^.
b.
Peter is p^pared already to be showed i^ the last time, at which time ye shall
rejoice, though now for a season (if need require) ye are in heuines through
manyfold temptacio^s, y^ your faith ones tried, being much more p^cious tha^
gold y^ perissheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found i^ to praise
glory and honor. Ite^ the wise man says: Pro. iii. ^
who^ god loves he cha^^eneth. He scourges every son who^ he receives. This
effect of the cross is most excellently and and godly set forth thrughout the
hole. 12 chap. to the Hebr. Now exe^rles be these The te^ptacion of Abraham,
Gene. xxii.
where god bad him offer his son Isaac for trial of his faith. Job. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Job also was tempted, and sore afflicted for his proof of faith. Math. xxiiii. c
Christ called unto hi^ Peter on the sea to prove and try his faith. Iudic. ii.
d.
Moreover in the book of Judges it is red how god destroyed not certain nations
of the gentyles to the intent he would try through the^ the children of Israel
whether they would keep y^ way of the law, and walk in it or no. Finally very
many exe^ples of y^ glorious delivery, appear i^ the scripture i^ which a man
may se that god for this purpose has brought the faithful and godly persons
to y^ cross or tribulacio^, to thinte^t he would glorify and set out their name
and renown before their persecutour. Hither belongs thexe^ple of the
wonderful delivery of y^ children of Israel, Exodus 7. 8^
of Joseph out of prison of Anna the mother of Samuel, Gene. ^ li.
of David, i. Reg. i.
and infinite other. i. Reg. xvii.


THE cause of y^ cross or tribulacio^, is y^ kind will, grace, or charity of
god cording to the saying of Peter. This is the favor of god, and to this ye
be called Also of y^ wise man, who^ god loves him he chasteneth. The occasion
of the cross is the self gospel which detecteth the hypocritical and false
worship of god, which thing the hypocrites can not bear and therefore they
hasten the^ selves to persecute the lovers and folowers thereof. The formal
cause of the cross, or form and manner of bering the cross, is patience,
according to Christ's saying: (...). viii*
By patience ye shall possess your souls. Also according to the saying of
Paul, to al sufferau^ce and patience with joy (as who should say) Philip. ii. b.
y^ the heart be not angry with god i^ tribulacion. Ite^ to the Phil. Do ye al
things without grudging. Grudging and grefe in the cross be co^traryes to joy
and reioysyng. For surely the godly ought to joy and rejoice in the cross and
in afflictions in y^ they be such as god will let the^ suffer for the gospels
sake. And therefore s. James says: Jacob. i. ^
My brethren count it for an exceeding joy when ye fall in to sundry te^ptacions,
knowing this, yt the trial of your faith brings patience, etc. To. 5. And
not only y^ but also we glory upon our afflictions.

Now, y^ patience is the gift of tholy ghost, testifies Paul, where he says.
Gala. v. ^.
The fruit of y^ spirit is love, joy, peax, patience. etc. Ite^. Psalm. 61. Al
my things be subject to god. For from him comes my patience.

CROSS or tribulacio^ may be divided i^ to the outward and Parts of the Cross
inward cross The inward co^priseth thafflictio^s and te^ptacio^s of the
conscience. The outward cross co^teyneth al outward persecucio^s Howbeit the
inward and outward cross be very greatly co^ioyned and knyt the one to the other
so yt the outward afflictions be seldom without the i^ward. For when we suffer
tribulacion outwardly, we be inwardly assayed and tried also with te^ptacions.
Certes, it is right expedient to reteyn and know this division of the cross,
lest when we hear yt the cross is a thing incide^t and annexed to ye gospel,
we should forthwt judge that he can not be a good christen person which
suffers not outwardly either persecucion or death, Anabapti^ (...)
like as at this day the Anabaptystes play the foles in a right weyghty and
ernest matter which styfflye do contend and say we can not be true christen
men, unless we suffer death and be slain, and to thintente we might be
slain, they command us to seek occasions. In deed y^ cross as a thing
annexed to y^ gospel, shall never fail the christian me^. The inward cross is
much more grievous then the outward.
And albeit it shall not vex the^ outwardly, yet inwardly there shall be alwais
infinite te^ptacio^s of such pain and greua^ce y^ there is no man but had
rather suffer death most extreme and grievous perils that might outwardly chance
then such te^ptacions, so y^ the same temptacionk be true and unfeigned
terrors and fears of the mind.

Theffectes of the cross be these. Theff^^^es
To prove and try a ma^s faith, as y^ scripture witnesses. i. Pe. i. Iac. i.
Also in y^ book of Judges god in his anger says concerning the children of
Israel, y^ he would not cast forth the children of the gentiles Iudic.ii.d.
to thinte^t to prove Israel through the^ whether they will keep the way of
the lord to walk therein as their fathers did or not. Ite^ in Exo. xvi. he
says. To try the^ whether they will walk in my law. ^^^ter. viii. ^
etc. Finally in the book of Deuteronomy. it is red. Think on all the way which y^
lord thy gad led the this.xl. years i^ will dernes, for to humble the and to
prove the, to wite what was in thine heart whether y^ would keep his
commandments or no. etc. Prouer. iii. b
To be a token of the love of god toward us. For whom god loves, (...) he
chasteneth. To be a sign yt we be the sons of god. He. 12. If ye be not
under correct^od, whereof al are pertakers, the^ are ye bastardes, and not
sons. To be a sign y^ we be in the kingdom of heaven, and y^ the kingdom of
heaven perteyneth unto us. Math. v.b*
For blessed be they (says Christ) which suffer persecucion, for rightousnes
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, as who should say, they y^ suffer
persecucio^ be sure they be in the kingdom of heaven, and y^ the kingdom of heu^
belongs unto the^. To have a glorious delivery annexed unto it, of which
effect there be many exe^ples in scripture. As of y^ three children in the
buring furnace. Daniel. iii.
Ite^ of the deliuerau^ce of the children of Israel, Exodi. xiiii.
of susanna, Daniel. xiii.
of Joseph, Gene. xxxvii.
of Jonas of our savior christ, Jonas. ii. iii.
and of many other. Math. ii.
To have everlasting life aft this as a quiet fruit of rightousnes to it
annexed. For ever lasting life thapostle calls the fruit of rightousnesse as
a thing incident to rightousnes, where he says. Nebre. xii. c.
No manner chastifyng for the ^sent time seems to be joyous, but grievous,
nevertheless afterward it brnigeth the quiet fruit of rightousnes unto the^
which are therein exercised. To have a certain and sure joy associate unto it,
and that by promise. As appears in the gospel of John^ where Christ says:
Johan. xvi.d
verily verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice, ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned in to joy. To be a sign
of our bless. Mat. v. Blessed be ye when me^ shall revile you and persecute
you. etc. To have everlasting joy and glorificacio^ with Christ associate unto
it, according to Paul, Romans viii. c
we suffer with him to the intent y^ together with him we mighe be glorified. Also to
Timo. ii. Timo. ii.b.
If we be deed with hi^, we shall together live with him. If we be pacie^t we shall
together reign with him. To increase our hope in god, wytnessynge Paul: i.
Corin. iiii. c.
to this purpose we be betrayed and reviled, yt we might have sure hope in the
living god. Also To. v. We rejoice over our afflictions, knowing y^ affliction
gendreth patience, patience trial, trial hope.

BUT these and se^blable effects of the cross namely such as proceed of
rewards do not follow, eue^ because of y^ cross as things proprely due to ye
same, but because such effects be promised to the bearers of y^ cross.
Wherefore i^ the.v. cha. of Mat. and in diverse other places of scripture, we
ought diligently to consider y^ causes why they y^ suffer persecution be called
blessed, Math. v. ^
as where Christ says, blessed be they y^ suffer persecucion for rightousnes
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Here we must note that the cause of
bless is to be i^ the kingdom of heaven, so y^ the meaning and se^ce of this
text is, that such as suffer y^ cross be blessed, because they be in the
kingdom of heaven, and not because they suffer persecution. Math. v.d.
Also Christ says blessed are ye when me^ reuyle you and persecute you, and
shall falsely say al manner of evils against you for my sake rejoice and be glad
for your reward is great in heaven, here if ye will set the cause before ye shall
easily have the meaning and explicacion of this place in this wise. Because
they that be persecuted reviled for christ's cause, know y^ they be regarded of
god, and have a sure reward by promise laid up for them in heaven, therefore
they be blessed.

Contraryes to the cross be these. Contraryes or errors. Anabaptists
To grant with the Anabaptists that by the name of cross is only me^t an
outward persecucion. To grant that the cross or persecucion of the godly
persons chau^seth casuallye. To impute the cross of the godly unto Satan. To
deny that the cross chances of the bou^tiful will of god, of the grace and
charity of god. To bear the cross impatiently and grudgi^gly against the
form of beari^g the cross. To curse god i^ persecucio^, or i^ the cross.
Chiliastes.
To be angry with god i^ tribulacio^. To hold y^ the godly persons shall not be
subject to the cross eue^ to y^ end of the world, but y^ the cross of y^
godly shall ons cease here i^ earth, y^ they may reign here peasibly without al
manner of trouble or affliction to the end of a.M. years, al tyrau^tes and wicked
persons slain. This error long ago began of y^ Chiliastes, which now of late
the wretched Anabaptists have renewed. Anabaptists
Ite^ rashly to run upon persecucion and the cross. To lay the cross upon
the^ selves. To hold y^ it is syn to flee the cross, where escape or ^eing
may be without prejudice of gods name. To hold y^ the cross may be resisted with
the swerd, and with violence, against the manifest exemple of Christ, and of al
saints. To rush hedling in to the dangers of the cross, and to pray to have
the cross and persecucio^, as long ago y^ Donatistes did, Donatistes.
Anabaptists
and as y^ Anabaptists do at this day. To grant y^ he can not be a christian
man, The error of monks and friars.
which either suffers not outward persecucio^s or dye for y^ gospel. To
mainteyn the opinion of freres and monks, y^ the punishme^tes of wicked
malefactors stand for their salvation. To hold y^ the cross as a good work
iustifyeth. To hold y^ theffectes of y^ cross which proceed of rewards,
chance unto y^ godly, eue^ for the very persecucion or crosses sake, and not
because of the promise.

Of humility. CA. XXXII.
Humility or lowlynes toward god is y^ true fear of god, Diffinition.
whereby the conscience being terrified and made affrayd with the judgment of
god, cast from the^ their hole co^fide^ce of their own powers of their own
wisdom, of their own ryghtousnes. etc.

THIS diffinition is proved sufficiently by the prophet Esaie, Prove Esaias.
^xvi. ^
saying. Thus says the lord, heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footstool,
where shall now the house stand yt ye will buyld unto me? and where shall be y^
place y^ I will dwell in? As for these things my hand has made them al, and
they are al created says the lord. which of the^ shall I regard? even him
that is a lowly troubled spirit, and stands in awe of my words. ii. Reg.
xii. ^
An exemple of this humility is excellent i^ David who being rebuked of the
prophet Nathan, espieth his syn, and not trusti^g y^ by his own propre justice,
he might appease the wrath and displeasure of god, when he saw he should he put
out of his kingdom he knew y^ the thing was done by gods counsel and
providence, wherefore he trusted not to his own powers or wisdom that he might
retain and keep still his kingdom. The vessel wherein this humility reposeth
is the mind, and therefore s. ^. Pet. v. a.
Peter calls it the lowlynes of mind, saying: se ye have lowlynes of mind
fixed in you.

OF humilite the cause is tholy ghost whose gift it is. Causes
To which is also gods word added, for the word of god teaches and
instructs us to distrust and condemn our selves, and to commyt our selves
holly to Christ. Barnar. suprant. serm^. 37
S. Bernarde makes the knowledge of a man's self the cause of humility, for
thus he says. I know that no man without the knowledge of him self is saved. For
of this knowledge of a man's own self springs humility mother of salvation,
and also the fear of the lord which in likewise as it is the beginning of
wisdom, so also it is of health.

THIS humility, No parts
of which we speak has no pertes. For it is one certain mocio^ of mind
toward god by which y^ co^scie^ces feared by y^ judgment of god distrust
the^ selves, to thi^te^t they might be helped by the mercy and aid of god. The
civil humilite or lowlynes whereby we despise not other before our selves, is
theffect of this humility toward god For who so ever knows his own
uncleanness and wickedness shall neither conte^ne ne despise other. Humility of
religious persons.
Certes an hypocritical and cou^terfeyt humilite is y^ which our monks,
freres, chano^s and nu^nes have feigned in ceremonies and outward apparel. This
humility may be rather called arrogaunce or pride.

Theffectes of this lowlynes of heart or humility in scripture be known to be
these. Effects of lowlynes.
To fear god truly. To be frayed by y^ knowledge of a ma^s own sin truly. To
cast away in the sight of god al his own rightousnes, holiness, wisdom
confidence. Gsaye. lxvi.
To be a co^trite and humbled heart. Psalm. l.
To be a token that god will have mercy on us. ^. Petr. v. ^
For god resists y^ proud but to the lowlyons he gives grace. To be a sign
yt we be in the kingdom of heaven, according to the saying of Christ. Blessed
are the meke. Now, the humble be called blessed, not because of the very
work of humilitye, but because they be in the kingdom of heaven. Judith. ix. c
Ite^ to be herd of god, as Judith says. There was never proud person y^
pleased the (oh lord) but i^ the prayer of the humble and meke has thy
pleasure ben evermore. Also ps. 101. God has looked upon the prayer of y^
humble, and has not despised their peticio^s. To be exalted of god. Lu. i. He
puts down y^ mighty from their seats and exalts the lowlye. To bear y^
weyknes of others. Of this effect s. Paul treats manifestly to the Gala.
Galath. vi. a.
saying. Brethren, if any man be fallen by chance i^ to any fault, ye which
are spu^al, help to amend hi^ in y^ spirit of mekenes. etc. Also Christ Mat. 7.

CONTRARYES to humility be these. Co^traries. The error of Religiouse
persons.
To hold y^ humility or lowlynes stands in outward gestures, clothing,
ceremonies, rytes, and outward things. To say lowlynes of mind before god is
our own work. To say humility even of it self gives remission of sins.
To make decrees of humilite, and certain rewards of them in the life to come.

Of sacraments. CA. XXXIII.
Sacraments be visible signs, Difinition.
institute and ordained to testify of y^ bou^tifull will of god toward us, and
to move and excite our hertes of faith toward the promyses of god.

I call the sacraments visible signs for ij. Probacion.
causes, the one because they be laid open to y^ eyes, the other because like as
things set before the eyes do move the sight to the sacraments move the heart
to believe. Augustine.
Therefore s. Aug. very properly calls a sacrament a visible word. For like as
the word is a mean whereby tholy ghost moves y^ hertes to bileue, and is cause
together with the holy ghost of faith (according to Paul. Faith is by hearing,
Roma. x. c
hearing by the word of god) So also the sacraments be means whereby tholy
ghost moves hertes to believe, and be in manner causes of the very faith.

Theffectes of sacraments have no a^biguite or dout, Theffectis or operacio^s
of the acramentes.
but be most clearly espied by y^ use of circu^cisio^ which was a sign yt
testified and bare witness of y^ favor of god toward Abraham. It admonished
hi^ of the promise. It lifted hi^ up in te^ptacio^ unto faith, and therefore
this sign is called of y^ apostle the seal of rightousnes, Roma, iiii. a
not yt it justified Abraham, but yt it assured, and as it were sealed up his
heart, and kept hi^ in a sure faith toward ye promise which was made unto
hi^. Undoubtedly no man will wonder at these effects of the sacraments if he
understands the use of y^ word wherefore y^ word serves And where as a
sacrament is a visible word, who shall doubt but yt a sacrament may work y^
thing in the eyes, which y^ word works in the ears.

According to the variety and Division of sacraments.
diversity of sacraments, we divide the^ in to signs universal, Uniuersall
sacraments
and signs particular. Universal signs be such as pertein to al me^ alike,
and be not bound to certain persons, as baptism and the souper of ye lord.
Under baptism we may co^prise absolucio^, which proprely belongs to
penite^tes or repe^tau^t persons, for baptism also is a sign of repe^tau^ce.
Truly these signs I mean baptism (under which I also co^prise absolucio^) and
the souper of the lord be proprely called sacraments, because besides yt they
be signs of grace, they have also remission of si^nes annexed. But forasmoch
as we se yt al those things in a generalite may be called sacraments which
conteyn promises to the^ annexed, as be prayer, the cross, alms matrimony,
gouerna^ce, and such like, therefore these and semblable ought to be referred
to the universal sacraments. For prayer pertains to al me^ indifferently,
like as also y^ rest namely in respect of power. Signs particular be such as
be given to private or peculier persons, Signs or sacraments particular.
or to some certain people, as circu^cisio^ was given to the Iues. Also there
were signs given to Gedeo^, Ezechias, and to other. In deed yt these
particular signs although they were signs of grace, yet they had not promises
annexed unto the^ of remission of si^nes, as have yt sacraments of the new
testament. Causes


THE signs or sacraments of the new testament, which pertein proprely unto us
were ordained and institute of Christ. Our weyknes gave the occasion of
instituting the^. For man's mind after the fall of Ada^, being of such weyknes
yt by y^ bare word it could not have steadfast bileue, therefore crist moved by
our weyknes, added to y^ word certain lignes to help our infirmite, to thinte^t
we might be led felyngly, as it were by the hand unto faith and the believe of
gods promises, as testifies also s. Aug. Augustine.
where he says: Man before syn saw god, understood him and trusted unto him.
After sin, man can not conceive god, unless he be helped by some means. To
these causes is added the word,
according to this saying, if the word be put to the element, so is made the
sacrament.

Theffectes of the sacraments be gathered Theffectes of the sacraments
of their propre use whereunto they serve, which who so marketh, together with the
circumstances and occasion of thordinau^ce of the^ shall easily se what be
theffectes of the sacraments. Surely they may be these. To testify of gods will
toward us, or to be signs of grace. To advertise us of y^ promis^s of god.
To exercise and move y^ heart to believe the promises of god. To lift up the
godly in te^tacio^ unto faith. To be tokens of confession by which we confess
what god we serve. To be signs of thanks giving. To be allegories and as a
man would say watch words of good manners, which might provoke us to serve one
an other, and to change our life in to better.

Co^traries to the sacraments be these: Co^traries or errors.
To hold yt sacraments be only marks of our profession, whereby y^ christian
me^ are discerned from the hethen. Anabaptists.
To say with the Anabaptists yt sacraments be only tokens or watch words of
good manners. Enthusiasts.
To grant with the Enthusiastes yt the holy ghost is sufficient, and that we need
no sacraments in the congregation. To hold with the scholeme^ yt there be only
seven sacraments, Scholomen
if we call al those things in generalite sacraments which have promises
a^nexed. To call with the scholeme^ some sacraments which have no promises
annexed. To grant with the Donatistes and Donatiste^
other heretykes yt the sacraments may not be handled of evil ministers. To
deny y^ sacraments to be signs of grace. To add any thing to the sacraments
or pluck any thing from them. To deny yt the sacraments be made by the
coming of the word unto the^. To deny yt sacraments be means to move the
heart unto believe. To deny yt the propre and pri^cipal effects of sacraments
be to testify of y^ loving will of god toward us, and to stire our heart to
faith which receives forgyuenes of sin^es a^nexed to y^ signs of the new
testament. To grant yt the sacraments be not ratifyed or sure without faith or
our addicio^s. To this error answers s. August. S. Augustine
in his book of baptysme with these words. It skylleth not when we treat of the
perfection and holiness of the sacrament, what he bileueth or with what faith he
is endued, which receives the sacrament. In deed it skylleth very much as
touching to y^ way of salvation, yt is, that you sholdest obteyn theffectes
annexed to the sacrament. But it skylleth nothing as concerning to the question
of the sacrament. And even in the same book of baptism he writes thus.
Manifestu^ est fieri posse, vt no^ fide integra, maneat sacramentu^ integru^.
That is, it is manifest it may be, yt faith not being perfect, yet the
sacrament may remain perfect. To hold yt theffectes added to the sacraments
may be take without faith.
To adore and supersticiously to worship the sacraments, nevertheless in the
mean season a reverence toward the sacraments is not prohibit. To wrest
and strau^gely to interp^te y^ words by which the sacraments be institute.
Al which co^traries you shall find debated and confuted in my Catechism or
institution of a christen man.

Of baptism. CA. XXXIIII.
BAptysme is a sign or sacrament institute of Christ for remission of sins.

The prove of this diffinition.
GO ye and teache (says Christ the instituter of this sacrament) al nations,
(...) viii. d.
baptising the^ in the name of the father the son, and the holy ghost. Also
Mark. 16. Who so bileueth and is baptized shall be saved, yt is shall have
remission of sins. Likewise Pe^ preaching to the people said. Act. ii. ^
Repent ye, and be ye every one of you baptized in the name of Christ for
remission of sins.

THE causes far and nere of baptism be these, Causes of baptism.
the word, the water, the ministre, the person to be baptized, the godfathers
and godmothers. Of these some be of the substance of baptism, as the word and
the water, according to the ordinance of Christ. Augustine.
S. Augustine of the word speaks thus. Accedat verbum ad elementu^, et fiat
sacramentum That is, let the word be put to the element, and so let the
sacrament be made. Also in an other place he says. Verbo baptismus
consecratur, August. upon John.
detrahe verbum, et quid est aqua nisi aqua, that is: By the word is baptism
consecrate, pluck away the word, and what is the water but water? Now y^
minister the person to be baptized, and the godfathers and godmother, be not
the substance of baptysme. For baptysme is made neither the better nor the
worse by reason of persons.
Faith which the Anabaptystes require as pryncypall cause to the full
perfection of baptysme, is not of the substance of baptysme because the
entiertie and perfection of the sacrament depends only of the word and the
water, which two things being p^sent it is not to be disputed further of the
entiertie of baptism. For baptism is entiere and perfect whether the persons
be baptized, the minister, godfathers or godmothers do bileue or not believe.
Nevertheless this is true thobteyni^g of forgyuenes of sins, which is
theffect annexed to baptism is required faith assenting to the promise of
remission of si^nes. And this is it y^ s. Aug. Augustine.
says: It skylleth not as touching the entiertie of y^ sacrament what he
bileueth, or with what faith he is endued which receives the sacrament. Great
diversity doubtless there is as pertains to the way of salvation. But as to
the question of the sacrament there is no difference. S. Aug. calls the way
of salvation which I call thobteyning of the effect annexed to baptism
concerning remission of sins, howbeit after what manner and how the infantes
receive remission of sins in baptysme, where as they have not faith by
hearing of y^ word, I have sufficiently declared in my cathechisme or
institution of a christen man.

ONE only thing undivided is baptime of which we here speak, No parts
that is to wite the baptism of water.

THE propre effect of baptism is remission of sins, Theffectes of baptism.
Act. ii. b
according to y^ saying of peter repent ye, and be every one of you baptized in
the name of Christ for remyssio^ of sins. Item of Christ. Mar. xvi. ^
He that byleueth and is baptized shall be saved, that is to say shall have
remyssions of sins. The rest of theffectes which follow, do spring original
of things incident to baptism, and of the propre use of sacraments, as: To
be a sign that we be delivered from the devil, sin, death, hell, etc. To be
a sign of our remouinge out of the kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of
Christ. To testifye of the bountiful will of god toward us. To be a toke^ that
we be reco^cyled to god. To be a wasshing, in which is given unto us the holy
ghost, who begins to mortify y^ concupiscence which nevertheless abides in
us, although the giltye of original sin be taken away. To exercise and move y^
heart to believe as often as we remember baptime and the use thereof. To witness yt
we be christians and sworn to Christ and so baptism is a sign of our
profession. To testify y^ we be borne to the waves of perilles, and to the
change of life, to the intent we should dye contynually, as long as we live,
from syn, and rise again like new me^ unto rightousnes as declares Paul, and
so is baptism an allegory.

Contraryes to baptism be these. Contraries or errors.
To considre baptism without the promise to it annexed, which error ge^dreth
the contempt of baptism. To deny baptism with the Seleucians. Seleucians.
Enthusiasts.
To grant with the Enthusiastes, that the holy ghost is enough, and that
baptism needs not in the church. To hold that word and faith suffice to
salvation, and therefore we need not baptism. This error presumes above the
judgment of Christ which ordained baptism, which doubteles would never have
ordained it if he had known no use of it in the church. To hold y^ baptism
is only a sign of our profession. Anabaptists.
To say with y^ Anabaptists y^ baptism is only an allegory or watch word of
good manner. To say baptism is only an outward wasshi^g of y^ body which the
outward satisfaction is forgyuen. To mainteyne y^ baptism is perfyte and
entyer although the water be not there. This eroure is against y^ matter of
baptism. To say y^ spiritual baptism suffices, whereby we be baptized of
tholy ghost. To hold that baptism is hole and perfect without the word. To say
that baptism is not perfyte or sure, but is to be renewed again, unless faith
be present. This error is confuted sufficiently well in the causes of baptism
by the words of S. August. August. co^te^ Crescencium gra^maticu^^
To say that evil ministers make baptism not good, which error saint Angust.
consuteth. To grasit that for the unfaithfulness or unworthiness of the
godfathers or godmothers baptism lacks of his perfection. To deny that a man
is apt and mete to be baptized at any time of his age, which error bi^d the
kingdom of Christ unto obseruacio^ or merking. For if the kingdom of christ
comes not (as Christ him self witnesses) with merking, Ergo neither baptism
comes by merkinge which is a part of the kingdom of Christ. To hold that
either we be otherwise to be baptized the^ in the name of the father, the son,
and the holy ghost, or that this form suffyseth not. This error is against y^
form of baptism. To hold that to be dipped thryse in the water is by gods
law. To hold that baptism is good enough out of y^ congregation, although the
persons baptized return not unto the congregation, undoubtedly if they do not
return their baptism is to their destruction as shows s. Aug. To say y^
baptism made August*
with corrupt words is of no force, but ought to be done again. To deny y^
in necessite it is lauful for every person to baptyse. To take rasshely or
without calling y^ office of baptising, no necessite constrayninge thereunto. To
hold that such as be baptized of herelikes ought to be baptized again. To
hold that theffectes of baptism do follow baptism for other causes then for
faith concerning the promise. To say baptism takes away in us the natural
co^cupi^ce^ce or just. This error is openly false against common experience,
albeit the gilt of original syn is taken away. To say that the gilte is taken
away by baptism, but not y^ pain or punishment. To say that baptism is not a
comfortable thing unto us through out our hole life, so that by it we may lift
up and solase our selfs. To deny that theffectes ofbaptisme do endure
contynually unto us to our co^solacion. To deny repentance unto such as fall
after baptism with the Nouacians and Anabaptists. Nouacians. Anabaptists
Catharians,
To deny mortificacion and regeneracio^ after baptism with y^ Catharia^s. This
error springs of ignorance of original concupisceuce or sin stickinge i^
us. To deny y^ ceromonyes added to baptism, by man's authorytye, be things
indifferent, that is to wete, which may be left undone or may be done so y^
same be not wicked without danger or scruple of conscience To make but a
trifle of y^ mystical sacrament of baptism. Anabaptists*
To hold that men ought as often times to be baptized as they fall into sin.
To hold that because of theffecte of baptism which is remission of sins,
baptism is the oftrner to be used, to the intent we may the oftener receive
forgiunes of our sins To hold that children not yet borne are to be baptized
in their mothers womb or those which partly be borne and partly yet stick in
their mother. Against this error says saint Agust. in this wise. Angust ad
darvanum.
Nothing can be borne again, which is not yet borne. To say that infauntes
which be baptized at home in time of need according to the form appoi^ted of
Christ contained in these words, in the name of the father and the son and the
holy ghost, ought to be baptized again in y^ temple Anabaptists
To hold with y^ Anabaptists that children are not to be baptized, till they
come to thage of discrecion. This error is new and was never herd i^ the
church of Christ before.

THESE co^traryes and other more I have confuted in my Catechism or
institucion where thou shall find a co^plete and entyer treatise of baptism.

The supper of the Lord. CAPI. XXXV.
THe supper of y^ lord is a sacrament Diffinycion.
ordained of Christ him self, y^ such as have faith in these words of Christ
y^ promyser (that for you is given and Math. xxvi. c
shed for the remyssion of sins) may receive pardon of all their sines to
thinte^t y^ also they may forgive their neighbor and do the^ good freely after
thexe^ple of christ

Probacions of this diffinicion.
That the supper of the lord is thordinannce of Christ, Math. xxvi. ^. Mar.
xiiii. c Luc. xxii. b i. Cor. xi. e
teach three evangelists, Mathewe, Mark, Luke. To who^ also Saint Paul
agrees. Remission of sins is theffecte added by the promise of Christ unto
this supper. But is not here taken but by having faith upon y^ words of Christ
the promyser, which be these: given for you or shed for the remyssion of
sins. Finally, for asmoch as this sacrament is a sign of mutual charity as
thapostle techeth, therefore I have made the final fruit of remyssion of
sins, ii. Cor. ^.
y^ we should so love our neighbor, and study to do him good, Causes of the
Eucharistie or lords louper
as Christ loved us and did us good.

The causes of y^ sacrament of the lords supper be these: Christ the
institutor y^ word, bred, wine, the receyuer, and the minister. The word the
breed and wine be of the substance of this sacrament, which being present it
is not further to be disputed concerning the entiertie or perfection of the
sacrament. The receyuer and mynister wether they be good or evil, whether they
believe or not, believe by their noughtynes or vnbylefe nothing is detracted or
plucked from y^ perfection and holiness of this sacrament, likewise as nothing
is added by the goodness and faith of them. Albeit in the mean season* it is
true, that theffecte annexed to the lords supper, concerning remyssion of
sins does not follow y^ eaters and drinkers in this supper, onles they eat
also by faith y^ words of Christ the promyser. The materyal causes of this
sacrament be y^ breed and wine, of which this sacrament the body and blood is
made. The formal causes be to eat and to drink.

The lords supper is not divided in pertes, No parts
onles a man will draw parts out of the matter of which it is made, I mean, of
y^ breed and wine or of other things p^se^t of which consists y^ body and
blood of Christ. Certes of y^ conjunction or rather S^lutinacion of these
things, is risen the error of one kind, contrary to the ordinances of
Christ, and the usage of y^ ancient church.

THE fathers, Of the two tortes of eatinge.
folowi^g y^ apostle have not unaptly made two manner of eatinges of the lords
supper. The one they corporal or sacramental eatinge which is done with the
mouth only without faith, August
and as S. August. says, which no spiritual refection follows. This eatinge
makes us to use the lords supper unworthily. And of this Paul makes mention
i. Corin. xi. f
writing to the Corinth. in this wise wherefore who so ever eat of this breed
or drink of the cup vnwothely, shall be giltye of the body and blood of y^
lord. Also he says, who so ever eteth or drinks unworthily eats and
drinks his own da^nacion because he makes no difference of the lords
body. The other they called the spiritual eating which is done The spiritual
eating.
by faith and which the spiritual refection does follow. This makes us to use
the lords supper worthelye. i. Corin. xi. f
Of this, thus writes paul, let a man therefore examine him self and so let
him eat of the breed and drink of the cup. Now, be examine to him self,
which by faith comes to y^ lords supper and po^dereth well with him self the
use and profit of this supper, and so discerns this supper from a fleshly
soupper. Doubtless this spiritual eating Christian
persons do daily use although they receive not the sacrament, when spiritually
they be impla^ted and graft in Christ by faith, that they may abide in Christ
and Christ in them. Of this eating speaks Christ throught the hole sixth
chaptre of Ioh. Iohst. vi. (...)
But to eat together with y^ mouth and also with faith this only makes the
worthy and wholesome eating of this supper.

This supper forasmoch as it is a sacrament of the new testament, Theffectes of
the lords souper.
therefore remyssion of sins is the propre effect thereof, which is purchased
by faith or credit given to these words of Christ the promiser. Given for
you, Math. xxvi. c
and shed for y^ remyssyon of sins. To this effect these also folowinge may
be added. To have ryghtousnes. To have everlasting life. For these two
effects be annexed to remyssion of sins. To testify of the bou^tyfull will
of god toward us. To testify that Christ dwells in us. To admonysh us of
the promyses of god. To be a sign that god is appeased. For such as believe
that they receive in this supper forgyuenes of sins, be also assured that god
is pacified, and well contented with the^ co^forti^g themselves with this sacrament,
as a sign of most certain grace and attoneme^t. To bring joy unto the
consciences, when approaching by faith to this supper we be through persuaded
y^ we receive remyssion of sins. To ki^dle raise and styre up our faith. To
provoke us to mutual love and charity for the supper of the lord is a token
of brotherly charity To move us to work well leest we polute and defyle
again our bodies which be now joined to the body of Christ. For to this
intent we be justified or receive remission of sins in this sacrament that we
should work well according to Paul, we be his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus to good works Ephe. ii. v
so that the end of iustificacio^ is to work well, Roma. vi.
To testifye y^ we be chrystyans, and apperteine to Christ. Thus the supper of
the lord is a token of our profession. why this sacrament is called
Eucharistia.
Testice us to giui^g of thanks. And therefore of y^ ancient fathers this
supper is called Eucharistia, y^ is to say a thanks giui^g.

Co^traryes and errors against this supper be these. Contraries.
To bring, forth supersticiously with the Thomistes sundry fygures and types of
this s^uper out of y^ old testament Thomistes. ^
Albeit y^ eating of y^ pascal la^be may be a figure of this sacrament. To
hold y^ the souper of y^ lord is only a mark to discern the christen from
the hethen. To say with y^ Anabaptists y^ the souper of y^ Anabaptists
lord is only a sign of brotherly frenshyp or love among the godly
persons. To hold with the papists y^ the souper Papists*
of y^ lord is an oblacyo^ or sacrifice to be applied for other both quyck and
deed so that this sacrifice may deserve and meryce unto the^ remissyo^ both of
pena and culpa y^ is, of the peyn and of the blame or fault.
This error shall be sufficyently espied by the co^paryng together of the
common and euangelical soup, and of the private and Papisticall mass.
papisticall mass, in which co^paryso^ we se that the popish mass agrees in
manner nothing at all with the lords soup which Christ instituted. To deny that
man's reason is not forthwith offended by this sacrament when it neglects the
word and commandment of Christ the institutour. To deny that man's reason,
is not forthwith offended with the vilitie of this souper when it considers
it without the promys annexed unto it. To deny i^ this louper that under bread
and wine is ministered unto us y^ true body and true blood of our lord Jesus
Christ. To dispute supersticyously (as of certain scole Scholemon.
men hearetofore it has been disputed of the presence of the body and blood
of Christ of how and after what fassyon the body and blood of Christ is there
present or how great and how little it is. To interpret the words of the
lords souper allegorycally. To put to, or take fro the souper of the lord. To
deny that the cause of puttyng to a and taking from in this souper is the
self reason.
To steal from the lay persons the one kind, even the blood of the lord,
contrary to the ordinance of Christ. To say that a sufficyent cause of the
foresaid theft is the fear of dangers leest any thing might be shed out of
the chalyce. This error for the most part I am wount thus to answer,
like as the testament or last will is not changed because of y^ feebleness of
the heyr neither the heir is depryued of his i^heretable goods not us
standing his feebleness or i^^yrmytie. So neither we should have been spoiled and
robbed of y^ one kind for any manner of our i^firmyte. To hold y^ y^ lords
souper is not truly mynistred or evil ministers To deny the.ii. sorts of
eating y^ lords
souper, the one whereby we use this souper worthily, the other whereby we use
the same unworthily. To deny that in our times the co^fusyon of the spirytual
eating, which yet daily christen men do use by faith, although they approach
not to the sacrament by y^ sacrame^tal eating, has i^gendred y^ error of this
souper. To appoint and lymyte p^cysely a certain time to take the lords souper.

To compel with the Manichees the takers Manichees.
of this souper to take it te^pered with man's sede. The cursed error of the
Cataphriges
To wrynge out blood with the Cataphrigis out of children of a year old) which
blood they fetch out of the hole body of the child by little small prickynges
(and myngle the same with flower maki^g breed thereof which they use i^ the souper
of the lord. To use with the Aquaries The heresy of Aquaries. The heresye of the
Artotirytes.
water i^ stead of wine. To mynystre in y^ lords souper with the Artotyrites
breed with these. To hold that outward p^paracyons make us worthy to y^ lords
souper To approach to this souper without all reverence and sobrenes. To deny
that such are to be dryue^ away from the lords souper according to the usage
of the au^cie^t church as be notoryous sinners and visyous persons: To hold yt
this souper is not a^ entyre and perfect sacrament onles y^ faith of the
receyuer be present, I a^swere with S. Augu. as before in the title of
sacraments. To say yt we may receive remissyo^ of sins, which is the
propre of fecte of this souper, without faith or (...) any other thing, then
because of faith. To deny the foresaid effecttes of the lords souper or to
admit some of the^ and to reject and damn other some. To hold that the
souper of the lord even for the The (...) papists
very works sake does iustifye and that without any good mocyon of the vser,
that is to say, without the faith of the receyuer of this sacrament, To
assygne or impute theffect of this souper concerning remyssyon of sins
partly to the self souper and partly to faith. To meynteyn with Thomas of
Aquyne that the body The heresye of a romyshe (...)
of the lord was ones offered i^ the cross for oryginall sin and is now
contynually offered in the altar for daily trespaces.

Of sacrifice. CA. XXXVI.
SAcrifice in a generalite is thoblacio^ (...)
of our work which we re^dre to god who^ we have known to be such one to who^
we give deserui^gly this worship THAT sacrifice is a^ oblacio^ is certain. For
to sacrifyce signifieeh here to offer, P^ons.
and where as I added, of our work, I note y^ difference bitwen such things
as we of fre to god, and such things as god offers to us. The words y^
follow in the diffinicio^ show thoccasio^ of sacrifice, which is the knowledge
of some god among men. For who^ every men eue^ from the beginynge of the
world has known or decreed with hi^ self to be god, hi^ he has studied to
worship, to honor, to give thanks unto, and to testify this knowledge with some
certain worship toward y^ fame god thus known. And because sacrifyce is the
pryncypal part of worship, therefore by it they have declared their stud^ and
zele toward the same god. Finally, I added deseruyngly to thi^tent I would
show y^ powers of our knowledge, which not only consyst i^ knowing him to be
god, but also y^ he creates, governs, and co^serueth al things creat. This
knowledge of god, which out of the law of nature is after a manner known,
enge^dreth in men a mind which believes that we ought to duty, and not
without cause to worship such a god.

THE effycyent causes of sacrifyces Cause^
be the self offerers. The material causes he taken of the things offered,
as be the beestes, the fruits. etc.

NOW thoccasyo^ of sacrifyces was y^ Thoc^asio^ of sacrifices,
natural knowledge of god i^ all me^, as I have said before. Of this knowledge
cert^neth us thapost. Roma. i ^
And eue^ there where as he says that the ge^tyles glorified not god who^ by
y^ law of nature they knew by this he also co^me^deth a certain worshyppynge of
god naturally put in the ge^tyles. Of this worshyppyng is sacrifyce a part.
wherefore I conclude thoccasyo^ of sacrifyces was universally by nature in all
me^, eue^ as there was naturally a certain knowledge of god. I speak vere of the
generalloccacyo^ of sacrifyces common to all me^ eue^ of nature, that they
should worship such as they take for god I speak nothing here of the true
worship of god. I speak nothing of those sacrifyces which of a faith have
proceeded among the godly before y^ law given or after y^ law by spe^yall
commandment. But I disput here* generally of the indifferent and common
occasyo^ of sacrifyces concerning the law of nature whereby eue^ from the
begi^nyng of ye world, me^ have worshypped such as they have been persuaded to
be gods, although not with y^ true worship or acceptable sacrifices to god. But
concerning y^ worship and sacrifices of y^ godly by which they have rightly
worshypped god, and whose sacrifices have been acceptable to god and as the
s^ipture says. In odore^ suauitatis* that is to say for a sweet savor or
savor of swetnes, A distinction between the worshyppes or sacrifyces of the
godly and of the ungodly.
ye shall understand y^ a distinction is to be had between the true and right
worship and between that general worship procedyng of nature, and again betwe^
the sacrifices of the godly which plese god and between the general sacrifyces
procedyng of the law of nature. The true and right worship of god has no
accasio^ of nature. For nature is corrupted. So neither y^ sacrifyces of the
godly which please god can have occasyon of nature. wherefore we ought to think
that tholy ghost and faith were causes of the true worship of god and of the
sacrifyces of (...) godly, tholy ghost as given (for all our good works be
gifts of tholy ghost) Faith as a cause mouyng to gratitude and ki^dnes,
forasmoch as faith ca^ not be unkind. Gene. iiii. ^.
So Abel without doubtinge rightly instructed of his parents concerning the
promys made of sede and being justified by faith willing to declare unto god
his kind heart offered unto hi^ sacrifices, of which god looked because they
were offered i^ faith as teaches th apostle were he says. Hebre. xi.
By faith Abel offered unto god ^ more ple^^ous sacrifyce the^ Cayn. But Eai^
offered sacrifices not moved by any faith of which he had no speek, but by y^
general occasion of nature whereby al me^ be i^pelled vnuiersally to some
worshipping of that god that they know. For this cause god regarded not y^
sacrifice of Cayn, Gene. iiii. a.
like as he allowed not y^ sacrifice of y^ other gentiles or worshippes where with
they worshipped god whom they knew other whiles by the image of man other
whiles of beestes as witnesses Paul to the Roma. Roma. i. d. Gene. viii. d.


Noe builded an altar to the lord, and of all the clean beasts and clean
fowls of fered a sacrifice upon y^ altars and this was a just and perfect man
wherefore he had also faith which moved him to declare again his kind heart
toward his god for the great benefyte of p^seruacion from drowni^g. And
forasmoch as Noe offered these sacrifices by faith they were exceptable to god,
wherefore it follows in y^ text, and y^ lord smelled a sweet savor I conclude
therefore of these exe^ples, y^ faith gave occasion Gene. viii. d
unto the godly as well before the law given as after by commandment of
sacrifice and worshipping god and further more caused y^ the same worshippes
and sacrifices were accepted of god.

There be also some persons in this opinion
and that not without sure grou^des y^ refer the first and original beginni^g
of serving god by sacrifices unto y^ godly fathers of whom they will that y^
gentiles had their beginning by folysh cou^terfeyting to offer their sacrifyes
but as commonly it comes to pass, folowinge the outward work of y^ fathers
without their faith eue^ as yet at this day they follow many works of saints
but their faith they follow not. Thus it is very lykelye that y^ gentiles in
sacrificing of their own children followed Abraham which by a special
commandment was commanded to offer his son Isaac.

Sacrifice taken in a generality for a service Parts.
of god i^differently among al men, procedinge of y^ knowledge of some god, is
of one only sort, y^ is to wice, a sacrifice of praise, which as well the godly
as the heche^, since the beginni^g of the world have studied to utter their
kindness toward him, who^ they have known for god, save yt y^ godly have had
other occasions or causes and also an other intent of their sacrifices which
were acceptable unto god because they proceed of faith. Afterward in the law
came sacrifices of rede^pcio^ which be called propiciatory sacrifices
Sacrifyces propiciatorie or of redemption,
which redeemed rightousnes i^ the comonalty of Moses.

BESIDE there is yet an other sacrifice of redemption which is a sacrifice for
sins made to reco^cyle and pacyfy god. This took his occacio^ of the fall of
Ada^ which after he had sinned and again received by grace a promise that his
fall should be redressed forthwith in the self: promys this sacrifice of
redempcio^ began to stand for the sins of Ada^, through faith upon Christ
that was to come, the offerer of this sacrifice, who should offer in the latter
days a propiciatory sacrifice for the sins of the hole world for a perfect
and everlasting rightousnes. In this offerer or priest,
I mean Christ believed y^ fathers and became partakers of this sacrafice.

Theffect of sacrafice taken in a generality Effects
is one only, and has been general among all men, that is to wite, to offer
so^ thing to god y^ might testify their loui^g heart toward hi^. Nevertheless
it is not all after one fassio^ i^ y^ godly and in y^ ungodly gentiles which
folishly have cou^terfayted y^ godly. But to the intent all things may be made
the clerer in this behalf. I will set forth severally y^ spices or kinds of
sacrifice, wherein ye shall se openly the final effects of all sacrifices The
co^traryes of sacrafyce in a generality. I shall bring forth after y^ treaty of
y^ kinds.

Of sacrafice propiciatory or of redemption.
I Think it good to begin with y^ sacrifices of redemption. For this began
before y^ sacrafice of praise, even tha^ when Adam received the first promise
of the seed to come, which promise Adam believed, and because of his faith which
he had upon Christ the bishop and offrer of this sacrifice of redemption to
come,
he was saved as al y^ rest of the fathers that came after were. Now this faith
afterward brought forth sacrifices Eucharisticall, y^ is to say, sacrifices of
praise or thanks giving, whereby the godly would utter their gratitude and
loving kindness toward god for the remyssion and grace promised them in y^
offerer of y^ sacrifyce of redemption to come. Truly there be two sorces of
sacrifyces of redemption. The one which serves in the comynaltye of Moses to
redeem the ryghtousnes of y^ law. The other which was auaylable always before
god, and is yet auaylable co^tynually because the pressed or offerer of it* I
mean Christ, is eternal, and everlasting for y^ redemption of sins and to
obtain us the favor of god.

Of the propiciatory sacrifice of Moses law.
A Sacrifice of redemcion in the common wealth of Moses, Of the propiciatorie
sacrifyce in Moses law.
is a work y^ redeemed the justice of y^ law, y^ he which had committed sin
should not be excluded out of y^ common weal of Moses, and it is a figure of
the true sacrifice of sins before god. Prove


This diffinicio^ is certain by the epist* to the hebrews. capi. ix where the
apostle plucketh from all the sacrifices of Moses law al manner of perfection in
y^ conscience. Hebre. ix. b.
For he says thus. Into the second table went the high pressed alone ones every
year, and not without blood, which he offered for him self, and for y^
ignorance ^f the people, wherefore the holy ghost ^his signyfyed, that y^ way
of holy thin ^es was not yet opened, while as yet y^ first tabernacle was
standing, which was ^simylitude for the time then present and ^ which were
offered gifts and sacrifices y^ should not make y^ ministre perfyte, as
perteynynge to the co^sience, etc. But Christ being an high priest, etc. shall
purge your conscience from deed works for to serve the living god. Also it
follows in the x. chap. Every priest is ready daily ministering and often times
offers one manner of offering which can never take away sins. etc. By which
words thapostle takes away from the propiciatory sacrifices of Moses the
purgacion of sins, wherefore forasmoch as such sacrifices could not take
away sins, it is certain y^ such sacrafices of Moses law only served to
make men rightous in the eye of the law. Finally that these Mosaicall
sacrifices of redemption were figures of the trtue sacrifices for sins in the
sight of god, is manifest by the epistle to y^. hebr, namely in the.x. chap^ter.

The causer of this sacryfyce is god, Causes
which commanded this sacrifice to the children of Israel, to admonysh them of
true sacrafices of rede^pcio^ which Christ the high bishop in time coming
should off^e Moses was the pupblysher of this sacrifyce. And the high bishop
was the offerer of it.

Of this sacrifyce be not parts, Parts
onles a man will take the diverse kinds i^ stead of parts. For unto this
sacrifice belong all such sacrafices as were made for sins or trespaces as
sin offringes. etc. of which mention is made in the.iiii. and.v. cap. of
Leuiticus.

Theffectes of the sacrifice of redemcio^ Effects*
in Moses law were these. To reconcile y^ Iues to their comynaltye again. To
redeem the justice of y^ law. These effects be certain by thexe^ples of such
as have be reconcyled by these sacrifices unto y^ publyque weal^ of Moses. Also
where as y^ epistle to the Hebrews plucketh from the^ redemcio^ of sins
before god it leaves unto them the redempcio^ of justice in the polycye of
Moses. Ite^ to puryfye or sanctify to y^ purgacion of y^ fles heb. ix.
For if the blood of oxe^ and of gotes, and the ashes of an heifer, when it was
spri^kled, puryfyed the unclean as touching the purifieng of y^ flesh, how
much more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered
him self without spot to god, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the lyui^g god. To be figures of y^ true sacrifice of Christ as testifies the
said epist. Hebre. x. a
to the Heb. For the law which has but the shadow of good things to come*
etc.

The sacrifice of redemption before god.
THe sacrifice of redempcio^ y^ serves before god, Diffinicyon.
is a satisfactory work for the sins of other, reconcylyng god and appesing
his wrath.

In this diffinicion is no difficulty, Probacion.
of which who so doubts is no christian man Heb. ix. How much more shall y^
blood of Christ which through y^ eternal spirit offered him self without spot
to god, purge our consciences from deed works. Ite^ in the same chap. Christ
was ones offered to take away the sins of many.

THE causes of this sacrifice be, Causes.
god the promyser, and Christ the high bishop or offerer.

This sacrifice is not perted. For there is one only sacrifice of redemption
for sins before god, Parts hereof be none.
appeasyng the ire of god and satisfying unto god, concerning perfyte
rightousnes e^during for ever. hebr. ix. he entered ones for all into the holy
place and found eternal redemption.

Theffectes be taken of the aduauntages and Effects.
co^modityes which this sacrafyce has brought unto us and be these. To drive
away sin as witnesses the said epistle the. heb. where it is thus said. Hebre*
ix. s.
But now in the end of the world has he appeared ones to put sin to flight by y^
offeri^g up of hi^ self to put out sines. esaias. liii. After he has given his
life a sacrifice for sins. To. ix. Of sin he condemned sin. y^ is to say, be
put out sin by sacrifice which by the hebrew phrase is called sin as to y^ Cor.
him which knew not sin he mad to be sin that is to say a sacryfyce for
sin. Hebr. ix. d
To purge our consciences from deed works. To purifye or sanctify the
beleuers according to the sayi^g of Christ in the gospel of John where he
says, John^. xvii. c.
As thou dyddest send me into the world eue^ so have I sent the^ into the
world, and for their sakes sa^ctifie I my self, that they also might be
sanctified through y^ truth. Finally hythervnto may be referred all theffectes
or vtilitys of the death and passion of Christ.

Of sacrifice of thanks or praise.
SAcrifice eucharistical that is to say a Diffinicyon.
sacrifice of thanksgiving or of praise is an oblacion of our kindenes whereby
after we be ones reconcyled to god by the sacrifice of Christ we honor god,
praise him, and give him thanks.

This diffinio^ is certain for it is evident by the epist. The probacyo^.
to the heb. that there is one only purging sacrifice for sins. wherefore it
follows that all the other works in which such as be reconcyled to god do
declare their obedience toward him by honorynge praysinge and giuinge thanks
be sacrifices of praise, and not of redemcion.

Of which sacryfice there be Particyon.
.ii. ki^des y^ one is Mosaycall, the other is of the new testament.

THE Mosaycall sacrifyce of praise, Diffinicyon.
was whereby oblacyons were offered of the children of Israel to testifye their
obedience and tha^kfulnes toward god.

OF this diffinicyo^ no man shall doubt Prove.
after he shall perceive that there is one only sacrifyce of redempcyo^ for
sins. Causes.


THE causes of this sacrifyces be these God the institutour* Moses the
publissher, the priests the offerers, also the in whose name this sacrifyce
was offered, and finally the commandment to offer.

THE sondrynes of sacrifices procedyng of such things as were offered and
Parts.
of the circumstau^ces of them suffyseth here instead of parts* For albeit
there were so^dry kinds of this sacrifyce, yet they te^ded to this end, even
that the Israelites should by them declare their obedyence toward god. Hither
belo^ge oblacyo^s retribucions* first fruits, tenthes. etc.

The^ffectes of this Moysaical sacricyce were these: Effects.
To declare their obedience toward god. To render thanks to god: To praise
god, and semblable.

Thankful sacrifyces of the new testament.
SAcrifyce of praise of the new testament is whereby we honor, Diffinicyon.
praise, and thank god for y^ received remissyo^ of sins in Christ and his
other benefytes.

IN the new testament outward sacrifyces, The probacio^.
slaughters of beeltes, or other ceremonies be no longer in force and strength,
but only spiritual works of the heart and of thaffectio^ of such a person as
is borne again in heart by tholy ghost, according to this of saint Peter. i.
Peter. ii. a.
As living stones ye are made a spiritual house, and an holy preesthode, Roma.
xii. a
for to offer up spiritual sacrifyce acceptable to god by Jesus Christ Also
according to this of saint Paul. Make your bodies a quycke sacrifyce, holy and
acceptable to god, even your reasonable sacrifyce, John. iiii. c.
Ite^. Hebr* xiij. By him let us offer y^ sacrifyce of praise always to god,
that is to say, the fruit of those lyppes which confess his name. Ite^. the
true worshyppers (says Christ) shall worship the father in spirit and
truth. All these places do show yt the thanfull sacrifyces in the new
testament be spirytuall, wherein we offer our thankfulness by good works unto
god for our ryghtousnes and other benefytes received in Christ. For thankful
sacrifyces be nothing else the^ good works of y^ godly which serve for the
declaracion of their kyndnes toward god, and for to provoke other to give
credyte to the gospel, and thanks to god.

Causes of this sacrifice be these. Causes
The holy ghost. The commandment and faith. Tholye ghost is cause, forasmoche
as he creates in us new mocio^s and new minds mete to do spirytuall works or
sacrifyces. And therefore also I suppose yt y^ sacrifices of chryste^ me^ be
called spirytuall sacrifyces not so greatly because they be spirytuall
sacrifyces as because the holy spirit works the^ in us. The commandment
is cause, forasmoche as we be wylled by gods commandment to work well, by
which also we be assured that our sacrifyces or good works be pleasant and
acceptable to god. Now, faith is y^ cause, inasmoche as it is a degree to the
receyuyng of tholy ghost. For faith takes hold of Christ, Christ gives us
tholy ghost. Tholy ghost engenders i^ us new minds and spiritual which be
hable to offer spiritual sacrifices. Furthermore faith is y^ mean whereby our
sacrifices please god according to Paul what so ever is not of faith is syn.
Roma. xiiii. ^
Also It is i^possyble to please god without faith The i^pullsyue cause to these
sacrifices is taken of the co^lynes or co^uenience. For sithe^s we be the
people of god and prestes, it is convenient y^ we have some sacrifyces. To
formal cause of these sacrifyces puts Paul Romans xii. where he says the
lively and holy sacrifyce.

OF one sort be all thankful sacrifices in y^ new testament, Parts.
eue^ procedynge of spiritual affections of the heart which is renewed and
again borne by tholy ghost. Howbeit because the good works of saints or godly
persons be of.ij. sorts, some of the first table, which prescrybe as well the
inward as the outward worship of god, and some of the second table which
co^teyn the cyuyle and honest manners or offices toward the neighbor.
Therefore we may also make two kinds of eucharistycall sacrifices in the new
testament, not yt they be double and of two sorts of their own proper nature,
but because they co^syste in two kinds of works, to the perfyte executynge
whereof, be required the self same pure affections and the self same holy
ghost to make those works holy and lively sacrifices. Thankful sacrifices of
the first table
The sacrifices therefore out of the first table be these. Faith toward god,
fear of god Prayer or calling on god. Love or charity of god. Preching of y^
gospel. Thanks gyuyng. Co^fessyng of god and se^blable perteynyng to thynwarde
and outward seruyng of god. The scripture is full of places which teach these
sacrifyces to be most acceptable to god, and therefore often time they be
called odours or savors most sweet placable sacrifyces, acceptable offerynges
to god.

OF y^ later table be taken forth these sacrifices. Thankful sacrifices out of
the.2. table
To help y^ neighbor. To honor the parents and rulers. Not to slaye, Not to
commit adultery. To absteyn from theft, and such like which albeit they be
outward things or works yet they be called spiritual sacrifices forasmoch as
for y^ most part they be done by y^ work of tholy ghost, and with a co^se^tyng
mi^de. To be short all y^ works of saints ought to be referred hither, yet
eue^ y^ vilest and most base works. For the^^e^d al unto.i. mark Forasmoche
as the eucharisticall or thankful sacrifyces of the new testament Effecte^.
be nothing else but good works of the godly: therefore they have the same
effects in common that good works have with these. To praise, to honor god
with these sacrifyces. To render graces to god as well for the received benefyte
i^ Christ as for all other which god does bestow daily upon us* To exercise by
these sacrifices our faith To provoke others by these sacrifices y^ they may
believe y^ gospel and gloryfy god Many more effects of this sacrifice may be
brought hither out of theffectes of our good works.

Contraryes to the hole sacrifice.
Contraryes to sacryfice be these. To grant yt sacrifice generally taken, is a
purging sacrifice for the redemption of our sins. To deny y^ the gentiles
received their custom of sacrificing either of nature which teaches a
certain worshipping of such god as it knows, or of the folowinge and
imitacion of the godly fathers. To hold yt ye sacrifices of the godly and of y^
rude gentiles were al ones of like virtue before the law was given To hold
that the godly before the law given were moved by any other cause to do
thankeful sacrafyces the^ by faith enforcing their kinds as her propre
effect, Abraham concerning the offeringe of his own son had a special
commandment of god, To say that y^ godly fathers before y^ law was given,
deserved rightousnes by their sacrifices and that after the law was given
first began the propiciatory sacrifice of Christ for rightousnes. To ny that
forthwt eue^ in the very promise made unto Ada^ the sacrifice of Christ stood
for the sines of Ada^: Gene. iii. e
when he herd the voice of god saying unto him yt the seed of the woman should
trede down y^ head of the serpent. The error of papists,
To maynteyn more sacrifices for purging of sins than the only sacrifice of
Christ. To mainteyn more sacrifices of redemption then two, y^ one Mosaycal
the other of Christ This for the fines before god, the other for the redemption of
rightousnes in the common well of the Iues. To hold yt the Mosaycal sacrifice
of redemption redeemed sins before god. To hold yt the new testament do yet
after a manner require as well purging sacrifices for sines, as the eucharistical
or thankful sacrifices of Moses. To say y^ our tha^kful sacrifices there, is
some cause i^ us. To hold yt sacrifices of praise do plese god in other then
such as he reconciled. To hold yt our sacrifice of praise do satisfy for
sins, and do justify. Papists and scholemen,
To maintein yt our tha^kful sacrifices may be applied for others, so yt they
may deserve unto the^ remission of sins eue^ for the very works sake. To
co^founde with the papists sacrifice and sacrament togithers, Papists*
where as god offers in this his grace unto us and in the other we offer
lauds and thanks to god.

Of repentance. CA. XXXVII.
Repentance is whereby by true contricio^ we dye unto sins, Diffinition.
and lift up again our selves from sines for the receiving of forgiveness of ye
same.

THIS diffinitio^ which is made of y^ pertes of repentance is very certain.
The probacio^. of ye diffinicio^
For of repentance there be two pertes, co^tricio^ and faith, which two if I
can prove y^ they co^cur and mete together i^ repe^tau^ce and can not be
plucked the one from the other then my diffinitio^ shall be most certain,
notwtstanding yt all the schole doctors be against it. In Mark.i. Christ
says. Do repentance and believe the gospel. In the gospel of Matthew he says.
Math. xi. d.
Come unto me al ye yt labor and are laden, and I shall refresh you. Here
labor and burden signify co^tricio^. To come unto Christ is to bileue that
for Christ sins be released, which thing Christ calls to be refreshed. Ite^
Mat. 3. Repent you of your formar life. This perte is co^tricion, for at hand
is the kingdom of heaven. This perte requires faith, whereby we com to the
kingdom of heaven, and wherein is found remission of sins. S. Paul euerywhere
makes me^cio^ of these two pertes whereas he joins together mortifienge and
quickening, as To. 6. Col. 2. And i^ other places of scripture ofte^tymes
these.ij. pertes of repentance be coupled together as in the book of kings,
where it is said. i. Reg. ii. ^*
The lord kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and fetches up
again. Exemples hereof be these. ii. Reg. xxiiii.
David being chidde of the prophet Nathan, and made afraid says. I have sined
against the lord. This perte is co^tricion. Afterward the prophet adds
absolucio^ saying. The lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not dye.
This word comforted and lyfted up David again, and by faith, held him up
justified, and received him. In the book of Nu. ca. xxi. The people punysshed
for their sins do come unto Moses, saying: we have sinned. This is
contricion. Afterward by the commandment of Moses they resort by faith to
the brazen serpente, which the lord caused to be rered up, and so were made
hole. Item in Exodus xiiij. The people fear the lord. This is a part of
contricion. After this, they believe the lord. Iosue. v^^*
Again Iosue is sorry for his sins, that done, he rayseth him self by faith,
and puts god i^ remembrance of his promises. Finally, yt there be two
pertes of repentance or penance, it appears most evidently even of the very
authors of baptism. S. John^ y^ baptist baptized to repe^tau^ce, yt is, he
preched mortificacio^. Christ baptiseth by the spirit and fire, y^ is, he
quickneth y^ hertes. The final effect of faith is remission of sins, and to
which end repentance was institute. Now yt there be two pertes of repe^tau^ce
co^tricion and faith, Probacio^ by doctors that there be these two pertes of
penance Gregorye.
is sufficiently declared before. But lest it might be thought of the papists
yt the ancient fathers be against this diffinitio^ I will bring forth some
testimonies of them.

Greg. in the third book of dialoges. Of co^punctio^, yt is repentance, there
be two kinds, by which the soul thursti^g after god, is first pricked to
fear god, and afterward to love god. This fear is co^tricio^, love theffect of
faith.

Amb. S. Ambrose
writes thus: wherefore we ought to bileue yt both repentance is to be had and
perdon to be given, to the intent we might hope for perdo^ as it were by faith,
which pardon faith obteyneth, as it were by an hand writing or indenture of
covenant,

Tertullia^ agrees to the same, Tertulian.
where he says: It is good to be always penitent. what doubtest you? God has
so commanded.
And he has not only commanded but also provoke and allureth the by the
reward of everlasting salvation, Ezechi. xviii.
yea, and adds also an oath, saying: I live, he y^ swereth would be bileued. O
happy and blessed be we, for whose cause god swereth. On the ^trary perte most
wretched be we if we bileue not the lord, neither when he swereth. Barnard.


BERN. in the third sermon of the anu^ciacio^ writes thus. Let every man in
his fear and anguish of mind say, I shall go down to y^ gates of hell, to
thinte^t y^ now we should not look up for comfort but in the only mercy of god.

CAUSES of penance or repentance be. Tholy ghost and the word. Causes of
penance.
The holy ghost, lest in true penance we should ascribe any thing to our own
powers. Of this cause testifies these scriptures Hiere. 31. After that, o
lord, you shewedst my offenses unto me, I struck my self upon the thigh.i. reg.
ij. The lord kylleth and makes alive. Item Christ says: Johan. xvi. b
when tholy ghost comes he shall reprove the world of syn. etc. The word is
the cause, because it is the mean whereby y^ holy ghost moves to repe^tau^ce
according to y^ exe^ple in David who by the word being rebuked of Natha^,
said: ii. Reg. xii. b
I have si^ned against y^ lord. Now I do not sever here the law from y^ word,
but under the word I co^prise both y^ law and gospel. The law shows the syn,
it kills and drives down the ^scie^ce. The conscience at last seeks
comfort. Then the gospel comes and promises to y^ bileuers thereof remission
of si^nes and health, if they live a new life accordingly.

Theffectes of penance be taken either of the pertes of the same, Effects of
repentance.
either of things annexed as commodities which do chance i^ ^enau^ce, or
which follow it because of faith an other perte of penance. So yt for the most
perte, these effects do proceed jointly of theffectes of co^tricion and of
faith. For to be sorry for si^nes, makes not the perfect effect of repe^tau^ce,
unless you also addest faith which lifts up it self from the si^nes, wherefore
theffectes be these. To be sorry in y^ heart for thy si^nes, and to lift up thy
self again by faith to thinte^t y^ may receive remission of sins. To
bewail eue^ from the heart for thy si^nes: to confess thy sins and again to
comfort thy self by faith, to the end y^ may receive forgiveness of si^nes. To
acknowledge with thy heart thy si^nes, to da^ne them and agyne to aspyre by faith
unto grace. To dye unto sins by co^tricion, and again by faith to rise up
unto the newnes of life, to the intent yt might be renewed by the spirit, and
put on a new man. To mortify the old Adam, and again by faith to be renewed ^y
the spirit of the minds. Ephe. iiii. ^.
To lay down lies, and to speak the troth. To tremble and quake for the
horriblenes of sins, and again to seek by faith the discharge of the same.
To be sad and heavy with the brosyng and beating of the heart, which beating I call
co^tricion, and again to be glad and joyful because of faith, to eschew evil
and do good. To damn al our own works, our rightousnes, judgments, yea and
the best things in us, and from thens by faith to fle unto grace. For to be
truly penitent, is not only to forsake evil works, but also to damn al such
things as thou have before trusted in. Therefore Christ says, John. xvi. b.
that the holy ghost shall come to the intent that he may repreue the world of
sin, of rightousnesse, and of judgment, all which things the world ought
to condemn in them selves, if they will be partakers of the ryghtousnes of
Christ. This effect of penance John^ the baptist also requires, where he
says. Mark. i. b.
Repent ye and believe the gospel, yt is, distrust your own rightousnes and
embrace Christ who is promised in the gospel. To receive y^ holy y^ is given.
For when by faith Christ is taken hold of in repe^tau^ce, the si^nes be
released and the holy is given, who af^ward rules defe^deth and creates new
mocio^s to draw with it wiping out of sins, according to the saying of Peter in
y^ act. Be ye repe^tau^t and turn, Act. iii. d.
yt your sins may be wiped away. To draw with it quietness of conscience and
health, according to the prophet Hieremy. Hiere. z. d. g
Be ye turned yt ye may rest and be saved. To bring life with it according to
Ezech. Eze. xviii. c
If the wicked shall repent from al his sins which he has done, and shall
keep my commandments, and do that thing that is egal and right. etc. he shall
be saved. Certes these and such se^blable effects of penance taken forth of
the commodities annexed to the same, do follow eue^ for y^ penance sake, but
either because of the promise of god added thereunto, or for faith sake the other
perte of penance, which cleueth to the promises of god.

FINALLY, forasmoch as faith is an other perte of penance, and charity is a
thing allied to faith, therefore also charity first toward god, and since
toward the neighbor must needs follow penance. From hens do flow forth now
also outward good works, which testifye y^ penance to be true. For what
outward things so ever penance requires, yea, and what outward things so
ever follows penance, y^ same bear witness only of the true penance,
according to s. Aug. Augustine.
in his book of penance, which says. Sicut penite^cie comes est dolor, ita
lachrime su^t doloris, that is: like as the co^pagnion of penance is sorrow, so
the teres be witnesses of sorrow. Hereof it comes yt to work well outwardly,
to give alms, to fast to subdue y^ flesh, and to do se^blable works or
exercises convenient for repe^tau^ce, we judge symplely to be testimonies of y^
true repe^tau^ce in the heart which be done even for this very purpose, yt the
flesh may be tamed by the^, to the intent yt hensforth it might the less
offend. Also forasmoch as we read in scripture diverse exe^ples which testify
yt through repentance, temporal peynes be here mitigate i^ this life therefore
we attribute also this effect unto penance yt it does mitigate temporal
peynes in this life, according to thexe^ple of the Ninevites and of the
children of Israel Jonas. iii. Iosue. vii. a
where god turned away his furye from them after ye Achan was punysshed which
took away of the excommunicate things. Ite^ in the book of judges. cap. x. the
children of Israel do ^fesse their sins, and with outward factes also declare
that they truly repented, and therefore they threw away their ydols, wherefore
god delivers Israel from the bondage of y^ Philistines and of Amo^. But this
mitigacio^ of temporal peynes chau^ceth not merely eue^ for y^ penance sake,
as tofore I have said of the other effects, but for faythes sake the other perte
of penance. To this effect of penance belong al such places of scripture as
either do promise mitigacio^ of temporal peynes because of repe^tau^ce or
declare y^ the mitigacio^ of temporal peines have followed upon repe^tau^ce, as
be these, if we will condemn our selves, we shall not be condemned of y^ lord.
Ite^ almeses deliver from sins, yt is to wite as apperteyneth to the
remission of pain in this life.

Co^traries to penance be these. Contraryes to repe^tau^ce. Catharans
Nouacians.
To deny with the Cathara^s and Nouacians that such as fall again after baptism
can forthink the^ selves or be penitent, ^trary to the manifest exe^ples of
David, of Manasses, of Peter, and infinite others. To hold, y^ by this word
penance is only signified a sorrow for sinespast, which error comes of the
pertes of penance not rightly understand. To hold that penance is only a
bewayling or wepi^g for such sins as be past. To say penance is only a
ceasing from outward vices without the sorrow of the heart. To ascribe penance to
our own powers. To grant y^ penance comes by any other common mean, tha^ by
the word preached, whereby the holy ghost da^ncth our wickedness, yea and our own
rightousnes judgments and opinions. Al which things the world lay against
the justice of Christ. To affirm yt there be other parts of repentance, or
more then co^tricion and faith. Schole men.
To put with the schole men three parts of penance, contrici^^ confession, and
satisfaction. To mainteyn that there is one and the self same penance common
to al manner of persons. This error confounds the true and feigned penance
together, where as undoubtedly beside the true repentance which consysteth in
the true sorrows of the heart, lyftynge up it self with sure faith toward the
promyses of god concerning the frank remission of sins,
there is also a feyned and hypocritical penance, which me^ lay upon their own
backs and divise it with outward works or outward chastity without the true
terrors of the heart and of the conscience and without faith. In the mean season
to what purpose these outward things serve, I have declared before i^
theffectes of penance. To hold yt penance ^ue^ for the very works sake do
justify without faith, or co^ferreth grace. To say theffectes of penance
proceeding of the commodities thereof do follow for any other things then for
faythes sake an other perte of penance. To hold y^ by repe^tau^ce or as they
call it penance, only y^ actual blame is remitted, and not the pain which
they say is done away by satisfaction. To hold y^ theffectes of penance do
Pap^^sticall error.
follow because of the priests absolucio^, although the penitent lack faith.
To maynteyn y^ by repentance though the hole blame be released, yet not always
the hole gilt, yt is to wite, that which is due to the hole pain. The ^eresye
of papists.
To say y^ in repentance all the dross of actual syn is not remitted,
unless penance be perfect according to al his papistical pertes, yt is to
wite, co^tricion, confession, and satisfaction. To hold y^ true repentance can
stand without y^ works of charity or other good works. To deny yt penance
ought to endure throughout y^ hole life for since we do daily commit sins,
therefore so long as we live we need repentance.

Of co^tricion a part of penance. CA. XXXVIII.
COntricion is a true remorse or fearfulnes of ^science, Diffinition.
which feleth yt god is angry with syn, and therefore it soroweth for sins.

MANY places of scripture there be Probacions.
which make us certain of co^tricion, y^ it is a remorse and terror of
conscience. The prophet Joel says. Iohel. ii, c.
Rent your hertes and not your clothes. Ite^ Ps. 6. have mercy on me lord, for
I am weike, heal me lord, for my bones are troubled. 2. co. 8 Ye be made sad
unto repentance.
This word (true) excludes hypocresy which fayneth ^tricio^ in fastinges,
watchinges and se^blable outward works, all which nevertheless do follow, if so
be the ^tricio^ be true, but without the true fears of conscience, al such
outward works be nothing worth. Finally faith also ought to approach to y^
outward works which make the^ quick and true.

THE causes of contricio^ be tholy ghost Causes of contricion.
and the word. The holy ghost moves and ledeth us to contricio^, according to
his office, while he rep^ueth us of our syn, John. xvi. b.
of judgment, and of our rightousnes. The world is y^ mean whereby tholy ghost
ledeth to contricio^: ^i. Reg. xii. a
So David being rebuked by gods word of Nathan, says. I have sinned against
the lord.

THE true contricion is one only thing Parts none
consisting in the conscience, endued with true remorses and trobles springi^g
forth through the preching of gods word, repreui^g us of our sines, and is the
gift of tholy ghost. Besides this there is also a cou^trefet or hypocritical
co^tricio^, which me^ do lay upon the^ selves by outward works without the true
troubles of conscience. This is rejected of scripture.

Theffectes of co^tricio^, Effectis
be none other thing tha^ true fearinges and troubles of conscience, rising by
ye knowledge of sins, as these, To sorrow with the heart for the sines
acknowleged, and outwardly to testify this sorrow with good works, e^e^ple of
Mary Magdaleyn, Luc. vii. ^
which in her heart sorowed for her sins, and declared outwardly this grief
of heart with tears and works of love toward Christ. To be wayle eue^ from
the heart thy sins, and to confess y^ same. Thus David (as is said) being
chidden of Nathan soroweth for ii. Reg. d.
his sins, and says with a mournful heart I have sinned against the lord. And
to the true co^tricion of sins is necessarily required the confession of
sins before god. Psalm. xiii.
King David witnessynge the same where he says, I shall ^fesse against me mine
unrighteousness before y^ lord, and y^ have perdoned the wickedness of my heart. To
acknowledge in heart our sins, to which knowledge very egrely provoke us the
prophet Hier. ca. 2. 3. and 4. To da^ne thy sins eue^ with thy heart. To dye
unto syn even with the very heart. To sorrow hertely for thy sines with purpose to
change thy hole life i^ to better. Now outward things, as fastings,
watchynges, chastity, wepynges, and (to be short) all manner of outward
things make nothing to the co^tricion of heart save yt they be marks or
testimonies of the contricion of heart, profitable to subdue the flesh that
hensforth it may sin the less.

Co^traryes to ^tri^cio^ be these. Co^traries or errors.
To say co^tricion is nothing else but a volu^tary sorowing for sins with a
purpose of confessing and satisfyeng. Scholemen.
To trifle with certain scholemen of the difference of attricion and
co^tricion. Attricion and contricion
To dispute supersticiously with the scholeme^ whether sins be remitted by
attricion or co^tricion. They call attricion an imperfite displeasau^ce for
sins yt be committed. To say co^tricion is our own work. To maynteyn y^
there be other causes of co^tricion tha^ the holy ghost and the word. To hold
yt contricio^ is co^uersau^t essentially Scholemen.
in the heart, and virtually in confessing and satisfieng outwardly. To make
folish distinctions bitwene a first ^tricio^, yt must be a moderate sorrow, and
a second ^tricio^, yt must be the greatest sorrow, but not to much. To hold yt
contricion according to grace, requires sorrow and merit. This error I grant
judges aryght of sorrow and grace, but of merit it judges amysse, as
perteyneth to y^ remission of the blame, and everlasting pain. To grant yt
contricion ought to be had for every offense which we know, but for such as we
have forgotten the common contricion suffyseth. To say y^ contricion be it
never so little eue^ of it self wipeth away all the blame and pain. To hold yt
the outward nurture or disciplyne of works and exercises serves for part of
penance or true remorse of conscience. To say ^tricion always requires of
necessity tears, or other outward gestures. To defend that thobseruing of
outward things serve to an other purpose the^ to testify of the true ^triciou
of heart, and to bridle the flesh y^ it be no more so prone to sin. To hold yt
contricion by reason of charity wypeth away the blame, and by reason of sorrow
quenches the pain. To maynteyn yt contricion without faith is any other thing
then very desperacio^, for doubtless it can be nothing else when the conscience
do feel their sins and se no remedies how to be discharged of the same.

Of faith the other part of repentance. CA. XXXIX.
Faith the other and necessary perte of penance, Diffinition.
is yt whereby the ^sciences be again delivered out of the fearfulnes, unto the
certain and sure remission of sins, lest they should despair, being made
afraid by the greatness and abundance of sins.

I thought good here severally to handle Prove.
also faith as it is the other perte of penance, to thend yt the virtue of
penance may be y^ better known. But what thing properly faith is, I have
before in the title of faith declared sufficiently, which treatise may be also
referred hither. Now, how necessarily faith is required unto penance, and how
and in what wise y^ co^scie^ces be delivered out of their fear by faith these
reasons following which be grounded upon ye word, shall prove well enough. For
take me away faith and the ^scie^ces being dep^ssed by sines have no thing
whereby they may raise up the^ selves again out of ^tricio^. Furthermore sines
being by ^tricio^ bewailed and detested ca^ yet not be remitted without faith.
Finally penance is utterly unprofitable yea and also full of despair without
this faith: Mela^cthon
look more of this matter in y^ common places of Philip Mela^chton.

Faith as it is a perte of penance is not divided No parts
i^ to pertes. For it is one certain affection of mind of a sure ^fide^ce
app^hending remission of sins by Christ.

THE causes of faith be as before the Causes.
holy ghost and the word. To these also may be added absolucio^, which
nevertheless is y^ self word, which word when the co^scie^ces do hear co^cerni^g
remission of sins, they raise the^ selves by faith which afterward receives
theffect of y^ word even remission of sins.

HITHER may well be referred Effects.
theffectes of faith, so that thou apply the same hither unto repentance. For
faith as a part of penance differs nothing from faith justifying. Of which
I have heretofore severally entreated. Theffectes be these. To attain
remyssyon of sins acknowleged, and detested in contricyon, for faith
iustifyeth. To raise up, to quycken, and to releue the dismayed conscience in
contricion. To deliver the concyence from desperacion. To make quyete
conscyences, which be assured they be released of their sins through
Christ.
To bring with it the holy ghost to be our leader, and the creator of new
affections and mocyons in us unto a new life. For Christ if he be cleaued
unto by faith, gives unto us the holy ghost. To cause a right love
toward god and the neighbor. For charity can not be true and accepted,
before there be an atonement made by faith. To engeno^re of it self al good
works, and to cause that they may plese god, according to this text,
without faith it is impossyble to please god. Roma. xiiii.
Item, all that is not of faith is syn. To show the difference between
frutful co^tricio^ and vnfrutful, helthsom and damnable, bitwene the ^tricion
of Judas and of Peter, of David and of Saul. For the ^tricion of Judas and of
Saul was therefore unprofitable and da^^able because it lacked faith the
necessary perte of repe^tau^ce. To show the difference bitwene the servile and
the filial fear. The servile fear is fear without faith: the filial fear is
joined with faith. Co^traries


Co^traries to the faith be these. To deny y^ faith is the other perte of
penance. To say penance avails without faith. To hold yt penance without faith
is any other thing then very desperacio^. To hold yt faith the other perte of
repentance is our work. To defend yt the foresaid fruits of penance do follow
by reason of any other thing then of faith.

Of confession. CA. XL.
COnfession is of four sorts. Division of confession.
One is before god. An other open. The.iii private, but yet of open crimes, and
which followed instead of open ^fession. The fourth auricular.

Of confession before god.
CONFESSION which is made Dyffinicion.
before god is whereby we daily confess before god our sins, co^demning our
selves for unjust and wretched siners, to the end y^ by the mercy of god on
which we call, we may obtain forgyuenes of our sins.

NOW, Probacion.
that there is a confession to be made before god, we be certified by many
places of scripture. The prophet says: Psalm. xx^i.
Mine offense I have knowleged unto the, and mine unrighteousness I have not hyd
from the. I said, I will confess against me my unrighteousness unto god, and thou
have forgive the wickedness of my heart. These words of the prophet besides y^
they prove this confession, they do also set forth theffect, which follows
such as confess the^ unto god, yt is to wite remission of sins. This
diffinition also is approved by the hole. 50. psalm of the prophet. i. Johan.
i.
S. John^ agrees to y^ sane where he says. If we confess our sins, god is
faithful yt he will forgive us our sins. To this confession euerywhere we be
exhorted by the prophets, namely of Hiere. ca. 2. 3. and. 4.

This confession is a daily confession because we sin daily, Math. vi. e
Luc. xi. a
and therefore Christ did put it in the prayer which be taught us to pray,
named the Pater noster, wherein we say forgive us our sins. etc.

THE causes of this ^fessio^ be tholy Causes
ghost and the word. For while tholy ghost rebukes us according to his office of
sin judgment and rightousnes, and yt by y^ word it comes to pass yt we be
brought to y^ knowledge of our sins, and aft we have known the^, yt we ^fesse
the same before god, which he forgiueth when his promise of mercy is ones laid
hold of by faith. according to his own saying by y^ prohet Ier. Hiere. 3. d.
Know you thine iiquite because y^ have forsaken ye lord thy god,
and have made thy self pertaker of strange gods under al grene trees, but
have had no will to hear my voice says the lord: oh ye shrinki^g children,
turn again says the lord, and I will be married with you. etc. Ite^ a little
before he says. Hiere. iii. b
Therefore at the lest way from hensforth call on me in this wise. O my father,
y^ art he which have brought me up in my virginity, will y^ then be angry for
ever? etc.

TO the foresaid causes also the commandments of god is to be added, which
comaundeth us to confess our sins to god, whereby we be certified that this
confession pleases god. This commandment is openly espied in this place
where Christ says. Repent ye. For this confession is theffect of contricio^
which is an other part of penance. Mark. i. a.
In the gospel of Mark it is red that all were baptized of John^ in the
floude Iordane, confessing their sins. Furthermore, contricyon is cause of
this confession. For he that is contryte, shall necessarily also confess his
sins.

THERE be no pertes of this confession. No parts.
For it is one certain confession before god of sins even from the heart,
which nevertheless is done of diverse persons with diverse and sundry gestures.
The confession of hypocrtis.
It is an hypocritical confession which is made only with the mouth,
without the true terrors of conscience without faith. etc.

IF faith be put to this confession, Effects.
so that you confessest thy sins before god under a certain confidence had
upon y^ promises of god, by which he has promised to penitentes and such as
confess their sins remission of the same, tha^ thou receyuest forgyuenes of
sins. Wherefore the chief effect of this confession, is forgiveness of sins
purchased by faith. The Other effects be common with theffectes of contricion. For
^fession before god does nothing differ from contricion, but as the causes
and effects differ. And he y^ is co^trite, never forgets confession.

Co^traries to this ^fession before god Co^traries.
be these. To say confession which is made before god is not by gods law. To
say this ^fession before god is enough, and so to despise the keys and
absolucion ministered by thy brother.
To say y^ this confession before god, takes away ^fessio^ y^ ought to be made
to thy brother learned i^ gods word, to thinte^t you might be instructed i^
the knowledge of yt word and receive by the word absolucio^ of thy sins. To
hold yt confession before god done as it should be is our work. To say this
confession has none express commandment in scripture. The error of
papists.
To hold yt confession before god is unprofitable, because we be uncertain of
absolucio^. This error is great, for this confession has his absolucion by
the word. And hitherto perteyn such places of scripture as do remit sins
unto the repentau^t persons and which testify yt by this confession the holy
fathers have obtained remissyon of sins, as psalm. 31. And you have remitted
the wickedness of my heart. To hold y^ forgyuenes of sins which follow the
confession before god, does follow for any other thing then faith.

Of open confession. CA. XLI.
OPEN confession is by which in Definicy^^^
times past the co^mitters of open crimes did confess their sines before the
hole co^gregacio^, ernestly promising yt they would he^sforth amend their
living, which done, they were pardoned, and admitted again in to the
congregation.

WE be certain of this diffinitio^ by Probacion.
thexe^ples of scripture, which do as well testify yt this confession was in ure
in ye church as also prove the residue of y^ diffinitio^ ^cerning the form of
this ^fessio^ Thexe^ples hereof be. 1. Cor. 5. and. 2. Cor. 2. In the first
place thapostle writes thus. i. Corin. v. a.
It is reapported co^sta^tly yt there is fornicacio^ among you, and such
fornicacio^ as is not ones named among y^ gentiles, yt one should have his
fathers wife And ye swel, and have not rather sorowed, yt he which has done
this deed might be excluded your company. For I verily as abse^t in body, yet
persent i^ spirit have determined already, as though I were p^se^t, of him y^
has done this deed. In the name of our lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of the lord Jesus Christ deliver him unto
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, yt the spirit may be saved in the day
of the lord Jesus. etc. ii. Cor. ii. b
In the second place he writes thus. It is sufficient for y^ same man yt he
was rebuked of many, so yt now contrary wise ye ought to forgive him and
comfort him, lest y^ same person should be swalowed up with ouermoche heaviness.
etc.

TO this confession was not added satisfaction, as openly teaches Paul by
these words: It is sufficient for the man that he was rebuked of many.

IN asmoch as this confession seems Causes. Mat. xviii. c.
to apperteyn to the form of repreuing the brother yt sins taught by
Christ, it has the commandment of god for the cause. For albeit Christ
speaks there of the sins of private persons, yet because we be commanded
there to disclose the sins of our stubborn brother unto the church,
therefore it seems that this public or open confession took her occasion and
beginning of the said commandment. Furthermore this confession in the respect
of absolucion has gods word for the cause. The circumstaunces and ceremonies
of the thing was instituted by the authority of man.

THIS confession is not divided in to No parts.
pertes, but is one simple thing, even a public and open disclosyng of
notorious crimes according to the manner and form above specified.

THEFFECTES of open confession be these. Effects.
To win the brother yt falls, as Christ shows Math. 18. To reconcile him
that is fallen in to sin unto the church again. Of this effect monissheth
us thapostle where he says Wherefore I pray you do so that charity ii. Cor. ii.
may be wrought upon him, meaning the person that was fallen in to sin. To
warn others by this open confession, and to fraye them from committing the
like enormytyes. To be a token of earnest repentance, or a trial whereby
their stomachs be examined whether they have earnestly repented.

Contraries to this confession be. Contraries.
To deny open confession to be of gods law as having regard to the.xviii.
chapter of Mathewe. To hold that open confession has satisfaction annexed
unto it. To say that this open and public confession, which in times past
has been used of the fathers,
is not to be brought again in to ure,
specialy as farforth as it is of gods law.

Of co^fessyon pryuate of open crimes before a private priest. CA. XLII.
Confession private of open crimes Diffinicyon.
before a private priest, is which has succeeded i^ place of public
confession before remembered by which open sinners were wont to confess their
sins before some one pressed appointed out of the no^bre of the elders for yt
purpose which to such as were in will to repent, enjoined a certain punishment
(which coruptly thy call now penance) before the ^gregacio^, by which they
were tried whether they would ernestly forthik and forsake their old life, which
done, they were then first received unto the congregation again.

OF this diffinitio^ such writers are to Probacions
be sought and looked upon which have written of this confession. S. Cyprian.
Cypria^ makes mencio^ of this in his sermon De lapsis, and else where.
Tripartita historia.
Also y^ tripartite history whose words you shall find in y^ common places of
Melanchto^. Also an exe^ple somewhat like unto this confession remains yet in
such places as perdons be had, whereunto murderers or other open sinners
resort, and there making a private confession before some certain pressed be
afterward carried about the temple, holding under their left arm a rod, and
in their right hand a bre^nyng tapre, with the rod they be beaten of every one of
the co^fessours, al which things done, they be enjoined certain fastinges and
prayers, and so at last be admitted to the company of the faithful. Certeynly
of this confession a like exe^ple remains yet at this day in Rome where is a
special place appointed for penite^tes, and where they stand even like unto
mourners. Ite^ certain west churches are reapported to keep still a like usage
of this confession.

THIS confession depperteth further from Causes.
the word of god the^ the open confession before me^cioned, wherefore y^ cause of
this confession we may laufully make ma^s authority by which it was first
ordained as the tripartite history also declares Tripartite hystorye.
where it says.
It was seen to y^ ancient bisshops, yt as it were i^ a stage play notorious
crimes should be laid open to the testimony of y^ church, and for this cause
they appointed forth a pressed of a good ^uersacio^, a faithful kepe^ of counsel,
and a wise man, unto who^ such as had offended might approach and confess
their enormities. And ye pressed according to every ma^s fault enjoined
punishment. etc.

THIS confession has no pertes, No parts.
but is of one sort, according to the form before prescribed.

Theffectes hereof be not unlike to y^ Effects.
effects of open confession set forth heretofore, as. To win the brother yt is
fallen. To reco^cile him to the church. To monish and fear other from like
falling. To be the trial of true repentance.

Contraryes be these. Contraries
To say this confession is by gods law although i^ some part I can not deny
but it had occasion of the former confession. To hold that the penalty or
punishment is added to this confession that the penitent by the same might
satisfye for his sins. To hold that this confession in which the priest
enioyneth penalty or punishment (which they folyshly call penance) is of
necessity to be used, whereas in deed the same is not commanded by the law of
god.

Of auricular or ear confession. CA. XLIII.
AUricular or ear confession is D^ffinicion.
whereby doubtful consciences and laden with sins seek by y^ word assurance,
instruction, comfort, and a certain way to com to remission of si^nes, which
the bileuers also receive because of absolucion and the power of the keys.

THE necessary use of this confession Probacyon.
proves sufficiently this diffinitio^. For man being laden with the burden of
sins for the most part can not comfort him self, either because he is not
well taught in the word, or because the batayls of his conscience be greater
then that it can well ryd it self of the same. Wherefore by all means this
confession is necessary and profitable, to the intent y^ by it the conscience may
be instructed and taught where it ought to seek for comfort, yt it may obtein
remission of sins. Now, yt remission of sins follows this confession
because of absolucion, and the power of the keys, these places teach us. He
that hears you, hears me. Item to whom so ever ye shall remyt sins,
Math. xviii. ^
they shall be forgyuen in heaven.

The cause of this ^fession, Causes.
I grant, is ma^s authority. But forasmoch as god approves absolucion, and
every man has need of it, therefore this confession is to be kept still in the
church, if so be we will that there be any use of the keys i^
the church. Neither do I se why men should be grieved with this confession, onles
I suppose because they have no delight to be instructed in the word, where as
yet they most of al glory of the gospel, or because remission of sins is
unthankful unto the^, which is offered in this confession by absolucio^. Thou
therefore which have yt gospel, which disdaynest not to run to sermons,
imbrasing the same with great admiracion and delectacio^ of mind why do you
shrink back from confessing or askyng counsel concerning thy health and
salvation, and friendly to talk with the curate or shepeherde, to thintente thou
may learn of him even the self same thing that thou hear at sermons by
the open preaching of the word.

EAR confession is not divided into No parts.
pertes but is one simple confession whereby the consciences do seek comfort
institution and remission of sins, through absolucio^, which is by the word.

Theffectes of auricular confession proceed Effects
of the profit and necessity of the same as. To be institute and instructed
better in y^ christen doctrine. To receive a stronger comfort by further
instruction. To here of remyssion of sins by ye power of the keys. To
receive remyssion of sins by the word throuh the power of the keys there may
also be gathered other effects of ear confession forth of the commodities of
the same which help to repre^^e the occasions of sins when the conscience do
here in confession the heynousnes of sins and how horrible god punishes
sin. On the contrary part how great rewards he will give to good works.

Contraryes to ear confession be these Contraryes
To hold that ear confession is by gods law. Albeit I grant that god
approves absolusion. To despise auryculer confession or to neglecte it which
although it be not commanded by the law of god yet for the foresaid
commodities it is not to be despised ne neglected, oneles a man thinks that
he needs not the word which he hears in the institucion and absolucio^. To
bind auricular confession to to a time certain. To say that the rehearsal and
rekening up of al sins is required in confession by gods law. To say ear
confession is therefore necessary that the penitent may receive satisfaction for
his sins. To hold that all y^ sines are to be confessed under pain of deedly
sin. Papisticall
To hold that auricular confession without satisfaction added to y^ same is in
vain and nothing worth. To hold that all sins are to be confessed to
gither with all the circumstaunces be longinge to the same. To say ear
confession of it self concerns necessite of health as perteyneth to the
remyssion of y^ blame but not to the remyssio^ of y^ pain for which they
hold that satisfaction is to be had. Papisticall error.
To hold that ear confession even of it self wypeth away sins as well
concerning the blame as yt pain The error of scholemen.
To say ear confession makes of a deedly sin venial sin. To hold that
auricular confession as a work of it self delyuereth from the everlasting
peine and dimynissheth y^ temporal pain, The heresye of. S. Thomas worshipped
might he be.
To hold with Thomas y^ scholeman yt the pryncypaul effects of ear ^fession be
to deliver from everlasting pain and from the pain of purgatory in which y^
said Thomas says yt such as be confessed be more easly pu^ysshed tha^ such
^s be but only co^trite.

Of satisfaction. CA. XLIIII.
SAtisfaction is of two sorts the one A division of satisfaction.
which in times past was added to open penance y^ other is devised by ye
scholeme^, and by reason of many opinions added to the same is utterly wicked
and ungodly.

Of satisfaction used in times past in open repentance.
Satisfaction used i^ old time i^ open penance, Diffinition.
is a certain peyn or punishment which in old time was enjoined by y^ priest
to the penitent persons for their open sins to try the^ whether they were
ernestly repentaunt.

There is no doubt of this diffinicio^ which Probacion.
is taken forth of y^ tripertite histo. which shows y^ original begi^ning
of this satisfaction e^ioyned by y^ pressed, according to the quality of
thoffe^ce, by which y^ penite^tes exercised the^ selves until the time
appointed by the bishop, when y^ bishop being p^sent they were admytted again
to y^ pertaking of y^ lords supper, y^ final effect ca^ not be called i^ to
doubt, for we must keep still this dorctin y^ by only faith we obteyn remission
of sines, through christ and not through our own works.

The cause of this effectio^ is ma^s authorytye, Causes.
according to y^ of the tripertite history. It was seen to the ancient
bisshops. etc. as before in the title of confession of open crimes before a
pryuate priest yt cause also of this satisfaction is the priest which enjoined
the pain or punishment for which followed satisfaction, which lasted till the
time prescribed of the pressed Furthermore the cause of this satisfactyon is y^
penitent, which performed y^ same. Thoccacio^ of this satisfaction was given
Occasion.
by the malice and noughtines of me^, which by their false and feyned
repentance disceyued the church.

Sundry sorts of satisfaction there were Parts.
according to y^ qualytie and gretnes of thoffence. And as ye sins were, so
had they canons rules and laws for the same.

Theffectes be these. Effects or works of satisfaccion in old time used.
To try by y^ enjoined satisfaction whether the penite^tes were truly sorry for
their sines. To attempt them whether they wysshed hertely to come again to y^
co^gregacio^. To tame the flesh from the wa^tonnes of sinning. To be an
i^pedime^t to the flesh that it fall no more so sone into vices.

Co^traryes be these. Contraryes
To say satisfaction i^ old time was by gods law, to hold that there is an
other satisfaction for sins the^ the merits of Christ. Papistical erroures.
To meynteyn two manner of satisfactions, one for venial sins and an other
for deedly. To say satisfaction stands not of due works but superogatiue y^
is of superfluous works and more than need by which be redeemed the pains of
purgatory or other temporal peynes. This is a papistical satisfaction of
which I will entreat her after. Purgatory men.
To hold that satisfaction changes eternal peines into peynes of purgatory
or other temporal pains. To hold that such peynes be remytted partly by the
power of S. Peter's keys and partly by satisfaction. To say satisfaction takes
away the blame and gives remyssion of sins. Good Saint Thomas.
To meynteine with Thomas y^ the confessor does laudablye when he
says to his gostly child. What so ever good you do by satisfaction y^ same
might be unto the for remyssion of sins. To hold that satisfaction
suffiseth for the purginge of the peine either eternal or temporal, To defend
that the penitent obteyneth by satisfaction the perfect fruit of grace. To
defend that satisfaction is called a price raunsom or recompense for sins.
To hold that one man may satisfye for an other as well for the pain as for
ye blame. To grant that satisfactions do yet serve when they be done in deadly
sin. To hold that the satisfaction of Christ serves for y^ hole nature of man
but yet y^ every man ought to satisfy for his own sins. To maynteyne y^
there he superogatyue or superfluous works which be not utterly wicked and
abhomynable. To hold that fastinges and other exercises to bridle the ryote of
the flesh be not due works to be done duti^g life and not at times appointed.

Of satisfaction dyuised by scholemen. CA. xlv.
SAtisfaction divised by scholemen is Diffinicyon.
which stands of works not due but superrogatiue or superfluous whereby be
redeemed y^ peines of purgatory or at lest way other temporal pain. Probacions


The reasons which yt scholemen bri^gforth for the co^^irmacion of their heresy
be these. Iniuryes committed must be reco^pensed or satisfied according to the
egaltye of justice. Etgo say they works not due but superogatiue are required.
Also where as god is merciful he remytteth y^ blame and whereas be is a
rightous judge he changes the everlasting pain in to y^ peyn of purgatory or
other temporal peines. Now, part of these peynts they say is relesed by power
of ye popish keit^ and part is to be redeemed by satisfactions. The cause of
this satysfactio^ is thautorytie Causes.
of man which besides gods word yea against ye most open word of god has
dyuysed satisfaction. Thoccasion of this deuyse was the confession in old time
used of public crimes before a private pressed not rightly understand which
added to the penitentes a certain penalty or punishment not that by the
executinge of the same they should satisfye for their sins but that being
now realesed of them by the power of the keys they might declare before the
hole church y^ they ernestly repented. The causers also of this satisfaction
be y^ popish prestes that enjoin this satisfaction or penau^^ as they call it
to such as be confessed of the^. Out holy relygions parsons lay penance upon
them selves.
Ite^ they which say it upon the^ selves as hertofore has been used to be done
of workmen, I call the^ so which strive to win heaven by their own good works
as they call the^, The matter or substance of this satisfaction is taken forth
of the self works which they call supererogatyue or superfluous (i^ deed they
be superfluous and vein) as be pilgremages, rosaries of our lady, vygilles,
tormentaryes and beti^ges of their own bodies wearing of ^^y^ces made of here
rope girdels goi^ge wolwarde and barefote or with windows i^ their shoes, and
such other most vile works yea and often times most folysh. Parts.
The ^umysshe schole doctors of later time which write that satisfaction
deserves remission of sins make two pertes thereof. The one which satisfies
for venial sins for which they dreme that pytter patteringes daily said be
sufficient. The other, which satisfies for deedly sins and for the peine of
purgatory. Effects


Effects of this scholastical, or rather diabolycal satisfaction, they will
have these. To change the everlasting pain into pains of purgatory, of which
part is remytted say they, by the power of ye popish keys and part by
satifactions. To redem themporal pains to merit remission of sins or of the
blame. To merit (for they be great meriters) life everlasting. These two last
effects, the rude and folysh monks have put to, devising them out of their
drowsy pates.

Of pardons or indulgences, CA. XLVI.
INdulgences or perdons were in times Diffinicion.
past forgiui^ges of open penau^ces (as they call them) or satisfactions. Prove.


This diffinicio^ taken forth of ye manner and custom of open penance, and
therefore it is certain and sure.

THE cause of pardons is the priest Causes.
which released the enjoined penance or satisfaction.

Indulge^ces have no parts which nevertheless Parts.
according to the state of the persons, and necessity of the thing were
otherwhiles granted more, otherwhiles less unto the penitentes.

Theffectes of perdons were these. Effects.
To vnburde^ y^ penite^ces, either because of their weakness, or for other
causes, To serve i^ y^ stead of satisfaction, that was enjoined. Contraries to
this ancient ordinance be these. Co^traries or erroures. Papists.
To grant with ye papists that pardons is a release of pain which
deseruingly we should suffer for our own sins, taken out of the treasure of
the church, to pay home the justice of god. To say with ye holy man S. Thomas
of Thomas of Aquyn.
of aquyne, that indulgences by given by satisfactions to the honor of god and
common profit of the church. In deed it is to great profit and advantage of
the popish church which is ecclesia malingna^tum, even the church of harlotes.
To hold with schole clerks, that pardons be not given for corporal things of
the^ selves but as temporal things be ordained unto spiritual, se how pretely
they cloak their stinking gaynes.
To defend that pardons by the power of S. Peter's keys do deliver souls out
of Purgatory To say pardons do good service for the remyssyo^ of temporal
pains. Rome Pardones.
To grant out pardons with the bishop of Rome and his reverend clergy, for
such as give their helpyng hands to the building of chapels and churches. To
hold that pardons be auaylable for those y^ dyed in grace, Papists.
or also out of grace. To mayntyne with the disgysed papystes, y^ pardons take
away both culpa^ and pena^, the syn and the punysshme^t due ^or y^ same.

Of the ecclesiastical power or power of the church. CA. XLVII.
THe ecclesiastical power or power of the church, Diffinicion.
is which stands in teaching the gospel, admynistratyng y^ sacraments,
and exco^minicating such as ^e open sinners, and again in assoy^ing y^ same
when they demand absolucio^ THE realm of Christ is spyritual, Probacyon^^er
of.
not ruled by the swe^de, by the armours, and other things apperteynynge to a
worldly polycye: wherefore this chyrchly power is ryghtly descrybed by ye words
aforesaid. Furthermore Christ which is both the (...) and maker of this
churchly power removed all worldly governance both from him self, and from
his discyples unto the princes of the world from himself which would not be
chose^ to be king, but fled away from his apostles and disciples where as he
says unto the^, Ioh. vi. d
y^ rulers of the ge^tyles have dominion on the^ but so shall it not be among
you. Now S. Peter him self, who^ y^ papists make the need of their popysshe
power or rather tyranny, used no worldly or temporal power, i. Pet. ii. c.
yea on the contrary perte S. Peter writes that we ought to obey ye temporal
rulers ordained of god for the defense of such as be good, and punishment of
the wicked. i. Peter. v. a.
Also S. Peter exhorts his fellow priests to feed the flock of Christ and
to play the pertes of bisshops Some of our bysshps had need be constrained to
this.
(for so it is i^ the greek) not co^streynedly but wyllynglye, not for foul
lucouts sake but of a prompte mind, not as though they bare rule over their
flock allotted to their spiritual charge but in such wise as they may be
exe^plers unto their flock. Neither does his fellow s. Paul dysse^t from hi^
who also testifyeth unto the Corynth. of hi^ self sayng. Corin. xxii. d
Not that we are lords over your faith but we are helpers of your joy Now to
teach y^ gospel they be commanded of Christ who says, Mar^. xvi. d John.
xx. f.
go ye i^to y^ hole world and preach the gospel. Item as my father has sent
me, so send I you.

By sacraments I understand here baptism, the souper of the lord, Mat.
xxviij. d
and absolucyo^. Of baptysme speaks Christ thus. Go and teach all nacyones,
baptisyng them i^ the name of the father and the son and tholy ghost. Of the
souper of the lord he says, Math. xxvi. c. Mat. xviii. c
Eat ye drink ye, etc. Of absolucion he sayt^* Uerely I say unto you, what so
ever ye bynd upon earth it shall be bound in heaven, etc. The diffinicyo^ also
appears certain by the parts of the ecclesiastical power which be these, y^
power of doctrine or order, and the power of exco^municacyo^ and absolcuyo^. Of
exco^munycacyo^ speaks Christ in the.xviii. chap. of Math. Exemples of
exco^municacyon appear in the first epistle to Timoth. cap. i. in the persons
of Hymeneus and of Alexander whom saint Paul betoke to Satan that is to say
he exco^munitated i. Timot. i. d.
that they should learn not to blaspheme. Ite^ thapostle blames y^ Corinth, i.
Cor. v. a.
that they accused not, that is yt they put not out of their company the man yt
had committed adultery with his own fathers wife. And again afterward he
blames the^ after they had excommunicate hi^ wha^ he took great sorrow for his
offense yt they received him not in to their company, Finally such as have
fallen and he repugnau^t ought to be taken again according to thexemple of
Peter, and infynyte other.

Christ is the pri^cipal cause of this power. Causes of the power of the church.
For he ordained it and committed it to the co^gregacio^, as appears. Mat.
xvj. and xviii and in the gospel of John^. cap. xx. After Christ, the church
is a seco^darye cause of the ecclesiastical power, which has authorite do
co^fer and to exerciyse it. No pryuate person, no bishop, no archebysshop, or
what so ever name he beats or takes upon him has no power, onles it be
committed to such pryuate persons by the hole co^gregacyo^, not taken away
again for the abusing of the same. The usurpation of the bishop of Rome.
wherefore the bishop of Rome is not a little to blame that he draws ye power
of the church to his own propre person and usurps upon the authority of
the same most tyra^nously. For only ye church has the keys, and therefore
it also has the power to elect and nominate such as ought to administre the
keys of the church where the pure word of god is bad and the right use of
the sacraments. The manner and The ancient usage of the church:
form of calling and chosyng y^ ministers in old time used i^ the church was
this. The people did those and
afterward came ye next bishop adioynynge to that diocese and approved the
election. Testimonies of this election thou shalt find in common places of
Melancthon. And saint Paul commands Titus to ordeyne priests in the places
nere about him. Afterward by authorytie of the counsel of Nyce, the
confyrmynge of the bishop elected Did. lxiiii. ^^a. Episcopi
was given* to all the bishops of y^ same prouynce, which constitution because
it seemed very hard, was changed to the confyrmacyo^ of three, either being
there present, or else by wrytynges agreynge thereunto.

Hable persons to the ministration of Parsones. mete to be the ministres of the
congregation.
gods word be described of thapostle in his epistles to Timo. and to Titus,
which description is approved. Did. xxv. Hither pert^ine also other decrees,
as did. xxiiij. where it is commanded that such be promoted to the dignity
of a bishop as be approved of long time, as well by the word of faith, as by
thexemple of right co^uersacion. Item did, xxiij. cap. Tales. Let such be
elected to be ministers of ye church as can worthyly handle the divine
sacraments. Also did. xxiij. cap. Hiis igitur. Let them study and endeavor
them selves to keep perpetually the chastyte of an undefiled body, or at
leestwaye let the^ be coupled with the yoke of one only matrymonye.

It is a^ old division of the churchly or Parts
ecclesiastical power, to deuyde it i^to power of order or doctrine, whereunto
perteyneth p^chyng of y^ gospel, declaryng of remyssyo^ of syunes, and
co^municatyng thereof, administrynge of the sacraments.

And i^to y^ power of jurisdiction, to which belongs excommunication and
absolucio^. Theffectes of the ecclesiastical power Effecte^
be these. To teach y^ pure word or gospel, according to the sayng of Christ,
I se^d you, as my father has sent me, but Christ was not sent to teach lies,
ergo nether y^ p^chers be sent to teache lies. To teache repe^tau^ce and
remission of synes i^ ye name of Christ, for these be ye pertes of the pure
word or gospel. To ministre remission of sins to others, for this is y^
chief effect of y^ gospel. To ministre sacraments, according to ye word. To
assoyle by y^ power of y^ keys al true penitentes demau^dyng ye same. To
excommunicate open siners, among whom I recke^ blasphemours, falls techers. i.
Tiom. ^
etc. Se^blably Pau. excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander for their
blasphemy. To receive again such as covet to return again unto y^ church,
and so to assoyle the^, according to thexemple of the aduout^er me^cioned of
thapostle in the second epistle to the Cori^. ii. Cor. ii.
Now, these effects and offycies they may not exercise in a corner, but
openly and in y^ sight of the congregacyo^. For the doctrine of the gospel is
an open and ii. Cor. xiiii.
manifest preaching. Neither is it lefull for every pryuate
person to exercise these offices, but only to such as be appointed and
called thereunto by the church, that all things may be done in the
co^gregacyo^ semyngly, and in due order. Nevertheless every man may, yea and is
bound preuely to teach and instruct his neighbor, to declare unto affrayed
co^scyences remyssyo^ of sins and that by the word and so to assoyle them.
Also in case of necessity it is lawful for every person to minister the
sacraments. But to excomunicate is not lawful for any pryuate person as it is
neither lawful to ossoyle the excomunicate person. For these things because
they be publyke iudgme^tes and spectacles ought to be done before the hole
church. And therefore thapostle writes to y^ hole church of Cori^th. and not
only to the mynystres of y^ church that they should receive him again into
their company which had committed thaduoutrye.

I thought good among y^ co^traryes Co^traries
hereof, co^pendyously to touch the ecclesisticall power which unto this day
the bishop of Rome has used or rather abused with horible tyrany, which thing
I will the gladlyer do because I know that the true ecclesiastical power shall
the better be espied, when on the contrary side the false and tyrannycal power
of this monstre is set forth.

Of the popish power.
THE power of the church which hythervnto Diffinicion.
the pope has usurped is a domynion in things spiritual and temporal yea
rather a power as well upon all the laytie as upon the clergy with authorytye of
making and statuting laws to rule men withal, as well in spiritual as
temporal things and where laws have no place there to exercise the swerd for
the mayntenau^ce and defense of y^ goods both spiritual and temporal of the
church mylytaunt.

THE first perte of the diffinitio^ is apparaunt Probacyon.
did. xix. capt. Ita dominus. Also i^ the decretalles de electione. ca.
significasit. Also i^ the decretales de hereticis ca. A^ abolendam. Now of his
dominion upon the layty, there be exe^ples enough i^ which we se the tyrany of
the bisshops of Rome upon emperors and kings, pope zacharye deposed Hilderich
the french zachary.
king and made of a king a monk. Innocent the.iiii. did put down Frederike
the.ii. from the empire and in his place set up an other, Alexander the third.
pope Alexandre the third before hi^ did trede with his fete upon Frederike
the first emperor of yt name surnamed Barbarossa father to the said Friderike
the.ii. And of thauthorytye of making and inactinge laws at their pleasure
which they bynd me^ unto more straightly the^ to y^ gospel certifieth us Leo,
Leo.
Did. 4. ca. de libellis, Now, Boniface Boniface.
the.8. raised great wars in Italy. Grego. Gregory.
moved al wars upon the emperors of Rome for maynteyning the confyrmacion of
y^ bishop of Rome. Julius.
Pope Julius because he made many wars is honored of some for a Saint and a
blessed man. The false and traytorous wars or rather co^spiracyes of Clement
be not unknown. Clement.


This popish ecclesiastical power Particion of the popish power.
they divide i^to order whereby they chose their mynistres that may proclayme
and preach this power furnyshed with lies and tirannye, and in great abuse
distrybute y^ sacraments. And into jurisdiction spiritual and temporal.

Of this power y^ causes be Tyranny Causes.
and a mere lust to reign whereby Boniface the third obtained of y^ emperor
Phocas the name of the universal bishop, which obtained by little and little to
his powers, he increased the same, and to the intent it might be the more sure
and stable and also extend the farther, his successors bishops of Rome
studied y^ same that Bonyface did, till at last they were become in worldly
power far myghtyer the^ kings and e^perours, who^ other whiles they utterly
deposed of thempyre, finally, I call the popish power a tyrranny, forasmoch as
it is a power gotten without right and vnrightlye possed of them, namely since
they also glory and bost to be y^ vica^s of Christ, by which fact they declare
them selves to be very a^tichristes that is to say against Christ.

Their effects and Effects.
works be these. To d^uise and make laws, statutes, ceremonies, articles of
y^ faith, and now these now those rites which the bisshops of Rome do lay upon
the fely congregation as oracles of god or gospels with this condition annexed
thereunto y^ who so ever transgresses the same shall be depryued of y^ name of
a christen man as openly testifies Leo. did. iiii. ca de libellis. To
co^fyrme the highest temporal ruler i^ earth did. xxii.C. Omnes, where it is
red that S. Peter received of Christ the admynynistracio^ both of the erthely
and of the heavenly empire. To administre wordly powers whch power y^ bishops
of Rome take unto the^ of Peter their p^decessour according to their law
aforesaid. To make temporal laws. To give sentence of death according to y^
same. To make wars for defense of the church goods. These temporal office
and be nothing mete and convenient for bishops especially sythens (as I said)
they will be vyca^s of Christ i^ y^ kingdom of christ which was altogyther
estraunge from this world. To ordeyne and elect blind bousardes, contrary to
their own decrees, as well to preach impute doctrine defoyled with man's
inuencions and for the most part repungnaunt to the sincere word of god as to
distribute y^ sacraments in an horyble abuse. To curse and excommunicate every
man at their own pleasure, as testifye exe^ples of themperours of whom there
has been in manner none before our times which has eskaped their thunderboltes.

Here follow the rest which be contraryes to y^ true ecclesiastical power.
Contraryes therefore to y^ true power Contraryes
of the church be these. To hold that y^ right of conferring the
ecclesiastical power remains only with the pope and not with the church
which has the keys given unto them of Christ. Papistical
To say no man ought to be admitted to ministre the word unless he be elected
ordinate and co^fyrmed of the pope or his deputies. To deny that every
particular congregation has power to elect their ministres of the word by the
authorite of the keys The detestable heresy of papists.
committed unto the^. To say that only to S. Peter and his successors bishops
of Rome were given the keys of the ecclesiastical power and not to the
church. To deny that the principal effects of the churchely power be, to
teach gods word, to preach remyssio^ of sins by Christ, to bestow the same
upon such as cover it to distrybute ryghtly and purely y^ sacraments.
To hold that the power of the church stands not but among the anointed
prestes.
To hold that private persons may not privately exercise thoftyces of the
ecclesiastical power as to i^struct their neighbor i^ gods word, to speak
and talk of the gospel, i^ necessitye to distribute y^ sacraments. etc. To
hold y^ open confession is not necessary. The erruor of fantastical persons
To do away private absolucion and be conte^^ed with an absolucion
pha^tastical. To say that publyque absolucion ca^ not stand with pryuate
absolucion but yt the one or the other is to be abolyshed. To defend y^
excommunycacion apperteyneth to private persons that they may excommunicate of
their own authoryty whom they lust To hold that excomunycacion may duly be
done although it be not openly done before the congregation. To say yt only
such as preach evil doctrine are to be excomunicate and not such as give evil
exemples of living. Error of Anabaptists.
To deny that such are to be received again into ye congregacyon which have
repented. To seek any other thing by the ecciesiasticall power then the
execucion of the fore said effects. To exercise the officies of the
eclesiastical power openly without lawful calli^g by the church to ye same. To
resist rashely the mynisters of the church contrary to y^ commandment of
Christ who says. Math. xxiii. a
All things yt they command you to do that do ye, y^ is to wit, as long as
they sit in the chair of Moses. What is to sit in Moses chayer.
Now to sit in y^ chair of Moses is to expown the law of god purely and
sincere^y. To hold that y^ use of the ecclesiastical power is leted or taken
away through evil ministers, so yt they sit in ye chair of Moses. Therefore
Christ signifies that there sit in the chair of Moses scribes and pharisees
both good and had. whereunto accords Paul writting to the phi. Philip. i.
thus Some preach Christ of envy and conte^cion, some also of a good will. etc.
But what forces it, says Paul, so y^ Christ be preched by any manner of ways
whyther it be by occasion or of true meani^g I therein joy, yea and will joy.
To abuse the offices of y^ eccliastical power for gains and foul lurce. To
hold that the ecclesiastical power is of no force. Heresy of purpatorye men.
To hold y^ by the power of the keys souls be delivered through pordons out
of purgatory. Popish error.
To say in reseruacion of cases not only y^ canonical pain but also the
offense may be reserved, yea and in such as be truly repentaunt.

Of men's traditions in the church CAPI. XLVIII.
I Would not put y^ place of men's traditions among theffectes of y^
ecclesiastical power, as though it should protain perprely thither, forasmoch as
to co^stitute humane tradicyo^s in the church, is not the propre effect of y^
churchly power, but which myxed therewith for certain and necessary causes, as
hereafter shall more plainly appear. Description.


Men's traditions in the church therefore be ordinances of men which they make,
which have a commyssyon of the church to the same, to the intent that althinges
may be done in the congregation with comeliness and in order.

THIS diffinicio^ is plain. Probacion.
For they be not gods which ordained humane traditions in y^ church, or yet
do ordeyn. Furthermore certain it is y^ the tradicions be not of the law
divine, because they be not expressly mencyoned of in the word. And thapostle,
i. Corynthi. vij. where as he had not an open word of god to serve for his
purpose durst not but call his traditions counsels and not co^mau^dem^tes
where he says: Co^cerni^g virgyns I have no commandment of y^ lord, ^. Cor.
vii, c
but I give counsel, etc. Wherefore we ought diligently, according to the manner
of Paul, to discern men's traditions from the express commandments of god,
For thus the apostle always perte^eth before his traditions: I speak this of
favor, i. Cor. vii. a.
and not of commandment. Item to y^ rest speak I (says Paul) and not y^
lord. i. Cor. vii. c.
The final effect puts Paul where be says: i. Cori. xiiii. g.
wherefore brethren e^deuer your selves to this, y^ ye perphecy (he calls
prop^^^ye interpretacion of scripture) and forbid not to speak with tongues,
and let al things be done honestly and in order. So there Paul does institu^e
lessons or redynges in the church. Ite^ yt women speak not in the
congregation but keep silence. Also in the.xi. chap. y^ women haueth eyr hedes
covered and y^ me^ be bare heeded when they pray Item in the vij. chap. that
the man and wife abstain one from an other for a time, but not so but they
come again together afterward. lest Satan might te^pt the^ for inco^tine^cie.
Also y^ the faithful husband forsake not his unfaithful wife, so y^ she will
agree to tarry with him. And thapostle adds the final effect wherewith he
concludes his tradicyons, saying: Not yt I should cast a i^nare upon you, i.
Cor. vii. e
but y^ ye might follow that which is honest and comely. etc. Hereby it also
appears y^ humane traditions be no sacrifices or service of god, but things
indifferent which may be changed, altered, correct, and rejected, according to
thoccasion of y^ time, eue^ as the same self thing was done in counsels,
following which customably have corrected and oftentimes rejected y^
co^stitucyons of their predecessors which thing they might not have done if
humane tradicions had been of gods law.

THE causes of humane traditions in y^ Causes.
church be these. Thauthorytie of man, and the power which the pastors and
mynysters have that be called of the church. Parts.


Humane tradicions be of all one sort in the church which some me^ call rytes,
some cerymonies. And forasmoch as some ordynau^ces apertayne to order, and other
some to institucio^, therefore they may be diuyded in to tradicyons ordinall and
institutory. Unto ordinal may be referred holy days, fasting days, dyuersitie
of garments. etc. Unto institutorye laws may be referred lessons and songs,
wherewith the youth and the rude people be instructyd. The papystes diuyde the
trudycions in to universal and particular. The universal they say ought not
to be corrected ne changed but the particular may.

Theffectes of humane tradicyons in Effects i. Cor. xiiii.
the church be these. To make that all things (according to the rule of Paul)
be done in the church honestlye and in order. i. Corin. vii. f.
Also in an other place he says: This I speak for your profit not to
entangle you in a snare but yt ye might follow that is honest and comely. Item
to make ye confusion unmeet for ye church be eschued. To cause that soberly
and quyetly all things be executed in y^ church. To bring to pass that the
youth and vulerred people may be instruct, and brought up in the word of god.

Co^traryes to men's tradicions in the Contraryes
church be these. To hold y^ humane tradicyo^s be institute in the church to
be a true service of god. To say men's tradicyo^s in the church if they be
repungnau^t to y^ word ought not to be cast forth. To say all humane
traditions ordained of popes in the church are to be kept under pain of
deedly syn, The most damnable heresy of papists.
because popes be hedes of the church and bycars of christ To hold y^ men's
tradicyo^s must be had in such price yt we may not ones doubt or ask the
questyon whether they be repungnaunce with the word or no. To hold that it is
in the bishop of Romes power to make traditions and laws of like strength
with the commandments of god. To hold yt humane tradicyons deserve grace or
remyssyon of sins. To meyntayne y^ men's tradicion in the church serve to
pacify god and to satisfye for sins. To say men's tradicions in y^
congregation may not be broken in case of necessity. To cast forth of yt
church al humane tracicio^s, yea and those also which be not repungnau^t to
the word which rashness is cause of great dissencion and of manifold
inco^modities. To deny that we ought to obey men's traditions which be not
contrary to the gospel but ordained to this only end y^ all things be done
in the church semyngly and in order. To raise discord for men's traditions in
i. Cor. xi. c.
y^ church. Against these speaks Paul where he says. But if any man seem to
be contentious among you, let him know y^ we have no such custom neither
the co^gregacions of god to meynteine y^ this life may be ruled without
ceremonies and rites. To auaunce and extol humane traditions above the
commandments of god as they have done which have dreamed superfluyitie of
ceremonies. To snarle the conscience by humane traditions against whom writes
Paul i. Corin. vii. To deny men's tradicions Ceremonies be things in different.
whether they be rites or ceremonies to be things indiff^rent. I call y^
indifferent wherein consists neither rightousnes neither sin. To tra^sgresse
the tradicions of me^ in the church after a sedicious manner and to y^ sklau^dre
of others. To say y^ scriptur only da^neth humane traditions among yt Jews
where Christ says: They worship me in vain with the commandments of men.
etc. To lade y^ church with humane tradicions. To keep and observe tradicions of
me^ supersticiouslye. The error of supersticious persons.
To say men's tradicions may not be of diverse sorts in diverse places. To say
that of necessity of salvation al humane traditions ought to be in all places
alyke.
To deny yt honest ceremonies and rytes used hitherto in y^ church which be
not against the word may more profytably be kept still then new ordained. To
deny yt the chaunginge of humane tradicions onles necessite or urgent
commodite moves to the contrary, is cause of i^finite myscheues and
i^co^modities. To co^de^ne such as have throwe^ out of their
churches unprofitable and wicked ceremonies. To deny yt charity and
necessite be the means whereby all men's traditions in the church ought to be
measured.

Of the church of congregacyon. CA. XLIX.
THe place or title of church follows very co^uenie^tly y^ ecclesiastical
power. For the church is the kingdom wherein is exercised this ecclesiastical
power, and from whe^s it proceeds originaly by reso^ of y^ keys committed by
the church unto the mynisters of the same. But for asmoch as the church
consists i^differe^tly, as well of yt true faith full persons, as also of
hypocrytes and false harlots. it is hard so to descrybe yt church y^ thou
may thereby know wherein the godly do dyffre from the cou^terfayte and
disgysed game players (we call such hypocrytes) namely sythens these two sorts
of men have in outward apperau^ce al things alyke. I nevertheless to
thi^tent I may show some difference between the true me^bres of the church and
the disgysed hypocrytes have to my power severed the^ in the causes and
effects, leest I should give occasyo^ of sklau^dre to the papystes which be
ever barkynge and crying out against us, of yt one church we make two, because
we make dystinction between the true and the cou^terfayte.

Wherefore y^ church in a generalytie Diffinicion.
is y^ congregation of all such as profess y^ gospel, only y^ excommunicate
excepted.

I think it unknown to no man y^ Probacions.
the church takes his original beginning of the professyon of the gospel,
and that then it began when the first promise was made of the gospel, which
forasmoche as it befell even in Adams time, and unto Adam, it is certain that
the church began even then, and that from Adam until this day it has stand
among all the professors of the gospel, and yet it stands with all such as
profess the same. I Added (in a generality) because I would make a
distinction and difference between the true bylyuers or ryghtous persons, and
bytwne false hypocrytes and dysceyuers. And albeit the scripture names as well
the bad as the good under the name of church, as the parable of the net
casten in to the sea teaches in which be taken both good and evil fysshe, yet
every man will judge that the good fysshes are to be p^ferred before the bad.
Wherefore no man ought to merueyle though we because of y^ open testimonies of
scripture, have separated ye church of y^ true bylyuers from y^ hypocrytes,
which church king Dauyd calls ecclesia^ malignantium / the church of the
evil and wicked persons, which he would not have done if there were only
without dyuersitie one general church, and besides it none other which may
truly be called the church as hereafter I shall declare in y^ causes. Now the
exco^municat persons be no longer of ye church according to y^ saying of our
savior Christ. That if he will not here y^ church, Math. xviii^
let him be unto the as a hethe^ person, and publyca^. Parts.
There is one church in a generality (as said is) throughout al christendom
in which church be two sorts of me^ (...) be holy in deed, some cou^terfait
holy or hypocrites. The congregation of those, the scripture otherwhiles
calls y^ co^saile of the rightous, as. psalm. ci. other whiles the immaculate
or undefiled church, as ca^tt, v. now without wrincle as Ephe. v. now y^ seat of
David, as Esaias. ix. now the kingdom of David, as even in the same place, now
the body of christ as.i. Cor. ii. now y^ church of the saints as. psalm.
lxxxviiii. now the members of Christ, now y^ multitude of beleuers. etc But ye
church of the other y^ scriptur calls y^ congregation of y^ ungodly and of
disseueraunce.

THE true and proprely called church is thus discribed of Paul. Ep. i. The
description of the true church.
The church of y^ rightous is which Christ loved so well y^ he bestowed eue^
him self for it to thinte^t he might sanctify it being purged with the washing of
water by y^ word y^ he might make it a glorious church not having either spot
or wrincle and y^ it might be holy and without fault. And this true church is not
laid open to y^ eyes but is byleued according to the article of our Creed. I
believe the holy church catholyke, the communion of saints. The church of
hypocrites describes the prophet Esaie with these words. Esa. xxvi. d.
This people (says the lord) approaches unto me with their mouth, and with their
lyppes they honor me, but their heart is far from me in vain they worship me,
teaching doctrynes and commandments of me^. This church co^traryly is open
and apparaunt to the eyes, for all her works, al her worship wherwt it thinks
to serve god is outward. It is an outward hue or vysour of the pure church, with
men's traditions instead of the sincere doctrine, with the mouth and lyppes only
without thaffections of the heart worshipping god.

AND forasmoche as I said in the Cause^
church to be two sorts of men, true faithful, and con^itrefet or hypocrites,
therefore now also two sorts of causes are to be set, proceeding nevertheless of
al one matter, to the intent it may appear why these be hipocrites, and the other
verily faithful. These causes therefore ensuing of the true church, which
otherwhiles the fathers have called y^ pillar of the troth. The promise of god
or the gospel, Causes of ^ true church.
, Christ faith, tholy ghost, y^ pure doctrine hole and perfect in all her
effects and jurisdiction. THE promise of god or the gospel is the cause of
the true church, forasmoch as through the promise of the gospel it had her
beginni^ge whereupon it was founded. For forthwt as the promise of the gospel
was ones made the church began to spri^g, and whereunto as soon as Adam gave
credit he becam a member of the same.
So eue^ at this day such as by faith take hold of y^ glad tidings of Christ
(for y^ is the gospel) ar^ become the true me^bres of the church. I speak here
of faith as it is an assured confidence upon the promise of the gospel, and not
of the feigned faith of hypocrites, which is only a knowledge without true
mocio^s of heart, whereof I shall here after speak in the causes of the
hypocritical or cou^terfet church. Now, Christ is cause of the true
congregation, for asmoch as of him the promise of y^ gospel was made, and who
also satisfied y^ same. Also because he is y^ heed of the church whereof the
takes al her sustentacion, Ephe xv. Colos. i. Ela. viii. i. Cor. iii. Gala. ii.
increase ryghtousnesse, glory, clennes, holiness, Item because he is the
fundacion of the church. The holy ghost is cause of the true church,
forasmoche as he given unto the church of Christ to be the ruler and governor
callethe the church by the word, gathers it together, sanctifyeth or makes
it holy (whereof also he has his name) furnissheth it with sundry gifts,
comfort and rayseth it up again in tribulacion, makes it apt and mete to
do lively and true works, which may please god, and which be most acceptable
and thankful sacrifices unto him, full of good sauoure, and finally which
preserves it in the truth acknowleged, that it fall not away again from the
same.

THE formal cause of ye true church The formal cause
is the pure doctrine being absolute and
perfect in all effects and jurisdiction. For this doctrine is a sure sign
and a certain mark whereby the true congregacyon is known from the forged
church. I understand under this doctrine the pure preaching of the gospel,
and the lively effects of the same in the conscyences. For so does our
shepeherde Christ discern the doctrine of false prophets or hypocrites from
the true doctrine where he says. Math. viii. c.
Take heed of false prophets which come unto you in shepes clothes, that is
to say, in outward apperaunce of true doctrine. For all that hole place must
be referred to doctrine, but inwardly says Christ) they be ravenous wolves y^
is, tearing and plucking pieces men's co^scie^ces with their wicked and false
doctrine by their fruits ye shall know the^, y^ is, by theffectes of their
doctrine. Whether do me^ gather grapes of thorns, or figs of breres, whether
can hipocrites give rest unto men's ^scie^ces with their doctrine. For by fygges
and grapes be understand most sweet fruits of ^science, as be peax joy, and
tranquillity. So every good tree makes good fruits, y^ is, good techers with
their true doctrine, bring unto the consciences peax, joy, tranquillity. etc.
A corrupt tree makes evil fruits, that is the impure doctrine of hypocrites
disseuereth, confounds and disturbeth the consciences. etc.

I refer also unto the pure doctrine y^ lauful use of sacraments, for this is
a part of the pure doctrine. Item fre remission of sins which is theffecte
of pure doctrine. Also absolucion and exco^muni^cacio^ formed of the word of
god, all which I make here to be signs and sure marks whereby the true church
is kowen.

The causes of the hypocritical church.
AS to the outward show and appera^ce the false and cou^terfet church has y^
self Causes.
same causes y^ the true church has. The church of Rome.
For it has the same gospel, the same bibles the same sacraments, they
profess y^ same Christ, they glory of y^ same faith, they perscribe the same
holy ghost unto al their counsels, and the same they dreme to be the author of
all their affairs and doings. But look nevertheless how much diversity there
is bitwene troth and dissimulacion, bitwene apperance of things and the
things self, bitwen a painted face and a native color, eue^ so much
difference there is bitwene the causes of the true church and the causes of
the feyned and hipocriticall church. Friar forestes church.
A lively exemple of this hipocriticall church is at this day the popish
assemble. For the papists do ascribe their church to be a society or
fellowship of outward things and rites etc. wherefore they the^ selves make
their church thexe^plar of y^ hypocritical congregation and not I, namely since
it is apparau^t yt the true church is spiritual, not of this world, neither
comes it with appointing and marking, and which is not open and laid out to the
eyes, but bileued only by faith, according to tharticle of y^ Creed, I bileue
the catholic church. Thexe^ple also of the prophet Elias teaches the same,
ii. Reg. xxi. c Roma. xi. a* This Baall among us is the bishop of Rome the
great god of the earth.
who^ when he saw the outwardly apparaunt members of the church, said to the
lord, I only am left, but the lord answered, I have left me seven thousand in
Israel of which never one man bowed his knees unto Baal, nor kyssed him with his
mouth.

Theffectes of the true church.
DOUBLE effects do arise of the Effects.
two sundry kinds of men in one general church. But to ye true church these
effects ensuing apperteyn which the true church works by thassistence and
governance of tholy ghost. To hear the pure word truly. To receive the word
(...) the heart. To believe the word with confidence. To understand truly the word
herd received and bileued, Math. xiii. c.
according to y^ parable of the sower where Christ expowneth y^ good seed the
true church. To use the sacraments laufully according as is appointed by y^
word. For who so reteyneth the pure word, keeps also the sacraments in the
right form being a perte of the word. John^. x. a.
To love the pure word, according to the saying of Christ. My sheep do hear my
voice. To deperte in no wise from the true word forasmoch as the church is the
pyller of the troth, because it is buylt upon Christ y^ stone. To fle the
vnpure word, none otherwise then sheep do fle evil pastures and yt by the
commandment of their shepeherde Christ who byddeth the^ beware of false
prophets and also of the leue^ of the pharysees. Math. vii. ^ Math. xvi.
To know and receive only Christ for their herdman, heed, iustifiour,
sa^ctifiour and savior. For what so ever holiness the church has, what so
ever iustificacion, what so ever clennesse, it takes it al together of Christ.
To be ruled of the holy ghost to the intent yt all the works of the church may
be both lively and affectual and also pleasant to god. To exercise the keys
given unto them of Christ and to commytte the same to pryuate persons, to
the end that the pure word may be preached, and the free remissyon of sins
in Christ publysshed, that men may be comforted by absolucyon, and brydled by
excommunicacion. To sacrifyce unto god sacrifyces i. Pet. ii. H^bru. xiii.
Roma. xii. Mat. xviiii. c.
of praise, and spiritual sacrifyces, even of our own bodies, and the fruit
of our lyppes. To be kept from error, rindx;
according to the saying of Christ that the false prophets shall arise and
shall bring in to error, eue^ the very elect or chose^ persons may err finally
or to the end, even because they be in the hand of Christ, out of whose hand no
man can take away. To obey every humane creature for y^ lords sake. To have
of promise everlasting life annexed, and other i^finite rewards i^ this life.
To follow thrughly Christ as capiteyn and leader in the doctrine and manners of
life. For so is Christ propowned in ye scripture, as an exe^ple for the church
to follow. Se^blable effects very many may be yet gathered of the true church,
all which y^ scripture expresses in ye name of spouse by which the church is
signified. Now, The propertes of a spous or bryde
the offices and pertes of a spouse or bryde be, in all things to obey the
brydegrome, to love the brydegrome, to have a good hope and confidence in ye
bridegroom, to cleue only unto him, to obey him, to fear and honor the
brydegrome, to be against the dihonestie of y^ bridegroom, and to do all
things yt may tend to the honest fame and worship of him, to reverence, to
magnify and auaunce him, to rejoice in the brydegrome, to be obedient to his
commandment, to execute his pleasure lovingly and with gladness, to use in
co^m^ne all his goods together with hi^. etc. Al these things also ought to
be appropriate and be the very parts of the church toward Christ the
brydegrome.

BUT now, albeit the spouse performs all these things truly and is made
handfast by tholy ghost, yet is she not called even for these works sake a
church i^maculate or undefiled, holy, and without wrincle, but for Christ's sake,
who has hallowed it, Ephe. v.
putting him self in to the utter perils of death for his spouse sake. Also
because y^ church has tholy ghost, yeuen her as a tuter or defensour who by
christ p^serueth and governs her to thobteining of everlasting life and the
hereditary goods of Christ, to who^ she is espoused, which goods she already
possesses in sure and certain hope.

Theffectes of hypocrites in the church.
Theffectes of hypocrites in y^ church be taken by the contrary of theffectes
perteyning to the true church, as be these. To hear the word but not purely. To
receive the word but not with the heart. To bileue the word, but not only. To
understand after a manner the word, but without frut. To use the sacraments
unlawfully, and wickedly to abuse the^. To love the word embrued with men's
traditions, ^ with the^ to co^taminate the pure word. To p^fer or at lestway to
match men's traditions with the self word of god, and with the same to defete gods
word. Of this effect Christ accuses the hypocrites in ye gospel of Mat. Math.
xv. b.
where he says: ye have disanulled the commandment of god through your
traditions. To deperte from the pure word, according to the parable of the
sower, where Christ declares the hypocrites to be shrinkers from the word,
bileuing only for a time. To embrace works besides Christ, and by the same to
seek rightousnes. To deny remission of sins by only faith in Christ. To bost
and brag of the holy ghost, but without regeneracio^ without lively works and
pleasing god. The reason is because hypocrites embrace not purely christ,
therefore the holy ghost is not given the^, without which all the works of
hypocrites be deed. To preche the virtues and benefits of works eue^ as the
godly preche ye powers virtues and benefits of Christ. i. Pet. ii.
To exercise the keys of y^ church after their lust as
many cruel factes of bisshops of Rome do testify. To abuse the keys horribly
to y^ oppression of the sincere word and effects of the same. To be holly
conuersaunt in outward and carnal things, according to the saying of Christ:
Math. xxiii.
Woe be to you pharisees and hypocrites, for ye make clean the outward parts
of the cup. etc. look upon the hole.xxiij. chap. of Math. To work without all
fruit. For like as with fruit the true byleuers work their works, because they
believe truly, and because they be regenerate and borne again of tholy ghost.
So the hypocrites because they want faith because they have not tholy ghost,
therefore al their works be deed and plese not god. To sacrifyce unto god
outward sacrifyces, by which they study to pacify god. To have always
troubled consciences and full of fear, Esaye. xxxi.
according to the prophet Esaie. The siners in Syon be made affrayd, fear has
possessed the hypocrites. Mat. vi. xxiii Math. xxiii.
To do works to the intent to be seen of men, and to be commended. To covet to
be glorified before men. To err, according to Christ where he says: False
prophets shall arise and bring in to error. etc. Moreover god punissheth
hypocrites for their ungodliness, with other sins and errors. To be prompt and
ready to such things as perteyn to this world, according to the saying of
Christ: Math xvi. a
ye hypocrites, the face of y^ sky ye can judge, and can ye not discern the
signs of y^ times. To take upon the^ temporal power as many exe^ples of
bishops of Rome do teach, yea and the me^bres of the hole popish church. To
be frustrate of everlasting life, according to the saying of Job. Job. viii.
Spes imperiorum peribit. The hope of the ungodly shall perish. For the promise
of everlasting life, perteyneth only to y^ true bileuers, according to this of
Christ. John^. viii.
Who byleueth in me, has eeuerlasting life. Finally theffectes of hipocrites,
The propertis of the aduoutrous church
or of the painted and hypocritical church do appear most evidently of
properties of the bride y^ is an harlot, for she seems in outward apparaunce
to love the brydegrome, to bileue his words. etc. where as in deed she does in
her heart nothing less but runs a hooring yea she ca^ not hertly love y^
bridegroom because she receives no dowry for the spousels of tholy ghost the
handfaster but re^neth a horing after strange gods,
namely y^ pope the great god i^ earth and Babylonical strompet.

Co^traries to the church be these. Contraries.
To hold yt the church began first when the gospel was disclosed at the
birth of Christ. To say they be true me^bres of y^ church which only do hear,
and with the mouth profess y^ gospel. To cut y^ church in to pertes save only
for the. ij. kinds of me^ which under the general term of church be
comprised, yt is to wite of the rightous and of the hypocrites. To hold that
the true me^bres of the church may be deed in whom works not Christ n^ tholy
ghost. Popish^ error
To mainteyn yt the church as it is truly and properly taken for the
congregation of the holy is a temporal kingdom, which needs a secular arm
worldly defenses, and that ought to be ruled by men's traditions to the health of
their souls.
To deny yt the saints and true bileuers be only the true church. To say y^
true church which is of the faithful may be seen with the bodyly eyes contrary
to y^ article of faith I bileue y^ catholic church. etc. To define the church
to be a fellowship of outward things and rites. To defend yt the true church
may stand without the pure gospel and lauful use of sacraments onles tyranny
lets the same. Papisticall.
To say the church is only an outward policy of good and bad, which error
defaceth the kingdom of Christ and ryghtousnes of the heart, and takes away
the holy ghost governor of the catholic church. For then it is byleued that
the church is nothing else then a kepi^g of certain rites or services. To bind
the catholic co^gregacio^ to certain obseruau^ces, against this of Christ.
Obseruaun^ The detestable heresye of papists.
My kingdom comes not with obseruacio^ or waiting. To hold yt the catholic
church is left to the bishop of Rome or to any other private person to be
administered at his pleasure. This error is against y^ everlasting bisshopryche
of Christ. To ^old with the fabryle Faber, The error of Faber.
yt the catholyque church does not always p^ferre the word of god before men's
traditions. To say the catholic church apperteyneth to me^ by reason of
power of dignity either ecclesiastical or secular. Papists.
To hold with the papists, yt the church is an outward and sup^me monarchy or
reign of the hole world, in which the pope has a power irrefragable as well
upon the laytie as upon the clergy, against whom it is leful for no mortal man
to resist either in deeds or in words. To say the general church may stand
without hypocrites. To bynd the true church to outward sacrifices. To say y^
hypocrites in the church be any other things then a grave painted outwardly
and wtin full of deed men's bones, yt is to say full of ungodliness. To make the
hypocrites the lively me^bres of the true church. To say hypocrites may be in
the church without the foil and contaminacion of gods word, and of the
sacraments. To deny yt the part in the church of hypocrites is the cloak,
visour, and counterfeyture of the troth. To make here in earth a church,
wherein be not both holy me^ and hypocrites, contrary to the place in Mat. Math.
xiii. f.
So shall it be i^ the end of the world, the angels shall come and sever the bad
from the good. etc. whereby is signified y^ in the kingdom of heaven here in
earth, yt is to say in the church be both good and bad. etc.

Of sklaunder or offense. CA. L.
SKlaunder because it ryseth in the church, therefore very conveniently it may
be put af^ the title of church which of necessity is vexed with many
sclaunders and offenses, according to the saying of Christ: Math. xviii. a
woe be unto ye world because of offenses, howbeit it can not be avoided but
that offenses shall be given. etc. wherefore forasmoch as Christ says that
offenses or sclaunders do necessarily chance, let us diligently enserche the
causes of this necessity. Ce^tes of the^ selves sclau^ders be not necessary,
neither ought they to be given, since Christ has prohibit the^, but that they
should perish which by y^ just judgment of god ought to perish, it must needs
be that sclaunders be given, which be as it were means whereby the ungodly
hypocrites be called away, and frayd from the truth, but it is a very
perilous thing to give offendinges or sclau^ders unto the godly, according to
the co^municacion of Christ in the said place of of Math.
which although they be in the hand of Christ, neither can be taken out of his
hand, yet with offenses or sclau^ders to vex and trouble their minds, and to
make the^ either to doubt of the troth of gods word, or to be the more remiss
or slack in regardyng the same is undoubtedly a right heinous syn.

The diffinition of offending or sclau^der in a generality.
Sclau^der therefore in a generality is Diffinicion.
an offense or greuau^ce whereby the consciences are frayd away from the
doctrine that they have received and manners of life, and be provoked and led
away to the following of an other opinion and manners of life, either by
doctrine or by manners of life.

This general description of sclau^der shall appear in y^ declaracio^ of pertes.
And throughont the new testament testimonies do appear of y^ doctrine and
manners of life, which be principal causes of sclaunder, as orderly shall be
declared hereafter.

THERE be two sorts of sclau^der Dinision of sklaunder.
one whereby hipocrites or pharisees be offended, an other whereby the godly
brethren be offended: Of this sclau^der or offense the scripture speaks more
often then of the other.

Of thoffending of hypocrites.
Thoffending of hypocrites is a greuau^ce what thoffending of hypocrites is.
of the right doctrine or necessary works commanded in the word, which the
godly do give freely without sin while they care rather to obey god, then men.

Thexe^ples which throughout all the Probacyons
eua^gelistes be recou^ted do approne this description of which the evangelist
John^ has before other a great no^bre, namely in the second, third, fyfth,
seventh and right chap. where Christ pertly teaches partly heals the sick
in the Saboth day. Also hither perteyn all sclaunders throughoute the new
testament, where the hypocrites and pharisees together with the scribes were
grieved with crist either because of his doctrine, or for necessary works. For
doctrine and necessary works be causes of this offendinge. I call necessary
works which either necessity or charity requires. Mark. ii. d. Math. xii. a
Of necessity an exe^ple thou have where the disciples of Christ on the Saboth
day passing through the corns, began to pluk the ears of corn, at which the
pharisees were offended and cried unto Christ lo why do they on the Saboth
days yt which is not lawful? Mat. xii. ^.
An exemple of charity you have where Christ healed in y^ Saboth day a man
having a withered hand and dried up.

UNTO necessary works protein also al fre manners and exemples of life, yea
though they be not p^scribed ne appointed expressly in gods word which never
thelesse be done of the godly without syn, but the hypocrites be offended with the^
by reason of their ^stitutio^s. Thus were the pharisees and scribes offended with
Christ's apostles, Math. xv. a.
only because they washed not their hands, when they eat breed according to
the traditions of y^ elders. Thus at this day while our hypocrites do se Holy
water.
y^ we suffer no longer the water to be consecrate
they be offended as though we had committed a great offense. The
commandment of god excuses the godly in this pharisaical offending. For they
have for them a commandment of god concerning the pure and right doctrine,
and concerning necessary works wherwt the neighbor for the most part is
helped. This commandment we ought to obey symplely, and these hypocrites
ought not to be regarded according to this text. Act. iiii.
It behooves to obey rather god, then men.
Now such things as the open and special commandment of god, excuses not
in the godly concerning this kind of offe^ding, The christen liberty excuses.
yet the christian liberty excuses whereby the godly be fre from al men's
tradicions which oftentimes the hypocrites prefer, or at leest match with
gods word, I am moved to speak this of the christen liberty, because the
hypocrites require special commandments of god for every work that the
godly do.
For they cry out against us, that we have no commandment of god to
despise or neglecte the holywater and like tradicions.

THE causes of this offending, Causes.
be the holsom doctrine and necessary works whereby for the most perte the
neighbor is helped either in a time or in a place which ought not to be done
after y^ traditions of the hypocrites or done against their fasti^ges or
se^blable their ^stitutio^s yea or against the very Saboth day the law of god,
which nevertheless god sets behynd the use and help of the neighbor, as many
places and exe^ples of scripture do wytnes, as yt of the prophet Osee. Osee.
vi. ^
Misericordia^ volo, no^ sacrificiu^. I will have mercy, Math. xix. b.
and not sacrifice. Item the Saboth day (says Christ) is made for man, Marc.
ii. d.
and not man for the Saboth day. Wherefore the son of man is lord even of the
Saboth day. Also in the prophet Esaie god says: Esaias. i. d.
offer me no mo oblacions for it is but lost labor, I abhor^^ your sensing, I
may not away with your new mones, your Sabothes and solemn days, your
fastinges also are in vain I hate your new holy days and fastinges even from
my very heart. They make me weary, I can not abide them. etc. Learn to do right,
apply your self to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles. etc.
Math. v. d.
Likewise Christ says: when thou offrest thy oblacio^ at the altar, and there
reme^brest y^ thy brother has any thing against the, leave there thine offering
and go first be at one with thy brother and then come and offer thy gift.
Necessary work what it is.
Finally by necessary works ought to be understand not only such works wherwt
the neighbor is helped, but also wherwt we help our selves in necessitye, for
if it be leful for me to help my neighbor in y^ Saboth day, how much more may
I help my self.

THE parts of this sclau^der whereby Parts.
hipocrites be offended may be taken of the foresaid causes, so that you may
divide the offe^ding of hypocrites in to y^ offe^ding which rises by doctrine
or teching, and in to y^ which proceeds of works or manners of living.

Theffectes of this offending Christ seems Effects.
with one word to express where he says: Math. xxi. d.
who so ever shall fall on this stone, he shall be broken, but on whom so ever
it shall fall, it shall grynde him to poudre. So yt the chief effect of this
offending by Christ's words is yt the hypocrites be confounded and destroyed
which by the just judgment of god ought to perysh. Luc. ii. e
For Christ is put unto such for a fall. etc.

Other effects also of this offendinge may be fetched forth of the things
annexed, as induracio^ of heart and cruel tyranny, which the hypocrites being
offended with holsom doctrines and necessary works do exercise against the
troth, and against the prechers and publisshers of the same. And albeit these
effects be evil and horrible, yet the godly ought not to regard the^. Act.
iiii
For it behooves rather to obey god, then men: though the guts of the
hypocrites should brust, and of the hole world.

Of offending the brethren.
THE sclaunder or offense whereby the brethren be offended, Diffinicion.
is committed when weyke consciences be plucked away from the simplicity and
pureness of gods word unto these and those opinions and manners of life, either
by false and uncertain doctrine or by manners and exemples of living.

THIS diffinition is certain of gods word. Probacion.
For ye scripture alwais gives commandment of this sclau^der. As touchi^g
doctrine Crist mouisheth where he says, Math. xviii. a Luc. xvii. a
who so ever offend one of these litleones which believe in me, better it were
for him yt a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the sea, yt is to say, who so ever ledeth away these litleons from
the pureness and
simplicity of gods word. etc. For this word sclau^der or offending
signifies here proprely a grief or a stomblinge stock whereby we be led away
from the simple truth of gods word, through the diversity of opinions,
which he brought against the same. Mark how the weak be offended.
For who is he in manner yt can find in his heart to become a child again in
the kingdom of Christ, but will savor beyond the word of god, which thing
when the weyke persons se done: forthwt they be offenctd, yt is, they be
brought away and plucked from the simple word,
and if utterly they bid not farewell to the gospel, at lestway they begin
somewhat to doubt of it, till at last they shrink clean away from the right
and true doctrine unto strange opinions. As touching manners or exemples Paul
every where makes mencio^ namely. To. 14. and 15. 1. Cor. 8. Gal. 6. Phil. 1.

ALBEIT it had be^ enough to have showed false doctrine and Causes of the
offending of the weak brethren.
uncertain and the evil manners or exe^ples of life as general causes of this
sclau^dre, yet there be other causes which may be brought declarynge the very
oryginall root of those general causes, which be these. Satan, the evil
understanding of the christen liberty, dissencyon, lack of lernyng,
presumption of the teachers, batred of the neighbor, and se^blable causes. The
de^yll
Now Satan is the cause of this sclau^der or offe^ding forasmoch as he
impelleth and stireth to y^ same, and furthermore he makes the true doctrine
to be suspect bringing all things in to a rore. Mistaking of the christen
liberty
The misvndestanding of the christian liberty is cause, forasmoch as the rash
christe^s while they bileue yt they be fre from all outward things as
perteyning to iustificacio^ which is tied unto no obseruacio^s or ceremonies,
furthwt of y^ christian and spiritual liberty they make a fleshly liberty, and
think now al things to be lefull unto the^ especially in the manners of life,
by means whereof inumerable offendinges and sclau^ders do arise, of which at
this day Germany is full: Dissen^ion of preachers.
this dissencion of the teachers is cause also of this sclaunder, while they
defend (...) wicked and oftentimes folysh opinions, as they do at this day,
which with sundry heresies disturb the pure doctrine. The lack of lerning also
of techers is cause, Sir Johan lack lerning does much harm.
in asmoch as blind bouserdes rush out at all adventures such stuff as they
have, and declare not sufficiently the matters as they have purpsed, but leave
the consciences of the hearers doubtful and in the brires. For this cause
thapostle Paul will y^ a bishop i. Timot. iii. ^
(that is to say a teacher, a pastor, an ouerseer) be apt to teach, yt is to
say, which has the feat and cunning hansomly and properly to declare his
matters. Certes, the apt and propre way of teaching, is to follow in teching
the methodical form of doctrine, which is natural indifferently common to
all men, save yt it excels in some, and is more apparau^t by reason of
p^ceptes and instructions which they have learned to induce them. From which
trade and form of teaching, who so ever abhors, undoubtedly shall never
hansomly instruct the conscience of me^, neither shall utter and declare
sufficiently his purpose. Neither do there want at this day exemples hereof in
the church. Arrogancy.
The arroga^cie of techers is cause of this offe^ding when one swells, when
one enuieth an other when every man would be counted best learned, when no man
will be made a child in the church, and while they thus strive for
preeminencie and primacie, in y^ mean season the weyke brother is offended,
occasion is given either to forsake y^ simple and pure word, or at lest to
sclau^der it, and bring all things in doubt. But this cause touches not
only the teachers, but generally all that of hye mind and statelynes offend y^
weike brethren, while they declaring the^ selves to much spiritual, Hatred.
think al things lawful unto the^. Hatred to y^ neibour is cause forasmoch as
sclau^dersarise of it, while y^ brother hates the brother. The ^trary to this
cause s. John^ puts charity, i. John^. ii.
where he says, he y^ loves his brother dwells i^ light, Parts.
and sclau^dre is not in him.

OF one sort is this sclau^der, whereby the brethren be offended of the false
and to fre brethren, yet having respect to y^ causes this sclaunder may be
divided in to Division.
sclau^dre yt rises of doctrine and y^ ryseth of manners or exe^ples of life.
Also to the place of pertes of this sclau^dre may be referred also an other
sclau^dre which the godly do suffer through y^ happy luck of the noughty
persons and hypocrites while they se y^ al things prospere with the^. This
offeding now adays entangleth many, which measure and wey the goodness of
learning by the success of noughty hypocrites, as though their doctrine were
therefore sound because they be in best reputacio^, and be counted ye wise the
mighty, the rich and great me^ in the world. Against this sclau^dre Christ
oftentimes armeth his disciples, co^forting the^ against the sclaunders of the
cross. Item thapostles ever among do arm good minds against this offending.
And among other places this text of s. Paul is notorious, i. Cor. i. d
where he says: Uyle things of the world and things which are despised,
has god chosen. etc. To this kind of sklaunder perteyn al bountiful things in
the world as wisdom, power, richesse, great men. etc.

EFFECTS of sclau^der whereby good me^ be offended be these. Effects of
offendinge the weak. brethren.
To pluck away the weyke brethren from the simple word. To make doubtful
consciences of the troth of the christen doctrine. To styre weyke minds to
sclau^dre the true gospel, and to receive false opinions. Spritishe r^^our.
To bring to pass y^ weyke brethren shall follow evil exemples and manners,
which the rash brethren, and for the most part to much spritish use among
such as have not yet herd the pure kind of learning, or be not yet thoroughly
entered in the same. To chase away weyke minds from the gospel causing them to
condemn and utterly to disalowe it, and to return again to popyshnesse and
wicked doctrine. For the avoiding of these effects the thretes of Christ are
to be red Math. xviij. Item To. xiiij. and.xv. where among other things
thapostle says: lose not him with thy meat, for whom Christ has dyed.

Contraryes to the hole offendyng or sclaunder.
Contraryes to sclaunder be these. Contraries.
To say sclaunder only comes of doctrine. To hold y^ unto doctrine and
manners of life all sclau^ders can not be ^uenie^tly referred. To say of power,
wisdom, riches and other great things in the world sclau^der never ryseth,
where as in deed these things be for the most part causes of evil manners. For
power, wisdom and riches do change very oftentimes the manners of me^. To deny
the pharisaical or hypocritical sclau^der whereby the pharisees and hypocrites
be offended. For there is one general church in which be both good and bad,
godly and hypocrites. To say no man can so be offended that he shall utterly be
destroyed and lost. To hold y^ the commandment of god ought not always to be
preferred before sclau^der. To say the weyke consciences have always just
causes to
be offended, when they se cloked religion and ungodly destroyed, or therefore
co^corde bisturbed, debate raised in the church, co^minalties and empires
brought to naught, when the weyke consciences se this thing done, they ought to
comfort them selves with this saying. It is better to obey god then men. To hold
yt scripture forbyddeth al sclau^der. Scripture* forbyddeth not al man^r
offendynge.
For here is ye sclaunder excepted, whereby hypocrites be offended, which
offending ought not to be eschued i^ such wise as we shall deny the true
doctrine, or leave necessary works. Liberty is not alwyes to be used.
To hold y^ we must use y^ christian liberty every where i^ al things, and
among al me^, whether the weike be offended or not. This error thapostle
destroys sufficiently where he says. I am made al things to al me^, weyke to
the weike etc. that I might wyn al men to Christ. Diffrence between manners and
doctrine.
To say by the same reason we may use manners among all men as we use the
right doctrine among al. This error
answers s. Paul by his exe^ple, Act. xvi. ^
which with out doubt kept not in the pure word and yet in the mean season
thoccasion of the weyke so requyring he suffered Timothe to be circumcised. To
hold it not laufull to use the liberty where stubburnes is and not weiknes, or
where men's traditions or Moses laws be matched with the gospel, or necessaryly
required unto rightousnes. Against this error serves the exemple of Paul,
Gala. ii. a
who durst keep Titus uncircumcised. To deny y^ charity is the maystres in
moderating and governing the sclaunders of manners or in letting the same.

Of the kingdom or reign of Christ. CA. LI.
THe church and the reign of Christ signify al one thing wherein god reygneth
in his subjects that be godly by the word, and wherein the godly do reign over
all spiritual ennemies, over syn, y^ devil, death, hell. etc. But forasmoch as
this word reign or ki^gdom seems to set out the name of church, and to make
it more triu^phant and magnificent, therefore I think it good to put before
your eyes a co^pendious treatise of the kingdom of Christ. Discryption.


The kingdom of Christ is spiritual consisting in the conscience, and making
spiritual subjects, yt is, which be led with the spirit, and in whom Christ
reigns by y^ holy spirit, and by his word here in earth, but sitting on the
right hand of god the father to make intercession for his subjects and to
defend them, yea and to give them iustificacion and spiritual goods for
everlasting life. This their king as well in doctrine as in manners of life is
this spiritual kingdom, his subjects ought to follow as their guide and
capteyn. This reign is begone here i^ faith and spirit, and shall be fynysshed
to the full perfection after this life euerlastyngly. Probacions John. ^viii. ^.


THAT Christ's reygne is spiritual is proved by Christ where he says: My
kingdom is not in this world. Now that which is spiritual agrees only to
the conscience, I call the reygne of Christ spiritual of theffecte that it
makes spiritual either because the subjects of this kongdome be led and
ruled of this spirit, either because this kingdom only stretches to
spiritual things, or finally because he makes his subjects kings over all
spiritual enemies. It is called the reign of Christ because Christ is the
author of it, the preserver and ruler in this reygne or kingdom. The holy
ghost and the word be means whereby and wherewith Christ reygneth in this
kingdom. For to this intent the holy ghost is sent where Christ rules that he
should glorify him, expound and proclayme him. Johan. xiiij. xv. and xvi. which
might led in to al troth, that is, might declare Christ the kings will in
the hertes of the godly, his proclamacio^s, his commandments, his benefits,
and therwtall might make us obedient subjects. But al these things the holy
ghost works not but by the word, as thapostle teaches. To. x. And left no
man should doubt either of the power of Christ the king, The seats ^ throne of
Christ.
or should not know his seat, or would think him not to regard his subject, let
hi^ know that Christ the king sytteth on the right hand of god the father,
of egall power, and being with god the father, both to defend his subjects,
in that he is king, and to make intercession for them in that he is priest.
what rewards the king christ shows to this subictes
Iustificacion and everlasting life be benefytes and priuyleges of the king
Christ, wherewith he has rewarded, and yet daily does reward his subjects,
and which by his continual suit, he obteyneth and gets for his subjects.
But now what the subjects ought to follow in this kingdom, they must learn of
their king Christ as well in doctrine as manours of life, and thus the
scripture propowneth our king Christ unto us for an exemplar whom we should
follow. So Christ has imbrased ye only will of god has preached it and
declared the same to men. 1. Pet. ^.
So we in like wise beside the pure and sincere word ought to imbrase
nothing more desyreouslye ue ought to prech and declare any thing more often.
And as pertayneth to y^ manners of life, so Christ being reviled, reuyled not
again being evil entreated, rendered not evil for evil. So Crist dysturbed
not temporal polycies, wherefore neither we ought to disturb them Christ bare
the Cross patiently wherefore we ought also patiently to suffer. Finally
forasmuch as this ki^gdom is spritual and everlasting and not seen with y^ eyes.
Therefore it is only with faith and y^ spirit espied and begone which after this
life shall in the very thing self be opened and made manifest everlastingly and
as thapostle says even face to face. The causes of this kingdom be god the
Causes of the reign of Christ.
father which ordained it and with promises confyrmed it christ in whom this
kingdom was constitute and which is y^ king hereof. The holy ghost is cause in
y^ he sa^ctyfyeth and with sundry gifts furnishes this ki^gdom. And like as
these causes be not carnal, but spiritual: so neither the ki^gdom institute
of them can be carnal. The mean whereby this realm is administered is gods word
by which the holy ghost works in y^ same. Now the way that a man may come i^
to this ki^gdom is declared sufficiently in the places before. The ki^gdom of
christ is not divided i^ to pertes, One only. spiritual kingedom of Christ.
for eue^ as there is one king of this ki^gdom, so his ki^gdom is one y^ is to
say spiritual co^sisti^g in ye consciences of me^ and begins here i^ faith
to be co^summate and made perfect after his life eternally.

Theffectes of the reign of Christ, Effects.
be partly taken of Christ the king, and partly of the subjects. Theffectes of
the king Christ be nothing else but benefits and privileges which god
bestows upon his subjects, and be these. To give remission of sins.
To deliver and enfraunchese the consciences from al outward things as
appertaining to iusti^icacion. To deliver the subjects from the power of sin
and of death. To defend the subjects from the power of y^ devil, of the world,
and from a ^uyls. To give the holy ghost y^ may rule, defend, guide, stay and
keep his subjects in his realm. Roma. viii. i. John. ii.
To make intercession unto the father for his subjects and play the advocate.
To make his subjects kings over all spiritual enemies that is to say, sin,
the devil death, hell, and the world also, according to the saying in y^
reuelacio^ of John^, Apoca. i. b
where is said, that Christ made us kings and prestes. To make his subjects
prestes so y^ they may offer spritual sacrifices to god according to y^ saying
of pet. i. Pet. ii. ^
Ye are made a spiritual house and a^ holy presthode for to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to god by Jesus Christ, and therefore y^ subjects of this
ki^gdom be called a kingly or royal presthode of ye said Peter. 1. Pet. ii. b
And of John in his reuelacion they be caled ye prestes of god. Apoca. i. b
To reward his subjects with everlasting life which in faith and spirit
begineth here and shall be perfected after this life eternally. Se^blable
effects may be brought hither out of theffectes of Christ set out before. Also
out of the places of abrogacion, and of the christen lyberty. Effects
procedyng of the subjects.
Theffectes of y^ subjects of this kindome be gathered of thobedie^ce, which
they owe to their king Christ, to thi^tent they should follow him as well in
doctrine as in manners of life, as. To love and imbrase the same word. To teach
y^ same word that Christ taught. To cleue to y^ word of Christ faithfully
according to thexemple of him. To proclayme Christ their king. To magnify him.
To believe and have affiaunce i^ Christ that he will save. keep and defend
them, and also that he can do these things. Not to shri^ke ne swa^ue from
Christ their king traitorously unto Satan and his kingdom. To execute
louyngly al y^ commandments of their king Christ.
To deny themselves. and to thynk no goodness of the^ selves i^ respect of this
christ their king. To suffer by thexe^ple of Christ their king pacie^tly. To
fle unto Christ their king in te^ptacio^ or affliction, and not unto weapons,
unto y^ sword wherwt y^ may defend the, and that also by thexe^ple of christ
thy king, which when he was afflicted i^ the cross he fled by prayer in faith
unto the father. To honor temporal rulers, to obey the^, not to chase the^
away, not to disturb common weyles, or to invade empyres and other men's
dominions, and all this by thexe^ple their king Christ. To love not only their
fre^d, but also their enemies by thexe^ple of Christ, Not to re^dre evil for
evil, but good for evil by thexe^ple of christ. To be servant to al me^, and
contrary to no man, and y^ by thexe^ple of christ their king. These and
se^mblable effects i^ numerable may be gathered of thobedie^ce of y^ subjects
of this kyi^gdo^ which for y^ most part stands only i^ imitacio^ yt
subjects should follow Christ their king in doctrine and in manners of life, and
so by all things obey Christ eue^ as he obeyed ye father, etc. Ite^ ye title of
church to fore expounded gives more effects of subjects, for theris no
difference bytwen the church and the kingdom of christ but y^ in thexpouni^g of
the kingdom y^ benefits and pryuyleges of the congregation be more evidently
espied which it takes at Christ's hands and him who^ in this ki^gdo^ we call
king, Contrar^es.
in y^ church we called head Contraryes to y^ kingdom of Christ are these. To
grant y^ kingdom of Christ Papisticall Luke. xiii.
to be carnal or temporal or of this world To bynd Christ's kingdom to outward
obseruacions contrary to this of Christ My kingdom comes not with markinge.
To say Christ the king of this realm sits on the right hand of god the
father idle and nothing regarding here in earth his subjects. Therrour of
Epicurians
This error is the Epicurians error. To say Christ ascending up to heaven
left his kingdom The detestable here^ye of papystes.
here in earth unto the pope his deputy to be admynistred of him, which error
is against the eternal reign of Christ his eternal byshoprich and presthode.
To say there may be true subjects of this kingdom which believe not. To say
Christ rules his kingdom by other means tha^ by the holy ghost and his word.
To deny this kingdom to begin here in faith and in spirit and after this
life to endure eternally. To hold that the subjects of this kingdom owe an
other obedience then that which Christ their king used toward god y^ father
which was of all y^ most perfect. To say Christ y^ king in his ki^gdo^ is only
to be followed i^ docrtine and not i^ manners of life. To deny yt i^ this kingdom
generally taken be hypocrites and shall be to thend of y^ world. Chiliasts
To bold with chiliastes y^ Christ shall reign here i^ earth a. M. year with y^
godly in all kind of pleasures. Anabaptystes.
To grant with the Anabaptists and the captains of that error yt is to say
Nicholas Storkey, Storkey.
Monetary Pipery Monetarie Piperie.
and other new heretics that y^ godly here in earth shall set up a corporal and
ciuyle ki^dome all the ungodly put down. This error those furious persons have
taken forth of y^ psalm where it is wri^te^ i^ this Psalm. cxlix.
wise, let the saints be joyful with glory, let the^ rejoice in their beds,
let the praises of god be i^ their mouth and (...) in their hands, that they
may be avenged of y^ hethen and rebuke the people that they may bind their
kings in chains and their nobles with lynkes of iron. That they may be
avenged of the^ as it is written, such honor have al his saints. This psalm
they have carnally wrested to their purpose whereas if it be well considered it
makes nothing with the^ al. Ite^ it is contrary to this doctrine to forbid
unto ye subjects of this kingdom (...) or civil works. As to ^er^ any
temporal office, to play y^ king, y^ mayre, the constable, y^ sheryf, or any
other i^ferior rowmes, to bye to sell, or to exercise any manner of contracte in
the world.

Of resurrection. CA. LII.
THe resurrection of y^ deed is wherbi Diffinicion.
i^ y^ last day all me^ shall rise again from death, y^ good to everlasting life
the wicked to everlasting punyshme^t.

Probacion of the diffinicion.

Merueil not at this (says christ) The Ioh v. e
hour shall come when al y^ are in y^ graves shall bear his voice, Math. xxv.
and shall com forth, they y^ have done good unto the resurrection of life, but
they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of da^nacion.

The universal cause of y^ resurrection Causes
is y^ promise of god, wherbi god promyseth i^ scripture y^ resurrection.
Hither also may be reduced such places of scripture (...) treat of the
resurrection, namely Esai. 36. 66 24. Dani. 12. Oseas. 13. Job. 19.

Beside the foresaid cause of resurrection christ also is cause specially for y^
godly, according to Paul. i. cor. xv. where he proves y^ resurrection by
thexe^ple of y^ resurrection of Christ i^ this wise. Christ rose from death to
life, ergo y^ deed also shall rise again. The same argum^^t he uses i^ his
first epistle to the thessa. ca. 4. where he says i^ this wise, for if we
bilyue y^ Jesus dyed and rose again, eue^ so them also which stepe by Jesus,
god will bring again with him. In y^ same place thapostle also descrybeth the
manner and form of the resurrection. Parts.


The resurrection shall be one syngle thing and common to all men even an
vprysynge as well of the ungodly as of the godly but unto diverse ends.

Forasmoche as two sorts of me^ shall Effects.
rise again a godly and ungodly* therefore there be.ij. sorts of final effects
to be made of y^ resurrection. The godly shall have these effects folowi^g
the^. To rise up unto everlasting life. To be with the lord always according to
Paul's saying. John. v.
And so shall we ever be with the lord. i. These. iiii.d
The ungodly shall follow these effects. To rise again to everlasting
punyshme^tes. John. v.
To be for evermore with the devil and his au^gelles Math. xxv.


Contraryes Contraries
to resurrection be these. To deny with y^ Sadducia^s, Sadducians
Symonia^s Symonians
Archo^tykes, Archontiks
Hierarchytes Hierarchits
and other heretykes the resurrection of the deed. To say with the Chyliastes
Chiliastes.
y^ there shall be after the resurrection in earth a ciuyle kingdom induryng a
thousand years, in which shall reygne the godly with Christ in all ki^de of
pleasure. To hold with the Seleucia^s Seleucians
y^ there shall be no resurrection at all in time to come but yt it is now daily
made in the regeneracyon of the children of god To say with the heretykes of
Araby y^ the soul peryssheth together with the body. To be of the same
opinyon that Many cheus was which said that his hearers or disciples were
resolved in to y^ elect or baytes of the elect and that the other sowles
returned in to wyld bestes To hold with certain heretykes y^ the sowles of
wicked persons be converted in to deuiles and i^ to other beasts according to
their deserts. To say the deed forthwt after their death do rise again by
thexemple of Christ. Against who^ Tertulia^ disputes i^ his book de
resurrectione carnis, to hold with y^ Epicuria^s Epicurians
and with certai^ other philosophers y^ al things be at a point after death To
hold with Marcio^, Marcion
Basilides, Basilides
and Ualentinus Ualentinus
that we shall not rise again in flesh. To hold that the hole man shall not
rise again but only either the flesh either the soul either the spirit
against which error disputes copyously Tertulian in his book de resurrectione
carnis. To grant a spiritual resurrection after this life. To hold any other
causes of y^ resurrection than y^ promise of god and the resurrection of Christ
for whose cause the godly shall rise again ^ for whose contemte the ungodly
shall be damned risinge again to their eternal damnacio^. To make two
resurrections one of y^ flesh or body, an other of y^ soul or spirit. To hold
with y^ Anabaptists Anabaptists
that the souls of the damned persons shall rise again the second time unto
everlasting life when they have ones suffered punishment enough for their
sins. This error they have taken by the occasion of that text in the psalm
where it is said non imperpetuum irascetur deus neque ineternu^ co^mouebit^.
God shall not be a^gry perpetually, neither shall he be moved for evermore. Item
out of y^ fourth book of Esdras where hell is like^ed iiii. Es. iiii.d
to amatrix. To dispute fo^dly and supersticiously byside the word of god of
the manner and form of the resurrection. To judge of the resurrection after the
judgment of reason leauinge the word, like as saducians Saducians
do judge of the resurrection in the gospel, Mar^. xxii.d.
where Christ calls them back again from the judgment of reason Math.
xxii.c.
unto the word of god saying. Luc. xx.d
Have ye not red in the book of Moses. etc.

Of everlasting life CA. LIII.
Everlasting life is a certain and sure Diffini^ion.
knowledge of god and of our lord Jesus Christ which begins here in faith
under suer hope and in spirit and shall be made manifest after this life unto
perpetual joy and imortall inheritance.

Probacions.
As y^ have given unto him power over John. xv^^^
every flesh and all which y^ have given unto him y^ he may give unto the^
everlasting life. Now this is the everlasting life y^ they should know y^ only
to be y^ true god and who^ thou have seen Jesus christ. The rest of the
diffinicio^ proves thapostle Peter in ^is first epistle. ca. i. Blessed be god
the father of our lord Jesus christ which through his abou^dan^t mercy begat
us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Ies^ christ from death, to
enjoy an i^heritau^ce i^mortall and undefiled and vnperysshable reserved in
heaven for you which are kept by the power of god through faith un to salvation
which is p^pared already to be showed i^ the last time when ye shall rejoice,
though now for a season, yfnede require, ye are in heaviness through manifold
te^ptacio^s, y^ your faith ones being much more p^cyous the^ gold yt
perissheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, glory,
and honor, 1. Corin. xiii.d
at the appering of Jesus christ. etc. Also thapostle Paul, says: we se now
in a glass even in dark speaking but then shall we se face to face.

Theffectes of everlasting life appear also i^ other places every where i^
scripture, as apoc. 21. 2 pet. 3. Esa. 36. 63. 66. and they ought to be
gathered by the contrary of theffectes of everlasting punisshment which abides
for the ungodly.

The cause of everlasting life is y^ promis Causes.
of god. For because god has promised everlasting life to such as bilyue in
christ therefore they receive it. Therefore also y^ apostle calls euerlastyge
life y^ gift of god, Roma. vi.
and in the fourth cha. to y^ To. he ascribes the inherytau^ce not to the law
but to the promise. Christ is the person for who^ god has promised eternal
life and for who^ it is given according to this of christ. John. v.^
Uerily verily I say unto you he y^ hears mi words and biliueth on hi^ y^
sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come in to da^nacio^ but is eskaped
from death unto life. Ite^, Christ gives everlasting life to such as cleave
unto him by faith according to this. John. xvii.
All whom thou have given unto him he shall give them eternal life To these
causes may also faith be added. For faith takes hold of Christ, and so
iustificacyon ensues: but unto iustificacyon is eternal life annexed.

Eternal life is not cut in to parts Parts.
but the scripture calls life eternal one certain and perpetual joy in a
new heaven and a new earth in which the godly shall be euerlastynglye with
god and shall worship god according to Esaias the prophet: Esaias. lxvi.
And all flesh shall come to worship before my face.

Theffectes of eternal life be taken chefly of y^ commodities and joys ensuyng
in Effects
the life to come, and be these: To have eternal joys. For in the everlasting
life shall cease all waylyng, all sorrow, finally all afflictions and sadness.
Apoc. 21. And god shall wype a way every tear from their eyes. Esaye. lxv.^^
To joy and rejoice euerlastyngly. Esaie. xxv.
To worship god perpetually not to feel any more syn, death, and persecucions.
For death also shall be utterly devoured, Apoca. xxi.b
and god shall wype away every tear, as a fore I said. Certes these effects
and semble of eternal life be far from all understanding of man. For
everlasting life is such a thing as is beyond y^ capacite of man, and above
al humane things. Math. xxii.c
As also Christ teaches where he says y^ in the resurectio^ of the deed, Luc.
xx.d
they shall neither mary nor be given in marriage (that is to say) no erthly nor
carnal thing shall be in the everlasting life. Mar^. xii.


Contraryes to eternal life be these. Contraryes
To say there is any other more pri^cipal cause of everlasting life then y^
promise made to y^ bilyuers in Christ. Papisticall
To grant y^ everlasting life chau^ceth for our works or merits. Popish
errors
To say everlasting life is a du^eward for our works. To say from purgatory is
y^ way to everlasting life. The error of the Anabaptists
To hold y^ y^ wicked and the devils shall ones at last come to everlasting
life, after they be ones sufficiently pourged. To drem, any carnal thing of
everlasting life as of pypynge and dauncyng, of eating and drinking, of
delicate fare. etc. To judge of everlasting life by natural reason, leauyng the
open word of god.

Of prayer. CA. LIIII.
PRayer is an asking with faith of some thing of god, ^escriptino.
with an effection of heart, and is gyuyng of thanks for benefytes received of
god.

THIS description of prayer is plain because of the two kinds of prayer,
Probacion.
peticion, and thankesgyuyng: Concerning the effection of the heart, we be
advertised by the prophet Esaye. Esaye. xxix. d.
This people (says the lord) approaches unto me with their mouth, and honor me
with their lyppes, but their heart is far from me. etc. Concerning faith
Christ says: Marc. xi. Therefore I say unto you, what so ever ye ask when ye
pray, b^liue that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you.

There be two kinds of prayer, Parts Inuocacion Peticion
calling on, or petition and gyuing of thanks. Calling on or peticion is in
which god is called upon in some thing, or wheri^ any thing is asked of god.
To this kind of prayer perteyne such psalms as be peticionarye or
inuocatorye, in which thou may very well behold the force nature, and form
of calling on. Such be these psalms. xi. xij. xxi. xxiiij. xxxiiij.

Gyuynge of thanks is whereby we Thankesgy^uynge
tender and yield thanks to god for the hearing of your prayer, and for
things received of god. Unto this kind of prayer perteyn such psalms as be
demo^stratyue conteynyng praises and thanks for the delyuery out of peryls,
and for other benefytes, as be these psalms the third. xvij. xxix. xxxix.

Causes of the hole prayer be, the commandment, Causes.
promise, faith, and necessite. Johan. xvi. ^
Of y^ two former causes, thus speaks christ Ask and it shall be given you.
Item what so ever ye shall ask y^ father in my name he will give it you. Of
faith speaks Paul Ro^. x. How shall they call on him upon whom they have not
bilyued Ite^ Mar. xi. Christ says: what thing so ever in your prayer ye
ask, bylyue y^ ye receive it and it shall be done unto you. Undoubtedly unto
christ for whose cause we be herd of god ye father, is required faith* which
takes hold of the promise whereby god has promised y^ we shall be herd in
Christ. This faith is espied very well in y^ miracles of Christ in the
gospel, where always before any miracle was declared, faith went before,
although y^ eua^gelystes have not always set it out. Necessity the fourth
cause of prayer proves Esaias the prophet where he says. (...).
Lord in their straytes they have sought y^. So Susa^na forsaken of all began
to cry to y^ lord: Daniel. xiii. Jones. ii.
So Jonas the prophet being in y^ whalles belly poured out this prayers to god:
so David ever among prays in his necessity and perils, he is herd and
gives thanks to god. So also Christ i^ the orchyarde prays. Math. xvi.^
Mark. xiiii. d Luke. xxii. c
And these foresaid causes do proprely belong to i^uocacio^ or calling on:
Tha^kesgyuyng takes his propre cause of the duty. For in that we be the people
of god, god hereth us / yea and in manner he ouerwhelmeth us with his benefytes.
Therefore we owe of duty to render thanks, beside which god requires of us
none other recompensacion or reward for his benefytes, as every where the
scripture testifyeth.

Theffectes of prayer yt demands or calls on y^ lord, Effects of peticion
and inuocacion.
be these. To be herd of god. To obtayn our demau^des. To be delivered from
euyls or perils. But these efectes do not chance eue^ for y^ selfprayer sake,
but for y^ promise sake added to the prayer, according to this, ask and it
shall be given you. Math. vii. d
Now because Christ byddeth us pray, and has promised hearing of y^ father,
eue^ therefore we be herd. Furthermore these effects be brought forth of god,
and so^times they follow not y^ prayer which thing nevertheless is not done with
out our great utility and profit. Note this s^mylitude
For like as a wise and
prudent father gives not forth with al things to his son yt he asks vnwisly,
or of other causes, so y^ heavenly father knows thopportunitie of time when to
give to grant and to hear us, and y^ for our incredible profyt, wherefore no
time of hearing ought to be appointed unto god. But when we have made our
prayer, we must abide with al patience til it pleseth god to grant us our
requests, from whe^s therefore proceed these offices of prayer. To pray alweis.
Ec. 18. Be y^ not let alwais to pray. Ite^ in y^ gospel of Luke we be
commanded of Christ still to pray and not to faint. Luc. xviii. ^
Look there upon the parable of y^ wicked judge. Colos. iiii. i. These. iiii^
Ite^ to be in sta^t in prayer. To pray without ceasing.

Theffectes of giving thanks of god be these: Theffectes of tha^kesgiuing
To praise god, to render thanks to god, to magnify god, to ^fesse his name:
These effects be called in scripture y^ sacrifices of praise, and Ebre. xii. f.
fruits of our lips, which we offer to god for his benefits toward us. Now
as in theffectes of peticio^ and inuocacion be excluded the circu^staunces of
time and of places, so al^^ in thanksgiving.

Co^traries to y^ true prayer are these: (...). The erro^ of friars an monckes.
The error of sayntment.
To make of prayer a work yt of it self deserves iustificacio^, bearyng and
other things. To worship saints: to call on saints. To bind prayer to certain
circu^sta^ces of places, of times. etc. To pray without faith and hope of
hearing. To pray with a wavering mind. To pray without necessity or when you have
not occasion to demand any thing of god.
To mu^ble up certain psalms or prayers i^ vain, contrary to the second
commandment, you shall not take y^ name of god in vayn. Not to pray or call on
god or give thanks for benefits received for hi^, since we have a
commandment to pray, to call on, and to give thanks. To hold yt our prayers
be herd of god eue^ for our works sake because we pray, and not because of y^
promis made yt the prayers shall be herd. To leave praying when god hears us
not forthwt. The error of temple men.
To expound y^ commandment of scripture of praying always, night and day to
keep in y^ temple and to mu^ble up prayers. To pray to thi^te^t you may be
seen and praised of me^, after the facio^ of hypocrites Mat. vi. To be a blaber
and pytterpatterer Hypocrites Piterpatterynge
when you prayest. Mat. vi. To p^fer or match prayers divised of me^ with the
lords prayer, named the Pa^n^. To deny yt god does defer the time of hearing
us, to our own profit and commodity. To deny yt prayer may be applied for
the necessities of other.

Of rule. CA. LV.
RUle is gods ordinance, Diffinicion.
to appoint good and profitable things to be done, to punish the fauty, and
save the vnfauty, which is to be obeyed, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

Proves of this diffinition.
THERE is no power (says Paul) but of god, Roma. xiii. ^
the powers that be, are ordined of god, who so ever therefore resysteth power,
resists gods ordinance. And they that resist, shall have to them selves
damnacion. etc. Hither perteyn manysentences out of the proverbs of Salomo^
which confyrme the civil and temporal power to be the ordinance of god, as
this sentence: Per me reges regnant. etc. By me the kings reygne, Prou. viii. c
and princes make just laws, through me lords bear rule, and al judges of
the earth execute judgment. Here Salomo^ signifies y^ the temporal power is
ordained by y^ word of god. Prouer. xvi. b
Ite^ he says: Diuinacio in labijs regis, i^ iudicij^ no^ errabit oseius: yt
is, diuinacio^ is i^ the lips of y^ king, and in judgment his mouth shall not
err. etc. The offices and pertes of a ruler be declared of thapostle Paul by
these words: Roma. xiii. b
wilt y^ be without fear of the power,
do well the^, and so shall y^ be praised of y^ same, for he is y^ minister of
god for thy wealth. But if y^ do evil, the^ fear, for he bears not y^ swerd
for naught, but is the minister of god to take vengeance on the^ y^ do evil.
The self same offices be put of Peter. i. Pe. ij. Furthermore the ruler ought
to p^scribe and co^mau^d his subjects such things as be right profitable, and
to punish the evil, and save the innocent for the ^seruacio^ of public peax
and honesty. And like as rule is thordinau^ce of god, so the ordinance of the
ruler and his offices god ascribes to hi^ self, lest a man should contemn
the^ or set them at naught, Prouer. xxi. d
according to the said text of Salomo^, di^inacio^ is i^ the mouth of y^ king
neither his mouth shall err i^ judgment. Ite^ a true measure and a true
balau^ce are the lords, and he is y^ author or weightes.

Thoffice of the ruler ^cerning the p^scribing of right and profitable things
in a common well is set forth by a goodly description of Cicero in his. ij.
book de legibus. Cicero.
But ^cerni^g our obedience toward y^ ruler, Roma. xiii. b
thus writes thapostle i^ his epistle to y^ To. wherefore ye must needs obey
(says Paul) not for fear of vengeance only, but also because of conscience,
y^ is, y^ the ^scie^ce be not spotted with syn. Hither perteyn such se^te^ces i^
the proverbs of Salomo^ as teache yt rulers are to be fered, as Pro. 16.
Indignatio regis nu^ciu^ est mortis, at vir sapie^s placabit. The kings
displesure is y^ messe^ger of death, but a wise man will pacify him. Ite^ in an
other place. The terror of the king is as the roaring of the lion, he y^
offe^deth him his soul synneth.

THE causes of rule be these: Causes.
God whose ordinance it is, and the persons ordained to elect the ruler (where
as it goes by election) or a just title of inheritance (where it goes by
succession of blood) to thinte^t al things be done in order. The formal cause
is taken out of the privileges of themperours, kings and princes, or by any
othervsage whereby the ruler is constitute.

OF temporal rulers, Parts.
some is superior and heed, other be inferyours and under powers.

Theffectes of the magistrate or ruler Effects.
be his self offices which he exercises for the profit and avail of his
subjects, as To p^scribe yt is egall and profitable. To ordeyn and institute a
certain and sure policy stablysshed with good and honest laws. To defend y^
giltles, ^. Petri. ii.
to punish y^ gylty, to put of wrongs. To maynteyn tranquillity and quietie.
To defend a peasible and quiet life, for to y^ purpose will thapostle y^
subjects should pray for their kings, eue^ yt we may live (says he) a quiet
and ^. Timot. ii. b
peasible life in all godliness and honesty. To revenge wro^ges done to his
subjects. To punish evil. Roma. xiii. a
To be dred of evil doers. To p^serue and ^serue a public honesty and peax i^
the world. Of this effect and office have written many excellent, wise, and
politikely learned me^, Plato. Aristotle. Cicero
as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and other. To accept y^ word of god according as
is commanded in y^. 2. psalm. Nu^c regis i^telligi^te. Now ye kings be ye
wise, be ye learned, ye yt are judges of the earth. Serve ye the lord with fear.
etc. Now, to serve the lord with fear, is to receive and take his word. Ite^
thoffice and pertes of a prince is to se the true and sincere religion of god
be set forth to his subjects, according to thexe^ple of Salomo^ ii. Pat. viii.
c
who ordained the offices of the prestes by certain courses and days. Item
according to thexemple of king Iosaphat ij. Par. xviii. of Ezechias. ii. Par.
xviii.
Item in the book of Iosue. ca. viii. it is written how Iosue the capteyn red
unto the people the book of Deuteronomy. even all the words of the law, both the
blessing and cursynge, according to all that is written in the book of the
law. Finally it is the office of the ruler to nourysshe and maynteyne the
teachers of the pure relygion, unto which office the prophet Esaye exhorts
the rulers, Esaye. xli^. ^
where he writes that kings shall be the noursyng fathers of the church and
queen's shall be the noursynge mothers.

Co^traryes to the lauful rule and temporal power be these. Contraries and
errors
To deny that temporal power is the ordinance of god, contrary to the open
place of Paul. To. xiii. To say in depressynge the dignity of temporal power
that is thordinaunce of nature. To hold that temporal rule is a casual
ordinance, which men ordained among them selves by fortune and chance, as
they did other things. To say that an ungodly ruler ought not to be obeyed in
temporal or civil things,
contrary to thexemple of Joseph, of Daniel and other saints which have lived
under wicked maiestrates, in high obedience. To hold that the gospel does
abrogate civil power, whereas in deed y^ gospel only perteyneth to the
conscience, and in such things as we have to do with god. Even tyrant ought of
a christen man to be obeyed. ^. Pet. ii. c
To deny y^ we owe obedience in all civil things unto evil Magistrates and
tirau^tes, contrary to y^ place of Peter which requires obedience unto the
heedes, not only if they be good and courteous, but also if they be froward. To
say there is any other cause of disobedience of some subjects toward their
rulers then the judgment of reason. For whereas reason understands not y^ the
temporal power is the ordinance of god it disdeyneth and thinks it a thing
unworthily to obey. To deny y^ a good ruler is a synguler gift of god, ^trary
to the place of Ecclesiasticus where it is said. Ecclesia. x. a.
The power of y^ earth is in the hand of god, and when his time is he shall set a
profitable ruler upon it. To deny yt an evil ruler is given for the sins of
me^, ^trary to this of the prophet. For the sins of the people has he made
hypocrites to reign, also the prophet Esaie. ca. iij. I shall give children to
be their princes (says y^ lord) and babes shall have the rule of you. Ite^
Salomo^ says in his proverbs. Pro. xxviii. a.
Because of syn the la^d does often change her prince. To grant y^ subjects
may a ue^ge the^ selves of their own injury, contrary to this of Christ. Mat.
xxvi. e John. xviii. b
He y^ strikes with the swerd, shall with the swerd perish. To deny yt the
counsels, the statutes, judgments, and the reigns of kings and rulers be of
god, contrary to these places following. Pro. 6. Diuinacio^ is in y^ lips of
y^ king. Ite^ Job. God casts not away the mighty ones because he him self is
mighty. Pro. 21. The heart of the king is in the hand of the lord, like as y^
ryuers of water he may turn it whither so ever he will. Ite^ the weightes and
eue^ measures be the judgment of the lord. To hold we ought to obey rulers,
commanding wicked things, Act. iiii. d
^trary to this of Pe^. it behooves rather to serve god the^ men. Neither would
Mathathias as we read i^ the first of the Machabees ne his i. Macha. ii. b
sons in any wise obey the king Antiochus co^mau^ding to sacrifice to ydols
against the commandment of god. In like wise neither y^ prophet Balaa^ would
obey king Balaac. Numer. xxii.
To say yt the election of public officers and magistrates does not rather
perteyn to princes, alderme^ or such as be in authority, the^ to the multitude
of subjects, which for their rudenes and lak of experience in civil things be
for y^ most perte void of judgment and blinded. To hold y^ the felicity of
commonweals stands in altering rulers. To disturb the common peax for the
election of y^ ruler To pluk violently unto the^ the election of the ruler,
against y^ old privileges laws and customs. To usurp y^ office of a king or
ruler without lauful calling or election. To hold yt god does prospere such ruler
as violently or tyra^nically, y^ is, without lauful vocacio^ usurps any rule,
contrary to the open exe^ples of histories and very experience. To grant yt
any impe^eis or kingdoms may be co^stitute and ruled without heroical me^
i^dowed with noble and heroical virtues, for which man look upon Plato. Plato.
ii. de Legibus.
To divide y^ civil magistrate or ruler in to the seculer and spiritual ruler.
To deny y^ such subjects as resist y^ temporal power and refuse oftentimes
light burdens be not more grievously punisshed of god, ^ier. xxviii. d
as the prophet Ier. also witnesses. Thus says the lord, y^ have broken the
cheines of wod, and y^ shall make for the^ cheynes of iron.
To deny y^ the disobedient and sedicious subjects against their prince and
ruler be most grievously punisshed of god, according to thexe^ple of Datha^,
Abiro^, and Chore, as is red in y^ book of Nu. 16. ii. Reg. xv.
Ite^ according to thexe^ple of Zambry.

TO say there may be such a prince or ruler as may plese al his subjects
whereas y^ good king David ^trarily was reported of Absolo^ his own son y^ he
was not egal i^ judgment unto y^ people, also Salomo^ yt he grieved the people
to much To forbid with the Anabaptists temporal power unto christian me^, Holy
and godly persons have borne rule.
contrary to the open exe^ples of scripture whereas Joseph and David which
bileued i^ Christ bare temporal rules, Cornelius as we read i^ the acts was an
officer of Rome. Ite^ y^ Ce^turio^ in the gospel with infinite other. To forbid
unto christian rulers batels in defense of their subjects, execution of judge
me^tes with the swerd upon y^ tra^sgressours and other civil offices whereby
realms and i^peries be kept, maintained and co^serued. So Abraham was a
christian man for y^ faith which he had in Christ, and yet nevertheless he made
many wars. So king David and other. To say yt to play the ruler is to play
the thief and robber. A wicked ^ knauishe error
This error is against the honesty of y^ offices of kings and rulers whose
offices be to defend his honest subjects, to keep common peax. etc. which
offices to do, is not to play the thief. For although there be found some
rulers which do exercise robberyes pillagies and theftes, yet the office
remains of it self good, neither ought it to be dispraysed, because of
certain evil officers. Math. xx. c.
To hold by this place of y^ gospel, the kings of the ge^tyles have rule over
the^. etc. that a christian man can not bear office or rule. This error
spri^geth of the misvndersta^ding of the co^pariso^ where Christ co^pareth the
apostles which were subjects with kings co^stitute in lauful rule. To deny unto
rulers their customs, tributes and taxes to y^ suste^tacio^ and maintenau^ce of
their empire or kingdom, contrary to the place of Paul. To. 13. where he says,
give tribute to who^ tribute belongs, custom to who^ custom is due. etc. To
deny due reverence to the ruler, Roma. xiii. b
contrary to Paul, who says give honor to who^ honor perteyneth. To depose
and put down the magistrate and ruler by y^ subjects and to make new rulers,
where as their formar rulers will not receive y^ gospel, which error was in
manner y^ destruction of a sort of cities in Germany. To neglect the office
committed unto hi^, or neglige^tly to regard his office. For whereas the
scripture p^scribeth to officers and public ministers their offices, it will
have them also accordingly to execute the same, to defend the good and punish
the bad. Hither perteyn such exhortacio^s in the prophets Ernest
adm^^nistracion
as exhort the rulers to ernest administracion of the common well, as Esaie.
i. Learn to do right, apply your selves to equity, deliver the oppressed,
help the fatherles to his right, let the widows complaint come before you.
Ite^ the prophet Zach. ca. 7. Execute true judgment. etc. To regard
slouthfully y^ offices of a ruler, when y^ see thy subjects rebellious and
sedicious, which evil by little and little destroys commonweals.

Of wedlock. CA. LVI.
WEdlok is the laufull couple of man and wife, Definicyon
ordained indissolubly to bring forth children, and to eschew fornicacion.

THAT matrimony is the couple of Probacyon^
man and wife doubts no man. This word (lauful) excludes al gyle and fraud
which may chance about persons co^tracting matrimony. Now the formar effect of
matrimony, which is, y^ it is ordained to the procreacion of issue, proves the
place of Gene. ca. i. Cressi^e et multiplicamini. Increase, and be ye
multiplied. The latter effect declares Paul to the Corin. ^. Corin. vii.
writynge: It is good for man not to touch a woman, nevertheless to avoid
fornicacio^ let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her husband.
As touching the institution, god did institute wedlock. Ge. ij. I added this
term (indissolubly) that is to say, vndepartably or without breakyng, that a
man should not think that wedlock ones lawfullye made can be undone and
broken, which thing Christ him self forbyddeth saying. That god co^ioyned,
Mat. xix. a
let no man separate. Howbeit where aduoutry comes bitwene, there is no
longer wedlock. For the promise given is broken, wherefore in such case it is
lawful, according to the doctrine of Christ to separate the persons which
before were contracted in matrymonye.

Causes of wedlock be these: Causes.
God the instituter, the consent of the pare^tes, or of such as supply their
rowmes, and of y^ persons co^tracting. Ite^ the laws as well natural as
politic, the customs of y^ country. etc. For matrimony belongs also to
civil and politic things, wherefore the laws of nature, of princes, the
customs of the country may not be neglected about matrimony.

Wedlok is of one kind, Parts
yt is to wi^e, the lawful couple of man and wife, by the agreement of both.

THEFFECTES of wedlock be these. Effects of matr^monye.
To bring forth children. Gene. i. This effect although it proprely belongs
to wedlock, yet it chances not without the singular blessing of god or gift
of the lord, wherewith god rewards such as fear him, according to the
prophet: Psalm. cxxvi^.
Blessed are all they that fear the lord and walk in his ways thy wife shall
be as the fruitful vine upon y^ walls of thy house, thy children like the
olyue branches round about thy table: lo, thus shall the man be blessed that
fears the lord. i. Cor. vii. a
To be a remedy against fornicacion. To be a sign of gods will toward us in
yt we know this kind of life please god, and therefore is decked with the
promises of god, and with the word. To be a token of the spiritual wedlock and
fellowship, which is bitwene the church and Christ, Ephe. v. ^
according to Paul. This is a great mystery, but I speak bitwene Christ and the
congregation.

Co^traryes to matrimony be these. Contraryes
To say matrimonye is not thordinau^ce of god, but ma^s inue^cio^. To say
matrimony is a sacrament, justifying even of the very work self. Poligamie,
that is, the having of many wives together is forbidden.
To hold a man may have by gods law mo wives at ones the^ one, contrary to
the first ordinance of matrimony. Ge. 2. And they.ij. shall be one flesh. etc.
Neither is there red any commandment in the old testament for the having of
many wives, although exemples do testify yt it was i^ ure, and perchance also
suffered at those times for increase of issue or for other causes. But y^ new
testament does utterly forbid the having of many wives, and that by thauctorite
of Christ, who brings us back again to the true instinct of nature, and right
ordinance of god.
To hold it a lauful matrimony y^ is co^tracted against gods laws of princes,
vsages of the country, ^sent of y^ pare^tes, or of such as rep^sent their
rowme, against the consent of the co^tractours or which is co^tracted bitwene
persons impote^t unable and unmeet to the same. To hold y^ certain matrimonies
co^tracted against some of y^ causes before said ought to be dissolved and
broken after they be made, and can not be undone. To hold yt it is lauful about
matrimony to use al manner of gyle and fraud. Math. v. xix.
To say y^ bare consent of the man and wife ought to make matrimony. To say
matrimony may be broken for any other causes the^ for only aduoutry. To say
sycknes or other chance of fortune, Forbydding of wedlock is the doctrine of
deuyls i. Corin. vii. ^
either prosperous or adverse may break matrimony ones laufully co^tracted. To
hold yt the infidelity or unfaithfulness of either of the persons in matrimony
breketh matrimony, contrary to the apostle. 1. Cor. 7. To say it were not
better to marye then to burn in outward concupisscence and lusts. To
exercise frowardnes and ungentleness in matrimony. To regard matrimony
slouthfully, or not to susteyn lovingly such things as pertayne unto it. (?)

The end of the common places of Erasmus Sarcerius.
^ELOS.
The table of the common places handled in this present book.
First an epistle to y^ kings majesty. Of God. Folio. i. Of god the father.
fo. ii. Of god the son. fo. iii. Of god the holy ghost. fo. viii. Of
predectinacion. fo. xii. Of contingencie. fo. xvii. Of creacion. fo. xx. Of
creatures fo. xxii. Of angels or good spirits. fo. xxv. Of evil spirits or
angels. fo. xxviii. Of man. fo. xxxii. Of the old man fo. xxxiiii. Of the
new man. fo. xxxvi. Of fre will fo. xxxviii. Of fre will before the fall fo.
xxxviii. Of fre will after the fall fo. xl. Of sin. fo. xliiii. Of oryginal
sin fo. xlv. Of actual sin fo. l. Of venial sin fo. lvii. Of syn against
tholy ghost fo. lviii. Of the law. fo. lx. Of the law of nature fo. lx. Of the
law of god fo. lxiii. Of moral laws fo. lxvi. Of laws judicial fo. lxviii. Of
ceremonial laws fo. lxviii. Of humane laws fo. lxxi. Of the gospel. fo.
lxxiii. Of faith fo. lxxvi. Of iustificacion fo. lxxxii. Of hope fo. lxxxv. Of
love toward god fo. lxxxviii. Of love toward the neighbor. fo. xc. Of good
works fo. xcvi. Of fulfyllynge the law fo. cv. Of the abrogacio^ of the law
fo. cx. Of the christen liberty fo. cxv. Of the cross fo. cxix. Of humility
fo. cxxv. Of sacraments or signs fo. cxxvi. Of baptism fo. cxxix. Of the
souper of the lord fo. cxxxiii. Of sacrifice fo. cxxxix. Of repentance fo.
cxlvii. Of contricion fo. cliiii. Of faith the other part of repentance. fo.
clv. Of confession before god fo. clvi. Of open confession fo. clix. Of
confession private. etc. fo. clx. Of auriculer or ear confession. fo. clxii.
Of satisfaction fo. clxiii. Of pardons fo. clxvi. Of the eclesiastical power
fo. clxvii. Of the popysh power fo. clxxij Of men's tradicions fo. clxxiiii. Of
the church or ^gregacio^. fo. clxxvi. Of sclaunder or offending. fo. clxxxvi.
Of the kingdom of Christ fo. cxciii. Of resurection fo. cxcvii. Of everlasting
life fo. cxcix. Of prayer fo. cciii. Of rule fo. ccv. Of wedlock. fo. ccx.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Iohu^ Byddell, dwelling in Fletestrete at the sign of
the Son over against the Cundyte. In the year of our lord god.
M.CCCCC.xxxviii.

Cum priuilegio.


