THE CHRISTIANS STRENGTH.

BY WILLIAM SCLATER.

BATCHELAR OF DIVINITY and Minister of the word of God at PITMISTER in Somerset.

AC: OX

printer's device of the University of Oxford

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612:

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL Mr WILLIAM HILL ESQVIRE, at PITMISTER in Somerset, grace
and peace.
SIR, a weaker creature then man in Adam, the world affords not: a stronger
then a Christian, a man in Christ the earth bears not. The strong men of David
2. Sam. 23.8.
are in scriptures renowned: yet what were their conquests, but over Giants or
fell beasts? We fight not against flesh and blood: we encounter and conquer,
yea Romans 8 37.
overconquer the 2. Cor. 4 4.
God of this world. Principalities and powers, our headstrong selves, we rule,
yea overrule, thorough Christ that reigns in us. The might among
naturalists, if abasures have not dejected, yet honors have puffed up: if
penury has not distracted, yet plenty has bewitched. But Phil 4.12.
we know how to abound, and how to be abased: how to be full, and how to
suffer need. We can do all things in Christ that strengthens us. It is said
of some of David's worthies, 2. Sam. 23.19
they reached not to the first three. Nor we (we must confess) to the Apostles
measure: but yet we have all received of the 2. Tim. 1.7.
spirit of power, every one his measure, according to the measure of the
donation of Christ. It shall behooue us to know our strength either actual or
possible to all duties necessary to salvation, that the idle pretense of
absolute infirmity make us not securely presumptuous. And it nearely concerns
us, to acknowledge the fountain thereof, the mighty God in our weakness
perfitting his power: least selfeconceit make us over confident in adventures;
or unthankfulness, careless to refer our abilities to his glory. That comfort
also would be meditated, that the supply of strength is certain when it is
humbly sought, where and how it ought: that no sluggish fear of the Adversary
dismay us in the encounter. To this sum amounts this whole sermon. 1. Pet.
5.10, 11.
Now the God of all grace that has called you to this eternal glory by Christ
Jesus make you perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish you. To him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Your worships in the truest love, WILLIAM SCLATER.

PHIL. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.


IT is the speech of the Apostle not vainly boasting of his strength natural,
but thankefully acknowledging the power of Gods grace in him.

And howsoever our small modle reach not to this Apostolical quantum, yet is
it in some measure verified of all Gods children; They can do all things
through Christ which strengthens them.

In the words, for order and more distinct handling, observe four things, 1.
The blessing acknowledged; power and ability I can do. 2. The extent of the
blessing in the object; All things. 3. The fountain of the blessing; Christ.
4. The continual supply of the blessing, in the description of Christ by his
effect; through Christ which strengthens. Of the first (...), I have strength
to do all things. Man in his naturals is (...), a creature made of frailties.
View him in his anatomy, ye shall see nothing of moralities but mere
privations. 1. Cor. 2.14.
He knows not nor can know the things of the spirit of God. 2 Cor. 3.5.
He thinks nor can think as of himself a good thought. Romans 8.7.
He submits not, nor can submit to the law of God. Phil. 2.13.
He wills not nor can will things pleasing unto God. He grieves not nor ca^
grieve for the offense of God. He fears not nor can fear the displeasure of
God. He does not nor can do things acceptable unto God. And yet of man
reformed it is true; He can do all things through Christ which strengthens.
By nature, impotent; by grace, omnipotent, says Ser. in Ca^tic. 85.
Bernard: Ioh. 15.5.
without Christ nothing; in Christ he can all things. I can do all things. So
mighty is God in man's weakness, able to enable the weakest creature, to the
strongest performances.

Let me apply it thus. There are amongst us at this day many strange and
unheard of opinions touching obsession and possession of men's bodies by Devils;
some holding, as they think, not without probability, that there is now no
possession or obsessio^ ordinary. Neither my Text nor purpose leads to
discuss that controversy. But however that be, this once I am sure of; There
are many hellish spirits whether possessing or infesting the souls of men. We
read of Luke 13.11.
a spirit of infirmity a woman was possessed withal; the weaker vessel, with
a spirit of weakness. And this spirit is rife almost in all men professing
Communion with Christ by his spirit.

There are some, says Isay, Isai 5.22.
mighty to drink wine, and strong to pour in strong drink. Reprove; These
men so strong in lewdness, pretend for themselves infirmity in grace; Bear
with me; it is mine infirmity. There are tongues, says St James, set on fire
of hell. I have heard, says David, the blasphemy of the multitude. And who
has ears to hear, but he hears fearful oaths come out, as the flowers
of speech, and the gracing praeludia of common conference? Reprove; What hear
we, but infirmity pretended? It is true, you say, swearing is naught; but
bear with me, it is my infirmity. Beloved in Christ Jesus; such spirits of
infirmity, are hellish spirits; Gods spirit it is a spirit 2. Tim. 1.7.
of power. And where he dwells, either in Paul, or Cephas, they can do all
things. I freely acknowledge, there are infirmities in the strongest of Gods
children; yea, if I said, all actual sins of Gods children are in them
infirmities, I should not much err: but yet there go many sins masked under
color of infirmities, which nearly looked on, descrie themselves to be
presumptious. Suffer me therefore a little to descry unto you, what are these
infirmities that may stand with grace; what weaknesses those are, that are
seen in these (...), these strong ones of the Lord. Besides these inevitable
lustings of the flesh against the spirit, which no strength of grace in any,
was ever able to suppress: another sort of them there is, incident to Gods
children; gross and notorious sins in themselves, though in Gods children
sins of weakness. You may thus discover them; Infirmities (I speak now of
gross, and notorious sins, that may deserve this favorable title of
infirmities) infirmities truly so called, are usually sins of incogitancie,
besides the purpose of a regenerate Christian: etc.

Gal. 6.1. Tentatio fallie and praeoccupat nescientes. Aug. de peccat. merit
and Remiss. lib. 2. cap. 2.
If any be prevented, taken ere he is aware, in a slip of infirmity, says
Paul, describing infirmities of Gods children: they are therefore usually
sins besides the purpose gene^all or particular. Such those of David, and
Peter; infirmities no doubt in the^, though enormities in themselves* David's
adultery 2. Sam. 11.2.
not thought of, before suggested. Peter's denial Mat. 26.35.
purposed against; Though I should die with thee I would not deny thee.

Now when men shall plot iniquity, and Mic. 2.1.
fashion it on their beds; when, as Genesis 27.41.
Esau, they hunt after opportunities, and purposely study how to compass their
notorious sins: these should not I dare call sins of infirmity.

In sins of infirmity, Premit and vrget infirmos, Aug. qua supra.
as the temptation is sudden, so the consent not without some reluctation
wrested from them, and ever there is more or less resistance before consent.
1. Ioh. 3, 9.
He that is borne of God sins not, nor can sin. i. say some, not make a
trade of sinning; say others, not sin to death; this I may add, not with
fullness of consent, not without some reluctation. And these sins thus
striven against, are indeed infirmities in Gods children, how ever enormious in
themselus. By the law of God, Deuteronomy 22.26, 27.
a Virgin found in the field, suddenly and violently assaulted, if according
to strength she make resistance, crying out, and none near to help her, in
such case is reputed guiltless of the crime of fornication. And if we by
violent assaults be withdrawn, striving to the utmost of power received, to
withstand, and yet fall; of such falls we may say as David, they are our
infirmities. But if we shall wait for occasions, and bid welcome to
opportunities; as the strumpet in Solomon, to her adulterous copesmate, Prove
7.15.
I came forth to meet theo; I have sought thy face, and rejoice that I have
found thee: such sins dare any call infirmities?

Sins of weakness, (I speak still of notorious and gross sins) have
commonly for their ground, some strong passion in nature; something that is
with nature very prevalent; as fear of death in Peter, of shame in David. That
same which the Philosopher calls most terrible of all evils, prevailed with Mat.
26.
Peter and overcame him; Job. 2.4.
skin for skin and all that a man has, will he give for his life. and that
shame, which ingenuous natures fear more then death, no marvel, so prevalent
with David. But what shall we say of sins abhorred of nature? that same
unmeasurable and Dutchmanlike drinking? Of this shall we say it is an
infirmity?

4 Sins of infirmity, as in their temptation they are sudden and resisted:
so in their loose, they give farewell in bitterness; they end in mourning.
Mat. 26.27.
Peter's bitter banning cost him bitter weeping: and David's sweet sin was Psalm.
51.
sowerly sauced. Arist. Eth. 2.1
(...).

But when men Philip. 3 19.
shall glory in their shame; and as the buyer in Solomon, It is naught, It is
naught; but when he is gone he boasts: this I should never call a sin of
infirmity.

5 Sins of infirmity, are never sins of custom, Noesuit aliquae do
ebrius, qudvis absit vt fuerit ebriosus. Aug. de peccat. merit and remis. l. 2.
c. 10.
yea seldom or never iterated (I speak still of gross sins, notoriously
known to be enormious:) but fortification is ever there planted, where the
breach has once been made. Of Judah his incest we read, but withal Genesis
38.26.
that he never came more near Thamar. Now when men shall Isai. 5.11*
follow drunkenness; Prove. 23. vlt.
seek it yet still: how shall we call these infirmities?

And as, for sins, they have strength to avoid them; so for duties, they have
power to practice. The questions that Christ propounded to the sons of
Zebedee, if it be moved to any of Gods children, will receive the same answer
with the same or more truth. Mat. 20.22.
Can you drink of the cup that I shall drink of? and be baptized with the
baptism that I shall be baptized with? They answer, we can. Can thou
moderate thy affections? refrain thy lips? subdue thy thoughes to the
obedience of Christ? Surely these (and what not?) can a child of God do in some
measure. So that it is but hypocrisy, that pretends absolute disability. And
of the blessing acknowledged thus far.

See we now the extent of the blessing in the object. All things. Strangely is
Paul's voice changed. In one place he thus complains, Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me, but I find no power to perform: yet here he
triumphs; I can do all things. We may thus reconcile them. 1. It may be, that
is a negative by comparison, as such are obvious every where in Scripture. And
the meaning may be, not that he had no power, but none answerable to his
will: as else where; Ioh. 9.41.
If ye were blind ye should have no sin.i. as Augustine, none in comparison,
not simply none. And surely as in men aliens from the life of God, there is an
endless desire to sin, (which makes their punishment endless,) though their
power in execution be restrained: So in Gods children, though we see some
performances, more endeavors; yet endless desires, and never satisfied with
their measure of obedience: they will, but find no power answerable to their
desire. Or 2 thus: To will is present, but (...), to go through with the
work, Non ait facere, sed perficere bonum, dug. Cont. Julian pelag. l. 3. cap.
26.
they find not. God having reserved perfection of power, to the world to come.
All things. Papists falling on this Scripture, infer presently a possibility
by grace, to keep the law to justification: for what should he want to
righteousness, that can all things inioined in the law of God? Not to trouble
you with that controversy at large, take only what may serve for loosing their
hold on this Scripture.

Some here acknowledge universal accommodum; the universal particle,
restrained to the particulars mentioned. All things.i. all these things. And it
is true, there are in Scriptures plentiful examples of such restrictions. But
yet I see no great necessity or warrant, in this place, to run to such
limitation. This once I am sure of: the things here specified, are of as
difficult performance as any, J know, in the whole circle of Christian duties.
Aequabilitie in all states; what has Christianity harder? Not to surfeit of
prosperity; what temperance? Not to be dejected with abasures; of how great
fortitude? And he that can these: may, without restraint, profess his power in
all the rest.

Some therefore in this question thus distinguish performance of the law. It is
of two sorts. One after legal rigor: another after Evangelicall mitigation.
That is Romans 8.3.
impossible: for when Gal 3.10.
one duty may not be wanting, and Iac. 3.2.
in many things we sin all, who can by the law expect justification? After
Evangelicall mitigation, it is possible to do all things; yet not so as to be
justified thereby.

As 1. it is possible to love the law and the duties therein contained. Ps.
119.37.
Lord says David, how do I love thy law.

2 Possible to purpose obedience. Ps. 119.106.
I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed, to keep thy righteous judgments.

3 Possible to desire obedience: Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me.

4 Possible to endeavor obedience: Act 24 16. Phil. 3, 13.
(...): I strive and wrestle with my Corruptions that I may keep a good
conscience.

5 Possible in a measure to perform obedience: for we have 2. Tim. 1.7.
a spirit of power.

6 Possible to 2. Cor. 7.11.
grieve for defects. And this is acceptable performance at the bar of mercy:
though such as cannot but dread the censure of exact Justice, to which they are
all liable, that seek justification by the law. Aug. de peccat. merit. and
remiss. lib. 3. ad Calcem.
Optandum est vt fiat, conandum est vt fiat, supplicandum est vt fiat: non
tamen quasi factum fuerit confidendum est. Others thus; Acceptably we may;
perfectly we cannot. And it is true there may be acceptance where is not
perfection; 2. Cor. 8.12.
(...), the ready mind is accepted: and that of the Lord by the Prophet; Mal
3.17.
I will spare, as a father does his son that serves him.

To which if I may add one thing for explanation, I think the answer will be
beyond exception. Consider we therefore in every christian duty, two things; 1.
Rem, 2. Modum: the substance of the duty, the manner of doing. The things are
al possible in a measure: and yet impossible in that perfect, and full measure
that the law requires. For Pro. 20.9.
whose heart is clean? Or who dares Psalm. 143.2.
present his best works to be judged without mercy? and rather subscribes not
feelingly to that vae of a father? Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota
misericordia discutias came.

But yet for the duties, some measure there is of sincere, and hearty
performance. Bernard blasphemed not when he said, Christ makes believers
omnipotent. Ser. in Cant. 85.
There is nothing (says he) wherein the omnipotency of the word more shines,
then in this; that he makes after a sort omnipotent, all that trust in him. All
things are possible to a believer. An non omnipotens cui omnia possibilia?
Surely so is every believing newborn christian, in his kind, omnipotent: not
as God, with a tra^scendent power beseeming the deity; but with all sufficiency
necessary to christianity. They can do all things.

Now brethren, if I had leave, a little largely to apply this universality; me
thinks it would not be hard by it to discover the hypocrisy of many,
pretending union and communion with Christ. Iud. 12.6.
Shibboleth never descryed so many Ephraimites, as this would hypocrites in
the Church of God. Gell. Attic. noct. lib. 12. c. 1.
Phauorinus in Gellius, seeing a nice mother willing to share her motherly
offices betwixt her self and her nurse, thus angerly cries out; Quod nam
inquit, est hoc contra naturam imperfectum and dimidiatum matrum genus? What a
half kind of mothers against nature is this; that brings forth, and forthwith
casts from her the birth of her own womb? Such a dimidiatum Christianorum
genus, a half kind of Christians, ye shall every where see; cut of shorter in
their practice, then ever were the garments of David's servantes by Hanun. Act.
26.28.
Agrippa, as now the rate of christians goes, nere worthy a prime place in the
Church of God; and Mar. 6.20.
Herod's many things might justly require a preachers connivence at his incest
with Herodias. But yet by Paul's rule, neither better then hypocrites. 2. Reg
5.18.
Naaman in one thing would be borne withal. And howsoever the Prophet speak
peace unto him, upon hypothesis of his contrary purpose: yet S. James is
resolute; that the Iac. 2.10.
willing bearing with our selves in one thing, argues a mere nullitie of
sincere obedience. And what availes it, my brethren, whether covetousnes or
prodigality, profaneness or hypocrisy reign in us? whether on the right
hand; or on the left; by overgoig, or undergoing; we be deprived of salvation?
There are many by-pathes misleading a christian: but they mere all in one
term; the Prove. 16.25.
issues of them all are the issues of death. What profits it to fly precisenes,
and incur profanenes? As if a man fled from a Lion and a Bear met him, as
the Prophet speaks in another case.

Yea this let me more say, could we go as far in sincere practice, as the
young man in the gospel went in proud profession; Mat. 19.20.
All these things have I done, from my youth up; and yet one thing wanting:
those other things should no whit avail us. Grace breeds no monsters: as it is
not redundant in superfluities, so neither defective in necessarijs. 1. Cor.
1.7.
You are behind in no gift; it is the general description of every truly
renewed christian.

We have many amongst us in pretense new creatures: and yet well weighed, but
monsters of new men. The good heart goes far, when the whole outward man is
unreformed. I know it is true of the heart even in this second generation, it
is primum vivens: but yet I could never find a clear fountain, but the
streams were also in some measure purged. Iac. 3.11.
Can a fountain? says S. James; and can Mat. 12.35.
a good man out of the good treasure of his good heart, but bring forth good
things? The waters of Bethel were naught and unwholesome; and the ground by them
made barren. What marvel? whilst the springs were filthy. 2. Reg. 2.21.
But when Elisha had cast his salt into the springs; Thus says the Lord, I
have healed the waters, Death shall no more come thereof, nor barrennes to the
ground. The heart unsanctified, is no better then a sink of uncleanness,
always foaming out shame and filthiness. But when once the Lord has seasoned
the heart with grace, the streams that thence flow, are health and holiness.
Heb. 10.22.
When the heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience, the body is also washed
with pure water. And how many? alas, how many, bare tonguy Christians?
Linguists only, in religion? Iac. 2.16.
Be warmed, be filled, is all their charity; a little of the language of
Canaan, all their sanctity. He is a monster in nature, that is bigger tongued
then handed. And they are monsters in grace, whose tongues swel with proud
boastings of holiness; and their right hands are right hands of iniquity.
Beloved, hear Peter's exhortation: 2. Pet. 1.5.
Join to faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge te^perance; etc:
Virtutes christianae are Copulativae; and so linked in amity each to other;
that as Nami speaks to Ruth; Ruth 1.16. Qui vnam virtutem habet, Aug. ep. 29.
where thou go, I go; where thou dwell, I dwell; nothing but death can
sever. So where one dwells, al dwell; where one is wanting, no one is obtained.
Pass we unto the third member; the fountain of the blessing.

I can do all things through Christ, etc. These are magnifica that Paul
speaks of himself; and such speeches as these of himself, made Porphyrie
charge him with the crime of boasting. But yet this shall ever be noted as the
nature of thankfulness; It is willing to draw out received benefits to the
utmost extent; but still with reference to the praise of the bestower. I can do
all things, but the fountain of this power is Christ. So else where; 1. Cor.
15.10
I have labored more then all: yet not I, but grace which is with me. And what
if we say with Bernard, we are not only Bern. de great. and lib. arbit.
operis ministri per effectum, but operantis quodammodo socij per consensum. If
this be withal acknowledged, that God Communicates the work unto us, and that
will and work proceed from him.

Aug. de haeres. cap. 88.
Pelagius in Austins old age, set this heresy on foot; that man in nature, as
now borne of Adam, has power of himself, to keep all the Commandments. From
him it should seem the Greeks took their (...), and that natural (...),
self ability and sufficiency, which they dreamed to be in nature, even to
things supernatural, as belief and repentance. My purpose is not to run out
into the large discussing of that controversy; this only, it will not be
amiss to show, how far natures strength reaches in moralities, and to what
it extends not. This then I think may be granted to Pelagius, without any
prejudice of truth. That natural me^ have some kind of command over the
locomotiue faculty; and may do the external works of piety toward God, and
justice to men, without any more then the general influence of providence, or
the common work of Gods spirit, which is vouchsafed to hypocrites in the
Church, yea to some heathen out of it. The Romans 2.14.
Gentiles by nature.i. by instinct, direction, power of nature, do the things
of the law. I say not all things; I say not any thing in the right manner. Yet
Seneca spoke much, if performance were answerable: Si scirem Deos ignoscituros,
homines ignoraturos: tamen propter peccati turpitudinem peccare dedignarer:
Were J sure of pardon fom God, and concealment from men; yet for the turpitude
sin has in it, I would scorn to commit it. Magna sunt haec in homine
Philosopho: and a saying as near as any to christian sincerity.

But yet if this be true, that principium and finis denominant actionem, the
motive and end denominate the action: nature will never reach; I say not; to
do al things, but not to do any thing morally good, or acceptable to God. The
principles of moral actions, that they may be acceptable according to the law,
are two; Love, and Duty. Love inclining the affections; Duty pressing the
conscience. And how of love to God we should do duties, that have not had Gods
love shed abroad in our hearts, I know not: seeing John says, 1. Ioh. 4.19.
we love him because he loved us first. And who ever could find a natural
man so rectifyed; as that he performed his religious or civil offices, for
conscience of God?

The end is Mat. 5.16.
Gods glory. And if ever heathen or unsanctified men come thus far, to such
intention, Pelagius shall soon be acknowledged a teacher of truth. Dulce and
decorum, honestum and honorificum; Virtutes istae tali fine turpes and
defermes. Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 4 cap 3. Non ossiciis sed sinibus a
vitiis discernendae virtutes. Idem ibidem.
vain glory and eternity of fame; these were motives heathenish. But for Gods
glory, who so finds in nature a desire to advance it; finds more then the
Lord himself could find in his most strict surview of man in his naturals:
Psalm. 14 2 3.
There is none that understands, none that seeks after God. And what lack
Papists of Pelagianisme; that allow to nature a power dispositiue, and ability
to prepare it self to regeneration? The Apostle, that Philip. 3.6.
in nature went as far as any; yet acknowledges all his power to proceed
from Christ. And our Savior himself, Ioh. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing; no, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.5.
not think a good thought. And howsoever it be true, Gods children have power
to practice: yet is the fountain of all power Christ Jesus. On him first
rested Isai. 11.2.
the spirit of strength, and Ioh. 1 16.
of his fullness we all receive grace for grace; grace be it what it will be;
Ephesians. 4.7.
according to the measure of the donation of Christ.

Now brethren beloved and longed for, what remains for us: but Ps. 116.12, 13
to take the cup of Salvation, and give thanks unto the Lord? It is all the
recompense the Lord expects from us, for all the blessings he has bestowed on
us. It may be, we can say, some of us, that the bloody flux of natural
corruption is stopped in us; we shall be vnthakfull, if we acknowledge not
Mark. 5.30.
the virtue to have come from Christ. It may be, we can say our lips are
purged; that we can now speak to the praise of the Lord: but Isai would
acknowledge Isa. 6 6.
that the coal came from this Altar. It may be that we have received Isai. 50
4.
a tongue of the learned but can we forget that the Lord has given it? It may
be a spirit and power in prayer: but shall we not remember, that it is the Romans
8.26.
spirit that helps our infirmities? Yea go over all the good things thou
inioyost, thou shall be forced to acknowledge Christ for the fountain. And why
may I not again infer; that seeing our rivers flow all from this sea, they
should Ec. 1.7.
thither return, as tributaries, whence they first proceeded? my meaning is,
the gifts we have received from Christ, we should use all Romans 11. vlt
to the honor of him from whom we have received them. It is good in
Christianity, in some sense, to circulate: and if in the use of our gifts
received, we could make our whole life a circle, to close in the point whence
it began, the motion were heavenly. This do then. Marshall up your graces that
you have received: set them as the Cherubims on the mercy seat, Exodus 25.20.
each facing another, all with their faces turned to Christ. Zeal and
knowledge, faith and charity, let each look to other: knowledge, to direct
zeal; zeal, to use knowledge to the glory of him, that has enlightened our
eyes to see, and enflamed our hearts to love him in truth.

The last member remains: the supply of the blessing in the description of
Christ by his effect; Christ which strengthens.

Christ strengthens two ways: 1. by infusing habitual strength; I mean, by
giving the habits of graces whereby we are fitted to do all things required of
us to salvation, as faith, patience, charity etc. 2, by giving use of these
gifts, when occasion requires. Both are here employed; but this latter rather
to be insisted on. Whence observe two things: 1. the necessity; 2. the
certainety of Christ's assistence in practice of christian duties.

Necessity, even after grace received. So that when a man is endued with
habitual faculties: yet is not he enabled for any actual performance without
special assistence of Christ by his spirit. See Ioh. 15.5. Phi. 2.13. the
places are known. No one act of faith, patience, charity, etc. but has need
of Christ's special assistence for right performance. Titus had received the
habit of love: yet 2 Cor. 8.16.
thanks be to God (says the Apostle) that has put into the heart of Titus
this care for you. Augustine speaks excellently to this purpose: De great. and
lib Arbit. cap. 17.
sine illo vel operante vt velimus, vel cooperante cum volumus, ad bona
pietatis opera nihil valemus. The altar of the sanctuary, at the base, had
Lions of brass for supporters; It may be, as types of Christ, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, supporting us in every particular action of worship acceptable
to God. The church is described coming out of the wilderness of this world,
Cant. 8.5.
leaning on her beloved. Bernard is always elegant; not always apt: in this
gloss, me thinks, aptnes and elegancie have met together; Frustra nititur si
non innitur.

It is vain to attempt one step without this staff to lean on. Petrus ex
egregio praesumptore creber negator effectus. Aug ep. 120.
Peter's lamentable experience is evidence enough; presuming but a little of
himself, we know how fowly he fell. There is an heresy about providence, that
God indeed gives to every creature the first power and ability of moving; but
after that once given, affords no more but general influence, for using the
faculties received. The Lord confutes it in Jeroboam; 1. Reg. 13.4.
stretching out his hand to smite the Prophet, but not able to pull it in. Not
much unlike is that heresy about the grace of God: that God indeed preve^ts
with grace, but needs not supply us with grace subsequent for actual
performances. Would God our own daily woeful experiences were not too
plentiful confutation of this error. Alas how often find we it true, That we
would do good, but Romans 7.21.
evil is so present with us, that we are not able to perform it? How many
holy purposes fail of execution, through Gods just withholding his assisting
grace for our pride and unthankfulness?

Whiles Moses was praying in the mount, at Iosuah his great battle with the
Amalekites, his Ex, 17.12.
hands grew feeble, and Aaron and Hur were feign to support them. Beloved, not
Aaron and Hur, but Christ himself must support us, if in any action we desire
performance. This do the^, whether thou read, or hear, or pray, or practice, a
Christo principium: pray Christ to strengthen, and give ability for
performance. That which remains, I contract into this short compendium: We
have heard the necessity; see we now the certainty of Christ's assiste^ce, in
every necessary duty of christianity, our endeavors being adioined. Christ
which strengthens; so certain is assistence where a christian endeavors.

And let it be our encouragement in all necessary duties, how difficult so ever
they seem to us. It is the fault of many to forbear endeavors, thorough
despair of performance. And, as the sluggard in Solomon, we are ever in
christianity fancying difficulties, a great deal more then the duties
contain. A Lion is in the way, etc. It is a sweet epithet here given to
Christ: he is strong in himself, and gives strength to us; 2. Cor. 12 9.
my grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is made perfect in weakness. What
he commands as necessary to salvation, he enables in acceptable measure to
perform by his gracious assistence.

I conclude all with that saying of Moses to the Isralites. When he saw them
dismayed with the sight of the Aegiptian host, pressing so hard after to destroy
them; Ex. 14 13.14
Fear not (faith Moses) stand still, and ye shall see the salvation of the
Lord. So say I unto you beloved, whereas you shall see the huge host of your
rebellious corruptions, threatening your overthrow and utter destruction; yet
despair not of victory: Fear not, stand still, be of good Courage; ye shall
see the great salvation of the Lord. None of them so strong; but by resistance,
thou shall be enabled to overcome: No duty so difficult; but Christ shall
enable thee, in acceptable measure, to perform.

FINIS.

