THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCEL OF TRENT.

Containing eight Books.

In which (besides the ordinary Acts of the Council) are declared many
notable Occurrences, which happened in Christendom, during the space of
forty years and more.

And, particularly, the practices of the Court of Rome, hinder the reformation
of their errors, and to maintain their greatness.

Written in Italian by Pietro Soaue Polano, and faithfully translated into
English by NATHANAEL BRENT.

Unto this SECOND EDITION are added diverse obseruable Passages, and Epistles,
concerning the truth of this History, specified in the next Page.

DIEV ET MON DRO^


LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

M. DC. XXII.

THE APPENDIX OF THIS SECOND Edition, containing;
1 AN Epistle of Gregory the First, Bishop of Rome to Maurice the Emperor.

2 A passage of the History of Fr. Guicciardine Florentine, concerning Pope
Alex. 6. left out of his third Book in the printed Copies.

3 A second passage of the same Author, containing a large discourse of the
means, whereby the Popes of Rome atteined to their greatness, that they now
enjoy, left out of the fourth Book.

4 (...) third passage of the same Author, left out of his 10. Book.

5 Certain passages out of the Letters of the Lords de Lansac, Pibr^^c,
Ferrier, etc. taken forth of the Instructions, and Missies of the Kings of
France, and their Ambassadors sent to the Council of Trent, Published in
French. An. 1608.

6 Andr. (...)udithius, Bishop of Quinquecclesiae in Hungary, his Testimony of
the Council of Trent, in his Epistle to Maximilian 2. Emperor.

7 An Epistle ^f Bishop Jewel unto Seignior Scipio, a Senator of Venice,
touching the causes moving the Church of England to refuse Communion with the
Council of Trent: now first published according to the Original annexed.

8 Lastly, the foresaid Epistle of Dudithius, written by himself in Latin.

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
I Offer to your MAJESTY'S view the truest and most judicious Ecclesiastical
History, that either modern times, or any antiquity has afforded to the
world; impaired (I confess) in beauty, as being transported out of the
natural luster both of style and phrase, by a rude and unskillful Translator,
but nothing altered in the truth and sincerity of the matter, which it
handles.

The Author, a stranger to these parts, conversant only where the Gospel
cannot be truly preached, was moved to write it, as for the common good of all
Christendom, so particularly in contemplation of your Majesty's service. For
as you hold the highest place amongst all Kings and Princes, and are Gods
greatest Lieutenant under the whole cope of heaven, so your admirable
perfections, of Wisdom, Learning, Justice, and Religion (with which your
royal breast is enriched beyond all comparison to be made with any others)
cast forth their bright shining rays into all Countries and quarters of the
world, and rouse up the endeavors of the worthiest, even in places the farthest
remote, to labor in the building up, or repairing of Gods Church, so far as
the tyranny of Antichrist, under which they live, and the safety of their
lives, which nature binds them to preserve, does give them leave. In which
number, is the Author of this present Treatise. The end and scope whereof being
the glory of God, by discovery of those practices, which, for many years, have
been concealed by the enemies of CHRIST, the advancement of true piety and
Religion, I know not to whom it may be addressed more justly, then to the
greatest Majesty upon the whole surface of the earth, and the chiefest Defender
of the true faith amongst us.

And surely if ever any book (except only the Book of God) did deserve the
protection of so excellent a Patron, it is this History of the Council of
Trent. For, of all the things in the world, Religion is of the greatest
consequence, and, in Religion, Ecumenicall Councels (next after the holy Writ)
have ever carried the greatest sway; which being true, and guided by the holy
Ghost, have been causes of infinite blessings, but being pretended only, and
governed by humane policies and Art, have brought forth as many mischiefs
and afflictions to the Church of God.

Now in this of Trent it is plainly discovered, that the Bishops of Rome (of
whom eight lived and died, during the time of the Synod and treaty thereof)
in stead of being CHRIST'S holy Vicars, as they pretend, have been the
greatest, and most pernicious quackesaluing iuglers that ever the earth did
bear.

It would be infinite to relate the Stratagems they used to divert it, before
it began; their postings to and fro, to hinder the proposing of those things
which they thought would diminish their profit, or pull down their pride;
their policies, to enthrall the Prelates and Divines, by hopes and fears;
their diligence in sending their adherents to Trent, and so, by procuring a
mayor part of voices, to make themselves the absolute Lords of all the
determinations that passed. By which devices that which was desired by godly
men, as the only remedy against all the errors in manners and doctrine, both
in Church and Commonwealth, and especially against the greatest enormities of
the Popes themselves, has been wrested to a quite contrary use, to weaken the
lawful rights of Kings and Princes, to pervert the doctrine and Hierarchy of
the Church of GOD, and to lift up the Papacy to an insufferable height of
pride. This is that holy and great Synod, of which the Romanists do boast
themselves so much.

And indeed every one of any mean capacity may easily know, that many
controuerted points between them and the true Professors, necessary (as they
maintain) for the saving of men's souls, had never any colorable
establishment but this; which insensibly creeping in by the superstition of the
vulgar, or secretly set on foot by those that were ambitious and covetous, or
(at the best) blindly zealous, have always been opposed by the Orthodox, even
publicly, until the malicious industry of the greater part, put to silence
(though never quite overcame) the paucitie of the better. So that their vanting
of the Antiquity of their Religion, and of the infancy of ours, is vain and
idle.

And if they will glory (as usually they do) of the universality of their
doctrine, because it was established (forsooth) by the holy Ecumenicall
Council of Trent, as they term it, none can better judge then your MAJESTY
how factious and how unlawful that assembly was, and, by this History, the
whole world may understand the weakness of that foundation.

The Almighty bless your MAJESTY with length of days, strength of body,
loyalty of your people, and with all imaginable happiness in your most Royal
Progeny, and in swaying the Scepter of your Dominions.

Your Sacred Majesty's most humble, and most faithfully devoted Subject,
NATHANAEL BRENT.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, thou shall see in this Book greater variety of remarkable
accidents, then, before the reading of it, thou could have possibly
imagined. The state of religion quite altered, in diverse Kingdoms and
Countries of Christendom; the Grandies sometimes divided and armed one against
another, sometimes joined in confederations and leagues; the Ecclesiastikes
oppressed; the Protestants persecuted; the Bishops of Rome, as it were, acting
their parts, and most lively deciphered in their natural colors. If learning
will content thee, mark the disputations of the Theologues, and the deep
discourses of the Author himself. If policy will please thee, thou shall
find it in the consultations and treaties of Princes, managed, with admirable
dexterity, by their Ambassadors and Ministers; and generally no delight will
be wanting to thee, which thy curiosity can desire, or any other History
afford. But consider, above all, in what a strange manner the Conciliarie Acts
of this assembly in Trent were carried. By reading of those few words of thy
Countryman Edmond Campian, below in this page, thou may perceive in what
repute the Papalins do hold it; and after, when thou have read the Book, thou will know how much it is ouer-valued. Compare thy judicious censure with his
that is partial, and thou shall find them to agree as white with blackenesse,
darkness with light. Farewell.

Verba Edmundi Campiani, ratione quarta, reddita Academicis.
TRidentina Synodus quo magis inueterascet, eo magis indies ebque perennius
efflorescet. Bone Deus, quae gentium varietas, qui delectus Episcoporum totius
orbis, qui regum and rerumpublicarum splendour, quae medulla Theologorum, quae
sanctitas, quae lachrymae, quae ieiunia, qui flores Academici, quae linguae,
quanta subtilitas, quantus labor, quam infinita lectio, quanta virtutum and
studiorum diuitiae augustum illud Sacrarium impleuerunt?

The words of Edmond Campian in his fourth reason given to the Universities.
THe Synod of Trent the older it waxes, the more it will flourish, Good God,
what variety of Nations, what choice of Bishops of the whole world, what
splendour of Kings and Commonwealths, what marrow of Theologues, what
sanctity, what weepings, what fasts, what Academicall flowers, what languages,
what subtilties, what labor, what infinite reading, what riches of virtues and
studies did fill up that Maiesticall sacred place?

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, THE LORD Archbishop
of Canterbury his GRACE, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, and one of
His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
MOst Reverend in Christ, It may seem strange (and I am sure it is without
example) that of one Council only so large an History should be written, and
so full of all variety of matter. For in those of former ages, in which the
Holy Ghost did really and effectually assist the Fathers, howsoever more
Prelates and Divines were assembled from places more remote, and the actions
guided by the greatest Princes of all those times, yet nothing was attempted to
increase or maintain the Heresies and abuses that reigned then, nor was any
thing remarkable, but the very Doctrines and Decrees themselves. But after
that the Bishops of Rome, scorning to be Ministers and Servants, made
themselves Masters and Monarkes of the Church of God, the practices and
inventions of worldly men chased away the heavenly inspirations of the blessed
Spirit, and greater confusions and troubles did arise in handling Divine
Mysteries, then did happen at any other time in negotiating the affairs of
Kingdoms and of Commonwealths. This has ministered a whole Ocean of
occurrences, and affoorded a most copious Subject to this present Treatise.

And so irresistible is the force of Truth, and the Divine Providence so great,
that howsoever the Romanists have used all possible diligence to hinder the
finding out of their unlawful proceedings in this Council, by suppressing all
public writings and monuments, by which their treacheries and abuses might
be discovered more plainly to the eyes of the world, the writer of this
History (a man of admirable learning, exquisite judgment, indefatigable
industry, and integrity scarcely to be matched) has been raised up by God,
who, out of the Diaries, Memorials, Registers, and other writings, made and
preserved by the Prelates and Divines themselves, and by the Ambassadors of
Princes and Republiques, who were assistants herein (which are the most
infallible grounds that any writer can have) has revealed an infinite of
intolerable abuses, and (as the proverb says) Cornicum oculos confixit.

This Book I have translated out of Italian into our vulgar language,
presuming to commend it to the royal protection of his sacred Majesty, for
whose sake (as some reasons induce me to believe) it was principally composed.
And because I undertook this work at your Graces command, who have been the
chiefest cause why the original crossed the Seas before the just nativity of
it, and saw the first light within his Majesty's dominions, as also in regard
of the high place you most deservedly bear in the Church of God, I thought it
my duty to crave your favor likewise; that as the birth of it has been
happy by your Graces means, so the growth may accordingly proceed, and the
fruit of both (which is to remove an erroneous opinion of the infallibility
of this pretended Council) may constantly endure until the worlds end.

In publishing hereof, if my Pen has not merited such praise as others might,
yet my desire to benefit Gods Church has not been wanting, and my zeal to
serve your Grace, in whatsoever I am able, shall never yield to any. Unto whom
I wish (for the public benefit of Church and Commonwealth, and for your own
particular contentment) a perfect accomplishment of all your pious and
honorable designs.

Your Grace's most obliged to do you service, NATHANAEL BRENT.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
MY purpose 1500 Pope ALEXANDER 6: Emperor MAXIMLLIAN. I. HENRY 7. King of
England. LEWIS 12. French king.
is to write the History of the Council The purpose of the Author
of Trent. For though many famous Historians of our age have made mention in
their writings of some particular accidents that happened therein, and John
Sleidam, a most diligent author, has related, with exquisite industry, the
causes that went before, notwithstanding all these things put together would
not suffice for an entire narration.

For my self, so soon as I had understanding The means he used for
collection of his matter.
of the affairs of the world, I became exceeding curious to know the whole
proceedings thereof: and after I had diligently read whatsoever I found written,
and the public instructions, whether printed or diuulged by pen, I betook my
self, without sparing either pains or care, to search in the remainder of the
writings of the Prelates, and others who were present in the Council the
Records which they left behind them, and the Suffrages or opinions delivered
in public, preserved by the Authors themselves, or by others, and the letters
of advice written from that City; whereby I have had the favor to see even a
whole register of Notes and Letters of those persons, who had a great part in
those negotiations. Having therefore collected so many things as may minister
unto me sufficient matter for a narration of the progress, I am resolved to
set it down in order.

I will relate the causes and managings of an Ecclesiastical Convocation, by
some, for diverse ends, and by diverse means procured and hastened, by some
hindered and deferred for the space of 22. years: and for 18. years more,
sometimes assembled, sometimes dissolved, always celebrated with diverse
intentions, and which has gotten a form and conclusion contrary altogether to
the deseigne of them that procured it, and to the fear of those, that with all
diligence disturbed it; a clear instruction for us to refer our selves to
God, and not to trust in the wisdom of man.

For this Council desired and procured by godly men, to reunite the 1500
ALEXAND. 6. MAXIMILL 1. HENRY 7. LEWIS 12. The conclusion of this Council was
contrary to the opinion of all men.
Church which began to be divided, has so established the Schism, and made
the parties so obstinate, that the discords are become irreconciliable: and
being managed by Princes for reformation of Ecclesiastical discipline, has
caused the greatest deformation that ever was since Christianity did begin: and
hoped for by the Bishops to regaine the Episcopal authority, usurped for the
most part by the Pope, has made them loose it altogether, bringing them into
greater servitude: on the contrary, feared and avoided by the Sea of Rome, as a
potent means, to moderate the exorbitant power, mounted from small beginnings
by diverse degrees unto an unlimited excess, it has so established and
confirmed the same, over that part which remains subject unto it, that it was
never so great nor so soundly rooted.

It will not be inconvenient therefore to call it the Iliade of our age; in the
explanation whereof I will exactly follow the truth, not being possessed with
any passion that may make me err. And he that shall observe that I speak
more copiously of some times, and more sparingly of others, let him remember
that all fields are not equally fruitful, nor all grains deserve to be kept:
and that, of those which the Reaper would preserve, some ear escapes the
hand, or the edge of the sickle; that being the condition of every harvest,
that some part remains to be gleaned after.

But first I must call to mind, that it has been a most ancient custom in
the Church of Christ to compose the differences of Religion, and to reform The
original cause and progress of Synods.
the corrupted discipline, by the convocation of Synods. So, the first which
began in the life time of many of the holy Apostles, whether the converted
Gentiles were bound to observe Moses law, was composed by a meeting in
Jerusalem of four Apostles, and of all the faithful which were in that
City: by which example in the occurrences which incidently sprung up in every
province for the space of 200. years and more afterward, the Bishops and
chiefest of the Churches assembled themselves together to qualify and end
them; that being the only remedy to reunite divisions, and to accord contrary
opinions.

But after that it pleased God to give peace unto his Church, by exciting
Constantine to favor religion, as it was more easy for many Churches to
communicate and treat together, so also the divisions became more common. And
whereas before, the differences went not out of a city, or, at the most, out of
a Province, now by reason of the liberty of meeting together, they extended
themselves over the whole Empire. Wherefore also it was necessary that the
Councels (which were the usual remedy) should be assembled from places more
distant. Whereupon a Council of the whole Empire, being congregated in those
times by that Prince, it had the name of the holy and great Synod; and a little
after was called the general and Ecumenical Council, though not assembled from
all parts of the Church, a great part whereof extended it self beyond the
bounds of the Roman Empire; but because the use of that age was to call the
Emperor Lord of the whole habitable earth, howbeit the tenth part thereof was
not subject unto him. By which example the like Councels were called by
Constantine his successors in other occurring differences of Religion. And
though the Empire was divided into the Eastern and Western, notwithstanding
the affairs thereof being managed ^ A new deriuation of the name of general
Councels.
under a common name, the Convocation of Synods throughout the whole continued
still.

7 But after that the East was so divided from the West, that there remained no
more communion in the Sovereignty, and after that the East was for the most
part possessed by the Saracens, and the West parted amongst many Princes, the
name of an Universal and oecumenicall Council was no more derived from the
Roman Empire, but amongst the Grecians, from the assembly of the five
Patriarchs, and in these countries of ours, from the unity and communion of
those Kingdoms and States which obeyed the Pope in causes Ecclesiastical. And
the assembling of these has been continued, not to appease the dissentions
about Religion principally, as before, but either to make war in the
Holy Land, or to compose Schisms and divisions of the Church of Rome, or else
for controversies between the Bishops and Christian Princes.

8 In the beginning of the 16. centurie of years after the nativity of our
1500
Savior Christ, there appeared no urgent cause to celebrate a Council,
neither was there any likely to happen for a long space. For the complaints of
many Churches against the greatness of the Court, seemed absolutely to be
appeased, and all the countries of the Western Christians were in the
communion and obedience of the Church of Rome. Only in a small part, that is
in that tract where the Alps are joined with the Pyrences, there were some
remainders of the old Waldenses or Albigenses. In whom notwithstanding
Waldenses in the Alps.
there was so great simplicity and ignorance in learning, that they were not
fit to communicate their doctrine unto others; besides their neighbors
conceived so sinister an opinion of their impiety and obscenitie, that there
was no danger that the contagion could spread any further.

9 In some Cantons also of Bohemia there were some few who maintained Picards
in Bohemia.
the same doctrine, even remnants of those whom the Bohemians call Picards;
whose increase could not be feared for the same reason.

10 In the same Kingdom of Bohemia there were some followers of John Hus,
which were called Calistini, or Subutraque, who, except that particular,
Calistial in Bohemia.
that in the holy Communion they ministered the Cup unto the people, in other
things differed not much from the doctrine of the Church of Rome. But these
also were not esteemed considerable, as well for their small number, as because
they wanted learning; neither did it appear that they desired to communicate
their doctrine, nor that others were curious to understand it.

11 There was yet some danger of Schism. For Julius the second, having Pope
Julius the second was more a soldier then a Clergy man.
addicted himself more to the Arts of war, then to the Priestly ministry,
and governed the Popedom with excessive imperiousnes toward the Princes and
Cardinals, had constrained some of them to separate themselves from him, and to
call a Council. And the French King Lewis the twelfth, excommunicated Lewis
the 12. excommunicated.
by the same Pope, had withdrawn his obedience from him, and was joined with
the separated Cardinals; which beginning, did seem might produce some
important conclusion. But Julius opportunely dying, and Leo being created in
his stead, with his dexterity he reconciled, in a very short space, the
Cardinals and the Kingdom of France both at once: so that a fire was quenched
with admirable celerity and ease, which in likelihood might have burned the
Church. LEO 10. MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 7. LEWIS 12. The description of Pope Leo.


12 Leo the tenth, as one whose birth and education was noble, adorned the
Papacy with many good parts which he brought into it; amongst which were his
singular learning in humanity, goodness, and a marvelous sweet manner in
treating of affairs, together with a pleasing behavior, more then humane,
joined with incomparable liberality, and a great inclination to favor those
that were learned, and endowed with any extraordinary quality. Which virtues
were not found in that Sea of a long time before, neither equal, nor near
unto his. And he would have been a Pope absolutely complete, if with these he
had joined some knowledge in things that concern Religion, and some more
propension unto piety, of both which he seemed careless. And as he was most
liberal and well seen in the Art of giving, so in that other of gaining he
was not able enough of himself, but used the assistance of Lorenzo Pucci,
Cardinal of Santi Quatro, a man exceeding sufficient in that behalf.

13 Leo therefore finding himself in this state, quiet, the Schism
extinguished absolutely, without an adversary, as one may say, (because those
few Waldenses and Calistini were not any way considerable) liberal in spending
and rewarding as well his kindred, as Courtiers, and professors of learning,
other fountains, from whence the Court of Rome was wont to draw riches unto it
self out of other nations, being dried up, he thought fit to serve himself of
that of Indulgences.

14 This manner of gaining money was put in practice after the year When the
Art of gaining money by Indulgences began.
1100. For Pope Vrbane the second having granted a plenary Indulgence and
remission of all sins to whosoever made war in the Holy land, to regaine and
set at liberty the Sepulcher of Christ, out of the hands of the Mahumetans, was
imitated by his Successors for many hundreds of years; some of which (as
always new inventions are enlarged) granted it to those that maintained a
soldier, in case they could not, or would not go to war themselves in
person. And after in progress of time, the same indulgences and pardons were
given for the taking of arms against those that obeyed not the Church of Rome,
although they were Christians: and for the most part infinite exactions were
made under those pretenses; all which, or the greater part, were applied to
other uses.

15 Leo being counseled, by the Cardinal of Santi Quatro, to follow these
examples, sent an Indulgence and pardon for sins throughout all Christendom,
Leo granted a plenary Indulgence.
granting it to whosoever would give money, and extending of it even unto the
dead; for whom when the disbursement was made, his will was that they should be
freed from the pains of Purgatory; giving also power to eat eggs and
whitmeats on fasting days, to choose themselves a Confessor, and other such
like abilities. And although the execution of this enterprise of Leo had some
particular in it that was neither pious nor honest, as hereafter shall appear
(which did give scandal, and caused innovation) notwithstanding many of the
grants formerly made by the preceding Popes, had causes more unjust, and were
exercised with more avarice and extortion. But occasions arise many times which
are able to produce notable effects, and yet come to nothing, for want of those
that know how to use them. And, which 1517 LEO 10. MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS
1. 1517
is more, it is necessary, for the effecting of anything, that the time come in
which it may please God to correct the errors of men. All these things met
together in the time of Leo, of whom we speak.

16 For having published an universal grant of Indulgence, in the year 1517.
he distributed part of the harvest, before it was reaped or well sowed, giving
unto diverse persons the revenues of diverse Provinces, and reserving some also
for his own Exchequer. In particular, the Indulgences of Saxony, and of that
arm of Germany, which reaches from thence to the sea, he gave The Popes
sister has a great part of the benefit of Indulgences. Leo was created
Cardinal at the age of fourteen.
to his sister Magdalene, wife unto Franceschetto Cibo, bastard son of
Innocentius the eighth: By reason of which marriage, this Leo was created
Cardinal at the age of fourteen years, which was the first beginning of
Ecclesiastical greatness in the house of the Medici. And Leo used this
liberality, not so much through brotherly love, as for recompense of the
charges which the family of Cibo were at, when he retired himself to Genua,
not daring to abide in Rome so long as Alexander the 6. had linked himself
with the Florentines, who being enemies to the house of the Medici, had chased
it out of Florence. The sister (that the Pope his gift might be profitable unto
her) committed the care of preaching the Indulgences, and exacting the money
unto Bishop Aremboldus, Aremboldus was the agent of the Popes sister.
who in the assumption of the Episcopal dignity, deuested not himself of any
of the qualities of a perfect Genua Merchant. This man gave power to publish
the Indulgences to whosoever promised to raise most profit by them, without any
regard of the quality of the persons, even so so rididly, that no man of any
tolerable condition could contract with him; but he found Ministers like unto
himself, who aimed at nothing but the gain of money.

17 It was a custom in Saxony, that whenever Indulgences were sent by The
Heremit Friars were publishers of Indulgences in Saxony by custom.
Popes, the Friars of the order of the Heremites were employed to publish them.
The Pardon-mongers, Ministers of Aremboldus would not go to these, because,
being accustomed to manage the like merchandises, they might use some device to
draw some secret profit to themselves, and from whom likewise, as practiced in
this office, they expected not any extraordinary thing, which might bring them
more then usual advantage; but they The Dominicans were employed by the
ministers of Aremboldus.
went to the Dominican Friars. These men, in publishing the Indulgences,
desiring to amplify the value of them, more then others had done before, spoke
many strange things, which gave cause of scandal. Whereunto was added the bad
life of the Pardoners, who, in Tauernes, and elsewhere, in games, and other
things not fit to be named, spent that which the people spared from their
necessary expenses, to purchase the Indulgences.

18 By these means Martin Luther, an Heremite Friar, being stirred up, began
Martin Luther speaks against the Indulgences.
to speak against the Pardoners, first reprehending these new excessive abuses
only; after being provoked by them, he set himself to study this matter,
being desirous to see the foundations and the roots of the doctrine of
Indulgences. Which when he had examined, passing from the new to the old 95.
Conclusions of Luther.
abuses, and from the building to the foundations, he published 95. Conclusions
in this matter, which were proposed to be disputed on in Wittenberg, John
Thecel a Dominican proposed Co^clusions contrary to those of Luther.
where they being seen and read, they were not opposed in any vocal
conference, because no man appeared against him: but John Thecel, a Dominican
Friar, proposed others contrary unto these, in Frankfort of Brandeburg.

19 These two files of Conclusions were, as one may say, a joining of issue.
Wherefore Martin Luther went on to write in defense of his, and John Ecchius to
oppose them; and these Conclusions, together with other writings, being gone to
Rome, Siluester Prierius, a Dominican Friar, wrote against Luther. Which
contestation enforced both the one and the other party to swerve from this
John Ecchius opposes Luthers conclusions. Siluester Prierius wrote against
Luther. The doctrine of Indulgences was never well understood until this time.
matter, and pass to other things of greater importance. For the doctrine of
Indulgences having not been well examined in former ages, which did never
consider how they might be defended and maintained, or how impugned, the
essence and causes of them were not well understood. Some thought they were
nothing but an absolution or freeing, made by authority of the Prelate, from
penance which the Church in the most ancient times imposed, by way of
discipline, upon the penitent, (which imposition was assumed in succeeding ages
by the Bishop only, after delegated to the penetentiary Priest, and in
conclusion left wholly to the will of the Confessor) and that they delivered us
not from paying the debt due to the Justice of God. Others thinking that this
brought more hurt unto Christians then benefit, who being delivered from
Canonical punishments, became negligent to satisfy the divine Justice with
voluntary penance, began to be of opinion, that they set us free from both the
one and the other: but these were divided. Some thought that they set us free,
though nothing were given in recompense for them. Others, abhorring that
opinion, said, that, by reason of the mutual participation in charity of the
members of holy Church, the penance of one might be communicated unto another,
and free him by this compensation. But because it seemed that this was more
proper to men of an holy and austere life, then to the authority of Prelates,
there arose a third opinion, which made them in part an absolution, because
authority was necessary for them, and in part a compensation. But in regard the
Prelates lived not in such sort, as that they could spare much of their merits
for others, there was made a treasury in the Church full of the merits of all
those who had more of them then would serve their own turns; the dispensation
whereof is committed to the Pope, who, when he gives Indulgences, recompenseth
the debt of the sinner, by assigning so much in value out of the treasury.
Neither was there The treasure of the Church
an end of the difficulties: for it was opposed that the merits of Saints being
finite and limited, this treasure might be diminished. Wherefore desiring to
make it indeficient, they added the merits of Christ, which are infinite:
Whence arose a doubt what need there might be of the little drops of the merits
of others, when there was an infinite Ocean of the merits of Christ: which gave
cause to some to make the treasure to be only of the merits of our Savior.

20 These things, so uncertain at that time, and which had no other foundation
then the Bull of Clement 6. made for the Jubilee of they year 1350, seemed not
sufficient to oppugn the doctrine of Martin Luther, to resolve his reasons,
and to convince him. Wherefore Thecel, Ecchius, and Prierius, seeing themselves
The adversaries of Luther prove the doctrine of Indulgences by common reasons
only.
not strong enough in points proper for this matter, betook themselves to
common places, and laid for their ground work the Popes authority, and
consent of the Schoolmen; concluding that the Pope, not being 1518 LEO 20.
MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Luther begins to speak against the Popes
authority, and other doctrines of the Roman Church.
able to err in matters of faith, and having approved the doctrine of the
Schoolmen, and himself publishing the Indulgences to all the faithful, it
was necessary to believe them as an article of faith. This gave occasion to
Martin to pass from Indulgences to the authority of the Pope; which being
predicated by others to be the highest in the Church, was by him made inferior
to a General Council lawfully called, where of he said there was need in that
instant and urgent necessity: and the heat of disputation continuing, the more
the Papal authority was advanced by others, the more it was by him abased.
Notwithstanding, he contained himself within the bounds of speaking modestly
of the person of Leo, sometimes referring himself to his judgment. And, for
the same reason, the doctrine of remission of sins, of Penance, and of
Purgatory was set on foot, the Romanists serving themselves of all these
common places for proof of Indulgence.

21 Friar James Hogostrat, a Dominican Inquisitor, wrote against Martin Luther
James Hogostrat his persuasion to the Pope.
more to the purpose then them all; who, setting these reasons aside, exhorted
the Pope to convince Martin with chains, fire, and flames.

22 Nevertheless, the controversy grew still more bitter, and Martin always
1518
went forwards to some new proposition, as occasion was offered. Wherefore Pope
Leo caused him to be cited to Rome by Hierom Bishop of Ascoli, Auditor of
Means used by the Pope to bring Luther to Rome.
the Chamber, in August 1518; and wrote a Brief to Frederick Duke of Saxony,
exhorting him not to protect him. He wrote also to Thomas de Vio, Cardinal
Caietan, his Legate in the diet of Ausburg, that he should use all diligence to
commit him to prison, and to send him to Rome. Diverse means were used to the
Pope, that he would be contented to order that his cause might be examined in
Germany; who yielded to refer it to his Legate, unto whom the judicature
thereof was committed, with instruction, that if he could discover any hope of
repentance in Martin, he should receive him into favor, promising Luthers
cause referrred to Card. Caietan the Popes Legate.
him pardon of all his errors past, together with honors and rewards,
referring the whole to his wisdom; but in case he found him incorrigible, he
should desire Maximilian the Emperor, and the other Princes of Germany, that
he might be punished.

23 Martin went to the Legate to Ausburg, under the safe conduct of Maximilian;
Luther comes to the Legate with the Emperors safe conduct.
where, after a convenient conference upon the controuersed doctrine, the
Cardinal having discovered that by terms of Schoole-diuinity in the
profession where of himself was most excellent, Martin could not be convinced,
that he always served himself of the holy Scripture, which is used but a
little by the Schoolmen, he declared that he would dispute no more with him,
but exhorted him to a retractation, or, at least, to submit his Books and
doctrine to the judgment of the Pope, showing him the danger he was in, if he
persisted, and promising him favors and benefits from his Holiness. Martin not
answering to the contrary, he thought it not fit to wring from him a negative,
by pressing him too much, but rather to give space, that the threats and
promises might make impression, and therefore gave him leave Luther had leave
to depart.
to depart for that time. He caused also Friar John Stopiccius, Vicar general
of the order of the Heremites to treat with him in conformity hereof.

24 Martin being returned once more, the Cardinal had much conference with
him concerning the heads of his doctrine, rather hearing what he said, then
disputing, to gain himself credit by the proposition of accommodating the
business. Whereunto when he descended, exhorting him not to let slip so secure
an occasion, and so profitable, Luther answered him, with his accustomed
vehemency, that no composition could be made to the prejudice of the truth;
that he had offended no man, nor had need of the favor At his return he was
more vehement then before.
of any; that he feared no threats, and that, if any thing were unduly
attempted against him, he would appeal to a Council. The Cardinal (who had
heard that Martin was secured by some Grandies, that they might hold a bridle
in the Popes mouth) suspecting that he was persuaded to speak in that sort,
disdained at it, and descended to bitter reprehensions, and base terms, and
concluded that Princes have long hands, and so bid him be gone. Martin, being
parted from the Legates presence, remembering John Hus his case, went from
Ausburg without saying any more. From whence when he was a good way distant,
thinking better of his own case, he wrote a letter to the Cardinal,
confessing he had been too sharp, laying the blame Luthers letter.
upon the importunity of the Pardoners and of those that wrote against him,
promising more modesty hereafter, to satisfy the Pope, and not to speak any
more of Indulgences, with condition that his adversaries should do the like.
Yet neither they nor he could be kept silent, but one provoked the other;
whereby the controversy grew more sharp.

25 Wherefore the Court in Rome spoke disgracefully of the Cardinal,
attributing The Cardinal is blamed in Rome for using Luther with base terms.
all the mischeife to the severity and base terms used against Luther; they
blamed him for not having promised him great riches, a Bishopric, and even
the red hat of a Cardinal. And Leo, fearing some great innovation in Germany,
not so much against Indulgences, as against his own authority, made a Bull
under the date of the 9. of November 1518, wherein he set forth the validity
of Indulgences, and that himself as successor of Peter, and Vicar The Bull of
Leo for the doctrine of Indulgences.
of CHRIST had power to grant them, both for the living and for the dead; and
that this was the doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is mother and mistress
of all Christians, which ought to be received of whosoever would be in the
communion of the Church. He sent this Bull to Cardinal Caietan, who, being at
Lintz in upper Austria, published it, and caused many authentical copies to be
made thereof, sending them to all the Bishops of Germany, with commandment to
publish them, and severely, and under great penalties to enjoin all men not to
have any other faith.

26 By this Bull Martin saw clearly, that from Rome, and from the Pope, he
could look for nothing but condemnation; and as before he had for the most
part spoken reseruedly of the person and judgment of the Pope, so after the
publication of this Bull he resolved to reject it. Wherefore he set forth The
Popes Bull made Luther appeal to a Council.
an Appeal; wherein having first said, that he would not oppose himself to
the authority of the Pope when he taught the truth, he added, that he was not
exempt from the common conditions of being subject to err and to sin;
alleging the example of S. Peter, sharply reprehended by S. Paul. But he
said, it was an easy thing for the Pope, having so great riches and retinue,
to oppress whosoever was not of his opinion, without respect of any; unto whom
none other help remained, but to fly unto a Council, by the benefit of
appeal; because all reason persuades, that a Council ought to be preferred
1519 LEO 10. MAXINIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 7.
before him. This Appeal went throughout all Germany, and was read by many,
and esteemed reasonable. Wherefore Leo his Bull extinguished not the fire that
was kindled in those parts.

27 But it having given courage to the Court in Rome, as if the flame had been
quenched, Friar Samson of Milan, of the order of S. Francis, was sent to preach
the same Indulgences amongst the Suisses; who having published them in many
places, and collected the sum of 120000. crowns, came finally The occasion
why Zuinglius began to oppose the Pope.
to Zuric, where Vlricus Zuinglius, a Canon in that Church, was professor; who
opposing himself to the doctrine of this Friar the Pardoner, there grew great
disputation between them, passing also from one matter to another, as it
happened in Germany. Whereby it came to pass that Zuinglius was hearkened
unto by many, and gained credit, and was imboldned to speak, not only against
the abuse of Indulgences, but against the Indulgences themselves, and even
against the authority of the Pope, who granted them.

26 Martin Luther perceiving that his doctrine was esteemed, and that it Luther
passes to other points.
passed also into other countries, became more courageous, and set himself to
examine other articles, and, in the matter of Confession, and of the Communion,
he forsook the opinion of the Schoolmen, and of the Church of Rome,
approouing rather the Communion of the Cup used in Bohemia, and setting down
for the principal part of repentance, not the diligent confession made to the
Priest, but rather the purpose of amendment of life for the time to come. He
passed also unto Vows, and touched the abuses of the Monastical Order; and
these his writings, going on their journey, arrived in Louaine and Collen;
where, being seen and examined by the Divines of those His Books were
condemned in Louaine and Collen.
Universities, they were condemned by them. Neither did this trouble Martin one
jot, but rather caused him to go on, and to declare and fortify his doctrine
the more it was opposed.

29 With these contentions rather then resolute discussions passed the year
1519
1519, when many aduertisements coming to Rome, of the stirs in Germany and
Suisserland, augmented with many amplifications and additions, as the manner of
fame is, especially when matters are related from places far distant, Leo was
noted for negligence, that in so great dangers had not used powerful The Pope
was blamed.
remedies. The Friars particularly blamed him; that being addicted to
magnificence, to hunting, to deliciousness, and to music, (with which he was
delighted beyond measure) he passed over things of the greatest importance.
They said, that in point of Faith the least thing ought not to be neglected,
nor the provision against it one jot to be deferred, which, as it is most
easy before the mischief take root, so it comes too late when it is waxed
old. That Arius was but a small spark, which might easily have been put out,
and yet it set the whole world on fire. That John Hus and Hierome of Praghe
would then have done as much, if in the beginning they had not been suppressed
by the Council of Constance. On the contrary side, Leo Leo, though reprehended
for negligence thought he had done too much.
repented himself of whatsoever he had done in these occurrences, and most of
all of the Brief of Indulgences sent into Germany, thinking it would have been
better to let the Friars dispute amongst themselves, and to keep himself
neutrall, and reverenced by both parties, then by declaring himself for one to
constrain the other to alienate themselves from him; that this contention 1520
LEo 10. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1
was not so great, as that it was necessary to hold it in any reputation, and
that, so long as it was lightly esteemed of, few would think of it, and if the
Popes name had not been used in it until then, would have ended his course,
and so vanished.

30 Notwithstanding for the many instances of the Prelates of Germany, of the
Universities, who, being interessed by the sentence of condemnation, betook
themselves to the Popes authority for their protection, and especially for the
continual importunities of the Friars of Rome, he resolved to yield to the
common opinion. And he made an assembly of Cardinals, Prelates, Divines, and
Canonists, unto which he wholly remitted the business. A dispute between the
Divines and Canonists.
By this it was most easily concluded, that the Pope should denounce fire and
sword against so great an impiety. But yet the Canonists differed from the
Divines, these being of opinion that he ought presently to descend to this
denunciation, and those saying that a citation ought to go before. The Divines
alleged that the doctrine was evidently seen to be impious, that the books
were divulged, and the sermons of Luther notorious. The others said, that
Notoriousnes did not take away the defense, which is allowed by the law of God
and nature, alleging the usual places: Adam where art thou? Where is thy
brother Abel? and in the accident of the five Cities, I will go down and see.
They added that the citation of the Auditor the year before, by virtue whereof
the judicature was referred to Caietan in Ausburg, and remained imperfect, if
nothing else were, showed it to be necessary. After many disputes, in which the
Divines attributed the decision unto themselves alone, because the question was
in point of faith, and the Lawyers appropriated unto themselves as much as
concerned the form of judgment, a composition between them was proposed,
distinguishing the business into three parts, the doctrine, the books, and
the person. For the doctrine, the Canonists yielded that it should be condemned
without citation: for the person, they persisted to maintain that the citation
was necessary. Yet not being able to overcome others who insisted upon their
own opinions with greater acrimony, and covered themselves with the buckler of
religion, they found a middle way, that a precept should be sent to Martin with
a convenient term, that so it should be resolved into a citation. Concerning
the books there was more to do. The Divines did think they ought to be
condemned absolutely together with the doctrine, and the Canonists that they
should be joined with the person, and comprehended under the term. It not
being possible to make an accord herein, they did both the one and the other.
For first they were condemned for the time present, and afterward a term
allotted to burn them. And with this resolution a Bull was framed under the date
of the 15. of June 1520; Which being, as it were, a beginning and foundation of
the Council of Trent, whereof we are to speak, it is necessary to set down
1520
here a brief Epitomic thereof.

31 In which the Pope, directing the beginning of his words to Christ, who has
left Peter and his Successors for Vicars of his Church, exciteth him to The
Popes Bull.
assist it in these necessities. From Christ he turns to S. Peter, and
prays him, by the charge which he received of our Savior, to be careful of
the distresses of the Church of Rome, consecrated with his blood. And passing
to S. Paul, desires the like assistance from him; adding, that, although he
has deemed heresies to be necessary for trial of the good, yet it is
convenient to extinguish them in the beginning. Finally, turning himself to
all the Saints of heaven, and to the Church universal, he prays them to
intercede with God, that the Church may be purged from so great contagion. Then
he proceeds to show how it came to his knowledge, and how he has seen
with his eyes, that many errors were renewed, which were condemned long before,
of Grecians, Bohemians, and others, false, scandalous, apt to offend godly
ears, and to deceive simple minds, sowed in Germany, always beloved both by
him, and by his predecessors, who, after the translation of the Greek Empire,
have ever taken their protectors from that nation, and that many pious decrees
against heretics have been made by those Princes, which the Popes also have
confirmed. Therefore that he, not willing to tolerate the like errors any
longer, but rather to make provision against them, would recite some of them:
and here he repeateth 42. Articles, which are in the points The Pope condemns
42. articles of Luthers doctrine.
of original sin, Penance and remission of sins, of the communion, of
Indulgences, of Excommunication, of the power of the Pope, of the authority of
Councels, of good works, of Free Will, of Purgatory, and of poverty, all which
he says are respectively pestiferous, pernicious, scandalous, offensive to
pious ears, contrary to charity, contrary to the reverence which is due to the
Church of Rome, contrary to obedience, which is the sinew of Ecclesiastical
discipline: wherefore being willing to proceed to sentence, he, with the
Cardinals, genetals of the regular orders; with other Divines and Doctors,
both of the one and the other law, has made diligent examination of them.
Therefore he condemns and rejects them, respectively, as heretical,
scandalous, false, offensive to pious ears, deceitful to godly minds, and
contrary to the Catholic truth: He prohibiteth upon pain of
excommunication, and infinite punishments, that no man should dare to keep
them, defend them, preach them, or favor them. And because the same assertions
are found in the books of Martin, therefore he condemns them, commanding
Luthers books are condemned to the fire.
under the same pains, that none may read or keep them, but that they ought
to be burned, as well those which do contain the foresaid propositions, as
all the rest. Concerning the person of Martin himself, he says, he The Pope
gives an admonition to Luther and his followers.
has many times admonished, cited, and called him, with promise of safe
conduct, and provision for his journey; that, if he had come, he would not
have found so many errors in the Court as he said, and that himself the
Pope would have taught him, that the Popes his predecessors have never erred in
their constitutions. But because he has endured the censures for the space of
a whole year, and has dared to appeal unto a future Council, a thing
prohibited by Pius, and Julius the second, under the punishments due to
heretics, he could proceed to condemnation without any more ado;
notwithstanding, forgetting these injuries, he admonishes the said Martin,
and his protectors, to change their opinions, cease to preach, and in the term
of 60. days, upon the same pains, to revoke all the foresaid errors, and burn
the books; which in case they do not, he declares them notorious and
obstinate heretics. After he commands all under the same pains, that they
keep not any book of the same Martin, though it contain not the like
errors. Then ordains that all men ought to shun as well him as his
favorers; yea, commands every one to apprehend them, and bring them
personally before him, or at least chase them out of their Lands and Countries:
he interdicteth all places whither they shall go: commands that they be
every where made known, and that his Bull ought to be read in every place,
excommunicating whosoever shall hinder the publication thereof: he determines
that the exemplifications ought to be believed, and orders that his Bull be
published in Rome, Brandeburg, Misna, and Mansperg.

Martin Luther receiving news of the condemnation of his doctrine and The
Popes admonition cruseth Luther to make a solemn Appeal.
books, set forth a writing, repeating the Appeal made to the Council, and
making replication thereof for the same causes. Furthermore, for that the Pope
had proceeded against a man not called, nor convinced, nor the controversy of
the doctrine heard, preferring his own opinions to the word of God, and
leaving no place for the Council, he offers to demonstrate all these things,
praying the Emperor and all Magistrates to accept this his Appeal, for
defense of the authority of the Council, thinking that this decree of the Pope
binds not any, till the cause be lawfully discussed in a Synod.

But men of understanding seeing the Bull of Leo, marueiled at it for many
causes. First, concerning the form, that the Pope should proceed to a The
Bull of Leo censured:
declaration with clauses of the palace in a matter which ought to be handled
with the words of the holy Scripture; and especially using periods so
intricate, and so long and prolixe, that it was scarcely possible to draw any
sense from them, as if he had been to give sentence in a feodatary cause. And
it was particularly noted that one clause which says, Inhibentes omnibus ne
praefatos errores asserere praesumant, is so drawn out in length, with so many
inlargements and restrictions, that between Inhibentes and Praesumant, there
are placed more then four hundred words.

Others, passing on a little further, considered that, to have proposed and
condemned as heretical, scandalous, false, offensive to pious ears, and
deceitful to simple minds, 42. propositions, without declaring which of them
were heretical, which scandalous, which false, but only with a word
(respectively) attributing to every one of them an uncertain quality, caused
a greater doubt then was before; which was not to define the cause but to make
it more controuersed, and to show more plainly, that another authority and
wisdom was necessary to determine it.

Some also were filled with admiration, for that it was said, that amongst the
41. propositions there were errors of the Grecians condemned long ago. Others
thought it a strange thing, that so many propositions in diverse points of
faith, should be decided in Rome by the advice of the Courtiers only without
participating them to other Bishops, Academies, and learned persons of Europe.

But the Universities of Louain and Collen, being pleased that there was a
color given to their sentence by the Popes Edict, publicly burned the books
of Luther. Which gave cause that he also in Wittenberg, (all that School being
The Popes Bull and the Decretals burned in Wittenberg.
assembled) iudicially and publicly made to be burned, not only the Bull of
Leo, but together also the Popes Decretals; and after gave an account to the
world of that action in a long manifest, published in writing, noting 521. LEO
10. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. A Council was thought to be necessary for
two causes.
the Papacy in tyranny of the Church, perverseness of Christian doctrine,
and usurpation of the power of lawful magistrates.

But as well for Luthers appeal, as for these and other considerations, every
one became of opinion, that a lawful Council was necessary, by which, not
only the controversies might be decided, but the abuses also, long since
brought into the Church, might be redressed; and always the necessity hereof
appeared the more, by how much the more the contentions increased, writings
being set forth continually, both by the one part, and the other. For Martin
failed not to confirm his doctrine by diverse writings, and, accordingly as he
studied, he discovered more light, ever passing some step further forward, and
finding articles, of which in the beginning he had not thought: Which he said
he did for the zeal of the House of God. But he was constrained also by
necessity. For the Romanists having labored effectually in Collen with the
Elector of Saxony, by the mediation of Hierom Aleander, that he would deliver
Martin prisoner to the Pope, or by some other means to procure his death, he
saw that he was obliged to show unto that Prince, and to the people of Saxony,
and every one else, that he had reason on his side, that neither he nor any
other potentate, might yield to the earnest entreaties of the Romanists, made
against his life.

The year 1520, being thus passed, the diet of Worms, of the year 1521.
1521. Luther called to the Diet.
was celebrated in Germany; to which Luther was called to render an account of
his doctrine, and had given unto him a safe conduct by the Emperor Charles,
elected two years before. He was counseled not to go thither, seeing that
the sentence of his condemnation made by Leo was published before, and hanged
up; whereby he might assure himself to bring back nothing but a confirmation
of his doom, if peradventure no worse thing happened unto him. Notwithstanding
himself thought the contrary, against the opinion of al his friends, and said,
that though he were sure to have to do against as many devils as there were
tiles in the roofes of the houses of that city, he would go thither.

And in that place, the seventeenth of April, he was demanded by the Luther
interrogated in the Diet.
Emperor and the whole assembly of the Princes, if he were Author of the
Books which went abroad under his name, the Titles whereof were recited, and
the copies, placed in the midst of the room where they sat, were showed unto
him; and whether he would defend whatsoever was contained in them, or retract
something. His answer was that, concerning the books, he acknowledged the^ to
be his; but to resolve whether to maintain the things contained in them, or
not, was a matter of great moment, and therefore required some time of
deliberation. There was granted him time that day, to give his answer the
next: Which being come, Martin, brought into the assembly, made a long oration.
Answers.
First, he excused his simplicity, if, bred after a private and simple manner,
he had not used terms according to the dignity of that place, and given to
every one convenient titles; then he confirmed that he acknowledged the books
for his own. And concerning the defense of them, he said they were not all of
one sort, but some contained doctrine of Faith and Piety, others reprehended
the Doctrine of the Romanists, and a third kind was of those which were
written contentiously, against the defenders of the contrary doctrine. For the
first, he said he were no Christian or honest man if he should retract them;
the rather, because though all were condemned, yet all were not judged naught
by the same Bull of Leo. For the second, that it was too manifest, that all the
Countries of Christendom were oppressed and groaned under the bondage. And
therefore to retract the things already spoken would be nothing else but to
confirm that tyranny. In the books of the third kind, he confessed he was
more bitter and vehement then he ought, excusing himself that he made not
profession of Sanctity, nor would maintain his own manners, but his doctrine
only; whereof he was ready to give an account to any man whatsoever,
promising not to be obstinate, but to cast his books into the fire himself, in
case any error were showed him with the Scripture in hand. He turned himself
to the Emperor, and the Princes, saying, it was a blessing of God when the
true doctrine came to be made manifest, as to reject it, was to draw upon us a
cause of extreme calamities.

His Oration being ended, he was by order required by the Emperor to give a
plain and simple answer, whether or no he would maintain his writings.
Luther refuses to retract any thing.
Whereunto he answered that he could not revoke any thing that he had written
or taught, if he were not convinced by the words of the Scripture, or by
evident reasons.

The Emperor hearing these things, resolved, following the steps of his
predecessors, to maintain the Church of Rome, and to use all means to quench
that fire. Howbeit he would not violate the faith given, but proclaim a
banishment against Martin after he was safely returned to his house. Some of
the assembly approouing that which was done at Constance, said A noble
resolution of the Prince Elector Palatine.
that the faith ought not to be kept. But Lewis Count Elector Palatine opposed
himself, as unto a thing which would brand the German name with a mark of
perpetual ignominy, expressing with disdain, that it was intole-Rable, that
for the service of Priests, Germany should draw upon it self the infamy of
not keeping the public faith. Some there were also that said that there was
no need to proceed so fast to condemnation, because it was a matter of great
moment, and which might produce great consequences.

The days following there was a treaty in presence of some of the Princes,
and in particular, of the Archbishop of Triers, and of Ioachimus Elector of
Brandenburg, and many things were spoken by Martin in defense of that doctrine
and by others against it, being desirous to induce him to refer every thing
to the judgment of the Emperor, and of the assembly, and of the Diet, without
any condition whatsoever. But he answering that the Prophet forbade to put our
confidence in men, yea even in Princes, to whose judgment, nothing ought less
to be committed then the word of God, it was at last proposed that he would
submit all to the judgment of the future Council, whereunto Luther refers
himself to a general Council.
he agreed, with condition, that first the articles, which he intended to
refer, might be drawn out of his books: and that sentence might not be
given of them but according to the Scriptures. Last of all, being demanded what
remedies he thought might be used in this cause? he answered, those only which
were proposed to the Jews by Gamaliel; that is, that if the enterprise were of
man it would vanish, but if it came from God, it was impossible to hinder it;
and that it might give satisfaction to the Pope, because all men ought to rest
secure (as himself did) that if his deseigne came not from God, it would
perish in a short time. From which things it being impossible to remove him,
and standing firm in his resolution, not to accept any judgment but under the
rule of the scripture, he had leave given him to depart, and a term of 21
days assigned him to return to his home, with condition that he should
neither preach nor write any thing in his journey. For which, after he had
given thanks, he departed the 26. of April.

43 Afterward Charles the Emperor published an Edict in the same Diet The
Emperors Edict against Luther.
at Worms, the 8. of April. In which, having first declared, that it belonged
to the duty of the Emperor to advance Religion, and to extinguish heresies,
which began to spring up, he proceeded on to show that Friar Martine Luther
endeavored to stain Germany with that contagion, so that, if he were not
hindered, all that nation would fall into an horrible ruin; that Pope Leo had
fatherly admonished him, and, after that, the assembly of Cardinals, and other
excellent men, had condemned his writings, and declared him an Heretic, if
within a certain term he revoked not his errors; and had sent by Ierom
Aleander, his Nuncio, a copy of that Bull of condemnation to him the Emperor,
as protector of the Church, desiring him it might be put in execution in the
Empire, his Kingdoms, Dominions and Provinces; that notwithstanding this,
Martin amended not himself, yea multiplied his Books daily, full, not only
of new heresies, but even of those which have been long since condemned by holy
Councels, and not only in the Latin tongue, but in the German also, naming in
particular many of his errors; he concluded that there was no writing of his
where there was not to be found some contagion or deadly sting, so that it
might be said, that every word was a poison; that these things being considered
by him the Emperor, and his Counselors of all nations subject unto him,
treading in the steps of the Roman Emperors his predecessors, having
conferred, in that Diet of Worms, with the Electors, and men of other States
of the Empire, by their counsel and assent, (though it was not fit to hear a
man condemned by the Pope, obstinate in his peruersenes and a notorious
Heretic notwithstanding, to take away all occasion of cavil, many saying it
was necessary to hear the man before the Popes decree was executed) he
resolved to send to fetch him by one of his Heralds, not to know and judge the
things that concern faith, which belongs to the Pope alone, but to bring him
to the right way with good persuasions. Then he showed how Martin was brought
into the public assembly, and whereof he was interrogated, and what he
answered, as it has been declared before, and how he had leave given him, and
departed.

44 Afterward he goes on, concluding that therefore for the honor of God,
and reverence of the Pope, and for the duty of the Imperial dignity, by the
counsel and assent of the Princes, Electors, and States, executing the
sentence and condemnation of the Pope, he declared that he holds Martin
Luther for a notorious Heretic, and determines that he ought to be so held
of men, prohibiting every one to receive or defend him in any sort, commanding
both Princes and States, under all the penalties, to apprehend and take him
after the term of twenty days, and also to prosecute all his accomplices,
adherents, and favorers, spoiling them of all their goods mooueable and
immooueable. He commands also that no man should read or keep his books,
notwithstanding that some thing be good in them, giving order as well to
Princes, as others that administer Justice, that they, burn and destroy them.
And because books extracted out of his works are composed and printed in some
places, and pictures and images spread abroad to the disgrace of many, yea,
even of the Pope himself, he commands that none should print, paint, or keep
any of them, but that they be taken and burned by the Magistrates, and the
Printers, buyers and sellers punished, adding a general law, that no writing
may be printed where any point of faith is handled, though the least of all,
without consent of the Ordinary.

45 In this self same time also the University of Paris, drawing diverse
conclusions from the books of Luther, condemned them, partly as renewed out
The University of Paris condemned the writings of Luther.
of the doctrine of Wigleffe and Husse, and partly as newly delivered by him
against the Catholic Doctrine. But all these oppositions effected nothing
else, but that Luther answering, books were multiplied both of the one side
and the other, and the contentions waxed more sharp, and the curiosity of many
was stirred up, who, willing to inform themselves of the state of the
controversy, came to note the errors reprehended, and so withdrew their
devotion from the Pope.

46 Amongst the most famous contradictors, which the doctrine of Luther found,
was Henry 8. King of England, who not being borne the Kings eldest Henry the 8.
King of England writes against Luther
son, had been destinated by his father to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and
therefore in his youth was made to study; But the eldest being dead, and after
him the father also, he succeeded in the Kingdom; and esteeming it a great
honor to employ himself in so famous a controversy of learning, he wrote a
book of the seven Sacraments, defending also the Popedom, and oppugning the
Doctrine of Luther; a thing so grateful to the Pope, that having received the
Kings book, he honored him with the usual title of Defender of the Faith.
But Martin suffered not himself to bescared with that Gains the Title of
Defender of the faith.
most illustrious glittering name of a King, but answered his Majesty with
as much acrimony, vehemency, and as small respect, as he had answered the petty
Doctors. This Kingly tittle being entered into the controversies made men more
curious, and, as it happens in combats, that the lookers on are always ready
to favor the weaker, and to extol his actions, though they be but means, so
so here it stirred up a general inclination toward Luther.

47 So soon as the Emperors decree of banishment was published thoroughout,
the same month Hugo Bishop of Constance, in whose Diocese is the The B. of
Constance wrote to Zurie against Zuinglius.
City of Zuric, wrote to the College of the Canons of that place, of which
number Zuinglius was one, and another letter to the Senate of the same City. In
those letters he put them in mind of the damage which the Churches, and
Commonwealths also endured by innovation of doctrine, with much detriment to
spiritual welfare, and confusion of public quiet and tranquillity He
exhorts them to beware of new Doctors, showing that they are moved only by
their own ambition, and instigation of the devil. He sent there withal the
Decree of Leo, and the banishment published by the Emperor, exhorting them to
receive and obey both the one and the other, and particularly noted the person
and doctrine of Zuinglius and his adherents, which constrained him to give an
account of whatsoever he had taught his Colleagues, and to satisfy the Senate.
He wrote also to the Bishop, insisting principally upon this, that concubinarie
Priests were not any more to be tolerated, from whom sprang infamy to the
Clergy, and bad example to the people, and generally corruption of manners in
all; a thing which could not be taken away, but by bringing in of marriage,
according to the Apostles doctrine. He wrote also to all the Cantons of the
Suisses in his own defense, making particular mention of an Edict made by the
Magistrates their predecessors, that every Priest should be bound to have his
proper concubine, that he might not ensnare the chastity of honest women;
adding that though it seemed a ridiculous decree, yet it was necessarily to be
made, nor could be changed, unless that as much as was constituted in favor
of keeping Concubines, were at that present converted unto lawful matrimony.

48 The stirring of the Bishop induced the Dominicans to preach against The
Dominicans preach against Zuinglius, whereby he is stirred up the more.
the doctrine of Zuinglius, and him to defend himself. Wherefore he wrote and
published 67. conclusions, which contained his doctrine, and touched the abuses
of the Clergy, and of the Prelates. Whereupon much confusion and dissension
arising, the Senate of Zuric began to consult how to appease the tumults, and
called together all the Preachers and Doctors of their jurisdiction. They
invited also the Bishop of Constance to send some man of wisdom and learning,
to assist at that conference, to the end they might pacify the troubles, and
order some thing which might be for the glory of God. The Bishop sent his
Vicar, James Faber, who afterward was Bishop of Vienna; and the day Faber sent
by the Bishop of Constance to assist in composing the controversies.
appointed for the meeting being come, and a great multitude assembled
together, Zuinglius reproduced his conclusions, offered to defend them; and to
answer to whosoever would contradict them. After many things were spoken by
diverse Dominican Friars, and other Doctors against Zuinglius, and by him
answered, Faber said, that that time and place were not fit to treat of such a
matter, and that the discussing of such propositions belonged to the Council,
which would be called very soon: for he said, the Pope had so agreed with the
Princes, and greater Magistrates, and Prelates of Christendom. Which gave
subject to Zuinglius to fortify himself, saying, that these promises were
made to feed the people with vain hopes, and in the mean space to lull them
asleep in ignorance; that the things which were certain and clear in the
holy Scripture, and in the use of the Primitive Church, might very well be
handled at that time, though they expected a more exact declaration from the
Council, of the points that were doubtful; and always urging him to say what
he could, against his conclusions, Faber told him that he would not Who will
not answer in words, but in writing.
treat with him in words, but would answer his conclusions in writing.
Finally, the assembly ended with a Decree of the Senate, that the Gospel
should be preached according to the doctrine of the old and new Testament, not
The decree of the Senate of Zuric.
according to any humane Decree or Constitution.

49 It being therefore perceived, that the labors of the Doctors and Prelates
of the Church of Rome, and the Popes decree, who proceeded to an absolute
condemnation, and the Emperors Bando, so severe, not only could not
extinguish the new doctrine, but that notwithstanding it made every day a
greater progress, every one began to think that these medicines were not
proper for such a malady, and that in conclusion it was necessary to come to
such a kind of remedy, which, being used in times past in the like occasions,
seemed had appeased all troubles, which was the celebration of a Council.
Wherefore this was desired by all sorts of men, as a wholesome and the A
general Council was thought to be necessary.
only remedy.

50 It came to be considered, that these novelties had not had any other
beginning but from the abuses which time brought in, and from the negligence of
the Pastors; and therefore that it was impossible to remedy the confusions
sprung up, but by remedying the abuses which caused them; and that there was no
other way to provide against them, with concord and uniformity, but by an
universal Congregation. And this was the discourse of godly and well disposed
men. Notwithstanding there wanted not diverse sorts of persons, who thought the
Council would be profitable for their ends, and desired it should be regulated
with such conditions, that it could Diverse sorts of persons desire the Council
for diverse ends.
not be but in their favor, and not contrary to their interests. First, those
that had embraced Luthers opinions desired the Council, with condition that
therein all might be decided and governed by the Scripture, all the Pope his
constitutions and school learning being excluded: For so they assured
themselves, not only to defend their own doctrine, but also that only theirs
should be approved. But a Council that should proceed, as the use was 800.
years before, they would not, and would be understood that they referred not
themselves to that censure. And Martin was used to say, that in Worms he was
too faint hearted, and that he was so well assured of his doctrine, that it
being divine, he would not submit it so much as to the judgment of Angels;
yea, that with it he was to judge all, both men and Angels. The Princes and
other governors of the Countries regarded not much what the Council might
determine concerning doctriens, but desired it might be such a one as might
reduce the Priests and Friars to their beginning, hoping that, by that means
the regalities, and temporal jurisdictions would return unto them, which, in
such abundance and plenty, were passed into the Ecclesiastical order. And
therefore they said, that it was in vain to call a Council, where the Bishops
and other Prelates only should have a deliberatiue voice, because they ought
to be reformed, and it was necessary that others should have the charge
thereof, who could not be deceived by their proper interests, nor constrained
to resolve against the common good of Christendom. The meaner sort, though
they had not much knowledge of the affairs of the world, desired that the
Ecclesiastical authority might be moderated, and the poor people not
burdened with so many exactions, under pretense of Tithes, Alms, and
Indulgences, nor oppressed by the Bishops Officials, under color of
corrections, and sentences. The Court of Rome, the most principal part,
desired the Council, that it mighe restore obedience to the Pope, which was
taken from him, and approved such a one as might be governed according to the
forms used in the last ages. But that it should have power to reform the
Papacy, and to take away those introductions, from which the Court received so
many emoluments, and by which a great part of the gold of Christendom was
glued together in Rome, this pleased them not. Leo the Pope being, as it were,
in a strait between both the parties, knew not what to desire. 1522 ADRIAN 6.
CHARLLS 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Pope Leo knows not what to resolve about
the Council. What benefit the Lateran Council brought to the Papacy.
He saw that every day his obedience was diminished, and that whole countries
separated themselves from him, and desired a Council for remedy. But when he
considered that it would be worse then the malady, carrying with it in
consequence a reformation, he abhorred it. He considered with himself how to
call a Council in Rome, or some other place of the Churches dominion; as his
Predecessor and himself had celebrated with singular fruit, the Council of
Lateran a few years before, having by that means appeased the schism,
reduced the kingdom of France, which was separated, and, which was of no less
importance, abolished the Prgamaticall Sanction, doubly contrary to the
monarchy of Rome; as well in regard it was an example to take from him the
collation of benefices, a great foundation of the Pontifical greatness, as
also because it was a preservation of the memory of the Council of Basil, and
by consequence of the subjection of the Pope to a general Synod. But
afterward he saw not how a Council of that sort could give remedy to the
disease, which was not in the Princes and great Prelates, with whom familiarity
and interest prevailed, but in the people, with whom it was necessary to use
reality, and to make a true mutation. The case The death of Pope Leo.
standing thus, in the end of the year 1521. Pope Leo departed this life.

51 And in the beginning of the next year the ninth of January Adrian was
Adriax is created Pope, and much feared. 1522
created. Which assumption to the Popedom being made of a man who was never
seen in Rome, unknown to the Cardinals and the Court, and remained in Spain
(besides the world holding an opinion that he would not approve the manners of
the Romans, nor the free life of the Courtiers) all men's thoughts were turned
to consider of it; so that Luthers innouations were no more thought of. Some
doubted that he was too much inclined to a reformation, others that he would
call the Cardinals unto him, and so transport the Papacy out of Italy, as had
happened at other times. But they were soon delivered from this great fear.
For the new Pope, the next day after he had received advice of his election
(which was the 22. of the same month in the city of Victoria in Biscay) not
expecting the Legates sent unto him from the College of Cardinals, to signify
it unto him, and to have his consent, assembled those few Prelates which he
could get, consented to the Election, and having taken the habit and arms,
declared himself Pope, and went presently to Barcellona; where he wrote to the
College of Cardinals the cause why he had taken upon him the name and charge
of the Pope, without expecting the Legates, committing also unto them the
publication of it throughout all Italy. He was enforced to tarry at Barcellona
a convenient time, to pass the gulf of Lions, which was very dangerous; yet
he deferred no longer then needs must to imbarke for Italy; and arrived there
in the end of August 1522.

52 Adrian found all Italy in commotion, by reason of the war between the
Emperor and the French King, and the Apostolical Sea over head and The
troubled state of Italy at the arrival of Adrian.
ears in a particular war with the Dukes of Ferrara and Vrbin, Arimini,
newly taken by the Malatesti, the Cardinals divided, and not trusting one
another, the Isle of Rhodes assieged by the Turks, the lands of the Church
exhausted and in extreme confusion, during the anarchy of eight months.
Notwithstanding he applied himself principally to compose the discords in
religion in Germany. And being nourished and brought up from his childhood in
the studies of School-Diuinity, he held those opinions to be so clear and
evident, that he was persuaded that no reasonable man could think the
contrary. Wherefore he gave no other title to the doctrine of Luther, but
unsavory, Adrian was very learned' in School Divinity. The Epithetes he gave
to the doctrine of Luther.
foolish, and unreasonable, and thought that none, but some few fools, could
believe it, and that those that followed Martin were men, who, in their
conscience, undoubtedly maintained the opinions of the Church of Rome, and
fained the contrary, being provoked by the burdens laid upon them. His
opinion therefore was, that it must needs be an easy thing to extinguish
that doctrine, which had none other foundation then matter of profit, and
thought that, by giving some small satisfaction, the body would easily be
healed, which rather made show to be sick, then that it was so indeed. Adrian
borne in Vtrect.
And because he was borne in Vtrect, a city of low Germany, he hoped that all
that nation would willingly hearken to his proposes, and engage themselves to
maintain his authority, as being an Alman, and so sincere in all his treaties,
that he used neither Arts nor secret ends. And being persuaded that it imported
much to use celerity, he resolved to make his first proposition in the Diet,
which was prepared at Noremberg: which to the end it He resolves to make a
reformation before he makes his first proposition in the Diet of Noremberg.
might be gratefully heard, and his promise esteemed real, he thought it
necessary to give a taste, by beginning a reformation, before he treated with
them, remoouing the abuses which caused the dissension. To this end he called
to Rome, John Peter Caraffa, Archbishop of Chieti, and Marcellus Cazele of
Gaeta, men esteemed for their honesty and virtues, and very skillful in
whatsoever belonged to Ecclesiastical discipline, that by the counsel of
them, and of the Cardinals which he trusted, he might find some remedy
against the corruptions which were of greatest moment. In this number the
prodigality used in giving Indulgences first presented it self unto him,
because it gave way to the reputation which the new Preachers in Germany, had
gained.

53 The Pope, being a Divine who had written in this matter long before Luther
thought to handle it, meant to establish by an Apostolical Decree, and as
Pope, that doctrine which, being a private man, he had taught and written. That
is, that an Indulgence being granted to one that shall do such a godly work,
the work may be performed by some in such perfection, that he may obtain the
Indulgence; but if it want something of that exactness, the worker obtains
not all the Indulgence, but only so much as answers in proportion to the
imperfect work. The Pope thought that by this means he should not only
provide against scandal hereafter, but remedy also those that were past,
because it being possible to qualify with so good circumstances every little
work, that it may deserve any great reward, Luthers objection was answered,
how by the offering of a penny so great a treasure could be gained; and seeing
that by the defect of the work, he that gains not all, obtains
notwithstanding a proportionable part, the faithful drew not themselves back
from seeking Indulgences.

54 But Friar Thomas of Gaeta, Cardinal of S. Sistus, a perfect Divine,
dissuaded it, telling him, that this was to punish that truth, which, for the
safety of souls, it was better to keep secret amongst learned men, and that
it was rather disputable then decided. Therefore, that himself also, who
steadfastly believed it in his conscience, notwithstanding had so carried it in
his writings, that none but the most learned men could draw it from his words:
which doctrine being divulged and authorized, there would be danger, that
Card. Caietan dissuaded the Pope from making a decree concerning Indulgences.
even learned men would conclude, that the Popes grant profited nothing, but
that all oughtt to be attributed to the quality of the work, which would
absolutely diminish men's hot desires to purchase Indulgences, and the esteem
of the Popes authority. The Cardinal added that, after he had exactly studied
this subject, by the command of Leo, at the time when these contentions began
in Germany, and written a full tract thereof, being Legate in Ausburg, the next
year he had occasion to examine and treat of it more diligently, speaking with
many, and discussing the difficulties and motives which troubled those
Countries: and in two conferences which he had with Luther in that City, he
disputed that matter at large, which having well digested, he doubted not but
that he might say with asseueration and without danger of error, that there
was no other way to give remedy to the scandals past, present, and to come,
then by bringing back those things to their first beginning. That it is a
clear case, that, howsoever the Pope may free the faithful from any
punishment, by the means of Indulgences, yet to him that reads the Decretals
it plainly appears, that an Indulgence is an absolution from penance imposed
in confession only. Wherefore causing the disused penitentiary Canons to be
observed again, and imposing convenient penance, every one would evidently see
the necessity and vtility of Indulgences, and would earnestly seek them, to
free themselves from that great burden of penance; and the golden age of the
Primitive Church would return again, in which the P relates had absolute
command over the faithful, only because they were held in continual exercise
with penance; whereas now, being become wanton, they would shake off from them
the yoke of obedience. The people of Germany, who buried in idleness, give care
to Martin for preaching Christian liberty, if they were curbed with penances,
would think no more of this innovation, and the Apostolical Sea might favor
therein whosoever would be thankful to it in that behalf.

55 This opinion pleased the Pope, as grounded upon authority, and whereunto he
saw not what opposition could be made. He caused it to be proposed Who was
willing to embrace his opinion.
in the Penitentiarie Court, to find a means and form how to put it in
practice first in Rome, and then in all Christendom. For this cause diverse
assemblies were made by the deputies for the reformation, together with the
Penitentiaries, to treat of the manner how to use it. But so many difficulties
did cross it, that in conclusion Lorenzo Puccio, a Florentine, Cardinal of
Santi Quatro, who was Datarie to Pope Leo, and (as has been said) a diligent
minister But was dissuaded by Lorenzo Puccio.
to find out money, and was now chief Penitentiary, related to the Pope, with
a general assent, that the proposition was thought impossible, and that, when
proof thereof should be made, in stead of curing the present diseases, far
geater would be stirred up. That the Canonical punishments were grown into
disuse, because they could no longer be supported for want of the ancient
zeal. Wherefore for him that would bring them back, it was necessary he
should make the same zeal and Charity in the Church to return again. That
this presentage was not like unto those that were past, in which all the
Constitutions of the Church were received, without thinking any more of them,
whereas now every one will be a judge, and examine the reasons: Which, if it
happen in things that bring with them no burden at all, or very little, how
much more must it be expected in a thing that would be most heavy. It was
true, that the remedy was fitted for the disease, but that it was too strong
for the body that was sick, and instead of curing would kill it, and that in
place of regaining Germany, Italy would first be lost, and that estranged much
more. The Cardinal added, me thinks I hear one say, as S. Peter did, Why do
they tempt God laying upon the Disciples shoulders that, which neither we nor
our fathers have been able to bear. That his Holiness should remember that
famous place of the Gloss, alleged by him in his fourth book upon the
Sentences, that, concerning the value of ^ndulgences, the complaint is both old
and doubtful; That he should consider the four Opinions, all Catholic, and
yet so different as that Gloss does Four very different opinions about
Indulgences, and all Catholic.
recite. Whereby it is manifest, that this matter in these times requires
silence rather then any further discussion.

56 These reasons sanke deep into Adrians mind, and made him not know what to
do, and he was perplexed so much the more, because he found no less
difficulty in other things, which, in his secret purpose, he meaned to
reform. In the matter of dispensations for marriage, the taking away of many
prohibitions against contracting matrimony between certain persons, which
seemed superfluous, and hard to be observed (whereunto he was much inclined,
and it would have been a great ease to the people) was blamed by many, as a
thing that weakened the sinews of discipline, and the continuing of them made
the Lutherans say, that they were only to get money. To restrain the
dispensations to certain qualities of persons, was to give new matter to the
pretendants to allege that in spiritual things, and in whatsoever belonged
to the ministry of CHRIST, there was no difference of persons. To take away
pecuniary expenses for these things, that could not be, but by rebuying the
Offices which Leo sold, the buyers whereof were gainers by this. Which also
hindered the abolishing of Regresses, Accesses, and Coadiutories, and other
devices used in the collation of Benefices, which had the appearance (if not
rather the essence) of Simony. To rebuy the Offices was impossible, in regard
of the great charges which must be made, and always continued. And that which
most troubled his mind was, that when he was resolved to take away any abuse,
there wanted not some, who took upon him to maintain with colorable show,
that the thing was good or necessary. With these doubts the Pope was grieved
until November, desirous to make some notable provision, to give the world a
taste of his mind, who was resolute to remedy all the abuses, before he began
to treat in Germany.

57 At length Franciscus Soderinus Cardinal of Preneste, called Cardinal of
Volterra, The counsel of Franciscus Soderinus.
in whom he put most confidence (though afterward he was so far in his
disfavor that he cast him into prison) made him come to resolution. This
Cardinal, most conversant in managing civil affairs, and employed in the
Papacies of Alexander, Julius, and Leo, which were full of diverse and important
accidents, in all his discourses with the Pope cast out words which might
instruct him. He commended his goodness, his ingenuity and his mind inclined
to the reformation of the Church, and the rooting out of heresies: adding,
notwithstanding, that he could not have praise by his good intention only,
not able to do good by it self, unless he joined thereunto an exact choice
of fit means, and an execution managed with the greatest circumspection. But
when he saw him constrained by the straitness of time to resolve, he told
him there was no hope to confound and root out the Lutherans by correcting the
manners of the Court, but rather that it would be a means to augment their
credit much more. For the people, who always judge by the events, when they
shall be assured, by the following amendment, that the Popes government was
justly reprehonded, will persuade themselves likewise, that the other
innouations proposed have good foundation, and the arch-heretiques, seeing they
have overcome in one part, will not cease to reprehend the rest. That in all
humane affairs it falls out, that to receive satisfaction in some requests,
gives pretense to prepare more, and to think they are due. That reading the
stories past of the times, when herosies have been raised against the
authority of the Church of Rome, it will appear, that all took pretense from
the corrupted manners of the Court. Nevertheless, never any Pope thought fit
to reform them, but after admonitions and instructions used, to induce the
Princes to protect the Church. That, whatsoever has succeeded well here to
fore, ought always to be observed and kept. That nothing did more ruin a
government, then to change the manner of ruling it. That to open new ways not
used was to expose himself to great dangers, and that it was most secure to
tread in the steps of the holy Popes, who always have brought their
enterprises to a prosperous end. That no man has ever extinguished heresies by
reformations, but by Crusadoes, and by exciting Princes and people to root
them out. That he should remember that Innocentius the third, did by such
means happily oppress the Albigenses of Langue doc, and the next Popes
extinguished in other places, and by no other means, the Waldenses, Picards,
poor people of Lions, Arnaldists, Speronists, and Patauines, so that now there
remains no more of them but the name only. That there would not want Princes
in Germany, who, in case the Pope would give them leave to seize themselves of
the States of Luthers favorers, would greedily embrace the condition; and that
he might cause many people to follow them, by granting Indulgences and Pardons
to whosoever would assist them. The Cardinal put him also in mind, that he
ought not to think of the Germane stirs in Religion, as if there were no
more imminent danger to the Apostolical Sea; because the war of Italy, a
thing of greater peril, hanged over their heads, whereunto he ought
principally to apply his mind: in managing whereof, if he wanted money, which
is the sinew of war, he might receive some notorious affront; and that no
reformation could be made, that would not notably diminish the rents of the
Church; which having four fountains, the one temporal, the rents of the
Ecclesiastical state, the other three spiritual, Indulgences, dispensations,
and collations of Benefices, none of them could be stopped, but that one
quarter of the revenues would be cut off.

The Pope relating these discourses to William Encourt, whom afterward he
created Cardinal, and Theodorie Hezius, his familiar and trusty friends, said
the condition of Popes was miserable, seeing it was plain that they could not
do good, though they desired and indeauoured to do it, and concluded Adria^
be waileth the condition of the Popes.
that, before the journey which he was to make into Germany, it was not
possible to effect any one point of reformation, and that it was necessary
they should be contented to believe his promises, which he was resolved to
maintain, though it were to deuest himself of all temporal dominion, and to
be reduced to the life of the Apostles. Nevertheless he gave strait
commission to both, of which one was Dataric, and the other Secretary, that
they should be sparing to grant Indulgences, dispensations, regresses, and
coadiutories, until means were found to give a rule for them by a Law and
perpetual Constitution. These things, having read them largely related in a
Diarie of the Bishop of Fabriano, where he noted all the remarkable things
which he had seen and heard, I was willing briefly to repeat here, because
they may serve much to the understanding of those things which shall be spoken
of hereafter.

In the first Consistory of November, by consent of the Cardinals, he
appointed Francesco Chiericato, whom he knew in Spain, Bishop of Fabriano
(whom I named a little before) for his Nuncio to the Diet of Noremberg, The
Bishop of Fabriano is sent Nuncio to the Diet of Noremberg.
which was assembled in absence of the Emperor, who, some few months before,
was enforced to pass into Spain, to appease the tumults and seditions begun
in those kingdoms. The Nuncio arrived at Noremberg at the end of the year,
and presented the Popes Letters to the Electors, Princes, and The Popes letter
to the Diet against Luther.
Orators of Cities, written generally to them all, under the date of the five
and twentieth of November; in which he first complained that Martin Luther,
having been condemned by the sentence of Leo, and the sentence executed in
Worms by the Emperors Decree, published thoughout all Germany, he perseuered
notwithstanding in the same errors, continually publishing books full of
heresies, and that he was favored, not only by the meaner sort, but even by
the Nobles also. Adding that, though the Apostle foretold that heresies were
necessary for exercise of the godly, yet that necessity was tolerable in
times convenient, not in those, in which Christianity being oppressed by the
Turkish arms, all industry should be used to purge the disease within, that
the damage and danger, which it brings by it self alone, hinders his
endeauours against so great an enemy. Then he exhorts the Princes and
people not to make show of giving any consent to so great an abomination; by
tolerating it any longer. He showed them that it was a most shameful thing to
suffer themselves to be led out of the way of their ancestors, by a simple
Friar, as if only Luther were of understanding, and wise. He aduertiseth them
that, if Luthers followers have denied obedience to the Ecclesiastical Laws,
much more will they esteem basely of the secular; and if they have usurped the
goods of the Church, much less will they abstain from those of the Laity,
and having dared to lay their hands upon the Priests of God, they will not
spare the houses, wives, and children of them* He exhorts them, if they
cannot reduce Martin and his followers into 1523 ADRIAN 6. CHARLES (...) HENRY
8. FRANCIS (...)
the right way by fair means, to proceed to sharp and (...)ry remedies, to
cut the dead members from the body, as anciently was done unto Dathan* and
Abiram, to Anania^ and Saphira, to Iouinian and Vigilantius; and finally as
their predecessors did against John Husse, and Hierome of Praghe, in the
Council of Constance, whose example, in case they cannot otherwise do, they
ought to imitate. In conclusion he referred himself as well in this
particular, as in other affairs, to the relation of Francesco Chiericato his
Nuncio. He wrote letters also almost to all the Princes, with the very same
conceits* and to the The Popes letto the Duke of Saxony.
Elector of Saxony he wrote in particular, that he should consider what blemish
it would be to his posterity, to have favored a frantic man, who put
confusion into the world with impious and foolish inventions, turning vpside
down the doctrine established by the blood of the Martyrs, labors of the holy
Doctors, and arms of the most valiant Princes; that he should walk in the
paths of his ancestors, not suffering his eyes to be dazzled by the fury of a
petty companion, to follow errous condemned by so many Councels.

60 The Nuncio presented to the Diet, not only the Popes Brief, but his The
Nuncio persuades the Princes by seven reasons to oppose Luther, 1523
own instructions also, by which he was enjoined to exhort the Princes, with
seven reasons, to oppose themselves against that pestilent doctrine of Luther.
The first, because the worship of God, and charity toward their neighbor
moved them thereunto. Secondly, the infamy of their nation. Thirdly, their
own honor, showing themselves not to degenerate from their predecessors, who
where present at the condemnation of John Husse in Constance, and of the other
heretics, leading some of them to the fire, even with their own hands; and
that they would not fail of their own promise and constancy, the greater part
of them having approved the Emperors Edict against Luther. Fourthly, that the
injury should move them, which Luther has done to their progenitors,
publishing another faith then that which they believed, and concluding by
consequence that they are all in hell. Fifthly, they ought to be moved, by the
mark which the Lutherans aim at, which is to weaken the secular power, after
they have annihilated the Ecclesiastical, by a false pretense that it is
usurped against the Gospel, although they craftily make show to prcferue the
secular, only to deceive them? Sixthly, that they should consider the
dissentions and confusions raised in Germany by the sect, And finally he
desires them to observe that Luther treads in the same way that Mahomet did
long ago, permitting carnal inclinations to be sa^ia^ed* though he seem to
do it with more modesty, that he may the more powerfully deceive them. And if
any should say that he was condemned in absence and without defense, and
therefore that it were fit to hear him, the answer was, that it was a just
thing to hear him in that which concerns the fact, that is, if he have
preached, written, or not; but that in matter of faith, and of the Sacraments,
it was not convenient: because that ought not to be questioned, which has
been once confirmed by general Councels, The Pope (...)fesseth the abuses of
the Clergy, not exempting the A(...)sto(...) S(...)
and by the whole Church. Then the Pope gives him commission to acknowledge
ingenuously, that this confusion was caused by the sins of men, especially of
the Priests and Prelates; confessing that some years since some abominations
have been committed even in that holy Sea, many abuses in spiritual things,
many transgressions of the commandments, and lastly, all things turned to the
worst, so that it may be said, that the infirmity is passed from the head to
the members, from the Popes to the inferior Prelates, in so much, that there
has been none that has done good, no not one* For the amendment of which
evil, himself is resolved to employ all his wits, and use all diligence that
the Court of Rome, from whence peradventure all this mischief proceeded,
should be reformed first of all. Which he will the rather do, because he sees
that all the world does earnestly desire it. Notwithstanding that no man ought
to marvel, if he shall see that all the abuses be not so suddendy amended.
For the disease being inueterated and multiplied, it is necessary to proceed
slowly in the cure, and to begin from things of greatest weight, to avoid the
confounding of all, by desiring to do all together. He gave him commission
also to promise in his name the observation of the Concordates, that he would
inform himself of the causes called into the Rota, to remaund them to the
parties according unto justice. And lastly, that he should solicit the
Princes and States in his name, to answer the letters, and to inform him of
the means, by which he might most commodiously resist the Lutherans. Besides,
the presentation of the Popes Brief, and the information, the Nuncio proposed
that it was observed that almost every where in Germany, religious men forsook
the Cloisters, and returned to the world, and that the Priests married
themselves, to the great contempt and disgrace of religion; and the greater
part of them committed many excesses and enormities. Wherefore it was necessary
that some order were taken that these Sacrilegious marriages might be
dissolved, the Authors severally punished, and the Apostates reduced under the
power of their Superiors.

61 The Diet answered the Nuncio in writing, that with reverence they had read
the Popes Brief, and the instructions concerning Luthers sect, and that The
answer of the Diet.
they gave thanks to God for his Holiness assumption to the Popedom, wishing
him all happiness from above. And (when they had spoken what came into their
minds about the concord between Christian Princes, and the war against the
Turks) concerning the demand to execute the Sentence given against Luther, and
the Edict of Worms, they answered that they were most ready to employ all
their power to root out heresies, but that they had omitted to execute the
Sentence, and Edict, for most weighty and urgent causes, in regard that the
greater part of the people was persuaded by Luthers books that the Court of
Rome had brought many grieuances upon Germany; so that if any thing had been
done for execution of the Sentence, the multitude would have entered into
suspicion that it was done to uphold and mainetaine the abuses and impiety, and
popular tumults would have been raised with danger of civil wars. Wherefore
they said, that in such difficulties, more fitting remedies were necessary;
especially himself the Nuncio having confessed in the Popes name that these
evils proceeded from the sins of men, and promised a reformation of the
Court of Rome* the abuses whereof, if they were not amended, and the grieuances
removed, and some Articles reformed, it was impossible to make peace between
the Ecclesiastiques and Seculars, and to extirpate the present tumults. And
because Germany had consented to the payment of Annates, upon condition they
should be spent in the war against the Turks, they being paid so many
years, and never converted to that use, they desired the Pope, that from
henceforth the Court of Rome might not be troubled to exact them, but that
they might be left to the Exchequer of the Empire for the expenses of that
war. And whereas his Holiness demanded counsel of the means, by the which
he might oppose himself to so great inconvenience, they answered, that, if the
treaty were not of Luther only, but of rooting out altogether many errors,
and vices which by long custom, and for diverse respects, The Council is
demanded in the Diet to be held in some place of Germany.
have taken deep root, by some ignorantly, by others maliciously defended,
they deemed no remedy more commodious, effectual, and opportune, then if his
Holiness, by the Emperors consent, would call a godly, free, and Christian
Council, so soon as it were possible, in some convenient place in Germany;
that is, in Argentine, in Mentz, Collen, or Metz, not deferring the convocation
thereof above a year; granting power to every one, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, to speak and give counsel for the glory of God, and salvation of
souls, any oath or obligation to the contrary notwithstanding. Which, they
thinking that his Holiness ought speedily to execute, and being desirous to
make, for the interim, the best provision they were able, they were resolved to
treat with the Elector of Saxony, that the Lutherans should neither write not
print any more, and that the preachers throughout all Germany should be silent
in those things that might cause popular tumult, and should preach the holy
Gospel sincerely and purely, according to the doctrine approved by the Church,
not moving disputations, but reserving all controversies to the determination
of the Council. That the Bishops should depute godly and learned men to be
superintendents over the preachers, to inform and correct them; yet so, as
that no suspicion might be given that it was done to hinder the truth of the
Gospel; that hereafter no new thing should be printed before it were seen and
allowed, by honest and learned men. Hoping by this means to provide against the
tumults, if his Holiness will take order against the grieuances, and ordain a
free and Christian Council; not doubting but that the tumults will so be
quieted, and the greater part reduced to tranquillity. For undoubtedly all
honest men would expect the determination of the Council, when they saw that
it was to be celebrated quickly. Concerning married Priests, and religious
men, who returned to the world, they thought it sufficient if the Ordinaries
did impose upon them Canonical punishments, because the Civil Laws had made
no provision against them: But in case they commit any wickedness, that the
Prince, or Magistrate, in whose Territory they shall offend, ought to give them
their due chastisement.

62 The Nuncio was not satisfied with this answer, and resolved to reply. The
reply of the Nuncio to the answer of the Di(...)
And first for the cause why the Popes sentence, and the Emperors Edict
against Luther were not executed, he said, that the reason alleged did not
satisfy, which was, that they refrained to do it, to avoid scandals. For it
was not convenient to tolerate an evil, that good may come thereby, and that
they ought to esteem more the salvation of souls, then worldly tranquillity.
He added that Luthers followers ought not to be excused by the scandals and
grieuances of the Court of Rome. For in case they were true, yet ought they not
to forsake the Catholic unity, but rather support whatsoever was amiss with
all patience. Whereupon he entreated them to execute the sentence and Edict
before the Diet ended. And if Germany were any way burdened by the Court of
Rome, the Apostolical Sea would be ready to ease it. And if there were any
differences between the Ecclesiastiques, and secular Princes, the Pope was
willing to compose and extinguish them. Concerning the Annates, then he said
nothing, for that his Holiness would answer them in time convenient. But to
their demand of a Council, he replied, that his hope was, that it would not
displease his Holiness, if they had demanded it in more fitting terms, and
therefore besought them to take away all those words that might give him any
vmbrage. As those, that the Council might be called by the Emperors consent;
and those other, that the Council might be Celebrated rather in one City then
another. For if they were not taken away, it seemed they would bind his
Holiness hands, a thing which could not produce any good effect. For the
Preachers, he entreated them that the Popes decree might be observed, that
thence forward none might preach before his doctrine were examined by the
Bishop. For the Printers and diuulgers of Books, he replied that the answer no
way pleased him; that they ought to execute the sentence of the Pope and
Emperor, to burn the books, and punish the diuulgers, earnestly aduertising
them that all consisted in this. And concerning books to be printed hereafter,
that the late Lateran Council ought to be observed. But, for the married
Priests, the answer would not have displeased him, had it not had a sting in
the tail, while it was said, that if they shall do any wicked thing, they
shall be punished by the Princes or Magistrates. For this would be against the
liberty of the Church and the sickle would be put into another man's field, and
those men would be censured by the world, who are reserved unto CHRIST. For
Princes should not presume to believe that they were deuolued to their
jurisdiction by their apostasy, nor that they could be punished by them for
their other offenses, in regard, the character remaining in them, and the
order, they are ever under the power of the Church; neither can Princes do
more then delate them to their Bishops and superiors, that may chastize them.
In the end he desired them to consider more maturely upon the foresaid things,
and to give a better answer, more plain, more sound, and better consulted of.

63 The reply of the Nuncio was not well taken in the Diet, and it was commonly
spoken amongst those Princes, that he had a measure of good and Was not well
taken by the Princes.
evil, only by relation unto the profit of the Court, and not to the
necessities of Germany; and that the conservation of the Catholic amity, ought
rather to incite to do the good that is easy to be executed, then to support
the evil which is hard to be endured. And yet the Nuncio desired, that Germany
would support, with all patience, the oppressions laid upon it by the Court of
Rome, which was not willing to bend it self, though never so little to do
good, or rather to desist from evil, but with promise only. They said, his
Holiness had too quick a sense, if he would be offended by so The Dite
resolves to give no other answer.
modest and so necessary a demand of a Council. And after long discussion it
was resolved by common consent, not to give any other answer but to expect
what the Pope would resolve upon that which they had given already.

64 Afterward the secular Princes made a long complaint apart, of that which
they pretended against the Court of Rome, and the whole Ecclesiastical order;
reducing it to an hundred heads, which therefore they called Centum grauamina.
These they sent unto the Pope (because the Nuncio, unto The huudred grieuances
of the Princes of Germany.
whom they were imparted, went away before they were enlarged) with
protestation that they neither would nor could endure them any longer, and that
they were constrained by necessity, and the iniquity of them, to seek with all
industry to free themselves from them, and by the most commodious ways they
could.

65 It would be long to express the whole contents. But in sum, they
complained of the payment for dispensations, and absolutions, of the money
which was drawn from them by indulgences; of the suits in Law which were
drawn to Rome; of the reservation of Benefices, and the abuses of Commendaes,
and Annates; of the exemption of the Ecclesiastiques in offenses; of
Excommunications and unlawful interdicts; of Lay causes drawn before the
Ecclesiastical Judge by diverse pretenses, of the great expenses in
consecrating Churches and Churchyards, of pecuniarie penance; of expenses to
have the Sacraments and the burial. All which were reduced to three principal
heads; to enthrall the people, to rob them of their money, and to appropriate
unto themselves the jurisdiction of the secular Magistrate.

66 The sixth of March the Recesse was made with the precepts contained The
Recesse of the (...)
in the answer to the Nuncio; and, a little after every thing was printed, as
well the Popes Brief, as also the instructions of the Nuncio, the answers, and
replies, with the hundred greiuances and they were diuulged through Germany,
and passed from thence to other places, and even unto Rome also. Where the open
confession of the Pope, that all the mischeife proceeded from the Court of
Rome, and from the Ecclesiastical order, did not please; and The Popes
confession of the abuses of the Clergy was distasteful in Rome.
generally it was not grateful to the Prelates. For it seemed to be too
ignominious, and might make them more odious to the world, and cause the people
to despise them; yea, that it would make the Lutherans more bold and saucy: And
it grieved them most of all, to see a gate opened, where necessarily the
moderation of their profits, which they so much abhorred, would be brought in,
or themselves convinced of incorrigibility. And those that excused Reputation
is the chiefest ground of the Pontifical greatness.
the Pope most, did attribute it to his small knowledge of the Arts by which
the pontifical greatness, and the authority of the Court is maintained, which
are founded upon reputation. They commended the judgment and wisdom of Pope
Leo, who knew how to attribute the bad opinion which Germany conceived of the
manners of the Court, to the want of knowing it. And therefore he said in the
Bull against Martin Luther, that if he after he was cited, had come to Rome,
he would not have found so many abuses in the Court, as was believed. The
Popes condition was (...) expounded in German.


67 But in Germany those that were ill affected to the Court of Rome, expounded
that ingenuous confession in the worier sense, saying, it was an usual Art to
confess the evil, and to promise the amendment thereof, without any thought
to effect any thing, to lull a sleep those that are not wary, to enjoy the
benefit of time, and, in the mean space by treating with Princes, to justify
themselves, in such sort, that they may the better make the people subject 1524
CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5 -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
unto them, and take from them all power to oppose themselves against their
wills, and to speak of their defects. And because the Pope said, that in
giving the remedy, it was necessary not to strive to provide against all at
once, for fear of causing great mischief, but to do things step by step,
they laughed at it; adding that it was well said, step by step, but so that
there were a whole age between one and another. But, in regard of Adrians good
life before his assumption to the Papacy, as well after he was Bishop and
Cardinal, as before, and the good intention which was showed in all his
actions, holy men expounded all in good sense, thinking verily that he
confessed the errors with ingenuity, and that he would redress them sooner
then he promised; neither did the event make them judge the contrary. For the
Court being not worthy of such a Pope, it pleased God to call him, almost as
soon as he had received the relation of his Nuncio from Noremberg. For the 13.
of September he ended the course of his years.

68 But when the decree of the Recesse of Noremberg was published in Germany,
Pope Adrian dies. The decree of the Recesse of Noremberg was expounded in
contrary senses according to men's contrary interests.
with the precepts concerning Sermons and Prints, the greater part esteemed not
thereof, but those that were interested, as well followers of the Church of
Rome, as Lutherans, expounded all in their own favor. For it being said that
the things which might stir up popular tumults, should not be spoken of, the
Catholics understood it, that the things brought in by Luthers doctrine, and
the reproof of the abuses of the Ecclesiastical order should not be spoken
of; and the Lutherans said, that the meaning of the Diet was, that the abuses,
which stirred up the people against the Preachers, when they heard as well bad
things as good represented unto them, should not be defended. And that part of
the Decree, which commanded to preach the Gospel according to the doctrine of
writers approved by the Church, the Catholics understood, according to the
doctrine of the Schoolmen, and the last postillers of the Scriptures. But the
Lutherans said, it was to be understood of the holy Fathers, Hilary, Ambrose,
Austin, Ierom, and the like; expounding also, that by virtue of the Edict of
the Recesse, it was lawful for them to continue in teaching their doctrine
until the Council: and the Catholics understood that the meaning of the
Diet was, that they should continue in the doctrine of the Church of Rome.
Whereby it appeared that the Edict, in stead of quenching the fire of
Controversies, enflamed it the more; and in the minds of godly men there
remained a desire of a free Council, unto which it seemed, that both the
parties would submit themselves; hoping that by this they should be delivered
from so great mischief.

69 After the death of Adrian, Iulio de Medicis, cousin to Pope Leo, was
created successor, and called Clement, the seventh; who suddenly applied
himself Iulio de Medici-cousen to Leo the tenth, was created Pope, and called
clement the ^^^uenth (...) (...) 1524
to the affairs of Germany. And, being skillful in the knowledge of
negotiations, he saw clearly that Pope Adrian, contrary to the style of wise
Popes was too facil, as in confessing the defects of the Court, so in promising
the reformation; and too abject in asking counsel of the Germans how provision
might be made against the contentions of that kingdom. For thereby he drew
upon his back the demand of a Council, which was of great 1524 ADRIAN 6^ --
CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS (...)
importance, especially with condition to celebrate it in Germany, and had
given too much courage to tht Princes, that they dared not only to send, but
to print also the hundred grieuances; a writing ignom inious to the
Ecclesiastiques of Germany, but more to the Court of Rome. Having considered
all things well, he resolved that it was necessary to give some satisfaction
to the Dutch men, yetso, that his authority might not be endangered, nor the
commodities of the Court, taken away. He considered that howsoever some of the
100 greiuances concerned the Court, yet the greater part touched the Bishops,
Officials, Curates, and other Priests of Germany. Therefore he hoped if that
the foresaid persons were reformed, the Germans would easily be induced to be
silent for the present, in that which concerned Rome, and that with that
reformation he should have diuerted the treaty of the Council. Therefore he
thought it convenient suddenly to dispatch a Legate, a man of wisdom and
authority, tothe Diet, which was to be celebrated theree months after in
Noremberg, with instruction, to walk in the same way and above all, to
dissemble the knowledge of Adrians propositions, and of the answers given unto
him, that he might not receive any prejudice in his Tretaie, and might
proceed, as if the matter were to begin.

70 The Legate was Lorenzo Campeggio, Cardinal of S. Anastafia, who being Card.
Campeggio is Legate to the Diet of Noremberg.
come to the Diet, after he had treated of diverse things, with diverse
particular men, to set his negotiation in order, he spoke also in public,
where he said, that he wondered that so many Princes, and so wise, could
endure that religion, rites, and ceremonies, in which, they, their fathers and
ancestors deceased, were borne and bred, should be extinguished and abolished,
not considering that such innovation tended to the rebellion of the people
against the Magistrates. That the Pope not aiming at any interest of his own,
but having a fatherly compassion of Germany, fallen into spiritual and
temporal infirmities, and subject to very great imminent dangers, had sent him
to find a means to cure the disease. That it was not the intention of his
Holiness to prescribe any thing unto them, much less that any thing should be
prescribed unto himself, but only to consult of the fit remedies, concluding
that if the diligence of his Holiness were refused, it would not afterward
be reasonable to lay any fault upon him.

71 He was answered by the Princes (for the Emperor was in Spain, as The
answer of the Diet.
was said before) after they had thanked the Pope for his good will, that they
knew well the danger which hanged over their heads, by reason of the change of
the doctrine of Religion; that therefore, in the Diet the year before, they
had showed unto the Nuncio of Pope Adrian, a means and way to compose the
differences, and had given him also in writing whatsoever they desired or
sought from Rome; which writing they believed that Adrian had received, because
the Nuncio promised to deliver it, as also they thought that the grieuances,
which Germany received from the Clergy, were known unto all, being published
in Print, and that they expected, even until that instant, that their just
desires should be heard, and continued expecting still. Wherefore, if he had
any order or instruction from the Pope, they prayed him to declare it, that
they might consult of the whole together with him.

72 To this the Legate replied, according to his commission, that he knew not
that any instruction had bin brought to the Pope or Cardinals, concerning the
means and way of composing the differences in religion. But he well assured
them of the Popes very good meaning, from whom he had most absolute power, to
do whatsoever might serve for that end but that it concerned The Legeats reply.
them to show the way, who knew the condition of the persons, and the customs
of the country. That it was very well known that Caesar in the Diet of Worms,
had published, by their consent, an Edict against the Lutherans, whereunto some
had given obedience, and some not; of which diversity and variety he knew not
the reason: but it seemed good unto him, that first of all they ought to
deliberate of the means, how to put it in execution. That although he had not
as yet understood that the 100. grieuances had been published to be presented
to the Pope, notwithstanding he knew that three copies had been brought to
some private men in Rome, that himself had seen one of them, and that they
were seen by the Pope and Cardinals, who could not persuade themselves that
they were collected by any of the Princes, but thought they were set out by
some malignant person in spite to the Court of Rome; that although he had
neither order nor instruction from the Pope in that matter, yet they ought not
to think that he had not authority to treat thereof, as occasion served. He
said, that in those demands, there were many that derogated from the power of
the Pope, and sauoured of heresy, that of those he could not treat, but
offered to be informed, and to speak of those which were not against the Pope,
and had ground of equity, that if any thing remained, to be treated of with his
Holiness, they might propose it, but in more moderate terms. That he could not
choose but find fault that they were printed and published, because it seemed
too much, yet that he was certain, that the Pope, being Universal Pastor,
would do any thing for the love of Germany: but if the voice of the Pastor
were not heard, the Pope and himself must take it patiently, and refer every
thing to God.

73 The Diet, though they did not think it probable, that the Cardinal and Is
suspected by the Diet.
Pope knew not the treaties with Adrian, and judged, that in the Legates
answers there might be cunning, yet desiring that good deliberation might be
taken for the quiet of their Country, they deputed some Princes to negotiate
with the Cardinal, who could get nothing from him, but that he would have a
good reformation made of the Clergy of Germany; but for the abuse of the Court
of Rome, it was not possible to make him yield to anything. For when they began
to discourse of them, either he said that it was heresic to reprehend them, or
that he referred it to the Pope, and that it was necessary to treat with him
thereof.

74 The Cardinal made a reformation of Germany, the which (touching And his
reformation was not accepted.
only the inferior Clergy, and being judged that it would not only cherish
the evil, as light remedies always do, but that it would serve to enlarge
the dominion of the Court, and greater Prelates to the prejudice of temporal
authority, and would make an entrance to greater extorsions of money) was not
received, it being esteemed but a mask to delude Germany, and to reduce it
under greater tyranny, though the Legate used all effectual diligence that it
might be accepted. Wherefore he would not consent to any of the propositions,
made by the deputies of the Diet. By this it being plain, that it was
impossible to conclude any thing with him, they published the recesse the
eighteenth of April, with a Decree, that by the Pope, with consent of the
Emperor, a free Council, in some convenient place in Germany, should be The
Decree of the Diet.
intimated, so soon as was possible; and that the States of the Empire should
assemble themselves at Spira the eighteenth of November, to determine what
course should be taken until the Council were begun. That every Prince should
call together, in his own State, men, godly and learned, to collect the things
that ought to be disputed on in the Council. That the Magistrates should have
care that the Gospel should be preached according to the doctrine of the
approved writers of the Church, and all pictures and contumelious books
against the Court of Rome should be prohibited.

75 The Legate having answered to every point of the Decree, and showed With
which the Legate was not pleasep.
that it was not the office of Seculars, to deliberate of any thing concerning
faith and doctrine, or preaching thereof, he promised that he would give the
Pope an account concerning the Council only.

76 The Princes being gone from the Diet, the Legate endeavored to bring He
labors to cause his reformation to be received.
together those that most favored the affairs of Rome, to cause the
reformation (which the Diet would not receive) to be published; and there did
meet him in Ratisbon, Ferdinand the Emperors brother, the Cardinal
Archbishop of Salzburg, two Dukes of Bauaria, two Bishops, of Trent and
Ratisbon, and the Agents of nine Bishops. Where first they made a Decree under
the date of the sixth of July; That it having been ordered in the assembly at
Noremberg, that the Edict of Worms against Luther should be put in execution,
as far as was possible, therefore they, at the instance of the Legate,
Cardinal Campeggio, did command that it should be observed in all their
Dominions and States. That the innouators should be punished, according to the
form of the Edict. That nothing should be changed in the Celebration of the
Mass and Sacraments. That the Apostates, Monks and Nuns, and married
Priests, and those that received the Eucharist without confession, or did eat
forbidden meats, should be punished. And that all their subjects that were in
the University of Wittenberg should depart from thence, within three months,
and return home, or go to some other place. The day following, being the
seventh, the Cardinal published his Constitutions of the reformation, And
effects it.
which were approved by all the forenamed Princes, and it was commanded that
they should be published, received, and observed, throughout all their States
and Dominions.

77 In the proheme of the Constitutions the Cardinal said, that to reform the
life and manners of the Clergy being a thing of great moment for the rooting
out of the Lutheran heresy, he had ordained these decrees by the counsel of
the Princes, and Prelates assembled with him, which he commanded to be observed
throughout all Germany, by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other The reformation
contained 37. heads
Prelates, Priests, and Regulars, and published in all the Cities and Churches.
They contained seven and thirty heads, concerning the apparel and
conversation of the Clergy, administering gratis the Sacraments, and other
Ecclesiastical functions, Banquets, Fabriques of the Churches; those that were
to take orders, celebration of holy days, fastings: against Priests that were
married, against those that confessed not, nor communicated, against
blasphemers, sorcerers, soothsayers, and other things like these. In
conclusion, the celebration of Diocesan Councels every year was commanded for
the observation of these Statutes, giving the Bishops power to invoke the
secular arm against the transgressors.

78 The Edict of the reformation being diuulged, the Princes and Bishops, who
in the Diet had not consented to the Cardinals demand, were offended, as well
with him, as with all those that assembled in Ratisbon, it seeming unto Diverse
Princes and Bishops were offended with the acceptance of this reformation.
them, that they were wronged by the Legate, for making a general order for all
Germany, in a meeting of some few only; and so much the rather, because it
was done after it was demonstrated unto him, that no good could come thereby.
They thought themselves injured also by those few Princes and Bishops, who
alone had taken upon them to oblige all Germany, contrary to the opinion of the
rest. It was opposed also against that reformation, that, leaving the things of
importance, as if there had been no disorder in them, they made provision in
things of the smallest weight. For Germany suffered but little inconvenience by
the abuses of the inferior Clergy, but great by the usurpation of the Bishops
and Prelates, and greatest of all by those of the Court of Rome. And yet there
was no mention made of them, as if they were now in better order then in the
Primitive Church. Then concerning the inferior Clergy, the principal abuses
were not treated of, but those that were of least consequence, which was, as it
were to approve them; and those also that were reprehended, were left without
their true remedies, being only noted without applying the medicine, necessary
to cure the malady.

79 But the Legate, and the forenamed Princes that met him, cared but little for
what was said in Germany, and less for what would follow the publication of
the Edict. For their end was only to satisfy the Pope, and the Popes end was
only to show, that he had made provision that there should be no need of a
Council. For Clement, a man skillful in State affairs, even in Adrians time,
always maintained that it was pernicious counsel, in the occurrences of those
times, to use the means of Councels; and was wont to say, that a Clement did
ever thinks Council dangerous when the Popes authority was in question.
Council was always good when any thing else was treated of but the Popes
authority, but, that being called into question, that nothing was more
dangerous. For as in former times, the Popes strength consisted in having
recourse to Councels, so now the security of the Popedom consists in
declining and avoiding them, and the rather, because Leo having condemned the
doctrine of Luther, the same matter could not be handled or examined in a
Council, without doubting of the authority of the Apostolical Sea.

80 The Emperor having received the Decree of Noremberg, was much moved at
it; thinking that to treat and give so resolute an answer to a stranger The
Emperor was distasted with the decree of Noremberg.
Prince, without his knowledge, in so important a matter, was but small
reputation to his imperial Majesty. Neither did the rigor of the Decree
please him, foreseeing the Popes displeasure, whom he desired to keep loving
1525 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
and well affected toward him, in regard of the war which his Captains then
made with the Frenchmen. Wherefore he wrote back to the Princes in Germany
complaining that, himself having condemned all the books of Luther, the Diet
restrained themselves only to those that were contumelious. But he reprehended
them more severely, that they had decreed the celebration of a Council in
Germany, and desired the Legate to treat thereof with He wrtteth to the
Princes.
the Pope, as if this did not more belong to the Pope and him, then unto them,
who, if they thought that a Council would be so commodious for Germany, they
ought to have recourse unto him, to obtain it of the Pope; howsoever, he
knowing also that this would be profitable for that Country, was resolute it
should be celebrated, yet in time and place, when and where himself could be
personally present. But touching a new assembly at Spira, which they had
ordained, to order their matters of Religion until the time of the Council,
he said that by no mean; he would yield unto it: yea, he commanded they should
be careful to obey the Edict of Worms, And commands the execution of the
Edict of Worms.
and that they handled no point of Religion, until a Council were called by
the Popes order and his. The Emperors letters, more Imperious then Germany was
used to receive from his predecessors, moved very dangerous humors in the
minds of many Princes, which floting up and down, might easily have come to a
troublesome conclusion.

81 But the moving was soon stopped, and the year following 1525. had 1525
no negotiation in this matter. For the Bores in Germany rebelled against the
Princes, and Magistrates, and every one was busied with the war of the
Anabaptists, and in Italy in the beginning of the year succeeded the battle
of Francis the French King is taken prisoner in the battle at Pauia.
Pauia and the imprisonment of Francis the French King. Which so li^ted up the
Emperors mind, that he thought he had all the world in his power: But
afterward the leagues of many Princes against him, which were treated of, and
the negotiation of the Kings liberty, gave him business enough. The Pope also,
because Italy was without defense, in the power of the Emperors The Pope
suspecteth the greatness of the Emperor.
Ministers, thought of his own case, and how he might be joined with others,
who were able to defend him against the Emperor, from whom his mind was
alienated, seeing he was become so potent, that the Popedom remained at his
discretion.

82 In the year 1526, they returned to the same treaty in Germany and Italy.
In Germany all the States of the Empire being assembled at the Diet in Spira
1526
in the end of June, it was consulted of, by special order from the Emperor,
how Christian Religion, and the ancient customs of the Church might be The
Diet of Spira.
preserved, and the transgressors punished. The opinions being so various, that
it was impossible to conclud any thing, those that represented the Emperors
persons (...) caused the Imperial letters to be read: where Charles said, that
he was resolved to pass into Italy, and to Rome, for the Crown, and to treat
with the Pope for the calling of a Council. Wherefore he commanded that
nothing should be ordained in the Diet contrary to the laws, Ceremonies, The
Emperor promises to Procure a Council.
and ancient customs of the Church; but that the form of the Edict of Worms
should be observed, and that they should patiently bear that small delay,
until he had negotiated with the Pope the celebration of a Council, which
should shortly be. Forby treating of matters of Religion 1526 CLEMENT 7.
CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Why the Edict of Worms could not be executed.
in a Diet, rather hurt arises then good.

83 The Cities, for the most part, answered, that their desire was to gratify
and obey the Emperor, but that they saw not the means how to do that which
he commanded in his letters, because the controversies were increased, and did
increase still, particularly concerning the ceremonies, and rites: and if for
the time past the Edict of Worms could not be observed, for fear of
Sedition, the difficulty was then greater, as was declared to the Popes Legate.
And if the Emperor were present, and informed of the state of the business,
he would be of the same opinion. Concerning the promise of his Majesty, for
the celebration of a Council; every one said, he might have effected it when
he wrote the letters, because he was then in amity with the Pope; but afterward
there being distastes between them, and the Pope having taken arms against
him, it appeared not how, things standing thus, a Council could be called. For
these respects some proposed that the Emperor should be entreated to grant a
national Council in Germany, to given remedy A National Council in
Germany is desired.
to the dangers that were imminent. Which if it pleased him not, at least (the
better to withstand the most greiuous seditions) that he would be contented to
defer the execution of the Edict of Worms until a general Council. But
the Bishops, who had no other aim but the preservation of their own
authority, said that no treaty ought to be made in the cause of Religion,
during the discords between the Emperor and the Pope, but that all should be
deferred until a better time.

84 The opinions were so diverse, and such discord, between the
Ecclesiastiques, and those that were inclined to Luther, doctrine, was stirred
up, that The Princes did not agree in the Diet of Spira.
there appeared manifest danger of Civil war, and many of the Princes put
themselves in order to depart. But Ferdinand and the other ministers of the
Emperor, seeing clearly what dang(...)d arise, if the Diet were dissolved
with such dissension of minds, and (...) Princes departed without any Decree
(because they would have proceeded diversely, with danger to have divided
Germany, without hope of reconciliation) they endeavored to pacific the
chiefest both of the one, and the other side; and in the end, they came to a
resolution, to make a Decree: which though it concluded not in substance
according to the Emperors mind, yet it showed some appearance of agreement
between the States, and obedience toward his Majesty. The contents of it was;
that it being necessary, for giving of order and form to the The decree of the
Diet of Spira.
affairs of Religion, and for the maintaining of liberty, to celebrate a
lawful Council in Germany, or an universal of all Christendom, which may
begin within the compass of a year, Ambassadors should be sent to the
Emperor, to pray him, that he would cast his eye upon the miserable and
tumultuous state of the Empire, and to return into Germany so soon as might
be, to provide for it. That in the mean space, while the one or the other
Council, necessary for the business of Religion and of the Edict of Worms,
be obtained, all the Princes and States ought to govern themselves in their
Provinces and Jurisdictions, that they may give a good account of their actions
to God and the Emperor.

85 But in Italy, Clement having passed the year before in grief of mind and
fears, thinking that sometimes he saw Charles armed in Rome, to possess
himself of the Ecclesiastical state, and to regaine the possession of the
Roman Empire, usurped by the Arts of his predecessors; sometimes set in a
Council to moderate the Popes authority in the Church, without which, he well
saw it was impossible to diminish the Temporal; and, above all, having
conceived a bad presage, that all the ministers sent into France, to treat
with the Queen mother, and the State, were perished in the journey, at last,
The Pope was distracted with fear of the Emperor, and of the Council.
in the end of March this year, he took breath a little, understanding that
the King was set at liberty, and returned into France. He sent presently to
congratulate with him, and to make a confederation against the Emperor. The
which being ratified in Cugnac the two and twentieth of May between He makes a
confederation with the French King set at liberty.
him, that King, and the Princes of Italy, under the name of the most holy
League, and having absolved the King from the Oath taken in Spain, for the
observation of the things agreed upon, now delivered from fear, a passion
which had much power over him, thinking he was in liberty, and being much
provoked that, not only in Rome and Naples, Ordinances were published to the
prejudice of the Court of Rome, but, which more greiued him, that in those
days a Spanish Notary dared to appear publicly in the Rota, and command two
Napolitans in Cesars name to desist from litigating in that Court, he resolved
to declare his mind, that he might encourage the confederates; and the three
and twentieth of June, he wrote unto Charles a very Writes a severe Brief to
Charles.
long Brief, in manner of an inuectiue; (...) having repeated the benefits
which he had done him, as well being Cardinal, as after his assumption to the
Popedom, and the great offers which he had refused from other Princes, to
stand firm in his freindship, seeing he was ill requited, and that there was
no correspondence, neither in good will, nor observation of promises, but on
the contary, much matter of suspicion was given him, and many offenses
committed by exciting new wars in Italy, and elsewhere (all which he
repeated in particular) laying the blame of all the mischeifes upon the
Emperor, showing that the Papal dignity was offended in all; and passing to
another kind of offenses done unto him, by publishing laws in Spain, and
Pragmatiques in Naples, against the liberty of the Church, and the dignity of
the Apostolical Sea, he concluded in the end, not according to the use of the
Popes, by denouncing spiritual punishments, but protesting unto him, that if
he will not leave to do wrong, ceasing to possess Italy, and to trouble
other parts of Christendom, he will not be wanting to the Justice and liberty
of his Country, wherein stands the protection of that holy Sea, but will
move his just and holy arms against him, not to offend him, but to defend the
public safety, and his own proper dignity.

86 This dispatch being sent into Spain, the next day he wrote and dispatched
another Brief to the Emperor, without making mention of the first. And
afterward another more moderate then the former.
Where he said in substance, that, for the maintaining of the liberty of
Italy, and the providing against the dangers of the Sea of Rome, he had been
constrained to come to these deliberations, which could not be omitted with out
failing to perform the duty of a good Pope, and a just Prince. Wherein if his
Majesty will afford the remedy, which is easy, profitable, and glorious for
him to do, he shall thereby deliver Christendom from a great fear; whereof
his Nuncio residing with him, shall give him an account more at large. He
prayed him, for Gods sake, to hear him, and to provide for the public
welfare, and to contain within the terms of justice, the unbridled, and
injurious desires of his ministers, that others may rest secure of their goods
and lives. Under these last words the Pope comprehended principally Pompeius,
Cardinal Colonna, Vespasianus, and Ascanius, with others of that family, who
followed the Imperial part, and were assisted by the Viceroy of Naples: from
whom he daily received diverse oppositions to his endeavors. And, which made
greater impression in his mind, he feared also that they might bring the
Papacy into straights. For the forenamed Cardinal, a man bold and proud,
contented not himself to speak of him publicly, as of one assumed to the
Papacy by unlawful means, magnifying what the house of Colonna had done
against other Popes, intruders (as he named them) and unlawfully chosen, but
he added that it was fatal to that family to hate the tyrannical Popes, and
to them to be reprehended by the virtue of it: and threatened him with a
Council, and treated with all the Emperors ministers, to persuade the Emperor
to call it. Whereby the Pope being provoked to anger, the better to prevent
him, published a severe Monitory against that Cardinal, citing him to Rome,
under the greatest penalties and The Popesendeth a Monitorie against Card.
Colonna.
censures; in which also he touched manifestly the Viceroy of Naples, and
obliquely the Emperor. But the war was not prosperously begun in
Lombardie, the army of the French King, not appearing as yet; and the Christian
army was discomfited at the same time in Hungary, King Lewis dead, the number
of those who followed Luthers doctrine did still increase, and all men required
a Council, which might make an universal peace amongst Christians, and give
an end to so great disorders.

87 The Pope for these causes, having first composed the differences with And
having changed his mind, makes a long discourse in Consistory.
those of the house of Colonna, and abolished the Monitory sent out against the
Cardinal, called a Consistory the thirteenth of September; in which he
comiserated, in a long discourse, the calamities of Christendom, bewailed the
death of the King of Hungary, and attributed all misfortune to the anger of
God, stirred up by sin, confessing that all began from the deformation of the
Clergy. He showed how it was necessary, for the appeasing of it, to begin (for
so he said) from the house of God, wherein he would give example in his own
person. He excused the raising of arms, and the Process against those of the
house of Colonna, exhorted the Cardinals to amend their manners, said he
would go in person to all the Princes, to negotiate an universal Peace,
resolute rather to die, then to leave this enterprise, until he had brought it
to effect, yet assuredly trusting in God to see the conclusion thereof. The
which being obtained, he resolved to call a general Council, to extinguish
the division in the Church, and to take away the heresies. He exhorted the
Cardinals, every one to think of, and propose unto him all those means,
which they thought might serve for these two ends, that is, to plant peace,
and root out heresy. The Popes discourse was published throughout Rome and
Italy, and Copies thereof were The Popes discourse was thought not to be
sincere.
sent abroad by many; and though it was much helped by the commendation of his
followers, yet few believed it to be sincere.

88 But in Spain the two letters being presented by the Popes Nuncio, to the
Emperor, the one a day after the other, there was much surmising raised in the
Counsel of that Prince. Some of them believed that Clement, repenting himself
of the bitterness of the first, had wrote the second for a medicine: wherefore
they advised that no notice should be taken thereof. And this opinion was
increased by a report given out by the Nuncio, that Surmises in Spain
concerning the two Briefes of the Pope.
by the second he had received order, that if the first were not delivered, it
should not be delivered at all, but sent back again, and the second only
consigned. The wiser sort saw well enough, that if the Pope had repented, he
might have prevented the first Corrier, by causing the second to make more
have: moreover, that it was not likely that so wise a Prince as he, would
resolve to write so bitterly without great consultation. Therefore they thought
it was a kind of cunning to make a protestation, and not to have an answer. And
it was resolved that the Emperor should imitate him, answering The Emperor
makes two answers.
to the first with terms fitting severity, and a day after to the second,
according to the form thereof.

89 And so it was done, and an apologeticall letter was written by the Emperor
the seventeenth of September, which in the original contained 22. The first
contained 22 sheets of (...) all paper.
sheets of royal paper, which Mercurius Gattinara presented open to the
Nuncio, and read it to him, and sealed it in his presence, and consigned it,
that he might cause it to be delivered to the Pope. In the beginning of the
letter the Emperor showed that the form which the Pope held was
disproportionable to the duty of a true Pastor, and not correspondent to the
filial obedience which he had performed toward the Apostolical Sea, and his
Holiness, who so praised his own actions, and so condemned his, with titles
of ambition and avarice, that he was constrained to declare his innocence. And
beginning the narration from what happened in the time of Leo, afterward in
the time of Adrian, and finally in his Papacy, he showed that he had a good
intention in all his actions, and was enforced to do as he had done, laying
the fault upon the Pope. He repeated many benefits which he had done him, and
on the contrary side many treaties which the Pope had made against him in
diverse occasions: and in conclusion he said, that he desired nothing more then
the public quiet, an universal peace, and the just liberty of Italy. Which
things if they were desired by his Holiness, he ought to lay down his
weapons, putting Peter's sword into the sheath. For this foundation being laid,
it was easy to build peace thereupon, and to apply themselves to correct the
errors of the Lutherans, and other heretics; wherein he should have found
him an obedient son. But if his Holiness did otherwise, he protested before
God and men, that he could not be blamed for none of these sinister chances
which should happen to Christian Religion; promising that if he will admit his
iustifications as true and lawful, he will not remember any injuries
received. But if he shall continue to bear arms against him, because this
will not be the office of a father, but of a party, nor of a Pastor, but of an
assayler, it will not be convenient that he be judge in those causes, and
there being none other unto whom recourse may he had against him, for his own
justification, he will refer all to the knowledge and judgment of a
general Council of all Christendom; exhorting his Holiness in the Lord to
intimate it in a secure and fit place, limiting unto it a convenient term. For
seeing the state of the Church and of Religion to be altogether troubled, to
provide for his own and the Commonwealths safety, he flies to that sacred
and universal Council, and appealeth unto it against all the threats past,
and grieuances to come.

90 The answer to the second was made the eighteenth; and in that he said, that
he was glad to see his Holiness treat more lovingly, and to desire peace The
Emperors answer to the second Brief.
more earnestly in his second letters; which if it were as much in his power to
establish, as it is in the power of others to make war, he should see what
his mind was. Although he thinks that his Holiness speaks as thrust forward
by others, not of his voluntary mind, and hops in God that he will rather
procure the public good, then follow the affections of other men. Wherefore
he prays him to behold the calamities of Christendom. For he calls God to
witness, that he will be always ready to let every one know, that he has
none other end then the glory of God, and the safety of his people; as he has
written more at large in the other letters.

91 The Emperor, the sixth of October, wrote also to the College of Cardinals;
that he was exceedingly grieved, that the Pope forgetting the Papal The
Emperor writes to the College of Cardinals.
dignity, went about to disturb the public quiet, and when he thought he
had given peace to the whole world, by making the accord with the French King,
that letters came to him from his Holiness, such as he never thought would
have come from a common Father, and Vicar of CHRIST: which he believed also
were not resolved on without their counsel, because he was persuaded that the
Pope treated not of things of so great a moment, without communicating all unto
them. Therefore he was troubled very much, to see that from a Pope, and so
religious fathers, should proceed wars, threats, and pernicious counsels
against an Emperor, protector of the Church, and so well deserving, that to
please them he stopped his ears in Worms against the prayers of all
Germany, made unto him against the oppressions and grieuanes, which it
received from the Court of Rome, making none account of the honest demands that
a Council might be called, to withstand the foresaid oppressions, which would
be as much as to withstand the Lutheran heresy. That to serve the Sea of Rome,
he had prohibited the meeting at Spira, which Germany had intimated,
foreseeing that it would have bin a beginning to separate it from the obedience
of Rome, and has diuerted the thoughts of those Princes by promising them a
Council. Whereof having written, and given an account to the Pope, his
Holiness thanked him for having forbid the assembly of Spira, but prayed him
to defer to speak of a Council until a more convenient time. And he, to
please, made more account to give him satisfaction, then of the prayers of
Germany, which were so necessary. And yet for all this the Pope now wrote
letters unto him, full of complaints and imputations, demanding things of him,
which he could neither justly, nor securely grant. Of which letters he sends
them a copy, being desirous to signify the whole unto them, that they might
uphold Christianity, now ready to fall, and employ themselves to divert the
Pope from so pernicious a deliberation; in which if he shall remain
immovable, they may exhort him to call a Council; whereunto in case he will
not condescend according to order of law, he beseeches their most reverend
Paternities, and the sacred College, that, the Pope denying or deferring the
convocation, they would call it themselves, observing the due order. Wherefore
if they shall refuse to grant him this just demand, or shall defer longer
then is convenient, he will make provision for it himself And persuades them
to call a Council if the Pope refuse.
by the Imperial authority, using the means that are just and fitting. This
letter was delivered in the Consistory the twelfth of December, and together
also with it a duplicate of the letter, which was consigned to the Nuncio in
Granada, was presented to the Pope.

92 All these letters were instantly printed in diverse places of Germany,
Spain, and Italy, and many copies went up and down from hand to hand. Those
persons, who though they observe the accidents of the world, yet have not much
capacity, and use to live and govern themselves by the examples of others, and
especially of the Grandies, and who by the demonstrations which Charles made
against the Lutherans, as well in Worms, as in other places, in The Emperor is
censured in Germany.
contemplation of the Papacy, believed that he favored the Popes side for
religion and conscience sake, seeing his change, were much scandalized,
especially for that he said, that he stopped his ears to the honest prayers of
Germany, to do the Pope a pleasure. And those of the wiser sort were of
opinion, that his Majesty was not well advised to diuulge so great a secret,
and to give the world occasion to believe, that the reverence showed toward
the Pope, was an Art of government covered with the cloak of religion. And
further they expected, that for these letters the Pope would show some desire
of revenge, the Emperor having touched two great secrets of the Popedom: the
one in appealing from the Pope to a future Council, contrary to the
Constitutions of Pius and Julius the seconds, the other, in having invited the
Cardinals to call a Council, in case of a negative given, or a dilation
interposed by the Pope. And it was necessary that this beginning should draw
great consequences with it.

93 But as seeds, though most fertile, cast into the ground out of season,
fructify not; so these great attempts happening in time not convenient, became
The family of Colonna assault Rome, and take it.
vain. And so much happened in this occasion. For while the Pope sought
revenge with his arms, and with the arms of so many Princes, that he might
use spiritual remedies, after he had made some temporal foundation, those of
the family of Colonna, either not trusting the Popes promises, or for some
other cause, arming their Subjects, and others who followed that faction,
approached Rome, upon the side of the Suburbs, the twentieth of September: which
amazed very much the Popes family. And the Pope himself, surprised upon the
sudden, and wholly confused, knowing not what resolution to take, called for
the solemn Pontifical habits, saying, that so apparelled, to the imitation of
Boniface the 8. sitting in the Pontifical chair, he would expect to see if
they dared add to the first, a second violation of the Apostolical dignity,
in the person of the Pope himself. But he easily The Pope saves himself in
the Castle.
yielded to the counsel of his friends, to save himself in the Castle by the
gallery, and not give occasion to be noted of folly.

94 The Colonnesi entered Rome, and sacked the Popes palace, and S. Peter's
Church. They spread themselves also even unto the principal houses of the
Borough. But the inhabitants making resistance, and the Orsini, a contrary
faction, coming in aid against them, they were constrained to retire
themselves into a secure quarter, which they had taken near hand, yet carrying
with them the spoils of the Vatican, with the infinite displeasure of the
Pope; and the army waxing bigger every day with succors, that arrived The
palace and S. Peter's Church are sacked.
from Naples, the Pope fearing some greater encounter, overcome by necessity,
called into the Castle Don Hugo de Moncado, one of the Emperors ministers,
concluded a truce with him for four months, with condition that the Colonnesi
and Neapolitans should retire themselves from Rome, and the A truce concluded.
Pope should call back his Soldiers from Lombardie: the which both parties
performing, Clement caused his men to return to Rome, under pretense to
observe the capitulations of the truce; and being by them secured, he
thundered out excommunications against the Colonnesi, declaring them
heretics, The Popes Bull against the Colonnest.
and Schismatiques, and excommunicating whosoever afforded them assistance,
counsel or favor, or gave them entertainment, and deprived also the Cardinal
of his red Hatte. This Cardinal being in Naples, not esteeming the Popes
censures, published an appeal to the Council, proposing not only the The
Cardinal appealeth to the Council.
injustice and nullity of the monitories, censures and sentences; but also the
necessities of the Church universal, which being manifestly ruinated, could
not be easied any other way, then by calling of a lawful Council, which might
reform it in the head and in the members. In conclusion he cited Clement to
the Council, which the Emperor would assemble in Spira.

95 Of this Appeal, or Citation, or Manifest, there were copies hanged by
night, by those of the faction of the house of Colonna, upon the doors of the
principal Churches in Rome, and in diverse other places, and spread over
Italy. This put Clement in a great passion, who mightily abhorred the very
name of a Council; not so much fearing the moderating of the Popes authority,
and of the profit of the Court, as for his own proper respects. For though Leo
his kinsman, when he made him Cardinal, caused proof to The Pope fears a
counsel in regard of his illegitimation, and Semonie.
be made, that there was promise of marriage between his mother and his father
Iulianus, yet the untruth of the proofs was notorious: and though there be no
law which prohibiteth bastards to ascend to the Papacy, yet the vulgar opinion
is, that the Papal dignity is not compatible with such a quality. He doubted
exceedingly, that unto such a pretense, though vain, strength might be given
by his enemies, being vpheld by the power of the Emperor. But he was more
afraid, because, being conscious by what arts he mounted to the Popedom, and
how Cardinal Colonna had a way to No subsequent consent can make good a
Simoniacall election of the Pope.
prove it, considering the severe Bull of Julius the 2. which makes a nullity
in a Simoniacall election, and forbids that it should be made good by any
subsequent consent, he greatly doubted that it would happen unto him as it did
unto Baltassar Cossa, called John the 23, But I have not been able to learn
what was the negotiation of the Counsel of Spira, having not found any mention
thereof, but in the foresaid Manifest, and in Paulus Iouius in the life of the
forenamed Cardinal. In the height of these tumults the year ended, with
public expectation, and fear where the tempest would fall.

96 For the next year 1527. the negotiations of a Council were buried in 1527
CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. The Viceroy of Naples marches
toward Rome, pretending the breach of the truce. Charles of Borbon marches
toward Rome. George Franspeg is General of 13000. Almans.
silence; according to the use of humane affairs, that in the time of war,
provision for laws has no place. Yet there succeeded notable accidents,
necessary to be related, for the understanding of those things which happened
afterward, in the matter which we handle. For the Viceroy of Naples,
pretending that the Pope, by proceeding against the Colonnesi, had broken the
truce, incited by the Cardinal, and others of that family, put his Soldiers
into their journey toward Rome: And on the other side also, Charles of
Borbone, general of the Emperors army in Lombardie, not having wherewith to
pay his Soldiers, fearing they would mutin, or at least, run away, being
desirous by all means to keep them together, sent them toward the
Ecclesiastical State; whereunto also he was mightily incited, by George
Fransperg, a German captain; who having conducted into Italy between
thirteen and fourteen thousand Soldiers of Germany, almost all Lutherans,
with no other pay, but of one crown a piece of his own goods, and promise to
lead them to Rome, he showed the great opportunity they had to get spoils,
and to make themselves rich, in a city where all the gold of Europe may be
found.

97 In the end of January, Borbon passed the Po with all his troops, and
directed his journey toward Romania: which march troubled Clement exceedingly,
considering the quality of the men, and the continual threats of Fransperg,
who caused a halter to be carried near his Colors, saying, that He calls
with him an halter to hang the Pope.
with that he would hang the Pope, the better to encourage his men to stand
united, and to support the journey though they were not paid: All which things
induced the Pope to give care to Caesar Fieramosca, a Neapolitan, who came newly
from Spain, and brought a long letter from Caesar, full of offers. And,
assuring his Holiness, that his Majesty disliked the invasion of Rome, made by
the Colonnesi, and that he was desirous of peace, he induced him to kearken to
the truce, which should be negotiated between him, and the Viceroy of Naples.
And although in March, Captain George Fransperg was taken with a fit of an
Apoplexy, which caused his death, yet because the army was entered into
Fransperg dies.
the Ecclesiastical State, and still marched forward, the Pope in the end of
the month, resolved to come to an accord, though he saw it would be to his
great indignity, and would give suspicion to his confederates, and perhaps
aliene them from defending him. Therefore the suspension of arms for An accord
is made.
eight months was established, the Pope paying 60000. crowns, absoluing those
of the house of Colonna from the censures, and restoring to the Cardinal his
dignity; whereunto he condescended exceeding hardly. But howsoever the truce
was concluded with the Viceroy of Naples, the money disbursed, and the
Colonnesi restored, yet this was not accepted by the Duke of Borbon; who
following on his journey, the 5. of May lodged near Rome, and assailed it the
next day on the Vatican side. Where, though the Popes Soldiers, and the youth
of Rome, especially of the Guelfish faction, opposed themselves valiantly in
the beginning, and Bourbon were slain by a Musket Shot, notwithstanding the
army entered, and those that defended the Town, fled into Rome taken by the
army of Borbon after his death, and sacked.
the Suburbs. The Pope, as in sudden accidents, full of fear, saved himself,
with some of the Cardinals, in the Castle: and although he was counseled not
to tarry, but to pass immediately into Rome, and from thence, to go to some
secure place, yet, refusing this good counsel, he resolved to remain there.
The City, now without a head, was full of confusion, so that none used the
remedy which then was fit, that is, to break down the Bridges, which go
over the river Tiber, from the Suburbs to the City, and to defend themselves;
which if it had been done, the Romans would have had time, at the least, to
retire all men of account, and goods of value, into a secure place. But this
not being done, the Soldiers passed into the City, spoiled not only the
houses, but the Churches also of all their ornaments, casting on the ground;
and treading under feet the relics, and other sacred things which were not of
value, putting the Cardinals and other Prelates in prison, making a mock of
their persons, by setting them on vilebeasts in the Pontifical The Cardinals
imprisoned and mocked, and some of them beaten.
habit. It is certain, that the Cardinals of Siena, Minerua, and Ponceta were
well beaten, and carried most basely in procession, and that the Spanish and
German Cardinals, though they were confident, because the army was composed of
their nations, were not better used then the rest. The Pope, retired into the
Castle of Saint Angelo, was besieged, and constrained to make an accord, at the
same time yielding the Castle to the Emperors Captains, and The Pope yields
the Castle and his person.
consigning his person prisoner therein: where he was kept very close. And
being in exceeding great affliction for the things past, there was added one
more, in his opinion, much greater, that the Cardinal of Cortona, who governed
Florence in his name, having heard the news, retired himself from Florence
becomes free again.
the City, and left it free. The which having suddenly chased out the Medici,
and regained their liberty, reformed their government, and the greater part
of the Citizens showed such hatred toward the Pope, and his family, that they
defaced their arms, even in their private places, and disgraced, with many
blows, the images of Leo and Clement, which were in the Church of the The
images of Leo the 10. and of Clement the 7. are defaced.
Nunciata.

98 But the Emperor having received advice of the sacking of Rome, and of the
imprisonment of the Pope, gave many signs of infinite grief, and The Emperor
makes a show of grief for the Popes calamity.
made demonstration thereof by causing the solemnefeasts to cease, which were
made in Validolid, for the birth of his son, the one and twentieth of the
same month. By which appearances he would have given testimony to the world,
of his piety and religion, if he had commanded at the same time that the
person of the Pope should be set at liberty. But the world, that saw the Pope
was prisoner six months more, perceived what difference there was between
truth and appearance.

99 They began immediately to treat of the Popes delivery. The Emperor would
have had him conducted into Spain, deeming (as was true indeed) And is
dissuaded from causing him to be brought into Spain.
that it would have been a great reputation to him, if in two years there had
been brought out of Italy into Spain, two so great prisoners, a French King,
and a Pope of Rome. But because all Spain, and especially the Prelates,
detested to behold so great an ignominy of Christianity, that he should be
brought prisoner thither, who represented the person of CHRIST, he changed
that opinion, considering also it was not good to stir up too much envy
against himself, nor to provoke the King of England, whom he feared much, in
case he should have joined himself more nearly with the French King, then he
was by the peace published in August; who had already sent a potent army into
Italy, and achieved diverse victories in Lombardie. Wherefore in the end of
the year, the Emperor granted that the Pope should be set free with this
condition, that he should not be against him in the affairs of Milan and
Naples, and, for security thereof, should give into his hands, Ostia, Ciuita
vecchia, Ciuita Castellana, and the Cittadell of Furli, and for hostages, The
Pope is set at liberty upon hard conditions.
his two Nephews, Hippolitus and Alexander, that he should grant him a Crusado
in Spain, and a tenth of the Church revenues in all his kingdoms. The
delivery being concluded, and having received power to depart out of the
Castle the ninth of December, he durst not expect so long, but went out the
night before, with a small conuoy, in the habit of a Merchant, and retired
himself immediately to Monte Fiascone, and after he had tarried there a little,
from thence he passed to Oruieto.

100 While the Princes were all busied in war, the affairs of religion altered
in diverse places; in some, by public Decree of the Magistrates; in others, by
popular sedition. For Berne, making a solemn assembly, both of their own The
state of religion in the Cantons of the Suisses and other places.
Doctors, and of Strangers, and hearing a disputation many days, received the
doctrine conformable to Zuric; and in Basil all the images were ruined and
burnt, by a popular sedition, and the Magistrate deprived, and others put in
his place, and the new religion established. And on the other side, eight
Cantons assembled themselves together, and ratified within their territories
the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and wrote a long exhortation to those of
Berne, persuading them not to change their Religion, which belonged not to one
people, or one Country, but only to a Council of the whole world. But for all
that, the example of Berne was followed at Geneua, Constance, and other places
thereabout; and in Argentina, after a public disputation, the Mass was
prohibited by a public Decree, until the defenders of it could show that it
was a worship acceptable to God, notwithstanding that the Chamber of Spira had
made a great and a long remonstrance, that it was not lawful, not only for
one City, but not for all the States of the Empire, to make innovation of
rites and doctrine, it belonging only to a general or national Council.

101 In Italy, these two years there being neither Pope nor Court of Rome,
1528 The reformed religion increases in Italy.
and it seeming, that these calamities were an execution of Gods judgment
against that government, many men began to reform, and in private houses in
diverse Cities, especially in Faenza, a Town belonging to the Pope, there was
preaching against the Church of Rome, and the number of those, whom others
called Lutherans, and themselves Gospellers, increased every day.

102 The year following 1528, the French army was far advanced within The
Frenchmen being entered into the kingdom of Naples, cause the Spanish army to
forsake Rome,
the Kingdom of Naples, and had possessed it almost all; which constrained the
Emperors Captains to conduct the army out of Rome, much diminished, partly by
reason of those, who, laden with spoils, meant to put them in a secure place;
and partly because of the plague, which caused great mortality among them. The
confederates instantly desired the Pope, that Rome being set at liberty by
necessity, not by the desire of the Emperor, having no more need to temporize
with him, he would in that occasion declare himself to be joined with them,
and proceed against 1529 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
him with spiritual arms, and deprive him of the Kingdom of Naples, and of
the Empire. But the Pope, as well for that he was wearied with troubles, as
also, because in case the confederates had gained the better, they would have
maintained the liberty of Florence, the government whereof he more desired to
recover, then to be revenged of the injuries received from Charles, he made a
firm resolution not to be contrary, yea, to join himself The Pope refuses
to join with the confederates, for the more easy recovery of Florence.
with him upon the first occasion, to regaine Florence: the which he was
assured that, if the French King and the Venetians had been conquerours in
Italy, they would have maintained in liberty. Yet keeping this within his
breast for the present, he excused himself that, by reason of his poverty,
and want of power, it would rather be a burden then an ease to the
confederats, and that the deprivation of the Emperor would cause Germany to be
suspicious, that he would pretend to have authority to create the Emperor.
And thinking that his confederates perceived what he aimed at, as he was
excellent in covering his designs, he made all demonstration that he had laid
The Pope makes show to have laid aside all careof temporal things.
aside all thought of Temporal things. He let the Florentines understand many
months together, that he was most unwilling to meddle in their government,
only desiring that they would acknowledge him as Pope, and not more then other
Christian Princes did: that they would not persecute his family in their
private affairs; that they would be contented that their arms should stand
within the buildings of his predecessors. He spoke of nothing but of reforming
the Church, and reducing the Lutherans. That he was resolved to pass into
Germany in person, and to give such an example that all should be converted.
And these were the speeches he used all this year: so that many believed for
certain, that those afflictions which God had laid upon him for his amendment,
had procured their due fruit. But that which followed in the years after, made
the godly believe, that they were as seed sown upon a rock, or by the way
side; and the wise, that they were a bait to bring the Florentines asleep.

103 The next year 1529, a peace being negotiated between the Emperor, and
the French King, and the heat of war abated, the treaties of a Council 1529
The treaties of the Council begin again.
began again. For Francis Guignones, Cardinal of Santa Croce, having
brought out of Spain, from the Emperor to the Pope, the release of Ostia,
Ciuitta Vecchia, and other Towns belonging to the Church, consigned to the
Emperors ministers for security of the Popes promises, together with The
cautionary towns are restored to the Pope.
large offers, Clement, considering the treaty of peace, which was negotiated
with the French King, and how much his own interests required, that he should
be firmly joined with Charles, he sent unto him, unto Barcellona, Ierolamo
Bishop of Vasone, master of his house, to treat the articles of accord
between them: which were easily concluded, for that the Pope promised the
inuestiture of Naples, for the tribute of a white horse only, the A peace is
concluded between the Pope and the Emperor, with diverse conditions.
patronage of the 24. Churches, passage for his men, and the Imperial Crown.
On the other, the Emperor promised to restore into Florence the Popes Nephew,
the son of Lorenzo, and to give him to wife Margarite his bastard daughter,
and to assist him in the recovery of Ceruia, Rauenna, Modena, and Rheggio,
taken from him by the Venetians, and the Duke of Ferrara. They agreed also to
receive one another at the Coronation, with the accustomed ceremonies. Only
one point was long disputed: For the Popes Ministers proposed, that Charles and
Ferdinand should be bound to constrain the Lutherans, by force of arms, to
return to the obedience of the Church of Rome; and those that were for the
Emperor required, that to reduce them the better, the Pope should call a
general Council. After long discussion of this point, not to cut off so many
other important designs, on which they A point much disputed between the Pope
end the Emperor.
were agreed, it was resolved to stand in this article in general terms, and
concluded, that, to reduce the Lutherans to the union of the Church, the Pope
should use spiritual means, and Charles and Ferdinand temporal; who also
should make war against them if they remained obstinate: and in that case the
Pope should provide that the other Christian Princes should assist them.

104 In this sort the confederation was concluded, with much joy of Clement,
Clement suddenly recouereth all his greatness.
and marvel of the world, how, having lost all his state and reputation, he
should return to the same greatness in so short a time. In Italy, which saw an
accident so full of variety, or rather contrariety, it was esteemed a divine
miracle, and by those that loved the Court, it was ascribed to a demonstration
of the favor of God toward the Church.

105 But in Germany a Diet being intimated in Spira, which began the 15. of He
sends to the Diet of Spira.
March, the Pope sent thither John Thomas of Mirandula, to exhort them to the
war against the Turk, promising to contribute himself also as much as his
forces, exhausted by the calamities of the years past, would allow him to do,
and to give assurance that he would use all industry to accord the differences
between the Emperor and the French King; that all things being pacified, and
all impediments taken away, he might apply himself, as soon as it was
possible, to the calling and celebration of a Council, to reestablish Religion
in Germany.

106 In the Diet they first treated of Religion: And the Catholics thought
The Landgraue of Hassia preuenteth the division which the Roman Catholics,
would have made amongst the Reformatists.
to put dissension between their adversaries, divided into two opinions, some
following the doctrine of Luther, and some of Zuinglius, if the Landgraue of
Hassia, a man wise and provident, had not withstood the danger; showing that
the difference was not great, and giving hope that it might easily be accorded,
and declaring the damage that would arise by the division, and the advantage
which their adversaries would have gained. After long disputation in the Diet,
to find out a form of composition, in the end a Decree was made, that, the
Decree of the former Diet of Spira, being wrested by the bad interpretations
to defend all absurdity of opinions, and The decree of the Diet of Spira.
therefore being now constrained to expound it, they ordained, That whosoever
had observed the Emperors Edict of Worms, should observe it still, compelling
also the people thereunto until the time of the Council, which the Emperor
gave assured hope should be called shortly: and he that had changed doctrine,
and could not be reduced without danger of sedition, should abide there, and
innouate nothing more until the Council began: that the Mass should not be
taken away, nor hindered in any place where the new doctrine was received; that
Anabaptisme should be punished capitally, according to the Edict published by
the Emperor, which they ratified, and that concerning the Sermons and Prints,
the Decrees made in the two last Diets of Noremberg should be observed; that
is, that the Preachers be circumspect, take heed of giving offensive words,
and give not occasion to the people to rise against the Magistrate, that they
propose no new opinions which have no foundation in the holy Scripture, but
preach the Gospel according to the interpretation approved by the Church,
without touching other things that be disputable, expecting the determination
of the Council, where all shall be lawfully decided.

107 The Elector of Saxony, and five Princes more, opposed themselves to this
Decree, saying, that they ought not to forsake the Decree made in the Is
opposed.
former Diet, by which every one might exercise his own religion until the
Council; which Decree being made by the common consent of all, could not
without the same consent, be changed. That the original cause of the
dissentions was very clearly perceived in the Diet of Noremberg, and the same
Pope, unto whom the demands were sent, and the hundred grieuances expounded,
confessed it; yet for all this, no amendment was seen. That, in all the
consultations it was ever concluded, that there was no way more convenient to
remove the controversies then by a Council. In the mean space, while this is
expected, to receive their Decree, were to deny the pure and undefiled word of
God; and to allow the Mass, were to renew the disorders. They said they
commended that part, that is, to preach the Gospel according to the
interpretations approved by the Church, but that there remained a doubt which
was the true Church. That to establish a Decree so obscure, was to lay open a
way to many tumults and controversies, and therefore would not by any means
give consent unto it. That they would give account to all men, and even unto
Caesar himself, of this their opinion. And that until the beginning of the
Council, either general of all Christendom, or national of Germany, they
will do nothing that may justly be reproved.

108 To this declaration fourteen principal cities of Germany adhered, How
the name of Protestants began.
and from hence came the name of Protestants, by which they are called who
follow the doctrine renewed by Luther. For these Princes and Cities gave out
their protestation and appeal, from that Decree unto Caesar, and to a future
General Council, or National of Germany, and to all judges not suspected.

109 And because mention is made of the difference in opinion between Luther
and Zuinglius, in matter of the Sacrament, it is fit to show here, how the The
difference in opinion between Luther and Zuinglius.
renouation of doctrine being begun in two places, by two persons independent
the one of the other, that is, by Luther in Saxony, and Zuinglius in Zuric,
they consented in all the heads of doctrine, until the year 1525. and then in
the explication of the mystery of the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist,
though they both agreed, in saying that the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ are in the Sacrament only in use, received with the heart and faith,
yet Luther taught that the words of our Lord (This is my body) ought to be
received in a naked and plain sense; and, on the contrary, Zuinglius taught
that the words were figuratively, spiritually, and Sacramentally, and not
carnally to be understood. And the contention always increased, and became
every day more bitter, especially on Martins side, who treated after a sharp
manner against the adverse party. And this gave matter to the Catholics in
this years Diet of Spira, to be able (as has been said) to put distrust and
distaste between the parties. But the Landgraue of Hassia, who, having
discovered the cunning of the adversaries, kept his side in peace, with hope to
reconcile the contrary opinions, as Well to maintain his promise, as to
withstand future dangers, procured a conference, solicited the Suisses to send
The conference of Marpurg. 1529
their men, and assigned Marpurg for the place of the disputation, and all the
month of October of the same year 1529. There came out of Saxony, Luther and
his two scholars, and out of Suisserland, Zuinglius and Ecolampadius. Only
Luther and Zuinglius disputed, and the disputation continued many days; yet
Luther and Zuinglius could not agree.
for all this it was impossible for them to agree; whether it were, because the
controversy being passed on so far, it seemed that the honor of the Authors
was in question, or because, as it happens in verbal contentions, the
smalnesse of the difference, nourishes the obstinacy of the parties: or
because, as a little after Martin wrote to a friend, seeing much tumult raised,
he would not by Zuinglius his form of words, which the Romanists so much
abhorred, make his Princes more odious, and expose them to greater danger. But
be the cause what it will, one more universal is very true, that it pleased
the Majesty of God to use this difference of opinions, for diverse effects,
which followed after. It was necessary to end the colloquie without
conclusion, but that, by the means of the Landgraue they agreed in this, that
being of accord in all other points, they ought hereafter to abstain from
bitterness in this particular, praying God to show some light of agreement.
Which conclusion, though resolved on with wisdom, and, as they said, with
charity, being not followed by their successors, hindered very much the
progress of the reformed Doctrine. For in cause of religion, every
sub-diuision is a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary part.

But the league between the Pope and Emperor being concluded, as has been
said, and the order set down for the Coronation, the City of The Pope and
Emperor met at Bologna about the coronation, but treated of diverse other
matters.
Bolonia was appointed for the place. For it seemed not convenient to the Pope
that this solemnity should be performed in Rome, in the presence of those who
had sacked it but two years before. This was acceptable also to Charles,
because it made the ceremonies more short: which he desired, that he might
pass into Germany so soon as might be. Therefore the Pope, as the greater
person, arrived first in Bolonia, and afterward the Emperor the fifth of
November, where he tarried four months, and remained in the same palace with
the Pope. Many things were treated of by these two Princes, partly for the
universal quiet of Christendom, and partly for the private interest of the
one and the other. The principal were, the general peace of Italy, and the
extirpation of the Protestants in Germany. To speak of the first, belongs
not to the subject that is handled, but concerning the Protestants, it was
proposed by one of the Emperors Counselors, that, considering the nature of
Germans, who are tenacious of liberty, it were better by fair means and
sweet representations, and by dissembling the knowledge of many things, to
cause the Princes to return to the obedience of the Pope. For this protection
being taken from the new Doctors, the residue would easily be remedied. And to
do this, a Council was the true and proper remedy: as well because it was
desired by them, as because every one would bow at that maiesticall and
venerable name.

But the Pope, who feared nothing more then a Council, especially if it were
to be celebrated beyond the mountains, free, and in the presence of those,
who already had openly shaken off the yoke of obedience, saw very well what an
easy thing it was for these to persuade the others also. He considered
further, that although the cause was common to him with all other Bishops, whom
the new opinions sought to deprive of the wealth they possessed, yet there
remained some matter of distaste, between them and the Court of Rome. For they
pretended that collation of Benefices, with the reseruations and preuentions,
was usurped from them, and a great part of their authority taken away, and
drawn to Rome, by calling of causes thither, by reseruations of dispensations,
and absolutions, and such like faculties, which formerly being common to all
Bishops, the Popes of Rome had appropriated to themselves. Whereupon it was
represented unto him, that the celebration of a Council would be a total
diminution of the Popes authority. Therefore he turned all his thoughts to
persuade the Emperor, that a Council And the Pope did infinitely dissuade the
Emperor from desiring a Council.
was not good, to pacify the stirs of Germany, but pernicious for the
Imperial authority in those Provinces. He put him in mind of two sorts of
persons, the multitude, and the Princes and Grandies: that it was probable
that the multitude was deceived, but to give it satisfaction in the demand of
a Council, was not to give it more light, but to bring in popular license. If
it were granted unto them to make question, or seek greater perspicuitie in
religion, they would immediately pretend also to give laws for government,
and to restrain the authority of Princes by Decrees: and when they have
obtained to examine and discuss the Ecclesiastical authority, they will
learn also to trouble the temporal. He shevved him that it was more easy to
oppose the first demands of a multitude, then after they had been gratified
in part, to prescribe them a measure. For the Princes and Grandies, he might
assure himself, that their end was not piety, but the making themselves Lords
of the Ecclesiastical goods, and being become absolute, to acknowledge the
Emperor nothing at all, or very little; and that many of them kept themselves
unspotted with that contagion, because they have not, as yet, discovered the
secret, which being made manifest, they will all address themselves to the
same scope. That there was no doubt but that the Papacio would lose much in the
loss of Germany: but the loss of the Emperor, and of the house of Austria
would be far greater. Against which, if he would make provision, he had no
other means, then severely to employ his authority and power, while the
greater part obeyed him: wherein expedition was necessary, before the number
increased, and the profit were discovered by all, which is reaped by following
those opinions. That unto expedition, so necessary, nothing is more contrary,
then to treat of a Council. For though every one incline himself to it, and
no impediment be interposed, yet it cannot be assembled but in length of
years, nor the causes handled without prolixitie: which thing only he would
consider. For it were infinite to speak of impediments which would be raised
for diverse interests rests of persons, who would oppose themselves with diverse
pretenses, at the least putting in delays, that it may come to nothing. That
there was a same spread, that the Popes will have no Council, for fear their
authority should be restrained, a reason, which makes no impression at all in
him, having his authority immediately from Christ, with promise, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And the experience of former times
has showed; that the Papal authority has never been diminished in any
Council, but according to the words of our Lord, the Fathers have ever
confessed it to be absolute and unlimited, as it is in deed. And when the
Popes in humility, or for some other respect, have forborne to use it
entirely, the Fathers have made him to put it wholly in execution. And this is
clearly to be seen by him that shall read the things that are past. For the
Popes have always employed this means against the new opinions of heretics,
and in every other necessity, with increase of their authority. And setting
aside the promise of CHRIST, which is the true and only foundation, and
considering the things but temporally the Council consists of Bishops; unto
Bishops the Papal greatness is profitable, because they are by that protected
against Prince and people. Kings and other Souereignes also who have
understood, and will understand well the rules of governing, will always
favor the Apostolical authority, having no other means to repress and
keep in order their Prelates, when they have the spirit to go beyond their
degree. The Pope concluded, that in his mind he was so assured of the issue,
that he could speak thereof as a Prophet; and affirm, that, by calling a
Council, greater disorders would ensue in Germany. For those that desire it,
pretend to continue until then in what they have begun, when their opinions
shall be condemned, and nothing else can succeed, they will take another
cloak to detract from the Council: and in conclusion the Emperors authority
in Germany will come to nothing, and in other places will be shaken; the Popes
power will be diminished in that Country, and in all the residue of the
world, will be increased the more. And therefore the Emperor should believe
his opinion, the rather because he was not moved by his proper interest, but
with a desire to see Germany reunited to the Church, and himself obeyed. That
nothing The Pope persuades the Emperor to execute the sentence of Leo, and the
Edict of Worms.
would take good effect, if he went not presently into Germany, and
immediately used his authority, intimating that the sentence of Leo, and the
Edict of Worms should be executed without any reply, not giving ear to any
thing the Protestants could say, either demanding a Council, or more
instruction, or alleging their appeal or protestation, or any other excuse,
because they are all but pretenses of impiety. That he should use force
against the first encounter of disobedience, which would be easy for him to
do against a few, having all the Ecclesiastical Princes, and the greater part
of the Seculars, who, to this end, would take arms with him. That this and no
other thing is congruous to the office of the Emperor, Advocate of the Church
of Rome, and to the oath taken in Aquisgran, and which he ought to take in
receiving the Crown from his hand. Lastly, that it was a clear case, that the
holding of a Council, or any other treaty or negotiation in this occasion,
would necessarily end with war. Therefore it was better to make trial of
composing these disorders, by the strength of authority, 1530 CLEMENT CHARLES
-- HENRY 8. FRANCIS (...)
and with absolute command, which would easily take good effect; and in case
it should not, rather to proceed to force of arms, then let the raines loose
to popular license, to the ambition of the Grandies, and perverseness of the
arch heretics.

These reasons unseemly in the mouth of Friar Julius de Medici, Ganalier Who
condescendeth thereunto.
of Malta, (for so the Pope was called before he was created Cardinal) much
more of Pope Clement the 7. did notwithstanding prevail with Charles, being
seconded by the persuasions of Mercurius de Gattinara, the Emperors
Chancellor and Cardinal, (unto whom the Pope made many promises, and
particularly that in the first promotion of Cardinals, which he then prepared
to make, he would have regard to his kindred and dependants) and by the
Emperors proper inclination to have more absolute authority in Germany, then
was granted to his grandfather, or his fathers grandfather.

In Bolonia all the solemn acts and ceremonies of the coronation were 1530 The
Emperor is crowned in Bolonia.
performed, which was finished the 14. of February, and Caesar being resolved
to go personally into Germany, to give an end to those disorders, be
intimated an imperial Diet for the 8. of April, and in March he began his
journey.

The Emperor parted from Bolonia with this firm resolution, to labor And
resolves to employ his authority in matter of religion.
in the Diet, with authority and command, that the Princes separated one from
another, should return to the obedience of the Church of Rome, and to
prohibit Sermons and books of the reformed doctrine. And the Pope gave him
for company the Cardinal Campeggio, as Legate, who should Campeggio the Legate
goes with him. And Peter Paul Vergerius to Ferdinand.
follow him to the Diet. He sent also Peter Paul Vergerius, Nuncio to King
Ferdinand, with instruction to labor with him, that there should be no
disputation in the Diet, nor consultation concerning Religion, nor any
resolution taken to call a Council in Germany to that purpose; and to gain
the favor of that Prince, (who, being the Emperors brother, and having spent
many years in Germany, he thought was able to do much) he should grant him
power to take a contribution of the Clergy of Germany, for the war against
the Turks, and to make use of the gold and silver appointed for ornament of
the Churches.

Almost all the Princes arrived at the Diet before Caesar, who came thither the
thirteenth of June, the eve of Corpus Christi day, and went in The Diet of
Ausburg. The Protestants refuse to go in procession.
procession the day following; but was not able to obtain that the Protestants
would content themselves to be there. Which the Legate perceiving, with
infinite displeasure, for the prejudice done to the Pope by this contumacie, as
he termed it, to go a step further, and to cause the Protestants to assist
at the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, was a means that the Emperor eight
days after, being to begin the assembly, gave order to the Elector of Saxony
to carry the sword before him, as he went thither, according The Duke of
Saxonte carries the sword.] after a long disputation whether he might ^^tely
assist at the Mass.
to his office, and to stand at the Mass. The Elector thought that by yielding
he should contradict his profession, and by refusing should loose his
dignity, having found out, that in case of his denial, the Emperor would
give the honor to another. But he was counseled by his Divines Luthers
Scholars, that he might do it without offense to his conscience, assisting as
at a civil, not as at a religious Ceremony: by the example of the Prophet
Elizeus, who thought it not inconuinient that the captain of the troops of
Syria, converted to the true Religion, should bow himself in the Temple of the
Idol, when the King bowed, who leaned on his arm. This (...)sell was not
approved by others, because by it one might conclude that every one might
lawfully be present at all the Rites of another Religion, as at civil
Ceremonies, for no man could want a cause of necessity, or vtilities which
might induce thereunto. But others approouing the counsel, and the purpose of
the Elector concluded, that if the new doctors had formerly used this reason,
and would use it hereafter, a gate had not been opened in many occasions to
diverse inconveniences, because it would be lawful to every one by that
example, for preservation of his dignity, or his territory, or the favor of
his Lord, or other eminent person, not to refuse to give assistance to any
action whatsoever, at which, though others were presents at a religious act,
he assisted, as at a civil thing.

In that Mass; Vicenzo Pimpinello Archbishop of Rosano the Popes, Nuncio, The
Sermon of Vicen(...) Pi(...) the Popes (...)
made an Oration in Latin before the Offertorie; in which he spoke not a word
of any spiritual or religious matter, but vpbraided Germany for having
suffered so many wrongs by the Turks without revenge and exhorted them by many
examples of ancient Captains of the Roman Commonwealth, to make war
against them. He said, the disadvantage of Germany was that the Turk obeyed
one Prince only, whereas in Germany many obeyed not at all: that the Turks
live in one religion, and the Germans every day invent new, and mock the old,
as if it were become mouldie. He taxed them, that being desirous to change the
faith, they had not found our one more holy at the least, and more wise.
Finally he exhorted them, that imitating Scipio Nasica, Cato, the people of
Rome, and their ancestors, they should observe the Catholic Religion, forsake
those nouities, and apply themselves to the war.

In the first Session of the Diet, the Legate, Cardinal Campeggio, presented
The Leg(...) presents his letters, and makes an oration.
the letters of his Legation, and in the assembly, in the presence of the
Emperor, made an Oration in Latin, the substance whereof was, that the cause
of so many Sects, which then reigned, was want of charity and love, that the
change of doctrine and rites, had not only rent the Church in pieces, but
brought all policy to a miserable desolation. For remedying of which
mischief, the former Popes having sent Legates to the Diets, and no fruit
coming thereby, Clement had sent him to exhort, to counsel, and to employ all
his endeavors to restore the true doctrine. And having commended the Emperor,
he exhorted all to obey whatsoever he shall ordain and resolve upon
concerning Religion, and Articles of belief. He persuaded them to make war
against the Turks, promising that the Pope would spare no cost to assist them.
He prayed them for the love of CHRIST, for their Countries, and their own
safety, that, laying aside all errors, they would apply themselves to set
Germany, and all Christendom at liberty. That in so doing, the Pope,
successor of S. Peter, gave them his benediction.

The Archbishop of Mentz answered the Legates oration, by order of the And is
answerred by the Archbishop of (...)
Emperor and the Diet, that Caesar, as supreme Advocate of the Church, will
use all means to compose the disorders, will employ all his forces in the
(...) against the Turks, and that all the Princes will join themselves (...)
that their action^ shall be approved by God and the Pope After this, many
(...) (...) being heard, the Elector of Sacco(...) and protestant Cities ^oyned
with him, presented to the Emperor she confession of their faith, written
Latin and Dutch, (...) it might be read. But the Emperor refusing to have it
The Lutherans do present a confession of their faith. And so do the Zuinglians.
(...) in public it was put off until the next day, when the Legate would
not be present for fear of receiving some prejudice. But the Princes being
assembled before the Emperor in an Hall, capable to receive about (...)
persons, it was read with aloud voice. And the Cities, which followed the
doctrine of Zuinglius, presented apart the confession of their faith, not
differing from the former, but only in the point of the Eucharist!

The confession of the Princes, which afterward from this place, where it was
read, was called Augustana, cont^ined two parts: in the first were The name of
the Augustan confession bega(...)
expounded (...)de of the unity of the Godhead, of original sin, of the
incarnation, of justification, of the ministry of the Gospel, of the Church,
of administering the Sacraments, of Baptism, of the Eucharist, of Confession,
of Penance, of the use of the Sacraments, and the Ecclesiastical order, of the
rites of the Church, of the civil Commonwealth, of the last judgment, of
free will, of the cause of sin, of faith, of good works, and worshipping of
Saints. In the second were expounded the doctrines which were different from
the Church of Rome, and the abuses which the Confessionists reproved. And
these were declared at large in seven articles; of the holy Communion, marriage
of Priests, of the Mass, of Confession, of the distinction of meats, of
Monastical vows, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. In conclusion they
offered, in case it were needful, a more full information. But in the proheme
thereof they delivered, that they had put their confession in writing to obey
the Propose of his Majesty, that all men ought to present their opinions and
therefore if the other Princes will give up theirs in writing, they are ready
to confer peaceably with them, that they may come to an agreement; whereunto
in case they could not come, his Majesty, having given them to understand in
all the former Diets, that he could not determine or conclude any matter of
Religion for diverse respects then alleged, but that he would persuade the Pope
to call a general Council, and finally having caused it to be said in the
Diet of Spira, that the differences between his Majesty and the Pope being
ready to be composed, there could be no doubt but that he would give
consent unto it, they offered to app(...), and to give a reason, and make a
defense of their cause in such a general, free, and Christian assembly, of
which it has always bin treated, in all the Diets celebrated during the time
of his Empire. Unto which Council, and to his Majesty, they have formerly in
due form, and upon good cause appealed, unto which appeal they do yet
adhere, not intending to abandon it, neither by this treaty, nor by any other,
if the difference be not charitably reduced first to a Christian concord.

This was the only Act of the first day. But the Emperor, before he made any
resolution, would have the Legates advice. Who, having read The Legate would
not censure the Confession.
and considered the confession, together with the Divines which he brought out
of Italy, though he was of opinion that it ought to be opposed, and a
censure published under his name; yet, foreseeing that it would give occasion
of greater tumults, and saying plainly that the difference for the most part
seemed verbal, and that it imported not much whether one spoke after one
manner or after another, and that it was not reasonable that the Apostolical
Sea should take part in the disputations of the Schools, he con^ented not to
have his name used in the contentions. And he answered the Emperor, that for
the present, there was no cause to make any (...) examination of the doctrine,
but to consider the example which would be given to all unquiet and subtle
wits, who would not have wanted infinite other nouities to propose, with no
less probability, which would have been heard with greedines, because of the
itching of cares which they stir up in the world, and that by correcting the
abuses that were noted, greater inconueniencies would be raised then those
which one sought to remedy. That his opinion was that the doctrine of the
Lutherans being read, to remove all prejudice, a confutation thereof should be
read likewise, which should not be But gave order that a confutation thereof
should be read, and no copy given.
published in copies, for fear of opening a way to disputations, but means
should be used, that the Protestants should (...) from going further on, by
proposing favors and threats. But the Confession being (...) it wrought diverse
effects in the minds of the Catholics who heard it. Some thought the
Protestants more wicked, then they were persuaded, before they were informed of
their particular opinions others on the contrary, remitted much of the bad
conceit they had against them, esteeming their opinions not to absurd as before
they did, yea, for a great part of the abuses, they confessed they were justly
reprehended. It is not to be omitted that Cardinal Mattheo Langi, Archbishop of
Salzburg, told every one, that the reformation of the Mass The Archbishop of
Salzburg would not have the world reformed by a Monk.
was honest, the liberty of meats convenient, and the demand just, to be
disburthened of so many commandments of men, but that a poor Monk should
reform all, was not to be endured. And Cornelius Scoperus, the Emperors
Secretary, said, that if the Protestant Preachers had money, they would
easily buy of the Italians what Religion pleased them best, but without gold,
it was impossible to make theirs shine in the world.

The Emperor, according to the Legates advice, approved also by his own
Counselors, desirous to compose all by a negative, went first about to
separate the Ambassadors of the cities from joining with the Princes: which
project not succeeding, he caused a confutation to be made of what the
Protestants put up in writing, and another of that which was produced by the
Cities. And having called the whole Diet together, he told the Protestants
that he had considered of the confession presented unto him, and given order to
some pious and learned men, to deliver their opinion thereof. And here he made
the confutation of it to be read, in which, many of their opinions being taxed,
it was confessed in the end, that in the Church of Rome, there were some things
fit to be amended, against which he promised that provision should be made,
(...) therefore that the Protestants ought to refer themselves unto him, and
return to the Church, assuring them to obtain all their just demands, but in
case they did otherwise, he would not fail to show himself protector and
defender of it.

The Protestant Princes offered to perform whatsoever could be done with a
safe conscience, and if out of the holy Scripture, any error in their doctrine
were showed to correct it, or to make a further declaration, in case it were
necessary. And because some of the points proposed by them, were granted in
the confutation, and some rejected, if a copy of the confutations were given
them, they should be expounded more clearly.

After many treaties, seven Catholics, and seven Protestants were chosen, A
Colloquie between the Protestants and Catholics.
to confer together, to find out a means of composition: who, not being able
to agree the number was restrained to three a piece. And though some few small
points of doctrine, and other petty things; belonging to some rites, were
agreed on, yet in conclusion, it was perceived, that the conference could
produce no concord at all, because neither party was willing to grant to the
other any thing of importance. Many days being spent in this treaty, the
refutation of the Cities confession was read: whereunto their Ambassadors
answered, that many Articles of their writing were repeated otherwise then The
answer of the Protestant Ambassadors to the confutation.
they were written by them, and many other things proposed by them, drawn to a
bad sense, to make them odious: unto all which objections they would have
answered, if a copy of the confutation had been given them: in the mean
time, they prayed them nor to believe any calumny, but to expect their
defense. They denied to give them a copy, and said that the Emperor would
not suffer, that the points of Religion should be put into disputation.

The Emperor assayed by way of canuase to persuade the Princes, telling them,
that they were but few, their doctrine new, that it had been sufficiently
confuted in this Diet, that their boldness was great to condemn of error,
heresy, and false religion, the Imperial Majesty, and so many Princes and
States of Germany, with whom, themselves being compared, made not a number;
and which is worse, to esteem also for heretics, their own fathers and
ancestors, and to demand a Council, and yet to go on still in the errors.
These persuasions auayling nothing, because they denied theirs to be new, and
the rites of the Roman Church old, the Emperor employing other remedies,
unto which he was advised by the Legate Campeggio, caused every one to be
treated with apart, proposing unto them some satisfaction in their proper
interests, and laying before them diverse oppositions and crosses, which he
would have raised against their proceedings, in case they persisted in their
resolution, not to reunite themselves to the Church. But whither those thought
to bring about their own designs by perseuering, or preferred the
preservation of their Religion, before all other interest, the persuasions,
though very potent, produced none effect. Neither could the Emperor obtain of
them, to grant the exercise of the Roman religion within their territories,
until the time of the Council, which he promised should be intimated within
six months, because the Protestants had discovered that this was the
invention of the Popes Legate, who not being able to obtain his purpose for
the present, thought it sufficient, if by the establishing the Roman doctrine
in every place, he put confusion among the people who were alienated already,
whereby away might be opened to those accidents which might give occasion to
root out the new. For concerning the promise, to intimate a Council within
six months, he well knew that many impediments might be pretended in the
very nicke and finally all expectation deluded.

It being impossible to conclude any thing, the Protestants departed in the end
of October, and the Emperor made an Edict, to establish the ancient rites of
the Roman Catholic religion; which contained in sum, The Edict of A(...).
that nothing should be changed in the Mass, in the Sacrament of Confirmation,
and extreme unction, that the Images should not be taken out of any place,
and those restored that were taken away already, that it should not be lawful
to deny free will, nor to hold opinion, that only faith does justify, that
the Sacraments, Ceremonies, Rites, Obsequies of the dead, should be observed in
the same manner they were before, that Benefices should be given to fit
persons, and that the married Priests should forsake their wives, or be
banished, all sales of Church goods, and other usurpations made void, that in
preaching and teaching, no man should pass these terms, but the people
should be exhorted to hear Mass, to invoke the Virgin Mary, and the other
Saints, to observe the feasts and fastings, that the Monasteries, and other
sacred Edifices, which have been destroyed, should be rebuilt, and the Pope
should be requested to intimate a Council within six months, in a convenient
place, and after to begin it within a year at the most, that all things
remain firm and constant, and no appeal or exception to the contrary take
place, and that every one ought to employ all his forces, possessions, life,
and blood, to preserve this Decree, and that the Imperial Chamber proceed
against whosoever shall oppose it.

The Pope having received advice from his Legate, of what was done in the Diet,
was touched with an inward grief of mind, discovering that, The Pope was
displeased with the Emperor for me^ling in religion, but especially for
promising a Council.
though Charles had received his counsel, by using his authority, and
threatening violence, yet he had not proceeded as advocate of the Church of
Rome, unto whom it belongs not to take knowledge of the cause, but to be a
mere executor of the Popes Decrees: whereunto was quite contrary to have
received the confessions, and caused them to be read, and to have instituted a
conference to accord the differences. He complained beyond measure, that some
points were agreed unto, and especially that he had consented to the abolition
of some rites; thinking that the Popes authority was violated, when things of
so great moment were treated of, without his priuity: at the least if his
Legates authority had been interposed, it had been tolerable. After he
considered that it was a great prejudice to him, that the Prelates had
consented to it. But the promising of a Council, which he so much abhorred,
pressed him above all: in which, though honorable mention were made of his
authority, yet to subscribe six months, to call it, and a year to begin
it, was to meddle with that which was proper to the Pope, and to make the
Emperor the principal, and the Pope his minister. By the observation of these
beginnings, he concluded that there was little hope in the affairs of Germany,
and that he was to think of a defensive, that the disease might not pass to
other parts of the body of the Church. And because that which was past, could
not be yndone, he thought it not wisdom to show it was done against his
will, but to make himself the author 1531 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8.
FRANCIS 1. He writes to al Princes that he would call a Council, though he
never meant it.
of it, that he might receive a less blow in his reputation.

Therefore he gave an account of the things past to all Kings and Princes
dispatching his letters the first of December, all of the same tenor, that he
hoped the Lutheran heresy might be extinguished by the presence of the
Emperor, and that principally for that cause he went to Bolonia to entreat
him for, it, though he knew that of himself he was very well affected that way.
But having received advice from the Emperor, and from his Legate Campeggio,
that the Protestants are become more obstinate, he has communicated the whole
to the Cardinals, and together with them, sees clearly, that there remains
no other remedy, but that which has been used by his Predecessors, that is a
general Council. Therefore he exhorts them to assist in the Council that
shall be called, either in person, or by their Ambassadors; a thing so holy,
that he is resolved to put it in execution; so soon as it is possible,
intimating a general and free Council, in some fit place in Italy. The
Popes letters were known to the whole world, because his ministers endeavored
in every place to give notice of them unto all: not because the Pope or the
Court desired to apply their minds to a Council, from which they were most
auerse, but to entertain the world; that by expectation of the remedy of the
abuses and inconveniences, they might remain constant in obedience. Yet few
were deceived; for it was not hard to discover, that to desire Princes to send
Ambassadors to a Council, whereof And his collusion is discovered by many.
neither time, nor place, nor manner was resolved on, was too much affected
prevention.

But the Protestants also took occasion by these letters to write likewise to
the Kings and Princes: and the next year in February they framed 1531 The
Protestants do write likewise to all Princes.
a letter to every one under a common name of all, of this tenor. That the old
complaint of pious men against the vices of the Clergy, noted by John Gerson,
Nicolas Clemangis, and others in France, and of John Collet in England and of
others elsewhere, was known unto their Majesty's, which also happened in
Germany in these last years, by occasion of the detestable and infamous gain
which some Friars made by publishing Indulgences. And passing from this to
relate whatsoever happened until the last Diet, they said that their
adversaries endeavored to incite the Emperor and other Kings against them,
using diverse calumnies; which as they have withstood in Germany, so they will
more easily confute in a general Council of the whole world; whereunto they
will refer themselves, so that it may be such a one, in which preiudices and
passion may take no place. That amongst the Calumnies laid upon them, this is
the principal, that they condemn all Magistrates, and vilify the dignity of
Laws: which is not only not true, but, as they have showed in the Diet of
Augusta, their doctrine honors Magistrates, and defends the strength of
Laws, more then ever has been done in other ages, teaching Magistrates that
their state and kind of life is most acceptable to God, and preaching to the
people that they are bound, by Gods commandment to give honor and obedience
to them, and that he will not leave unpunished the disobedient, because the
Magistrate has his government by divine ordination. That they have desired to
signify these things to them, Kings, and Princes, for clearing of themselves
before them, praying them not to believe the calumnies, and to suspend their
judgments, until those that are accused have place to acquit themselves
publicly. And therefore they will desire the Emperor that he would call a
godly and free Council in Germany, as soon as might be, and not to use
force, until the matter be disputed, and lawfully defined.

The French King answered with very courteous letters, in substance, giving The
answer of the French King to the Protestants.
them thanks for communicating unto him a business of so great weight: he
showed them that he was glad to understand of their innocence, and did
approve the instance they made, that the vices might be amended, wherein they
shall find his Will to concur with theirs: that their requiring of a
Council was just and holy, yea, necessary, not only for the affairs of
Germany, but of the whole Church: that it was not honest to use Arms, where
the controversies may be ended with treaties. The letters of the King of
England were of the same Tenor, but that he The answer of the King of
England.
declared in particular, that himself also desired a Council, and that he
would mediate with Charles, to find out a means of composition.

The Emperors Decree being known throughout all Germany, they began
immediately to accuse the professors of the new Religion, in the chamber
Sentences were made in the chamber of Spirae, against the Protestants, and
contemned.
of Spira, some for zeal, others for revenge, and some also to possess the
goods of their adversaries. Many sentences were made, many declarations, and
many confiscations against Princes, Cities, and private men, and none took
place, but some against private men, whose goods were within the territories of
Catholics. By others the sentences were contemned, with great diminution of
the honor, not only of the Chamber, but of the Emperor also; who soon
perceived that the remedy was not fitted to themaladie, which increased daily.
For the Protestant Princes and Cities (besides that they esteemed little the
judgments of the Chamber) combined themselves together, prepared for their
defense, and fortified themselves with foreign intelligences: so that it
appeared, that in case things went on, a War would arise, dangerous for both
parties, and whatsoever the issue was, pernicious for Germany. Wherefore he was
willing that some Princes should interpose, and find out a way of agreement. To
this end many heads and conditions of composition were negotiated all this year
1531, and to give them some conclusion, a Diet at Ratisbon was appointed for
the next year.

In the mean space, all things remained full of suspicions, and the Zuinglius
takes arms, and is slain.
diffidences between the one part and the other, rather increased. And this
year also, there happened a notable event among the Suisses, which composed
the disputes between them. For though the controversy in religion, between
Zuric, Berne, and Basil on the one side, and the Popish Cantons on the other,
was often composed, by the mediation of diverse, yet at that time the hatred was
so great between them; and new causes of distasts arising daily, the
contentions were often renewed. And this year they were greatest of all, those
of Zuric and Berne attempting to hinder the victualling of five Cantons, which
caused both parties to arm. With those of Zuric, Zuinglius took arms, though
his friends persuaded him to remain at home, and leave that charge to others.
Whereunto he would by no means yield, that 1532 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8.
FRANCIS 1.
he might not seem to encourage the people in the Church only, and forsake
them in time of danger. The eleventh of October they came to a set battle, in
which, those of Zuric had the worst, and Zuinglius was slain; for which the
Catholics more rejoiced, then for the victory. They did diverse disgraces to
the corpse, and the death of that man was the chiefest cause of Whose death
caused a composition between the Cantons.
a new composition between them, both the parties retaining their own
religion. The five Catholic Cantons assured themselves, that he being
removed, who, by his Sermons changed religion in the Country, all would
return to the old. In which hope, they were confirmed the more, because And
makes Ecolampadius, die with grief
Ecolampadius, a Minister in Basil, of the same opinion with Zuinglius, dyed
within a few days after with grief, for the loss of his friend, the
Catholics attributing the death both of the one and the other, to the
providence of God, who, compassionating the Heluetians, had punished and taken
away the Authors of their discord Surely it is a pious and religious thought,
to attribute the disposition of every event, to the providence of God: but to
determine to what end those events are directed, by that high Wisdom, is not
far from presumption. Men are so straightly and religiously wedded to their
own opinions, that they are persuaded that God loves and favors them, as
much as themselves. But the things that happened afterward, showed that the
Cantons called Gospellers, made greater progress in the doctrine received,
after the death of these two: a manifest Argument, that it came from a higher
cause then the labors of Zuinglius.

An agreement between the Protestants and the others, was negotiated 1532
in Germany, by the Electors of Ments and the Palatine, and many writings An
agreement between the Protestants and the Catholics was negotiated, but could
not be effected.
were made and changed, because they gave not full satisfaction to either of
the parties. This made the Emperor resolve, that a Council was exceeding
necessary; and having imparted his opinion to the French King, he sent one to
Rome by post, to treat thereof with the Pope and College of Cardinals. The
Emperor made none account of the place prescribed, nor of any other special
condition, in case Germany were so satisfied that the Protestants would The
Emperor does seriously negotiate a Council.
be present, and submit themselves, which satisfaction the King also thought to
be just, and offered to join with him. The Embassage was delivered to the Pope
in these terms, that the Emperor having used all means to reunite the
Protestants to the Church, by employing authority, threats, treaties, and
justice also, nothing now remaining, but either war, or a Council, in regard
he could not take arms, by reason of the Turks preparations against him, he
was constrained to take the other resolution, and therefore did beseech his
Holiness, that, imitating his Predecessors, he would be content to grant a
Council, whereunto the Protestants would submit themselves without
difficulty, having offered diverse times to stand to the determination of one
that is free, in which the Judges might be men without partiality. The Pope,
who by no means would have a Council, hearing the request, and not being able
to give a plain negative, made a grant, but so as The Pope consents to the
Council upon such a condition as he knew would not be accepted.
that he knew it would not be accepted. For the place he proposed one of the
Cities of the Churches State, naming Bolonia, Parma, Piacenza, cities capable
to receive and feed a multitude, healthful, with a large territory round
about: whither the Protestants ought not to make difficulty to got, because
they should be heard: unto whom he would give a full and ample safe conduct,
and himself would be there in person, that every thing might be handled with
Christian peace, and no man wronged. That he could by no means consent to
celebrate it in Germany, because Italy would not endure to be neglected, and
Spain and France, who in Ecclesiastical matters yield unto Italy, for the
prerogative of the Papacy, which is proper unto it, would not give place unto
Germany, and the authority of that Council would be little esteemed, where
only Duch-men were present, and some few of another nation. For undoubtedly
the Italians, Frenchmen, and Spaniards would not be induced to go thither.
The medicine is not in the power of the sick, but of the Physician. Therefore
Germany corrupted with the multiplicitie and variety of opinions, could not
give right judgment in this subject, as Italy, France, and Spain, which are
uncorrupted as yet, and wholly persevere in subjection to the Apostolical Sea,
which is mother and mistress of all Christians. For the manner of defining
things in the Council, the Pope said there needed no words, because no
difficulty could arise therein, except they would make a new form of a
Council, never used in the Church. That it was manifest, that none had voice
in a Council, by right of the Canon, but Bishops, and Abbats by custom, and
some others by the Popes privilege: the others that desire to be heard, ought
to submit themselves to the determination of these; every Decree being made in
the name of the Synod, if the Pope be not present in person: but when he is
there, every Decree passes under his name, only with the approbation of the
Fathers of the Synod. The Cardinals likewise spoke in the same key, The
Cardinals will not believe that a Council is necessary.
but always interposed some reason, to show that a Council was not
necessary, so long as the determination of Leo stood in force, which being
executed, all would be remedied; and he that will not refer himself to the
determination of the Pope, especially accompanied with the counsel of the
Cardinals, will much more despise all Conciliarie Decrees. That it was manifest
that the Protestants call not a Council, but only to gain time, and to
hinder the execution of the Edict of Worms. For they well know that the
Council cannot choose but approve that which Leo has determined, except they
would be a conuenticle, or unlawful assembly, as all those be, who have
separated themselves from the doctrine and obedience of the Pope.

The Emperors Ambassador, to find out a mean, had many audiences The
Empeors Ambassadous labors to persuade the Pope to choose a place in Germany
for the Council, but cannot obtain it.
with the Pope, and with two Cardinals, deputed by him over this matter. He put
him in mind, that neither he, nor France, nor Spain, had need of a
Council, nor did desire it; and that therefore it was to no purpose to have
respect unto them: that it was sought for, to cure the diseases of Germany,
unto which, because it ought to be proportionated, it was fit to choose a
place, where all that Nation might be present. That, for other Countries, the
principal subjects were sufficient, because nothing was to be handled
concerning them; that the Cities proposed; were in all respects exceeding fit,
but only that they were far distant from Germany; and though the safe
conduct of his Holiness ought to secure every one, yet the Protestants were
suspicious, for diverse reasons, both old, and new, amongst which, they esteemed
not the least, that Leo the tenth, his cousin, had condemned them already, and
declared them heretics. And although all their reasons are resolved with this
only, that every one ought to rely upon the Faith of the Pope, yet his
Holiness, by his great wisdom and experience, might know that it was
necessary to yield to the imperfection of others, and for pity, to
accommodate himself to that, which though in rigor is not due, yet in equity
is convenient. And concerning the deliberatiue voices of the Council, Who
ought to have voices in Council.
he discoursed, that they being brought in, partly by custom, and partly by
privilege, a large field was opened unto him, to exercise his benignity, by
introducing another custom, more fit for the present times. For if the Abbots
were formerly admitted by custom, because they were more learned and
intelligent in religion, it is reason to grant the same now, to persons of
equal or greater learning, though they have not the title of Abbats. But the
privilege ministers matter to give satisfaction unto all. For by granting the
same privilege to every one that is able to do God service in that
congregation, there will be a Council exactly pious and Christian, such as
the world desires. Unto these reasons answer being made, with the motives
before named, the Emperor could obtain nothing of the Pope; whereby the
business remained imperfect for that time, and the Emperor applied himself
to solicit the treaty of peace already begun: which being brought to a good
conclusion, and the Turkish war drawing near, at the last a composition was
published the three and twentieth of Iulie, that A peace of religion
conclu(...) Germani, July 23. called the IUterim.
there should be common and public peace between the Emperors Majesty, and
all the States of the Empire of Germany, as well Ecclesiastical as secular,
until a general, free, and Christian Council, and in the mean space, that
none should make war against another for cause of religion, nor take spoil,
or besiege him, but that there should be true amity, and Christian unity
amongst all. That the Emperor should procure the intimation of the Council,
within six months, and the beginning within a year; Which if it be not
possible, all the States of the Empire should be called together, to resolve
of what is fit to be done, as well for the Council as for other necessary
things. That the Emperor should suspend all the judicial processes, in cause
of religion, made by his Fiscall, or others; against the Elector of Saxony,
and his adherents, until the future Council, or the forenamed resolution of
the States.

On the other side, the Elector of Saxony, and the other Princes and Cities,
should promise faithfully to observe this public peace, to give due obedience
The Emperor pro(...) the calling of a (...)ou ^within 6. months.
to the Emperor, and convenient aid against the Turk. This peace the
Emperor ratified, and confirmed by his letters, dated the second of August,
and suspended also all processes, promising to do his endeavor for the calling
of a Council within six months, and for the beginning of it within a year.
He gave also an account to the Catholic Princes, of the embassage sent to
Rome, for that end, adding that some difficulties of weight could not as yet
be accorded, concerning the manner and place. But he would continue his
endeavors that they should be resolved, and that the Pope should grant the
convocation; hoping that he would not be wanting to the necessity of the
Commonwealth, and his own duty: but in case this succeeded not, he would
intimate another Diet to find a remedy herein.

This was the first liberty of Religion, which those that adhered to Luthers
confession, called the Augustan, obtained by public decree: whereof the world
talked diversely. At Rome the Emperor was reprehended, for putting The first
liberty of the Augustan confession.
his sickle (as they said) into another man's harvest, every Prince being
obliged, by the strictest bonds of censures, to the extirpation of those that
are condemned by the Pope: wherein they ought to spend their goods, state, and
life: and the Emperors much more, because they do so solemnly swear unto it.
This not being performed by Charles, an example not heard of, there was cause
to fear a sudden revenge from heaven. But others commended the piety and
wisdom of the Emperor, who labored more to prevent the danger, imminent to
Christendom, by the arms of the Turk, a direct opposer of Religion; against
whom he could not have made resistance without securing the Protestants, who
are Christians too, though dissenting from others, in some particular rites,
which is a tolerable difference. That the Maxim, so renowned in Rome, that it
is more meet to persecute heretics, then infidels, was well fitted to the
Popes dominion, but not to the benefit of Christendom. Some also, not
regarding the Turks, said that Kingdoms and Principalities, ought not to be
governed by the laws and interests of Priests, who are more partial, for
their own greatness and profits, then any other, but according to the
exigence of the public good, which requires now and then, the tolerating of
some defect. That it was the duty of every Christian Prince, to endeavor
equally, that his Subjects maintain the true faith, as also that they observe
all the Commandments of God, and not this, more then that. But when a vice
cannot be rooted out, without the ruin of the State, it is acceptable to the
Majesty of God to permit it: neither is the obligation greater to punish
heretics, then fornicators; who if they be tolerated, for public quiet, it is
no greater inconvenience, if those be permitted, who defend not all our
opinions. And though it be not easy to allege examples of Princes, which
have done this within these 800. years, yet he that will consider the times
before, will see it done by all, and laudably too, when necessity has
required. If Charles having attempted to compose by all means the differences
in religion, has not been able to bring any thing to pass, who can reprehend
him, if, to try what can be done by a Council, he has established peace in
the mean time in Germany, that he may not see her ruin? None knows how to
govern a territory, but the Prince himself, who alone knows all the
necessities of it. He will overthrow his State, whosoever will govern with
respect unto the interests of others, and it would be to as much purpose to
govern Germany, as the Romans desire, as to govern Rome as the Dutchmen
please.

No man that shall read this occurrence, ought to marvel, if these and The
Romanists would have every country governed according to their interests.
many more discourses did run in the minds of men, it being a thing which did
inwardly touch them. For the case was, whether every Christian Country ought
to be governed, according to its own necessity and profit, or was a slave of
one only City, to maintain the commodities whereof, all others should spend
themselves, and become desolate. The times following 1533 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5.
HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
have taught, and will teach perpetually, that the Emperors resolution was
conformable to the laws of God and man. The Pope, who was more troubled herein
then all others, as one who was most intelligent in State affairs, saw very
well that he had no reason to complain; but he concluded herewithall, that
his interests could not concur with those of the Emperor, and The Pope is
aliened again from the Emperor.
therefore his mind was wholly aliened from him.

The Turk being chased out of Austria, the Emperor passed into Italy, and had
conference with the Pope in Bolonia, where they treated of all the common
affairs: and though the league was renewed between them, yet the Pope was not
fully satisfied, both for the liberty of Religion granted in Germany, as The
league is renewed between them, but suspicions remain in the Popes mind.
has been said, and because they agreed not concerning the Council, as might
cure the maladies of Germany, (in conformity to his Ambassadors proposition the
year before) which was impossible if the Protestants had no part therein. The
Pope continued in his resolution, not to admit of a Council by any means, but
in case of necessity, and which should not be celebrated out of Italy, and
wherein none should have a deliberatiue voice but those unto whom the Popes
laws did allow it. The Emperor would have condescended to the Popes will, if
there had been means to give the Protestants contentment; wherein that he
might give his Holiness certain information, he proposed unto him that he The
Pope and Emperor resolve to send a Nuncio and an Ambassador into Germany.
should send a Nuncio into Germany, and himself an Ambassador, to find out a
form and temper for these difficulties; promising that his Ambassador should
govern himself as the Nuncio would. The Pope accepted the match, though he
were fully satisfied of the Emperor, assuring himself, that in case the
negotiation of both those ministers had taken none effect, Charles would have
The Pope resolves to make an alliance with France, to be able to withstand the
Emperor. 15^3
gone about to have given Germany satisfaction; and from that time Clement
resolved to make a straight alliance with France, to be able, by that means,
to hinder whatsoever the Emperor should propose.

The Pope after Easter 1533. sent Hugo Rangone, Bishop of Rheggio, to execute
the proposition accepted by him: who coming with the Emperors Ambassador to
John Frederic, Elector of Saxony, (who had succeeded his deceased father a few
months before) as chief of the Protestants, declared his commission; that
Clement from the beginning of his Papacy, had always an extraordinary desire
to compose the differences in Religion, sprung up in Germany, and for that end
had sent thither many learned persons; and though their pains took not
effect, the Pope notwithstanding had hope, that at the Emperors going thither
after his coronation, all would be brought to perfection. But having not
obtained the end he desired, the Emperor returned into Italy, and showed him
that there was no fitter means then a general Council, which the Princes of
Germany desired also. With which the Pope being well pleased, as well for the
public good, as to give the Emperor contentment, had sent him, to agree with
them, concerning the manner of the future Council, and of the time and place.
And for the form and order thereof, the Pope proposed some necessary
conditions.

The first, that it should be free and general, as the Fathers were wont to
celebrate it in former times. Then, that those that demand a Council, should
promise and give assurance to receive the decrees that shall be made. For
otherwise it would be labor in vain, it being to no purpose to make laws,
which would not be observed. Thirdly, that he hat could not be present should
send Ambassadors to make promise, and put in caution. After this, that it was
necessary, that in the mean while, all things remained as they are, The
conditions of the Council required by the Pope.
and that no innovation were made before the Council. The Nuncio added, that
for the place the Pope had not long, frequent, and great consideration. For it
was necessary to provide one that should be fertile to afforde victuals to so
famous a concourse, and of an healthful air too, that the progress may not
be hindered by sickness. And in conclusion Piaconza, Places for the Council
proposed by the Nuncio.
Bolonia, or Mantua seemed unto him very commodious, leaving it to the choice
of Germany to elect which of these places they would. But he added that if any
Prince would not come, or not send Ambassadors, it would beeiust for all the
others to defend the Church. In the end he concluded, that if Germany would
give a fit answer to the propositions, the Pope would immediately treat with
other Kings, and would intimate the Council within six months, to begin a
year after, that provision of victuals might be made, and that all, especially
the farthest distant, might prepare themselves for the voyage.

The Nuncio gave up his proposition in writing, and the Emperors The Emperors
Ambassador makes the same negotiation.
Ambassador made the same negotiation with the Elector; who, having required
time to answer, the Nuncio was infinitely pleased. For he desired nothing but
delay, and took the answer for a presage of the happy success of the
business: and he could not refrain to commend him, for not being too hasty
in a deliberation which deserved time. Yet the Elector answered within few
days, that he was very glad that the Emperonr and the Pope were resolved to
call a Council, where, according to promise, oftentimes made unto Germany,
the controversies might lawfully be handled, by the rule of the word of God.
That himself for his own part, would willingly make present answer to the
things proposed; but because there are many Princes, which have received the
same confession in the Diet of Ausbug, it was not fit, nor profitable for the
cause, to answer alone: but an assembly being intimated against the 24. of
June, he desired he would be contented to grant this short delay, that he
might receive a more common, and resolute conclusion. The joy and hope of the
Nuncio was much increased, The Nuncio is pleased with the delatory answer. The
answer of the Protestants assembled in Smalcalde.
who desired the delay had been rather of years then months. But the
Protestants, assembled at the aforesaid time in Smalcalde, answered, thanking
the Emperor, that, for the glory of God, and safety of the commonwealth, he
had taken pains to cause a Council to be celebrated; which would be in
vain, if conditions were not observed, necessary for the curing of the
diseases of Germany: which desires that her controversies may be defined with
due order: and hops to obtain it, for that the Emperor has in many
imperial Diets promised such a one, which, by the mature deliberation of the
Princes and States, has been resolved should be celebrated in Germany; in
regard that many errors being revealed, by occasion of the Indulgences,
published in Sermons, Pope Leo condemned the doctrine and the Doctors, who
discovered the abuses. But that sentence was opposed by the testimonies of the
Prophets and Apostles. Whence did arise the controversy, which cannot be
decided but in a Council, where the Popes sentence, or the power of whosoever,
may not prejudice the cause, and where judgment may be given, not according to
the Popes laws, or opinions of the Schools, but according to the holy
Scripture. If this be not performed, this so great a labor would be taken in
vain, as may appear by the examples of some other Councels, celebrated before.

Now the propositions of the Pope were contrary to this end, to the petitions
of the Diet, and promises of the Emperor. For though he propose And their
exceptions against the propositions of the Pope.
a free Council in words, yet in effect he would have it tied, so that vices
and errors may not be reprehended, and himself may maintain his power. That
that was not a reasonable demand that any man should bind himself to observe
the decrees, before he know by what order, manner, or form they are made,
whether the Pope desire to have the supreme authority in him, and his; whether
he will have the controversies discussed according to holy writ, or according
to humane laws and traditions. That that clause also seemed captious, that the
Council should be made according to the old custom. For it being understood
of that old, when all was determined by the holy Scriptures, they would not
refuse it. But the Councels of the next preceding age were much different from
the other that were more ancient, where too much was attributed to the Decrees
of Popes, and other men. That the propose was glorious, but it took absolutely
away the liberty which was demanded, and was necessary for the cause. That
they desired the Emperor to be a means that all might pass lawfully. That
all men were in attention, and stood in hope of a Council, and demanded it
with vows and prayers, which would be turned into great sorrow and vexation
of mind, if this expectation should be deluded, by giving a Council, but not
such a one as is desired and promised. That there is no doubt but that all the
States of the Empire, and other Kings and Princes also will be of the same
opinion, to avoid those snares and bonds, with which the Pope thinks to bind
them in a new Council: to whose will if the managing of the affairs shall be
permitted, they will refer the whole to God, and think of what they have to
do. Yet for all this if they shall be cited, with good and lawful assurance,
in case they see themselves able to do some thing for the service of God, they
will not refuse to appear; but with condition, not to consent to the Popes
demands, nor to a Council which is not conformable to the Decrees of the
imperial Diets. In the end they prayed the Emperor not to take their
resolution in ill part, and to endeavor that the power of those be not
confirmed, who long since have waxed cruel against the innocent.

The Protestants resolved, not only to send the answer to the Pope, and the
Emperor, but to print it also, together with the Nuncio his proposition, which
by the same Pope was judged indiscreete, and too open. Therefore The Pope
recalleth Hugo Rangone B. of Rheggio, his Nuncio, and puts Vergerius in his
place.
under color that he was old and unable to bear that charge, he recalled
him, and wrote to Vergerius, Nuncio with King Ferdinand, that he should take
upon him that place, with the same instructions, admonishing him to remember
not to swerve by any means from his will, or to give ear to any 1534 CLEMENT
7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 2.
moderation, though the King desire it, that unadvisedly he cast him not into
some strait, and constrain him to call a Council, which was not profitable
for the Church, or for the Apostolical Sea.

While these things were in handling, the Pope who foresaw the answer which
would come out of Germany, and before in Bolonia had conceived but small
confidence in the Emperor, wholly aliened himself from his friendship. For in
the cause of Modena and Rheggio, between his Holiness and the Duke of
Ferrara, referred to him by the parties: he pronounced for the Duke. For all
which causes, the Pope negotiated a confederation with the French King; the
which was concluded, and established also by the marriage The confederation
between the Pope and the French King, is confirmed by marriage.
of Henry the Kings second son, with Catherine de Medici, the Popes great
grandchild. And to give a complete perfection to the whole business, he went
to Marseilles in person, to speak with the King. But understanding that this
journey was reprehended by all, as not addressed to any public respect, but
only to make his house great, he justified himself, by saying he undertook
it, to persuade him to favor the Council, and to abolish the Lutheran
heresy. And it is true that there, beside other treaties, he persuaded his most
Christian Majesty, to deal with the Protestants, especially with the
Landgraue of Hassia, who was to come to him into France, to cause them to
desist from demanding a Council, proposing unto them, that they would seek
out any other way to accommodate the differences, and promising his own
faithful and effectual help, when time should serve.

The King did thus negotiate, but could obtain nothing. For the Landgraue
alleged, The French King treats with the Landgraue of Hassia, at the Popes
request about the Council.
that there was no other means to hinder the desolation of Germany, and that
not to speak of a Council, was willingly to run into a civil war. In the
second place, the King treated with them, that they would be contented with a
Council in Italy. But neither did the Germans agree unto this; for they said,
that this match was worse then the first: because that constrained them only
to make war, but this cast them into a servitude both of body and soul:
whereunto resistance could not be made, but by a Council, in a free place: yet
condescending for his Majesty's sake, to whatsoever they were able, they would
cease to demand to have it celebrated in Germany, so that another free place
were appointed out of Italy, though it were near unto it.

In the beginning of the year 1534. the King gave the Pope an account 1534
of what he had done, and offered to bring to pass, that the Protestants
should be contented with Geneua. The Pope having received the advice, The Pope
is displeased with the Propose of Geneua for the (...) place of the Council.
was uncertain, whether the King, though his confederate and kinsman, would be
glad to see him in troubles, or if, in this particular, he wanted that
discretion which he showed in other affairs: But he concluded, that it was
not good to use him in this matter. And writing unto him, thanked him for his
pains, without answering to the particular of Geneua: and he encouraged many
of the Courtiers, whose minds were troubled, assuring them, that by no means
he would consent to such a folly.

But this year the Pope, in stead of regaining Germany, lost the obedience He
loses the obedience of England.
of England, by proceeding rather with choler and passion, then with wisdom
necessary in so great negotiations. The accident was of great importance, and
greater consequence, which to declare distinctly, it is necessary to begin from
the first causes, whence it had its original.

Catherine Infanta of Spain, sister to the mother of Charles the Emperor, was
married to Henry the eight, King of England, and was before, the wife of
Arthure, Prince of Walls, Henryes eldest brother; after whose death, their
father gave her in marriage to Henry, who remained successor, by the
dispensation The cause.
of Pope Iulio the second. This Queen was with child often, and always either
miscarried, or brought forth a creature of a short life, except one only
daughter, King Henry, either for displeasure against the Emperor, or for desire
of issue male, or for some other cause, conceived a scruple in his mind that
the marriage was not good; and taking counsel of his Bishops, separated
himself from her company. The Bishops treated with the Queen, that she would
be contented with a divorce, saying that the Popes dispensation was neither
good nor true. The Queen would not give ear to them, but had recourse to the
Pope: to whom, the King also sent to crave a divorce. The Pope, who was still
retired in Oruieto, and hoped for good conditions in his affairs, if the
favors of France and England, which still they performed, were continued, by
molesting the Emperor in the kingdom of Naples, sent into England the
Cardinal Campeggio, delegating the cause unto him, and the Cardinal of York.
From these, and from Rome, the King had hope given him, that in the end, the
sentence should be on his side: Yea, to facilitate The Cardinals Campeggio and
Wolsie were delegated by the Pope to hear the cause of the Kings divorce.
the resolution, that the solemnities of the judgment, might not draw the
cause in length, a brief was framed, in which, he was declared free from that
marriage, with the most ample clauses, that ever were put into any Popes Bull,
and a Cardinal sent into England, with order to present it, after some few
proofs were past, which he was sure would easily be made. And The Pope caused
his Brief which he had made in favor of the divorce to be burned.
this happened in the year 1524. But Clement, judging it fitter for compassing
his designs upon Florence, as has been declared in its proper place, to
join himself with the Emperor, then to continue in the friendship of France
and England, in the year 1529. he sent Francis Campana unto Campeggio, with
order to burn the Brief, and to proceed slowly in the cause Campeggio began
first to draw the cause in length, and after, to make difficulty of performing
the promises made to the King. Whereby being assured that the Judge and his
adversaries did collude, he sent to the Universities of Italy, France, and
Germany, for a consultation in his cause; where amongst A consultation about
the cause of divorce.
the Divines, some were contrary, and some favorable to his pretension. The
greater part of the Parisians were on his side, and some believed that the
Kings gifts more persuaded them, then reason.

But the Pope, either to gratify the Emperor, or for fear, that in England
by means of the Cardinal of York, something might happen, not according The
Pope to gratify the Emperor, recalleth Campeggio.
to his mind, as also to give occasion to Campeggio to part from thence,
called the cause to himself. The King impatient of delay, either, because he
knew their cunning, or for some other cause, published the divorce with his
wife, and married Anne Bullen in the year 1533. yet still the cause depended
before the Pope, in which, he was resolved to proceed slowly, to The King in
(...)yeth (...) Bulle^.
satisfy the Emperor and not offend the King. Therefore some by points rather
were handled, then the merits of the cause. And the disputation grew upon the
Article of the Attentats, in which the Pope gave sentence against the King;
declaring, that it was not lawful for him, by his own authority, without the
Ecclesiastical Judge, to separate himself from his wife. For which cause, the
King in the beginning of this year 1534 denied the Pope obedience, commanding
all his subjects, not to carry any money to Rome, The King causes the
Peter Pence to be denied the Pope.
nor to pay the ordinary Peter Pence. This infinitely troubled the Court of
Rome, and daily they consulted of a remedy. They thought to proceed against
the King with censures, and to interdict all Christian Nations all commerce
with England. But the moderate Counsel pleased best, to temporize with him,
and to mediate a composition by the French King. King Francis accepted the
charge, and sent the Bishop of Paris to Rome, to negotiate a pacification with
the Pope; where they still proceeded in the cause, but gently, and with
resolution, not to come to censures, if the Emperor did not proceed first, or
at the same time, with his forces. They had divided the cause into three and
twenty Articles, and then they handled, whether Prince Arthure had had carnal
conjunction with Queen Catherine; in this they spent time until mid-lent was
past, when, the nineteenth of March, news came, that a Libell was published in
England, against the Pope, and the whole Court of Rome, and that besides, a
Comedy had been made in presence of the King and Court, to the great disgrace
and shame of the Pope, and of every Cardinal in particular. For which cause
all being inflamed with choler, they ran headlong to give sentence; which was
pronounced in the Consistory, the four and twentieth of the same month, that
the marriage between Henry and Queen Catherine was good, that he was bound to
take her for his wife, and that, in case he did it not, he should be
excommunicated.

The Pope was soon displeased with this precipitation. For six days after,
the French King his letters came, that the King of England was contented to
accept the sentence concerning the Attentates, and to render obedience, with
condition, that the Cardinals whom he mistrusted should not meddle in the
business, and that persons not suspected, should be sent to Cambray to take
information. And the King had sent his Proctors before, to assist in the cause
at Rome. Wherefore the Pope went about to devise some pretense, to suspend the
precipitated sentence, and again to set the cause on its feet.

But Henry so soon as he had seen it, said it was no matter. For the Pope
should be Bishop of Rome, and himself sole Lord of his kingdom: and that he
would do according to the ancient fashion of the Eastern Church, not leaving
to be a good Christian, nor suffering the Lutheran heresy, or any other to be
brought into his kingdom. And so he did. He published an Edict, wherein he
declared himself head of the Church of England, and punished capitally,
whosoever said that the Pope of Rome had any authority there: he chased out
the Collector of the Peter Pence, and caused the Parliament to approve all
these things: where it was determined, that all Bishoprics of England, should
be conferred by the Archbishop of Canterbury, without sending to Rome, and
that the Clergy should pay to the King one hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling yearly, for the defense of the Kingdom against whosoever.

This action of the King was variously expounded. Some thought him wise, for
freeing himself from the subjection of Rome, without any innovation in
Religion, and without putting his subjects in danger of sedition, How the
action of K Henry was expo^nded
and without referring himself to a Council, a thing which they saw hard to
be effected and dangerous also for him, it being impossible that a Council,
composed of Ecclesiastical persons, should not mainetaine the Popes power,
which is the maine pillar of their order: because by the papacy it is above
all kings and the Emperor, but without it is subject to them, there being no
Ecclesiastical person that has superiority but the Pope. But the Court of
Rome maintained that it could not be said, that there was no change in
Religion, the first and principal Article being changed, which is the
supremacy of the Pope, and that seditions would arise as well for this only,
as for all the rest. Which the event showed to be true. For the King was feign
to proceed severely against some of his subjects, whom he loved and esteemed.
It cannot be expressed what grief was conceived in Rome, and by all the
Clergy, for the alienation of so great a Kingdom from the Popes subjection:
and it discovered the imbecillitie of humane affairs, wherein, for the most
part, great damages proceed from those things, from which the greatest The
Popes have gained much by matrimonial dispensations.
benefits were formerly received. For by matrimonial dispensations, and by
sentences of divorce, as well granted as denied, the Papacy has gained much
in former times, sheltering the Princes with the name of the Vicar of Christ,
whom it concerned with some incestuous marriage, or by dissoluing one to
contract another, to unite some other territory to their own, or to drown the
title of diverse pretendants, making, for this cause, straight alliance with
them, and interesting their power to defend that authority, without which
their actions would be condemned and hindered: yea, interesting not those
Princes only, but all their posterity, to maintain their legitimation. But
the misfortune which then arose, might be ascribed to the precipitation of
Clement, who, in this case, knew not how to manage his authority: and if it
had pleased God to have given him in this fact the use of his usual wisdom,
he might have gained much, where now his loss was great.

But the Emperor at his return into Germany, being informed of the
negotiation of the Nuncio Rangone, concerning the Council, wrote to Rome,
complaining that himself having promised a Council to Germany, and treated
with the Pope in Bolonia, in what sort the Princes should be dealt with in this
matter, yet the Nuncij of his Holiness had not proceeded in that manner that
was agreed of, but had so treated, that the Protestants thought themselves
deluded: praying him in the end, to find some way to give Germany
satisfaction. The eighth of June the Emperors letters were read in the
Consistory; and because there came advice, a little before that the Landgraue
of Hassia had taken the Dukedom of Wittenberg from King Ferdinand, by force of
arms, and restored it to the Duke Vlrick, the lawful Lord of it, and that
Ferdinand also was enforced to make peace with them, many of the Cardinals
said, that the Lutherans having achieved 1534 PAVL. 3. CHARLES (...). HENRY 8.
FRANCIS 1.
so great a victory, it was necessary to give them some satisfaction, and not
to proceed any more by Art, but to make some demonstration of effects, because
the Emperor having promised a Council, it was necessary he should not be
deluded, and said, that if the Pope could not find a way, there was danger,
That his Majesty would be constrained to yield to some other thing of greater
prejudice and loss to the Church. But the Pope and mayor part of the
Cardinals, seeing it was impossible to make the Lutherans accept such a
Counsel, as might be serviceable to the Court of Rome, and being resolute not
so much as to hearken to any speech of making it otherwise, they resolved to
answer the Emperor, that they knew very well the importance of the times, and
what great need there was of a general Council: which they were most ready
to intimate, in case it might be so celebrated, that it might produce good
effects, as need requires: but seeing new discords arise between him and
France, diverse open dissentions between other Christian Princes, it was
necessary they should cease, and minds should be reconciled, before the
Council were called. For, during the discords it could not produce any good
effect, and now least of all, the Lutherans being in arms, and made proud by
the victory of Wittenberg.

But it was necessary to leave discoursing with the Pope of a Council: For he
fell into a long and mortal infirmity, whereof he dyed in the end Clement the
7. dies.
of September, with no small joy of the Court. For though they admired his
virtues, which were a natural gravity, exemplary parsimony, and
dissimulation, yet they hated more his avarice, rigiditie, and cruelty,
increased, or more manifested, after he was oppressed by his infirmity.

In the vacancies of the Sea, the Cardinals use to compose certain
Capitulations always composed in the vacancie of the Popedom.
capitulations, to reform the Papal government, which all swear to
perform, if they shall be assumed to the Popedom, though it appear by all
precedent examples, that every one swears with a mind not to keep them, in
case he shall be Pope. For so soon as he is elected, he says, he could not bind
himself, and that he is at liberty by gaining the Papacy. After the death of
Clement, the capitulations were set down, according to custom, amongst which
one was, that the future Pope should be bound to call a Council within a year.
But the capitulations could not be established and sworn, because the same
Card. Farnese is created Pope, h^st called Honorius. 5 and in the coronation
named Paulus 3. Whose chiefest virtue was dissimulation.
day, the 12. of October in which the Conclaue was locked up, Cardinal Farnese
was suddenly created Pope, first called Honorius 5. in the creation, and after
in the coronation Paulus 3. A Prelate endowed with good qualities, and among
all his virtues, made more esteem of none then of dissimulation. He being a
Cardinal practiced in six Popedomes, Deane of the College, and much
conversant in negotiations, showed that he did not fear the Council, as
Clement did, but thought it profitable for the Papacy, to make show by all
means of desiring it, being assured that he could not be enforced to call it
in such manner, and in such a place where he could have no advantage, and when
there was cause to hinder it, the contradiction which the Court and Clergy
would make, was sufficient. He thought also that this might serve to maintain
peace in Italy, which he esteemed very necessary, that he might govern in
quiet. He saw very well that this color of a Council might serve to cover
many matters, and to excuse him in not doing those things which were contrary
to his will. Therefore soon after his Creation he let them know, that though
the capitulations were not sworn, yet he was resolved to observe that of the
convocation of a Council, knowing it to be necessary for the glory of God,
and benefit of the Church: and the 16. of the same month he made a general
congregation of the Cardinals, which is not called a Consistory, the Pope not
being crowned as yet, where he proposed this matter. He showed, by potent
arguments, that the intimation He makes show that he desires a Council.
could not be deferred, it being otherwise impossible to make true amity
between Christian Princes, and to extirpate the heresies: and that therefore
all the Cardinals ought maturely to consider how it should be celebrated. He
deputed also three Cardinals to advice of the time, and place, and other
particulars, with order to deliver their opinion in the first Consistory after
the coronation. And to make contradictions arise, which might serve him in
occasions, he added, that as he would reform the Clergy in the Council, so
it was not convenient there should be need to reform the Cardinals, but that
it was necessary they should then begin to reform Persuades the Cardinals to
reform themselves.
themselves, because he was resolved to draw fruit from the Council, the
precepts whereof would be of small force, if the effects appeared not first in
the Cardinals.

The custom is, that in the first days the Cardinals, especially the great
ones, obtain favors easily of the new Pope. Therefore the Cardinal of
Lorraine, And resuseth to grant the nomination of Bishops and Abbats to any
Prince.
and other French, in the name of the King, desired him to grant to the Duke of
Lorraine the nomination of the Bishoprics, and Abbacies of his dominion:
which demand also it was thought the Venetians would make for theirs. The Popes
answer was, that in the Council, which should be called shortly, it was
necessary to take away the faculty of nomination from those Princes that
already had it; which was some blemish to the Popes his Predecessors, who had
granted them. Therefore it was not reasonable to augment the heap of errors,
and to grant that now which shortly should be revoked with small reputation.

In the first Consistory, which was the twelfth of November, he discoursed
again of the Council, and said, that first it was necessary to obtain an
union of Christian Princes, or assurance of suspension of arms, The Pope
makes show to desire an union of Princes, and a reformation of the Court.
while the Council should endure. Therefore that he would send Nuncij to all
Princes to negotiate this point, and other particulars, of which the Cardinals
put him in mind. He called also Vergerius out of Germany, to be well informed
of the State of those Provinces, and deputed three Cardinals, Vergerius is
recalled out of Germany.
one of every order to consult of the things to be reformed. These were the
Cardinal of Siena, of S. Seuerino, and Cesis. Neither was there ever any
Consistory where he entered not, and spoke much of this matter, and often said,
it was necessary for this end, that the Court, and especially the Cardinals
should first be reformed. This was expounded by some, to be spoken with good
zeal, and desire of effect, by others, that the Court and Cardinals, might
find means to hinder the Council, that there might not be any reformation.
And the ground of this their opinion was, that having deputed three Cardinals,
he elected neither the most zealous, nor the 1535. PAVL 3. CHARLES (...).
HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Two of the Popes nephews are created Cardinals, both very
young.
most practical, but the slowest and most quiet of all the College. But the
next month of December, he gave more ample matter of discourse. For he
created Cardinals, Alexander Farnese his own grandchild, by Peter Aloisius his
bastard, and Guido Ascanius Sforza, grandchild by his daughter Constanza, the
former of fourteen years of age, and the other of sixteen. To those that
told him of their youth, he answered, that his own decrepite old age did
supply it. The hope of reforming the Cardinals, and the fear of some of them
vanished immediately, because it did not appear how it could begin, but from
the age, and lawful birth of those which were to be created. The Pope also
gave over to speak thereof any more, having done that, which would not suffer
him to mask any longer. Yet the proposition of calling a Council was current
still.

And in the Consistory of the sixteenth of January 1535. he made a long 1535
and vehement Oration, exciting the Cardinals to resolve in that matter. For by
proceeding so slowly, the world did think that the Council was not truly
intended, and that they had nothing but words, and Court holy water. And he
delivered his mind with such grave sentences, that the whole The Pope sends
Nunci^ to all Princes, to treat with them concerning the Council.
auditorie was moved. In that consistory it was resolved to dispatch Nuncij
to the Emperor, to the French King, and other Christian Princes, with
commission to declare, that the Pope and College had determined absolutely,
for the benefit of Christendom, to celebrate a Council, exhorting them to
favor it, and to procure peace and tranquillity, while it shall last, but to
tell them, that for the time and place, his Holiness was not resolved as yet.
And the most secret instruction was, that they should cunningly find out, what
the Princes thought concerning the place, to the end, that all their interests
and purposes being known, he might hinder them, by opposing one against
another, and so work his own will. He charged also the Nuncij to complain
of the actions of the King of England: and, when they saw opportunity, to
incite them against him, and to offer them also that Kingdom for a prey. Among
these Nuncij Vergerius Vergerius is sent back into Germany with special
instructions.
was one, sent back into Germany with more special Commissions, to penetrate
the mind of the Protestants, concerning the form of proceeding in the
Council, that he might draw from thence such conclusions as were necessary.
He gave him also particular charge to treat with Luther, and the other
principal Preachers of the reformed doctrine, using all kinds of promises and
offers, to reduce them to some composition. The Pope reprehended in all
occasions the rigidnesse of Cardinal Caietan, who in the Diet of Ausburg 1518.
refused Luthers offer, that silence being imposed to his adversaries, he would
also be contented to hold his peace: and he condemned the acerbitie of that
Cardinal, who, by urging obstinately a recantation, cast that man headlong
into despair, which had cost, and would cost the Church of Rome, as much as
the half of her authority is worth. That he would not imitate Leo, in
believing that the Friars are good instruments to suppress the Preachers of
Germany. For reason, and experience have declared the vanity of that
cogitation. That there were but two means, force and treaties; both which he
would use, being ready to agree to any condition, so that the Popes authority
might remain entire. For which end he said he had need of able men, fit for
negotiation, and therefore the one and twentieth of May, he created six
Cardinals, and the seventh, a few days after all which, were men much esteemed
in the Court. Among these was John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, then prisoner in
England, for refusing to obey the Kings Decree, which took away the Popes
authority. The Pope in making choice of him, considered that he honored this
promotion, The Pope creaseth seuca Cardinals.
by putting in that number a learned man, and well deserving, for the
persecution which he endured: and that having increased his dignity, he In
which number was John Fisher B. of Rochester.
would have more respect with the King, and more credit with the people. But
that Cardinals Cap profited that Prelate in nothing, but to hasten his death,
which was given him 43. days after, by cutting off his head in public.

But howsoever the Pope made open demonstrations to desire such a Council, as
might give satisfaction, and reduce Germany, yet all the Court, and the Popes
nearest friends, who treated most secretly with him of these The Court was of
opinion that Mantua was the: fittest place for the Council.
things, said that it could not any where be celebrated but in Italy, because
in no other place it could be free, and that in Italy, no place could be
chosen but Mantua.

Vergerius, at his return into Germany, delivered the Popes Embassage, first
to Ferdinand, and then to those Protestants that came to that King about the
present occurrences, and at last he made a journey to treat with the others
also. He had no other answer from any of them; but that they would consult
together, and resolve by common consent in their assembly, which should be
called in the end of the year. The proposition of the The negotiation of
Vergerius in Germany.
Nuncio contained, that that was the time for the Councels, so much desired,
the Pope having treated with the Emperor, and all the Kings to call it
seriously, not as formerly, in appearance only; and that it may not be
deferred any more, he determined to choose Mantua for the place, according to
the resolution taken with the Emperor, two years since: Which being a City
of the Emperors vassal, placed near his confines, and the Venetians, they
might hold it for secure: besides that the Pope and the Emperor would give
any greater caution whatsoever. That it was not necessary to resolve or speak
of the manner and form of treating in the Council, because this would better
be done in the Council it self, when it shall be called. That it could not
be celebrated in Germany, which abounded with Anabaptists, Sacramentaries,
and other sects, for the most part, both foolish and furious. Therefore that it
would not be secure for other nations, to go where that multitude is potent,
and to condemn their doctrine. That to the Pope it is all one to call it in
any other Country whatsoever; but he would not seem to be enforced, and to
have that authority taken from him which he has inioyed so many ages, to
prescribe the place of general Councels.

In this journey Vergerius found Luther at Wittenberg, and treated with He
treats with Luther.
him very courteously, upon these terms, enlarging, and amplifying them very
much. And first, he assured him, that the Pope, and College of Cardinals,
esteemed him exceedingly, who were infinitely grieved for the loss of one,
who, if he had been employed in the service of God, and the Apostolical Sea
(which are joined together) might have brought foo(...) inestimable fruit; and
that they would do whatsoever they could to regaine him. He told that the
Pope blamed the rigiditie of Caietan, and that the Cardinals did no less that
he might expect all favor from that holy Sea, and that the rigor of Leo,
which he used by the instigation of others, not of his own disposition,
displeased all men. He added also that he would not dispute with him of the
controversies, because he professed not Divinity, but that by common reason
he could show him that it was good to reunite himself with the head of the
Church. For considering that his doctrine, coming to light, and being
published within these eighteen years had raised innumerable sects, of which
the one detesteth the other, and so many popular seditions, with the death and
banishment of so great multitudes, it could not be concluded that it came from
God. But one might well assure himself, that it was pernicious to the world,
because so much mischief proceeded from it. Vergerius said, that it was too
great a self-love, and too great a conceit of ones own worth, when a man
would trouble the whole world to sow his own opinions. If you have innouated
in the faith, (said Vergerius) in which you were borne, and bred up 35. years,
for your conscience and saluations sake, it was sufficient to keep it within
your self. If the love of your neighbor moved you, why did you trouble the
whole world unnecessarily, seeing that, without it men did live, and God was
served in tranquillity? He added that the confusion was gone on so far, that
the remedy could not be deferred. The Pope is resolute to apply it by calling
a Council, where all the learned men of Europe meeting together, the truth
shall be cleared, to the confusion of unquiet spirits, and for the place, has
destinated the City of Mantua. And although the chiefest hope consists in
the goodness of God, yet putting to that account the endeavors of men, it was
in Luthers power, to make the remedy easy, if he will be present, treat
with charity, and oblige to himself also the Pope, a munificent Prince, who
takes special notice of persons of merit. He put him in mind of the example
of Eneas Siluius, And proposes unto him the example of Aentas Siluius.
who following his own opinions with much slavery and labor, could get no
further preferment, then to be Canon of Trent, but, being changed to the
better, became Bishop, Cardinal, and finally Pope Pius the second. He called
to his memory Bessarion of Nice, who of a poor Caloier of And of Bessarion.
Trapizonda, became a great renowned Cardinal, and wanted not much of being
Pope.

Luthers answers were, according to his nature, vehement and fierce, Luthers
answer.
saying, that he made no account of the esteem which he had with the Court
of Rome, whose hatred he feared not, nor regarded their good will; that he
applied himself to the service of God, as much as he could, though when he
had done all, he was but an unprofitable servant; that he savv not how the
services of God were joined with those of the Papacy, but as darkness with
light; that nothing in all his life was more profitable to him, then the rigor
of Leo, and the rigidity of Caietan, which he could not ascribe to them, but
to the providence of God. For not being as yet in those times illuminated in
all the truth of Christian faith, but having only discovered the abuses of
Indulgences, he was ready to have kept silence, in case his adversaries had
done the like. But the writings of the master of the holy palace, the insulting
of Caietan, and the rigor of Leo constrained him to study, and to descriemany
other less tolerable abuses, and errors of the Papacy, which he could not
dissemble, nor refrain to declare them unto the world with a good conscience.
That the Nuncio had ingenuously confessed that he understood not Divinity;
which appeared clearly by the reasons which he proposed because none could
call his doctrine new, but he that believed that CHRIST, the Apostles, and the
holy Fathers lived, as now the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops do. Neither can
any argument be drawn against the doctrine, from the seditions happened in
Germany, but by him that has not read the Scriptures, and knows not that
this is proper to the word of God, and the Gospel, that it stirs up troubles
and tumults, even to the separation of the father from the son, wheresoever
it is preached. That this was the virtue of it, to give life to them that
hearken to it, and to bring greater damnation to whosoever rejects it. He
added, that it was a great fault of the Romanists, to establish the Church with
gouernements taken from humane reasons, as if it were a temporal State. That
this is that kind of wisdom, which S. Paul says, is accounted foolishness
with God, as not to esteem those politic reasons, by which Rome does
govern, but to trust in Gods promises, and to refer to his Majesty the
managing of the Church affairs, is that humane folly, which is wisdom with
God. That to make the Council take good effect, and to be profitable for the
Church, was not in the power of Martin, but of him that can make it free, that
the Spirit of God may rule there, and guide it, and the holy Scripture may be
the rule of the resolutions, not bringing thither interests, usurpations, and
artifices of men: which in case it should happen, yet himself would there use
all sincerity, and Christian charity, not to bind the Pope or any other unto
him, but for the service of Christ, and peace and liberty of the Church. But
that he could not hope to see so great a good so long as it appeared not that
the wrath of God was appeased, by a serious conversion from hypocrisy. That no
sound argument could be taken from the assembling of learned men, seeing that
so long as the anger of God is kindled, there is no error so absurd and
unreasonable, which Satan cannot persuade, especially to those great wise men,
who think they know much, whom the Majesty of God will confound. That nothing
can be received from Rome compatible with the ministry of the Gospel. That
the examples of Eneas Siluius, and Bessarion moved him not. For he esteems
not those cloudy glitterings, and, in case he would exalt himself, he might
truly reply that which facetely was spoken by Erasmus, that Luther being
poor and base, makes rich, and aduanceth many. That it was well known to the
Nuncio himself, (not to go far) that the last May himself had a great part
in the creation of the Bishop of Rochester, and was the total cause of the
creation of Scomberg. That if the life of the first was so soon taken away,
this was to be ascribed to the providence of God. Vergerius Vergerius could
not move Luther.
could not persuade Luther, to remit any thing of his constancy, who so
steadfastly maintained his doctrine, as if it had been apparent to the eyes,
and said that the Nuncio, yea and the Pope himself, should sooner embrace his
faith, then he would abandon it.

Vergerius assaied also to persuade some other Preachers in Wittenberg, and
elsewhere in the journey, according to the Popes commission; but found no
inclination, as he thought he should, but rigiditie in all that were of
account; Not any of the other Lutherans, except some few of small esteem. The
answer of 15. Printes and 30 Cities assembled in Smalcalda. Mantua is refused
by the Germans.
and those that rendered themselves were of small worth, and pretended much, so
that they were not for his purpose.

But the Protestants, understanding Vergerius his proposition, there being
fifteen Princes, and thirty Cities assembled in Smalcalda, answered that they
had declared their resolution concerning the Council in many Diets, and last
of all to the Nuncio of Pope Clement, and the Emperors Ambassadors, two
years since, and that still they desired a lawful Council as they were sure
that all godly men did, and that they would go to it, as many times has been
determined in the Imperial Diets. But for the Council which the Pope has
appointed to be in Mantua, they hoped that the Emperor would not break the
decrees of the Diet, nor his own promises, so often made unto them, that the
Council should be celebrated in Germany; and that they saw not how there
could be any danger there, seeing that all the Princes and Cities obey the
Emperor, and are so well governed, that all strangers are received and
entertained with all humanity. But that the Pope should provide for the
security of those that went to the Council they could not see how, especial
considering what things have happened in the precedent age. That the Christian
Commonwealth has need of a godly and free Council, and that to such a one
they have appealed. And whereas the Nuncio said, that they ought not to treat
of the manner and form first, it signified nothing but that there should be
no liberty, and that all should be referred to the Popes power, who already
having so often condemned their religion, the Council cannot be free, if he
shall be Judge. That the Council is not the tribunal of the Pope and Priests
only, but of all the orders of the Church, not excluding the Seculars. That to
prefer the Popes power before the authority of the whole Church, is an
unjust and tyrannical opinion. That the Pope defending the opinion of his own
men, yea with cruel edicts, making himself a party to the cause, it is just
that the manner and form of the process should be determined by the Princes.

The Kings of England and France, sent Ambassadors to the assembly of The King
of England and the French King send Ambassadors to Smalcalda. Francis Sforza
dies.
Smalcalda: the French King (who had a disseigne to make war in Italy,
Francis Sforza Duke of Milan; being now dead) desired them not to accept of
any place for the Council, without the advice of him, and of the King of
England, and that they would accept of none without them. The King of England
advised them to be aware that they called not such a Council, where, in stead
of moderating the abuse, they should more establish the Popes authority, and
desired them to approve his divorce. On the other side they dealt with him to
receive the Augustan confession: Which things, being treated of in diverse
assemblies, had no conclusion at all.

But Vergerius, in the beginning of the year 1536. returned to the Pope, to
1536
relate the effect of his Embassage. He delivered in sum, that the
Protestants 1536 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
would not receive any Council, except it were free, and in a fit place,
within the confines of the Empire, grounding themselves upon the Emperors
promise, and that of Luther and his accomplices there was no hope at all, nor any
other way to be thought of, but to oppress them with war Vergerius for his
reward had the Bishopric of Capo d'Istria, his own Country, and was sent by
the Pope to Naples, to make the same relation to the Vergerius returns and
deliueceth to the Pope the effect of his negotiation. He is rewarded and sent
to the Emperor.
Emperor, who having been victorious in Africa, was passed into the kingdom,
to settle the affairs thereof. The Emperor hearing the narration of the
Nuncio, went to Rome. He had private conference with the Pope, concerning the
affairs of Italy, and the pacification of Germany. The Pope, according to
Vergerius counsel, said there was no means to be used but war. But the
Emperor, seeing the time not ripe as yet, to reap from thence The Emperor
goes to Rome to confer with the Pope.
that good fruit, as others were persuaded he might, and himself also
entangled in Italy, without possibility of being free, but by yielding Milan,
which he resolved, by all means to make his own, whither all his actions did
principally tend, alleged for a reason to defer that war, that it was more
necessary to defend Milan from the French men. On the other side the Pope,
whose thoughts were wholly bent to make an Italian Lord of that State, and
therefore proposed the war of Germany, not so much to suppress the
Lutherans (as he said openly) as to divert Caesar from possessing Milan, which
was his principal end, though secret, replied that himself and the Venetians,
what by arms, and what by treaties, would more easily make the King desist, in
case his Imperial Majesty did not meddle.

The Emperor having discovered the inward thoughts of the Pope, The Pope and
Emperor have contrary ends and dissemble one with another.
with as much dissimulation, made show he was persuaded, and inclined to the
war of Germany; yet he said, that it was fit to justify the cause well,
that the whole world might not be against him, and to show, by intimating a
Council, that he had first used all other means. The Pope was not sorry that,
being necessarily to intimate a Synod, it should be done in a time, when, in
regard the French King had invaded Sauoy and Piemont, all Italy would be set
on fire with war; whereby an apparent pretense was given him to enuiron the
Council with arms, under color of custody and protection. He The Emperor is
puffed up with the African victory.
showed himself to be contented, so that such conditions were set down which
might not derogate from the authority and reputation of the Apostolic Sea.
The Emperor, who, by reason of the victory achieved in Africa, was lifted up
in mind, and swollen with vast thoughts, believed he should make an end of
the war in Lombardy within two years at the most, and that having immured
the King of France beyond the mountains, he might apply himself to the
affairs of Germany, without any impediment. His meaning was the Council
should serve him for two things. First to bridle the Pope, in case, during the
war of Italy, he should according to the custom of other Popes, put
himself on the French side when that should be the weaker, to counterpoise
him that was victorious. Secondly to reduce Germany to his obedience, which was
the mark he shot at. But for the Popes obedience, he esteemed it but an
accidental thing. For the place, Mantua pleased him; and for the rest he
cared not what condition the Pope might add, considering that when the
Council were assembled, he should be able to change whatsoever pleased him
not. Therefore he concluded that he was contented with any condition, so that
the Council might be celebrated, alleging that he hoped to persuade almost
all Germany to consent unto it. Wherefore the resolution was established by
the Pope, and the whole college of Cardinals. A resolution established for
calling the Council.


Therefore the Emperor, entering into the public Consistory the 28. of
April, thanked the Pope and College, for having readily and without delay
resolved to call a general Council, and then desired them that the Bull The
Emperor enters into the public Consistory.
might be dispatched before he parted from Rome, that himself might give
order for the rest. The Bull could not be framed so soon, because it was
necessary to consider of fit words to be put into it, such as might give as
much hope of liberty as was possible, and yet not prejudice the Papal power.
Six Cardinals, and three Bishops were deputed for this business; The Bull for
Convocation of the Council is made.
and finally the Bull was finished the twelfth of June, published in the
Consistory, and subscribed by all the Cardinals. The tenor was as follows.

That from the beginning of his Papacy he had desired nothing more then to
cleanse the Church, recommended by God to his care, from heresies and errors,
and to restore the discipline to its former state: for which finding no way
more commodious then that which always has been used in like occurrences,
that is, a general Council, he had often written concerning it to the
Emperor and other Kings, with hope not only to obtain this end, but also,
that all discords being appeased between Princes of Christendom war might
be made against the Infidels, to free the Christians from that miserable
slavery; and also to reduce the Infidels themselves to the faith. Therefore by
the fullness of authority which he has from God, by the consent of his
brethren the Cardinals, he does intimate a general Council of all
Christendom, against the 27. of May the next year 1537. The Council is to
begin in Mantua, May 27. 1537.
in Mantua a rich place, and commodious for the celebration of the Council.
Therefore he commands the Bishops and other Prelates, of what place soever, by
virtue of their oath, and under the pains set down by the holy canons and
decrees, that they tender their presence there at the day prefixed. He prays
the Emperor, French King, and all other Kings and Princes to be there in
person, or in case they cannot, to send honorable and ample ambassages, as the
Emperor, French King, and other Christian Princes have often promised both to
Clement, and to him: and to cause the prelates of their Kingdoms to go
thither, and there remain until the end, to determine that which shall be fit
to reform the Church, extirpate heresies, and to make war against the
Infidels.

The Pope published another Bull also, to correct (as he said) all the vices A
Bull for the reformation of Rome.
and defects of the City of Rome, the head of all Christendom, mistress of
learning, manners and discipline; that his own house being first purged, he
might more easily cleanse the rest. But not being able fully to perform this
business by himself, he deputed the Cardinals Ostiense, Saint Seuerino,
Genutio, and Simoneta, commanding all men under the most grievous pains, to
yield them absolute obedience. These Cardinals, together with other Prelates,
deputed also by the Pope, applied themselves immediately to reform the
penitentiarie and Datarie Courts, and the manners of the Courtiers: yet nothing
1537 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
took effect. But the intimation of the Council seemed very unfit to every
man of any mean capacity, in a time when wars were on foot in Picardie,
Prouence, and Piemont, between the Emperor and the French King.

The Protestants when they had seen the bull, wrote to the Emperor, The
Protestants do not approve the Bull of the Convocation.
that it appeared not what should be the form and manner of the Council. They
desired it should be pious, free, and in Germany, and such a one was ever
promised unto them, and said they hoped that his Majesty would provide that
their demands should be satisfied, and his promise fulfilled.

But in the beginning of the next year 1537. the Emperor sent to the
Protestants Matthias Eldo his Vice Chancellor, to exhort them to receive the
1537 The Emperor exhorts the^ to accept the Council.
Council, for the calling whereof he had taken so great pains, and where he
meaned to afford his personal presence, if some great war constrained him
not to be elsewhere. He put them in mind that they had appealed to a Council,
and therefore that it was not convenient that now they should change their
purpose, and refuse to meet all other Nations, who have fixed therein all
their hope for reformation of the Church. Concerning the Pope, the Emperor said
there was no doubt but that he would govern himself as was fit for the
principal head of the Church, and that in casethey had any complaint against
him, they might modestly prosecute it in the Council. For the manner and form,
that it was not convenient they should prescribe it to all Nations, but should
rather think that not their divines only were inspired from God, and
understood holy mysteries, but that men may elsewhere be found, who want
neither learning, nor sanctity of life. For the place, though they have
demanded it in Germany, yet the should consider what was fit for other
Nations. Mantua is near to Germany, rich, healthful, and the Duke thereof
vassal of the Empire; so that the Pope has no power there; and if they
desired any further caution, himfelfe was ready to give it them. He spoke also
apart with the Elector of Saxony, exhorting him to send his Ambassadors to
the Council, without using exceptions or excuses, which would hatch nothing
but inconveniences. Concerning the And they answer.
Council, the Protestants answered, that having read the Popes letters, they
saw well, that he and the Emperor were not of one mind; and, having repeated
what was treated of with Adrian, Clement, and Paul, they concluded that they
had all the same end. They went on to allege their reasons, why the Pope
should not be judge in the Council, nor yet those, who were by oath tied unto
him. And for the place appointed, beside that it was against the Decrees of the
Imperial Diets, no safe conduct could free them from danger, if they went
thither. For the Pope having adherents throughout all Italy, who bitterly hate
the Protestants doctrine, there was great danger of treachery and secret plots.
Besides, in regard that many Doctors and Ministers ought to go in person,
because it is not fit to handle a matter of that importance by deputies, their
Churches would be left desolate. And how can they consent to the judgment of
the Pope, who has no other aim but to root out their doctrine, which he
calls heresy, and cannot refrain from saying so much in all his Bulls, yea,
in that, by which he intimates the Council: and in the Bull, which,
dissemblingly, he made for reformation of the Court of Rome, he has often
repeated, that he has called a Council to extirpate the Lutheran heresy,
and makes demonstration thereof by effects, exercising bloody torments and
punishments, against poor innocent people, who adhere to that religion, for
conscience sake. And how shall they be able to accuse the Pope and his
followers, when himself will be judge? And to appoue his Brief, is nothing
else but to consent to their own condemnation. And therefore that they have
always demanded a free and Christian Council, not only that every man may
freely speak, the Turks and infidels being excluded; but that those that are
linked together by oaths, and other Covenants, may not be Judges, and that
the word of God may govern, and define all the controversies. That they well
know, that there are learned and godly men in other Nations: but withal they
assure themselves, that if the unlimited power of the Pope shall be moderated,
not their Divines only, but many others, who now by reason of oppression hide
themselves, will labor for reformation of the Church. That they will not
dispute of the situation and fitness of Mantua, but they may well say, that so
long as there is war in Italy, they cannot want matter of suspicion. That it
is sufficient to say of the Duke of that City, that he has a brother a
Cardinal, one of the prime men of the Court. That in Germany, there are many
Cities as commodious as Mantua, where Justice and equity do flourish: and in
Germany those secret wiles to take away men's lives, are neither used nor
known, as they are in other places. That in the ancient Councels, the
securenesse of the place has ever been first sought for, which would not be
sufficient there, though he the Emperor were personally present in the
Council. For it is known that the Popes grant him place in consultations, but
for power of determining, they reserve it to themselves only. That it was
known what happened to the Emperor Sigismond, in the Council of Constance,
whose safe conduct was violated by the Synod: and himself constrained to put
up so great an affront. Therefore they prayed his Majesty to consider the
importance of these reasons.

There appeared in this same Diet the Bishop of Aix, sent by the Pope to inuit
them to the Council. But he did no good, and some of the Princes Some of the
Protestant Princes would not so much as hear the Popes Nuncio
would not so much as hear him. And to make their reasons known to the world
they printed and published a writing, where they labored principally to
answer that objection, that they would not submit themselves to any Judge,
that they despised other nations, that they refused the supreme They justify
their actions to the world by writing.
tribunal of the Church, that they had renewed heresies formerly condemned,
that they were glad of civil discords, that the faults which they found in the
manners of the Court of Rome, were small, and tolerable. They alleged the
causes why it was not fit, that the Pope alone, nor yet together with his
adherents should be judge: they brought the examples of many Councels refused
by diverse of the Fathers, and in fine, implored the aid of all Princes,
offering that whenever a lawful Council shall be called, they will therein
defend their cause, and render an account of all their actions. They sent also
an express Ambassador to the French King, to give him a particular account of
the same things: who answered, that for the Council he was of their opinion,
not to approve it, except it were lawful, and in a secure place, assuring
them that his son in-law, the King of Scotland was of the same mind.

The Duke of Mantua to gratify the Pope, granted his City for the Council,
without considering what he did, thinking as others, that it could not The Duke
of Mantua makes a grant of his City and afterward recalleth it.
be effected, there being wars between the Emperor and French King, and
Germany opposing it, for whose sake it was called, But when he saw the
intimation, he began to think how to secure the place, and sent a proposition
to the Pope, that, in regard of the great number of those that would come to
the Council, there was need of a great garrison, which he would not have depend
upon any but himself; and that he was not able to maintain it. Therefore in
case his Holiness would celebrate the Council in that City; he must allow
him money for soldiers pay. The Pope answered that the multitude would not
consist of men of arms, nor professed for the war, but of Ecclesiastical and
learned persons, which one magistrate, whom he would depute to render justice,
with a small court and guard, was able to keep in order; that a garrison of
soldiers would breed a general suspicion, and became not the place of the
Council, where all should appear and be truly peaceable; and that in case a
garrison were necessary, it were not reasonable to put it into the hands of any
but of the Council it self, that is, of the Pope, who is head thereof. The
Duke, considering that jurisdiction draws The Pope claymeth right to
administer justice where the Council shall be celebrated.
with it absolute sovereignty, replied, that by no means he would have
justice administered in his City, but by his own officers. The Pope, a very
wiseman, who seldom received any answer which he did not foresee, was much
amazed, and answered the Dukes man, that he would never have believed that by
his Lord, a Prince of Italy, whose family has been so much advanced by the
Apostolical Sea, who had a brother a Cardinal, that would be denied him of
which never any made doubt before, which the Law of God and man does give him,
which the very Lutherans cannot deny, that is, to be supreme judge of the
Clergy; a thing which the Duke denies not to his own Bishops, to judge the
causes of Priests in Mantua. That in the Council none should be present but the
Ecclesiastiques, who are exempted from the secular power, both themselves and
their families. Which Priests concubines are of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
is so clear, that the Doctors of Divinity affirm that the very concubines
of Priests are of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and yet he would deny him a
Magistrate to render justice to those men, during the time of the Council. The
Duke, for all this, was constant, as well in refusing the Popes Magistrates, as
also in demanding pay for soldiers. These conditions seeming hard to the
Pope, contrary (as he said) to the ancient custom, and against the dignity
The Pope resolves not to call the Council at Mantua.
of the Sea and Ecclesiastical liberty he would not yield unto them, and
resolved not to call the Council at Mantua. He remembered very well what
happened to John 23. for calling a Council where another was stronger then
he. His purpose therefore was to prolong the time, and excused himself in a
public Bull, saying in substance, that though with grief he was constrained
to depute an other place for the Synod, yet he endured it with patience,
because another was in fault and not himself: and because he could not
resolve so suddenly upon a convenient City, he deserred the celebration
thereof until the first of November the same year.

At that time the King of England published a manifest in his own name, and of
his nobility, against the Popes Convocation, as by a person that had no power,
in a time when Italy was set a fire with war, and in a place not secure,
adding that he much desired a Christian Council, but that to The King of
England opposes the Council by a public manifest.
the Popes he would neither go nor send Ambassadors, having nothing to do
with the Bishop of Rome, or his Edicts, more then with the edicts of any other
Bishop. That the ancient Councels were called by the authority of Kings,
which custom ought now the rather to be renewed, because the defect of the
Court of Rome are called into question. That it was not usual with Popes to
break their faith, which himself had more cause to consider then others,
being most bitterly hated by him, for having denied him authority in his
Kingdom, and the reuenew which was paid him. That to blame the Prince of
Mantua, because he will not receive so many people into his City without a
garrison, is to mock the world; as also to prorogue the Council unto November;
not saying in what place it shall be celebrated. And if the Pope choose the
place, without doubt it will be in his own State, or of some Prince that is
obliged to him. Therefore, it being impossible that any man of judgment should
hope for a true Council, the best way was for every Prince to reform Religion
at home: concluding in the end that if any man could give him better
directions, he would not refuse to follow them. The care of reforming the
Court, was committed to 4. Cardinals, but nothing was done, which made the
Italians suspect the Popes actions.


In Italy also there was a general disposition to interpret the Popes actions
in the worser sense: and it was spoken freely, that though the Duke of Mantua
were blamed, yet he was not the cause why the Council was not called, whereof
there was a manifest argument, because the Pope had published a Bull for
reformation of the Court, and committed the care thereof to four Cardinals at
the same time; which notwithstanding was buried in silence, though neither the
Duke, nor any body else hindered it from being in his power: and having
proposed it immediately after it was assumed to the Papacy, it was not so much
as spoken of for three years after. The The reformation is set on foot again.
Pope to withstand these defamations, resolved to set the business on foot
again, first reforming himself, the Cardinals, and the Court, that none might
object against him, nor make bad construction of his actions; and he elected
four Cardinals, and five other Prelates, whom he so much esteemed that the
year following he made four of them Cardinals, giving charge to those nine
to collect the abuses, which deserved amendment, and withal to add the
remedies, by which they might quickly, and easily be removed, and to reduce
all to a good reformation. The Prelates made the collection, as the Pope
commanded, and committed it to writing. The fountain^ of the abuses of the
Court.


In the beginning they proposed for the fountain and source of all the abuses,
the Popes readiness in giving ear to flatterers, and his facility in
dispensing with Laws, with neglect of the Commandment of Christ, not to
receive gain for spiritual things. And descending to particulars, they noted
twenty four abuses in the administration of Ecclesiastical matters, and four
in the special government of Rome: they touched the ordination of The
particular abuses.
Clergy men, Collation of Benefices, Pensions, Permutations, Regresses, 1538
PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
Reseruations, Plurality of Benefices, Commendoes, Exemptions, deformation of
the regular order, ignorance of Preachers, and Confessors, liberty of printing
pernicious Books, the reading of them, toleration of Apostates, Pardoners.
And, Passing to dispensations, first they touched that, for marriage of those
that are in orders, for marriages in degrees forbidden, dispensations granted
to Symoniacall persons, facility of granting Confessionals and Indulgences,
dispensation of vows, license to bequeath by will the Church-goods,
commutation of wills and testaments, toleration of harlots, negligence of the
government of hospitals, and such other things, which they exactly handled,
expounding the nature of the abuses, the causes and original of them, the
consequences of the evils which they carry with them, the means to redress
them, and to keep hence forward the body of These things are set down at
large in the 12. Book of Sleidan.
the Court in Christian life: a work worthy to be read, and which deserved to
be set down word by word, if it had not been too long.

The Pope having received the relation of these Prelates, caused many Cardinals
to consider of it, and after, that he might resolve what to do, proposed it in
the Consistory. Friar Nicholas Scomberg, a Dominican Cardinal of S. Sistus,
alias of Capua, showed in a long discourse, that that time comported The
Cudinall of S. Sistus would have no reformaton at al made.
not any reformation at all. First, he put them in mind of the malice of man,
which being stopped in one course, finds a worse, and that it is better to
tolerate a known evil, which, because it is in use, is not so much marueyled
at, then by redressing that, to fall into another, which, being new, will
appear greater, and be more reprehended. He added that it would give occasion
to the Lutherans, to brag that they had enforced the Pope to make that
reformation; and above all he considered that it would be a beginning to take
away not only the abuses, but the good uses also, and to endanger the whole
state of religion. For by the reformation it would be confessed that the things
provided against were deservedly reprehended by the Lutherans, which would be a
great abetting to their whole Cardinal Caraffa desires the reformation.
doctrine. On the other side, John Peter Caraffa, Cardinal Theatino, showed
that the reformation was necessary, and that it was a great offense to God to
leave it, and answered that it was a rule in Christian actions, that as evil
is not to be done that good may follow, so no good of obligation is to be
omitted, for fear that evil may ensue. The opinions delivered were diverse,
The Pope comandeth the remonstrance of the Prelates to be concealed, but a copy
of it is sent into Germany by Cardinal Scomberg, The King of Denmark
becomes a Protestant.
and the final conclusion was not to speak any more of it until another
time; and the Pope commanded that the remonstrance of the Prelates should be
concealed. But Cardinal Scomberg sent a copy thereof into Germany, which
some thought was done by the Popes consent, that it might appear there was
some design in Rome, and some pains taken also for reformation. The copy was
suddenly printed, and published, throughout all Germany, and many wrote against
it, both in Dutch and Latin. And the number of the Protestants increased daily
in that Country, the king of Denmark, and some princes of the house of
Brandeburg being entered into their league.

November drawing near, the Pope sent out a Bull for convocation of The
Council is intimated at Vicenza, and three Legates appointed.
the Council at Vicenza, and alleging the necessity to prorogue the time,
because winter was at hand, he did intimate it, for the first of May, the next
year 1538. and appointed three Cardinals Legates for that place; Lorenzo
Campeggio, Legate before for Clement the seventh in Germany; Iomes Simoneta,
and Ierom Aleander created Cardinals by himself.

So soon as this Bull went out the King of England published another Manifost,
against this new convocation, and addressed it to the Emperor; Kings, Another
manifest published by the K(...) of England.
and Christian people, dated the eight day of April, the same year 1538. that
having before declared to the world, the manifold causes, why he had resused
the Council, which the Bishop of Rome fained he would celebrate in Mantua,
prorogued afterward, without assignation of any certain place, it seemed not
convenient to protest, as often as he did excogitate a new way, and to refuse
that Council, which the Pope(...) de a colorable show that he would
celebrate. He said that that declaration desended his, and his Kingdoms
cause, against all the attempts, that either Paul, or any other Pope could
make, which he was willing to confirm with this Epistle, to excuse himself
for not going to Vicenza, more then he would have done to Mantua, though no
man desired a public assembly of Christians more then himself, so that the
Council be general, free, and picus, such as he has described in his
protestation against the Council of Mantua. And as nothing is more holy then a
general Convocation of Christians, so nothing is more prejudicial and
pernicious to religion, then a Council abused for gain and profit, or
confirmation of errors. That it is called a general Council, because all
Christians may speak their opinions; and that it cannot be called general,
where only they are heard, who are resolved to put themselves on the Popes
side, in all matters, and where the same men are plaintifes, defendants,
advocates, and judges. That all may be said of Viconza which, in his
declaration, has been said of Mantua. And briefly repeating a short contents
thereof, he said, if Frederick Duke of Mantua has not yielded so much to the
Popes authority, as to grant him his City in that manner that he would; why
should we so much esteem it, as to go whither he pleases? If the Pope has
power from God to call Princes whither he will, why can he not choose what
place he lists, and make himself obeyed? If the Duke of Mantua can, with
reason, deny the place which the Pope has chosen, why cannot other Kings and
Princes refuse to go thither? And if all Princes should deny him their
Cities, where would be his power? what a thing would it have been, if all men
had put themselves into the journey, and being arrived there, should have been
shut out of doors by the Duke of Mantua? That which happened for Mantua, may
happen likewise for Vicenza.

The Legates went to Vicenza at the time appointed, and the Pope to Nizza, The
Legates toe to Vicenza.
in Prouence at the same time, to speak personally with the Emperor, and
French King, which he gave out was only to make peace between those A
conference in Nizza between the Pope, French K. and King of Spain.
two great Princes, though his principal end was to draw the Dukedom of
Milan into his house. I here the Pope, amongst other things, desired them both
to send their Ambassadors to the Council, and to cause the Prelates which
were in their trains to go also, and to give order that those that were at
home in their Kingdoms should begin their voyage thither. For gluing the order
they both excused, and said, that first it was fit to inform themselves by the
Prelates, of the necessities of their Churches; and for sending those that wore
present, that it would be hard to persuade them to go before they had
consolted with others. The Pope was so easily satisfied with the answer, that
it was doubted, whether he more desired the affirmative, or the negative.
Therefore this Treaty being unprofitable, as were all his other in that
meeting, he went his way, and, being at Genua, in The Council is defened vnull
Easter.
his return, received letters from his Legates, who were at Vicenza, yet alone
without any Prelate; wherefore he recalled them, and by his Bull, dated the
eight of Iulie, prolonged the term of the Council until the next Easter day.

This year, the Pope brake the wise patience, or rather dissimulation, which,
for four years together, he had used toward England, and sent against the
King a terrible thundering Bull, such as never was The Pope thundereth against
the K. of England.
used by his predecessors, nor imitated by his successors. Which fulmination,
having its original from the Manifests, published against the Council of
Mantua, and Vicenza; my purpose requires, I should make mention thereof.
Besides, for the understanding of many accidents which shall be related
hereafter, it is necessary to repeat this event, with the particulars of it.

The King of England having denied his obedience to Rome, and declared himself
head of the English Church, the year 1534. as has been said in its place,
Pope Paul, immediately after his assumption, was continually instigated by the
Emperor for his own interests, and by the Court, which thought by that
means, either to regaine England, or set it on fire, to fulminate against that
King: which he, as a man well experienced in the world, judged would be to
little purpose; considering, that if the thunders of his predecessors never had
good success, when they were believed and feared by all, there was less hope
they could effect any thing, after a doctrine was published, and received by
many, which did contemn them. He thought it wisdom to hold a weapon within
the scabberd, which had no other edge, but what was given by the opinion of
those against whom it was used. But the beheading of the Cardinal of Rochester
happening in the year 1535, the other Cardinals were earnest in remonstrating
unto him what a shame, and how great a danger it was to the Order, which ever
was esteemed most sacred and inviolable, if such an example should be suffered
to pass. For the Cardinals defend the Popedom boldly with all Princes,
because they are assured of their lives: which assurance, when it shall be
taken away, and made known to the Seculars, that the Cardinals may be
iusticed, they should do their business with too much fear: Notwithstanding,
the Pope forsook not his resolution, but found a temper, never used by any of
his predecessors, to lift up the thunderbolt with his hand and to threaten to
shoot, yet to hold it without flinging it abroad, and so to satisfy the
Cardinals, the Court, and others, and not to put the Papal authority in
hazard. Therefore he framed a Process and most severe sentence against that
King the thirtieth of August 1535. and withal suspended the publication,
during his pleasure. Yet secretly he let the copy go into the hands of some
that he knew would cause it to be delivered to the King, dispersing the rumor
of the Bull that was framed, and the suspension, with fame, that very suddenly
he would remove the suspension, and come to publication, yet with deseigne
never to proceed so far.

And though he wanted not hope, that the King either for fear of the
excommunication framed, or by the inclination of his people, or by the satietie
of punishments, used against those that disobeyed his Decree, would induce
himself, or by the mediation of the Emperor, or French King, (when by reason
of the occurrences of the world, he should be constrained to unite himself
with either of them) would be induced to yield, yet he was principally moved
by the forenamed cause, that he might not show the weakness of his weapons,
and more confirm the King in his separation. But in the end of three years
he changed his purpose, by reason of the provocation which the King seemed to
use against him, by sending out manifests against all his callings of the
Council, and by opposing his actions, though without particular offense of his
person, and lastly, by having prosecuted, cited, and condemned S. Thomas of
Canterbury, for a traitor to the The King of England senteneeth S. Thomas
Bec(...).
kingdom, with confiscation of goods, whom Alexander the third canonized in
the year 1171. for being slain in defense of the Ecclesiastical power and
liberty, whose solemn feast the Church of Rome does annually observe: which
sentence was executed by taking the bones out of the grave, which were
publicly burned by the hangman, and the ashes sprinkled in the river, putting
his hands into the treasures, ornaments and revenues of the Churches dedicated
to him, which was to touch a secret of the Popedom, of far greater
importance then the matter of the Council. Whereunto joining some hope which
he conceived from the conference with the French King, which was, that he
would assist the malcontents of England, so soon as he was free from the
wars with the Emperor, the 17. of December, he brandished the thunderbolt
of excommunication, made three years before, and opened his hand to cast it
forth, which all this while was ready to do it. The causes alleged were in
substance these. The divorce, obedience The causes of the excommunication, and
the punishments.
taken away, the death of the Cardinal of Rochester, and the proceeding
against S. Thomas. The punishments to the King were, deprivation of his
Kingdom, and to his adherents, of whatsoever they possessed, commanding his
Subjects to deny him obedience, and strangers to have any commerce in that
kingdom, and all to take arms against, and to persecute both himself and his
followers, granting them their states and goods for their prey, and their
persons for their slaves.

But how much the Popes Brief was esteemed, and his commandments The
excommunication was generally contemned.
observed, the leagues, confederations, peaces, treaties, which by the
Emperor, French King, and other Catholic Princes, were made with that King,
do evidently declare.

In the beginning of the year 1539, new controversies being raised in 1539
Germany about religion, and perhaps by men ofbad intentions, who used it but
for a pretense, there was an assembly held in Francfurt, whither the An
assembly is held in Francfurt about religion.
Emperor sent a commissioner; and after long disputation there, it was by his
consent concluded, the 19. of April, that there should be a conference in
Noremberg the first of August, to create quietly and lovingly of Religion, 1539
PAVL 3. 1. C(...) 15. HENRY 8. 3. F(...)
where on the one side and the other, besides the Doctors, other persons of
wisdom were to be present, sent by the Emperor; King Ferdinand, and other
Princes, to superintend at the colloquie, and deal between the parties: and
what was determined by common consent, should be signified to all the orders of
the Empire, and ratified by the Emperor in the next Diet. The Catholics would
have the Pope entreated to send also some person to the conferent (...) but the
Protestants thought it contrary to their protestation; and therefore it was not
done. This news of the assembly being arrived at Whereat the Pope was much
offended.
Rome, the Pope was offended, as well because there should be a treaty about
Religion in Germany, as because it derogated from the credit of the Council
intimated, though he cared very little to have it celebrated, and more
particularly because there was a dispute to admit of one to be sent by him,
and in the end his authority wholly rejected. Therefore he suddenly
dispatched into Spain the Bishop of Monte Pulciano, whose principal message
was to persuade the Emperor not to confirm, yea, rather to annihilate the
Decrees of that Diet.

The Nuncio had a great and long instruction, first, to complain grievously He
sends a Nuncio to the Emperor.
of the demeanor of John Vessalius, Archbishop of London, his Commissary, who
forgetting his oath made to that Sea, and infinite Benefits received from the
Pope, and the instruction given him by the Emperor, had consented to the
demands of the Lutherans, with prejudice of the Apostolic Sea, and dishonor
of his imperial Majesty. That London was corrupted with gifts and promises,
the City of Ausburg having given him 250. thousand Florins of gold, and the
King of Denmark promised him 4. thousand Florins yearly, out of the fruits of
his Archbishoprique of London, which was taken from him. That he thought to
take a wife, and forsake the Church, A City in Denmark.
and had never entered into holy orders. The Nuncio had commandment to show to
the Emperor, that if the things which London had granted, were confirmed by
him, they would show that he was not a son of the Apostolic Sea; and that
all the Catholic Princes of Germany complained thereof, and were of opinion
that his Majesty would not confirm them. He gave order also to propose unto
him his interests concerning the Duchy of Ghelderland, and the election of
the King of the Romans, to move him the more; putting him also in mind that
he could not have Germany at his disposition, by tolerating the Lutheran
heresies, as London and others did persuade. For it is a thing long since
known, that principalities cannot in likelihood be preserved where Religion is
lost, or where two religions are suffered. That this happened to the Emperors
of the East, who having abandoned the obedience due to the universal Bishop of
Rome, lost their forces and Kingdoms. That the cunning of the Lutherans was
manifest, who have proceeded maliciously with his Majesty, and that, under the
color of establishing their Religion they do ever procure something else.
That an example thereof was the Diet of Spira in the year 1526, of Noremberg
1532, and of Calano 1534. when the Duke of Wittenberg regained the Duchy,
which showed that those commotions of the Landgraue and the Lutherans were not
for religion, but to take that state from the King of the Romans. That he
should put him in mind that, when he made an accord with the Lutherans, the
Catholic Princes would not endure such a disorder, that his Majesty should
have more power over them then over the Protestants, and would think upon new
remedies. That there are many other lawful and honest ways to reduce
Germany, the Pope being resolved to afford him all possible aid, according to
the proportion of his forces. And when his Majesty shall have well thought
thereon, he will find that these capitulations cannot be approved, without
making all Germany Lutheran; which were wholly to deprive himself of
authority. For that Sect excludes all superiority, extolling liberty, or
rather license above all. That he should put into the Emperors head to augment
the Catholic League, and to take from the Lutherans their adherents, as much
as he could, and to send as much money as was possible into Germany, to
promise, and really to give it to those that follow the Catholic league. That
it were good also, under color of Turkish affairs, to send a competent number
of Spaniards or Italians into those parts, lodging them within the territories
of the King of the Romans. That the Pope was resolved to send some person to
the Catholic Princes, with money, to gratify those that shall be fit for his
purpose. That he should exhort Caesar, to make such an Edict, as the King of
England made in his Kingdom, causing a rumor to be spread cunningly, that
his Majesty negotiated with the said King, to reduce him to the obedience of
Rome. The Pope gave commission also to the said Montepulciano to complain to
the Emperor, that his sister, Queen Mary, Gouernesse of the low Countries,
secretly favored the Lutherane part, that she purposely sent The Nuncio
complains against the Emperors sister, Gouernesse of the low Countries.
men unto them, that, when the Catholic league was to be established, she
wrote to the Elector of Triers, that he should not enter into it, and so that
good work was crossed; that she hindered the Lord of Lauaur, the French
Ambassador, from going into Germany, to consult with the King of the Romans,
and the Legate of his Holiness about religion: which he did believe proceeded
notfrom her own will, but from the counsel of her bad ministers.

But because mention is made of the Edict of the King of England in matter The
Edict of religion made by K. Henry the 8.
of Religion, it will not be amiss to recount here, how Henry the eight in
the time of the Diet of Francfort, either because he thought to do God service
by not permitting innovation of religion within his Kingdom, or to show
constancy in what he had wrote against Luther, or to give the Pope the lie,
who laid an imputation upon him in his Bull, that he had published heretical
doctrine in his Kingdom, made a public Edict, whereby he commanded that the
real presence of the true and natural body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, under the kinds of bread and wine, there remaining no substance of
those elements, was to be believed throughout all England, as also that Christ
was wholly contained under the one and the other kind; that the communion of
the Cup was not necessary; that it was not lawful for Priests to marry; that
religious men, after their profession and vows of chastity, were bound always
to keep them, and to live in Monasteries; that secret and Auricular confession
was not only profitable but also necessary; that the celebration of Mass even
private, was an holy thing, which he commanded should be observed in his
Kingdom. He prohibited all to do or teach any thing contrary to these
articles, upon pain to be punished as heretics. It is to be marueiled at,
how the Pope, who a little before thundered against that King, was constrained
to praise his actions, and to propose him to the Emperor for an ensample to be
imitated. So a man's proper interest makes him commend and blame the same person.

But the Pope, after he had dispatched Montepulciano; seeing that by calling
the Council, and after deferring it, though he entertained the world, yet he
lost reputation, thought it necessary to leave that ambiguous proceeding, which
howsoever it had given men satisfaction heretofore, yet in A consultation
about the Council.
progress of time it might produce some sinister effect. And he made a secret
resolution, to declare himself, and to forsake ambiguities; and in the
consistory, having related what had happened, and proposed that it was
necessary to make a constant and firm resolution, he put the matter in
consultation. Some of the Cardinals, to deliver themselves from fear, which
every other day amazed them, did not approve the suspension, but desired an
express declaration that there should be no Council at all, because it
appeared not how the difficulties could be overcome, before there was a
reconciliation between Princes, a necessary means, without which there was no
hope it could be celebrated. But the wiser sort were balanced between this
and another fear, that there might be National Councels, or other remedies
used, more offensive to them then a general Synod; and therefore the mayor
part gave consent for the suspension during pleasure: thinking that when it
should seem not fit to bring it to effect, it might be continued, by
pretending the discord between Princes, or some other thing; and that if there
happened any danger of a National Council, or of Colloquies, or ought else,
it might be removed by promoting the General Council, and assigning unto it
place and time; and afterward it might be called, or let alone, as time
should advise. The match was made, and a Bull The Council intimated is
suspended during pleasure.
was framed the thirteenth of June, by which the Council intimated was
suspended during pleasure of the Pope and the Apostolical Sea.

But Montepulciano the Nuncio, who went into Spain, executed his commissions
with the Emperor; who, either for the cause alleged by the Nuncio, or for
some respects of his own, declared not himself whether he dissented or
assented to the Colloquie, appointed to be held at Noremberg in August.
Afterward, by reason of his wives death, and the rebellion of Gant, with part
of the low Countries, he had occasion, by pretending affairs of greater
importance, to leave the matter in suspense, and so the whole year 1539.
passed.

When I set my self to write this Story, considering the number of Colloquies,
some only intimated, and some held, to compose the differences in religion, I
doubted whether it was fit to make mention of all, having concluding reasons
for the one part and the other. In the end, considering that I have proposed to
my self to relate all the causes of the Council of Trent, and observing that
none has been intimated or held, but to hinder, or divert, or delay, or to
hasten and accelerate the Council, I resolved to make mention of every one,
especially for the fruit which may be gathered from 1540 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5.
HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1 1540
the knowledge of the notable particulars which happened in them: as in that
which was appointed the year following, which had his beginning thus.

The Emperor went to the low Countries by the way of France, to accommodate
those seditions, and Ferdinand met him there where one of the most principal
businesses, conferred of between them both, was to find a way of composition
for matters of religion in Germany, which being exactly handled by the body of
the Emperors Council, all did incline to institute a Colloquie herein.

This coming to the ears of Farnese, who was Legate there, and had
accompanied Cardinal Farnese the Popes Legate dissuadeth the Colloquie.
the Emperor in the voyage (which Cardinal, though a youth, under the age of
twenty years, yet had in his company many persons fit for business, and
amongst others, Marcellus Ceruinus, Bishop of Nicastro, who after was Pope, and
called Marcellus the second) he opposed this resolution, and treating with the
Emperor, Ferdinand, and with all those of the Council he put them in mind, that
the Protestants had been often dealt withal, for peace, beginning ten years
since in the Diet of Ausburg, but still without effect: And in case any
conclusion had been made, it would have been vain and fruitless. For they
daily change their opinion, not following any certain doctrine, and have
opposed even their own Augustan confession. That they are slipperie as Eeels.
First they were desirous that the abuses and vices should be removed; now they
will not have the Papacy amended but extinguished, and the Apostolical Sea,
rooted out; and all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction abolished. And if ever they
were petulant, they would be then much more, when the peace was not well
confirmed with France, and the Turk threatened Hungary. That there was no hope
to persuade them, because the controversies were upon innumerable doctrines.
And because there are many Sects among them, it is impossible to accord with
all; besides, that the greater part of them has no other end, but to possess
the goods of others, and bereave the Emperor of his authority. It was true
that the instant Turkish war persuaded an agreement in Religion; but this was
not to be done in particular or National Diets; but in a general Council,
which might immediately be intimated. For where Religion is in question, no
mutation can be made without common consent. That Germany is not only to be
respected, but France, Spain, Italy, and other people, without whose counsel
if Germany shall make a change, there will arise a dangerous division of that
Province from the rest. That it was a most ancient custom; even from the time
of the Apostles, to compose controversies with a Council only, and that now
all Kings, Princes, and godly men desired it. That peace may now easily be
concluded between the Emperor and the King of France, and immediately after a
council called, and in the mean space endeavors may be used to increase the
number and power of the Catholic league of Germany, which, by intimidating
the Protestants, will cause them to submit themselves to the Council, or at
the least they will be enforced by the Catholics; and when it shall be
necessary to resist the Turk, the Catholic league, being strong, may
constrain the Protestants to contribute: which in case they will not do, it
was necessary of two evils to choose the lesser, it being a greater fault to
offend God by abandoning the cause of Religion, then to want the assistance of
one part of a Province. And the rather, because it is not easy to judge who
are more contrary to Christ, the Protestants or the Turks. For these desire to
inthrale our bodies, but those, both bodies and souls together. All the
discourses and parlies of the Cardinal had for their conclusion, that it was
fit to call a Council, and to begin it that same year, and not to treat of
Religion in the Diets of Germany, but to labor or augment the Catholic
league, and to make peace with the King of France.

The Emperor after much deliberation, concluded that he would labor for a
concord, and gave order for a Diet to be held in Germany, where Ferdinand
thought good, inuiting the Protestant Princes to be there in person, and
promising public security unto all. Cardinal Fernese, hearing of this The
Legate departs.
conclusion, made without his knowledge, went immediately away, and passing by
Paris, obtained of the King a severe edict against the heretics, and
Lutherans, which being published, was executed in that city, and after
throughout all France with much rigor.

In Germany the Diet was called by Ferdinand in Aganoa, where the Catholigue
The Diet of Aganoa about Religion.
Doctors, and many Protestant Preachers and Ministers met together; and the
Elector of Triers, the Palatine, Duke Lewis of Bauaria, and William, Bishop of
Argentina, were deputed for mediators between the parties. The Protestants
being required to present the heads of the doctrine in controversy, answered
that they had given up their confession in Ausburg, ten years since, and an
Apology in defense of it; that they perseuered in that doctrine, and were
ready to give an account thereof unto all men: and not knowing what the
adversaries reprehended, they had no more to say, but expected to understand
from them what it was they esteemed contrary to truth, for so the matter will
come to a conference, and themselves will not fail to set peace before their
eyes. The Catholics took them suddenly at their word, and assenting to what
the others proposed, inferred that it was fit to esteem for approved all things
passed in that Diet, and to account the Decree firm and stable which was
published in the Recesse, and to lay before them the form of reconciliation
begun in that Diet. The Protestants, knowing their disadvantage, in case they
followed that form, and the prejudice which that decree would have inferred,
urged for a new form, and to have all the preiudices taken away. On the other
side the Catholics demanded, that in regard all prejudice was to be removed,
those things that the Protestants had done should be rectified, and the Church
goods, taken by them restored. The Protestants replied, that the goods were not
taken away, but, by renouation of the true doctrine, were reapplyed to those
lawful and honest uses, unto which they were destinated in their first
institution, from which the Clergy had degenerated, and therefore that it was
necessary to decide the points of the doctrine before they talked of the
goods. And the contentions increasing, Ferdinand concluded that a new form,
not prejudicial to any, should be instituted, that the Doctors that treated on
both sides should be equal in number, and that it should be lawful for the
Pope to send his Nuncij thither, and that the place of the Colloquie should be
changed, which should begin in Worms, the eight and twentieth of October next
if the Emperor thought good. The Protestants accepted the Decree declaring
that they refused not the presence of the Nuncij, but intended not to attribute
thereby any primacie to the Pope, nor authority to them.

The Emperor confirmed the Decree, and gave order for the assembly; and
appointed Granuel for his Commissioner there: who going thither with his son,
the Bishop of Arras, who after was Cardinal, and three Spanish Colloquie in
Worms without effect.
Divines, began the Colloquie, and made a very godly discourse, and fit for
pacification. A few days after, there arrived Thomas Campeggio, Bishop of
Feltre, Nuncio to the Pope. For his Holiness, though he saw that every To
which the Pope sends a Nuncio.
treaty of religion in Germany was pernicious to his affairs, and therefore
had used all diligence to break off that conference, yet he thought it less
hurt to give consent unto it, then suffer it to be done against his will. The
Nuncio, according to the Popes instruction, at his entry, made a discourse,
that the quiet of Germany was always procured by the Popes, and especially by
Paulus 3. who for that cause, had intimated a general Council in Viconza,
howsoever he was constrained to defer it, until another time, because man
went thither, and now was resolved to intimate it again in a more convenient
place: in which, that the matter of religion might be handled with fruit, he
had granted to the Emperor, that a Colloquie might be held in Germany,
which might be an entrance; to dispose them to the resolution of the Council,
and had sent him to be present there, and to assist. Therefore he prayed them
all to aim at concord, promising that the Pope would do whatsoever with
piety he could. There arrived also The Pope sends another Nuncio under a
false name.
the forenamed Bishop of Capo d'Istria, who, though sent by the Pope, as one
who well understood the humors of Germany, yet came as sent from France, that
he might do the Pope better service under another name. He caused an Oration
to be printed, the subject whereof was, the unity and peace in the Church, but
the scope to show that a National Council, was not the means to attain
thereunto. And this he distributed amongst as many men as he could, to
interrupt the Colloquie, which had a resemblance of it. Much time was spent, in
giving form to the conference, as well for secrecy, as for the number of the
Doctors which were to speak. And there were some who studiously protracted the
time, as well for the diligent endeavors of the Nuncio Campeggio, as the secret
negotiations of Vegerius. Finally it was ordered that John Ecchius should
speak for the Catholics, and Philip Melancthon for the Protestants, and that
the subject should be original sin. While these things went on in Worms,
the Popes Nuncio, residing with the Emperor, ceased not to persuade his
Majesty, that the Colloquie would bring forth some great schism, and make
all Germany Lutheran, and not only take obedience from the Pope, but weaken
his own also. He repeated the same conceits which Monte-Pulicano, used to
hinder the Colloquie appointed in the Diet of Franckfort, and those that were
used by Cardinal Farnese to hinder that of Aganoa. In conclusion, the
Emperor, considering these reasons, and the aduices given him by Granuel, of
the difficulties which he incountered, thinking to do the work better in his
own person, he resolved the Colloquie should not proceed. Wherefore Ecchius
and Melancthon having spoken three days, the conference was interrupted. For
1541 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. 1541 The Diet of Ratisbon.
letters came from the Emperor, which recalled Granuel, and referred the rest
to the Diet in Ratisbon.

That began in March 1541. The Emperor was personally present, with great hope
to end all discords, and to unite Germany in one Religion. For which purpose
he also had desired the Pope to send a Legate, a man learned and discreet,
with most ample authority, that there might be no need to send to Rome for
any thing, but all might be there immediately determined, which by the Diet and
the Legate should be thought convenient; saying, that for this end he had
yielded to the great importunity of the Nuncio residing with him, to break
off the Colloquie of Worms.

The Pope sent for his Legate Jasper Cardinal Contarini, a man much esteemed,
Jasper Contarini the Popes Legatin Ratisbon.
for his singular honesty and learning, and put also into his company men
instructed in all the interests of the Court, with Notaries to make Instruments
of whatsoever should be handled or spoken: he gave him Commission, that if he
foresaw that they went about to do any thing His instruction.
which might tend to the diminution of the Papal authority, he should
interrupt it, by propounding a general Council, the only and true remedy;
and in case the Emperor were forced to yield to the Protestants in any
prejudicial matter, he ought to forbid it, by the Postolique authority, and,
if it were done, to condemn it, and to declare it void, and, to leave the
Diet, but not the Emperors company.

Being arrived at Ratisbon, the first thing he had to do with the Emperor,
The first negotiation with the Emperor.
was to excuse the Pope, that he had not given that ample authority, and
absolute power which his Majesty desired. First, because it is so annexed to
the very bones of the Papacy, that it cannot be granted to any other;
secondly, because neither words nor clauses are found; by which the authority
of determining controversies of Faith can be communicated by the Pope, the
Privilege of not being able to err being given to his person only; in those
words, I have prayed for thee, Peter: But that the Pope had given him all
manner of power to agree with the Protestants, so that they deny not the
Principles, which are, the Primacie of the Apostolic Sea, instituted by
CHRIST, the Sacraments, as they are taught in the Church of Rome, and what else
is determined in the Bull of Leo, offering in other things to give Germany
satisfaction. And he desired his Majesty not to give ear to the propose of
any thing not fit to be granted, without the priuitie of other Nations, to
avoid all dangerous division in Christendom. It is necessary to make
particular mention of the things that passed in that Diet, because that was the
principal cause, which induced the Pope not only to consent, as before, but
to use all endeavors that the Council might be celebrated; and which assured
the Protestants, that neither in Council, nor in any other place, where any
Minister of the Pope was present, they could hope to obtain any thing.

The first action began the fifth of April; and it was delivered in the
Emperors name, that his Majesty, seeing the Turk entered into the bowels of
Germany (the cause whereof was the division of the States of the Empire for the
difference in religion) had always sought a means of pacification; and that
of the Council seeming unto him most commodious, he went purposely into Italy
to treat thereof with Pope Clement: and after, not being able to bring it to
effect, he returned, and went in person to Rome, to make the same negotiation
with Pope Paul, in whom he found much readiness. But not being able to effect
any thing, by reason of diverse impediments of war, he had finally called
that Diet, and besought the Pope to send a Legate thither. The first action of
the Diet in Ratisbon.
Now he desired nothing but that some composition might be made, and that some
small number of godly and learned men might be chosen on either side, to
confer upon the controversies, in friendly manner, without prejudice of either
of the parties, and propose to the Diet the means of concord, that all being
consulted with the Legate, the wished conclusion might be attained. Suddenly
there arose a controversy between the Catholics and Protestants, about the
manner of choosing those that should treat. Wherefore the Emperor being
desirous that some good should be done, demanded, and obtained of either
party, power to nominate the persons, desiring them to believe he would do
nothing but for the common good. For the Catholics he elected John Ecchius,
Julius Flugius, The names of the disputants.
and John Groperus; and for the Protestants, Philip Melancthon, Martin Bucer,
and John Pistoria: whom he called to him, and gravely admonished them to
abandon all passion, and to aim only at the glory of God. He made Frederique,
the Prince Palatine, and Granuel Presidents of the Colloquie, adding unto them
some others, that all might pass with the greater dignity. When the assembly
was made, Granuel published a book, and said it was given to A book given to
the Emperor as a (...) for the future concord.
the Emperor, by some godly and learned men, as a direction for the future
concord, and that his will was they should read and examine it, that it might
serve for an argument and subject of what they ought to treat, that that which
pleased all, might be confirmed, that which displeased all, might be
corrected, and in that wherein they assented not, means might be used to
reduce them to an agreement. The book contained 22. Articles. The creation of
man, the integrity of nature, free will, the cause of original sin,
Justification, the Church, her signs, the signs of the word of God, penance
after sin, the authority of the Church, the interpretation of the Scripture,
the Sacraments, Order, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance,
Matrimony, extreme Unction, charity, the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the
articles determined by the Church, the use, administration, and ceremonies of
the Sacraments, Ecclesiastical discipline, and discipline of the people. It
was read and examined, and some things were approved, some things amended by
common consent, and in others they could not agree. And these were, the ninth,
of the power of the Church, the foureteenth, of the Sacrament of Penance, the
eighteenth of the Hierarchy, the 19. of the articles determined by the Church,
the 21. of single life. In these they differed, and either party wrote his
opinion.

This being done in the assembly of all the Princes, the Emperor required the
opinions of them all concerning the things agreed on, and the different
opinions of the Collocutors, and withal proposed the amendment of the state
of the Commonwealth, as well civil as Ecclesiastical. The Bishops rejected
absolutely the Book of the concord, and whatsoever was done in the Colloquie,
unto whom the other Electors and Catholic Princes, desirous of peace, agreed
not: and it was concluded, that the Emperor; as advocate of the Church,
together with the Apostolic Legate, should examine the things agreed on, and if
any thing were obscure, should cause it to be expounded; and should treat with
the Protestants, that concerning the things in controversy, they should
consent to some Christian form of concord. Caesar imparted all to the Legate,
and urged him that the Ecclesiastical State ought to be reformed. The Legate,
after he had considered of all the business, answered in writing not more
perspicuously then the ancient Oracles; in this The Legate speaks like (...)
Oracle.
manner. That having seen the Book presented to the Emperor, and what was
written by the deputies of the Colloquie, as well the explications of either
party, as the exceptions of the Protestants, it seemed that the Protestants,
differing in-certaine articles from the common consent of the Church (in which
not withstanding he despaired not, that, with the help of God, they might be
induced to agree) nothing should be ordered concerning the residue, but
referred to the Pope, and the Apostolical Sea, who, either in the general
Council, or some other way, if there shall be cause, will define them
according to the Catholic truth, with regard unto the times, and what shall
be expedient for the Christian Commonwealth, and for Germany.

But for reformation of the Clergy, he promised all readiness, and, to The
exhortatation of the Legate Contarini made to the Pr^^^s.
that end, called into his house all the Bishops, and made them a long
exhortation. First for their manner of living, that they should abstain from
all scandal, and appearance of luxury, avarice, and ambition. For their
family, that they should understand that from it the people made conjecture of
the manners of the Bishop, that, the better to keep their flock, they should
remain in the most inhabited places of the Diocese, and have diligent
watchmen elsewhere, that they should visit the Diocesses, give the Benefices
to honest and fit men, spend their revenues upon the necessity of the poor,
flying not only luxury, but all superfluous pomp, make provision of godly,
learned, discreet, and not contentious Preachers, procure that the younger sort
be well brought up, because by this means the Protestants draw all the
Nobility unto them. He committed this Oration to writing, and gave it to the
Emperor, to the Bishops, and the Princes: which gave occasion to the
Protestants to tax the answer made to Caesar, together with the exhortation
made to the Prelates, alleging for their motive, that the writing being
published, they should seem to approve it, if they dissembled the knowledge
of it. His answer made to the Emperor pleased not the Catholics, because it
appeared that he did approve the things agreed on in the Conference.

But the Emperor related in public Diet whatsoever was done until The
Emperors opinion concerning Religion, to which the Lag^^ does agree.
that time, and communicated unto them the writing of the Legate, and concluded,
that having used all possible diligence, he saw not what more could be done,
but only to deliberate, whether (saving the recesse of the Diet of Ausburg) the
articles agreed on in this conference, ought to be received, as being
Christian, nor any more to be disputed of, at the least until a general
Council, which shall be held very shortly, (of which opinion the Legate seemed
to be) or, in case there were no Council, until a Diet, where all the
controversies of religion may be exactly handled.

The Electors approved for good, and undoubtedly profitable, that the Articles
agreed on in the conference, should by all be received, until the time of the
Council; in which they may be examined again, or, in case that fail, in a
National Council, or Diet, because it would serve to make a perfect The
answer of ye Electors.
reconciliation in the Articles, not accorded as yet. But yet they prayed his
Majesty to go on, if there were any hope to make any further agreement in
that Diet: and if opportunity served not, they thought it good, that, by his
favor, a general or National Council, might be called in Germany, as
soon as might be, that the union might wholly be established. The Protestants
The answer of the Protestants.
made the same answer, only declaring themselves, that as they desired a free
and Christian Council in Germany, so they could not consent to any, where the
Pope and his Ministers, had power to hear and judge the causes of religion.
But the Bishops and some few other Catholic Princes, The answer of the BB.
and of the Catholic Princes.
answered after another manner; first, confessing that in Germany, and other
Nations, there were many abuses, sects, and heresies, which could not be
extirpated without a general Council; adding, that they could not assent to
any change in religion, ceremonies, and rites, seeing that the Popes Legate
offers a Council within a short time, and that his Majesty will treat with
his Holiness thereof. But in case the general Council could not be
celebrated, they desired that the Pope and Emperor would ordain a National
Council in Germany; which if they would not do, another Diet should be
assembled, to root out the errors; and that they were resolved to adhere to
the old religion, as it is contained in the Scripture, Councels, doctrine of
the Fathers, and also in the Imperial Recesses, especially in that of Ausburg.
That they will never consent to receive the Articles accorded in the Colloquie,
because some of them are superfluous, as are the 4. first, and because there
are words in them, not conformable to the custom of the Church; besides some
positions, which are partly damnable, and partly to be tempered; and because
the Articles accorded, are of less moment, and those of consequence remain in
controversy: and because the Catholics of the Colloquie had granted too much
to the Protestants, whereby the reputation of the Pope, and the Catholic
states was wounded. They concluded it was better the acts of the Colloquie were
left to their place, and whatsoever belonged to religion, deferred to a
general Council, or National, or a Diet. Not the opinion only of the
Catholics, that the Emperors proposition was too aduantagious for the
Protestants, caused them to make this answer, but also because the three
Catholic Doctors of the Colloquie dissented amongst themselves.

But the Legate understanding that the Emperor had named him, as consenting to
the establishment of the things accorded, as well for fear, as at the instance
of the Ecclesiastikes of the Diet, he went to the Emperor and complained, that
his answer was ill interpreted, and that he was blamed The Legate complains
that his answer was mistaken.
for having given consent, that the things accorded, should be tolerated until
the Council; that his mind was, that nothing should be resolved on, but all
sent to the Pope, who promised by the faith of a good Pastor, and Universal
Bishop, that all should be determined by a general Council, or by some other
way, equivalent, sincerely, and without passion, not hastily, but maturely,
always aiming at the formed of God. That his Holiness had to the same end, in
the beginning of his Papacy, sent letters and Nuncij to the Princes, to
celebrate the Council, and after did intimate it, and sent his Legates to the
place; and if he had endured so many ireaties of religion in Germany, with
small reverence of his authority, to whom only it appertains to make them,
it was upon his Majesty's purpose, and promise that all should be for the
best, that it was unreasonable, that Germany should assume that to her self,
with injury to the Apostolik Sea, which belongs to all nations of
Christendom. Wherefore the Popes clemency was no longer to be abused, by
concluding that in a Diet, which belongs to him, and the Church universal,
but said, that the book, and all the acts of the Colloquie, together with the
opinions of both parties, was to be sent to Rome, and the determination of his
Holiness to be expected. And not satisfied with this, he published a third
writing, in which he said, that his writing given to the Emperor, concerning
the treaty of the Colloquie being diversely interpreted, some expounding it, as
if he had consented to the Articles accorded of, until the general Council,
and others understanding that he had referred both these, and all other things
to the Pope, to the end there may remain no doubt herein, he declares that
in the writing he had no intention to decide any thing in this business, nor
that any Article should be received or tolerated until the future Council,
and least of all did then decide or define them, but had referred the whole
treaty, and all the Articles thereof unto the Pope, as he did refer them
still. Which having declared to the Emperor by word, he would also declare
and confirm it to the whole world in writing.

And he was not contented with this, but, considering that all the Catholic
Princes, even the Ecclesiastikes, did agree in demanding a National Council,
and that, in his instruction, he had straight charge from the Pope to oppose
himself when that should be urged, though they would do it with his
authority, and with the presence of the Apostolical Legates to show what
danger it would be to men's souls, and injury to the Popes authority, from
whom would be taken the power which God has given him, and granted to one
Nation; to put the Emperor in mind how himself, being in Bolonia, detested a
National Council, knowing it to be pernicious to the Imperial authority,
because the Subjects, encouraged by seeing power given them to innouate in
matter of religion, would think to do the like in the temporal state, and
that his Majesty, after the year 1532. would never have an Imperial Diet
celebrated in his presence, lest he should give occasion of demanding a
National Council: he treated most seriously with the Emperor, and with every
one of the Princes, and besides published a writing addressed to the
Catholics. He said therein that he had diligently considered what a
prejudice it would be, if the controversies of doctrine should be referred to
The Legate publishes a writing to dissuade all treaties about rel^ion in a
National Council.
the Council of a Nation, and thought it his duty to admonish them, that
they should by all means remove that clause, for that it was most manifest
that questions of faith could not be determined in a National Council,
because it concerned the Universal state of the Church; and if any thing were
determined therein, it would be void and of no force. And, as in not
celebrating such a Council (as he was persuaded they would not) they should
do a thing most acceptable to his Holiness, who is head of the Church, and of
all Councels, so the celebration of it would be most offensive to him. That it
was a clear case; that by this means greater (...)ditions would arise in
matter of Religion, as well in other Nations, as in that most noble Province.
That he would not omit this duty, both to obey the instruction of his
Holiness, and not to be wanting to the charge of Legation laid upon him.

The Princes answered this writing of the Legate, that it was in his The
answer of the Princes to the writing.
power to remedy all the inconveniences which might arise, by persuading his
Holiness; that a general Council might be intimated and celebrated without any
more procrastination. That by this means all occasion of a National Council
(which all the States of the Empire desired and prayed for) would be removed.
But if the general Council, so often promised, and last of all by himself,
were not brought to effect, the manifest necessity of Germany required, that
the controversies should be determined in a national Synod, or in an
imperial Diet, with the assistance of the Popes Legate. The Protestant Divines
answered also in a long writing, and said, The answer of the Protestant
Divines.
that neither greater seditions, nor any at all could arise, when the
controversies of Religion shall be composed according to the word of God, and
manifest vices corrected according to the doctrine of the Scripture, and the
undoubted Canons of the Church. That to determine of faith has never been
formerly denied to National Councels, because CHRIST has promised his
assistance, where two or three shall be assembled in his Name. That the number
was great, not only of National Councels, but even of a very few Bishops,
which have determined the controversies, and ordered the manners of the Church
in Syria, Greece, Affrique, Italy, France, and Spain against the errors of
Samosatenus, Arrius, the Donatists, Pelagius, and other heretics; whose
determinations cannot be called void, of no force, and vain, without
impiety. That it has been granted to the Sea of Rome to be the first, and
to the Pope to have the chiefest authority amongst the Patriarchs; but that it
is not found in any Father, that he has been called head of the Church, or
of the Councels. CHRIST only is head; Paul, Apollos, and Cephas are but
Ministers of the Church. That what may be expected from Rome the discipline
there observed so many ages, and the tergiuersation to celebrate a lawful
Council do declare.

But the Emperor, after long discussion, the 28 of July made the Recesse of
the Diet, remitting the whole action of the Colloquie unto the general
Council, or National Synod of Germany, or a Diet of the Empire. He promised
to go into Italy, and to treat with the Pope for a Council; which if he
could not obtain either general or National, he would intimate a Diet of
the Empire within eighteen months, to settle the matters of Religion, and be
a means that the Pope should send thither a Legate. He commanded the
Protestants to receive no new opinions, but those that were agreed on, and the
Bishops to reform their Churches. He commanded that the Monasteries should
not be destroyed, nor the goods of the Church usurped, nor any man solicited
to change religion. And, to 1542 PAVL 3 CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
give the Protestants greater satisfaction, he added, that, concerning the
doctrines not as yet accorded, he prescribed them nothing; but that they ought
not to destroy the Cloisters of the Monks, but reduce them to a holy and
Christian amendment, that the Ecclesiastical goods should not be usurped,
but, left to the ministers; without regard of diversity of religions that no
man should be moved to change his religion, but those received who change it
willingly. He suspended also the Recesse of Ausburg, for as much as concerned
religion, and the things depending thereon, until the controversies were
determined in a Council or Diet.

After the Diet was ended, Caesar passed into Italy, and discoursed with A
conference between the Pope and Emperor in Lucca.
the Pope in Lucca, concerning the Council, and the Turkish war, and
concluded that the Pope should send a Nuncio into Germany, to take resolution
both in the one matter and the other, in the Diet which should be held in
Spira in the beginning of the next year, and that the Council should be held
in Vicenza, as was before appointed. The Pope signified the conclusion to the
Senate of Venice, who thought not fit, for diverse respects, that so great a
multitude should meet in the City, and should treat of the Turkish war, as
certainly they would have done, either with a purpose to effect it, or at the
least to make a fair show. Whereupon they The Venetians will not suffer the
Council to be held in Vicenza.
answered, that, the case being altered by reason of an accord which they
lately had made with the Turk, they could not continue in the same opinion,
because Soliman would suspect that they moved the Christian Princes to
conspire against him. Hereupon the Pope was constrained to alter his deseigne.
But the Cardnall Contarini was much calumniated in the Court of Rome, where an
opinion arose, that he was somewhat affected to The Legate Contarins was
suspected of Lutheranisme
Lutheranisme; and those that spoke least hurt of him, said, that he opposed
not as much as he ought, and that he had put the Popes authority in hazard.
The Pope also distasted his service, though he were mightily defended by the
Cardinal Fregoso. But at his return to his Holiness, whom he found in Lucca
expecting the Emperor, he rendered an account of his Legation, and gave
absolute satisfaction.

The year 1541. ended thus: and in the next the Pope sent John Morone, Bishop
of Modena, to Spira, where the Diet was held in presence of Ferdinand: 1542
John Morone is sent Nuncio to the Diet of Spira.
who, according to his commission, declared, that the Popes mind concerning
the Council, was the same as before; that is, that it should one day be
celebrated; that he had suspended it by Caesar's consent, to make way first to
some concord in Germany: but seeing this to be in vain, he returned to his
former opinion, not to defer the celebration of it. But that he could not
consent to make it in Germany, because he meant to be there in person, and
that his age, and length of the way, and so great a change of the air hindered
his going into that country. And that it seemed not more commodious for other
Nations. Beside, that there was a great probability to fear, that the
differences could not be handled without commotions. Therefore, that Ferrara,
Bolonia, or Piacenza (all great and most opportune cities) seemed to him more
fit. But in case they liked them not, he was contented to call it in Trent, a
City at the Confines of Germany. That his will was to begin it at
Whitsontide, but for the straightness of the time he had prorogued it to the
thirteenth of August. He prayed them all to be present there, and, laying
aside all hatred, to handle the cause of God with sincerity. Ferdinand, and
the Catholic Princes thanked the Pope, and said, that, not being able to
obtain a fit place in Germany, as Ratibon or Collen, they were contented with
Trent. But the Protestants would not agree (...) Trent is named for the place
of the Council, but the Protestants would not consent.
there that the Council should be intimated by the Pope, or that Trent should
be the place, which was the cause why nothing was determined in that Diet
concerning the Council.

Howsoever, the Pope sent out a Bull of the intimation, the two and twentieth
of May this year; wherein, having declared his desire to provide The Pope
publishes the Bull of the int(...)
against the evils of Christendom, he said, he had always thought upon the
temedies: and finding none more fit then a Council, he was constantly
resolved to call it: and, making mention of the Convocation at Mantua, then of
the suspension, after of the Convocation at Vicenza, and of the other
suspension made in Genua, and finally of that other during pleasure, he went
on to show the reasons that induced him to continue the same suspension until
then. These were, Ferdinends war in Hungary, the rebellion of Flanders
against the Emperor, and the things that happened in the Diet of Ratubon,
expecting a time appointed by God for this work. But considering in the end,
that every time is acceptable to his divine Majesty, when holy things are
handled, he resolved to expect no other consent of the Princes; and because
he could not have Vicenza, being willing to give satisfaction to Germany
concerning the place, and understanding they desired Trent, though a City more
within Italy seemed to him more commodious, yet his fatherly charity inclined
his will to yield to their demands; and he chose Trent to celebrate there an
Oecumenicall Council the first of November next; and that he interposed that
time, that his Decree might be published, and the Prelates have time to arrive
at the place. Therefore, by the authority of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and the Apostles Peter and Paul, which himself exercises on
earth, by the counsel and consent of the Cardinals, all suspensions being
removed, he intimates an holy, Oecumenicall, and general Council in that
City, a fit place, free, and opportune for all Nations, to be begun the first
of that month prosecuted, and ended: calling all Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and those who by law or privilege, have voice in general
Councels, and commanding them by virtue of the Oath made to him and the
Apostolic Sea, and by holy obedience, and under the punishments, by law or
custom to be inflicted upon the disobedient, to be there in person, or, in
case they shall be hindered, to make faith of the hinderance, or send
proctors: praying the Emperor, the most Christian King, and all other Kings,
Dukes, and Princes, to be personally present, or, in case they cannot, to send
Ambassadors, men of gravity and authority, and to cause the Bishops and
Prelates of their Kingdoms and Provinces to go thither: desiring further of
the Prelates and Princes of Germany, for whose sake the Council is intimated
in the place they wished, that the things may be handled which belong to the
truth of Christian religion, to the correction of manners, to the peace and
concord of Christian Princes and people, and oppression of the Barbarians and
Infidels.

The Bull was presently sent from Rome to also inches, but went not forth in a
fit time. For Francis the French King, having in July denounced war, in
threatening tormes; against the Emperor and published it by a book which
boo(...) he made it at the same instant in Brabant, The French King makes
war against the Emperor. The Emperor excepted against the Bull, and
complayneth of the French King.
(...)nt, and (...).

The Emperor, having received the Bull of the Council, answered the Pope,
that he was not satisfied with it. For having never refused any pains, danger,
or do, that the Council (...)ght be ended and contrarily the French King
having always endeavored to hinder it, reseemed strange unto him that they
were compared and made equal in the Bull; and, rehearsing, all the injuries
which he protended to have received from the King, added also that, in the last
Diet at Spira, he had labored by his Ambassadors to cherish the discords of
religion, by promising friendship and favor to either party. In fine, he
referred it to his Holiness to consider, if the actions of that King did ferue
to remedy the mischiefs of the Christian Commonwealth, and to begin the
Council, which he did ever cross, for his private gain, and had constrained
him, who did perceive it, to find a way to reconcile the differences of
religion. Therefore, in case the Council shall not be celebrated, that his
Holiness ought not to blame him, but the King, and denounce war against him,
if he meant to assist the public good: because this is the only way, to
call the Council, establish religion, and regaine peace.

The King, presaging what imputations would be laid upon him, for The French
King waxes cruel against the Protestants, to free himself from the
imputations laid upon him by the Emperor.
making a war to the hurt of religion, and hinderance of the service of God,
which might be expected from the Council, prevented it by publishing an Edict
against the Lutheranes, commanding the Parliaments to execute it inuiolably,
with severe charge that all should be appeached, who had books differing from
the Church of Rome, that made secret conuenticles, that transgressed the
commandments of the Church, and especially that observed not the doctrine of
meats, or prayed in any tongue but the Latin; and commanded the Sorbonists to
be diligent spies against them. Afterward understanding the Emperors cunning,
who assayed to incite the Pope against him, he coused the Lutheranes to be
really proceeded against, and commanded that a form to discover and accuse
them, should be instituted in Paris, proposing punishments to the councealors
of them, and rewards to the delators. Afterward having full notice what Caesar
had written to the Pope, he wrote also He writes also to the Pope against the
Emperor.
unto him a long apology for himself, and an inuectiue against the Emperor,
vpbraiding him with the surprise and sack of Rome, and with the derision added
to the loss, by making processions in Spain for the Popes delivery, whom
himself kept prisoner. He discoursed of all the offenses between himself
and the Emperor, and laid all the blame on him. He concluded that it could
not be ascribed to him, that the Council of Trent was hindered or foreslowed,
because he gained nothing by it, and that this was far from the examples of
his ancestors, by whose imitation he used all endeauours to preserve religion,
as the edicts and executions made in France did very well demonstrate.
Therefore he prayed his Holiness, not to believe the calumnies, and to assure
himself that he should find him ready to assist him in all occasions, either
of his own, or of the Church of Rome.

The Pope not to prejudice the office of a common Father, whereof his
predecessors did ever make ostentation, sent Legates to both the Princes, to
mediate a pacification, Cardinal (...) to the Emperor, and (...) to The Pope
as death (...) to (...) or paci(...).
the French King to pray them to forget private injuries, for the public
cause, and to be reconciled, that their discords may not hinder the peace of
religion. To Cardinal Contarini, who immediately dyed, he substituted Cardinal
Cardinal Contarini dies.
Viseus, whereat the Court (...)led because he was not gracious with the
Emperor, to whom he was sent. And though the war waxed hot in so many
places, yet the Pope thinking that the wronged his reputation The Pope sends
3., Legates to Trent. 154(...)
if he went not on with the Council, the 26 of August, this year 1542. sent
his Legates to Trent, to the Synod which he had intimated, Peter Paul
Parisius, John Morone, and Reginald (...), the first as a learned, and
practiced Canonist, the second, as a man fit for negotiation, the third, to
show that, howsoever the King of England was alienated from the subjection of
Rome, yet the kingdom had a great part in the Council. To these he dispatched
the mandat of the Legation, commanding them to go thither, and to entertain
the Prelates and Ambassadors who came unto them, without making any public
act before they had received instructions, which he meant to send them in time
convenient.

The Emperor also understanding the deputation of the Legates, though The
Emperor sends Ambassadors and Prelates to Trent, and so does the Pope; but
the Council does not begin.
as the case did then stand, he hoped for no good, yet that the Pope might do
nothing to his prejudice, he sent thither for his Ambassadors, Don Diego, his
resident in Venice, and Nicholas Granuel, together with his Son Anthony,
Bishop of Arras, and somefew Bishops of the kingdom of Naples. The Pope,
besides his Legates, sent thither some Bishops, whom he esteemed most faithful,
with order not to make too much have in their journey. As well the Popes men as
the Emperors, arrived at the time appointed. These presented to the Legates the
Emperors mandat, and desired that the Council should be opened, and the
business begun. The Legates make delay, and said, that it would be a dishonor
to the Council, to begin it with so small a number, especially where Articles
of so great importance were to be handled, as were those which the Lutherans
did question. The Imperialists replied, that the matter of reformation might
well be handled, which was more necessary, and not subject to so many
difficulties. The others alleged, that it must be applied to the use of
diverse Nations, so that the assistance of all was more necessary therein. In
fine they passed to protestations, to which the Legates not answering, but
referring the answer to the Pope, no conclusion at all was made. Granuell is
sent to the (...) in Noremberg, and Don Dieg, remains in Trent.


The end of that year approaching, the Emperor gave order to Granuell to go to
the Diet, which was to be held in Noremberg in the beginning of the next, and
to Don Diego to remain in Trent, and to labor that the Council should begin,
or at the least, that those that were assembled should not depart, that in the
Diet he might make use of that shadow of the Council. In Noremberg Granuel
proposed the war against the Turks, and that the Emperor might be assisted
against the French King. The Protestants replied, demanding that 1543 PAVL 3.
C(...) HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
the differences of Religion might be composed, and the oppressions which the
ludges of the Chamber used against them under other pretenses, though indeed
for that cause, might be taken away. Granuel answered, that it neither could,
nor ought to be done in that place and time, because a Council was assembled
in Trent to that end. But the excuse was in vain, because the Protestants The
Protestants refuse to go to Trent and D. Diego returns to Venice.
approved not the Council, and said plainly, that they would not be there.
The Diet ended without conclusion, and Don Diego returned to his Embassage at
Venice, though the Legates entreated that, to give reputation to the business,
he would entertain himself there, until they received answer from the Pope.

The Emperors Ambassador being gone, the Bishops of the Empire followed; The
Legates being left alone were recalled.
and all the others, having leave to depart under diverse colors; at the last,
the Legates, after they had been there seven months, without doing anything,
were recalled by the Pope. And this was the end of that Congregation. The
Emperor, being parted from Spain by sea to go into Germany by the way of
Italy, the Pope resolved to speak with him some where, and desired it should
be in Bolonia. And to this end he sent Peter Aloisius his son to Genua, to
inuit him. But because his Majesty would not go out of his way; not loose
time in his voyage, he sent the Cardinal Farnese to meet him, and pray him to
go by the way of Parma, where the Pope might expect him. But after there being
difficulty how the Emperor might enter into that City the twenty one of June
1543. they met in Busseto: a Castle belonging to the Palauicini, situate upon
the river Tarus, between Parma and Piacenza. 1543 The Pope and Emperor meet
in Busseto.
The ends of them both suffered not that the business of the Council, and of
Religion should be the principal treaty between them. But the Emperor being
wholly bent against the French King labored to incite the Pope against him,
and to have money from him for the war. The Pope, serving himself upon this
occasion, was wholly set upon the gaining The Pope seeks to gain Milan.
of Milan for his Nephews; wherein he was assisted by Margarite, bastard
daughter to the Emperor, married to Octauius Farnese, the Popes Nephew, and in
that respect, made Duchess of Camerino. The Pope promised the Emperor to
combine with him against the French King, to make many Cardinals of his
nomination, to pay him for some years 150000. crowns, leaving also in his
hands the Castles of Milan and Cremona. But because the Imperialists required a
million of ducats for the present, and another million upon short days of
payment, nothing could be concluded: and in regard the Emperor could not
longer tarry, it was agreed to continue the treaty, by means of the Popes
Ministers, who should follow the Emperor. Caesar showed he was satisfied with
the Council, that by the sending of Legates, and assistance of those few
Prelates, the Catholics of Germany at the least had known his ready mind:
and, because the impediments might be imputed to the French King, he concluded
that the remedy He mistrustes the Emperor and turns to the French King.
was not to be thought upon, until it did appear how the war proceeded.
They parted with great demonstrations of mutual satisfaction; yet the Pope
mistrusted the Emperor, and from that time turned his mind toward the French
King.

But while he was thus doubtful, the league between the Emperor and the King
of England against France, was published, which constrained the Pope wholly to
alienate himself from him. For he saw how much that league prejudiced his
authority, being contracted with one excommunicated, anathematized by him,
cursed, destinated to eternal damnation, a schismatique, deprived of his
Kingdom and dominions, whose confederation A league between the Emperor and
King of England.
made with whom soever was void, against whom also all Christians, Princes were
bound by his commandment to take arms, and, which most imported, that still
remaining more contumacious, and openly despising his authority, The Pope was
much offended with the league.
this evidently showed to the world that the Emperor bare no respect unto him,
neither spiritual nor temporal, and gave example to all, to make no account
of his authority. And the affront seemed to him the greater, because Clement,
who might easily have temporized in that cause, to please the Emperor, and for
his interests, had proceeded against that King, who otherwise was well
affected, and deserved well of the Apostolic Sea. To weigh down these
offenses, the Pope put in the other balance, that the French King had made so
many laws and edicts before named, to preserve religion and his authority.
Unto which was added that the Parisian Divines the first of August, assembling
the people by the sound of a Trumpet, published five and twenty heads of
Christian doctrine, proposing the bare conclusions and determinations, without
adding reasons, persuasions, or grounds, but only prescribing, as it were by
authority, what they would have believed; which were printed, and sent through
all France, confirmed by the Kings letters, under most grievous punishments,
against whosoever spoke or taught other wise, with another new Decree to make
inquisition against the Lutherans. These things the rather pleased the Pope,
because he knew the King did them, not so much for the reason related before,
that is, to justify himself to the world that he made not war with the
Emperor to favor the Lutherans doctrine, nor to hinder their extirpation, but
principally to please him, and for reverence of the Apostolical Sea.

But the Emperor knowing the Popes complaints, answered, that the The Emperors
answer to the Popes complaints.
French King having made a League with the Turk to the prejudice of Christians
(as the siege of Nizza in Prouence, made by the Ottoman Army, guided by
Polinus the Kings Abassadour, and the spoils taken in the rivers of the
Kingdom, well showed) it was lawful for him to use, for his defense, the
help of the King of England, a Christian, though he acknowledge not the Pope;
as also, by the same Popes leave, himself and Ferdinand used the assistance of
the Protestants, more auerse from the Apostolic Sea then that King; that the
Pope, understanding the League of the French King with the Turk, should have
proceeded against him. But he saw well what difference was made. For the
Turkisharmie, which had so much damnified all the Christians wheresoever it
went, passed friendly by the Popes rivers, yea going to Ostia to take in the
fresh water on S. Peter's day at night, for which all Rome, was in confusion,
the Cardinal of Carpi, who commanded in the Popes name that was absent, put
them out of fear, being secure by the intelligence which he had with the
Turks.

The war and these complaints put to silence the treaties about the 1544
PAVL. 3. (...) CHARLES (...) HENRY (...) FRANCIS. (...)
council for this year, which the next 1544 returned into the field, and began
in the Diet of Spira, where the Emperor rehearsing the pains which he
formerly took to remedy the discords in religion and finally the care and
diligence used in Ratisbon, be put them in mind how, it not being then possible
to compose the controversies, all was finally referred to a general or National
Council 1544. The treaty a(...) both the Counsel began again in the Diet of
(...).
or a Diet, and that afterward the Pope at his instance had intimated the
Council where himself resolved to be in person and would have performed it if
the war of France had not hundred him. But now in regard the discord in
religion remains the same and is accompained with the same inconveniences; it
is not time to defer the remedy any longer, for which he gave order they
should consider, and propose to him what way they thought to be best. The
business of religion was much considered on But because the affairs of the
war pressed them more, it was referred to the Diet; which was to be
celebrated in December, and in the mean space, a Decree was made, that the
Emperor should give charge to some honest and learned men to write a form of
reformation, and that all the Princes should do the same, that all being
conferred together, that might be determined in the Diet by common consent,
which was to be observed until the future general Council, to be held in
Germany, or until a National. In the mean space that all should remain in
peace, without raising any tumult for Religion, and the Churches of the one and
the other should enjoy their goods. This Recesse did not generally please the
Catholics; but some of them, because they inclined to the Protestants opinion,
approved this middle way. Those that were not contented, seeing their number
to be small, resolve to endure it.

But the war went on still; and the Popes disdain conceived for the league
with England, did wax greater, for that the Emperor had never The Popes
disdain against the Emperor is increased.
assented to any of those maine and ample matches offered him by the Cardinal
Farnese, whom he sent Legate with him into Germany, concerning the grant of the
Duchy of Milan to the Family of the Farnesi; and, that being to assist in
the Diet of Spira, he would not suffer the Cardinal Legate to follow him
thither for fear of offending the Protestants. And finally, considering the
Decree made in the Diet, so prejudicial to him and the Apostolic sea, he was
more offended, because he saw his hopes lost, and his authority and
reputation much diminished, and judged it necessary to show he was sensible of
it. And though on (the other side he considered that his party in Germany was
weakened, and was counseled by his most inward friends to dissemble, yet
finally, being assured, that by declaring himself openly against Caesar, he
did more straightly bind the French King to maintain his reputation, he
resolved to begin from words to take occasion to pass to deeds, as the
coniunctures should comport.

And the fifth of August he wrote a great long letter to the Emperor; the
substance whereof was; That having understood what decrees were made The Pope
writes a long angry letter to the Emperor.
in Spira, his duty and fatherly charity did enforce him to tell him his
opinion, that he might not follow the example of Ely the Priest, whom God
severely punished for his too much indulgence toward his sons. That the
Decrees of Spira were dangerous for the Emperors soul, and extremely troubled
the Church; that he should not violate the rules observed by Christians, which
command that, in the cause of religion, all should be referred to the Church
of Rome: and yet he, not esteeming the Pope, who only, by the law of God and
man, has power to call Councels. And to decree in spiritual matters, was
willing to think of assembling a General of National Council; and has
suffered Idiots and Heretics to judge of religion: has made decrees
concerning sacred goods, restored to honor the rebels of the Church, whom he
had condemned by his own Edicts: that he is willing to believe that he has
not done these things by his own inclination, but by the pernicious counsel
of those that bear ill will to the Church of Rome, and that he complains of
this, that he has yielded unto them; that the Scripture is full of examples of
the wrath of God, against the usurpers of the office of the High Priest, of
Vzza, Dathan, Abiron, and Core, of King Ozias, and others. That it is not a
sufficient excuse to say, the Decrees are but temporary, until the Council
only. For though the thing done be holy, yet in regard of the person that did
it, it not belonging to him, it is wicked. That God has always exalted those
Princes, that have been devoted to the sea of Rome, Head of all Churches,
Constantine, the Theodosij, and Charles the Great: and contrarily has punished
those that have not given due respect unto it. Examples hereof are Anastasius,
Mauritius, Constan^ the 2. Pilip, Leo, and others; and Henry the 4. was for
this cause chastised by his own son; as also Frederick the 2. by his. And
not Princes only, but whole Nations have been punished for it; the Jews for
putting to death Christ the Son of God; the Grecians for having many ways
contemned his Vicar: which things he ought the more to fear, because he is
descended from those Emperors, who have received more honor from the Church
of Rome, then they have given it. That he commends him for desiring the
amendment of the Church, but withal does advise him to leave the charge
thereof to him, to whom God has given it. That the Emperor is a Minister, but
not a Governor, nor an Head. He added, that he desired the reformation, and
has declared it often by intimating the Council, whenever any spark of hope
has appeared that it might be assembled, and though in vain until then, yet
he had not been wanting to his duty, desiring much a Council, which is the
only remedy against all mischiefs, as well for the general good of
Christendom, as the particular of Germany, which has more need thereof. That
it has been intimated already, though deferred until a more commodious time,
by reason of the wars. That it belongs to the Emperor himself, to give
way that it may be celebrated, by making peace, or deferring the war, while
matters of religion are handled in the Council. That he should obey these
fatherly commandes, exclude from the Imperial Diets all disputes about
religion, and refer them to the Pope, ordain nothing concerning
Ecclesiastical goods, revoke the grantes made to the rebels against the Sea of
Rome; otherwise to perform his own duty, that he shall be forced to use
greater severity against him then he would.

THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. THE SECOND BOOK.
THe War between the Emperor and the French The Emperor is wholly incliued
to peace, which was concluded the 24. of September.
King lasted not long. For the Emperor saw plainly, that while he was busied
in that, and his brother in the other against the Turk, Germany so much
increased in liberty, that the Imperial name would not be esteemed within a
short time; and that so long as he made War in France, he imitated Esops
dog, who following the shadow, lost both it and the body. Whereupon he
hearkened to the propositions of peace made by the French men, with design not
only to be freed from that impediment, but, by the Kings means, to
accommodate the Turkish affairs, and apply himself unto Germany. The four
and twentieth of September the peace was concluded between them, and amongst
other things they both capitulated to defend the old Religion, and to labor
for the union of the Church, and reformation of the Court of Rome, from whence
all the dissensions are derived, and that, for this purpose, the Pope should
jointly be requested to call the Council, and the French King should send to
the Diet of Germany, to persuade the Protestants to accept it. The Pope was
not afraid of the capitulation for the Council, and reformation of the Court,
being assured that whenever they began that enterprise, by reason of their
diverse ends and interests, they would not long agree: neither did he doubt, but
that the design being to be executed by a Council, he would so accommodate
every treaty, that his authority should be amplified. But he thought that in
case he should call the Council at their request, the world would imagine he
was constrained, which would bring much dishonor to his reputation, and
encouragement to him that designed the moderation of the Papal power.
Therefore not expecting to be prevented by any of them, and dissembling The
Pope dissembleth his suspicions.
the suspicions conceived against the Emperor, even those that were most
important (which the peace made without his knowledge, with points prejudicial
to his authority put into his head) he set forth a Bull, in which he invited
the whole Church to rejoice for the peace, by which the only impediment of the
Council was removed, which he established again in Trent, giving order it
should begin the 15. of March.

He saw the term was straight, and not sufficient to give notice throughout,
much less to give the Prelates space to put themselves in order, and make the
journey: Yet he thought it advantage, that, in case it were to be celebrated,
it should begin with few, and those Italians, Courtiers, and his dependants,
whom he had solicited to be there first, because the manner of proceeding in
the Council should be handled in the beginning The Popes Bull of the
convocation of the Council.
(which is the principal, yea the only thing to preserve the Pontifical
authority) unto whose determination they who daily arrived would be
constrained to stand. That it was no marvel that a general Council should
begin with a few: for so it was in that of Pisa and Constance, which
nevertheless had an happy progress. And having penetrated the true cause of
making the peace, he wrote to the Emperor, that he had used prevention and
celeritie to intimate the Council, to do him service. For knowing that his
Majesty was constrained, by reason of the French war, to permit, and promise
many things to the Protestants, by intimating the Council he had now given him
a means to excuse himself in the Diet, which was to be in September, if, the
Council approaching, he performed not what he had promised to grant until
the Council.

But the Popes hastiness pleased not the Emperor, nor the reason gave him
satisfaction. He desired, for his reputation, to be the principal cause, The
Emperor was displeased with the sudden intimation of the Council.
to make Germany accept the Council more easily, and for many other respects.
And therefore being able to do nothing else, he used all those terms, which
might show himself to be the Author, and the Pope the adherent. He sent
Ambassadors to all Princes to signify the intimation, and to pray them to send
Ambassadors to honor the meeting, and to confirm the Decrees which should
there be made. And he set himself to make serious preparations, as if the
enterprise had been his own. He gave diverse orders to the Prelates of Spain
and the Low Countries, and commanded, amongst other things, that the Divines of
Louaine should assemble themselves together, to consider of the doctrines which
were to be proposed; which 33. Points of doctrine collected by the Divines of
Louaine.
they reduced to three and thirty heads, without confirming them by any place
of Scripture, but explicating magisterially the conclusion only. These Heads
were after confirmed by the Emperors Edict, and published, with command, that
they should be defended and followed by all. And the Emperor The Emperor
shows his distaste against the Pope.
concealed not his distaste against the Pope, in his speeches to the Nuncio, as
well upon that occasion, as in other audiences: yea, the Pope having created
thirteen Cardinals in December, amongst which were three Spaniards, he forbad
them to accept the arms, or use the name or habit.

The French King also assembled at Melun the Parisian Divines, to consult of
the necessary positions of the Christian Faith, to be proposed in the
Council: where there was much contention. For some desired to propose the
confirmation of whatsoever was constituted in Constance and Basil, and the
reestablishment of the pragmaticall Law; and others, doubting that the King
would be offended by destroying the Concordate, made between him and Leo, which
would necessarily follow, gave counsel not to set that disputation on foot.
And afterward, because there were diverse opinions in that School concerning
the Sacraments, unto which some give effectiue ministerial virtue, and others
not, every one desiring that his opinion should be an Article of Faith,
nothing could be concluded, but that they should keep themselves within
compass of the five and twenty Heads published two years before.

But the Pope, signifying to the French King how little good will the Emperor
bare him, desired him, for the maintenance of the Apostolic Sea, to send
Ambassadors to the Council as soon as might be, and charged his Nuncio
residing with the Emperor, that, attending all occasions when the Protestants
gave him any distaste, he should offer all assistance from him, to recover the
Imperial authority, with Spiritual and Temporal aids. Whereof the Nuncio
having had too many occasions, he so wrought, that The Emperor is reconciled to
the Pope.
the Emperor, finding he might have need of the Pope both the one and the other
way, remitted his rigiditie. And he gave an argument thereof, by granting the
new Cardinals leave to assume the name and arms, and by giving the Nuncio more
grateful audiences, and by conferring with him of the affairs of Germany
more then he was wont to do.

The Pope made great haste, not only to call the Council, but to dispatch The
Pope dispatcheth the Legates to Trent.
the Legates, whom he charged, that, for maintenance of their dignity, they
should not first send some substitute to receive the first Prelates, as some
advised, that afterward they might make their entry with meetings and
ceremonies, but would have themselves to be the first, and to be there before
the time. He deputed for his Legates, John Maria de Monte, a Bishop, Cardinal
of Palestrina, Marcellus Ceruinus, Priest of the Holy Cross, and Reginald
Poole, Deacon of S. Mary in Cosmedin. In this man he chose Nobility of blood,
and opinion of piety, which commonly was had of him, and the rather for that
he was an English man, to show that all England did not rebel: in Marcellus
constancy, and immovable and undaunted perseverance, together with exquisite
knowledge: in Monte, reallitie, and opennesse of mind, joined with such
fidelity to his patrons, that he could not prefer their interests before the
safety of his own conscience. These he dispatched with a Brief of Legation,
without giving them, as the custom is, a Bull of Faculty, or any instruction
in writing, being uncertain, as yet, what commission He gives them no
instructions.
to give them, meaning to govern himself, as the successes, and the Emperors
proceeding should counsel him. So he made them depart with the Brief only.

But besides the care the Pope had for the affairs of Trent, another of no
less moment troubled his mind, concerning the Diet to be celebrated in
Worms, where he thought the Emperor would not be present, and doubting
Cardinal Pernese is sent to the Diet of Worms, and to the Emperor.
that, being provoked by the letter written unto him, he would underhand cause
some Decree to be made, more prejudicial to his affairs then the former, or
at the least give way unto it; he thought it necessary to have in that place a
minister of authority and reputation, with title of Legate. But he feared an
affront that way, in case the Diet should not receive him with due honor. He
found out a temper, to send to the Emperor the Cardinal Farnese his nephew,
and make him pass by Worms, and there to give instructions to the
Catholics, and, after he had made the treaties that were convenient, to go
forward toward the Emperor, and in the mean space to send Fabius Mignanellus
of Siena, Bishop of Grosseto, for his Nuncio to reside with the King of the
Romans, with order to follow him to the Diet.

Afterward applying his mind to Trent, he caused a consultation to be begun
concerning the faculties to be given to the Legates. This had some difficulty,
because they had no examples to follow. For in the Lateran Council next
preceding, the Pope was personally present; before in the Florentine A
consultation about the faculties to be given to the Legates.
Eugenius the fourth was present, and that of Constance, where the Schism was
taken away, began with the presence of John the 23. one of the three deposed
Popes and ended with the presence of Martin the fifth. Before that, the
Council of Pisa was called by the Cardinals, and concluded by Alexander the
fifth. And in more ancient times, Clement the fifth was present in the Council
of Vienna; in the two Councels of Lions, Innocence the fourth, and Gregory the
tenth; and before these in the Lateran, Innocence 3. Only the Council of
Basil, at that time when it obeyed Eugenius the fourth, was celebrated by
Legates. But to imitate any thing that was there observed was too bad a presage.
He resolved to frame the Bull, with this clause, that he sent The Contents of
the Bull.
them as Angels of peace to the Council, which before he had intimated in
Trent: and gave them full and free authority, that, for want of that, the
celebration and continuation might not be hindered, with faculty to preside
there, and to ordain any Decrees or Statutes whatsoever, and to publish them
in the Sessions according to custom: to propose, conclude, and execute
whatsoever was necessary, to condemn errors and root them out of all
Provinces and Kingdoms: to take knowledge, hear, decide, and determine the
causes of heresy, and whatsoever else concerns the Catholic faith: to
reform the State of the holy Church in all her members, as well Ecclesiastical
as Secular: to make peace amongst Christian Princes, and to determine any thing
else which may be for the honor of God the increase of Christian faith: with
authority to bridle, with censures and Ecclesiastical punishments, all
contradicting and rebellious persons, of what state or preeminence soever,
though graced with Pontifical or Regal dignity; and to do any thing else
necessary and fit for the extirpation of heresies and errors, and the reducing
of those people that are aliened from the obedience of the Apostolic Sea,
preservation, and restoration of Ecclesiastical liberty; yet with condition,
that in all things they proceed with consent of the Council.

But the Pope, considering not only how to set the Council forward, but of
the means to dissolve it when it was begun, in case his service did The Bull
for the dissolution of the Council.
require it, to provide for himself in good time, he followed the example of
Martin the fifth, who for fear of those encounters which happened to John the
23. in Constance, when he sent Nuncij to the Council of Pania, gave them a
particular Brief, with authority to prolong, dissolve, or translate it to
what place they would; A secret to cross all deliberation which was contrary
to the interests of Rome. A few days after he made another Bull, giving the
Legates power to transfer the Council. This bare date the 22. of February,
the same year, of which being to speak hereafter, when the

The thirteenth of March 1545. the Cardinals of Monte and Santa Croce 1545 PAVL
3. (...) CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. The Legates grant an Indulgence
without authority.
arrived in Trent, and were received by the Cardinal of that place. That day
they made their public entry, and granted three years, and so many times
forty days of Indulgence, to those that were present. They had not this
authority from the Pope, but hoped he would ratify the fact. They found no
Prelate there, though the Pope had caused some to part from Rome, that they
might be present at the prefixed time.

The first thing the Legates did, was to consider of the contents of the Bull
of Faculties given them, and resolved to keep it secret, and sent advice to
Rome, that the condition, to proceed with consent of the Council, tied them
too much, and made them equal to every petty Prelate, and would breed great
difficulties in the government, in case it were necessary to communicate every
particular unto all; and said it was to give too much liberty or rather
license to the multitude. It was perceived in Rome that the reasons were good,
and the Bull was corrected according to the advice, and absolute The Bull was
corrected.
authority was given them. But the Legates, while they expected an answer,
appointed out the place for the Session, capable of 400. persons, within the
Cathedral Church.

Don Diego de Mendoza, the Emperors Ambassador with the Republique Don Diego
returns to Trent.
of Venice, arrived in Trent ten days after the Legates, to assist at the
Council, with large commission given him from Bruxels the twentieth of
February, and was received by the Legates, assisted with the Cardinal
Madruccio, and three Bishops, who only were then arrived; whose names are not
to be omitted, because they were the first. And they were, Thomas Campegio
Bishop of Feltre, the Cardinals nephew, Thomas of S. Felicius, Bishop of Caua,
Friar Cornelius Mussus, a Franciscan, Bishop of Bitonto, the most eloquent
Preacher of those times. Four days after, Don Diego made his proposition in
writing; which showed the Emperors good disposition concerning the celebration
of the Council, and that order was given to the Prelates of Spain to be
there, who he thought were already in their journey; he excused himself by
reason of his indisposition for not being there before, desired that the
actions of the Council, and the reformation of manners might begin, as was
proposed two years before in the same place, by the Lord Granuel and himself.
The Legates answered in writing, commending the Emperor, receiving his
personal excuse, and showing their desire of the Prelates coming thither. And
the proposition and answer were received by the parties unto whom it belonged,
in the points not prejudicial to the rights of their Princes respectively. A
caution which gives a manifest argument, with what charity they treated in
the proposition and answer, where there were only words of pure complement,
except the mention of reformation.

The Legates not knowing which way to treat, made demonstration to The Legates
desire to have two sorts of letters and a cipher.
proceed jointly with the Ambassadors and Prelates, and to communicate to them
their most inward thoughts; whereupon when letters came from Rome or Germany,
they assembled all to read them. But perceiving that Don Diego equalized
himself to them, and the Bishops presumed more then they were wont to do at
Rome, and fearing some inconvenience would arise when their number did
increase, they sent advise to Rome that always one letter should be written to
be showed, and the secret things apart, because of the letters which they had
received until then, they had made no use but by their wit. They demanded also
a cipher, to communicate the matters of greater moment. All which
particularities, with many more that shall be spoken of, having taken out of
the Register of the letters of the Cardinal of Monte, I have not been willing
to conceal them, because they serve to penetrate the depth of the treaties.

The month of March being past, and the time, prefixed in the Popes Bull, to
begin the Council expired many days, the Legates consulted amongst
themselves concerning the opening of it, and resolved to expect advise from
Fabius Magnanellus, Nuncio with Ferdinand of what was handled in Worms, and
order from Rome, after the Pope had heard of the arrival and proposition of
Don Diego; and the rather, because they were ashamed to make so great a
beginning with three Bishops only. The Ambassadors of the King of the Romans
arrived the eight of April, and a solemn congregation was made to receive
them. In that Don Diego would have preceded the Cardinal of Trent, and sat
next the Legates, saying that in regard he represented the Emperor, he ought
to sit in the same place where his Majesty D. Diego would have preceded the
Cardinal of Trent.
should. But not to hinder the business, they found out a way to place them so
that it could not appear who had the precedence.

The Kings Ambassadors presented only their Prince his letter, and declared
by word of mouth, his observance toward the Apostolic Sea and the Pope, his
readiness to favor the Council, and large offers: and they The Ambassadors
of the K. of the Romans are received in congregation.
added that he would send a commission in form, and persons better instructed.

After this, the wished for advise came to Rome and Trent, of the proposition
made in the Diet the 24. of March by King Ferdinand, who was President there in
the Emperors name, and of the negotiation which followed thereupon. The Kings
proposition was, that the Emperor had made peace with the French King, that he
might apply himself to co^pose the differences of religion, and prosecute the
war against the Turks; from whom he had The proposition of Ferdinand in the
Diet.
promise of assistance, and an approbation of the Council, with a resolution to
be there in person, or by his Ambassadors. That for this end, it being before
prorogued, he had dealt with the Pope to intimate it again, and solicited him
to give aid against the Turks. That he had obtained the intimation of his
Holiness, and that Ambassadors sent from the Emperor and himself were already
in Trent. That all the world knew what pains Caesar had taken to cause the
Council to be celebrated; first with Clement in Bolonia, then with Paul in
Rome, Genua, Nizza, Lucca, and Busseto. That according to the Decree of Spira,
he had given order to men of learning and good conscience, to compose a form
of reformation; which was accordingly performed. But it being a thing of great
deliberation, and the time short, and the Turkish war threatening them, the
Emperor was resolved not to speak of this any more, but to expect how the
Council would proceed, and what might be hoped from it, because it was
suddenly to begin, and in case no fruit appeared, he might before the end of
that Diet, intimate another to handle all that business, applying himself how
to that which is of more importance, that is, the Turkish war.

This proposition made the Protestants very suspicious. For the peace of
religion being to last until the Council, they were in doubt that when they
were exhausted, by contributions against the Turks, they should be assailed,
upon pretense that the peace was ended by opening the Council in Trent. The
suspicion of the Protestants.
Yet they demanded that the treaty begun should be continued, alleging that
the time was long enough to him that feared God; or at least that a new peace
should be established until a lawful Council, so often promised, such as that
of Trent was not, for the reasons so many times rehearsed before. And they
declared that they could not contribute, if they had not assurance of peace,
not ^^ed to the Popes Council, which they had refused whenever it was spoken
of. And though the Ecclesiastiques did consent absolutely, that the cause of
religion should be wholly remitted to the Council, yet it was resolved to
expect the Emperors answer before the conclusion.

Three particulars in this action displeased the Pope and Legate which The Pope
and the Legates were displeased with three particulars in the proposition.
were at Trent. One, that the Emperor arrogated to himself, to have induced
the Pope to celebrate the Council, which argued small care of Religion in his
Holiness. The second, that he had induced the French King to consent unto it,
which was no honor to his sanctity, to whom this belonged. The third, that
he would still keep the bit in his mouth by a future Diet, that, in case the
Council went not forward, he should always fear, that things concerning
Religion should be treated of in the Diet. The Pope was perpetually troubled,
not so much for the injuries received from the Protestants, as for the
Emperors actions, which, as he was wont to say, though they seemed
favorable, yet were more pernicious to religion, and his authority, which
could not be separated. Besides, it seemed he was always in danger, that the
Emperor would make some accord with the Dutchmen, to his prejudice. And
thinking how to provide a remedy, he could find none, but to set on foot a
war for Religion, because the Protestants would be curbed, and the Emperor
likewise entangled in a dangerous enterprise, and all speech of reformation and
the Council would be buried in silence. He had great hope it would succeed,
by that which his Nuncio wrote unto him, that he found in the Emperor great
disdain against the Protestants, and that he hearkened to his propositions to
subdue them by force. For this respect, beside that which was before related,
and to hinder that no prejudicial thing might be done in the Diet, and to
encourage and give strength to his followers, another cause was added, more
urgent, because it belonged to his private interest. For being resolved to give
Parma and Piacenza to his son, The Pope is resolved to give Parma and Piacenza
to his sonne^^ but fears the Emperor.
he thought he could not do it without great danger, if the Emperor
consented not; because he might find pretenses, either for that those cities
were formerly members of the Duchy of Milan, or might say, the Church should
not be damnified, whereof he was advocate. To dispatch these businesses, he
sent Cardinal Farnese into Germany, with instructions necessary.

But the Legates in Trent had commission from the Pope, to open the Council
with those few Prelates that were there, without expecting a greater number, in
case they understood that they would treat of Religion in the Dier; but if
not, to govern themselves as other respects should advise. They saw that the
proposing of the Diet did not bind them, but, on the other side, that the
small number of Prelates (who then were not more then four) persuaded a
prorogation. Notwithstanding, they were in doubt that the danger of the Turkish
arms would constrain Ferdinand to make the Recesse, and, The Legate know not
what to resolve about the opening of the Council.
according to promise, to intimate another Diet, in which Religion should be
treated of: casting the blame upon them, by saying that notice was given them
of the proposition, that, knowing what was promised with good intention, they
might have hindered the execution of it by opening the Council. For this cause
they sent in diligence to the Pope, to receive order from him what to do in
this doubtful consultation, seeing themselves on the one side constrained by a
potent respect to make haste, and on the other enforced to desist, because they
were almost alone in Trent. They declared to the Pope that they had many
conjectures, and signs, that the Emperor regarded not the celebration of the
Council; that Don Diego, after his first comparition, had never spoken so much
as one word, and did show, as it were, in his countenance, that he was pleased
with that leisure and spending of time. For his appearance only was sufficient
to excuse and justify his Master, that having, by himself and his
Ambassadors, continually desired and solicited the Council, and brought the
business to that pass, and not seeing a convenient progress, he might and
ought to intimate another Diet, to determine the cause of Religion, as by
reason deuolued unto him by his own diligence, and negligence of the Pope.
They resolved to take a It is resolved that the council should be opened,
only by singing a Mass of the holy Ghost.
middle course: that is, to sing a Mass of the holy Ghost, before the Emperor
arrived in the Diet; which might stand for a beginning of the Council, and
prevent whatsoever the Emperor could do in the Recesse, and, on the other
side, remove all occasion of saying, that the matters of the Council were
begun to be handled with four persons; remaining in liberty to enjoy the
benefit of time, and to be able to go on, or desist, or transfer, or shut up
the Council, as the occurrences should advise. They wished him to consider,
that if the Council were opened, after that Cardinal Farnese had spoken with
the Emperor, one might think that Cardinal was sent to entreat that it might
not be opened, and could not obtain it. Besides, the fame of the Turkish Army
increasing, it would be said it was opened when necessity compelled to think
of other matters, and when it was known it could not be done. The Cardinal
Santa Croce desired much that signs of devotion The desire of the Cardinal
Santa Croce.
should be showed, and the people made to run together with the usual
ceremonies of the Church; and therefore persuaded that all should write to the
Pope, to demand a Brief, with authority to give Indulgences, dated from the
time of their parting, that the Indulgence which they granted at their entry,
might be made good. That Cardinal was serupulous, that the people which were
present at that entry, should not be defrauded of those three years and
thrice forty days which they granted, and would supply it by this; not
considering that a difficulty did arise, whether he that has authority to
grant Indulgences, can make good those which another has granted without
authority.

The Cardinal, Bishop and Lord of Trent, considering that that City, little
in it self, and not much inhabited, would remain at the discretion of
Strangers, and in danger of seditions, in case the Council proceeded, gave the
Pope to understand, that there was need of a garrison, of, at the least, an
hundred and fifty footmen, especially if the Lutherans came, which expense
himself was not able to bear, being exhausted by paying his Predecessors The
Cardinal et Trent ^esir^^h a garrison.
debts, The Pope answered, that, if he put a garrison into the town, the
Lutherans would have a pretense to publish that the Council was not free; that
it was in vain to make doubt, so long as none but Italians were in Trent; and
that he had no less care of the quiet of the City, then the Cardinal
himself, because the security of the Council more imported the Pope, then
the Bishop of the place; therefore that he should leave the care thereof unto
him, and assure himself, that he will be vigilant to provide against dangers,
for his own interest, and will not burden him with any expense. Having well
considered all the reasons which persuaded and dissuaded to begin the Council,
for disswasion he saw no weighty reason but this, that when the Council
should be opened, he would be entreated to leave it so, until the impediments
of the Turkish war, and others, did cease: which was to put a bridle in his
mouth, which would turn him whither he pleased that held the raines: a thing
dangerous to his affairs. This made him resolve firmly in himself, by no
means to let the Council stand idly open, and not to depart from this
disjunctive, either to celebrate the Council if he could, or, if he could not,
to shut it up, or suspend it, until he had published another day The Pope
gives commission to open the Council on Holiroode day. Card. Farnese passes
by Trent.
to reassume it. Having established this point, he wrote to the Legates, to open
it upon Holiroode day; which order they published to the Emperors Ambassador
and the rest, without naming the particular time. A little after Cardinal
Farnese, in his journey toward, Worms, arrived in Trent, and brought the same
commission; and all being consulted of between him and the Legates, they
resolved to continue, notifying unto all, the Commission to open the Conncell
in general, without descending to the particular day, more then this, that it
should be when he had spoken with the Emperor in Worms. And they conceived
good hope; because they understood that his Majesty, knowing the dispatch of
the Legation, was much satisfied with the Pope, and declared that he would
jointly proceed with him; and therefore they would not go on to any new
action, without his knowledge, for fear of disturbing him; and the rather
because Don Diego, and the Cardinal of Trent advised the same.

Don Diego renewed his pretense, to precede all but the Legates, alleging,
Don Diego renews his pretense for precedence.
that if, when the Pope and Emperor met, no man could sit between them, the
same ought to be observed in those that represented the one and the other; and
said he had the advice of learned men herein. The Legates answered in
general terms only, that they were ready to give every man his place,
expecting orders from Rome; which pleased Don Diego, hoping that decisions and
examples thereof would be found in the public Records; showing he was ready
out of the Council, to give place to every petty Priest, but adding that, in
the Council, none after the Pope, had more authority then his Prince. Some
that read this relation may think it superfluous, because it contains
matter of small weight: but, contrarily, the writer of the Story has thought
necessary to make known, from how small rivers so great a lake, which
possesses all Europe, has been raised; and he that shall see how many letters
went to and fro before the opening was concluded, would wonder at the esteem
was made of it, and at the surmises that did fly abroad.

In Italy, because they saw the Council went on, and hoped that now it would
be celebrated, the Bishops thought of their journey. The Viceroy of Naples
took care that all his should not go. His will was to send The Viceroy of
Naples would send but four bishops to the Council, and those of his own
nomination and is much opposed.
four of his own nomination, with commission from the rest of the Kingdom,
which are above an hundred. Therefore the great Chaplain of the kingdom
assembled the Prelates in his house, and intimated unto them, that they should
make a proxy. Many opposed, and said they would go in person, because they
were so bound by oath: but in case they could not, it was reasonable that every
one should name a Proctor, according to his own conscience, and not one for
all. The Viceroy was angry, and gave order again to the great Chaplain to
call them, and command them to make the proxy, and sent the like order to all
the governors of the Kingdom. This troubled the Pope and Legates very much,
because they knew not whether it came from the Viceroy his own fantasy, to
show himself a sufficient man, or from want of wit, or whether some other had
made him do it, and proceeded from a deeper root. To discover from whence
this motive came, the Pope made a severe Bull, that none, without exception,
should The Pope makes a severe Bull, that none should appear in Council by
Proctor.
appear by Proctor. This the Legates concealed, as being too severe, because
it contained all the Prelates of Christendom, even the most remote, and those
that had lawful impediment, who could not possibly observe it: and also
because it was too rigid, constituting that they incurred ipso facto, the
punishment of suspension from their Ministry. And they feared it would cause
many irregularities, nullities of acts, and undue receiuings of fruits, and
that by this means some discontented Nation might be stirred up to appeal and
contest for jurisdiction. Wherefore they wrote, that they ought not to publish
it without new commission, thinking the rumor that the Bull was made would
suffice, though it were not showed. What end this Bull had, shall be declared
in its fit place.

Another business remained, though of smaller moment, yet no less
troublesome. The Legates, until then, had received but small store of money The
Legates require money for the expenses of the Council.
for their expenses, and were too poor to supply out of their own, as was
fit for them to do in some particular; in so much, that if they so continued,
they should not be able to maintain themselves. Whereupon they did communicate
it to Farnese, and wrote to the Pope, that it was not for his reputation to
hold a Council without necessary and accustomed ornaments, with that luster
that so great an assembly required; for which it was necessary to send some
person, to undergo this charge only: and therefore it would be good to appoint
a Depositarie, with a sum of money, to discharge the occurring expenses, to
assist some needy Prelate, and to cherish some man of account: a thing
necessary to procure a good end of the Council.

The third of May, ten Bishops being then arrived, they made a congregation The
first congregation spent in ceremonies.
to establish the things that should go before; in which they publikelie
intimated the Popes commission to open the Council, adding, that they would
not determine of the day, until they had imparted it to the Emperor. This
Congregation, for the most part, was spent in matters of ceremony, that the
Legates, though of diverse Orders, one being a Bishop, another a Priest, and the
third a Deacon, should notwithstanding have the same ornaments, wearing Rochets
all three alike, as their office and authority was equal in one Legation and
one Presidencie; that the place for the Sessions should be beautified with
hangings of Arras, that it might not seem an Assembly of mechanical men. They
proposed whether it were fit to make seats for the Pope and Emperor, which
should be adorned and remain empty: they treated whether it were fit to give
Don Diego a more honorable place then the other Ambassadors. It was considered
that the Bishops of Germany, who are Princes of the Empire, do pretend right
of preceding all other Prelates, even Archbishops, all aging that it is not
only so observed in the Diets, but also that the Bishops which are not Princes
stand bare before them. It was remembered, that the year before, there was a
difference in the same City, where the Bishop of Heicstat, and the Archbishops
of Corsu and Ottranto met together at a Mass. Some also alleged, that in the
Popes chapel, the Bishops that are Ambassadors for Dukes, and other Princes,
do precede the Archbishops, and therefore that the Princes themselves should
do it much more. And they concluded to resolve nothing herein until the
Council were more frequent, that they might see how the French men and
Spaniards did understand it. They thought fit to renew the Decree of Basil, and
of Julius the second, in the Laterane Council, that it should prejudice no man
to sit out of his place. The resolution to expect the advice of Farnese, to
determine the day of opening the Council, gave much satisfaction to Don Diego;
and those few Bishops showed much devotion and obedience to the Pope, as did
also the Bishop of Vercells, who arrived the same day after the Congregation
ended, together with Cardinal Poole the third Legate.

While they met in Trent to convince heresies by a Council, in France they did
the same by force of arms, against a small remainder of the Waldenses,
inhabitants of the Alps of Prouence, who (as has been said before) maintained
a separation from the Sea of Rome, with a diverse doctrine and rites, very
imperfect and rude. These men, after the reformations of Zuinglius, enlarged
their doctrine by his, and reduced their rites unto some form, at the same
time when Geneua embraced the reformation. Sentence was pronounced against
these many years before, by the Parliament of Aix, which had never been
executed. The King now commanded to execute the sentence. The President
mustered together as many Soldiers as he could in the places bordering upon
them, and in the Popes State of Autgnion, and went with A miserable slaughter
of the Waldenses made by the French men.
an army against those poor creatures, who neither had weapons, nor thought,
otherwise then by flight, to defend themselves, those that could. They went not
about to teach them, or by threats to make them leave their opinions and rites:
but first of all, filling all the Country with rapes, slew asmany as stood to
their mercy, because they could not fly, without sparing old or young, of what
age or condition soever. They destroyed, or rather razed the Countries of
Ca^riers in Prouence, and of Mernidolo in the County of Viinoisin, belonging to
the Pope, and all other places in those precincts. It is certain that more
than 4000. persons were slain, who, without making defense, desired mercy.

But in Germany, the Emperor arrived in Worms the 16. of May, and Cardinal
Farnese the day following, who treated with him, and with the Cardinal Farnese
his negotiation with the Emperor in Worms.
King of the Romans apart. He delivered his commissions particularly concerning
the Council, declaring that the Pope had given the Legates power to open it:
which they meant to do when they should understand from him, what was done in
the Diet. He told the Emperor, that it was not necessary to regard the
oppositions of the Protestants, seeing that the impediment, alleged by them,
was not new, but was foreseen from the day the Council was first spoken of:
that he might assure himself, that they, having cast off the yoke of
obedience, the principal foundation of Religion, and proceeded to so impious
and wicked innouatio^s, against the rites, observed many hundreds of years, by
the approbation of so many famous Councels, they would, with the same
boldness, spurn against the Council, which was to begin, though lawful,
general, and Christian, assuring themselves to be condemned by it. Therefore
that nothing remained, but that his Majesty should induce them to obedience by
authority, or constrain them by force. Which, in case it were not done, and
they so much regarded, as not to be condemned, or, after condemnation, not
constrained to lay aside their errors, all the world would know that the
heretics command, and the Pope and Emperor obey. That his Holiness as he
thought fit to use mildness at the first, so he thought it necessary to show
really, that after it would follow force of Arms. That he offered him a grant
of part of the Ecclesiastical revenues of Spain, and power to sell the plate
of those Churches, to assist him with his own money, and to send him out of
Italy 12000. foot, and 500. horse paid, and to endeavor that he might likewise
be assisted by other Princes of Italy, and to proceed, during the time of the
wars, with spiritual and temporal Arms, against whosoever should molest
his territories. Farnese declared also to the Emperor the attempt of the Vice
roy of He complains of the Vice roy of Naples.
Naples, who would have sent four Proctors in the name of all the Bishops of
the Kingdom, showing it was neither reasonable nor lawful, and that it was a
dishonor to the Council: For if Bishops, dwelling so near, and being so
many, might be excused by sending four, France and Spain might do it much
rather, and so a General Council should be held with twenty Bishops. And he
prayed the Emperor not to tolerate a thing so contrary to the authority of the
Pope, and dignity of the Council, whereof himself is Protector, desiring him
to give some remedy herein. The Cardinal also treated with him concerning the
promise made in his Majesty's name, in the proposition sent to the Diet; that
is, that to determine the controversies of Religion, in case the Council did
not proceed, another Diet should be held; and desired him to consider, that if
neither his Holiness, nor his Legates and Ministers, nor the Court of Rome,
were in fault that the Council were not celebrated, nor proceeded, he could
not by any means intimate in the Recesse another Diet, under this color. And
he inculcated this point exceedingly, because he had strait commission therein
from Rome; and because the Cardinal of Monte, a man very free, not only spoke
but also wrote unto him thereof, in his own name and his colleagues, after
that he parted from Trent, saying in plain terms, that this was the most
important point at which he should ever aim, without forgetting it in his
whole negotiation, taking care not to admit any excuse, because this only
would produce any other good agreement. And for his own part, he would put
his Holiness in mind rather to abandon the Sea, and restore the keys to
Saint Peter, then suffer the Secular power to arrogate authority to determine
causes of Religion, under pretense and color that the Ecclesiastical has
failed in celebrating a Council or otherwise.

Concerning the attempt of the Viceroy, the Emperor said it proceeded from his
own proper motion, from which, in case he had not great reason to the
contrary, he would be removed. For opening the Council he The Emperors
answer to the Legate.
gave no resolute answer, but spoke diversely, sometimes that it would be good
to begin it in a more fit place, sometimes that it was necessary to make sundry
provisions first. Whereby the Cardinal saw plainly that his aim was only to
hold the matter in suspense, and to govern himself as occasion served, either
opening or dissoluing it. For not intimating another Diet to treat of
religion, he gave a general and vnconcluding answer, that he would always
make as much esteem as was possible of the Popes authority. But to the
proposition of making war against the Lutherans, he answered that the Popes
counsel was the best, and that the only way was proposed by him, which he was
resolved to embrace; yet that he would proceed with due caution, and first
conclude a truce with the Turk, which he then did mediate diligently, and
most secretly, by the French King, and that he knew well, that the number and
power of the Protestants was great, and insuperable, and that in case they were
not divided or surprised at unawares, the war would prove doubtful and
dangerous. That his design was to conceal his purpose until opportunity
served, and then to treat with the Pope. In the mean while he accepted the
offers made unto him.

Beside these public businesses, the Cardinal had one private for his The
Legates private negotiation concerning his own family.
own house. The Pope thinking it too little to give to his family the
Dukedom of Camerino, and Nepi, thought to give them also Parma and Piacenza;
which because they were a little before in the possession of the Dukes of
Milan, he desired the Emperors consent, to establish his gift the better. The
Cardinal treated with the Emperor hereof, showing it were better for his
Majesty that those Cities, so near to the Duchy of Milan, were in the
possession of a family so devoted and allied unto him, then in the power of
the Church, in which if an ill affected Pope should succeed, diverse
inconveniences might arise; that this would not be an alienation of the
patrimony of the Church, because they first came into the hands of Julius 2.
neither was the possession of them well confirmed but under Leo; that it would
be more profitable for the Church, because the Pope would give it Camerino in
exchange and that detracting the charge of maintaining the garrisons of those
two Cities, and adding eight thousand crowns, which the new Duke would pay,
the Church would receive more rent by Camerino, then by them. To these
expositions the Cardinal joined his daughters letters, who effectually prayed
the Emperor for her own interest; unto whom the matter was not displeasing,
as well for the affection he bare to his daughter and nephews, as because it
would be more easy to recover them from a Duke, then from the Church. Yet he
neither denied nor granted, but said only he would not oppose. The Emperors
answer.


The Legate treated with the Catholics, and the Ecclesiastikes especially,
encouraging them to defend the true Religion, and promising them all favor
from the Pope. The Protestants suspected the negotiation of the war, though
handled secretly, because a Franciscan Friar, preaching before Charles, The
Protestants suspect that war would be made against them.
Ferdinand, and the Legate, after a great inuectiue against the Lutherans,
turned to the Emperor, and said it was his office to defend the Church with
arms; that until then he had not performed that which was necessary to be
effected; that so many benefits which God had bestowed upon him, deserved he
should make acknowledgement of them by setting himself against that contagion
of men, who ought not to live any longer; and that he ought not to make any
further delay, because many souls did daily perish by this means, for whom
God will ask an account of him, if he gave not some sudden remedy. This
Sermon not only begat suspicion, but raised discourses also that it had been
commanded by the Legate, and by the public exhortations, they concluded what
the private were. To remedy which rumor, the Cardinal parted secretly The
Legate does secretly and suddenly return into Italy.
by night, and returned quickly into Italy. Yet the suspicion of the
Protestants increased, by the aduises sent from Rome, that the Pope, when he
dismissed some Captains, gave them hope he would employ them the next year.

But the B. of Sidonium arrived in Trent the 18 of May, with a Friar, a Divine,
and a secular Doctor, as Proctors of the Elector Cardinal and Archbishop of
Mentz. The B. made a short oration of the Electors obedience to the Pope, and
Apostolic Sea, much commending the celebration of the Council, as the only
necessary remedy to those wauerings of faith, and Catholic religion. The
Legates, in their answer, commended the piety and devotion of that Prince;
and for admitting his commission, they said, it was necessary to see it first,
because his Holiness had made a new provision, that none could give voice by
proxy, and that they were in doubt, whether it comprehended a Cardinal, and a
Prince; that they well knew the prerogative which his excellency deserved,
whereunto they were most ready to give all honor and respect. These three men
perceiving the difficulty, were in a confusion, and thought The Proctors of
the Archbishop of Mentz are about to leave the Council.
to depart. The Legates repented them of the answer, knowing of what importance
it would be if the prime Prince and Prelate of Germany, for dignity and
riches should be aliened from the Council. And they wrought by way of
mediation, dexterously made by the Cardinal of Trent, by the Ambassadors and
others, that they would remain, saying the Bull spoke only of Italian Bishops,
and that the Legates were deceived: which imputation they were contented to
bear, that they might withstand so great a disorder.

Wherefore they wrote to Rome, giving an account of the success, and demanding
whether they should receive them while the Bull was in force, adding that it
seemed hard to repel the Proctors of so great a personage, who showed himself
zealous and favorable to the Catholic party, who by this means might grow
lukewarm: they were instant to have an answer, because the determination
hereof would serve for a president, for that the other great Bishops of
Germany might send Proctors likewise, whom it were better they went not to
Trent in person, because being accustomed to ride with great trains, the City
would not be able to receive them all: and they The Legates do earnestly
demand a resolu^^^ about admitting Proctors.
wrote that, above all things, it was not fit to scorn the Dutchmen, who are
naturally suspicious, and easily resolve themselves; and especially those that
are loving and well-deseruing, as Cocleus, who is already in his journey, as
Proctor for the Bishop of Heicstat; who has written so much against the
Heretics, that one would be ashamed to say that he could not have a voice
in the Council. The Pope thought it not fit to write precisely hereof, The
Pope knew not what to answer.
considering the difficulties of Naples. For the Vice roy continuing in his
resolution, a commission was made to four to be present there, in the name of
all. These being prepared for their journey, passed by Rome, concealing they
were elected for the rest, saying they went for themselves; and that the others
would follow. But he wrote to the Legates to entertain the Proctors with good
words, until he gave another resolution. The Neapolitans spoke also in the
same tenor at their arrival in Trent, and as well the Pope as the Legates
dis^embled the same, deferring to speak of it until they were resolved of the
time to open the Council.

In the end of May 20. Bishops, five Generals, and one Auditor of the Rota were
come to Trent, all much wearied with expectation. These commended the rest,
who, not caring to be hasty, expected to see a more reasonable occasion to
part from their home, and were by them called, to their great distaste,
headlong fools, for being so easily persuaded. Therefore The Prelates desire
to depart from Trent. And D. Diego returns to Venice.
they asked the Legates leave to go for fifteen or twenty days to Venice,
Milan, or elsewhere, to avoid the incommodities of Trent, pretending want
either of health, or apparel, or other respects. But the Legates, knowing how
much it concerned the reputation of the Council, entertained them, partly by
saying they had not power to give leave, and partly by giving hope that the
Council should begin within few days, Caesar's Ambassador returned to his
Embassage at Venice, upon pretense of ind^ position, leaving the Legates
doubtful whether it were by the Emperors commission upon some trick, or for
being wear^ to be idle and incommodated. He promised a speedy return,
adding that in the mean while the Ambassadors of the King of the Romans
remained there to assist the service of God; and yet he desired the Council
should not be opened until his return.

But in the end of the next month the greater part of the Bishops, moved, some
by poverty, and some by incommoditie, made grievous complaints, and raised as
it were a sedition among themselves, threatening that they would depart, and had
recourse to Francis Castel-Alto, governor of Trent, whom Ferdinand had
appointed to hold his place, together with (...) Gine^a. This man came before
the Legates, and desired them in the name of his King, that now at last they
would begin, it being plain how much good would ensue by the celebration, and
how much evil by temperizing th^^. The Legates held themselves offended
herewith, because they thought it was to show the world that which was contrary
to the truth, and to attribute to them the delay, which proceeded from the
Emperor. And though they among themselves resolved to dissemble, and to
answer in general terms, yet the Cardinal Monte could not bridle his
liberty, but in making answer, concluded in the end with persuasion to expect
Don Diego, who had more particular commissions then he. It was hard to
entertain and comfort the Prelates, who ill endured that idle delay, and
especially the poor ones, who wanted money, and not words. Wherefore they
resolved to give at the Popes charge, forty Ducats a year to the Bishops of
Nobili, Bertinoro, and Money is given to the poor Bishops
Chioza, who complained more then the rest, and fearing that the munificence
might give pretense hereafter, they declared themselves that it was for a
subsidy, and not for provision. They gave the Pope an account by letter of
what they had done, showing him the necessity to assist them with some greater
aid: but telling him withal, that it was not good to give it as a firm
provision, that the Fathers might not seem the stipendaries of his Holiness:
which would cherish the Protestants excuse, not to submit themselves to the
Council, because it was composed only of those that depended on, and were
obliged to the Pope.

At the same time the Emperor, in Worms, cited the Archbiship of Collen The
Archbishop of Collen is cited by the Emperor in Worms.
to appear before him within thirty days, or to send a Proctor, to answer
to the accusations and imputations laid upon him, commanding him in the mean
space not to make any innovation in Religion and Rites, but to reduce the
things innouated to their former state. Hermannus Bishop of Collen, desiring to
reform his Church, in the year 1536. called a Council of the Bishops his
Suffragans, where many Decrees were made, and a book printed, composed by John
Groperus, a Canonist, who, for service done to the Church of Rome, was after
created Cardinal by Pope Paul the fourth. But whether the Archbishop, and
Groperus himself were not satisfied with the reformation, or whether he
changed his opinion, he assembled the Clergy and Nobility, and chief men of
his state in the year 1543. and established another reformation. This, though
it were approved by many, pleased not the whole Clergy, yea, the mayor part
opposed it, and made Groperus their head, who before had given counsel for it,
and promoted it. They entreated the Archbishop to desist, and expect a general
Council, or at the least, an Imperial Diet; which not being able to obtain,
in the year 1545 they appealed to the Pope, and to the Emperor, as supreme
advocate and protector of the Church. The Archbishop published by a writing,
that the appeal was frivolous, and that he could not desist from that which
belonged to the glory of God, and amendment of the Church; that he had not to
do either with the Lutherans or others, but that he observed the doctrine
agreeable to the holy Scripture. The Archbishop going on in his reformation,
and the Clergy of Collen insisting upon the contrary, the Emperor received
the Clergy into his protection, and cited the Archbishop, as has been said.

This news coming to Trent, gave matter to pass the time at the least with
discourses. The Legates were much moved, and amongst the Prelates which were
present those that were of any understanding blamed the Emperor, for making
himself Judge of faith and reformation; the most gentle word they spoke was,
that the Emperors proceeding was very scandalous. They began to know they were
not esteemed, and that to be idle, was to be scorned by the world. Therefore
they did discourse that they were constrained to declare themselves to be a
Council lawfully called, and to be begin The Emperor is blamed, for the
Citation, by the Fathers of Trent.
the work of God, proceeding first against the foresaid Archbishop, the
Elector of Saxony, the Landgraue of Hassia, and likewise against the King of
England. They grew into so great spirits that they seemed not the same, who a
few days before thought themselves confined in prison. The Ministers of the
Archbishop of Mentz abated this heat, putting them in mind of the greatness
of those Princes and their adherents, and the danger to make them unite
themselves with the King of England, and so to make a greater fire in Germany:
and the Cardinal of Trent spoke in the same form. The Italian Bishops,
thinking it a great matter to meddle in such eminent subjects, said it was true
that all the world would be attentive at such a process, yet that all the
importance was to begin and ground it well: They incited one another, saying it
was necessary to redeem the slownesse past with celerity hereafter. That they
should demand of the Pope, some man of worth to perorate against the accused,
as did Melehior Baldassino, against the Pragmatique, in the Laterane Council;
being persuaded that to deprive Princes of their States had no other
difficulty, then to use well the forms of Processes. But the Legates, as well
for this as for other occurrences, knew it to be necessary to have such a
Doctor, and wrote to Rome to be provided of one.

The Pope understanding the Emperors action, was astonished, and doubted The
Pope was wonderfully distasted with the Citation.
whether to complain or be silent. To complain, when no effect would succeed
he thought frivolous, and a demonstration of his small power. And this moved
him exceedingly. But on the other side, considering well how much it imported
him not to pass over a matter of that moment, he resolved not to give words,
as they did in Trent, but to proceed to facts, and answer the Emperor
afterward, if he should speak of it. Therefore he The Archbishop is cited
by the Pope.
made another citation against the Archbishop, the eighteenth of July, that
within sixty days he should appear before him. He cited also the Deane of
Collen, and five of the principal Canons, leaving the world to dispute how the
Archbishop could appear before two which cited him for the same cause, in
diverse places, at the same time, and how a dispute of the competencie of the
place of judicature belonged to the honor of Christ. But how this succeeded,
and what end the cause had, shall be said in its place.

To return to that which more nearly concerns the Council, the Emperor
assayed in the Diet diverse ways, to make the Protestants grant him The Emperor
demands assistance against the Turks of the Protestants, who give a
conditional answer.
assistance against the Turks, not mentioning Religion. Whereunto they still
answered, that they could not resolve without they were secured, that the peace
should be kept, and that, by the convocation in Trent under the name of a
Council, it was not understood that the time of the peace was ended, according
to the Decree of the former Diet, but declared that the peace cannot be
interrupted, nor themselves enforced by any Decrees made in Trent; because they
cannot submit themselves to that Council, where the Pope, who has condemned
them already, has free power. The Emperor said, he could not give them peace
which might exempt them from the Council, to whose authority all are subject
that he had no way to excuse himself to other Kings and Princes, if it were
granted to Germany alone not to obey the Council, assembled especially for
her sake. But if, as they said, they pretended a cause why they would not
submit, let them go to the Council, and allege their reasons why they suspect
it; that they should be heard, and if it appeared they had wrong, they might
then refuse; that it was not pertinent to prevent, and to suspect that which
appeared not, pretending grieuance of things to come, and judging of that which
is not seen as yet. They replied, they spoke not of things to come but past,
their Religion being condemned already, and persecuted by the Pope and all his
adherents. Therefore they were not to expect any future judgment, because it
was past already. That it was just that the Pope, and his adherents of Germany,
and of all other places, should make one part in the Council and themselves
the other and for the difficulty about the manner and order of proceeding, the
Emperor, Kings, and Princes should be Judges, but for the merits of the
cause, the Word of God only.

They could not be removed from this resolution, though the Ambassador of
France, there present, did very much, and with menacing terms, entreat them to
consent to the Council; which threats the Ministers of that K. the Popes
favorers, did dictate to the Ambassador, when he parted from France. The
Imperialists proposed the translation of the Council into Germany, under the
Emperors promise to labor effectually, that the Pope should condescend; which
the others accepted, upon condition the peace were established until the
Council were assembled there. But Charles, being sure that the Pope would never
agree, saw that this was to give them a perpetual peace, and therefore he
thought it better to leave things in suspense, granting it only until another
Diet, seeing he was constrained, having not concluded truce with the Turks as
yet, and esteeming more that war; thinking that by occasion of a Colloquie,
other reasonable means would be offered hereafter; to make them consent anew
to the Council of Trent, or, in case of refusal, to hold them contumacious,
and to make war against them. Therefore the fourth of August he ended the
Diet, and ordained another in Ratubon, Another Diet is ordained in Ratubon for
January.
for January next, whereat the Princes should be personally present, and
instituted a Colloquie in matter of Religion, of four Doctors, and two Judges
for a side. This was to begin at December, that the matter might be digested
before the Diet. He confirmed and renewed the former Edicts of peace, and set
down a manner to pay the contributions for the war. How the Colloquie did
proceed, shall be said in its place.

The Protestants, being departed from Worms, set forth a book, where The
Protestants do protest against the Tridentine council.
they said in sum, that they esteemed not the Tridentine for a Council,
being not assembled in Germany, as Adrian and the Emperor promised; whereunto
to make show of giving satisfaction by making choice of Trent, was to mock the
world, because Trent cannot be said to be in Germany, but only because the
Bishop is a Prince of the Empire: but for security, that it was as well in
Italy, and as much in the Popes power as Rome it self. And the rather they
esteemed it not lawful, because Pope, Paul would be president in it, and
propose by his Legates; that the Judges were tied unto him by oath; that the
plea being against the Pope, himself ought not to be Judge; that it was
necessary to treat first of the form of the Council, and of the authorities,
whereupon to ground. But the Emperors resolution displeased The Emperor is
taxed again for meddling in Religion.
alike in Trent and at Rome, as well because a secular Prince meddled in
Religion, as because, it seemed the Council was casseered, in regard, that
approaching, order was given to handle elsewhere the controversies of
doctrine. The Prelates in Trent blamed the Decree, as it were with one voice,
saying it was worse then that of Spira, and maruelling that the Pope, who
showed himself so quick against that, had and did tolarate this, after that
the Council was intimated, and already assembled. From this they drew a
manifest Argument, that their remaining in Trent was vain and dishonorable.
The Legates tried their wits to consolate, and persuade them, that all The
Prelates in Trent are discontented, and most of them do depart.
had been permitted by his Holiness for a good end. But they replied, that
whatsoever the end was, and what thing soever does follow, the blemish, not
only of the Pope and Apostolic Sea, but of the Council and the whole Church
will never be taken away. Neither could the Legates resist their complaints,
which ended in demanding leave to depart, some alleging necessary and
important affairs of their own, and some to retire themselves into some of the
next cities for infirmity or indisposition. And though the Legates gave leave
to none, yet some of them daily took it, so that before the end of the month,
there remained very few. But in Rome, though this success was foreseen by the
negotiation of Cardinal Farnese, yet after it happened they began to think
more exactly of it. They considered that the Emperors ends were much different
from the Popes; for he, holding things in suspense, dispatched his business
well in Germany, giving the Protestants The Emperor desires to hold the
Council in suspense.
hope, that if they pleased him, he would not suffer the Council to be
opened, and putting them in fear, that in case they did not, it should begin
and proceed against them. Therefore he ever caused some new emergents to arise,
which might hold things in suspense, passing the time pleasantly under diverse
colors, and sometimes also proposing that it were better to transfer it to
another place, giving hope he could be contented it were translated into
Italy, even unto Rome, that the Pope and the Prelates of that Nation might
more easily hearken to the proposition, and draw the Council in length.

The Pope was in great straits. Sometimes he had the ancient desire The Pope
is doubtful what course to take.
of his predecessors that the Council should not be celebrated, and condemned
himself for having proceeded so far, yet he saw that it was scandalous and
dangerous to him, to show openly that he would not have it, by dissoluing that
small congregation which remained in Trent. He saw clearly that it was not a
good remedy to extinguish heresies. For concerning that which belonged to
Italy, it was better to provide against it by force, and by the office of the
Inquisition, whereas the expectation of the Council hinders that which is
the only remedy. For Germany, it appeared plainly that the Council did
rather make difficult, then facilitate those things. Besides; in ease it were
celebrated, he doubted whether he should grant the Emperor the half fruits
and vassalages of the Monestaries in Spain. For if he did not, his Majesty
would be angry, and if he did it, he doubted that the Spanish Prelates would
discover in the Council that they were alienated from him and the Apostolic
Sea, for giving that to others which belonged to them. He saw likewise that the
Prelates of the kingdom were if satisfied, who would think it intolerable to
pay the tenths, and be at charges in the Council. He thought that those of
France would join with them; and encourage them, not for charity, but to
hinder the Emperors profit. Therefore he began to incline to the translation,
so that it were not carried further into Germany, as was treated of in Worms,
whereunto he said he would never consent, though he had an 100. hostages, and
as many pawnes: and the rather because by transferring it more into Italy, into
a place more fertile, commodious and secure, he thought he avoided the
inconvenience of continuing in that state, and letting the Council lie at
anchor, and be drawn in length from season to season; the worst resolution
that could be made, for infinite and perpetual preiudices which might ensue.
Besides, by the time which the translation required, the present mischief was
cured, which was to have Council, and a Colloquie, and Diet instituted for
religion concur together, not knowing what end the one or the other might
have; a thing dishonorable, and dangerous, and of bad example; and the Prelates
would be satisfied by parting from Trent. Being thus resolved, that The Bull
of translation.
he might be provided to put it fitly in execution, he sent to the Legates the
Bull of faculty to translate it, dated February 22. of which it has been
spoken before.

These thoughts did not possess either the whole, or the principal part of
the Popes mind, but he thought much more of infeoffing his son in Parma and
Piacenza, which he had imparted to Caesar, and did effect it in the end of
August, There is much murmuring at the donation of Parma and Piacenza to a
bastard.
not respecting the general murmuring, that, while the Clergy was to be
reformed, the head of it should bestow principalities upon a son of a damned
conjunction. This the whole College took ill, though only John Dominicus de
Cupis, Cardinal of Trani, with some few more, opposed it; John Vega, the
Emperors Ambassador, refused to be present, and Margarite of Austria, his
nephews wife, showed herself discontented, because she desired the
inuestiture in the person of her husband, for that she lost the title of the
Duchess of Camerino, and got nothing, Afterward, being wholly employed in
freeing himself from the difficulties and dangers which the Council brought
with it standing thus, neither opened nor shut, but so as it might serve the
Emperors turn against him, he resolved to send the Bishop of Caserta to
treat with his Majesty, proposing either to The Pope sends a Nuncio to the
Emperor.
have it opened and begun, or suspended for a time, and in case that pleased
not, he was to propose the translation of it into Italy, to give convenient
time to what should be handled in the Colloquie and Diet, or some other match,
which were not sodishonourable and dangerous for the Church, as to have the
Council remaining still on foot, and the Legates and Prelates idle.

This negotiation had many rubs. For the Emperor was resolute, not to consent
either to suspension or translation; not holding it good for his ends to begin
it, he did not absolutely deny any of the things proposed; and having no other
course to take, he knew not what to do, but to interpose difficulties to the
three propositions. Finally, in the midst of October, he found out a temper,
that the Council should be opened, and the reformation treated of, forbearing
to speak of heresies and points of doctrine, lest they should provoke the
Protestants. The Pope advised hereof by the The Pope is much oftended with
the^ Emperors answer.
Nuncio his letters, was touched at the very heart. For he saw plainly that
this was to give the victory into the hands of the Lutherans, and to rob
himself of all authority, making him depend of Colloquies and Imperial
Diets, ordaining in them treaties of religion, and forbidding the Council
tomeddle with them, and so to weaken him by alienating his dependants, and to
strengthen the Lutherans, by supporting, or not condemning their heresies. And
being assured that his and the Emperors interests were so contarie, as that
they could not be united, he resolved to conceal his own ends, and to
proceed as best befitted his affairs. Therefore, without showing any distaste
of the answer, he presently replied to Caserta, that, for his Majesty's sake,
he resolved to open the Council immediately, commanding that the acts thereof
should begin, and all should proceed with full liberty, and in fit manner and
order. This the Pope said in such general terms, because he would not
express himself, what should be first, or what last, or what treated of, or
What wholly left out. For he was resolute to handle the matter of religion and
points of doctrine principally, without alleging other reason, incase he
should be constrained to allege any, but that to treat of reformation only,
was a thing never used before, contrary to the reputation both of himself and
of the Council. Therefore, the last of October, having imparted all to the
Cardinals, by their counsel and advise, he ordained, and wrote also to Trent,
that the Synod should be opened the next Sunday, called Gaudete in Aduent,
which was to be the 13. He gives order to begin the Council the 13. of
December.
of December.

The Prelates showed great joy for the news, seeing themselves delivered from
the imminent danger, to remain long in Trent, and do nothing. But a little
after the ambiguities were on foot again. For letters came from The 3. Fren^
Prelates are recalled, but two of them are persuaded to remain.
the French King to his Prelates, which were three, that they should depart.
This seemed to the Legates a thing of the greatest importance, being as it were
a declaration. that France and the King approved not the Council. They used
all means to hinder their departure, telling the Prelates, that the King gave
that order when the case was otherwise, and that they ought to expect another,
because his Majesty was now informed of the present state, putting them in
mind of the scandal that would ensue, in case they did otherwise, and of the
offense which other Nations would take. The Cardinal of Trent, and the Spanish
and Italian Prelates protested against their departure. Therefore in conclusion
they took a middle course, which the King commended when he knew it, that the
Lord of Renes should go to give the King account, and the other two remain.

The last of November, the time prefixed for the opening of the Council
approaching, the Legates wrote to Rome, that, to preserve the authority of the
Apostolic Sea, it were fit, in opening of it, to read and register a Bull,
which might command it to be done; and they made a dispatch in all diligence
that it might come in time. The answer, together with the Bull, arrived the
eleventh of December. Therefore the Legates commanded a fast and Procession the
next day, and made a Congregation of all the Prelates, where first the bull was
read, and then all treated of, which was to be done the next day, in the
Session. The Bishop of Estorga proposed after a pleasing manner, that it was
necessary to read in the Congregation the Brief of the Legation and
Presidencie, that all might make profession of their obedience, and subjection
to the Apostolic Sea. The request was approved The Legates would not suffer
the Bull of their Legation to be read.
by almost all the Congregation, and accompanied with the particular instance
of every one. But the Legate Sancta Croce, considering how far the demand
might reach, and that to publish the authority of the Presidencie, might
breed danger to have it limited, thinking it better by keeping it secret, to
use it as occasion served, answered readily, that in the Council all were but
one body, and that it was equally necessary to read the Bulls of every
Bishop, to show he was such a one, instituted by the Apostolic Sea; which
would be tedious, and, by reason of those who daily will come, would spend the
time of all the Congregations, and so he stopped the request, and retained the
dignity of the Legation, which consisted in being unlimited.

The thirteenth of December came at last, when in Rome the Pope published a
Bull of Jubilee, where he declared that he had intimated a Council The
Council is opened in Trent, and a Jubilee published in Rome.
to heal the wounds of the Church, caused by impious heretics. Therefore he
exhorted every one to assist the Fathers assembled therein, with their prayers
to God: which to do effectually and fruitfully, they ought to confess
themselves, and fast three days, and during that time, to go in processions,
and then to receive the most blessed Sacrament; granting pardon of all his
sins to whosoever did so. The same day the Legates in Trent, with all the
Prelates, in number 25. in pontifical habit, accompanied With the Divines,
Clergy and people of foreign parts, and of the City, made a solemn
procession, from Trinity Church to the Cathedral; where Monte, the The
Ceremonies used.
prime Legate, did sing the Mass of the holy Ghost, in which the Bishop of
Bitonto made a long copious eloquent Sermon. That being ended, the Legates
caused a long written admonition to be read, the sum whereof was: that it was
their charge during the whole course of the council, to admonish the Prelates in
occurrences, and that it was fit to begin in that Session, understanding The
admonition of Card. Monte.
that this admonition and all the rest, were as well made to themselves as to
others as being of the same condition, with them that the Council was assembled
for three causes; for the extirpation of heresy, restitution of Ecclesiastical
discipline, and regaining of peace. To execute which things it was fit to have
first a true and inward sense, what it was to be the cause of all those three
calamities. Of heresies, not that they had raised them, but that they had not
performed their duty in sowing good doctrine, and rooting out the cockle. Of
manners corrupted that there was no need to make mention, it being manifest,
that the Clergy and Pastors only were corruptors, and corrupted. For which
things God had also sent the third plague, which was the war, foreign of the
Turks and civil of the Christians. That without this inward and true
acknowledgement, their entrance into the Council, and calling upon the holy
Ghost were in vain. That the judgment of God was just to punish them so
deeply, though it were less then they deserved. Therefore they exhorted every
one to know his own faults, to mitigate the wrath of God, replying that the
holy Ghost, which they had inuocated, would not come, if they refused to hear
of their own sins, and like Esdras, Nehemiab, and Daniel, confess them. He
added that it was a great blessing of God, that there was such an occasion
given to begin a Council, for reformation on all hands. And though
contradictors will not be wanting, yet it was their duty constantly to go
on, and, as Judges, to avoid passion, and aim only at the glory of God, in
regard they are to perform this duty before him, the Angels, and the whole
Church. In fine, they admonished the Bishops sent by the Princes, to do their
Masters service with faith and diligence; yet preferring the honor of God
before all. Afterward the Bull of the intimation of the Council in the year
1542. was read, and a Brief of the simple deputation of the Legates, together
with a Bull of the opening of the Council; and immediately Alfonso Zorilla,
Secretary to Don Diego, stepped forward, and reproduced the Emperors
Commission presented before to the Legates, and showed a letter of Don Diego,
in which he excused his absence, by reason of his indisposition. For his excuse
the Legates said it was worthy to be admitted. For the Commission, though they
might insist upon the answer given before, yet they were pleased for greater
reverence to receive it again, and examine it, and make answer afterward.

These things being done, according to the rite of the Roman Ceremonial, all
kneeled down to pray softly, as the use was in all the Sessions, and then they
said aloud, Adsumus Domine, etc. Sancte Spiritus, etc. Which the President
spoke with an high voice, in the name of all. The Letanie being sung, the
Gospel was read by the Deacon, Si peccauerit in te frater tu^s, etc. And lastly
the hymn, Veni Creator spiritus, being sung, and all sat down in their
places, the Cardinal of Monte pronunced the Decree, with interrogatorie words;
reading, whether it pleased the Fathers, for the praise of God, extirpation of
heresies, reformation of Church and people, depression of the enemies of
Christ, to determine and declare that the holy Tridentine and General Council
should begin, and be begun; whereunto all answered, first the Legates, then the
Bishops, and other Fathers by the word Place^, He then added, whether in regard
of the Feasts of the old and new year, it The decree for opening the Councels
and holden the next Session.
pleased them that the next Session should be the seventh of January; and they
answered likewise that it pleased them. This being done, Hercules Seuerallo,
Speaker of the Council, desired the Notaries to make an instrument of all. The
himne, Te Deum laudamus, was sung, and the Fathers putting off their
Pontifical habits, and putting on their common, accompanied the Legates, the
Cross going before. These ceremonies being used in the Sessions following,
shall be repeated no more.

Germany and Italy were very curious to know the first actions of this
assembly, which was begun with so many difficulties, and the Prelates in Trent,
and those of their family, were charged by their friends to advise them of it.
Therefore immediately after the Session, a copy of the Legates admonition, and
of the oration of Bitonto was sent into every place; which were quickly
printed. Whereof that I may the better tell what was commonly spoken, it is
necessary to relate briefly the contents of the Oration. It began with
showing the necessity of the Council, because it is an hundred years since
that of Florence, and because things of difficulty belonging to the Church,
The contents of the oration, made by the Bishop of Ritonto.
cannot well be handled but in it. For in them the Creeds have been made,
heresies condemned, manners amended, Christian Nations united, armies sent to
conquer the holy land, Kings and Emperors deposed, and schisms rooted out.
And that for this cause the Poets introduce the Council of the Gods. And
Moses writes that they were conciliarie voices, the Decree to make man, and
to confound the tongues of the Giants. That Religion has three heads,
Doctrine, the Sacraments, and Charity; and that all these three call for a
Council. He declared the corruptions entered into them, for restoration of
which, the Pope, by the favor of the Emperor, Kings of France, of the
Romans, and of Portugal, and of Christian Princes, has assembled the Synod,
and sent his Legates. He made a long digression in commendation of the Pope, and
another, not much shorter in praise of the Emperor; then he praised the three
Legates, deriuing their commendation from the name and surname of each of them;
and added that the Council being assembled, all ought to meet in it, as in the
Trojan horse. He invited the woods of Trent, to sound forth through the
world, that all should submit themselves to that Council; which if they do
not, it will be justly said, that the Popes light is come into the world, and
men have loved darkness better then the light. He lamented that the Emperor
was not present, or, at the least Don Diego, who represented him. He
congratulated the Cardinal Madruccio, that the Pope had assembled in his City
the dispersed and wandering fathers. He turned to the Prelates, and said, that
to open the gates of the Council, was to open the gates of Paradise from whence
would descend living water to fill the earth with the knowledge of the Lord.
He exhorted the fathers to amendment, and to open their hearts, as dry ground,
to receive it; adding, that if they do it not, yet the holy Ghost will open
their mouths, though their minds be possessed with an evil spirit, as he
did the mouths of Caiphas and Balaam, lest, if the Council should err, the
Church should err also. He exhorted them to lay aside all passion, that they
may truly say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. He invited Greece,
France, Spain, Italy, and all Christian Nations to the Marriage. In fine, he
turned himself to Christ, praying him, by the intercession of Saint Vigilius,
(the turelarie Saint of the valley of Trent) to assist that Council.

The Legates admonition was accounted pious, Christian, modest, and The censure
of the oration.
worthy of Cardinals, but the Sermon of the Bishop was judged far otherwise.
His vanity and ostentation of Eloquence was noted by all. But men of
understanding compared, as an holy sentence to a wicked, those ingenious and
most true words of the Legates, that without a good inward acknowledgement, the
holy Ghost would in vain be called on, with the saying of the Bishop quite
contrary, that, without that, their mouth should be opened by the holy Ghost,
though their heart remained replenished with a wicked spirit. It was thought
arrogance to affirm, that, in case those few Prelates erred all the Church
would err; as if other Councels of seven hundred Bishops had not erred, and
the Church refused their doctrine. Others added that this was not conformable
to the doctrine of the Romanists, who grant not infallibility but to the Pope,
and to the Council by virtue of the Popes confirmation. But to compare the
Council to the Trojan horse, an insidious invention, was noted of folly, and
reprehended for irreuerence. To have retorted the words of the Scripture, that
Christ and his doctrine, the light of the Father is come into the world, and
men have preferred darkness before the light, making the Council and doctrine
thereof, to be the Popes light, appeared to the world, which if it were not
received, it should be said, men have loved darkness more then light, was
esteemed a blasphemy, and it was wished that at the least he had not taken
the formal words of the holy Scripture, that he might not have showed so
openly to have disesteemed it.

But in Trent, the beginning being made, neither the Prelates, not Legates The
Legates not knowing how to proceed, write to Rome.
themselves knew what should be handled, nor what order observed. Therefore the
Legates wrote to Rome a letter, worthy to be repeated at large, to give an
account of what was done before. First they said they be appointed the next
session the day after the Epiphanie, as a term which could not be taxed
neither of too long delay, nor too much brevity, that in the mean time they
might be advised how to govern themselves in the other sessions, wherein they
desire to have light; and because they might every hour be interrogated of
diverse things, for which they could not have space to advise and expect an
answer, they desired that as particular an instruction, as was possible,
should be sent them. Above all they desired advertisement concerning the manner
and form to proceed, to propose, to resolve, and what matter should be
handled. They demanded especially if the cause of heresies should be the first,
or should be treated of in general, or in particular, condemning the false
doctrine, or the persons of the principal heretics, or the one and the other
together: if the Prelates propose an Article of reformation, where at all seem
to aim, whether it should be handled together with the Article of Religion,
or before or after: if the Council ought to intimate its beginning to all
people and nations, inuiting the Prelates and Princes, and exhorting the
faithful to pray God for it; or if his Holiness will do it himself; when
there shall be occasion to write some letter, missiue or responsiue, what form
is to be used and what Seal; likewise what form is to be used in the
extention of (...) ^re^s if they should take notice of the Colloquie and Diet
which will be held in Germany, or dissemble it, if they shall proceed slowly
or swiftly, as well in determining the sessions^, as in proposing the matters.
They informed that some Prelates thought fit to proceeded by nations; which
they held to be seditious; that it would make the Prelates of every one
^oonutin, and that the greater number of Italians, who are most faithful to
the Sea of Rome, would help nothing, when the suffrage of them altogether
would be of equal value with the suffrage of a few French men, or Spaniards,
or Dutchmen. They sent advise also (...) it was perceived that some had a
design to dispute of the authority of the Council, and Pope; a thing
dangerous to raise a schism amongst the Catholics themselves; and that in the
congregation of the 12. all the Prelates jointly and earnestly desired to see
the commission of their faculty, which they were constrained artificially to
avoid, not knowing as yet how their presidencie ought to be understood and how
far his Holiness would have it extended. They demanded also that order might
be taken for the rodes, that every day and hour they might send and receive
advise, as occasion served; they desired some order about the precedencie of
Ambassadors of the Princes, and provision of money, in regard those 2000.
crowns, sent them a little before were spent upon some poor Bishops.

The Prelates were earnest that the work might begin; wherefore the Legates
to give them some satisfaction, and to show they were not idle, called a
congregation the 18. day, without proposing any thing but the manner of living,
and conuersing, and governing their families. Much was said against the use
brought in, especially in Rome, to wear the habit of a Prelate in the
ceremony only, and at other times of a secular. Sumptuous apparel, as also
base and sordide, were equally reprehended: and much was said of the age of
their servants, but all was referred to be resolved in another congregation,
which was held the two and twentieth, and was wholly spent in discoursing upon
such ceremonies, concluding that a good reformation of the mind was
principally necessary: wherefore aiming at the seemelinesse which belongs to
their degree, and edification of the people, every one will see what he has
to redress in himself, and his family.

The Pope, understanding the Council was begun, deputed a congregation of
Cardinals and Courtiers to superintend, and advise concerning the affairs of
Trent. Consulting with these, he resolved that things were not as yet ripe
enough to see clearly what matters were to be handled, and in what order. He
caused an answer to be sent to the Legates that it beseemed The Popes answer.
not the Synod to inuit either Princes or Prelates, and least of all to
desire any one to assist them with prayers, because this he had sufficiently
done himself by the Bull of the Iubile, and that by the Letters for the
convocation of the Council: that they ought not to think that the Synod
should write to any, the Legates having power to supply that, by their own
letters written in all their names. Concerning the extension of the Decrees,
the title ought to be. The most holy Oecumenicall and general Synod of Trent,
the Apostolical Legates being Presidents. But for the form of giving voices,
that their reasons were very good not to do it by nations; the rather because
it was never used in ancient times, but was introduced by the Council of
Constance, and followed by that of Basil; which are not to be imitated. But
the form used in the last Later as Council being the best and most decent,
they should follow that, by which late example, which succeeded well, they
might stop the mouth of whosoever proposed any to the contrary. And concerning
the condemnation of the heretics, and matters to be handled, and other things
demanded by them, order should be given in time convenient: in the mean space
they should spend the time inprea^bulary things, according to the custom of
other Councels. That they should maintain their presidencie with that
comeliness that beseems the Legates of the Apostolic Sea, yet so as that they
may give satisfaction unto all; but, above all, should use diligence that the
Prelates should not exceed the bounds of honest liberty, and reverence toward
the Apostolic Sea. It was a matter of greater importance to assist the
Prelates that they might be able to maintain themselves. Therefore he sent a
Brief, by which he exempted all the Prelates of the Council from payment of
Tenths, and granted them the participation of all fruits, as well in absence as
presence: he sent also two thousand crowns to help the needy Bishops, giving
order they should not care to have it published; because, in case it were
known, it could not be expounded but for a loving courtesy of the head of
the Council.

This place requires, by reason of that which has been, and will be spoken
The manner of giving voices in the Council in all ages.
in diverse occasions, about the manner of speaking their opinions in the
Council called, Giving of voices, that it should be declared, what the custom
was of old, and how this, which is used in these times, came first up. The
assembling of a whole Church, to handle in the Name of God the occurrences of
doctrine and discipline, is a thing most profitable, used by the holy Apostles
in the choice of Matthias, and the seven Deacons: and the Diocesan Councels are
much like to this. But of the meeting of Christians from many remote places to
consult together, there is a famous example in the Acts of the Apostles, when
Paul and Barnabas, with others of Syria, met the Apostles and other disciples
in Jerusalem, who were assembled about the question of keeping the Law. And
though it may be said that it was a recourse of the new Churches of the
Gentiles, unto the old mother Church, from whence their faith was derived, a
custom much used in those first ages, and often rehearsed by Irenie and
Tertullian, and though the letter were written by the Apostles, Elders, and
brethren of Jerusalem only, yet in regard that not they only, but Paul and
Barnabas also did speak, it may well be called a Council; by example whereof
the succeeding Bishops thought all Christian Churches to be but one, and
likewise all Bishoprics to be but only one, so framed, that every Bishop
held a part thereof, not as his own, but so, as that all ought to govern the
whole, and every one to employ himself most in that which was particularly
recommended to him; as S. Cyprian, in his little golden book of the unity of
the Church, does piously demonstrate. In case of necessity of any particular
Church, though the persecutions sometimes waxed warm, as many as could
assembled themselves, to make provision in common. In which assemblies CHRIST
and the holy Ghost being president, and charity chasing away all humane
passion, they advised and resolved of what was fit, without ceremonies or
forms prescribed. But after a certain time, passions of men and charity
being mingled together, and there being a necessity to govern them with some
order, the chiefest man amongst those that were assembled in Council, either
for learning, or for greatness of the City or Church whereof he was, or for
some other respect of eminency, took upon him the charge to propose and guide
the action, and collect the voices. But after that it pleased God to give peace
to the Christians, and that the Roman Emperors received the holy faith, there
happening more difficulties in doctrine and discipline which, by reason of the
ambition or other bad affections of those that had followers and credit,
troubled the public quiet another sort of Episcopal assemblies had beginning,
congregated by Princes or their Lieutenants, to remedy the troubles. In these
the action was guided by those Princes or Magistrates which did call them
together, who also were personally present, proposing and governing the
treaty, and decreeing interlocutorily, the occurring differences, but leaving
the decision of the principal point, for which the Council was congregated,
to the common opinion of the assembly. This form appears in the Councels,
whose acts do remain. The Colloquie of Catholics and Donatistes before
Marcellinus and many others may serve for example. But to speak only of
general Councels, this was done in the first Council of Ephesus before the
Earl Candidianus, sent President by the Emperor; and more clearly in that of
Calcedon before Martianus and the Judges by him appointed, in that of
Constantinople in Trullo before Constantine surnamed Poganatus, where the
Prince or Magistrate that was President, commanded what should be handled,
what order observed, who should speak, and who be silent, and did decide and
accommodate the differences in these things. And in the other general
Council, the acts whereof are not extant, as of the first of Nice, and the
second of Constantinople, the historians of that Age do witness, that
Constantine and Theodofius did the like. Yet in those times, when the Bishops
themselves did assemble of their own accord and others meddled not, the action
was governed as has been said, by one of them, and the resolution taken
according to the common consent. Sometimes the matter was so easy, that it was
dispatched in one meeting. Sometimes, by reason of the difficulty or
multiplicitie thereof, it was necessary to reiterate the business, whence
proceeded the many Sessions in the same Council. Not one of them was about
ceremony, or only to publish what was digested elsewhere, but to understand the
opinion of every one, and the colloquies, discussions, disputes, and whatsoever
was done or spoken, were called the acts of the Council. It is a new opinion,
and seldom practiced, though established in Trent, that the Decrees only are
called Acts of the Council, and ought only to be published; but in the
ancient Councels all was given unto all. Notaries were present to collect the
voices, who, when a Bishop spoke and was not contradicted, wrote not his proper
name, but thus, The Holy Sinode says. And when many said the same thing, it
was written, The Bishops acclaymed, or affirmed, and the things so spoken were
taken for decisions; if they spoke in a contrary sense, the contrary opinions
were noted, and the names of the authors, and the Judges or Presidents did
pronounce. Sometimes some impertinencie did undoubtedly happen by reason of
some man's imperfection; but charity, which excuses the defects of ones
brother, did cover it. A greater number of the Province, where the Council was
held, and of the borders was present; but without emulation, every one rather
desiring to obey, then to give a law unto others. After the Eastern and
Western Empires were separated, there remained still in the West some mark of
the ancient Councels, and many were celebrated in Councels governed by Princes.
France, and Germany, under the posterity of Charles the Great, and not a few
in Spain, under the Kings of the Goths. At last, Princes being absolutely
debarred to intermeddle in Ecclesiastical matters, that kind of Council grew in
disuse, 1546 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. -- HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
and that alone remained which was called by the Ecclesiastikes themselves; the
convocation of which Provincial Councels was almost wholly assumed by the
Pope, by sending his Legates to be Presidents, wheresoever he heard there was
a treaty to hold a Council. And after a certain time he took that power to
himself which the Roman Emperors used, to conuocate a Council of the whole
Empire, and to be President himself, if he were present, or, in his absence,
to send Legates to be Presidents; and to govern the action. But the Prelates,
assembled in the Synod, being delivered from the fear of a Secular Prince,
which kept them in awe, as worldly respects, the causes of all mischiefs, did
exceedingly increase, which caused also the multiplying of many indecencies,
they began to digest and order the matters in private, that they might
observe a decency in the public meeting. Afterward this was observed for a
form, and in the Councels, besides the Sessions, they began to make
Congregations of some Deputies, to set in order the matters to be treated of,
which in the beginning, if they were many, were divided, and a proper
Congregation assigned to every one. And this being not sufficient to remove
all the indecencies, because those that were not present, having different
interests, made difficulties in public, besides the particular Congregation,
they made a general before the Session, where all were present; which
according to the ancient rite, is the Conciliarie action, because the Session,
every thing being done before, remains but a pure ceremony. But a little
more then one Age being past, private interests caused a contention to arise
amongst the Bishops of diverse Nations. Whereupon those that were remote being
few, and not willing to be overcome by the borderers, who were more in number,
to make the balance equal, it was necessary that every Nation should assemble
by it self, and resolve according to the number of voices, and that the
general decision should be established, not by the suffrages of particular
men, but by the plurality of the voices of the Nations. So it was observed in
the Councels of Constance, and Basil: which use as it was good where the
government was free, as it was when the world had no Pope, so it ill befitted
Why the Romanists made so great a matter of the form of proceeding.
Trent, where they desired a Council subject unto him. And this was the
reason, why the Legates at Trent, and the Court of Rome, made so great a matter
of the form of proceeding, and of the quality and authority of the Presidencie.

But the answer being come from Rome, they called the Congregation the fifth
of January 1546. where the Cardinal of Monte having saluted and blessed 1546
them all in the Popes name, caused the said Brief of exemption from payment
of tenthes to be read. The three Legates made as it were three encomiasticall
Orations, one after another, declaring the Popes good affection toward the
Fathers. But some Spaniards said that this favor of the Pope brought greater
damage then benefit, because the accepting of it implied a confession that the
Pope might lay burdens upon other Churches, and that the Council had not
authority to hinder him, nor to exempt those who by right were not to be
included. The Legates were not only displeased at this, but returned also some
biting terms. Some of the Prelates demanded that the grace might be extended
to those of their families also, and to as many as were present in the Council.
The Generals of the religious Orders demanded likewise the same exemption,
alleging the charge of the Monasteries for the Friars which they brought to
the Council. Catalanus Triultius, Bishop of Piacenza, who arrived two days
before, related publicly that he was rifled as he passed near to Mirandula,
and desired an order should be made in the Council against those that hindered
or molested the Prelates, or others that went to the Council. The Legates,
joining this propose with the foresaid pretense of exemption, considering of
what importance it might be, if the Council should meddle in such a business,
making Edicts for their own exaltation, and that this was to touch the secrets
of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, put it aside with much dexterity, alleging
it would seem strange to the world, and too great a desire of revenge,
offering to labor with the Pope, that he would provide for the security of
their persons, and have consideration of the families of the Prelates, and of
the Friars. And so they appeased all.

And going on to the Conciliary actions, the Cardinal of Monte related what
form was observed in the last Laterane Council, where himself was present, as
Archbishop of Siponto. He said, that treating then of the French Pragmatique,
of the schism against Julius 2. and of the war between Christian Princes,
three deputations of Prelates were made for those matters, that each
Congregation being employed in one only, it might better digest it; that the
Decrees being framed, a general Congregation was called, where every one spoke
his opinion, and that by those the resolutions were better reformed, so that
all things passed in the Session with great concord and comeliness; that the
business to be handled by them was more various, the Lutheranes having moved
every stone, to overthrow the building of Card. Monte prescribes an order for
discussing matters in Council.
faith; therefore that it will be necessary to divide the matters, and for
every one to ordain a particular Congregation to dispute it, to cause the
Deputies to frame the Decrees which are to be proposed in the general
Congregation, where every one shall deliver his opinion: which that it might
be absolutely free, themselves the Legates did resolve to be proposers only,
and not to give their suffrage but in the Session. That all should bethink
themselves what was necessary to be handled, that some beginning might be made
in the Session which approached.

They proposed then, whether they were pleased that a Decree already A great
difference about the title of the Council.
framed, concerning Christian conversation while the Council lasted in Trent
should be published in the Session. Which being read with the title, The most
holy, as the commandment from Rome was, the French men desired this addition,
Representing the Church Universal: which opinion many Bishops did follow with
a joint consent. But the Legates considering that that title was used only in
the Council of Constance and Basil, and that to imitate them, was to renew
their memory, and to give them some authority, and to open a gap to the
difficulties which then troubled the Church of Rome; and which imported more,
considering that after they had said (Representing the Church Universal) some
also might think to add the words following, that is, which has power
immediately from CHRIST whereunto every one, though of Papal dignity, is bound
to obey, they opposed strongly, and (as they wrote to Rome in plain terms)
they whetted themselves against it, without declaring to the fathers the true
causes, but only saying they were froathy and inuidious words, and that the
heretics would have made a bad interpretation of them. And they all so
labored, without discovering the secret, first by art, then by saying plainly
they would not permit it, that they appeased the general commotion, though the
French men and some few more remained firm in their proposition.

And John de Salazzar, Bishop of Lanciano, a Spaniard by Nation, assisted the
Legates very much, who having commended in ample terms the first Councels of
the Church, for antiquity and sanctity of those that assisted, he desired they
should be imitated in the title used by them, which was very plain, without
expressing representation, or what, or how great authority the Council had.
But he pleased them not, when he said, that, by their example the name of
Presidents ought to be laid aside, because it was never used by any ancient
Council, but begun only by that of Constance, which The name of Presidents
was never used in Council before the Council of Constance.
by reason of schism, changed Presidents often: adding, that if that example
were to be followed, it would also be necessary to nominate the Emperors
Ambassador. For then the King of the Romans was named, and the Princes with
him. But this pride was far remote from Christian humility: and he repeated
the discourse of the Cardinal Santa Croce, which he made the twelfth of
December, by which also he concluded, that they should desist to make mention
of Presidencie. This proposition troubled the Legates more then the former; yet
the Cardinal Monte suddenly answered, that Councels have spoken diversely,
according to the occurrences of the times: that formerly the Pope has always
been acknowledged, for head of the Church, nor ever any Council has been
demanded, with condition it should not depend on the Pope, as the Duch-men now
do with great boldness; unto which heretical temeritie it was fit to resist
in every action, showing they were joined with the head, which is the Pope, by
making mentions of his Legates. He spoke much in this matter, and knowing he
could better maintain it by diuersion, then persuasions, he was a means they
should pass to another thing. The contents of the Decree was approved by all;
but there being one particle in it, in which every one was exhorted to pray to
God for the Pope, Emperor, and Kings, the French Prelates desired there should
special mention be made of the French King. This the Cardinal Santa Croce
commended, but added, that the like specification would be expected by all in
their place, which would prove a long business, and full of danger, by reason
of precedencie. The French men replied, that in the Bull of the convocation,
the Pope had made mention only of the Emperor and French King; and therefore
by that example they should name them both, or neither. The Legates took time
to think of it, being desirous to give every one satisfaction.

The seventh of January all the Prelates, clad in their ordinary habit,
assembled The session January 7.
themselves in the house of the prime Legate, from whence they went to the
Cathedral Church with the cross before them. Out of the Country of Trent
were collected into the City three hundred foot, armed partly with pikes, and
partly with harquebushes, and some horse. These put themselves in file on
either side the way, from the house of the Church; where the Legates and Prelates
being entered, the Soldiers returned to the market place, and discharged their
harquebushes, and remained there to guard the Session. Besides the Legates and
Cardinal of Trent, there were present four Archbishops, twenty eight
Bishops, three Abbats of the congregation of Cassina, and four generals, who
sat in the place of the Session. These forty three persons made the general
Council. Of the Archbishops, two were titular only, never seen in the
Churches, from which they had their name, which the Pope gave them, only to do
them honor; the one was Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsala in Gothland, the
other Robert Venante, a Scottish-man, Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland; who,
though he were pore-blinde, was commended for his virtue, to ride post the best
in the world. These two men, having been relieved certain years in Rome, by
the Popes alms, were sent to Trent to increase the number, and to depend on
the Legates. About the number of twenty Divines stood on their feet; the
Ambassador of the King of the Romans, and the Proctor of the Cardinal of
Ausburg were present, and sat upon the Ambassadors bench, and near unto
them, upon the same bench, sat ten Gentlemen, chosen out of the bordering
places by the Cardinal of Trent. John Fonseca, Bishop of Castelamare said
Mass, and Coriolanus Martiranus, Bishop of S. Mark, made the Sermon.

When the Mass was ended, the Prelates put on their Pontifical habits, and
then the Letanie and Prayers were said, as in the first Session. After this all
sat down, and the Bishop that said Mass, mounting into the Pulpit, read the
forenamed Bull, against admitting to give voice the Proctors of those that were
absent, without mentioning the other, where those of Germany were excepted.
Then he read the Decree, in which the Synod exhorted all the faithful
assembled in Trent, to live in the fear of God, and daily to pray for the
peace of Princes, and unity of the Church, and those of the Council to say
Mass, at the least on Sundaies, and to pray for the Pope, Emperor, Kings, and
Princes, and all to fast, give alms, to be sober, and to instruct their
families. It exhorted also all men, especially the learned, to bethink
themselves exactly how to resist heresies, and in the assemblies to use
modesty in speaking. And it ordained beside, that if any sat not in their
place, or gave not voice, or was not present in their congregations, he should
not receive any prejudice, or gain any new right. The fathers being
interrogated, after this was read, they answered, it pleased them. But the
French men added, that they approved not so bare a title, and required an
addition of Representing the universal Church. In fine, the next session was
appointed the fourth of February, and the fathers had leave to depart; who
putting off their Pontifical habits, did, in their ordinary apparel,
accompany the Legates home in the same order they came to Church; which was
observed in all the sessions afterward.

After the session there was no congregation held until the thirteenth of
January, because Peter Pacceco, Bishop of Iahen, lately created Cardinal, who
expected the hat from Rome, without which the ceremony gave him not leave to
go abroad, had a desire to be there, because order was to be taken therein,
that no inconveniences should happen in the session. The congregation being
assembled, the Legates complained of those, who in the session had opposed the
title; they showed it was not seemly to cause diversity of opinions to
appear in that public place; that the congregations were made that every one
might deliver his mind more privately, and all agree in that which was to be
published; that nothing would more daunt the heretics, and encourage the
Catholics, then the fame of union. They descended to the matter of the title,
and said, that none was more fit then that which the Pope had given in the
Convocation, and in so many other Bulls, where it was called, Oecumenicall and
universal; unto which it was superfluous to add (representation) in regard
whole books declare what a Council lawfully called, and begun, is, and does
represent; that by doing otherwise they should seem to make doubt of the
authority thereof, and resemble it to some other Council, unto which they gave
that title, being willing to supply with words the lawful authority which
they knew it wanted, glancing at that of Basil and Constance, but to make a
firm resolution they would have every one deliver his opinion.

The Cardinal Pacceco began to say, the Council was adorned with very many
titles, which if they were used in all occasions, the expression of them would
be greater then the body of the Decree. But as a great Emperor A dispute
about the title of the Council.
possessour of many kingdoms and states, uses in his Edicts the title only
from whence they have force, and often puts his own name to them without
any title at all, so this Council, according to the Subjects that shall be
handled, ought to use many titles to express its authority; but now that they
are in the preparatories, there is no necessity to use any of them at all. The
Bishop of Feltre put them in mind, that the Protestants desired a Council
where themselves might have a decisiue voice, so that if this title be given to
the Council, that it represents the Church universal, they will draw an
argument from hence, that some of every order of the universal Church ought to
be present. These being two, the Clergy and the Laity, it cannot be entirely
represented, if the Laity be excluded. But for the rest, those also of the
Council who assented to the simple title, were of opinion that it ought to be
supplied. The Bishop of Saint Mark said that the Laikes are most improperly
called the Church. For the Canons determine that they have no authority to
command, but necessity to obey, and that this is one of the things which the
Council ought to decree, that the Seculars ought humbly to receive that
doctrine of faith which is given them by the Church, without disputing or
thinking further on it; and therefore that it is very meet to use the title,
that the Synod represents the Church universal, to make them understand
that they are not the Church, but ought to hearken to, and obey the Church.
Many things were spoken and they went on without any firm conclusion but only
that the simple title should be used in the next session, as it was in the
last.

When this was ended, because certain Prelates desired, that at the last they
might come to matters substantial, the Legates, to give them satisfaction,
proposed that they should consider of the three heads contained in the Popes
Bulls; that is, the extirpation of heresies, reformation of discipline, and
establishing of peace; how they should begin these treaties, what course they
should hold, and how proceed; that they should pray God to illuminate them
all, and every one should speak his opinion in the first congregation. In the
end some commissions from absent Bishops were presented; and the Archbishop
of Aix, the Bishops of Feltre and Astorga were deputed to consider of their
excuse, and relate in the Congregation.

The next day the Legates wrote to Rome, that it appeared that the
amplification of the title, with addition of Representing the Church
Universal, was a thing so popular and so pleased all, that it might easily be
spoken of again: and therefore they desired to know his Holiness pleasure if
they should persist in denying it, or yield unto them, especially upon occasion
of making some Decree of importance, as to condemn heresies, or the like. They
gave advice also, that they had made the proposition for the next Congregation
so general, that they might yield to the desire of the Prelates, which was to
enter into the substantial points, and yet enterpose time that they might
receive instruction from his Holiness. They added that the Cardinal Pacceco
had advice, that the Emperor had given order to many Spanish Bishops, men of
exemplary lives, and learning, to go to the Council. Therefore they thought it
necessary, that his Holiness should send ten or twelve Prelates, whom he
might trust, men fit to appear for their other qualities, that the number of
the Oltramontans increasing, especially men rare, of exemplaritie The Legates
desire to make their party strong.
and learning, they might in some part be incountred. For amongst those that
until then were in Trent, those that had good minds had little learning, and
less discretion; and those that had understanding, were discovered to have
deseignes, and hard to be governed.

In the next Congregation, assembled the eighteenth, to understand the The
Imperialists desire to begin with reformation.
minds of all, concerning the Propositions made in the last, the opinions were
four. The Imperialists said, that the points of doctrine could not be
touched, with hope of any fruit, because it was first necessary to remove the
transgressions, from whence the heresies arose, by a good reformation,
enlarging themselves very much in this field, and concluding that so long as
the scandal which the World receives, by the deformation of the Clergy,
cease not, nothing that they can say or preach will ever be believed, all
being persuaded that deeds ought to be regarded, and not words. And that
they ought not to take example by the ancient Councels, because in them either
there was not corruption of manners, or that was not cause of heresy; and in
fine, that to defer the treaty of reformation, was to show themselves
incorrigible.

Some few others thought fit to begin with doctrine, and then to pass to
reformation, alleging that faith is the ground and foundation of Christian
life; that no man begins to build from the roof, but from the foundations;
that it is a greater sin to err in faith then in other humane actions; and
that the point of rooting out heresies was put first in the Popes Bulls. A third
opinion was, that the points of reformation and faith might ill be separated,
because there was no doctrine without abuse, nor abuse which drawed not after
it the bad interpretation and bad sense of some doctrine. Therefore it was
necessary to handle them at the same time, for that the world having their
eyes fixed upon this Council, and expecting a remedy as well in matters of
faith as manners, it would be satisfied better by handling them both together,
then one after another: especially if according to the proposition of the
Cardinal of Monte, diverse deputations were made, and one handled this matter,
and the other that, which should be done quickly, considering that the time
present, when Christendom had peace, was precious, and not to be lost, not
knowing what impediments the time to come might bring. And the rather, because
they should study to make the Council as short as they could, that the
Churches the less while might remain deprived of their Pastors, and for many
other respects, intimating that which might arise in length of time, to the
distaste of the Pope and Court of Rome.

Some others, among whom were the French men, demanded, that that of the peace
might be the first: that they should write unto the Emperor, the most
Christian King, and other Princes, giving them thanks for the convocation of
the Council, for continuance whereof that they would establish peace, and help
the work forward, by sending their Ambassadors and Prelates; and likewise
should write friendly to the Lutheranes, inuiting them charitably to come to
the Council, and join themselves with the rest of Christendom. The Legates,
understanding the opinions of them all, and commending their wisdom, said,
that because it was late, and the consultation of weight, and the opinions
various, they would think of what every one had said, and, in the first
Congregation, propose the points to be determined.

Order was taken that there should be two Congregations every week, Two
Congregations every week, without intimation.
on Monday and Friday, without warning: and in the end the Archbishop of Aix,
having received letters from the most Christian King, saluted the Synod in his
Name, and promised that his Majesty would suddenly send an Ambassador, and
many Prelates of his Kingdom; and so the Congregation ended.

The Legates sent advice of all to Rome, and wrote that they had drawn in
length the resolution of the things that were handled, under the pretenses
before related, but in truth to gain more time, that they might receive
instructions and orders how to govern themselves; beseeching his Holiness
again to make his will known, and to consider above all, that to prolong the
Council, and hold it open, when he might make it short, was not good for the
Apostolic Sea: adding that they were constrained to hold two Congregations
every week, to keep the Prelates in exercise, and to take occasion from them
to make them by themselves. But they said that this would draw on the business
very fast, and therefore that it was necessary to take some course to resolve
their proposes quickly, and not to defer to answer them, as hitherto has
been done, but to advise them what they ought to do presently, and to foresee,
as much as might be, what could happen. And seeing they had written oftentimes,
that many poor Bishops came to the Council, for the hope and good promises
which his holiness and Cardinal Farnese had given them, they then repeated
it, adding, it was an error to think to use them as homely in Trent, as in
Rome, where, having no authority, they are humble and in subjection; but when
they are in the Council, they think they should be esteemed and maintained,
which if it be not done, it were better not to have them in that place, then to
have them there ill satisfied, and distasted; concluding that that enterprise
could not succeed Well, without diligence and cost.

It may generally seem strange, that the Pope, a wise man, and skillful in the
affairs of the world, should not give answer unto two particulars, of such
importance and necessity, in so long a time, after so many instances of his
ministers. But his holiness grounded not his hopes upon the Council; all his
cogitations were turned toward the war, which the Cardinal Farnese The Pope
is more intent upon the war against the Protestants, then upon the Council.
treated with the Emperor the year before, and could not forbear to make
demonstration thereof: neither did the Emperor desire the Council should
proceed, it being sufficient for his ends that it was opened only.

But the Prelates, who desired to begin with reformation, and leave the
doctrine behind, assisted by the Emperors Ministers, assayed to draw the
others A controversy how to begin, whether with reformation or doctrine, or
with both together.
to them: which thing being very easy, because the reformation was generally
desired, and not much believed, their number grew so great, that the Legates
were confounded. Therefore by themselves and their friends they often dealt
privately with diverse, and lastly, in the congregation of the 22. day, all three
one after another set themselves to ruin the foundations which were laid in
favor of the reformation. One reason, drawn from the Emperors proposition in
the Diet of Worms the last May, made a great impression, when he said they
ought to expect what the Council would do in the definitions of doctrine, and
in the reformation; and, that if nothing were done, he would intimate another
Diet, to accommodate the differences of religion, and correct the abuses:
arguing from hence, that if they handled not the points of doctrine, the
determinations of the future Colloquie and Diet would be canonized; neither
could they with reason hinder them to treat of religion in Germany, which
themselves refused to do in the Council.

There was a great rich Prelate in the congregation, who, with a premeditated
speech, went about to show, that they ought only to aim at the reformation,
aggravating much the common deformation of the whole Clergy, and inculcating,
that so long as our vessels were not cleansed, the holy Ghost would not dwell
in them, and by consequence, that no right judgment could be expected in
matters of faith.

But the Cardinal Santa Croce taking from hence occasion to speak, said, that
there was no reason to defer the reformation of themselves, who were to
manage the Council, but that was easy and ready, and might suddenly be
executed, without delaying the points of doctrine, which were intricate of
themselves, and of long digestion. He much commended that prelate for making
mention of a thing so holy, and of so good example: for beginning from
themselves, they might easily reform all the rest of the world; and he
earnestly exhorted all to come to the practice thereof. This opinion was much
commended by all, but not followed; for many soid, the reformation ought to be
general, without loosing time in that particular. Therefore they all
concluded, except two, that the Articles of Religion and reformation should be
handled together, as they are alike desired, and deemed necessary by the whole
world, and jointly proposed in the Popes Bulls. The Legates were content with
this resolution, though they rather desired to treat of faith, and leave the
reformation. But so great was their fear that they should be constrained to
handle reformation alone, that they thought it A resolution made to handle
doctrine and reformation together.
a great victory to join them together. And they thought also that their
opinion to leave the reformation was dangerous, because they should resist all
the Prelates and States of Christendom, who desired it, which they could not
do without much scandal, and infamy. If this course which they took, being
constrained thereunto by mere necessity, should not please those at Rome,
they could not complain of any but themselves, who were so often solicited to
answer the letters, and send necessary instructions.

Afterward it was resolved to write to the Pope to thank him for calling and
opening the Council, and to desire him to maintain and favor it, and to be
a means unto Christian Princes to continue peace among themselves, and excite
them to send Ambassadors to the Council. They resolved also to write to the
Emperor, the French King, Kings of the Romans, of Portugal, and other
Catholic Princes, to preserve peace, to send Ambassadors, secure the ways,
to move their Prelates to appear personally in the Council. The care of
writing these letters was committed to the Bishop of Saint Mark, and were to
be read and sealed in the next congregation.

The Legates published two points to be considered of by the Fathers, whereof
they were to give their voices. The first, whether in the next session the
heads of faith, and those of reformation which were correspondent, should be
handled together. The second how to proceed in making choice of the two heads,
and in handling and examining them. The Legates thought they had by these
propositions disburthened themselves of the importunate quest made by some, to
establish some substantial point in every congregation, and withal to have
showed that they held the Prelates in esteem.

The next congregation was spent in reading many letters, and disputing A
Congregation.
what Seal to use. Some proposed they should be sealed in lead, with a Bull
proper to the Synod, in which some would have on the one side the image of the
holy ghost in the form of a Dove, and the name of the Synod on the other, and
some desired other forms, all which were glorious. But the Legates, who had
another order from Rome, suffering the fathers to dispute heereon, diuerted the
proposition by saying it sauored of pride, and protracted the time, because
they must send to Venice to make the form of it, in regard no Artisan in Trent
was able to do it; adding that it might be better thought of afterward, and
that it was necessary to dispatch the letters now, which might be done by the
name and seal of the Prime Legate. That which remained was put off until the
next Congregation.

In the which, the two points before proposed were discussed, and concerning A
Congregation.
the first, there were two opinions. One that the Decree should be framed and
published: the other that it was not good to tie themselves with a Decree, but
to keep their liberty, and resolve as occasion should serve. They took a
middle course; to make mention only that the Synod was principally assembled
for these two causes, without going any further. But for the second point the
mayor part were of opinion, that they being assembled to condemn the Lutheran
heresy, they should follow the order of their confession; which others
contradicted, because it was an imitation of the Colloquies in Germany, which
would debase the dignity of the Council. And the two first heads of the
Augustan confession being of the Trinity, and incarnation, in which there was
no substantial difference, though they were expressed after a new manner, and
unusual in the Schools, if they should be approved, reputation would be
given them, and they could not so well condemn the rest; and in case they
would neither approve nor condemn them, and speak of them not with the
terms of that confession, but of the Schools or others, there was danger to
raise new disputes and new schisms. The Legates, who aimed at nothing but to
drive out the time, were glad to hear the difficulties, and did carefully
cherish them, sometimes encouraging one; and sometimes another.

The time prefixed for the session approaching, the Legates, having received The
Legates were perplexed for want of instruction.
no instruction from Rome, were much perplexed. For to pass that session, as
the former, in ceremonies only, was to loose all reputation; and to handle any
matter was dangerous, because they had not their mark prefixed whereat to
aim. That which seemed to have least peril, was to frame a decree upon the
resolution taken in the congregation, to handle the points of faith and
reformation together: whereunto opposition was made, that it was to bind
themselves, and to determine that in the congregation, which was undecided by
the Pope. In this ambiguitie it was proposed that they should make a delatory
decree, under pretense that many Prelates were in their iourny, and would
shortly come thither. Cardinal Poole told them, that in regard a confession of
faith has been made in all the ancient Cauncels, the same should be done in
that session, publishing that of the Church of Rome. At the last it was
resolved to make the Decree with a simple title, and to make mention therein
that they ought to treat of religion, and reformation; but in such general
terms, that the Creed might be recited, and passed over, making another Decree
to defer the material points until another session, alleging for a reason
that some Prelates were ready to set forward, and some in their journey
already: and to prolong the term of the next session as long as they could,
for fear of being brought into the like straits: yet so as not to put it off
until after Easter.

When this was framed, they imparted it to the Prelates they trusted most,
amongst whom the Bishop of Bitonto put to their consideration, that to make a
session to establish a Creed, made 1200. years before, and continually
believed, and now absolutely accepted by all, might be laughed at by those that
were envious, and ill expounded by others. That they cannot say they follow the
Fathers example in this: because they have either made aconfession against the
heresies they did condemn, or repeated the former made against the heresies
already condemned, to give them greater authority, adding some thing for
declaration, or to reduce it into memory, or to secure it against oblivion.
But now neither a new confession was composed, nor a declaration adjoined. To
give them more authority belonged not to them, nor to that age. To recall it
into memory, in regard it was repeated every week in all Churches, and was in
the fresh memory of every one, was a thing superfluous, and affected. That the
heretics ought to be convinced by the confession, was true of those who erred
against it: but it was not so of the Lutherans, who believed it as the
Catholics. If when this preparation shall be made, the confession be never
used to this purpose, it will be thought to be done to no other end then to
entertain the time, and to sprinkle Court-holy-water, not daring to touch the
points of doctrine, nor being willing to meddle with the reformation. He
thought it better to interpose delay, in regard of the expectation of the
Prelates, and so to end the Session.

The Bishop of Chioza added, that the reasons alleged might serve the
heretics turns, by saying, that if the confession can serve to convert
infidels, overcome the heretics, and confirm the faithful, they could not
enforce them to believe any thing besides. The Legate judged not these reasons
to be so strong as the contrary, that not to make a Decree was loss of
reputation. Therefore they resolved on that side, and fitted some words better,
according to the aduertisements of the Prelates, and proposed the Decree in the
Congregation of the first of February. Of this many things were said; and
though it was approved by the mayor part, yet in the end of the congregation it
gave distaste, and some of the Prelates said, reasoning among themselves, it
will be said, that by a work of twenty years time, it has been concluded,
that we should be brought to hear the Creed repeated.

The fourth day, destinated for the Session, they went to Church with The
Session.
the same ceremonies and company; in which Peter Tragliania, Archbishop of
Palermo, sang Mass, Ambrose Catarin of Siena, a Dominican Friar, Archbishop of
Torre, read the Decree: the substance whereof was, that the Synod, The Decree
is read.
considering the importance of the two points to be treated of, that is, the
extirpation of heresies, and reformation of manners, exhorts all to trust in
God, and arm themselves with spiritual weapons, and that their diligence may
have both beginning and progress from the grace of God, it determines to
begin from the confession of faith, imitating the examples of the Fathers, who
in the principal Councels, in the beginning of the actions, have opposed that
buckler against the heresies, and sometimes have converted the infidels, and
overcome the heretics with that alone; in which all that profess
Christianity do agree. And here the whole was repeated word by word, without
adding any other conclusion. And the Archbishop asked the Fathers, whether the
Decree pleased them. All answered affirmatively, b(...) some with conditions
and additions of no great moment, yet such as displeased the Cardinal of
Monte; who liked not they should descend to particulars in the Sessions,
fearing that when some matter of weight was to be The eighth of April is
appointed for the next Session.
treated of, some inconvenience might arise. Afterward the other Decree was
read, intimating the Session for the eighth of April, alleging for a cause
of the delay, that many Prelates were in a readiness to come, and some were in
the journey, and for that the deliberations of the Synod will be more esteemed
when they shall be strengthened by the counsel and presence of of more
Fathers; yet so as that they would not defer the discussion and examination
of what seemed fit to be handled presently.

The Court of Rome, who stood all amazed at the very name of reformation, was
well pleased to hear that the Council entertained it self in preambles,
hoping that time would bring forth some remedy. And the Courtiers that had
intemperate tongues, exercised their gibing, publishing diverse bitter Pasquins,
as then the custom was in all accidents, some commending Pasquins made against
the Session.
the Prelates assembled in Trent, for making a most noble decree, worthy of a
general Council, and some exhorting them to understand their own worth and
knowledge.

The Legates in giving the Pope an account of the Session held, sent also
advise, that it would be hard to oppose, and overcome those who desired to
finish The Legates give the Pope an account of the Session.
the title, with the representation of the Church universal; yet they would
endeavor to remove the difficulties. But that it was impossible to entertain
the Prelates any more without coming to, and doing some essential matter; and
therefore that they expected the order and instruction which they so often had
demanded. That for their parts they thought it fit to handle those points of
the holy Scripture, which were in controversy between them and the Lutherans,
and the abuse brought into the Church in that matter; which things would much
satisfy the world, and offend no man: and they would expect an answer for
this, there being space enough to examine those matters, and many occasions to
drive out the time until the beginning of Lent.

But though the Council was then opened, and still celebrated, the affairs of
Germany continued the same. In the beginning of the year the Elector The
affairs of Germany continue the same, And the Palatine embraces the reformed
religion.
Palatine brought in the use of the Chalice, the popular tongue in public
prayers, the marriage of Priests, and other things which were reformed before
in other places. And those that were appointed by the Emperor to be present
in the meeting, to find out a way to compose the differences of Religion, met
together at a Colloquie in Ratisbon. The Emperor deputed for Presidents the
Bishop of Eicstat, and the Conte of Furstemberg: but no good fruit grew
thereof, by reason of the suspicions which one part conceived against the
other, and because the Catholics omitted no occasions to give greater
iealousies to the other side, and to feign them of their own, which finally
made the Colloquie to dissolve.

The fifteenth of February Martin Luther died also. These news being Martin
Luther dies
sent to Trent and Rome, there was not so much grief for the change of
Religion in the Palatinate, as joy that the Colloquie succeeded not well, but
tended The Romanists rejoice at his death and at the dissolution of the
Colloquie without fruit.
to dissolution, and that Luther was dead. The Colloquie seemed another
Council, and gave great jealousy; because, if any thing had been accorded,
they saw not how the Council could after reject it, and, if it had been
accepted, it would seem that the Council received laws from another place.
And by all means the Colloquie being on foot, and the Emperors ministers
there present, it brought small reputation to the Council and the Pope. The
Fathers in Trent, and the Court in Rome conceived great hope, seeing that so
potent an instrument, to contradict the doctrine and rites of the Church of
Rome, was dead; who was the principal, and almost the total cause of the
divisions and innouations introduced, and held it for a presage of the good
success of the Council; and the rather because that death was diuulged
throughout Italy, with many prodigious and fabulous circumstances, which were
ascribed to miracle, and the vengeance of God, though there were but the usual
accidents, which do ordinarily happen in the deaths of men of sixty three
years of age: for in that age Martin Luther Fables raised upon Luthers death.
died. But those things that happened afterward even until our age, have
declared that Martin was only one of the means, and that the causes were more
potent and secret.

The Emperor being arrived in Ratisbon, complained grievously that The
Emperors letters concerning the Colloquy were laughed at.
the Colloquie was dissolved, and wrote letters thereof throughout all Germany;
which were laughed at, because it was too much known that the separation was
wrought by the Spaniards and Friars, and by the Bishop of Eicstat, whom he had
sent. And when the workmen are known, it is not hard to judge whence the
beginning of the motion does proceed. But the wise Emperor was willing to use
the same thing to satisfy the Pope and the Council, and to find an occasion
against the Protestants; which the event showed to be true. For the same
complaints being renewed in the Diet, and means of agreement being sought by
those that were assembled, the Ministers of Ments and Triers separating
themselves from the other Electors, and adhering to the other Bishops,
approved the Council, and desired the Emperor to protect it, and to cause
the Protestants to be there, and submit themselves to it. But they did resist
and remonstrate that that Council had not those qualities and conditions so
often promised, and desired that the peace might be kept, and the differences
in religion accorded in a lawful Council in Germany, or in an Imperial Diet.
But in the end the maskes The provisions for war were known
were removed, and the provisions for war could no longer be hid; whereof
mention shall be made in its proper place. The Pope considered very much of
the letter written from Trent, weighing the inconveniences that would follow,
if he kept the Council at anchor, with the ill satisfaction of the Bishops
that were there, and the mischief that might arise if the reformation should
begin. In fine, perceiving that it was necessary to put something to the
hazard, and that it was wisdom to avoid the greater evil, he resolved to
write back to Trent,, to begin the action as they had advised, admonishing
them not to broach any new difficulties in matter of faith, nor to determine
any of the things controuersed amongst the Catholics, and to proceed slowly
in the reformation. The Legates, who until then had in the Congregations
entertained themselves in general matters, having received power to go on,
proposed in the Congregation of the 22. of February, that the first foundation
of faith being established, they ought in the next place to handle another
more ample, which is the holy Scripture, wherein are points belonging to the
doctrines controuerted with the Lutheranes, and others, for reformation of
those abuses which are most principal, and necessary to be amended; and so
many, that perhaps the time until the next Session will not be sufficient to
find a remedy for all. They discoursed of the controversies with the Lutherans
in this subject, and of the abuses, and much was spoken hereof by diverse
Prelates.

The Divines, who were thirty in number, and almost all Friars, had until then
served in the Council only to make Sermons on Holy Days, in exaltation of
the Council and the Pope, and to make light skirmishes with the Lutheranes;
but now that controuerted doctrines were to be decided, and the abuses of
learned men rather then of others to be reformed, their worth The Divines
begin to be esteemed.
began to appear. And order was taken that in the points of doctrine to be
decided; articles should be extracted out of the books of the Lutheranes
contrary to the orthodox faith, to be studied and censured by the Divines,
that every one speaking his opinion of them, the matter might be prepared to
frame the Decrees, which being proposed in the Congregation, and examined by
the Fathers, when every man's voice was known, that might be established which
was to be published in the Session. And for the abuses, every one should call
to mind what he thought worthy of amendment, together with the remedy fit for
it.

The articles for matter of doctrine, drawn out of the Lutheranes books, were,

1. That the necessary doctrine of Christian faith, is wholly contained in the
holy Scripture, and that it is an humane invention, to add unto them unwritten
Traditions, as left unto the holy Church by Christ and his Apostles, derived
unto us by means of the continual succession of Bishops, and that it is
sacrilege to defend that they are of equal authority with the old and new
Testament.

2. That amongst the books of the old Testament, none should be reckoned but
those that have been received by the Jews, and in the New the six Epistles,
that is, that under the name of S. Paul to the Hebrews, that of S. James, the
2. of S. Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. John, one of S. Jude, and the Apocalypse.

3. That to understand the Scripture well, or to allege the proper words, it
is necessary to have recourse to the texts of the original tongue in which it
is written, and to reprove the Latin translation; as full of errors.

4. That the divine Scripture is most easy and perspicuous, and that to
understand it, neither gloss nor comment is necessary, but only to have the
spirit of a sheep of Christ's pasture.

5. Whether Canons, with Anathematismes adjoined, should be framed against all
these Articles.

Upon the two first, the Divines discoursed in four Congregations; and in the
first all agreed, that the Christian faith is contained partly in the
Scripture, and partly in Traditions; and much time was spent in alleging for
this places of Tertullian, who often speaks of them; and many were numbered out
of Irenie, Cyprian, Basil, Austin, and others; yea some said more, that
Tradition was the only foundation of the Catholic doctrine. For the
Scripture it self is not believed but by tradition. But there was some
difference how this matter might fitly be handled.

Vicenzo Lunello, a Franciscan Friar, was of opinion, that, in regard the holy,
Scripture and traditions were to be established for ground of faith, they ought
first to treat of the Church, which is a more principal foundation. For the
Scripture receives authority from it, according to the famous saying of Saint
Augustine: I would not have believed the Gospel if the authority of the Church
had not compelled me; and no use can be made of traditions, but by grounding
them upon the same authority. For if a controversy Discourses about the
authority of traditions.
arise about a tradition, it will be necessary to decide it either by the
testimony, or by the determination of the Church. But this foundation being
laid, that every Christian is bound to believe the Church; one may securely
build thereon. He added, that they should take example from all those that have
substantially written against the Lutherans, as Friar Siluester, and Ecchi^s,
who have more alleged the authority of the Church, then any other argument;
neither is it possible to convince the Lutherans otherwise. That it is contrary
to the end proposed, (that is to lay all the foundations of Christian doctrine)
to leave out the principal, and perhaps the only ground, but certainly that
without the which, the residue cannot subsist. This opinion had no followers.
Some opposed against it, that it was subject to the same difficulties which it
made to others. For the Synagogues of the heretics also would arrogate to be
the true Church, unto whom this authority was given. Others holding it to be a
thing most known and undoubted, that by the name of the Church the Clergy
ought to be understood, and more properly the Council and the Pope as head,
said they ought to maintain, that the authority of the Church is already
decided, and that to treat of it now were to show there was difficulty, or at
the least, that it was a thing newly cleared, and not most ancient, ever
believed since Christianity began.

But Anthonius Marinarus, a Carmelite Friar, thought fit to refrain speaking
of traditions, and said, that for decision of the first Article in this matter,
it was meet first to determine whether the question were facti, or iuris: that
is, if the Christian doctrine have two parts, one which was written by the will
of God, and the other which was forbidden to be writ, but only taught by word
of mouth; or if in the whole body of doctrine it has accidentally happened,
that all having been taught, some part has not been committed to writing.
He added, that it was a clear case that the Majesty of God ordaining the law
of the Old Testament, appointed it should be necessary to have it in writing;
and therefore wrote the Decalogue in stone with his own finger, commanding it
should be laid up in the Cabinet, called the Arc of the Covenant. That he
often commanded Moses to write the precepts in a book, and that one copy
should be kept in the Arc, and the King have another to read it continually.

This fell not out in the Gospel, which the Son of God wrote in the hearts,
for which neither tables, nor chest, nor book is necessary: yea, the Church
was most perfect before any of the Apostles wrote; and though they had writ
nothing, the Church would have wanted nothing of its perfection. But as Christ
founded the doctrine of the New Testament in the hearts, so he forbad it not
to be written, as in some false Religions, where the mysteries were kept
secret, nor was lawful to write them, but only to teach them by word of
mouth. And therefore that it is an undoubted truth, that whatsoever the
Apostles have written, and whatsoever they have taught by word of mouth, is of
equal authority, because they wrote and spoke by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, which notwithstanding, as, by assisting them; it has directed them to
write and preach the truth, so it cannot be said it has forbidden them to
write any thing, to the end to hold it in mystery; wherefore the Articles of
faith cannot be distinguished into two kinds, some published by writing,
others commanded to be communicated only by voice. He said, that whosoever
thought otherwise, must fight against two great difficulties; the one, to tell
wherein the difference is, the other, how the Apostles successors have been
able to write that which was forbidden by God: adding, that it was as hard to
maintain the third, that is, how it has accidentally happened, that some
particulars have not been written, because it would derogate from the
providence of God in directing the holy Apostles to compose the Scriptures of
the New Testament. Therefore The Fathers never made traditions of equal
authority with the Scripture.
he concluded, that to enter into this treaty, was to sail between
Scriptu^e. and Caribdis, and that it was better to imitate the fathers, who
served themselves of this place, only in case of necessity, never thinking to
make of it an Article of competition against the holy Scripture. He added,
that it was not necessary to proceed now to any new determination, because the
Lutherans, though they said they would be convinced by the Scripture only,
have not made a controversy in this article, and that it is good to keep
themselves only to the controversies which they have promoted, without setting
new on foot, exposing themselves to the danger of making a great division in
Christendom.

The Friars opinion pleased but few; yea, Cardinal Poole reprehended it, The
opinion of Marinarus was very distastefull.
and said, it better beseemed a Colloquie in Germany, then a Council of the
universal Church: that in this they should aim at the sincere verity it
self, not as there, where nothing is handled but the according of the parties,
though to the prejudice of the truth; that to preserve the Church, it was
necessary that the Lutherans should receive all the Roman doctrine, or that
as many of their errors as was possible might be discovered, the more to make
manifest to the world, that there was no agreement to be made with them.
Therefore if they have framed no controversy concerning traditions, it was
necessary to frame it now, and to condemn their opinions, and to show, that
that doctrine not only differs from the true, in that wherein it does
purposely contradict it but in all other parts: that they should endeavor to
condemn as many absurdities as can be drawn out of their writings, and that
the fear was vain to dash against Scilla or Caribdis for that captious
reason, whereunto whosoever gave ear^ would conclude there was no tradition at
all.

In the second Article they all agreed in this, that a Catalogue should be
Concerning the canon call books of the Scripture.
made, (as it was in former times) of the Canonical books, in which all
should be registered which are read in the Roman Church, even those of the Old
Testament, which were never received by the Hebrews. And for proof of this,
they all alleged the Council of Laodicea, Pope Innocence the first, the third
Council of Carthage, and Pope Gelasius. But there were four opinions. Some
would have two ranks made; in the first only those should be put, which
without contradiction have been received by all: in the other those, which
sometime have been rejected, or have had doubt made of them; and it was said,
though formerly this was never done by any Council or Pope, yet always it was
so understood. For Austin makes such a distinction, and his authority has
been canonized in the Chapter In Canonicis. And Saint Gregory, who was after
Gelasius, writing upon Job, says of the Maccabees, that they are written for
edification, though they be not Canonical.

Aloisius of Catanea, a Domican Friar, said that this distinction was made by
Saint Hierome, who was received by the Church, as a rule and direction, to
appoint the Canon of the Scriptures; and he alleged Cardinal Caietan who had
distinguished them, following Saint Hierom, as an infallible rule, given us by
the Church; and so he wrote to Pope Clement the seventh, when he sent him his
exposition upon the Historical books of the Old Testament. Some thought fit
to establish three ranks. The first of those which always have been held for
Divine; the second, of those whereof sometimes doubt has been made, but by
use have obtained Canonical authority, in which number are the six Epistles,
and the Apocalypse of the New Testament, and some small parts of the
Evangelists. The third, of those whereof there has never been any assurance;
as are the seven of the Old Testament, and some Chapters of Daniel and Hester.
Some thought it better to make no distinction at all, but to imitate the
Council of Carthage and others, making the Catalogue, and saying no more.
Another opinion was that all of them should be declared to be in all parts,
as they are in the Latin Bible, of divine and equal authority. The Book of
Baruc troubled them most, which is not put in the number, neither by the
Laodiceans, nor by those of Carthage, nor by the Pope, and therefore should be
left out, as well for this reason, as because the beginning of it cannot be
found. But because it was read in the Church, the Congregation (esteeming this
a potent reason) resolved, that it was by the Ancients accounted a part of
Jeremy, and comprised with him.

In the Congregation on Friday the fifth of March, advise being come The Bishop
of Bitonto, assisting in Council, is in danger of excommunication in Rome for
not paying his Pensionaries.
that the Pensionaries of the Bishop of Bitonto had demanded in Rome to be
paid, and for this cause had cited him before the Auditor, requiring he
should be compelled by excommunications and other censures, according to the
style of the Court, to make payment, he lamented his case, and said that his
Pensioners were in the right, and yet himself was not in the wrong. For so
long as he was in the Council he could not spend less then six hundred
crowns by the year, and that his pensions being detracted, he had left but
four hundred: wherefore it was necessary that he should be disburthened or
assisted with the other two hundred. The poor Prelates labored herein, as in
a common cause, and some of them passed to high words, and said it was an
infamy to the Council, that an officer of the Court of Rome should be
suffered to use censures against a Bishop assisting in the Council; that it
was a thing monstrous, and would make the world say that the Council was not
free; that the honor of that assembly required that the Auditor should be
cited to Trent, or some revenge taken against him, that the dignity of the
Synod might be preserved. Some also proceeded so far as to condemn the
imposition of pensions, saying, that it was just and anciently observed, that
the rich Churches should assist the poor, not by constraint, but by charity,
without taking things necessary from themselves, and that S. Paul taught so But
that poor Prelates should be constrained to give to the rich, some of that
which is necessary for their own sustenance, was a thing intolerable; and that
this was one of the points of reformation to be handled in the Council,
reducing it to the ancient, and truly Christian use. But the Legates,
considering how just the complaints were, and whither they might tend, appeased
all, and promised they would write to Rome, and cause the judicial process to
surcease, and to endeavor that the Bishop should in some sort be provided for,
that he might maintain himself in the Council.

All the Divines having made an end of speaking the eighth day, a Congregation
A Decree made on the day of Carnoual, that Traditions are of equal authority
with the Scriptures.
was intimated for the next, though it was no ordinary day, not so much to
establish quickly a Decree upon the disputed Articles, as for a grace of the
Council, that in that day, dedicated to a profane feast of the Carnoual, the
Fathers should busy themselves in the affairs of the Council. And then it
was approved by all, that the Traditions should be received as of equal
authority with the Scriptures. But they agreed not in the manner of making the
Catalogue of the Divine books; and there were three opinions: One, not to
descend to particular books; another, to distinguish the Catalogue into three
parts; a third, to make only one, and to make all the books of equal
authority. And not being all well resolved, three draughts were made, and
order given that they should exactly consider which of them should be received
in the next Congregation; which was not held the twelfth day, by reason of the
arrival of Don Francis of Toledo, sent Don Francis of Toledo arriueth in
Trent, Ambassador to the Emperor.
Ambassador by the Emperor, to assist in the Council, as Colleague to Don
Diego: who was met on the way by the mayor part of the Bishops, and families of
the Cardinals.

At this time Vergerius, who often has been named before, came to Vergerius
flies to the Council for refuge, but finds none.
Trent, not so much with desire to assist in the Council, as to fly the rage
of his people raised against him, as cause of the barrenness of the land; by
the Inquisitor, Friar Hannibal, a Grison. For he knew not where to remain with
more dignity, nor to have greater commodity to justify himself against the
imputations of the Frair, who published him for a Lutheran, not only in
Istria, but before the Nuncio of Venice, and the Pope. Whereof the Legates of
the Council being advertised, suffered him not to be present at the public
Acts, as a Prelate, if first he were not justified before the Pope, to whom
they effectually exhorted him to go; and if they had not feared to raise talk
against the liberty of the Council, they would have gone beyond exhortation.
This Bishop, seeing he was more disgraced in Trent, departed a little after,
with purpose to return to his Bishopric, hoping the popular sedition was
appeased. But when he came to Venice, he was forbidden by the Nuncio, to go
thither, who had order from Rome to make his process; for disdain whereof, or
for fear, or for some other cause, he quitted Italy within a few months
after. Vergerius forsakes Italy.


The fifteenth day, the three draughts being proposed, though every one was
maintained by some, yet the third was approved by the mayor part. In the
Congregations after, the Divines discoursed upon the other Articles, and in the
third there was much difference about the Latin translation of the Scripture,
between some few who had good knowledge of the Latin, and some taste of the
Greek, and others who were ignorant in the Tongues. Friar Aloisius of Catanea,
said that, for resolution of this article, nothing could Discourses about the
Latin translation
be brought more to the purpose, or more fit for the present times and
occasions, then the indgement of Cardinal Caietane, a man very well read in
Divinity, having studied it even from a child; who for the happiness of his
wit, and for his laborious diligence, became the prime Divine of that and many
more ages, unto whom there was no Prelate or person in the Council who would
not yield in learning, or thought himself too good to learn of him. This
Cardinal, going Legate into Germany, in the year 1523. studying exactly how
those that erred might be reduced to the Church, and the Arch-heretiques
convinced, found out the true remedy, which was the litterall meaning of the
text of the Scripture in the original tongue in which it is written, and all
the residue of his life, which was 11. years, he gave himself only to the
study of the Scripture, expounding not the Latin translation, but the Hebrew
roots of the old, and the Greek of the new Testament. In which tongues,
having no knowledge himself, he employed men of understanding, who made
construction of the text unto him word by word, as his works upon the holy
books do show. That good Cardinal was wont to say, that to understand the
Latin text, was not to understand the infallible word of God, but the word of
the translatour, subject and obnoxious unto errors. That Hierome spoke well,
that to prophecy and write holy books proceeded from the holy Ghost, but to
translate them into another tongue, was a work of humane skill. And he
complained and said; Would to God the Doctors of the former age had done so,
and then the Lutherane heresy would never have found place. He added that no
translation could be approved without rejecting the Canon, Vt veterum, d. 9.
which commands to have the Hebrew text to examine the relitie of the books
of the old Testament, and the Greek for a direction in those of the new. To
approve a translation as authentical, was to condemn S. Hierome, and all
those who have translated. If any be authentical, to what end serve the rest
which are not? it would be a great vanity to produce uncertain copies, when
there are some infallible. That they should be of the opinion of 9. Hierome
and Caietane, that every Interpreter may err, though he have used all art not
to vary from the original. But sure it is, that if the holy Council should
examine, or correct an interpretation according to the true text, the holy
Ghost, which assisteth Synods in matters of faith, would keep them from
erring; and such a translation, so examined and approved, might be called
authentical. But that any could be approved without such an examination, with
assurance of the assistance of the holy Ghost, he durst not say, except the
Synod did determine it, seeing that in the Council of the holy Apostles a
great inquisition was made before. But this being a work of ten years, and
impossible to be undertaken, it seemed better to leave things as they had
remained 1500. years, that the Latin translations should be verified by the
original Texts.

On the contrary, the mayor part of the Divines said, that it was necessary to
account that translation, which formerly has been read in the Churches, and
used in the schools, to be divine and authentical; otherwise they should
yield the cause to the Lutherans, and open a gate to innumerable heresies
hereafter, and continually trouble the peace of Christendom. That the doctrine
of the Church of Rome, mother and mistress of all the rest, is, in a great
part, founded by the Popes, and by school Divines, upon some passage of the
Scripture, which if every one had liberty to examine whether it were well
translated, running to other translations, or seeking how it was in the Greek
or Hebrew, these new Grammarians would confound all, and would be made Judges
and arbiters of faith: and in stead of Divines and Canonists, Pedanties should
be preferred to be Bishops and Cardinals. The Inquisitors will not be able to
proceed against the Lutherans, in case they know not Hebrew and Greek,
because they will suddenly answer, the text is not so, and that the
translation is false: and every nouity, or toy, that shall come into the head
of any Grammarian, either for malice, or want of knowledge in Divinity, so that
he may but find some grammatical trick in those tongues to confirm it, will
be sufficient to ground himself thereon, and he will never make an end. That
it does appear, since Luther began to translate the Scripture, how many diverse
and contrary translations have seen the light, which deserve to be buried in
perpetual darkness, and how often Martin himself has changed his own
translation; that never any has been reprinted without some notable change,
not of one or two passages, but of an hundred in a breath: that if this
liberty be given to all, Christianity will soon be brought to that pass
that no man will know what to believe.

To these reasons, which the mayor part applauded, others added also, that if
the providence of God has given an authentical Scripture to the Synagogue,
and an authentical New Testament to the Grecians, it cannot be said, without
derogation, that the Church of Rome, more beloved then the rest, has wanted
this great benefit, and therefore that the same holy Ghost, who did dictate the
holy books, has dictated also that translation which ought to be accepted by
the Church of Rome. Some thought it hard to make a Prophet or Apostle only to
translate a book; therefore they moderated the assertion, and said, that he
had not a Prophericall or Apostolical Spirit, but one very near. And if any
should make dainty to give the spirit of God to the Interpreter, yet he cannot
deny it to the Council; and when the vulgar edition shall be approved, and an
anathema thundered against whosoever will not receive it: this will be without
error, not by the spirit of him that wrote it, but of the Synod that has
received it for such.

D. Isidorus Clarus, a Brescian, and a Benedictine Abbat, a man well seen in
this study, went about to remove this opinion by an historical narration;
and said in substance, that in the Primitive Church there were many Greek
translations of the Old Testament, which Origin gathered into one volume,
confornting them in six columns; the chief of these is called of the
Septuagint; from whence diverse in Latin were taken: and many were taken from
the Greek text of the new Testament, one of which, most followed and read in
the Church, and esteemed the best by Saint Austin; is called Itala; yet so as
that the Greek text ought undoubtedly to be preferred. But Saint Hierom, a
man (as all do know) skillful in the knowledge of tongues, seeing that of the
old Testament to swerve from the Hebrew truth; by the fault partly of the
Greek interpreter, and partly of the Latin, made one immediately out of the
Hebrew, and amended that of the new Testament according to the truth of the
Greek text. Hieroms credit made his translation to be received by many; but
was rejected by some, either because they loved more the errors of antiquity,
then new trueths, or, as himself complains by reason of emulation. But a few
years after, when envy was laid aside, that of S. Hierom was received by all
the Latins; and so they were both in use, one being called the old, and the
other the new. Saint Gregory, writing to Leander upon Job, testifies that the
Apostolic Sea uses them both, and that himself, in the exposition of that
book made choice to follow the new, as conformable to the Hebrew text: yet in
the allegations he would use sometimes one, sometimes another, as it best
befitted his purpose. The times following, by the use of them both, composed
one; taking part of the new, and part of the old, according as the accidents
required, and to this the name of the vulgar Edition was given. The Psalms
were all of the old; because, being daily sung in the Churches, they could not
be changed. The lesser Prophets are all of the new, and the greater mixed of
both. This is very true that all has happened by the ordinance of God, without
which nothing can succeed. But yet it cannot be said that there was in it
greater knowledge then humane. Saint Hierome says plainly that no interpreter
S. Ierom says that no interpreter has spoken by the holy Ghost.
has spoken by the holy Ghost. The Edition which we have is his for the most
part: it would be strange to attribute the assistance of God to him that
knows and affirms he has it not. Wherefore no translation can be
compared to the text in the original tongue. Therefore his opinion was that
the vulgar edition should be preferred before all, and allowed, yet so as that
it should be corrected by the original, and all men forbid to make any other:
only that should be amended and the others extinguished: and so all
inconveniences caused by new interpretations, which have iudiciously been
noted, and reprehended in the Congregations, would cease.

Andrew de Vega, a Franciscan Friar, going as a Mediator between these two
opinions, approved that of Saint Hierom, that the qualities of an interpreter
are not any Prophetical, or other special divine spirit, which gives them
infallibility, and the opinion of the same Saint, and of Saint Austin, to
correct the translations by the texts of the original tongue. But added that
it was not contrary to this to say withal, that the Latin Church holds the
vulgar edition for authentical, because it is thus to be understood, that
concerning faith and manners there is no error in it, though in some small
matter, or expression of words there may be a mistaking, it being impossible
that all the words of one language should be transplanted into another, but
that there will be some restriction or enlargement of significations or
metaphore, or other figure. That the vulgar edition has been examined
heretofore by the whole Church during the space of 1000. years, and known
that there is no error in it, in matter of faith or manners; and in this
account it has been held and used by the ancient Councels, and so ought still
to be held and approved, and declared as authentical, that is, that it may
be read without danger, not hindering those that are more diligent to have
recourse unto the Hebrew and Greek originals, but forbidding so great a number
of whole translations, which beget confusion.

About the Article of the sense of the holy Scripture, the doctrine of
Cardinal Caietan gave occasion to speak diversely; who taught, and practiced
the same himself, that new conceits, when they agree to the text, and
Discourses about the exposition of the Scripture.
are not aliene from other places of the Scripture, and doctrine of faith, are
not to be rejected, though the stream of the Doctors run another way, in
regard the Majesty of God has not tied the sense of the Scripture to the old
Doctors: otherwise there would remain no more power to those that live now,
nor to posterity, then to transcribe the same things again; which some of the
Divines and Fathers approved, and some opposed.

To the first it seemed a spiritual tyranny to forbid the faithful to make
use of their proper ingenie, according to the grace which God has given them:
and that this was just a prohibition to exercise the talent given us by God.
That men ought to be enticed, with all allurements, to the reading of the holy
writ, from which when that pleasure, which nouitie brings, shall be
removed, all men will ever abhor it, and such strictness will make men
apply themselves to other studies, and abandon this, and by consequence all
study and care of piety. That this variety of spiritual gifts belongs to
the perfection of the Church, and is found amongst the Fathers, in whose
writings there is great diversity, and oftentimes contrariety, yet joined
with assured charity. Why should not that liberty be granted to this age
which others have inioyed with spiritual fruit? The Schoolmen though, in the
doctrine of Theology, they have no disputes about the meaning of the
Scripture, yet they have as many differences in points of religion, and no
less dangerous. That it is better to imitate antiquity, which has not
restrained the exposition of the Scripture, but left it free.

Those of the contrary opinion said, that popular license being worse then
tyranny, it was then fit to curb the unbridled wits, otherwise they could
not hope to see an end of the present contentions. That anciently it was
allowed to write upon the holy Books, because there was need, in regard there
were but few expositions. And the men of those times were of an holy life, and
settled mind, from whom no confusions could be feared, as now. And therefore
the Schoolmen, seeing there was no more need of other expositions in the
Church, and that the Scripture was not only sufficiently, but abundantly
declared, they took another course to treat of holy mysteries; and seeing
that men were inclined to disputings they thought good to busy them rather in
examining of the reasons and sayings of Aristotle to keep the holy Scripture
in reverence; from which much is derogated, when it is handled after a common
fashion, and is the subject of the Studies and exercises of curious men. And
this opinion went on so far, that Richard of Man's, a Franciscan Friar, said
that the doctrines of faith were now so cleared, that we ought no more to
learn them out of Scripture: which, it is true, was read heretofore in the
Church for instruction of the people, whereas now it is read in the Church
only to pray, and ought to serve every one for this end only, and not to
study. And this should be the reverence and worship due from every one to the
word of God. But, at the least, the studying of it should be prohibited to
every one that is not first confirmed in school Divinity; neither do the
Lutherans gain upon any but those that study the Scripture. Which opinion
wanted not adherents.

Between these opinions there went two others in the middle: One, that it was
not good to restrain the understanding of the Scripture, to the Fathers only,
in regard their expositions are allegorical for the most part, and seldom
literal; and those that follow the letter, fit themselves to their own time,
so that, the exposition agrees not to our age. That Cardinal The opinion of
Cusanus; that the exposition of the Scripture must be fitte^ to the time.
Cusanus, a man excellently learned and honest, said iudicially, that the
understanding of the Scripture must be fitted to the time, and expounded
according to the current Rites: and that it is not to be maruciled at, if the
Church in one time expounds in one fashion, at another in another. And this
was the meaning of the Lateran Council, when it decreed that the Scripture
should be expounded according to the Doctors of the Church, or as long use
has approved, that new expositions should not be forbidden, but when they
vary from the common sense.

But Dominicus Soto, a Dominican Friar, distinguished the matter of faith and
manners from the others, saying, it was meet in that only to keep every wit
within limits, but in others it was not inconvenient to let every one, so that
piety and charity be preserved, to abound in his own sense. That the
Fathers desired not to be followed of necessity, but only in things
necessary to believe and to do. Neither did the Popes; when in their Decretals
they expounded some passage of the Scripture in one sense, mean to canonize
that, so that it should not be lawful to understand it otherwise, though with
reason. And S. Paul meant so, when he said, that prophesying, that is,
interpretation of the Scripture, should be used according to the analogy of
faith, that is, with reference to the Articles thereof. And if this distinction
were not made, they must needs fall into notable inconveniences, by reason of
the contrarieties which are found in the diverse expositions of the ancient
Fathers, which do oppugn one another.

The difficulties were not so great, but that the vulgar edition was approved,
The vulgar edition is approved.
almost by a general consent, the discourse having made deep impression in
their minds, that Grammarians would take upon them to teach Bishops and
Divines. Some few thought it fit, in regard of the reasons brought by the
Divines, to leave the point for that time, but seeing the resolution was
otherwise, they desired them to consider, that having approved it, they should
command it to be printed and corrected, and in that case, that it was necessary
to frame a copy by which to make the impression. Whereupon six were deputed
by common consent, and commanded to be diligent in making that correction, that
it might be published before the end of the Council, reserving power to
themselves to augment the number, if amongst those that were to come, any were
fit for the work.

But in giving voices upon the fourth Article, after Cardinal, Pacceco had
said, that the Scripture was expounded by so many and so excellent men in
goodness and learning, that there was no hope to add any good thing more, and
that all the new heresies sprang from the new expositions of the Scripture, and
therefore that it was necessary to bridle the sauciness of modern wits, and
to make them content to be governed by the ancients, and by the Church, and
that if any had some singular spirit, he should be enforced to conceal it, and
not to confound the world by publishing it, almost all run into the same
opinion.

The Congregation of the 29. was all spent in the fifth Article. For the Divines
having spoken irresolutely, and with reference to the Synod, to which it
belongs to make Statutes, the Fathers were doubtful also. To leave out the
Anathema wholly, was to make no decree of faith, and in the very beginning to
break the order set down, to handle the two heads together. To condemn every
one for an heretic who would not accept the vulgar Edition in some particular
place, perhaps of none importance, or should publish some invention of his own
upon the Scripture, through vanity of mind, seemed too rigorous. After long
discussion they found a temper, which was to frame the first Decree, and
comprehend in it that only which concerns the Catalogue of the holy Books,
and the Traditions, and to conclude that with an anathema. Then in the second,
which belongs to reformation, to comprehend the translation and sense of the
Scripture, as if the Decree were a remedy against the abuse of so many
interpretations, and impertinent expositions.

It remained to speak of the other abuses, of which every one had collected
The abuses are spoken of.
a great number, and many ways to redress them, as humane weakness and
superstition uses holy things, not only beyond, but also contrary to that for
which they are appointed. Of enchantments to find treasures, and to bring
lascivious deseignes to pass, or to obtain things unlawful, much was said,
and many remedies proposed to root them out. Amongst enchantments some put,
carrying the Gospel about one; names of God to prevent infirmities, or to be
healed of them, or to be kept from evils and mischiefs, or to be prosperous;
likewise to read them for the same ends, and to write them with observation of
times. In this catalogue were numbered Masses, said in some Countries upon red
hot Iron, upon boiling waters, or upon cold, or other matters for vulgar
purgations; to recite the Gospel over Arms, that they may have more force
against the enemies. In this rank were put the coniurations of dogs to make
them not bite, of serpents to make them not offend, of harmefull beasts in the
field, of tempests, and other causes of the barrenness of the land, requiring
that all these observations might be condemned, forbid, and punished as
abuses. But in diverse particulars there were contradictions and disputes. For
some defended as things devout and religious, or, at the least, permitted, and
not damnable, which others did condemn for wicked and superstitious. The like
happened speaking of the Word of God by casting of lots, or diuinations, or
extracting schedules with verses of the Scripture, or observing those they met,
when they opened the book. To use sacred words in scandalous libels, and other
detractions, was generally condemned, and much was said of the means how to
remove the Pasquins of Rome; wherein the Cardinal of Monte showed great
passion in desiring a remedy, because he was often made a subject of the
sauciness of the Courtiers tongues, by reason of his natural liberty and
pleasantness of wit. All agreed, that the Word of God could never be
reverenced enough, and that to use it to men's commendations, though Princes and
Prelates, is not seemly, and generally that all vain use of it is a sin.
But yet the Council ought not to busy it self in this, in regard they were
not assembled to provide against all faults; neither was it to beforbid
absolutely, to draw the words of the Scripture to humane matters, because S.
Antoninus, in his story, condemned not the Sicilian Ambassadors, who, asking
pardon of Martin the fourth, delivered their Embassage in no other terms, but
saying three times, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis. Nor the
Popes answer who likewise said thrice, Aue Rex Iudeorum, Et dabant illi
alapas. Therefore that it was the malice of the Lutherans to reprehend the
Bishop of Bitonto, who in his sermon made in the public Session, said that to
him that refused the Council, it might be replied, Pap(...)lux venit in
mundum, and dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam lucem. So many Congregations
were spent herein, and the number so increased, and the weakness of the
remedies proposed did so much appear, that the common opinion inclined to make
no particular mention of any of them, nor to descend to the proper remedies, or
particular punishments, but only to forbid them under general heads, and
leave the penalties to the discretion of the Bishops. Of the abuses of the
Prints there was not much to be spoken; for all agreed that the Printers should
be brideled, and prohibited to Print any sacred thing before it was allowed;
but for this the Decree of the last Lateran Council was sufficient.

But about readings and preachings there were terrible controversies. A great
contention between the Regulars and Prelates, about readings and preachings.
The Regulars being already in possession of them, as well by the Popes
privileges, as by the practice of 300 years, labored to preserve them with
all their might: and the Prelates alleging that they belonged to them, and
were usurped, pretended restitution. And because the contention was here, not
of opinions, but of profit, they used on both sides not only reasons, but
deeds also. Which differences were set on foot that at the time of the
Session nothing might be decided. Therefore the Legates resolved, to defer
these two points until another Session. Two Decrees were framed, as formerly
was resolved, and were read in the last Congregation, and approved; yet with
some exceptions in the point of the vulgar Edition. In the end hereof the
Cardinal of Monte, after he had commended the learning and wisdom of them
all, admonished them of the seemly behavior which was fit to use in the
public Session, showing one heart, and one mind, in regard the points were
sufficiently examined in the Congregations: and the Congregation being ended,
the Cardinal Santa Croce assembled those that had opposed the vulgar Edition,
and showed they could not complain, because it was not prohibited but left
free to correct it, and to have recourse to No errors of faith in the vulgar
Edition.
the original; but that only it was forbid to say there were in it errors of
faith, for which it ought to be rejected.

The eight of April, appointed for the Session, being come, the Mass of the
holy Ghost was said by Saluator Alepus, Archbishop of Torre in Sardinia, and
the Sermon was made by Friar Austin of Aretium, General of the Serui, the
Pontifical habiliments put on, the accustomed letanies and prayers made, and
the Decrees read by the Archbishop that said Mass. The first contained in
substance; that the Synod, aiming to preserve the purity of the Gospel,
promised by the Prophets, published by Christ, and preached by the Apostles,
Two Decrees read in the Session.
as the fountain of all truth, and discipline of manners (which truth and
discipline are contained in the books, and unwritten traditions, received by
The contents of the former.
the Apostles, from the mouth of Christ, and dictated to them by the holy
Ghost, and passed from one to another) does according to the example of the
Fathers, receive with equal reverence, all the books of the old and new
Testament, and the traditions belonging to faith and manners, as proceeding
from the mouth of Christ, or dictated by the holy Ghost, and preserved in the
Catholic Church. And setting down the Catalogue of the books, concludes,
that if any will not receive them all, as Sacred and Canonical, in all parts,
as they are read in the Catholic Church, and contained in the vulgar Edition,
or shall wittingly and purposely despise the traditions, let him be Anathema;
that every one may know what ground the Synod will use in confirming the
points of doctrine, and reforming of manners in the Church. The substance of the
second Decree was; that the vulgar Edition should be The substance of the
second Decree.
held for authentical in public Lectures, Disputations, Sermons, and
expositions, and that none should dare to refuse it. That the holy Scripture
cannot be expounded against the sense held by the holy Mother the Church, nor
against the common consent of the Fathers, though with purpose to conceal
those expositions, and that the offenders should be punished by the Ordinaries:
that the vulgar Edition should be most exactly printed. That no books of
religion be printed, sold, or kept, without the authors name, and that the
approbation appear in the frontispice of the book, upon pain of
excommunication, and pecuniary punishment, constituted by the last Lateran
Council. That none should dare to use the words of the holy Scripture in
scurrility, fables, vanity, flatteries, detractions, superstitions,
enchantments, diuinations, castings of lots, libels, and that the transgressors
should be punished at the discretion of the Bishops. And it was determined to
hold the next The next Session is to be he^d the 17. of June.
Session the 17. of June.

Afterward the Commission of Don Diego de Mendoza, and Francis de Toledo, the
Emperors Ambassadors, was read by the Secretary of the Council. The
Commission of the Emperors Ambassadors is read.
Don Diego was absent; and the other, having, in the Emperors name, saluted
the Fathers in few words, said in substance; That all the world knew that the
Emperor thought nothing to befit him more, then not only to defend the flock
of CHRIST from enemies, but to free it from tumults and seditions; therefore
that he rejoiced to see the day when the Council, published by the Pope, was
opened, and that being willing to favor that occasion with his power and
authority, he had sent thither Mendoza, unto whom, in regard of his
indisposition, himself was joined. So that nothing remained but to pray God
uniformly, that he would favor the enterprise of the Council, and which is
the Principal, would preserve peace between the Pope and Emperor, for the
establishing of the truth of the Gospel, restoring the Church to her purity,
and weeding the cockle out of the Lords field. Answer was made by the
Council, that his Lordships coming was most acceptable, both for the duty
they did owe the Emperor, and for the favor he promised them, having also
much hope in the realtie and religion of his Lordship. That they embraced him
with all their heart, and did admit, as far as they could with reason, the
mandates of Caesar. That they were sorry for the indisposition of his
Colleague, and thanked God for the peace between the Pope and the Emperor,
praying him to favor the desires of them both, for the increase of Christian
religion, and peace of the Church. These things being done, with the usual
ceremonies, the Session ended; the Decrees whereof were sent to Rome by the
Legates, and a little after printed.

But after they were seen, especially in Germany, they ministered great A few
Prelates and not learned, do decide the greatest points of religion.
matter of discourse. Some thought it strange that five Cardinals, and 48.
bishops, should so easily define the most principal and important points of
Religion, never decided before, giving Canonical authority to Books held for
uncertain and apocryphal, making authentical a translation differing from
the original, prescribing and restraining the manner to understand the word of
God; neither was there amongst these Prelates any one remarkable for learning;
some of them were Lawyers, perhaps learned in that profession, but of little
understanding in Religion; few Divines, but of less then ordinary
sufficiency; the greater number Gentlemen or Courtiers; and for their
dignities some were only titular, and the mayor part Bishops of so small
Cities, that supposing every one to represent his people, it could not be said
that one of a thousand in Christendom was represented. But particularly of
Germany there was not so much as one bishop or Divine. Was it possible that
amongst so many no man should be sent! Why did not the Emperor cause some of
them to go, who assisted in the Colloquie, and were informed in the
differencies? Amongst the Prelates of Germany only the Cardinal of Ausburg had
sent a Proctor, and him a Sauoyard. For the Proctors of the Cardinal and
Elector of Ments, understanding their masters death, went away two months
before.

Others said, that the things decided were not of so great moment as they
Nothing is certainly defined concerning traditions.
seemed. For the point of traditions, which seemed most important, was of no
consequence. First because it was nothing to ordain they should be received, if
it were not declared which they were, and how they should be known: the^
because there was no commandment to receive them, but only a prohibition to
contemn them wittingly and deliberately. So that he that rejected them with
reverend terms, contradicted not; and the rather, because there is an example
of the adherents of the Church of Rome, who receive not the ordination of
Deaconesses, grant not to the people the election of the Minister, which
certainly was an Apostolical institution, continued more then eight hundred
years, and which more imports, observe not the communion of the Chalice,
Instituted by Christ, preached by the Apostles, observed by the whole Church,
until within two hundred years, and now also by all Christian Nations but the
Latin; that if this be not a tradition, it is impossible to show whatother is.
And for the vulgar edition declared authentical, nothing at all was done,
because among so many copies, it cannot be known which is the true. But this
last opposition was made, because the deputation to make a corrected copy of
the vulgar edition, was not known. The which, for what cause it was not
effected, shall be said in its place.

But the Decrees of the Session being seen in Rome, and the importance Nor
concerning the vulgar edition.
of the things treated of considered, the Pope began to think he ought more to
regard the business of the Council, then until that time he had done; and
he enlarged the congregation of Cardinals and Prelates, who were to consider of
the occurrences of the Synod, and to relate them. By the advice of these,
after their first assembling, he admonished the Legates of three things. One not
to publish hereafter in Session any decree, before they had communicated it at
Rome, and to avoid too much slownesse in proceeding, The Pope admonishes the
Legates of three things.
but to beware much more of two much celeritie, which might make them resolve
of some indigested matter, and want time to receive orders from him, what they
should propose, deliberate, and conclude. The second; not to spend time in
matters not controuersed, as they had done in those that were handled for the
last session; wherein all agree, that they are undoubted principles. The third,
to take heed, that by no means the Popes authority be disputed on.

Whereunto they readily answered that they would obey his Holiness To whom the
Legates make a ready answer.
commandment; but that it seemed to them, that in the things defined, there is
small difference between Catholics and Heretics, and that some of the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, received by the third Council of
Carthage by Innocentius the first, by Gelatius, by the sixth Synod of Trullus,
and the Florentine Council are called into question by the Heretics, and
which is worse, by some Catholics and Cardinals, and also that the unwritten
Traditions are impugned by the Lutherans, who intend nothing more then to
annihilate them, declaring that all things necessary to salvation, are written.
And therefore though these two heads be principles, yet they are the most
controuersed conclusions which are to be decided in the Council, and of the
greatest importance. They added that until then there was no occasion to
speak of the Popes authority, or of the Council, but in treading of the
title, when the addition of Representation of the universal Church was
required. That many desire it still, but that they will avoid it as much as
possibly they can. And in case they shall be brought to it by force, they will
desire (thinking it will not be denied them) to expound the manner how it does
represent, that is, by means of the head, and not otherwise; whereby there
will be rather gain then loss. For the rest because they think the mayor
part will always bear al reverence to his Holiness, being united, as Head,
with the body of the Council, (which will be so long, as they shall agree in
the reformation) he may set his heart at rest that his authority shall not be
questioned.

After this the Pope sent Ieronimo Franco Nuncio to the Swisses, giving him The
Pope sends a Nuncio to the Swisses.
letters to the Bishops of Sion and Coira, to the Abbat of S. Gallo, and other
Abbats of those Nations; to whom he wrote, that, having called all the
Prelates of Christendom to the General Council of Trent, it was fit that
they, who represent the Heluetian Church, should assist also, in regard he
much loved that nation, as especial sons of the Apostolic Sea, and
maintainers of the Ecclesiastical liberty. That Prelates out of Italy,
France, and Spain were arrived already, and the number increased daily. That
it was not seemly that they, being borderers, should be prevented by those
that dwelt further off. That their Country was infected with heresies, and
therefore had more need of a Council. In fine he commanded them, upon their
allegiance and oath, and pains prescribed by the laws, to go thither as
soon as was possible; referring the rest to be told them by his Nuncio.

And at the many instances of the Clergy and University of Collen, assisted
And gives sentence against the Archbishop of Collen.
by the Bishops of Liege, and Vtrect, and University of Louaine, he pronounced
sentence against the Archbishop and Elector of Collen, declaring him
excommunicated, depriving him of all benefices and privileges Ecclesiastical,
absoluing his subjects from their oath of fidelity, and commanding them not to
obey him, because he had incurred the censures of the Bull of Leo the tenth,
published against Luther and his adherents, as having held, defended and
published that doctrine against the Ecclesiastical rules; traditions of the
Apostles, and usual rites of Christian religion. And the sentence The Pope
makes a Bull in favor of Adolphus.
was after printed in Rome. He made also another Bull, giving order that
Adolphus Count of Scauemburg, assumed before by the Archbishop for his
Coadiutor, should be obeyed.

And he earnestly desired the Emperor, that the sentence might be executed;
The Emperor will not execute the Popes sentence.
who thought not this nouitie fit for his purpose, because it would make the
Archbishop, who until then had absolutely obeyed him, to unite himself with
those that were combined against him. And therefore he held him still for an
Archbishop and treated with him, and wrote to him, without regard of the popes
sentence. This vexed the Pope at the heart, but seeing The Protestants are
confirmed in their opinion by this sentence.
there was no remedy, he thought it folly to complaint in vain. That
sentence produced another bad effect, because the Protestants took occasion to
confirm their opinion that the Council was intimated only to ensnare them.
For if the controuersed doctrine of faith ought to be examined in the
Council, how could the Pope, before the definition thereof, proceed to
sentence, and condemn the Arch bishop of heresy? Therefore it appears that
in vain they should go to that Council, where the Pope domineereth, who
cannot dissemble, though he would, that he esteems them as men condemned.
That it was manifest also that the Pope made no account of that Council,
because, after it was begun, he proceeded definitiuely in that which belongs
to the Council, without imparting any thing unto it. The Duke of Saxony
signified this to the Emperor by his Ambassadors, and after said unto him,
that the Popes mind being now made manifest, it would be high time to provide
for Germany, by a National Council, or by handling seiorusly, the points of
Religion in a Diet.

But to return to the business of the Council there remained (as has been
said) as remnants of the things, handled before in the last Session, the two
points, to provide for the Lectures of the holy Scripture, and preaching of the
word of God. For this was handled in the first Congregation; and (to begin the
matter of faith) it was proposed to treat likewise of original sin. Whereunto
the Spanish Prelates opposed, and said, that to provide against the abuses of
preaching and reading, was matter enough for one session. Which opinion also
was followed by the Italian Prelates who were on the Emperors side. And the
Legates thought they had discovered that this was plotted by Caesar's ministers,
who at the very instant had seriously treated with those Prelates. Therefore they
sent advice thereof to the Pope, from whom they had answer, that they should
take heed to go on warily, until he were able to give them a resolution.
Therefore they used artificial diligence, entertaining themselves with part of
the Abuses, without coming to the conclusion of them, and without making
demonstration whether they would proceed in the matter of original sin. And
thus the case stood until Easter.

Which being past, the Pope wrote they should proceed, and propose Don Francis
of Toledo persuades that the reformation should be handled without doctrine.
that matter. This being delivered the second of May, came to the know ledge of
Don Francis; who going to visit the Legates used much art, sometimes making
show to give them counsel, sometimes proposing his opinion for the prosecuting
of the reformation only, to know their minds, and to persuade them obliquely
to embrace his deseigne. But seeing that did no good, he began to speak as
plainly as was needful, that he had letters from the Emperor, by which he
was charged to be a means that they should not enter into the points of
doctrine, but should handle the reformation only. The Legates brought many
reasons to the contrary; and amongst others they said, they could not do it
without contradicting the Popes Bulls, which proposed these two things together;
and that which was established in the Council, that they should go forward
cheek by iowle; adding, that they had written to his Holiness, that they
would begin eight days after Easter. Diverse discourses and replies were made
on both sides, and in conclusion the Legates said they were commanded by the
Pope, and could not be wanting to their duty. Don Francis said, it was the
duty of good ministers to maintain amity between Princes, and sometimes to
expect the second Commission. This was not denied by the Legates; but they
answered that more was not to be expected from them then they were able to do
with their honor. They gave the Pope an account of all this, adding, that the
Cardinal of Trent told them, that if the Article of original sing were
proposed, the Emperor would be discontented; and therefore on the one side
being desirous to make peace and concord, and on the other to obey his
Holiness commandments, they thought good to send away this advise in
diligence, beseeching him not to let them err; adding that if no other advise
came, they would follow his last commandment, and would labor to persuade Don
Francis and the Cardinal of Trent, that this Article of original sin was no
more questioned in Germany, but accorded, as was manifest by the last Colloquie
of Ratisbon, where his Majesty for the first Article to be accorded, caused
that of justification to be taken. But to give as much more time as is
possible, they will entertain themselves, as many days as they honestly can,
in dispatching that which remains of the last Session.

A Congregation was made for this only, to give a better form how they should
more orderly proceed then they formerly had done, as well in handling the
doctrine of faith, as the matter of reformation. And they distinguished two
sorts of Congregations, one for Divines, to discourse on the matter of faith
which should be proposed, whose opinions should be written by one of the
Notaries of the Council, to whom should be added A form to proceed in
Council is set down.
Canonists, when reformation was spoken of: (which Congregations were to be
held in the presence of the Legates, in which any of the Fathers that would
might be present.) Another sort of Congregations should consist of Prelates to
frame the heads of Doctrine and reformation, which, being examined, and set in
order, according to the most common opinion, should be proposed in the general
Congregation, to understand every ones voice that by the determination of the
mayor part, the decrees might be established, which are to be published in the
Session.

According to this order, they treated of Lectures and Sermons, framing The
diff(...) between the Prelates and Regulars, about lectures and sermons does
return.
and reforming diverse draughts of Decrees; neither was it possible to find a
way to please al, because the Prelates that were much interessed to desire that
all might depend upon the Episcopal power, without exemption of any. But on
the other side, the Legates desired to maintain the privileges given by the
Pope, especially to the Mendicants and Universities. And after many disputes,
when the matter was sufficiently debated, they thought that, in the
Congregation of the tenth of May, all would agree. But it proved to the
contrary, for though it lasted till night, yet in some points, they could come
to no conclusion, for the diversity of opinions amongst the Prelates
themselves, and in others, because the Legates would not yield to the general
opinion, to remove, or at the least, to moderate the privileges. They
alleged against the Bishops, that they were more moved by their proper
interest, then by reason; that they made none account to prejudice the
regulars; that they were too bold in correcting the former Councels, and in
meddling with the privileges granted by the Pope. And they could not agree, not
only for the variety of Opinions and interests of the Bishops, but also
because the Imperialists did endeavor to make a difference, to hinder the
proposing of the points of Doctrine Neither was this temporizing ungrateful to
the Legates, who were resolute, if they were not forbid in the answer, which
they expected from Rome, to propose the doctrines, and, as their inward friends
said, to clear themselves afterward of whatsoever should ensue.

But to make some end of the things handled, they caused a brief of the
opinions of the Divines and Canonists, delivered in diverse preceding
Congregations, to be read; saying, that in regard the voices were long, they
had collected the sum of them, that they may examine them, and speak their
opinions thereon. But Bracius Martellus, Bishop of Fiesole, hearing the extract
read, opposed it in a continued speech, and said it was necessary that the The
Bishop of Fiesole opposes the Legates.
general Congregation should know the voices and reasons of all, without
reading collections and sums; and enlarged himself by amplifying the
authority of the Council, and the necessity to inform it well, and the small
conueniencie, that some few should be Judges of the determinations, or that the
resolutions should come from any other place: whereat the Legates were much
offended, and reprehended the Bishop with affected modesty, but bytingly
enough. And so the Congregation brake up.

The next day the Legates sent to the B. to demand a copy of his discourse, and
sent it to Rome, taxing it as irreuerent and seditious; adding, that they had
modestly and severely reprehended him, and would have gone further Who
complain to the Pope both of him, and of the Bishop of Chioza.
(because he deserved no less) but that they feared to move some unseasonable
dispute, which might make a rent; But that he ought not to escape unpunished,
least he should be emboldened to do the like in every congregation, or worse:
representing to his Holiness, that by all means he should be chased out of
Trent, and order taken that the Bishop of Chioza, (not much unlike unto him,
though in another course) should never return. This Bishop parted immediately
after the session, upon pretense of indisposition, but in truth by reason of
words which passed between him and Cardinal Poole in Congregation, in the
matter of traditions. For having spoken in defense of Friar Antonius Marinarus,
and thereupon contested with the Cardinal, and so having complained that the
Council was not free, he saw, he was not in the Legates favor, and obnoxious
to danger. The Legates not content with what they had done, to mortify the
Bishop of Fiesole, and to keep the matter entire until there came advise from
Rome, that they might go on with it, or dissemble, as they should be
commanded, in the next Congregation. Monte gave him a nip by the way, and
concluded that he left him then to consider of his own affairs, because
himself was to be employed in matters of greater importance.

The Pope answered concerning the two Bishops, that he would give a remedy in
time convenient. But for the matters to be handled, he said, that The Popes
answer to the Legates.
if they regarded the desires of Princes, they would make the Council more
tumultuous, and the resolutions more long and hard, because every one sought to
cross what liked him not and by putting difficulty in one thing, to promote
another. Therefore that without any more to do, they should begin with
original sin, aduising them to omit the excuse which they purposed to use to
D. Francis, that is that the article of original sin is not questioned in
Germany; but should rather use general terms, and all reverence to the
Emperor.

He further commanded them, that concerning the correction of the The Council
in Tr(...) is gouernd by cert(...)ne (...)pu^tes (...) Rome.
vulgar edition, they should proceed no further, until the Deputies over the
Council in Rome, had determined what course should be held. The Legates
resolving, for execution of those orders, to propose original sin, made a
congregation two days together, to determine of the two heads of reading and
preaching, before they published their purpose to handle matters of faith,
least those two points, being undecided, might cause the Imperialists to dinert
from this. And they caused the Deputies for the vulgar edition, to bring to
them all they had done, charging them to proceed no further until they had
received new order. Such was the liberty of the Council depending on the
Pope, in leaving of things begun, and beginning new.

In treating of the Lectures and Sermons, there was a general complaint of the
Bishops, especially Spanish; that, CHRIST having commanded that his doctrine
should be taught, which is exercised in the Church by preaching and reading to
the more capacious, that they may be fit to teach the people, the care to
superintend, over all that exercise these functions, ought to be proper to the
Bishop. That the Apostles have so instituted, and the holy Fathers so
practiced. That now this office is absolutely taken from the Bishops by A
complaint against the regular orders.
privileges, so that no jot thereof remains. That this is the cause why all
is out of order, because the order instituted by CHRIST is changed. The
Universities are withdrawn with exemptions, that the Bishop cannot know what
they teach; the Sermons are by privilege given to the Friars, who by no means
acknowledge the Bishop, nor suffer him to meddle: so that the office of a
Pastor is quite taken from the Bishops. And on the contrary; those who
anciently were appointed to weep for sins, and expressly and severely
forbid to preach and teach, have assumed this power unto them, or, at the
least, it is given them for their proper function. And so the flock remains
without either shepherd or hireling, because these ambulatorie Preachers, who
to day are in one City, to morrow in another, know neither the need, nor the
capacity of the people, and least of all the occasions to teach and edify
them, as does the proper Pastor, who lives always with the flock and
knows the necessities and infirmities of it. Besides the end of those
Preachers, is not to edify; but to take alms either for themselves or their
Cloisters; which that they may the better obtain, they aim not to benefit the
soul, but to delight the care, and soothe men in their pleasures, that thereby
they may draw more profit; and the people, in stead of learning the doctrine of
CHRIST, learneth either nouitie, or vanity at the least. Luther was one of
these; who if he had remained weeping in his Cell, the Church of CHRIST had
not stood in these terms. That the abuse of the Pardoners was more manifest,
who go about preaching Indulgences, whose scandals, formerly given, cannot be
related without tears. That it is a clear case, that they exhort the people
to nothing but to give money. The only remedy for these disorders, is to take
away all the privileges, and to restore to the Bishops, the charge to teach
and preach, and to elect those for their fellow laborers whom they shall know
worthy of that ministry, and disposed to exercise it with charity.

On the contrary side, the Generals of the Regulars, and others said, An
Apology of the regular orders.
that the Bishops and Curates having wholly abandoned the office of a Pastor,
so that for many hundreds of years the people remained without Sermons in the
Church, and without the doctrine of Divinity in Schools, God had raised the
begging orders to supply these necessary ministeries; into which
notwithstanding they intruded not themselves, but entered by the grant of the
Supreme Pastor; unto whom it principally appertaining to feed all the flock
of CHRIST, it cannot be said that men deputed by him, to supply the defects
of him that had the care of the flock and did aband on it, have usurped the
office of another. But it may be say de, that if they had not used that
charity, there had now remained no sign of Christianity. Now that they have
applied themselves more then three hundred years to that holy work, with such
fruit as appears, they have prescribed those functions, and made them their
own, by a lawful title, given by the chief Pastor, the Bishop of Rome; and
that the Bishops have no lawful right unto them, nor can allege the use of
antiquity to regaine that office, which so many hundred years since they have
forsaken. That they have a desire of gayning for themselves or their
Monasteries is a mere calumny, because the alms are gathered only for their
necessary food, and apparel, and the residue being spent for the worship of
God, in masses, buildings, and ornaments of Churches, turns to the benefit
and edification of the people, and not to their own profit, that the services
done by their orders to the holy Church, and doctrine of Divinity (which is no
where to be found but in their Cloisters) deserve the continuance of that
charge which others are not able to exercise.

The Legates, importuned by both parties, by the Council of their most The
Legates relate this difference to Rome and expect an answer.
inward friends resoluted to relate to Rome, and expect an answer. The Pope
referred it to the Congregation; where presently it was seen whither the
pretense of the Bishops tended; that is, to make themselves so many Popes in
their Diocesses. For when the Popes privilege and exemption should be
removed, and every one should depend on them, and none on the Pope, all cause
of going to Rome would cease. They considered that the Popes The Deputies in
Rome take part with the Mendicants, for reasons of Policy.
have anciently had for a principal secret to preserve the Primacie given them
by CHRIST, to exempt the Bishops from the Archbishop, the Abbats from the
Bishops, and so to oblige men to defend him. That it is a clear case, that
after the six hundredth year, the Primacie of the Apostolic Sea has been
vpheld by the Benedictine Monks exempted, and after by the Congregations of
Clunie, and Cistercium, and other monastical assemblies, until God raised the
Mendicant orders, by which it has been maintained until now. Wherefore to
take away their privileges, were directly to oppugn the Papacy, and not
those orders; to remove the exemptions, were a manifest depression of the
Court of Rome, because they should want means to keep a Bishop within
compass, that he exalt not himself too high. Therefore that the Pope and
Court were compelled by necessity to maintain the Friars cause. But to do
these things smoothely, they considered also that it was necessary to conceal
this reason; and they resolved to answer the Legates, that by all means they
should preserve the state of The Popes answer.
the Regulars, and cause the Bishops to surcease, setting before them the
excessive number of the friars, and the credit which they have with the people,
and advise them to take a moderate course, and not make a Schism, by desiring
too much. That it was just they should receive some satisfaction, but they
should also be content to give it; and when they came to the point, they
should grant any thing concerning the Pardoners, but should do nothing
concerning the Friars, without communicating it to the Generals, and should
give the Bishops some satisfaction which might not take away the privileges.
That they should do the like for the Universities; because it was necessary
that both these and those should depend on the Pope, and not on the Bishops.

After these letters came to Trent, those of the Council had three diverse
ends. For the other particulars proposed in these two matters, by those who
were not interested either to favor or disfavor the exemptions, were but
little considered of. For the Lectures, some proposed the restitution of the
ancient use when Monasteries and Canons cloisters were but Colleges and
Schools. Whereof some remainder appears in many Cathedral Churches, where
there is the dignity of a Schooleman, Head of the readers, with a Prebend.
These men now do not perform the duty, and indeed are unable. All thought
it honest and profitable to restore the Divinity Lecture in Cathedral
Churches, and Monasteries. For the former they thought it easy to make
provision, by committing the care of the execution thereof to the Bishops; but
for the latter very difficult. The Legates opposed the Superintendencie of
Bishops, even in this also, though it were over Monks only, not Mendicants,
for fear of leaving a gate open to them, to meddle with privileges granted by
the Pope. But Sebastianus Pighius, Auditor of The invention of the Auditor of
the Rota.
the Rota, found a temper for this, that the superintendencie should be given
to the Bishops, as Delegates of the Apostolic Sea. The invention pleased,
because it was in favor of the Bishops, without derogation of the privilege,
for the Bishop was to superintend, not as Bishop, but as the Popes Delegate.
And this gave a pattern to accommodate other difficulties; one in giving
authority to the Metropolitans, over Parishes united to Monasteries, not
subject to any Diocese; another, in giving power to Bishops over exempted
Preachers, who fail; and served also very much in the Decrees of the Sessions
that were after.

The Canonists proposed that the School subtlety was not fit in these
Politic reasons to uphold the Popes authority.
times, and that it beseemed rather natural things, and Philosophy, that
these new Lectures should be introduced to handle the Sacraments, and the
authority of the Church, as Turrecremata, Augustinus Triumphus, and after them
S. Antoninus, and others have done with great fruit. But the Friars
contradicting, and opposing that this doctrine was as necessary as that, they
found a temper, and ordered that the Lecture should be for exposition of the
Scripture, and that the matter should be fitted to the exigence of the text
read, and the capacity of the auditors.

After many Discourses in many Congregations, they came to establish the
Decrees for the Sermons, and to overcome the difficulties, they caused the
Prelates, who were their assured friends, to negotiate with the Italian
Bishops, wishing them to consider how much they were bound, for the honor of
their nation, to uphold the dignity of the Papacy, whose authority was
treated of by meddling with the privileges, and what they might hope for from
the Pope and Legates, applying themselves to that which is just, and not
depriving the Friars of that they have enjoyed so long. That it was dangerous
to despise so many learned men, now when heresies do trouble the Church. That
the authority of Bishops should be enlarged, by granting them power to allow
or disallow the Preachers when they preach out of the Churches of their Order;
and when they preach in them, by making them acknowledge the Prelate, first
asking his benediction. That the Bishops might punish the Preachers for
heresy, and forbid them to preach, to avoid scandal. That they should be
contented with this, and that other things should be added, as occasion
served. By this means they gained so many, that they were secure to establish
the Decree with those conditions. But there remained another difficulty;
because the Friars and Generals were not satisfied, and to distaste them was
not secure, and expressly forbid by the Pope. They endeauored to show them, that
the grant made to the Bishops, was just and necessary, whereof themselves were
cause, by extending their privileges too much, and by passing the bounds of
honesty. In fine, by admonishing the Bishops to proceed so, that the Friars
might not have cause to complain, the Generals also were pacified.

When they made known their resolution to condemn in the same Session the
Lutheran opinions of original sin, they alleged, that, to keep the order
of putting both the matters together, it was necessary to handle some point of
faith, and that they could not begin from any other point. And they proposed
the Articles extracted out of the Protestants doctrine in that matter, to be
examined and discussed by the Divines in the Congregations, whether they ought
to be condemned for heretical. The Cardinal Pacceco said, that the Council
was to handle Articles of faith, only to reduce Germany, the which he that
would do out of season, should not only fail of his end, but make matters
worse. When there is opportunity to do it, it cannot be known to those in
Trent, but only to him that sits at the stern of that Country, who,
seeing all particulars, knows when to apply the medicine. Therefore he
advised that they should crave by letters the opinion of the principal
Prelates of the Nation, before they went any further, or that the Popes Nuncio
should speak thereof with the Emperor. To which opinion the Emperors
Prelates, induced by the Ambassador, did adhere. But the Legates, commending
their judgment, and promising to write to the Nuncio, added, that,
notwithstanding this, the Articles might be disputed by the Divines, to gain
time; whereunto the Cardinal also, and the others, adhered, hoping that many
difficulties might come acrosse, to cause a delay, and the Ambassador Toledo
was contented, so that the Summer might be past before the definition were
made.

The Articles proposed, were.

1. That Adam, by transgressing the precept, has lost justice, and incurred
the The points of original sin to be discussed.
wrath of God, and mortality; and though he be impaired both in soul and
body, yet no sin is transferred from him to posterity, but only corporal
punishments.

2. That Adams sin is called original, because it is derived from him to
posterity, not by transmission, but by imitation.

3. That original sin is ignorance, or contempt of God, or want of fear,
without confidence in his Majesty, without divine love, and with
concupiscence, and bad desires; and generally a corruption of the whole man in
his will, soul, and body.

4. That in children there is an inclination to evil, proceeding from the
corrupted nature, so that after the use of reason, it brings forth a loathing
of divine things, and an immersion in matters of the world; and that this is
original sin.

5. That children, at the least borne of faithful parents, though they are
baptized into the remission of sins, yet they have no sin by descending
from Adam.

6. That original sin is not cancelled in Baptism, but not imputed, or so
razed, that it begins to diminsh in this life, and is wholly rooted out in
that to come.

7. That the sin remaining in the baptized, hinders his entrance into
heaven.

8. That concupiscence which cherishes sin, and remains after baptism, is
truly sin.

9. That the principal punishment due to original sin, is hell fire,
besides corporal death, and other imperfections, unto which man is subject in
this life.

The Divines in the Congregation agreed, that to discuss those Articles, it
was necessary not to proceed in that order, but to examine all the matter
methodically, and see what was sin in Adam, and what, derived from him to
posterity, is sin in all men, called original, how it is transmitted, and how
remitted.

In the first point also they agreed, that Adam being deprived of
righteousness, The discussion of original sin.
his affections rebelled against reason; which the Scripture uses to express,
saying, the flesh rebelleth against the spirit, and by one only name, calls
his defect Concupiscence. That he incurred the wrath of God, and corporal
mortality, threatened by God, together with the spiritual death of the soul;
and yet that none of these defects can be called sin, but punishments that
follow. For sin is formally the transgression of a divine precept. And here
many enlarged themselves, to find out the kind of this fault. Some said it
was pride, some gluttony, some infidelity, and some more soundly, that it might
be drawn to all these, and more. But he that will take S. Paul's words for
his ground, can put it in no other kind, but of pure disobedience. But seeking
to know what thing derived from Adam is sin in us, the opinions were more
diverse. For S. Austine, who first sought into the essence thereof, following S.
Paul, said it is concupiscence. And S. Anselmus, many hundred years after,
holding that sin is cancelled in the baptized, concupiscence still remaining,
maintained that it is the privation of original righteousness, which in
Baptism is renewed, by a thing equivalent, which is grace. But S. Thomas, and
S. Bonauenture, desiring to reconcile these two opinions, considered that in
our corrupted nature there are two rebellions; one of the soul against God,
the other of the senses against the soul; and that this is concupiscence, and
that unrighteousness, and therefore both together are the sin. And S.
Bonauenture gave the first place to concupiscence, saying that this is
positive, and the other negative. And S. Thomas contrarily made concupiscence
the material part, and the privation of righteousness the formal. Whereupon
he said, that this sin in us is concupiscence, destitute of original
righteousness. The Master of the Sentences, and the old Schoolmen followed S.
Austins opinion, which was maintained in the Council by two Hermit Friars.
But because John Scotus defended the opinion of his countryman Anselmus, the
Fransciscans maintained it in the Council, and the greater part of the
Dominicans that of S. Thomas. So it was declared what was the sin of Adam,
and what original sin in other men.

But they were more troubled to discourse how it was transmitted from him to
posterity, and successively from father to son. For Saint Austin, who opened
the way unto others, pressed with the objection of Iulianus the Pelagian, who
asked him of the manner of transmitting original sin when man is conceived,
seeing that Matrimony and the use thereof is holy, neither How original sin
is transmitted to posterity.
God the first author sinning, nor the parents, nor he that is borne, by what
chinke sin entered, answered only, that chinkes were not to be sought where
a gate stood wide open, the Apostle saying, that by Adam sin entered into the
world. And in many places where he was to speak hereof, he showed himself
doubtful, and was irresolute whether as the body of the child is derived from
the body of the father, so the soul from the soul. For the fountain being
infected, the river must needs be defiled. The modesty of this Saint, was not
imitated by the Schoolmen; who, being resolved that every soul is created
immediately by God, said, that the infection was principally in the flesh,
contracted by our forefathers in the earthly Paradise, either from the
poisoned quality of the fruit, or the venomous breath of the Serpent. Which
contamination is derived into the flesh of the children, which is a part of
their parents flesh, and is contracted by the soul in the infusion, as a
liquor contracteth the ill quality of an infected vessel; and the infection
is caused in the flesh, by the lust of the parents in the generation. But the
variety of opinions made no difference in the censure of the Articles: For
every one cleaving to his own, showed that it was decided by it, that the
first article was heretical, which undoubtedly was condemned for such in the
Council of Palestina, and in many of Africa against Pelagius. And it was
reexamined in Trent, not as it was found in the writings of Luther, or his
followers, but as it was auerred by Zuinglius: who, notwithstanding seemed to
some of the Divines, who discussed his words well, to think rather that in the
posterity of Adam it was no sin of action, but a corruption and
transformation of nature, which he called a sin in the kind of substance.

The second Article was esteemed heretical by all, and was by the same
Pelagius long since invented; who, because he was not condemned in the
Council of Palestina, for saying that Adam had not hurt his posterity, he
recanted, and confessed the contrary, and after, together with his followers,
declared himself that Adam had damnified his posterity, not by transmission of
sin, but by giving them a bad example, which hurts those that do imitate
it. And Erasmus was noted to have renewed the same assertion, interpreting the
place of Saint Paul, That by Adam sin entered into the world, and passed into
all, in regard all have imitated, and do imitate his transgression.

The third Article for the first part, was censured in Trent, as also in many
Colloquies in Germany, by saying that those actions could not be original
sin, seeing they are not in children, nor always in those of ripe age: so
that to say there was no sin but that, was wholly to deny it, and not to
satisfy the excuse of those in Germany, who under the name of actions,
understand a natural inclination to ill, and an inability to good. For, if
they understood it so, it was sit to say it, and not to speak evil, but so as
that others may understand them well. And though Saint Austin spoke thus when
he said, that original righteousness was to obey God, and not to have
concupiscence, he would alter his speech if he had been in these times,
because it is very lawful to name the cause for the effect, and the effect for
the cause, when they are proper and adequate. But it is not so in this case for
original sin is not the cause of those bad actions, except a bad will, as
principal, be added. But for the second part of the Article, they said, that
if the Protestants understood a privative corruption, the opinion may be
tolerated; but they understand a corrupted substance, as if the proper nature
of man were changed into another form, then that in which it was created, and
reprehend the Catholics, when they call the sin a privation of Justice, as
a fountain without water; but they call it a fountain from whence corrupted
waters do issue, which are the acts of incredulity, distrust, hatred,
contumacie, an inordinate love of ones self, and worldly things: and therefore
that it was fit absolutely to condemn the Article. And the fourth also was
censured by the same reason, saying that inclination to be the punishment of
sin, and not sin formally; and without alleging ought else, it was
absolutely denied to be a sin.

It must not be omitted that in this point, the Franciscans could not contain
The Franciscans exempt the Virgin Mary from sin, and are opposed by the
Dominicans.
themselves from exempting the Virgin, the mother of GOD, from this law by a
special privilege, endeavoring to enlarge themselves in the question, and to
prove it; and the Dominicans labored to comprehend her by name, under the
common law, though the Cardinal of Monte omitted no occasion to make them
leave that controversy, saying, they were assembled to condemn the heresies,
not the opinions of the Catholics.

No man resisted the condemnation of the articles. But Friar Ambrosius The
opinion of Catarinus.
Catarinus noted the reasons for insufficient, in that they declared not the
true nature of this sin; and showed it in a long discourse. The substance
whereof was; that it is necessary to distinguish the sin from the punishment;
that concupiscence and privation of righteousness, is the punishment of sin;
therefore that it is necessary the sin should be another thing. He added,
that which was not a sin in Adam, it is impossible it should be a sin in us:
but neither of these two were sin in Adam, because neither privation of
righteousness, nor concupiscence were his actions; therefore neither are they
in us; and if they were effects of sin in him, of necessity they must be so
in others also. By which reason, it cannot be said that sin is the enmity of
GOD against the sinner, nor the sinners enmity against GOD, seeing they are
things that follow sin, and come after it. He oppugned also the transmission
of sin, by means of the seed and generation, saying, That as, if Adam had
not sinned, righteousness would have been transfused, not by virtue of the
generation, but only by the will of God, so it is fit to find another means
to transfuse sin. And he explaned his opinion in this form; that as God
made a Covenant with Abraham and all his posterity, when he made him father of
the faithful, so when he gave original righteousness to Adam and all
mankind, he made him seal an obligation in the name of all, to keep it for
himself and them, observing the commandments; which because he transgressed,
he lost it as well for others as himself, and incurred the punishments also
for them; the which as they are derived into every one, so the very
transgression of Adam belonged to every one; to him as the cause, to others by
virtue of the Covenant; so that the action of Adam is actual sin in him, and
imputed to others, is original; because when he sinned, all mankind did sin
with him. Catarinus grounded himself principally, for that a true and proper
sin must needs be a voluntary act, and no other thing can be voluntary but
the transgression of Adam imputed unto all. And Paul saying that all have
sinned in Adam, it must be understood that they have all committed the same
sin with him. He alleged for example, that St. Paul to the Hebrews
affirms, that Leui paid tithe to Melchizedek, when he paid it in his great
Grandfather Abraham; by which reason it must be said, that the posterity
violated the commandment of GOD, when Adam did it, and that they were sinners
in him, as in him they received righteousness. And so there is no need to run to
lust which infecteth the flesh, whence the soul receives infection. For it
cannot be understood, how a spirit can receive a corporal passion; and if
sin were a spiritual blemish in the soul, it could not first be in the
flesh, and if it be corporal in the flesh, it can work none effect in the
spirit. That the soul, by joining it self with an infected body, does receive
spiritual infection, is an inconceivable transcendencie. He proved the
covenant of God with Adam, by a place of the Prophet Osea, by another of
Ecclesiasticus, and by many places of Saint Austin. That the sin of every one
is the act only of the transgression of Adam, he proved by Saint Paul, when
he says, That by the disobedience of one man, many are made sinners; and
because the Church has ever understood that sin is nothing else but a
voluntary action against the law, of which kind there was none but that of
Adam; and because Saint Paul says, That death entered by original sin, which
entered only by actual transgression. And he brought for the principal
proof, that though Eve did eat the apple before Adam, yet she knew not she
was naked, nor that she had incurred the punishment, but only after Adam had
sinned. Therefore Adams sin, as it was not his alone, but of Eve too, so was
it also of all his posterity.

But Friar Dominicus Soto, to defend the opinion of Saint Thomas, and of the
other Divines from the objections of Catarinus, brought a new exposition,
Dominicus Soro crosses the opinion of Catarinus.
and said, that Adam sinned actually in eating of the forbidden fruit, but
after he remained a sinner by an habitual quality, caused by the action, as
by every bad action such a disposition is bred in the mind of the actor, by
which, though the act be past, he remains, and is called a sinner; that Adams
action was transitory, nor had existence, but while he wrought; that the
habitual quality remaining in him, passed into the posterity, and is
transfused as proper unto every one; that Adams action is not original sin,
but that consequent habit which the Theologues call privation of
righteousness, which may be well expounded, considering that man is called a
sinner, not only when he transgresses actually, but after also, until the
sin be cancelled, not in regard of the punishments, or other consequences of
sin, but in regard of the preceding transgression it self; as that which
makes a man crooked, until he be straightned again; who is said to be so,
not by an actual action, but by that effect which remains after the action
is past. He compared original sin to crookedness, as it is indeed a
spiritual obliquitie; for the whole nature of man being in Adam, when he made
himself crooked by transgressing the Precept, the whole nature of man, and by
consequent, every particular person remained crooked not by the curuitie of
Adam, but by his own, by which he is truly crooked and a sinner, until he
be straightened by the grace of God. These two opinions were sharply
disputed, and every one pretended that his own should be received by the
Synod.

But in the consideration how original sin was remitted, they agreed How
original sin is renutted
all, that it is cancelled by baptism, and the soul restored pure into the
state of innocence, though the punishments which follow sin be not
removed, that they may be an exercise for the just. And this all of them
expounded by saying, that the perfection of Adam consisted in an infused
quality, which adorned the soul, made it perfect and acceptable to God, and
exempted the body from mortality. And God, for the merit of CHRIST, gives
unto those that are regenerated by baptism another quality called justifying
grace, which wiping out every blemish in the soul, makes it pure, as was that
of Adam; yea in some it works greater effects then original righteousness,
but only that it works no effect in the body, whereby mortality, and other
natural defects are not removed. Many places of Saint Paul and the other
Apostles were alleged, where they say, that baptism washes, cleanses,
illuminateth and purifieth the soul, so that no condemnation, spot or wrinkle
remains. It was exactly discoursed, how, if the baptized have no sin, sin
can pass into their children? Whereunto Augustinus answered with examples
only: as of a circumcised father the son is borne uncircumcised, and of a
blind man one that can see, and of a pure grain, one clad in straw. Catarinus
answered, that the Covenant was made with Adam only, and that every one has
sin by imputation of that of Adam; so that the intermediate Parents have
nothing to do therein: and if the forbidden fruit had been eaten, not by
Adam, but by one of his sons, his posterity had not sinned; and if Adam had
sinned after he had begotsonnes, his sin had been imputed to them though
borne before. Soto disputed against it, that if Adam had sinned after his
sons were borne, those would not have been obnoxious unto it, but their
posterity should.

The common voice was, that the sixth Article was heretical, for saying there
remains in the baptized something worthy of death: and the seventh for
leaving remainders of sin in the baptized: and the eight most clearly, for
making concupiscence a sin in the baptized. Only Antoninus Marinarus, a
Carmelite Friar, affirming, as the others, that sin is cancelled by baptism,
and that concupiscence is before sin, yet, for condemning the contrary of
heresy, he considered that Saint Austin being old, writing here of to
Bonifacius, said plainly that concupiscence was not a sin but a cause and an
effect of sin: and writing against Iulianus he said in as plain terms,
that it was sin, and the cause, and effect thereof: and yet in his
retractions he never made mention of either of these two contrary
propositions, because he thought he might speak both ways of it, in regard
it was not a matter of faith, the difference being rather verbal then
otherwise. For it is one thing to ask if a thing be a sin, or if it be a
sin to a person excused. As he that goes forth to hunt for things
necessary for his sustenance, if he think to kill a wild beast, and, by
invincible ignorance, slaye a man, the Lawyers say that the action is murder,
and a sin: but the hunter is excused, so that unto him it is not, by reason
of his ignorance. So concupiscence, being the same before and after baptism,
is sin in it self; and Saint Paul says, that it resists the Law of God,
even in the regenerate, and whatsoever does that is sin. But he that is
baptized is excused; because he is cladde with CHRIST: so that the Article is
true one way, and false another; and it is not just to condemn a proposition,
which is true in one sense, without distinguishing it first. This opinion was
rejected by all, and it was said that Saint Austin made two sorts of
concupiscence; one before baptism, which is a repugnancie of the will to the
Law of God, which he said was sin, and abolished in Baptism; another, which
is the repugnancie of the sense to reason, which remains after baptism,
which S. Austin called the cause and effect, but never sin: and when he
seems to say otherwise, it must be defended that his mind is; that
concupiscence is a sin, which by baptism leaves to be so, and becomes an
exercise of virtue and good works. To this opinion of Soto they joined what
he had said in his sermons, made in the Mass on the fourth Sunday of the last
Aduent, and in that of the Lent, exhorting to repose all confidence in God,
condemning all trust in works, and affirming that the heroical Acts of the
ancients, so renowned by men, were truly sin; that he spoke of the
difference of the Law and the Gospel, not as of two times, but as if the Gospel
had been ever, and the Law ought to be ever, and also of the certainty of
Grace, though with ambiguous and doubtful clauses, for fear they might so
reprehend him, that he could not be defended. This made the Friar suspected by
some, that he was not wholly Soto is suspected of Lutheranisme.
auerse from the Protestants doctrine.

When they came to the Article of the punishment, though Saint Austin,
grounding himself upon Saint Paul, held expressly, that the pains of hell fire
belonged unto it, even in little children, whereunto none of the holy Fathers
contradicted, yet the master of the sentences, with the Schoolmen, who follow
most of all Philosophical reasons, distinguished two kinds of eternal
punishments; one the privation only of celestial blessedness, the other, a
chastisement: and they assigned the first only to original sin. Only
Gregory of Arimini forsook the general opinion of the Schoolmen, who by
that means gained the name of Tormenter of children. But neither he nor Saint
Austin were defended by the Theologues in the congregations. Yet there was
another division amongst them. For the Dominicans A difference between the
Franciscans and Dominicans about Limbo.
said that children dead, without baptism before the use of reason, remain
after the resurrection in a Limbo and darkness under the earth, but without
fire: the Franciscans said they are to remain upon the earth, and in light.
Some affirmed also, that they should be Philosophers, busying themselves in
the knowledge of natural things, not without that great pleasure which
happens when curiosity is satisfied by invention. Catarinus said further,
that they shall be visited and comforted by the holy Angels and Saints. And in
this so many vanities were delivered, that they might give great matter of
entertainment. But for reverence of Austine, and not to condemn Gregory of
Arimini, the Augustinians made great means, that the Article, though false, as
they thought, might not be condemned for heretical; though Catarinus employed
all his force to the contrary, to repress (as he said) the boldness and
ignorance of some Preachers, who, to the great scandal of the people, publish
that doctrine, affirming that Saint Austine had said so only in heat of
disputation against the Pelagians, and not because he was clear in that
opinion. Whereupon, since the truth is declared to the contrary by common
consent of the Schools, and that the Lutheranes have raised the same errors,
and the Catholics themselves fall into it, the declaration of the Synod is
necessary.

The censure of the Divines being ended, and the points treated of by the The
Prelates did scarcely understand the discourses of the Divines
Fathers, to resolve upon the form of the Decree, the Bishops (amongst whom
very few had knowledge in Theology, but were either Lawyers, or learned men of
the Court) were confounded with this scholasticall and crabbed manner of
handling the Articles; and amongst so-many opinions, knew not what to think of
the essence of original sin. That of Catarinus was best understood, because
it was expressed by a political conceit of a bargain made by one for his
posterity, which being transgressed, they are all undoubtedly bound; and many
of the Fathers did favor that. But perceiving the contradiction of the other
Divines, they durst not receive it. For remission of the sin, this only they
held to be clear, that every one has original sin before baptism, and is
perfectly purged of it by baptism. Therefore they concluded that this should
be established for faith, and the contrary condemned for heresy, together
with all those opinions which deny original sin, in what sort soever: but what
that sin is, there being so many differences amongst the Divines, they said it
was not possible to set down so circumspectly, that it might satisfy all, and
not condemn some opinion, which might cause a schism.

Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sinigaglia, Friar Ierom General of S. Austin,
Andreas Vega a Franciscan, opposes the common inclination to condemn the
opinion of the Lutheranes without declaring the opinion of t(...) Catholics
and Andreas Vega, a Franciscan Divine, were opposite to this general
inclination. This last showed more then the others, that it was not convenient,
nor ever used by any Council, to condemn an opinion for heretical, without
declaring first which is Catholic; that no true negative has in it self the
cause of its truth, but is so by the truth of an affirmative; nor ever any
proposition was false, but because another is true: neither can the falsity of
the one be known, but by him who knows the truth of the other. Therefore the
opinion of the Lutherans cannot be condemned of heresy, until the opinion of
the Church be set down. He that shall observe the manner of proceeding in all
Councels, which have handled matter of faith, will see, that they have laid
first an Orthodoxe foundation, and by that condemned the heresies; and so it is
necessary to do now. For when it shall be read that the Council of Trent has
condemned the Lutheranes, for saying original sin is ignorance, contempt,
distrust, an hate of heavenly things, and a corruption of the whole man in the
will, soul and body, who is there that will not demand, what is it then? and
will not say in himself, if this opinion be heretical, which is Catholic?
And when he shall see the opinion of Zuinglius condemned, that children the
sons of the faithful, are baptized into remission of sins, though nothing
be transmitted from Adam but the punishments, and the corruption of nature,
will not suddenly ask, what else is then transmitted? In sum, he concluded,
that the Council was assembled principally to tell the Catholic truth, not
only to condemn heresies. The Bishop said, That these Articles having been so
often disputed in the Diets The Bishop of Sinigaglia, and Friar Ierom General
of the Augustins speak to the same purpose.
of Germany, every one would expect from the Council a perspicuous doctrine,
cleared from all difficulties. The General also, who was somewhat suspected to
be suborned by the Ambassador Toledo, added, that the true Catholic doctrine
of original sin is contained in the writings of S. Austin; that Egidius
Romanus had wrote a book thereof; that whenever the Fathers would take but a
little pains, they might be able to understand the truth, and judge of it;
that they should not suffer a fame to be spread, that in Trent that was
resolved in four days, which in Germany has been so long discussed without
conclusion.

These aduertisements were not hearkened unto, because the Prelates had no hope
to be able by study to be well informed in the crabbed schoolepoynts,
neither durst they go about to make trial of it; and because the Legates had
received absolute command from Rome to define this matter in the next session,
they were constrained to avoid the difficulties, especially because the
Cardinal of Monte was resolved to make this great iumpe by all means. And
therefore calling unto him the Generals of the Orders, and the Divines,
Catarinus and Vega, who spoke more then the rest, he charged them to pass by
the difficulties, and help forward the dispatch.

The Prelates deputed to frame the decree, with the assistance of the Divines,
divided the matter into five Anathematismes. The first, of the personal sin of
Adam: the second, of the transfusion into posterity: the third, of the remedy
by baptism: the fourth, of the baptism of children: the fifth, of
concupiscence remaining. After this, the opinions of the Zuinglians were
condemned in the four first, and of Luther in the fifth. They conferred on
these Articles almost all, adding and taking away what they thought fit with
much concord, but only that the Franciscan Bishops and Friars approved not,
The Franciscans desire that the Virgin Mary should be excepted.
that it should be generally said, that the sin of Adam passed into all
mankind, because the blessed Virgin, the mother of our LORD, was
comprehended, if she were not particularly excepted; and they desired the
exception. The Dominicans said on the contrary, that the proposition so
general, and without exception was Saint Paul's, and all the holy Doctors, and
therefore that it was not fit to alter it with an exception: and that
contradiction waxing warm, they fell into the question which the Legates had
often diuerted. They said, that though the Church had tolerated the opinion of
the conception, yet he that would examine the matter well, might find that
she was not exempted from the common infection. And the others opposed, that
it would be as much as to condemn the Church, who celebrateth the conception
as immaculate, and a kind of ingratitude, derogating from the honor due unto
her, by whom all the graces of CHRIST pass unto us. The disputations turned
into contention, so far, that the Emperors Ambassador had hope to obtain
his design, that the matter might not be proposed in the next Session.

Many things were proposed upon that occasion, which caused them to A discourse
of the Author to show how the blessed Virgin came to be worshipped.
proceed to the Decree, which shall be rehearsed; which because it afforded
matter of discourse, for the entire understanding of all, it is necessary to
relate from the beginning the original of this controversy. After that the
impiety of Nestorius had divided CHRIST, making two sons, and denying him to
be God who was borne of the blessed Virgin, the Church, to inculcate the
Catholic truth in the minds of the faithful, made often mention of her in
the Churches as well of the East as of the West; with this short form of
words in Greek, Maria (...) in Latin, Maria matter Dei. This being instituted
only for the honor of CHRIST, was by little and little communicated also to
the mother, and finally applied to her alone; and therefore when images began
to multiply, CHRIST was painted as a babe in his mothers arms, to put us in
mind of the worship due unto him, even in that age. But in progress of time,
it was turned into the worship of the mother without the son, he remaining
as an appendex in the picture. The writers and Preachers, especially those that
were contemplative, carried with the torrent of the vulgar, which is able to do
much in these matters, leaving to mention CHRIST, invented with one accord new
praises, Epithites, and religious services; in so much that about the year
1050. a daily Office was instituted to the blessed Virgin, distinguished by
seven Canonical hours, in a form which anciently was ever used to the honor
of the Divine Majesty, and in the next hundred years, the worship so
increased, that it came to the height, even to attribute that unto her, which
the Scriptures speak of the Divine wisdom. And amongst these invented
nouities this was one, her total exemption from original sin. Yet this
remained only in the breasts of some few private men, having no place in
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, or amongst the learned. About the year 1136. the
Canons of Lions dared to bring it into the Ecclesiastical Offices. Saint
Bernard, who lived in those times, esteemed the most learned and pious of that
age, who was most frequent in the praises of the blessed Virgin, so far as to
call her the neck of the Church, by which every grace and influence passes
from the head, inueighed severely against the Canons, and wrote unto them,
reprehending them for introducing a dangerous nouitie without reason, or
example of antiquity; that there want not places to praise the Virgin, who
cannot be pleased with a presumptuous nouitie, mother of rashness, sister of
superstition, daughter of lightness. The next age had Schoole-Doctors of both
the orders Franciscan and Dominican, who in their writings refuted this
opinion, until about the year 1300. when John Scot, a Franciscan, putting the
matter into disputation, and examining the reasons, did fly to the
omnipotency, saying that God had power to free her from sin, or to cause
sin to remain in her only for an instant, or for a certain time: that God
only knows which of these three is true; yet it is probable to attribute the
first to Marie, in case it be not repugnant to the authority of the Church,
and of the Scripture. The doctrine of this famous Divine was followed by the
Franciscan order. But in the particular of the conception, seeing the way laid
open they affirmed absolutely for true, that which he had proposed as possible
and probable, under this doubtful condition, if it be not repugnant: to the
Orthodoxe Faith. The Dominicans did constantly resist; and followed Saint
Thomas, one of their order, famous for his learning, S. Thomas is canonized by
Pope John the, 22 to disgrace the Franciscans.
and for the approbation of Pope John the two and twentieth, who, to depresse
the Franciscans, who did for the most part adhere to the Emperor Lewis of
Bauaria, excommunicated by him, did canonize that Doctor and his doctrine. The
show of piety and devotion made the Franciscan opinion generally more
accepted, and more tenaciously received by the University of Paris, which was
in credit for eminent learning; and after long ventilation and discussion, was
afterward approved by the Council of Basil, which forbade to preach and
teach the contrary. This took place in those Countries which received the
Council. Finally Pope Sixtus the fourth, a Franciscan, made two Bulls in this
matter; one in the year one thousand four hundred seventy six, approouing a
new Office, composed by Leonard Nogarola Protonotarie, with Indulgences to him
that did celebrate it, or assist: the other in the year one thousand four
hundred eighty three, condemning the assertion, as false and erroneous, that
it is heresy to hold the conception, or a sin to celebrate it,
excommunicating the Preachers and others who noted that opinion of heresy, or
the contrary, because it was not as yet decided by the Church of Rome and the
Apostolic Sea. But this did not appease the contentions, which between the
two orders of Friars still waxed sharper, and were renewed every year in
December; so that Pope Leo the tenth thinking to give a remedy by deferring
the controversy, made letters be written unto diverse. But afterward he had
more important cogitations, by reason of the nouities of Germany, which in
these contentions wrought that which happens in States, that the City being
beleaguered, the factions do cease, and all join against the common enemy.
The Dominicans grounded themselves upon the Scripture, the doctrine of the
Fathers, and the most ancient Schoolmen, where not one jot was found in
favor of the others; but they alleged for themselves miracles, and
contentment of the people. John of Vdine, a Dominican Friar, said, either you
will that Saint Paul and the Fathers have believed this exemption of the
Virgin from the common condition, or not. If they have believed it, and yet
have spoken generally without ever making mention of this exception, imitate
them also now. But if they have believed the contrary, your opinion is a
nouitie. Ierolamus Lombardellus, a Franciscan Friar, said, that the authority
of the present Church, was no less then that of the Primitive; if the consent
of that in those times made men speak without exception, the consent of this,
which appears in celebrating the Feast throughout, ought to induce us not to
omit it.

The Legate wrote to Rome of the marvelous agreement of all against the
Lutheran doctrine, and the resolution taken to condemn it, and sent a copy of
the Anathematismes framed, giving advise withal of the contention raised about
the conception. Whereunto it was answered from Rome, that by no means they
should meddle with a matter, which may cause a schism between Catholics, but
should strive to reconcile the parties, and give The Pope commands that the
contention about the conception should be omitted for fear of making a schism
them both satisfaction, and above all to preserve in strength the brief of
Sistus 4. The Legates having received the order, did by themselves, and by the
wiser sort of Prelates persuade both parties to lay aside the contentions, and
apply themselves jointly against the Lutherans. They were on both sides
contented to be silent, so that their opinion were not prejudiced: yet the
Franciscans said that the Canon was against them if the Virgin were not
excepted, and the Dominicans that they were condemned if she were. It was
necessary to find a way how it might be declared that she was neither
comprehended, nor affirmatively excepted; which was by saying, they had no
intention either to comprehend or except her. Afterward at the great instance
of the Franciscans, the others were content it should be said only they had
no meaning to comprehend her. And to obey the Pope it was added, that the
constitutions of Sistus 4. should be observed.

While these things are handled in Trent, the Diet being assembled in Ratisbon,
The Diet of Ratisbon.
the Emperor showed great displeasure that the Colloquie was dissolved without
fruit, and required that every one should propose what he thought fit to
appease Germany. The Protestants desired that the difference of Religion might
be composed, according to the Recesse of Spira, by a national Council,
saying it was more fit then a general, because by reason of the great
difference in opinions between Germany and other Nations, it is impossible to
avoid the raising of a greater contention: and whosoever will enforce Germany
to change opinion, must first slay many thousands of men; which would be a
damage to the Emperor, and a joy to the Turks. The Emperors ministers
answered, that his Majesty was not the cause why the Decree of Spira was not
executed; and that it was known unto all, that, to make so necessary a peace
with the French King, he was constrained to yield to the Pope in matters of
Religion; that the Decree was fitted to the necessities of that time, which
being changed, it was also necessary to change opinion; that in National
Councels sometimes manners are amended, but Faith and Religion never handled,
that in Colloquies one has to do with Theologues, who, for the most part are
intractable and obstinate; so that with them one cannot come to such moderate
counsels as is necessary; that none loved Religion more then the Emperor, who
would not swerve one jot from that which is just and honest, to please the
Pope: but he knew well, that in a National Council he should neither be able to
reconcile the parties, nor find whom to make judge. The Ambassador of Mentz
and Triers divided themselves from the other four, and being united with all
the Catholics, approved the Tridentine Council, and besought Caesar to
protect it, and to persuade the Protestants to go thither and submit
themselves unto it. They answered that the Council in Trent was not free, as
was demanded and promised in the Imperial Diets: they desired again that the
Emperor would observe the peace, and ordain that Religion might be
established in a lawful Council of Germany, or an Imperial Diet Job a
Colloquie of learned men (...) both (...).

In this Interim, the Emperor had made secret provision, for war, which not
being able longer to concedles (...) known to the Protestants in the Diet, and
because peace was concluded with the French King, and The provisions for war
against the (...) Protest(...) (...) no longer be concealed.
truce with the T(...), every one did easily perceive the cause especially, for
that a fame was spread (...) the Pope also and Ferdinand did arm, whereby all
was in confusion. And the Emperor seeing he was discovered, the ninth of
Innosent, the Cardinal of Trent Post to Rome, to demand of the Pope the
succors (...) promised, and sent Captains with money into Italy and Flanders
to levy Soldiers, and solicited the Princes, and Protestant German
Captains, not combined with those of the league of Smalcalda, to follow his
colors, affirming, and promising be would not make war for Religion, but
suppress the rebellion of some, who, under that pretense, would not
acknowledge the Laws, nor the Majesty of the Prince, By this promise he
quieted many of the Cities, who before had received the renouation in the Rites
of the Church, promising all benevolence to the obedient, and security for
their Religion.

But in the Council there being no more difference amongst the Fathers
concerning the things discussed, and the decrees of faith and reformation being
framed, the Emperors Ambassador, being not able any longer to resist the
Legates resolution, the seventeenth of June being come, the day appointed for
the Session, Alexander Pichalhomini, Bishop of Pianza, sang, Mass: Marcus
Laureus, a Dominican Friar, preached; and when the usual ceremonies were ended,
the decree of faith, with five Anathematismes, was read. 1. Against him that
confesses not, that Adam, by transgressing has The Decree of faith with 5.
a(...) t(...) in the Session.
lost sanctity and justice, incurred the wrath of God, death and thraldom to
the Devil, and is infected in soul and body. 2. Against him that auerreth
that Adam by sinning has hurt himself only, or has derived into his
posterity the death only of the body, and not sin, the death of the soul.
3. Against him that affirms that sin, which is one in the beginning, and
proper to every one, transmitted by generation, not imitation, can be
abolished by any other remedy then the death of CHRIST: or denies that the
merit of CHRIST is applied as well to children, as to those that be of ripe
years, by the Sacrament of Baptism, ministered in the form and rite of the
Church. 4. Against him that de(...)eth that children which are newly borne
ought to be baptized though the sons of Christians, or says they are
baptized for remission of sins, but not because they have contracted any
original sin from Adam. 5. Against him that denies that by the grace of
Baptism the guilt of original sin is remitted, or says that all is not
removed which has the true and proper nature of sin, but that it is razed
and not imputed, concupiscence still remaining in the baptized for an exercise,
which cannot hurt but him that consents to it: the which being called sin
by the Apostle, the Synod declares that it is no true and proper sin, but is
so termed because it arises from sin, and inclines to it. That the Synod
means not to comprehend in the decree the blessed Virgin, but that the
constitutions of Sistus 4. ought to be observed, which it does renew.

The Decree of the reformation contains two parts, one in matter of the
Lectures, the other of the Sermons. For the Lectures it was ordered, that in
the Churches where there is a stipend allotted for reading Divinity, the
Bishop should provide that the holy Scripture should be read by the
Stipendary, it he be fit, and not being fit, the Bishop should depute a
substitute, The Decree of reformation.
to perform the charge: but for hereafter that the benefice should not be
conferred but upon a sufficient person. That in the Cathedral Churches of
populous Cities, and collegiate Churches of great Castles, where no such
stipend is assigned, the first Prebend that falls void, should be applied to
that use, or some simple benefice, or a contribution of all beneficed men, to
institute the Lecture. That in poor Churches, there should be at the least a
Master to teach Grammar, who shall enjoy the fruits of some simple benefice, or
have a stipend from the Capitular or Episcopal table, or the Bishop shall
find some other way to effect it. That in the Cloisters of Monks there should
be a Divinity Lecture, if it may be, wherein if the Abbats shall be
negligent, they shall be constrained to do it, by the Bishop as the Popes
Delegate. That in the Conuents of the Regulars, there should be deputed
Masters of sufficiency to perform this charge. That in public studies,
where a Divinity Lecture is not instituted, it shall be instituted by the
charity and piety of Princes, and Republiques; and where it has been
instituted and neglected, it shall be restored. That none shall be made a
Lecturer, either public or private, before he be approved by the Bishop, as
fit for his life, manners, and knowledge, except those that read in the
Cloisters of Monks. That the privileges granted by law, to Public Readers
in Divinity, and scholars, for the enjoying of the fruits of their benefices,
in their absence shall be preserved.

Concerning Sermons the Decree contains, that the Bishops and Prelates be
bound, if they be not hindered, to preach the Gospel in person, and if they
be, to substitute men of sufficiency. That the inferior Curates ought to
teach things necessary to salvation, either by themselves, or others; at the
least on Sundays and solemn Feasts: whereunto they shall be constrained by
the Bishops, any exemption notwithstanding. And the Curates of the Parishes
subject to Monasteries, which are in no diocese, shall be constrained to the
same by the Metropolitanes, as Delegates of the Pope, in case the Regular
Prelate shall be negligent. That the Regulars shall not preach, except they be
approved, for their life, manners and knowledge, by their superiors: and in
the Churches of their Order, they shall demand the benediction of the Bishop
before the Sermon begin: but in other Churches they shall not preah without the
Bishops license, which shall be given them gratis. If the Preacher sow errors
or scandals, the Bishop shall prohibit him; if heresies, he shall proceed
against him according to law and custom: and if the Preacher be a privileged
person, he shall do it as delegate; yet taking care that the Preachers be
not molested by false imputations, and calumnies, and have no cause to
complain of them. That they permit not that either Regulars who live out of
Cloisters, or secular Priests, except they be known and allowed by them, do
preach until an account be given thereof to the Pope. That the Pardoners shall
not preach, nor cause any to preach, and in case they do, they shall be
compelled to obey by the Bishop, notwithstanding the privileges. In fine, the
29. of Iulie, was assigned for the next Session.

The Decrees being pronounced by the Bishop that said Mass, the Secretary of
the Council read the letters of the French King, in which he deputed for his
Ambassador in the Council Peter Danesius; who made a long The 29. of July is
appointed for the next Session. Peter Danesiu is Ambassador for the French
King, and makes an Oration in the S(...)on.
and eloquent Oration to the Fathers, saying in substance; That the Kingdom of
France since the first most Christian King Clodoueus, has always preserved
Christian religion most sincere. That S. Gregory the first gave the title of
Catholic to Childebert, in token of his incorrupt religion. That the Kings
have never suffered any sect in any part of France, nor any but Catholics;
yea, have procured the conversion of Strangers, Idolaters, and Heretics, and
have constrained them with pious arms to profess the true and sound religion.
He showed how Childebert compelled the Visigothes, who were Arrians, to join
themselves with the Catholic Church: and how Charles the Great made war
thirty years with the Saxons, to reduce them to Christian religion. Then he
declared the favors done to the Church of Rome. He recounted the enterprises of
Pipin and Charles the Great against the Lumbards; and how, in a Synod of
Bishops, it was granted by Adrian to Charles, to create the Pope, and to
approve the Bishops of his Dominion, and inuest them after they had received
the oath of fidelity. He added, that though his son Ludouicus Pius,
surrendered that authority to create the Pope, yet he reserved that Legates
should be sent unto him, to preserve amity, which has been ever maintained
with mutual offices. For which confidence, the Popes, in times of difficulty,
either chased out of their Sea, or fearing sedition, have retired themselves
into that Kingdom. That it cannot be told how many dangers the French men
have run, and how much money and blood they have spent, to enlarge the lists
of the Christian Empire, or to recover that which has been usurped by the
Barbarians, or to restore the Popes, or to deliver them from danger. He added,
that King Francis descending from these, in the beginning of his reign, after
the victory achieved in Lumbardy, did, with the same piety, go to Bolonia, to
meet Leo the tenth, to confirm a peace with him; which has continued with
Adrian, Clement, and Paul: and in these 26. years the points of faith being
brought into great ambiguities in diverse regions, he has taken most exact
care, that nothing should be innouated in the common Ecclesiastical use, but
all reserved to the public censures of the Church. And though he be of a
quiet, pleasing, and not bloody disposition, yet he has used severity, and
made grievous Edicts; and has brought to pass, by the diligence and
vigilancie of his Judges, that in so great a tempest, which has subverted many
Cities, and whole Nations that most noble Kingdom should not be shaken, in
which the ancient doctrine, rites, ceremonies, and manners, do remain: so
that the Council might ordain what they thought to be true and fit for the
Christian Commonwealth. He said further, that the King knew how profitable it
was to Christendom to have the Pope for Head, and that, being tempted and
invited, with most gaineful profers, to follow the example of another, would
not forsake his opinion, and thereby has lost his neighbors love, with some
disadvantage. That understanding the Convocation of the Council, he presently
sent some of his Bishops, and when he saw it went on in earnest, and that the
authority thereof was established by many Sessions, he has sent him for his
Ambassador, to assist them, and to procure, that at the last, they would
constitute and propose the doctrine which ought every where to be professed by
all Christians, and rectify the Ecclesiastical discipline, by the square of
the Canons; promising that the most Christian King will cause all to be
observed in his kingdom, and protect the decrees of the Council. Then he
added, that, the merits of the French King being so great, his privileges,
granted by the ancient Fathers and Popes, ought to be preserved, which
Ludouicus Pius, and all the Kings of France since have possessed: and the
rights, privileges, and immunities confirmed to the Churches of France, of
which he is defender, Which if the Council will do, the Frenchmen will be
thankful, and the Fathers will not repent them of their deed. And is answered
by Hercules Seuerollo.


Hercules Seuerollo, Proctour of the Council briefly answered, in the name of
the Synod, thanking the King; showing that the Ambassadors presence was most
acceptable, promising all diligence in the establishing of faith and
reformation of manners, offering all favor to the Kingdom and Church of
France.

But the Decrees of the Session being printed, and gone into Germany,
affoorded The censure of the decrees in Germany.
matter of discourse. It was said that the Pelagian impiety was superfluously
handled, being by so many Councels, and the common consent of the Church, more
then a thousand years since, condemned, that it had been tolerable if the
ancient doctrine had been confirmed; that in conformity unto it, they had
well proposed a true universal proposition, by saying that the sin of Adam
did pass into all his posterity, but after had destroyed it, by an exception;
that it helped the^ not, that the exception was not assertiue, but ambiguous:
for as one particular makes false the contradictorie universal, so one
ambiguons particular, makes the universal uncertain. And who sees not that
so long as this exception remains, though with ambiguity, every one may
conclude, that it is not certain that sin is passed into all the posterity,
because it is not certain whether it be passed into the Virgin: and the
rather, because the reason which persuades that exception, may persuade many
more. That Bernard concluded well, that the same reason which induced to
celebrate the Conception of the Virgin, will conclude the like for her father
and mother, Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, and all her Genealogy
since Adam. But when they came to Abraham they should go no further; because
there is great reason to exempt from original sin none but him. For unto him
the promise of the Redeemer was made; CHRIST is ever called the seed of
Abraham, and Abraham the Father of CHRIST, and of all that believe, a pattern
of the faithful. These be greater dignities then to bear CHRIST in the belly;
according to that divine answer, that the Virgin was more blessed in having
heard the word of GOD, then in having borne CHRIST, and given him suck. And he
that will not for preheminencie except Abraham, but only esteem for sound the
ancient reason, that CHRIST IS without sin, because he was borne of the holy
Ghost, without the seed of man, will say it is better to follow the council of
the wise man, and contain ones self within the bounds set down by the
Fathers. They added, that the world was much bound to the Council, for being
contented to say that it confesses, and thinks that concupiscence remains
in the baptized; or else men would be compelled to deny to feel that which
they do. In the decree of reformation, it was expected that order should have
been taken with the schoolmen and Canonists, with these for giving divine
proprieties to the Pope, even to call him God, attributing unto him
infallibility and making the same tribunal of both, saying also, that he is
more merciful then CHRIST: with the School men, who leaving the Scripture, or
making it all doubtful, have made Aritostles Philosophy the foundation of
Theology, even making a question whether there be a GOD, and disputing of it
on both sides. It seemed strange that it was unknown until then, that to
preach was the office of Bishops: that the abuse of preaching vanities, or any
thing but CHRIST was not removed; that provision was made against the open
merchandising of Preachers under the name of alms. News being come of these
decrees to the Emperors The D(...)es a (...) in the Emperors Court.
Court, it was taken in ill part that light matters, not required by Germany,
were handled, and that in matter of faith the disputes were awaked by the
decree. For the controversy of original sin, being almost agreed in the
Colloquies, from the Council, from whence composition was expected, a decree
did proceed against the things accorded and it was written in the Emperors
name, to his Ministers in Trent, that they should promote the reformation, and
endeavor that the controversy of faith should be deferred until the
Protestants came, whom the Emperor was persuaded he could bring thither; or,
at least, until the Prelates of Germany did arrive, who would put themselves
into the journey, so soon as the Diet was ended But they talked but a little
while of these affairs of the Council because other accidents happened, which
drew all men's eyes and minds unto them.

For in Rome the 26. of June, the Cardinal of Trent concluded a league The
Cardinal of Trent concludes a league the 26. of June, between the Pope and
the Emperor, against the Protestants.
between the Pope and Emperor, against the Protestants of Germany, the treaty
whereof was begun the year before in Worms by Cardinal Farnese, as has been
said, and afterward continued by other Ministers. The causes alleged, and
the conditions were; because Germany had a long time perseuered in heresy, for
remedy whereof the Council was assembled in Trent, and already begun,
whereunto the Protestants refusing to submit, the Pope and Emperor, for the
glory of GOD, and safety of Germany, do agree, The causes and capitulations
of this league.
that the Emperor shall take arms against those that refuse it, and reduce
them to the obedience of the holy Sea: and for this, the Pope shall lay in
Venice an hundred thousand crowns in trust, beside the hundred thousand laid
there all ready, to spend in this use only, and shall send to the war at his
own charges, twelve thousand Italian foot, and five hundred light horse, for
six months, shall give the Emperor for this year, half the rents of the
Churches of Spain, and power to alienate, of the revenues of the Monasteries
of those kingdoms, to the value of five hundred thousand crowns: that during
the six months, the Emperor shall not make an accord with the Protestants
without the Pope, who also shall have a certain portion of whatsoever is
gained by the war and if the war continue longer new capitulations, which shall
seem fit to both parties; shall be treated on and place shall be left for
other to enter into the league bearing part of the charges, and receiving part
of the profits. There was one capitulation apart, which was kept secret,
concerning the French Kings that if any Christian; Prince during the war, did
move latins against the Emperor, the Pope should be bound to persecute him
with spiritual and temporal forces.

A few days after the Pope wrote to the Suisses inuiting them to assist The
Pope writes to the Suisses:
him; first showing in ample terms his benevolence toward them, and the
grief he felt for that some of them had ostranged themselves from his
obedience, and thanking God for those, who perseuered and commonding; them all
for that in this difference of religion they keep themselves in peace, whereas
in other places diverse tumults did arise for the same cause he added, that to
provide, against them he had ordained the Counsel of Trent, hoping that no
man would refuse to submit himself and he was assured that those amongst
them, who until then (...) in the Apostolical obedience will obey the
Council and the others not conteinneth. He invited them also to come thither,
complaining that; many in Germany, who are called Princes, did proudly
disdain and despise the Council; whose authority is rather Divine then
humane. This has compelled him to think of force and Arms. And because it
has happened that the Emperor has made the same resolution, he has been
constrained to join With him, and assist him with his own and the Churches
power, to restore religion by war, That he was willing to signify his
purpose and mind unto them, that they may join their prayers with him, render
the ancient honor to the Church of Rome, and assist him in so pious a cause.

But the Emperor made show he undertook the war, not for religion, The
Emperor would not have it thought that this war is made for religion.
but for matters of State, for that some denied him obedience, plotted with
strangers against him, and refused to obey the Laws, usurped the possessions
of others, especially the Churches, going about to make Bishoprikes and
Abbacies, hereditarie: and that having proved diverse gentle means to reduce
them, they ever became more insolent.

On the other side the Protestants labored to make manifest to the And the
Protestants show the contrary.
world, that all proceeded from the instigation of the Pope, and of the
Council of Trent. They put the Emperor in mind of the Capitulations which he
swore in Frankfurt, when he was created Emperor; and they made protestation
of the injury. But many of the Protestants kept themselves on his side,
because they could not believe, that he had any other respects then of State.
And the Archbishop of Collen (of whom we have spoken The Arch-b(...) of
Collen sentenced by the Pope is obeyed by his people, and follows the
Emperor,
before) who though he were sentenced, and deprived by the Pope, continued in
government, and was obeyed by his people, followed the Emperor; who also
acknowledged him for Election and Archbishop, and wrote unto him, that none of
his subjects might bear arms against him: wherein the Archbishop employed
his endeavors sincerely. The Elector of Saxony, and the Landgraue seeing this,
they published a Manifest the eleventh of July, declaring that the war was
undertaken for Religion, and that the Emperor covered his meaning with a
cloak of taking revenge against some few for rebellion, to disioyne the
confederates, and oppress them by degrees. They alleged that Ferdinand and
Granuell, and other ministers of his Majesty, had said, that the cause of this
war was the The Elector of Saxony and the Landgraue of Has(...)a publish a
Manifest against the Emperor.
contempt of the Council; they called to mind the Popes sentence against the
Elector of Collen; they added that the Spanish Prelates would not have
contributed so much of their proper revenues for any other cause; they showed
that in other things the Emperor could pretend nothing against them.

But while the Pope and Emperor prepared against the Lutherans some thing
beside Anathematismes, the day after the Session, the eighteenth of June, a
Congregation was made, where after the accustomed prayers and invocation
Justification is to be handled, in the next place.
of the holy Ghost, the Secretary read, in the Legates name, a writing, framed
by the principal Theologues, in which it was proposed, that having, by divine
inspiration, condemned the heresies concerning original sin, the order of
the things to be handled did require, that the doctrine of the modernes, in
the point of diuinegrace, which is the medicine of sin, should be examined;
and that the rather it was fit to follow the order, because it was observed by
the Augustane Confession; all which the Council means to condemn. And the
Fathers and Divines were entreated to have recourse by prayer unto the divine
assistance, and to be assiduous, and exact in their studies, because all the
errors of Martin were resolved into that point. For having undertaken from the
beginning to oppugn the Indulgences, he saw he could not obtain his purpose,
except he destroyed the works of repentance, in defect whereof Indulgences
do succeed. And justification by faith only, a thing never heard of before,
seemed to him a good means to effect this; from whence he has collected not
only that good works are not necessary, but also that a dissolute liberty in
observing the Law of GOD, and of the Church will serve the turn: has denied
efficiencie in the Sacraments, authority of Priests, Purgatory, sacrifice of
the Mass, and all other remedies for remission of sins. Therefore by a
contrary way, he that will establish the body of the Catholic doctrine, must
overthrow this heresy of justice by faith only, and condemn the blasphemies
of that enemy of good works.

When the writing was read, the Emperors Prelates said, that the more
principal and important the point proposed was, it should be the more
maturely, and opportunely handled, that the sending of the Cardinal Madruccio
to the Pope showed, that some business was on foot, the which it was not fit
to disturb, but in the mean space to handle some thing of the reformation.
The Papalins did, on the other side, inculcate, that it was no honor to
interrupt the order begun, to handle together, in every Session, doctrine and
reformation, and that after original sin no other matter could be handled.
The Legates, having heard all their opinions, concluded that to discuss the
points, and prepare them, was not to define them, but that they could not be
determined without preparation before, (Which they said only to gain time,
and after to put themselves in order, to execute what should be resolved at
Rome, between the Pope and the Cardinal, in the Emperors name. That to
digest that matter, was not to hinder the reformation, because in that the
Divines would be employed, and in this the Fathers and Canonists. With this
resolution it was concluded, that the Articles to be discussed and censured,
should be collected out of the books of Luther, out of the Colloquies,
Apologies, and out of the writings of the Lutherans and Fathers. And three
Fathers, and as many Divines were deputed to set down what should be
discussed, and to frame the Articles.

The next Congregation was held to order the matter of Reformation; The
discourse of the Card. Monte concerning residencie.
where the Cardinal of Monte said, that the world has complained long since of
the absence of Prelates and Pastoures, daily demanding residence: that the
absence of the Prelates and other Curats from their Churches, is the cause of
all the mischiefs of the Church. For the Church may be compared to a ship,
the sinking whereof is ascribed to the absent Pilot, that should govern it, if
he were present. He showed to them, that heresies, ignorance, and dissolution
do reign in the people; and bad manners and vices in the Clergy, because the
Pastors being absent from the flock, no man has care to instruct those, or
correct these. By the Prelates absence it is come to pass, that ignorant and
unlearned Ministers have been promoted, and persons assumed to bishoprics,
that were more fit for any other charge; for in regard they need not execute
their duty in person, no fitness is necessary. So he concluded, that to
establish the point of residencie, was a general remedy for all the maladies
of the Church; which also has sometimes been used by Councels and Popes, but
either for that the transgressions were then but few or for some other cause,
it was not applied with such strong and strait bonds, as is necessary now that
the disease is come to the height: that is with a more severe commandment,
with more greiuous and fearful punishments, and by means more easy to be
executed.

This was approved by the first voices of the Prelates. But when Iacomo The
Bishop of Vesone speaks in favor, of nonresidency.
Cortesi, a Florentin, Bishop of Vesone, was to speak, commending what had
been said by others, he added, that as he believed that the presence of the
Prelates and Curats in times past, was the cause of maintayning purity of faith
in the people, and discipline in the Clergy, so he could clearly show, that
their absence in these latter times, has not been the cause of the contrary
subversion, and that the custom of not residing has been brought in, because
residence has been wholly unprofitable. For the Bishops could not then
preserve sound doctrine amongst the people, when the Friars and Pardoners had
authority to preach against their wills. It is well known that the innovation
in Germany, sprang from the Sermons of Friar John Techel, and of Friar Martin
Luther; among the Suisses from the Sermons of Friar Samson of Milan. And the
residing Bishop was able to do nothing, but fight with disadvantage, against
these, who were armed with privileges. The Bishop is not able to make the
Clergy live honestly, for that, besides the general exemption of all the
Regulars, every Chapter has one, and there be few particular Priests that
want it. The Bishop cannot provide that fit men be promoted to that charge,
for the licenses to promote, and the faculties which the titular Bishops enjoy,
who suffer him not to use so much as the ministry of the Pontificals. And it
may be said in one word, that the Bishops do not reside, because they have
nothing to do, or rather that they may not make greater inconveniences to
arise, which would happen by their concurrence, and contention with privileged
men. He concluded, that as he thought it fit to restore residency, so they
ought to treat how to restore the Episcopal authority. The Bishops that spoke
after this Prelate followed his opinion, that it was necessary to command
residency, and to remove the exemptions which do hinder it. And the Legates
were enforced to consent, that both should be considered of, and that every one
speak his opinion of them, and that some Fathers should be deputed to frame
the Decree, that it might be examined.

The deputies for collecting the Articles of justification, having received The
Deputies for collecting the Articles dissent about the manner of proceeding.
the extracts of the propositions noted by every one to be censured, were not
all of one opinion. One part desired that four or six fundamental Articles of
the new doctrine might be chosen, and condemned, as was done in the matter of
original sin; alleging that it was fit to follow the style begun, and the
example of the ancient Councels, which, having declared the principal Article,
condemned the heresy, never descending to particular propositions, but
condemning the books of the heretics, in that universal they comprehended
all the pernicious doctrine; and so the honor of the Council required. But
the other part, aimed to put under censure all the propositions, which might
receive a bad construction, that those might be condemned, which in reason did
deserve it: saying, that it was the office of a Pastor to discern entirely the
wholesome grass from the hurtful, and not to suffer the flock to taste of
this. And if the example of ancient Councels ought to be imitated, they should
imitate that of Ephesus, which made so many, and so famous Anathematismes
against the doctrine of Nestorius, that they did contain whatsoever the
heretic had said, and the Councels of Africa, which descend to the
condemnation of all the propositions of the sects.

The first opinion did undoubtedly propose a more easy way, and would 25.
Articles concerning justification.
have pleased whosoever desired a speedy end of the Council, and left a
chinke open for agreement, which future times might produce. Yet the second was
embraced, which said it was good to examine all the propositions of the
Lutheran doctrine, to censure and condemn that, which, after mature
deliberation, should seem necessary and convenient. And 25. Articles were
framed. 1. Faith without works, is sufficient to salvation, and alone does
justify. 2. Justifying faith is a sure trust, by which one believes that his
sins are remitted for CHRIST; and those that are justified are bound to
believe certainly that their sins are remitted. 3. By faith only we are
able to appear before God, who neither regards, nor has need of our works:
faith only making us pure, and worthy to receive the Eucharist, believing that
in it we shall receive grace. 4. Those that do honest things, without the
holy Ghost, do sin, for that they do them with awicked heart, and it is sin
to keep the Commandments of God without faith. 5. The best repentance is a
new life, and the repentance of the life past is not necessary, neither does
the repentance of actual sins dispose us to receive grace. 6. No disposition
is necessary to justification; neither does faith justify because it disposes
us, but because it is a means or instrument, by which the promise and grace of
God is laid hold on, and received. 7. The fear of hell helps not in gaining
of justice; yea, hurts, and is sin, and makes the sinners worse. 8.
Contrition which arises from the discussion, calling to mind, and detestation
of sins, weighing the grieuousnesse, multitude, and filthiness of them, or
the loss of eternal happiness, and gain of perpetual damnation, makes a
man an hypocrite and a greater sinner. 9. The fears by which sinners are
terrified either internally by God, or externally by Preachers, are sins,
until they are overcome by faith. 10. The doctrine of the dispositions
destroys that of faith, and takes consolation from the consciences. 11.
Only faith is necessary, and other things are neither commanded nor forbid,
neither is sin any thing but incredulity. 12. He that has faith is free
from the precepts of the Law, and has no need of works to be saved; for
faith gives all abundantly, and alone fulfilleth all the Commandments, and no
work of a faithful man is so bad as may accuse or condemn him. 13. A man
baptized cannot lose salvation by reason of any sin whatsoever, except he
will not believe, and no sin, but infidelity, separateth us from the grace of
God. 14 Faith and works are contrary, and works cannot be taught without
shipwreck of faith. 15. External works of the second Table are hypocrisy.
16. The justified are set free, from guilt, and punishment, and satisfaction
neither in this life nor after death is necessary; and therefore there is no
Purgatory, or satisfaction, which is part of Penance. 17. The justified, though
they have the grace of God, cannot fulfill the Law, or avoid sins, though
mortal. 18. Obedience unto the law in the justified is weak, and vnpure in it
self, not acceptable to God, but accepted for the faith of the person
reconciled, who believes that the remainders of sin are forgiven him. 19.
The just sins in every good work, and no work makes the sin venial.
20. All the works of men, yea, of the most sanctified, are sin: the works of
the just are venial by the mercy of God, but in the rigor of his judgment
are mortal. 21. Though the just ought to doubt that his works be sins, yet
he ought withal to be assured that they are not imputed. 22. Grace and
justice are nothing but the will of God, neither have the justified any
inherent justice in them, and their sins are not abolished, but only
remitted, and not imputed. 23. Our justice is nothing but the imputation of the
justice of CHRIST, and the just have need of a continual justification, and
imputation of the justice of CHRIST. 24. All the justified are received into
equal grace and glory, and all Christians are equally great with the mother of
God, and as much Saints as she. 25. The works of the justified deserve not
blessedness, neither can any confidence be put in them, but only in the
mercy of God.

When the Articles were published, it was not so easy to set down a course to
handle them in the Congregations, as when original sin was disputed on. For
in that matter they found the Articles already handled by the Schoolmen; but
the opinion of Luther concerning justifying faith, that it is a confidence and
certain persuasion of the promise of God, with the consequences that follow,
of the distinction between the Law and the Gospel, and of the quality of works
depending on the one, and the other, was never thought of by any School
writer, and therefore never confuted or discussed: so that the Divines had
work enough, first to understand the meaning of the Lutheran propositions, and
that difference from those that are determined in the Schools, and then the
reasons, by which to distinguish them. It is certain that in the beginning
some of them, and the Fathers for the most part, did believe that the
Protestants, denying Free Will, held opinion, that man, in external actions,
is like a stone, and when they attribute justice to faith only, without the
concurrence of works, thought him just who believed only the Story of the
Gospel though, in other respects, he were never so wicked; and other such
absurdities; the which, by how much the more they are aliene from common sense,
so much the harder they are to confute: as is usual in all opinions contrary
to manifest appearance, and the generally received persuasion.

The mayor part of the Divines, who then were ascended to the number of five
and forty, was very tenacious of the opinions generally received in the
Schools, impatient of contradiction, where the School men agreed, but where
they agreed not, they did very much stand in defense of their own opinion; and
the Dominicans, more then the rest, were wont to vaunt, that, for the space of
three hundred years, the Church overcame heresies by their pains. Yet there
wanted not some wise men, who suspended their judgment, until the reasons
were weighed. In this number was Ambrosius Catarinus of Siena, a Dominican
Friar, after created Bishop of Minori, Andreus de Vega a Spaniard and
Frauciseane and Antonius Marinarus, a Carmelite. The Heremites, because they
were of the order which Martin Luther quitted, did affect to show themselves
more contrary to him then all others, and especially Ierolamus Seripandus the
General.

In examining the Articles, the Theoloques that began (to facilitate the
understanding of the three first) labored to set down what that faith which
justifies is, and what works it excludes, distinguishing them into three
sorts; preceding grace, whereof the seven following Articles until ten do
speak, concurrent in the very moment with the infusion of it, and subsequent
after grace received; of whicht he other eleven do speak. That faith
justifies must be presupposed as undoubted, for that it is said and repeated
by Saint Paul. To resolve what that faith is, and how it makes a man just, the
opinions were different in the very beginning. For the Scripture attributing
many virtues to faith, which some knew not how to apply to one only, they
thought the word was equivocal, and did distinguish it into many
significations, saying that sometimes it is taken for an obligation to keep
promises: in which sense Saint Paul said, that the incredulity of the Jews The
significations of faith.
made not vain the promise of God: sometimes for the virtue to do miracles,
as when it is said, if I shall have so much faith as to remove mountains;
sometimes for the conscience, in which sense it is said, that, that work, which
is not conformable to faith is (...); sometimes for a trust and confidence in
God, that his Majesty will keep his promises; so Saint James wills us to
pray in faith, without doubting: Lastly, for a persuasion and firm assent
(though not evident) to the things revealed by God. Others added other
significations, some to the number of nine, some to the number of fifteen.

But Frior Dominicus Soto, opposing himself against all, said, that this Soto
maintains a singular opinion.
is a renting of faith, and a giving of victory to the Lutherans, and that
there were but two significations; one, the truth and reality of him that
affirms or promises, the other, the assent in him that hears: that the
first is in God, the second is only in us: and of this last all places of the
Scripture, which speak of our faith, are understood: but to take faith for a
trust and confidence, is not only an improper kind of speaking, but abusiue,
never received by Saint Paul: that trust differs little or nothing from hope;
and therefore the opinion of Luther ought to be held for an undoubted error,
or rather heresy, that justifying faith is a trust and certainty in the mind
of a Christian, that his sins for CHRIST, are remitted. Soto added, and was
followed by the mayor part, that that trust could not justify, because it was
temeritie, and a sin: for that no man, without presumption, could assure
himself that he was in grace, but ought always to doubt. For the other part
Catarinus held, and had many followers, The opinions of Catarinus, and of
Andreus Vega.
that justification proceeded not from that trust, yet that the just might and
ought to believe by faith, that he is in grace. Andreus Vega set a third
opinion on foot, that it was neither temerity, nor certain faith, yet that
one might have a coniecturall persuasion without sin. And this controversy
could not be quitted, because in it consisted the point of the censuring the
second Article. Therefore it was first lightly discussed, then (the parties
being warmed) it divided, and held long in dispute all the Council, for the
reasons and causes which shall be declared. But all agreed, that justifying
faith is an assent to whatsoever is revealed by God, or determined by the
Church to be believed; which, sometimes being joined with charity, sometimes
remaining without it, they did distinguish into two sorts; one which is found
in sinners, which the Schools call unformed, solitary, idle, or dead, the
other, which is only in the good, working by charity, and therefore called
Formed, efficacious, and lively. And here another controversy arose. For some
thought that faith, unto which the Scriptures ascribe salvation, justice, and
sanctification, was only the lively faith, (as also the Catholics of Germany
held in the Colloquies) and included the knowledge of the things revealed, the
preparation of the will, and charity, in which the fulfilling of the whole Law
is contained. And in this sense it cannot be said, that only faith justifies,
because it is not alone, but formed with charity. Among these, Marinarus liked
not it should be said, that faith is formed with charity, because that kind of
speech is not used by Saint Paul, but only that faith works by charity.

Others understood, that justifying faith was faith in general, not saying it
was either lively or dead, because they do both justify after diverse manners;
either completely, as the lively, or as a beginning or foundation, as the
historical faith, and of this Saint Paul speaks when he attributes justice
unto it, no otherwise then as Philosophy is contained in the alphabet; that
is, as in a basis; which is as it were nothing, the principal remaining, that
is to set the statue upon it. This second opinion was jointly maintained by the
Dominicans and Franciscans, the other by Marinarus and his adherents. But the
principal point of the difficulty was not touched; that is, whether a man is
just, and then does justly, or, by doing justly, becomes just. They all
agreed in one opinion, that to say only faith does justify, was a
proposition of many fenses, and all absurd. For God and the Sacraments do
justify, as causes in their several kinds: so that the proposition has that
and many other exceptions. The preparation also of the soul to receive grace,
is a cause in its kind, so that faith cannot exclude that sort of works. But
the Articles concerning works that go before grace, all which Luther
condemns for sin, the Divines censured for heretical, rather by way of
inuectiue then otherwise, condemning likewise of heresy the opinion taken in
general, that humane works, without faith, are sin: thinking it a clear
case, that many actions of men are indifferent, neither good nor evil; and
that others there are, which though they be not acceptable to God, yet are
morally good, as the honest actions of Infidels, and Christians which are
sinners, which to call honest and sins implies a contradiction; and the
rather, because in this rank are included the heroical actions, so much
commended by antiquity.

But Catarinus maintained that man, without the special help of God, can do
no work, which may truly be good, though morally, but sins Catarinus his
opinion concerning the value of works.
still. Therefore the works of the Infidels, who are not excited by God to
believe, and of the faithful who are sinners before God stirs them up to
conversion, though they seem honest to men, even heroical, yet are truly
sins, and he that commends them, does consider them in general, and
according to external appearance; but he that shall examine the circumstances
of every one, shall find they are perverse: and that for this Luther was not
to be condemned; notwithstanding he said that the Articles ought to be
censured, as they speak of works that follow preventing grace, which are a
preparation to justification, as an abomination of sin, fear of hell, and
other terrors of conscience. For confirmation of his opinion, he brought the
doctrine of Saint Thomas, that to do a good work, the concurrence of all
circumstances is necessary, but the want of one only is sufficient for an ill.
So that howsoever among the works considered in general, some are
indifferent, yet in the singular there is no medium between having all the
circumstances, and wanting some. Therefore every particular action is good or
evil, neither is there to be found any one indifferent. And because amongst
the circumstances the end is one, all works referred to a bad end are
infected; so that the Infidels referring all to a bad end, their actions are
sins though they seem heroical, to him that knows not their intention.
Neither does it make any difference whether the relation to a bad end be
actual or habitual, because the just does merit, though he refers not the
work actually to God, but habitually only. He said further, alleging Saint
Austine, that it is sin not only to refer the action to a bad end, but also
not to refer it to a good; and because he defended that, without the
special preventing assistance of God, a man cannot refer any thing to God,
he concluded, that no good moral work can be before. For this he alleged
many places of Saint Austine, to show that he was of this opinion. He
alleged also places of Saint Ambrose, Saint Prosper, S. Anselmus, and of
other Fathers. He produced Gregory of Arimini, the Cardinal of Rochester, who,
in his book against Luther, was clearly of the same opinion, saying, it was
better to follow the Fathers, then the Schoolmen, who are divided, and rather
to take the Scriptures for a ground, from whence true Theology is taken, then
the subtilties of Philosophy, which the Schools have used: that himself also
was of that opinion, but having studied the Scriptures and Fathers, had found
the truth. He alleged the passage of the Gospel; A bad tree cannot bear
good fruit, with the amplification which our Savior added, saying, Either make
the tree good and the fruit good, or the tree evil and the fruit evil. He
used also other arguments, and especially the place of Saint Paul, that nothing
can be clean to Infidels, because their mind and conscience is spotted.

This opinion was very sharply impugned by Soto, proclaiming it heretical,
Soto proclaymeth the opinion of Catarinus to be heretical.
for inferring that man had not liberty to do well, nor could obtain his
natural end, which was to deny Free Will with the Lutheranes. He maintained
a man might, by that strength of nature, observe every precept of the Law, in
regard of the substance of the work, though not in regard of the end; which
was enough to avoid sin. He said there were three sorts of humane actions;
one, the transgression of the Law, which is sin; another, the observation
thereof, having charity for the end, which is meritorious and acceptable to
God; the third mixed, when the Law is obeyed for the substance of the precept;
which work is morally good and perfect in its kind, because it accomplisheth
the Law, making every work good according to morality, avoiding, by that
means, all sin. But he moderated this great perfection of our nature, by
adding, that it was one thing to take heed of any one particular sin, and
another to beware of all together; and said that a man might avoid any one, but
not all; by the example of him that had a vessel with three holes, who could
not stop them with two hands, but could stop which two of them he would, one
remaining open of necessity. This doctrine did not satisfy some of the
Fathers. For though it clearly showed that all works are not sins, yet it
did not wholly salve Free Will, because it will necessarily follow, that it is
not free in avoiding all sin. But Soto giving the title of good works unto
these, knew not how to determine whether they were preparatory to
justification. It seemed to him they were, in regard of the goodness of them:
and it seemed they were not, considering the doctrine of Saint Austine,
approved by Saint Thomas, and other good Divines, that the first beginning of
salvation proceeds from the vocation of God. He avoided these straits by a
distinction, that they were preparatory a far off, but not nearly, as though
giving a remote preparation to the force of nature, the first beginning was not
taken away from the grace A new distinction invented by Soto.
of God.

The Franciscans thought that not only this kind of works were good and did
truly and properly prepare to justification, but also that they were truly
meritorious in the sight of God. Therefore Scotus, the author of their
doctrine, invented a kind of merit, which he attributed to works done by the
force of nature only, saying that in congruitie they deserve grace by a
certain law, and infallibly and that a man, by natural power only, may feel
a sorrow for sin, which is a disposition, and merit of Congruity, to abolish
it: approouing a common saying of his times, that God never The doctrine of the
Franciscans concerning meritorious works
fails him that does as much as he is able. And some of that Order, passing
those bounds, did add, that if God gives not grace to him that does what he
can, he would be unjust, unrighteous, partial, and an accepter of persons.
They clamoured with much stomach and indignation, that it would be a great
absurdity, if God made no difference between one that is naturally honest, and
another drowned in all vices, and there would be no reason why he should
rather give grace to one then another. They also alleged, that Saint Thomas
was of this opinion, and that otherwise a man is put into desperation, and made
negligent to do well, and wicked men may excuse their bad works, and
attribute them to the want of the assistance of God.

But the Dominicans did confess that Saint Thomas was of this opinion, when
he was young, and after did retract it, when he was old. They did reprehend Is
contradicted by the Dominicans.
it, because in the Council of Orange, it is determined that no kind of merit
goes before grace, and that the beginning should be attributed to God;
saying, that the Lutherans having made such exclamations for this congruous
merit, it ought wholly to be abolished, as indeed it was never heard of in the
Church in ancient times, in so many controversies with the Pelagians. That the
holy Scripture does attribute our conversion to God, and that it is not fit to
leave the form of speech which it uses.

For the preparations there was no difference in the substance of the doctrine.
All held that after God does stir us up, fear and other considerations of
the malignity which is in sin do arise. They said that the opinion, that
these things are bad, was heretical, because God exhorts the sinner, yea,
moves him to these considerations, and it must not be said that God moves
to sin; and which is more, it is the office of a preacher to terrify a
sinner by these means: and because by the same means, all pass from the
state of sin to that of grace, it seemed very strange that one cuuld no
tpasse from sin to justice, without the means of another sin. But for all
this, they could not free themselves from the difficulty on the contrary part;
because all good works may stand with grace, but that fear and other
preparations cannot, and therefore are sins. Friar Antonius Marinarus thought
the difference was verbal, and said, that as passing from a great cold to a
heat, one must pass by a less degree of cold, which is neither a heat nor a
new cold, but the same diminished, so one goes from sin to justice by
terrors and attritions, which are neither good works, nor new sins, but old
sins extenuated. But he was compelled to retract, because all were against
him Of the works done in grace there was no difficulty amongst them. For they
all said they were perfect, and merited salvation; and that Luthers opinion,
that they are all sins, is wicked and sacrilegious: and holding it to be
blasphemy to say, that the blessed Virgin has committed the least venial
sin, they could not endure to hear that she sinned in every action, and
said, that the earth and hell would open themselves against so great
blasphemies.

For censure of the 22. and 23. Articles, in the point of the essence of Divine
grace, it was a common consideration, that the word Grace, in the first All
agreed to condemn Luther concerning works after grace.
signification, was understood for a benevolence or good will, which, when it
is in him that has power, necessarily bringing forth a good effect, that is,
a gift or benefit, which is also called Grace. That the Protestants thought so
meanly of the Majesty of GOD, that it could do no more then make us partakers
of his good will: but his omnipotency required that we should have the benefit
thereof in effect. And because some man might say, that the divine will only,
which is GOD himself, can have no greater thing to bestow, and that to have
given us his Son was the greatest benefit, and that Saint John, to show the
great love of GOD toward the world, alleged nothing else but that he had
given us his Son, they said that these benefits are common to all, and that
it was fit he should bestow a particular present to every one. Therefore the
Divines have added an habitual grace, given to every just man in particular,
which is a spiritual quality created by GOD, infused into the soul, whereby
it is made grateful and acceptable to the divine Majesty, whereof though the
Fathers speak not in express terms, nor the Scripture, yet it is clearly
deduced from the word Justify; which being effectiue, does necessarily
signify to make just, by the impression of real Justice: which reality,
because it is no substance, can be nothing else but a quality and habit.

And upon this occasion there was much spoken against the Lutherans, who will
not have the verb Iustificare to be effectiue, but judicial and declaratiue,
grounding themselves upon the Hebrew word (...) Tsadak, and the Greek (...)
which signify to be pronounced just; and upon many places of the New and Old
Testament, and that it is used in that signification in the Latin translation,
alleging for it places to the number of fifteen. But Soto excluded all those
of Saint Paul, which spoke of our justification, which he said must needs be
understood in an effectiue sense: whereupon arose a great dispute between him
and Marinarus, who said, one should not ground himself upon so light a matter.
But he said the Article of habitual Grace could not be doubted of, as being
decided in the Council of Vienna, and by the common opinion of all Theologues:
that this was to make sure foundations, which cannot be destroyed, and not to
say that Saint Paul to the Romans, when he says that GOD justifies, does not
mean declaratorily: for it is manifestly against the Text, which makes a
judicial process, and says, that none can accuse or condemn GODs Elect,
because GOD does iustifiethem: where the judicial words, to accuse and
condemn, do show that the word Justify, is judicial also.

But the Franciscans approved habitual grace, because charity it self is an
habit. And here was a sharp disputation between them and the Dominicans,
whether the habit of Grace be the same with the habit of Charity, as Scotus
would, or distinct, as Saint Thomas, and neither party yielding, they debated
whether, besides this Grace or inherent Justice, the Justice of CHRIST also be
imputed to the justified, as if it were his own; which they did in regard of
the opinion of Alvertus Pighius, who confessing the inherent, added, that we
must not trust in that, but in the imputed justice of CHRIST, as if it were
ours. None doubted that CHRIST had merited for us; but some blamed the word to
Impute, and would have it abolished, because it was not to be found in
Fathers: who contented themselves with the words, Communication, participation,
diffusion, deriuation, application, computation, and conjunction. Others said,
that, agreeing upon the thing, they ought not to differ upon the word, because
it signifies precisely the same that the others do, which though not by all
and often, yet sometimes was used. For this the 109. Epistle of Saint Barnard
was brought, and Vega defended, that, though the word be not found in the
Scriptures, yet it is a most proper Latin word, to say that the justice of
CHRIST is imputed to mankind for satisfaction and merit, and that it is
continually imputed to all that be justified, and do satisfy for their own
sins: but he would not have it said, it was imputed as if it were ours.
Whereunto it being opposed that Saint Thomas uses to say, that the passion of
CHRIST is communicated to the baptized for remission, as if himself had
sustained it and died, there was a long and great contention upon his words.
The Heremite General held an opinion, that, in the Sacrament of Baptism, the
Justice of CHRIST is imputed, because it is communicated wholly and entirely;
but not in penance, when our satisfactions are also required. But Soto said,
the word Imputation, was most popular and plausible, because it signified, at
the first sight, that all should be acknowledged from CHRIST; but yet that he
did ever suspect it, in regard of the bad consequences which the Lutheranes
draw from thence. That is, that this only is sufficient, without inherent
righteousness: that the Sacraments do not confer grace: that the punishment
is abolished together with the guilt: that there remains no place for
satisfaction: that all are equal in grace, justice, and glory: whence they
deduce also that abominable blasphemy, that every just man is equal to the
blessed Virgin. This admonition begat such a suspicion in the hearers, that
there appeared a manifest inclination to condemn the word for heretical,
though reasons were effectually replied to the contrary. The contentions
between the Theologues, did certainly arise from the immoderate affection they
bare to their own sect, and were cherished by diverse, for diverse ends. By the
Imperialists, to constrain them to abandon justification. By the Courtiers, to
find a way to separate the Council, and so to avoid the imminent reformation.
And by others, to free themselves from incommodities, which they feared would
be greater, by reason of the dearth, Contentions in the Council are cherished
by diverse for diverse ends. A Iubily is published in Rome, in which religion is
declared to be the cause of the war^e against the Protestants:
and of the war which approached: and the rather because they had little hope
to do good.

But while they thus dispute in Trent, the Pope published a Iubile in Rome, the
fifteenth of July: by which he eased the Princes of Germany of the pains to
find out, or persuade others, the true cause of the war. For having largely
declared, in that Bull, his pastoral affection and care for the salvation of
men, relating the perdition of souls by the increase of heresies, and that to
root them out, the Council was already begun, he bewailed, above measure,
the obstinacy of the heretics, who contemn and refuse to obey it, and to
submit themselves to the determination thereof. For remedy whereof he had made
a League with the Emperor, to reduce them to the obedience of the Church by
force of Arms. He therefore wished them all to have recourse unto GOD by
prayers, fastings, confessions, and communions, that GOD of his Divine
Majesty, would give a good issue to this war, undertaken for his glory,
exaltation of the Church, and extirpation of heresies.

The Emperor, in conformity to his purpose of concealing the cause of The
Emperors Band^ against the Sax on and Landgraue.
Religion, the twentieth of the same month, published a Bando against the
Saxon and Landgraue, laying to their charge that they had always hindered his
designs, had never obeyed him, made conspiracies against him, moved war
against other Princes of the Empire, seized upon Bishoprics, and other
governments, dispossessed many of their goods, and covered all these things
with the glorious and sweet name of Religion, peace, and liberty, but having
indeed rather any other end. Therefore he does prescribe them, as
perfidious, rebels, seditious, guilty of high treason, and enemies of the
public peace: and commands that none do assist them, or be linked with
them, absolueth the nobility and people of their dominions from their Oath of
fidelity, including all those in the Bando who persevere to obey them.

The cause of the war alleged by the Emperor grieved the Pope, and The
Pope and the Emperor are offended one with another for alleging diverse
causes of the war.
that of the Pope grieved the Emperor, because both their ends were hindered.
For though the Pope pretended that he had published this Manifest, that all the
people of Christendom might implore the aid of God, to favor the Emperors
Arms, yet both he and every man of judgment knew very well that it was to
give notice to Germany, and the whole world, that the war was for Religion:
which the simpler sort also did know a little after. For his letter to the
Suisses before mentioned, and a copy of the Capitulations made with Madruccio,
were published. The Pope crossed Casar in this, because he desired the
suppression of the Protestants, without the exaltation of the Emperor, and
therefore to balance them well, he meant to constrain all the professors of
the new Religion to unite against him. And it is certain that the Popes action
hindered the Emperors designs. For desiring the Suisses to continue their
league with the house of Austria and Burgundy, and not assist the rebels, the
Euangelikes answered that they would first be sure that the war was not for
Religion. So it hapened, that, the war being but newly begun, diseords were
already sowed between the Princes, lately confederated.

The Potentates of Italy were amazed, and saw the Popes usual wisdom The
Princes of Italy do censure the Pope for making this war.
was wanting to keep war far from Italy, and the Princes beyond the
mountains in an equal balance of strength; who in the same instant had
failed in both. For if the Emperor had subdued Germany, Italy had remained
at his discretion, and France not been able to resist. If the Emperor had been
overcome, the Dutchmen would have passed into Italy. And perhaps these reasons
running in the Popes mind, persuaded him when he had concluded the leagte, to
secure himself against the Emperor with the counterpoose of Germany.

But Caesar, besides his distaste for the Iubelie, suspected also that the
Pope, having obtained his end of making war against the Protestants; would
dissolve the Council, under pretense to defer it until the war was ended,
or for scare of the arms which the Protestants prepared in Sueuia. He knew
this was the aim of all the Court, negotiated with him more then five and
twenty years, and that the Bishops assembled in Trent, even his own, had the
same mind, for the incommodities which they suffered there. He feared the
Lutherans would say, if the Council were separated, that it was assembled
only to find a pretense of making war against them; and that the
Catholics of Germany would think, that, the interests of religion and
reformation being laid aside, he would endeavor only to subdue them. He
doubted also, that going on to handle the Controuersed points, as already they
had original sin, and meant to handle (as he was advertised) justification,
he might be hindered in some composition, which otherwise he might have
made, giving hope to the Cities that their reasons should be heard, to separate
them from the Princes of the league. He saw clearly it was necessary the
Council should remain open, and yet meddle only with reformation: but that it
was impossible to obtain it without the Pope consented with him. Therefore he
sent to certify him in diligence, that he would employ all his spirit and
forces to make Trent The Emperor does earnestly entreat the Pope that only
reformation may be handled in the Council, and that it might not be dissolved.
secure, though there went a fame of the Protestant armies in Sueuia. That it
was necessary to maintain the Council, that they might answer the
backebitings and calumnies, which would be spread against them both, if it were
dissolved. He earnestly prayed him to keep the Council open and not to
handle the controversies, because his purpose was to compel the Protestants,
his adherents, by authority, and his enemies by force of arms, to be present,
and submit themselves. But in the mean time he desired him not to hinder his
excellent deseigne, shutting the door upon them, with contrary decrees, made
in their absence. That this could not continue long, and that he hoped to see
the end of this summer. Therefore, that he should be contented that now
reformation only should be treated of, or, if religion were, they should
touch matters of small weight only, that, when they were defined, they might
not offend the Protestants. He ordained also, that his Ambassador in Trent
should make the same instance to the Legates. And being informed that Santa
Croce was inclined to any kind of dissolution of the Council, he charged his
Ambassador to give him a nip, and tell him, that if, in this, he did cross
his Majesty, he would cause him He threatens the Legate Santa Croce.
to be thrown into the river Adice. This was known to all, and written by the
Historians of this time.

The Pope, though he would feign have been free from the Council, which the
Court desired also, yet he thought it necessary to gratify the Emperor, in
keeping it open, and not handling controversies. But to treat only The Pope
and Court did not like that reformation only should be handled.
of Reformation neither pleased him nor the Courtiers. Therefore he wrote to
the Legates that they should not suffer the assembly to dissolve, nor make a
Session until himself had given order, but should entertain the Prelates,
and Theologues with Congregations, and such businesses and exercises, as seemed
to them best. The 25. day the Iubelie was solemnly published in Trent, in
pretense of the Legates, and all the Council. And that they might apply
themselves to fastings, and other works of Penance according to the (...) of
the ^al, the Session was deferred (...) it should be intimated all the
Congregations in (...)tted for 15 days. The Iubely is published in Trent.


At the same time the Protestant A^^y came near to Tirost, to stop the passage
of the (...) of Italy, to the Emperors service and Chiusa was taken by (...)
For which cause the Country was all The Protestant army makes the Prelates in
Trent afraid.
in arms, to find their progress, and Francesco Castela^^o, who guarded the
Council, went (...) person to Ispru^, and fortified that City, to prevent the
possession of the passages, and planted himself seven miles about it. This
made men doubt, at that Country would be the feet of the war, and that the
(...) wholly be disturbed. The Prelates, who desired a pretense to retire,
amplified the dangers and incommodities; whereunto the Legates not not opposing
in the beginning, caused a suspicion, that the Pope had no mind to continue the
Council. Some of the most timorous Prelates, who had no desire to remain in
Trent, departed; and so would more have done, if the Cardinal of Trent, lately
returned from Rome, had not assured them, that the Pope would have been much
displeased therewith and the timorous had not been comforted by him, and the
Emperors Ambassador, securing them that the great number, which came out of
Italy, would compel the Protestants to be gone: and also if the Popes letters
to the Legates, which came in the midst of these stirs, had not joined the
Popes authority and theirs, to the entreaties of others.

But though the Protestants enterprise did not succeed, and Tiroll remained The
Italian troops pass by Trent, under the conduct of Octanius Farnese.
secure, so that there was no doubt on that side, yet there was confusion in
Trent, by reason of the great number of soldiers, which continually passed out
of Italy into Germany, who, according to the capitulations of the league, were
in all to the number of twelve thousand foot, and five hundred horse, beside
two hundred from the Duke of Tuscany, and one hundred from the Duke of Ferrara.
The most famous Captains of Italy came with them, under the conduct of the
General Octanius Farnese, and his brother Alexander Farnese, Cardinal and
Legate, both grandchildren to the Pope, by his son; and six thousand
Spaniards, the Emperors own soldiers, taken out of Naples and Lumbardy. And
so long as the soldiers passed, which was until the middle of August, though
the public actions of the Council were not wholly omitted, yet the meetings
were not so many, nor so frequented. But that the Bishops and Divines might
have entertainment, the Cardinal Santa Croce held an assembly of learned men
in his house, where they treated of the samethings, but familiarly, and without
ceremony.

The Protestants combined with the Emperor, did then publish a writing, The
Protestants combined with the Emperor do rail against the Pope.
addressed to their subjects, full of raylings against the Pope, calling him
Antichrist, instrument of Satan, imputing unto him that, before, he had sent
to kindle a fire in diverse places of Saxony, and now was author and moouer of
the war, and had sent into Germany to poison the wells, and standing waters,
aduising all to be diligent in taking and punishing those poysoners. This very
few did think to be probable, and was esteemed a calumny.

The Popes men being come into the army, which was in Landisuth, the 15 of
August, the Emperor gave the collar of the golden Fleece, unto his Son in
law Octauius, which he had bestowed on him in the celebration of the assembly
of that Order, held upon Saint Andrews day, and he saw the The Emperor gives
the collar of the golden Fleece to his son in law Octanius Farnese.
muster of the Popes men, with much approbation and content, to have the flower
of the Italian Soldiers. Yet the ends of the Pope and Emperor being diverse,
they produced occasions of distastes. The Cardinal Farnese desired to carry the
cross, as Legate, before the army, and had order from the Pope so to do,
publishing Indulgences, as formerly was used so to be done in The Emperor will
not suffer Card. Farnese the Legate to carry the cross before the army.
Crasadoes, declaring it was the war of the Catholic Church. But he could
obtain neither of these from the Emperor, whose end was quite contrary, to
entertain the Lutherane Princes who were with him, and that the Cities might
not wax obstinate against him for it. The Cardinal perceiving he could not
tarry in the field in any other quality, with the Popes dignity, and his own,
he remained in Ratisbon, and faining himself to be sick, expected his
Grandfathers answer, whom he had advertised of all.

They now being in a readiness on both sides, though either had a great army,
and forced one another, presenting also the battle when they saw their
advantage, and though each of them had many good occasions to acchieue some
notable victory, yet they were not embraced by the Protestants, because the
Elector and the Landgraue had equal authority over The equal authority of the
Saxon and Landgraue brings great disadvantage to their army.
them: a government which ever succeeds ill in arms: and because the
Emperor knowing this, that he might be Conqueror without blood, and not give
the enemies occasion to set their affairs in better order, expected that time
should put into his hand a certain victory, in stead of one that was
doubtful, exposing himself to the hazard of a battle, whereby nothing of
moment or consequence was done.

The Legates in Trent, now freed from the Soldiers, did regulate the
Congregations, according to the first style, reducing them to ordinary days,
and be thinking themselves how to drive the time, according to the purpose of
the Pope. They found no other means, but to show that the importance of the
matter required an exact discussion, and to prolong the disputations of the
Divines, giving an entrance to new matters; whereof there could not want
occasion, in regard that by reason of connection, or intemperancie of wit,
Doctors do ever easily pass from one subject to another. They resolved also to
cherish the differences and variety of opinions; a thing easy to be done,
as well for the natural inclination of man to overcome in disputations, as
because in the Schools, especially of the Friars, too much obstinacy in
opinion of their own sect, is very usual. Monte, who was of an ingenuous
Card. Monte cannot dissemble so well as the other Legate Santa Crace.
disposition, thought it would be hard, and could not promise to be constant in
so long a dissimulation, as he saw was necessary. But Santa Croce, a man of a
melancholy and close nature, offered to take upon him the charge of governing
the business. Fathers are deputed to compose the Anathematisines.


In the Congregation of the twentieth of August, it seeming that as much had
been spoken upon the twenty five Articles, as was sufficient to frame the
Anathematisines, it was proposed to depute Fathers to compose them. And there
were named three Bishops, and three Generals, and Sonta Croce first of all. Who
having made a model of the Canons, and proposed it to be discussed in the
Congregations following, the same disputations did return, of the certainty
of Grace, of the moral works of Infidels and sinners, of the merit of
congruitie, of imputation, of the distinction of Grace and charity; and those
that were interested in the opinions spoke more earnestly, because the
Cardinal gave them an edge, by showing that the matters were of importance,
Santa Croce cherishes the division amongst the Divines.
and ought to be discussed well, and that without the resolution of them, it
was impossible to make a good determination. The controversy of the certainty
of Grace only, held the disputants in exercise many days, and made obstinate,
and divided into two parts, not only the Divines, but the Prelates also. Yet
the question was not cleared by the disputation, but more obscured.

In the beginning (as has been delivered) one part said that certainty A
difference in opinions about certainty of Grace.
of Grace was presumption; the other, that one might have it meritoriously. The
ground of the first was, that Saint Thomas, Saint Bonauenture, and generally
the Schoolmen thought so, for which cause the mayor part of the Dominicans
were of the same opinion. Besides the authority of Doctors, they alleged for
reasons, that God would not that man should be certain, that he might not be
lifted up in pride, and esteem of himself, that he might not prefer
himself before others, as he that knows himself to be just would do,
before manifest sinners: and a Christian would so become drowsy, careless,
and negligent to do good. Therefore they said that incertainetie was
profitable, and meritorious besides, because it is a passion of the mind, which
does afflict it, and being supported, is turned to merit. They alleged many
places of the Scripture also; of Solomon, that a man knows not whether he
be worthy of hate or love; of Wisdom, which commands not to be without
fear of the sin pardoned, of Saint Peter, to work out our salvation with
fear and trembling; of Saint Paul, who said of himself, though my conscience
accuse me not, yet am I not thereby justified. These reasons and testimonies
The opinion of Seripandal, Vega, and Soto.
together with many places of the Fathers, were brought and amplified,
especially by Seripandus, Vega, and Soto.

But Catarinus, and Marinarus, had other places of the same Fathers, to the The
opinion of Catarinus and Marinarus
contrary; which showed they had spoken accidentally in this particular, as the
occasions made most for their purpose, sometimes to comfort the scrupulous,
sometimes to repress the audacious. Yet they kept them close to the authority
of the Scripture. They said that to as many as it is read in the Gospel that
CHRIST has forgiven sins, to all them he said, Believe that your sins are
forgiven. And it would be an absurdity that CHRIST should give an occasion of
temeritie and pride, or, if the contrary were profitable, or a merit, that he
would deprive all men of it. That the Scripture binds us to give God thanks
for our justification, which cannot be given except we know we have obtained
it; for to give them when we are uncertain, would be most foolish and
impertinent. That Saint Paul does plainly confirm the certainty, when he
puts the Corinthians in mind to know that CHRIST is in them, except they be
reprobates. And when he says, we have received from God the Spirit to know
what is given us by his Divine Majesty; and more clearly: that the boly
Spirit does bear witness to our spirit, that we are the sons of God: and
it is much to accuse them of rashness, who believe the holy Ghost that
speaks with them. For Saint Ambrose says that the holy Ghost does never
speak unto us, but does make us know that it is he that speaks. After this
he added the words of CHRIST in Saint John, that the world cannot receive the
holy Ghost, because it sees him not, nor knows him, but that the Disciples
shall know him, because he shall dwell in them. Catarinus did fortify himself
strongly, by saying, that it was the opinion of a man in a dream, to defend
that grace is voluntarily received, when we know not whether we have it or
not; as if, to receive a thing willingly, it be not necessary that the willing
receiver should know it is given him, that he does really receive it, and
that, after it is received, he does possess it.

The force of these reasons made them first retire a little, who censured the
opinion of temeritie, and yield that there might be a conjecture, though not
an ordinary certainetie. Yet they acknowledged a certainty in the Martyrs, in
the newly baptized, and in some by special revelation; and from conjecture
they were brought to call it moral faith: and Vega, who, in the beginning,
admitted probability only, overcome by these reasons, and beginning to favor
the certainty, for fear of conforming himself to the Lutheran opinion, said,
that there was so much certainty as did exclude all doubt, and could not be
deceived, yet that it was not Christian faith, but humane and experimental.
And as he that is hot, is sure he is so, and should want sense if he
doubted, so he that has grace in him, does perceive it, and cannot doubt;
yet it is by the sense of the mind, not by Divine revelation. But the other
defenders of certainty, constrained by the adversaries to speak plainly,
whether they thought a man might have it, or whether he were bound unto it, or
whether it were a Divine or humane faith, they came to say, that it being a
faith given to the Testimony of the holy Ghost, it could not be said to be
in our liberty, every one being bound to believe Divine revelations, and that
it must needs be called Divine faith.

And they being pressed with the objection, that if that faith be not equal
to the Catholic faith, it does not exclude all doubt, if it be equal, then
the just ought as much to believe he is justified, as the Articles of faith,
Catarinus did answer, that that faith was divine, of equal certainty,
excluding all doubt, as well as the Catholic; but that it was not the
Catholic it self. He affirmed that the Faith which one gives to Divine
revelations, made unto ones self, in particular, was divine, and excluded all
doubt, but when it is received by the Church, then it is made Universal, that
is, Catholic, and that this only concerns the Articles of faith; which
notwithstanding, in regard of certainty and exclusion of doubt, is not
superior to private faith, but exceeds it only in universality. So all the
Prophets had first private faith of the things revealed to them by God, of
which, after they were received by the Church, they had a Catholic faith. This
opinion seemed hard at the first hearing, and the adherents of Catarinus, who
were all the Carmelites, because John Bacon, their Doctor, was of that
opinion, and the Bishops of Sinigaglia, Worcester, and Salpi, did willingly go
so far; but afterward, the reason being weighed and discussed, it was
strange how it was received by a principal part of the Prelates, Soto crying
out that it was too much in favor of the Lutherans, and others defending that
Luther ought not to be censured if he had said that, after justification, that
kind of faith does follow, but because he says that is the faith which
justifies.

They answered the reasons of the other part, that the Schoolmen ought not to
be regarded, who ground themselves upon Philosophical reasons; that one
cannot judge of divine motions; that the authority of Solomon was not to the
purpose; for saying none knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred,
applying it here, it would conclude, that the most wicked sinner, who
perseuereth, cannot know that he is in disgrace with God: that the saying of
Wisdom cannot be applied to this, and the translation does deceive, because
the Greek word (...) does not signify sin pardoned, as the translation is,
but expiation or pardon, and the words of the wise man are an admonition to the
sinner not to lay sin upon sin by too much confidence of pardon to come, or
past: that it was not fit to ground an Article of faith upon an error of an
interpreter. Thus did the same men, who then had made the vulgar edition
authentical, speak of it; which every one may also observe out of the books
printed by them, who assisted at the decree of the approbation. They said, that
to work with fear and trembling was an Hebrew phrase, which signifies not
ambiguitie, but reverence, because fear and trembling are used by servants to
their masters, even when they are commended by them, and know they are in
favor; that the place of S. Paul did fauourthem, when he spoke of
justification. For saying I am not conscious of any want, yet thereby am I not
justified, he would infer, but I am justified by something else, and so would
prove the certainty. But the true sense is, that Paul speaks of defect in
the office of preaching, and says, my conscience does not accuse me of defect
in any thing, yet I dare not say I have wholly satisfied, but I reserve all to
the judgment of God.

He that had not seen the memorials of those who had part in these
disputations, and how far different that was which they printed, would not
believe how much was spoken upon this article, and with how much heat, not
onley by the Divines, but the Bishops also, all seeming to understand the
truth, and to have it on their side: so that Santa Croce saw there was more
need of a bridle, then spurs, who desired to make an end of it by entreating
them to pass to something else, and to divert the controversy. It was twice
proposed in congregation of the Prelates to leave this question, as ambiguous,
long, and troublesome; yet they returned to it, being drawn by their
affections. At last the Cardinal, showing they had said enough, and that they
should consider again of the things spoken, to resolve on them more maturely,
obtained of them to speak of preparatiue works, and observation of the Law:
upon which occasion the matter of Free will was brought in by many, and not
neglected by the Cardinal, and he proposed whether they would have that
particular also handled together with the rest, because it did so cohere with
the^, that it could not be handled severally. Therefore Prelates and Divines
were deputed to collect Articles, out of the works of the Lutherans, that they
might be censured.

The Articles were, 1. God is the total cause of our works, good and evil:
and the adultery of David, the cruelty of Manlius, and the treason of Judas,
are works of God, as well as the vocation of Saul. 2. No man has power to
think well or ill, but all comes from absolute necessity, and in us is no
free will, and to affirm it, is a mere fiction. 3. Free Articles concerning
Free will.
will, since the sin of Adam, is lost, and a thing only tirular, and when
one does what is in his power, he sins mortally; yea, it is a thing fained
and a title without realitie. 4. Free will is only in doing ill, and has no
power to do good. 5. Free will moved by God, does by no means cooperate,
and follows as an instrument without life, or as an unreasonable creature. 6.
That God conuerteth those only whom he will, though they will not, and spurn
against it.

Upon the two first Articles they rather spoke in a tragical manner, then The
discussio^ of the articles.
Theological; that the Lutheran doctrine was a frantique wisdom; that man's
will as they make it, is prodigious; that those words, a thing of title only,
a title without realitie, are monstrous; that the opinion is impious and
blasphemous against God; that the Church has condemned it against the
Manichees, Priscillianists, and lastly, against Aballardus, and Wigleffe, and
that it was a folly, against common sense, every one proouing in himself his
own liberty; that it deserves not confutation, but, as Aristotle says,
chastisement, or experimental proof. That Luthers Scholars perceived the
folly, and to moderate the absurdity, said after, that man had liberty in
external, political, and oecumenicall actions, and in matters of civil
justice, that which every one but a fool knows to proceed from counsel and
election, but denied liberty in matters of divine justice only.

Marinarus said, that as it is foolish to say, no humane action is in our
power, so it is no less absurd to say that every one is, every one finding by
experience that he has not his affections in his power, that this is the
sense of the Schools, which say, that we are not free in the first motions;
which freedom because the Saints have, it is certain, that some freedom is
in them, which is not in us. Catarinus, according to his own opinion, that
without Gods special assistance, a man cannot do a moral good, said there
was no liberty in this, and therefore that the fourth Article was not so easily
to be condemned. Vega, after he had spoken with such ambiguitie, that he
understood not himself, concluded, that between the Divines and the
Protestants there was no difference of opinion. For these concluding now that
there is liberty in Philosophical justice, and not in supernatural, in
external works of the Law, not in internal and spiritual, it is to say
precisely with the Church, that one cannot do spiritual works, belonging to
religion, without the assistance of God. And though he said that all endeavor
was to be used for composition, yet he was not gratefully heard, it seeming in
some sort a prejudice, that any of the differences might be reconciled; and
they were wont to say, that this is a point of the Colloquies, a word abhorred,
as if, by that, the Laity had usurped that authority which is proper to
Councels.

A great disputation arose amongst them, whether it be in man's power to
believe or not believe. The Franciscans following Scotus, did deny it; saying,
that as knowledge does necessarily follow demonstrations, so faith does arise
necessarily from persuasions, and that it is in the understanding, which is a
natural agent, and is naturally moved by the object. They alleged
experience, that no man can believe what he will, but what seems true;
adding that no man would feel any displeasure, if he could believe he had it
not. The Dominicans said, that nothing is more in the power of the will then to
believe, and, by the determination and resolution of the will only, one may
believe the number of the stars is even.

Upon the third Article, whether free will be lost by sin, very many
authorities of Saint Austine being alleged, which expressly say it, Soto did
invent, because he knew no other means to avoid them, that true liberty is
equivocal; for either it is derived from the Noune, Libertas, freedom, or
from the Verb Liberare, to set free: that in the first sense it is opposed to
necessity, in the second to servitude; and that when Saint Austine said, that
free will was lost, he would infer nothing else, but that it is made slave
to sin and Satan. This difference could not be understood, because a servant
is not free, for that he cannot do his own will, but is compelled to follow
his Masters; and by this opinion Luther could not be blamed for intitling a
book, of servile will.

Many thought the fourth Article absurd; saying, that liberty is understood to
be a power to both the contraries: therefore that it could not be said to be
a liberty to evil, if it were not also to good. But they were made to
acknowledge their error, when they were told that the Saints, and blessed
Angels in heaven, are free to do good, and therefore that it was no
inconvenience that some should be free only to do evil.

In examining the fifth and sixth Articles, of the consent which free will
gives to divine inspiration, or preventing grace, the Franciscans and
Dominicans were of diverse opinions. The Franciscans contended that the will
being able to prepare it self, it has liberty much more to accept or refuse
the divine prevention, when God gives assistance, before it uses the strength
of nature. The Dominicans denied that the works preceding the vocation are
truly preparatory, and ever gave the first place to God. Notwithstanding there
was a contention between the Dominicans themselves. For Soto defended, that
although a man cannot obtain grace, without the special preventing assistance
of God, yet the will may ever some way resist and refuse it, and when it does
receive it, it is because it gives assent, and does will so: and if our assent
were not required, there would be no cause why all should not be converted.
For, according to the Apocalypse, GOD stands always at the gate, and
knocks: and it is a saying of the Fathers, now made common, that God gives
grace to every one that will have it, and the Scripture does always require
this consent in us; and to say otherwise were to take away the liberty of the
will, and to say that God uses violence.

Friar Aloisius Catanea said to the contrary, that God works two sorts of
preventing grace in the mind, according to the doctrine of Saint Thomas, the
one sufficient, the other effectual; to the first the will may consent or
resist, but not to the second, because it implies co^tradiction that
efficacity can be resisted. For proof he alleged places of Saint John, Saint
Paul, and very clear expositions of Saint, Austine. He answered, that it
arises hence that all are not converted, because all are not effectually
prevented. That the fear of overthrowing free will is removed by Saint
Thomas, that things are violently moved by a contrary cause, but never by
their own: and God being the cause of the will, to say it is moved by God, is
to say it is moved by it self. And he condemned, yea mocked the Lutherans
manner of speech, that the will follows, as a dead or unreasonable creature;
for being reasonable by nature, moved by its own cause, which is God, it is
moved as reasonable, and follows as reasonable. And likewise that God
conuerteth, though men will not, and spurn at him. For it is a contradiction
that the effect should spurn against the cause. That it may happen that God
may effectually convert one, that before has spurned against sufficient
prevention; but afterward cannot, because a gentleness in the will moved,
must needs follow the efficacy of the divine motion.

Soto said, that every divine inspiration was only sufficient, and that that
whereunto free will has assented, obtains efficiency by that consent,
without which it is ineffectual, not by the defect of it self, but of the
man. This opinion he defended very fearfully, because it was opposed, that
the distinction of the reprobate from the elect, would proceed from man,
contrary to the perpetual Catholic sense; that the vessels of mercy are
distinguished by grace, from the vessels of wrath. That Gods election would be
for works foreseen, and not for his good pleasure. That the doctrine of the
Fathers, and of the African and French Councels against the Pelagians, has
always published, that God makes us to will, which is to say, that he makes
us consent. Therefore giving consent to us, it ought to be attributed to the
divine power; or else he that is saved would no more be obliged to God, then he
that is damned, if God should use them both alike.

But, notwithstanding all these reasons, the contrary opinion had the general
applause, though many confessed, that the reasons of Catanea were not resolved,
and were displeased that Soto did not speak freely, but said that the will
consents in a certain manner, so that it may in a certain manner resist: as
though there were a certain manner of mean between this affirmation and
negation. The free speech of Catanea, and the other Dominicans, did trouble
them also, who knew not how to distinguish that opinion, which attributes
justification to consent, from the Pelagian: and therefore they wished them to
take heed of leaping beyond the mark, by a too great desire to condemn
Luther; that objection being esteemed above all, that, by this means, the
divine election or predestination, would be for works foreseen; which no
Divine did admit. This drew them to speak also of Predestination.

Therefore it was determined, by reason of the connection, to draw Articles,
Articles concerning Predestination, drawn out of the writings of the
Zuinglians.
in this subject, also from the doctrine of the Protestants. In the books of
Luther, in the Augustan confession, and in the Apologies, and Colloquies, there
was nothing found that deserved censure: but much in the writings of the
Zuinglians; whence these following Articles were drawn. 1. For Predestination
and reprobation, that man does nothing, but all is in the will of GOD. 2. The
Predestined cannot be condemned, nor the Reprobate saved. 3. The elect and
predestined only are truly justified. 4. The justified are bound by faith to
believe they are in the number of the Predestined. 5. The justified cannot
fall from grace. 6. Those that are called, and are not in the number of the
Predestined, do never recelue grace, 7. The justified is bound to believe,
by faith, that he ought to persevere in justice until the end. 8. The
justified is bound to believe for certain, that in case he fall from grace, he
shall receive it again.

In examining the first of these Articles, the opinions were diverse. The The
discussion of the Articles.
most esteemed Divines amongst them thought it to be Catholic, and the
contrary heretical; because the good School Writers, Saint Thomas Scotus, and
the rest, do so think, that is, that GOD, before the creation, out of the
mass of mankind, has elected by his only and mere mercy, some for glory,
for whom he has prepared, effectually, the means to obtain it; which is
called to predestinate. That their number is certain and determined, neither
can there be any added. The others not predestined cannot complain, for that
GOD has prepared for them sufficient assistance for this, though indeed none
but the elect shall be saved. For the most principal reason, they alleged,
that Saint Paul to the Romans, having made Jacob a pattern of the
predestined, and Esau of the Reprobate, he produces the decree of GOD,
pronounced before they were borne, not for their works, but for his own good
pleasure. To this they joined the example of the same Apostle, that as the
Potter of the same lump of clay, makes one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor, so GOD of the same mass of men, chooses and leaves whom he
lists. For proof whereof S. Paul brings the place, where GOD says to
Moses; I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will show pity, on
whom I will show pity. And the same Apostle concludes, that it is not of him,
that wills, or of him that runs, but of God who shows mercy: adding
after, that God shows mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will.
They said further, that for this cause the counsel of the divine
predestination, and reprobation is called, by the same Apostle, the height and
depth of wisdom, unsearchable, and incomprehensible. They added places of the
other Epistles, where he says; We have nothing but what we have received from
God, that we are not able of our selves, so much as to think well; and where,
in giving the cause why some have revolted from the faith, and some stand
firm, he said, it was because the foundation of God stands sure, and has
this Seal; the Lord knows who are his. They added diverse passages of the
Gospel of Saint John, and infinite authorities of Saint Austin, because that
Saint wrote nothing in his old age, but in favor of this doctrine.

But some others, though of less esteem, opposed this opinion, calling it
hard, cruel, inhumane, horrible, impious, and that it showed partiality in
GOD, if, without any motive cause, he elected one, and rejected another; and
unjust, if he damned men for his own will, and not for their faults, and had
created so great a multitude to condemneit. They say it destroyed free will,
because the elect cannot finally do evil, nor the reprobate good; that it
casts men into a gulf of desperation, doubting that they be reprobates,
that it gives occasion to the wicked of bad thoughts, not caring for penance,
but thinking that if they be elected, they shall not perish, if reprobates, it
is in vain to do well, because it will not help them. They confessed, that
not only works are not the cause of Gods election, because that it is before
them, and eternal, but that neither works foreseen can move GOD to
predestinate, who is willing, for his infinite mercy that all should be
saved; and to this end prepares sufficient assistance for all, which every
man, having free will, receives or refuses, as pleases him: and GOD, in his
eternity, foreseeth those who will receive his help, and use it to good, and
those who will refuse; and rejects these, electeth and predestinateth those.
They added, that otherwise there was no cause why GOD in the Scripture should
complain of sinners, nor why he should exhort all to repentance and
conversion, if they have not sufficent means to get them: that the sufficient
assistance, invented by the others, is insufficient, because in their opinion,
it never had or shall have any effect.

The first opinion as it is mystical and hidden, keeping the mind humble and
relying on GOD, without any confidence in it self, knowing the deformity of
sin, and the excellency of divine grace, so this second was plausible and
popular, cherishing humane presumption, and making a great show; and it pleased
more the preaching Friars, then the understanding Divines. And the Courtiers
thought it probable, as consonant to politic reasons. It was maintained by
the Bishop of Bitonto, and the Bishop of Salpi showed himself very partial.
The defenders of this, using humane reasons, prevailed against the others, but
coming to the testimonies of the Scriptures, they were manifestly overcome.

Catarinus holding the same opinion to resolve the places of Scripture, which
troubled them all, invented a middle way: that GOD of his goodness, has
elected some few, whom he will save absolutely, for whom he has prepared most
potent, effectual, and infallible means; the rest he desires for his part
they should be saved, and to that end has provided sufficient means for all,
leaving it to their choice to accept them, and be saved, or refuse them and be
damned. Amongst these there are some who receive them and are saved, though
they be not of the number of the elect; of which kind there are very many.
Others refusing to cooperate with God, who wishes their salvation, are damned.
The cause why the first are predestined, is only the will of GOD; why the
others are saved, is the acceptance, good use, and cooperation with the divine
assistance, foreseen by GOD; why the last are reprobated, is the foreseeing of
their perverse will, in refusing, or abusing it. That Saint John, Saint Paul,
and all the places of Scripture alleged by the other part, where all is given
to GOD, and which do show infallibility, are understood only of the first,
who are particularly privileged; and in others, for whom the common way is
left, the admonitions, exhortations, and general assistances are verified,
unto which he that will give care and follow them, is saved, and he that will
not, perishes by his own fault. Of those few who are privileged above the
common condition, the number is determinate, and certain with God, but not of
those who are saved by the common Way depending on humane liberty, but only
in regard of the foreknowledge of the works of every one. Catarinus said he
wondered at the stupidity of those, who say the number is certain and
determined, and yet they add that others may be saved, which is as much as to
say that the number is certain, and yet it may be enlarged; and likewise of
those who say, that the reprobates have sufficient assistance for salvation,
though it be necessary for him that is saved to have a grat^er, which is to
say, a sufficient vnsufsicient.

He added that Saint Austins opinion was not heard of before his time, and
himself confesses, it cannot be found in the works of any, who wrote before
him, neither did himself always think it true, but ascribed the cause of
Gods will to merits, saying, God takes compassion on, and hardens whom he
lists. But that will of GOD cannot be unjust, because it is caused by most
secret merits; and that there is diversity of sinners, some, who though they
be justified, yet deserve justification. But after the heat of disputation
against the Pelagians transported him to think, and speak the contrary. Yet
when his opinion was heard, all the Catholics were scandalized, as S, Prosper
wrote to him. And Genadius of Marscilles 50. years after, in his judgment
which he makes of the famous writers, said that it happened to him according
to the words of Salmon, that in much speaking one cannot avoid sin, and that
by his fault, exaggerated by the enemies, the question was not then risen,
which might afterward bring forth heresy; whereby the good Father did
intimate his fear, of that which now appears, that is, that, by that
opinion, some Sect, and division might arise.

The censure of the second Article was diverse, according to the three related
opinions. Catarinus thought the first part true, in regard of the efficacy of
the Divine will, toward those who are particularly favored, but the second
false, concerning the suffiencie of Gods assistance unto all, and man's liberty
in cooperating Others ascribing the cause of Predestination in all to humane
consent, condemned the whole Article, in both parts. But those that adhered to
S. Austin, and the common opinion of the Theologues, did distinguish it, and
said it was true in a compounded sense, but damnable in a divided: a subtlety
which confounded the minds of the Prelates; and his own, though he did
exemplify it, by saying; he that moves cannot stand still, it is true in a
compound sense because it is understood, while he moves; but in a divided
sense it is false, that it is in another time. Yet it was not well understood,
because applying it to his purpose, it cannot be said, that a man
predestined can be damned, in a time when he is not predestined, seeing
he is always so: and generally the divided sense has no place where the
accident is inseparable from the subject. Therefore others thought to declare
it better, saying that God governs and moves every thing, according to its
proper nature, which in contingent things is free, and such, as that the Act
may consist together with the power to the opposite; so that with the act of
predestination, the power to reprobation and damnation does stand. But this
was worse understood then the first.

The other Articles were censured with admirable concord. Concerning the third
and sixth, they said it has always been an opinion in the Church, that many
receive divine grace, and keep it for a time, who afterward do lose it, and
in ^ine are damned. There was alleged the example of Saul, Solomon, and
Judas, one of the twelve, a case more evident then all, by the words of CHIST
to the FATHER; I have kept in thy Name all that thou have given me, of which
not one has perished but the son of perdition. To these they added Nicholas,
one of the seven Deacons, and others first commended in the Scriptures, and
then blamed; and for a conclusion of all, the fall of Luther. Against the sixth
they particularly considered, that vocation would be an impious derision, when
those that are called, and nothing is wanting on their side, are not admitted:
that the Sacraments would not be effectual for them, all which things are
absurd. But for censure of the first, the authority of the Prophet was
brought, directly contrary in terms, where God says, that, if the just shall
abandon justice, and commit iniquity, I will not remember his good works. The
example of David was added, who committed murder and adultery; of Magdalene
and Saint Peter, who denied CHRIST. They derided the follies of the Zuinglians,
for saying the just cannot fall from grace, and yet sins in every work. The
two last were uniformly condemned of timeritie, with exception of those unto
whom God has given a special revelation, as to Moses and the Disciples, to
whom it was revealed that they were written in the book of heaven.

The examination of the Divines, concerning Free Will and Predestination,
being ended, and the Anathematismes in those matters framed, they were joined
to those of justification, according to their fit places. Whereunto opposition
was made by some in one part, by some in another, where there appeared any word
which might preiudicate their opinion. But Iacobus Coccus, Arch bishop of
Corfu, considered, that, by the Theologues, the Articles were censured, with
many limitations and amplifications, which ought to be inserted in the
Anathematismes, that the proposition might not absolutely be condemned, which
might receive a good construction; and the rather, because it is humanity, to
make the most favorable interpretation, and charity, not to think evil.
Diverse did contradict; first in regard of the practice of the ancient Councels,
which have condemned heretical propositions without limitation, naked, as they
have been delivered by the heretics; especially because it is sufficient in
matter of faith, for condemning an article, that it has one false sense which
may cause the unadvised to err. Both the opinions seemed reasonable, the
first, because it was fit to know which sense was condemned, the second,
because it was not for the honor of the Council, to limit the propositions of
heretics. Hereunto was added, that all the Canons were thus composed, reciting
the opinion which was to be condemned, and alleging, for cause thereof the
places of Scripture, and doctrine of the Church, unto which it was opposite.
The Canons were made, according to the form of the Council of Orange, like to
those of original sin, in the preceding Session. But the reading of them
proouing long and tedious, and the mixture of truth and falsehood, of things
reproved and approved not very intelligible; the Bishop of Sinigaglia put
them fitly in mind of a remedy for both inconveniences; that it was better to
separate the Catholic doctrine from the contrary, and make two Decrees; in one
to make a continuated declaration, and confirmation of the doctrine of the
Church, in the other to condemn, and anathematize the contrary. The advice
pleased all, and so it was resolved; and first the anathematismes were framed
apart; and then pains taken to make the other Decree. And this they called the
Decree of the doctrine, and that the Canons; which The Decree of the doct(...)
and the Canons.
style was after followed in the second and third Convocation of the Council.

Sancta Croce took incredible pains to make the Decrees, avoiding, as much as
was possible, to insert any thing controuersed among the Schoolmen, Santa
Croce took great pains to give every o^^ satisfaction in making the Decrees.
and so handling those which could not be omitted, as that every one might be
contented; in every Congregation he observed what was disliked by any, and
took it away, or corrected it, as he was advised: and he spoke not only in
the Congregations, but with every one in particular, was informed of all the
doubts, and required their opinions; he diuersified the matter with diverse
orders, changed sometimes one part, sometimes another, until he had reduced
them to the order in which they now are, which generally pleased and was
approved by all. It is certain, that to determine those things, Congregations
were held, consisting partly of Theoloques, partly of the Prelates, to the
number of one hundred, and that, from the beginning of September until the end
of November, there passed not a day, in which the Cardinal did not meddle with
that which was done before, and change something. The memorial of these
mutations remains: whereof I will rehearse two, as a taste of many, which it
would be tedious to recount. In the first point of doctrine, it was first
written, by common consent, that neither the Gentiles, by virtue of Nature, nor
the Jews, by the law of Moses, could free themselves from sin; and because
many did hold that circumcision did remit sins, they suspected that these
words might prejudice their opinion, though S. Paul has, in express terms,
said the same, in more then one place. The Cardinal, to satisfy these men, in
the place where it was said (Per ipsam etiam legem Moysi) changed, and said
(Per ipsam etiam litterant legis Moysi^) and every ordinary Divine might easily
judge, how well the word literam did befit that place. In the beginning of the
eight point, those that manetained certainety of grace, were not contented it
should be said, A man's sins are not omitted by the certainetie of remission,
and because one is confident in it. And the Cardinal gave them satisfaction,
by excluding the real certainety, and putting in the room, boasting, and
confidence in that only. And in the conclusion of that point, every one might
plainly see, that the cause ought to have been given, for that no man can
certainly know that he has obtained grace. But to satisfy one part, he
added, certainety of faith; and the Dominicans, thinking this was not enough,
urged him to add Catholic. But because the adherents of Catarinus were not
contented, in stead of those words, Catholic faith, it was said, Faith, which
cannot be subject to falsehood. This contented both sides. For one party
inferred, then, that certainty of faith which can be had herein, may be false,
and therefore is uncertain, the other inferred, that this certainety could
have no doubt of falsehood while it remained, but by changing from the state of
of grace to the State of sin, it may become false; as all contingent truths,
by alteration of their subjects are made false. But the Catholic faith is not
only certain, but unchangeable, because the subject of it (...)things
necessary, or past, which cannot be altered.

And truly, concerning these particulars, it is not fit to rob the Cardinal
of his due praise, who knew how to satisfy men, even obstinate in contrary
opinions. And those that would be better informed therein, may understand,
that, immediately after the Session, Friar Dominicus Soto, principal of the
Dominicans Dominicus Soto Principal(...) the Dominicans, and Andreas Vega,
(...) of the (...) publish books as commentaries of the Decree, contra^^ one to
an(...).
wrote three books, and did entitle them, of Nature and Grace, for commentary
of this Doctrine, and in his expositions, all his opinions are found when this
work was published, Friar Andrew Vega, the most esteemed of the Franciscans,
fet forth fifteen great books for Commentaries upon the (...)eene points of
that decree, and did expound it all according to his own opinion. These two
opinions do not only differ, almost in all the Articles, but in many of them,
are expressly contrary. Both which works were printed in the year 1548. and
he that shall read them, observing that they do give very often,
interchangeable and doubtful senses to the words of the Council, will marvel
how these two persons, the chief for learning, and estimation, who had greater
part therein then others, did not know the only sense and true scope of the
Synod: of which also, some few others, of those which were interested, having
written diversely, I could never find, whether that assembly did agree in one
sense, or whether there was unity of words only. But to return to the
Cardinal, when the Decree was approved The Decree is sent to Rome, and
approved there.
by all in Trent, he sent it to the Pope, and the Pope gave it to the Friars,
and learned men of Rome, to be consulted of and it was approved by them,
because every one might understand it in his own sense.

I have rehearsed altogether what was done in matter of faith, that I might not
divide things that are connexed. But in the mean time, some days Reformation
is handled.
were spent about the reformation; and in those congregations it was proposed
to set down the qualities, requisite in the promotion of the greater Prelates,
and Ministers of the Church. And very grave sayings were delivered with great
ostentation, but there was no way found how those things, whereof they spoke
might be observed. For where the Kings have the presentation, they saw not with
what bonds to tie them: where election has place, the chapter does consist of
great and mighty persons: for the residue, all dignities are conferred by the
Pope, and more then two thirds of the benefices The point concerning the
qualities of the Prelates is omitted.
are reserved to the Apostolic Sea; unto which it is not fit to prescribe a
law. Whereupon, after many and long discourses, it was concluded, that it was
better to leave the business.

The discourses in point of residency, were neither fewer nor shorter; The
point of residence is handled.
which ended not in the resolution which was necessary, and desired by many,
and made some confusion then, and prepared matter for other times. For the
understanding whereof, it is necessary to resume this matter from the beginning.

The Ecclesiastical Degrees were not originally instituted as dignities,
preheminencies, rewards, or honors, as now they are, and have been, many A
discourse of the author concerning residency.
hundred years, but as ministeries, and charges, otherwise called by Saint
Paul, works, and those that exercise them, are called by CHRIST our LORD in the
Gospel, Worke-men; and therefore no man could then enter into cogitation to
absent himself from the execution thereof in his own person: and if any one
(which seldom happened) retired from the work, it was not thought reasonable,
he should have either title or profit. And though the ministeries were of two
sorts, some anciently called, as now they are, with care of souls: others of
temporal things, for the sustenance and service of the poor and sick, as were
the Deaconries, and other inferior works, all held themselves equally bound
to that service, in person; neither did any think of a substitute, but for a
short time, and for great impediments, much less to take another charge, which
might hinder that. The Church being increased, where there were many
Christians, and free from persecutions, another sort of Ministers was
instituted, to serve in the Ecclesiastical assemblies, as well in reading the
divine Scriptures, as in other functions, to stir up devotion. There were
instituted also Colleges of Ministers, which might in common apply themselves
to some charge, and others as Seminaries, from whence to take Ministers
instructed already. These of the Colleges, not having any personal charge,
seeing the Congregation did administer, as well with one more, as with one
less, sometimes, by reason of study, or greater instruction, or for some
other cause, were absent from the Church, one for a short time, another for
along, without having title, charge, or profit. So Saint Ierom, a Priest of
Antioch, but without any particular Cure, and Ruffinus, in the same manner, of
Aquileia, and Saint Paulinus, ordained Priest of Barcellona, did reside but
little. But when the number of them increased, they did degenerate, and were
called vagabond Clerks, because that manner of living made them odious, who
are often spoken of in the Laws and novel constitutions of Justinian. But
never any thought to hold the title of an office, or enjoy the profit, without
doing service, but only, after the year seven hundred, in the West Church,
when the Ecclesiastical ministeries were changed, and made dignities, and
honors, and rewards for services done. And as before a person was chosen fit
for the necessity of the Church, so afterward a degree, dignity, or emolument
was fitted to the quality of the person; from whence arose the exercising of
the ministry by a substitute. This abuse has drawn in another by
consequence; that is, to think ones self disobliged, not only to minister,
but to be present, and assist him that labors in his place. And indeed
where the industry of the person is not chosen for the work, but a place and
degree is provided for the person, there is no reason he should be bound to
labor for himself, or assist him that does. The disorder proceeded so far,
that it would have overthrown the Clergy, if the Popes had not in part
resisted, commanding that Prelates and other Curates, though they might
exercise the charge by substitutes, yet should be tied to assistance in the
place, which they called residence. Whereunto also they bound the Canons,
without constraining other beneficed Clerks unto it, not so much as speaking
of them, but leaving them to the custom, or rather abuse brought in: by which
silence it came to pass, that they thought themselves obliged. Neither did
this voluntary deceit displease the Pope, who saw very well that it would end
in the greatness of the Court. And hence arose the pernicious, and never
sufficiently detested distinction, of Benefices of residence, and not
residence; which followed as well in deed as in doctrine, without any blush of
absurdity, which it did evidently bring with it: that is, to give a title and
salarie without Obligation. And to palliate it, or rather to make it more
shameful, whereas the Canonists have a maxim conuincing this absurdity, that
is, that every Benefice is given for an office, they have expounded it,
understanding by office, the hours or prayers of the Breuiarie: so that a
revenue of a thousand or ten thousand, or more crowns is given for this
only, to take a Breuiarie in hand, and read as fast as one can, in a low
voice, not marking any thing but to pronounce the words. But the distinction of
the Doctors, and the provision of the Popes augmented the abuse in the short
time: For without those some of the beneficed men might perhaps have made
conscience of it, but with them, they think the abuse is justified, as a thing
lawful. And for the Curates, the Popes dispensation was never denied to any,
that sought it by that way by which every thing is obtained at Rome. So that
the poor only do reside, and those that gain by it: and the abuse, first a
little remedied by the Popes laws did, by the dispensations, not only leap
to the height, but spread it self abroad, and infected the earth. After the
stirs of Germany for Religion; which gave occasion to speak of and desire
reformation, every one ascribing the mischief to the negligence, and small
care of the Prelates, desiring to see them at the government of their
Churches, detesting the dispensations, which caused them to be absent,
discourses were made of their Obligation; and some Pious men, amongst whom was
Friar Thomas Caietan, Cardinal, affirmed that the Obligation of residence was
by the Law of GOD. And it happened, as it does, in all things, that the
preceding passion persuaded the more rigid opinion, and more strict Obligation,
and made the disobligation more hard. This caused them to add unto it, the
vigor of the Law of GOD. The Prelates, seeing the mischief, and desiring it
should be excuseable, and a small fault, would needs believe, that they were
not bound by GOD, but by the Pope, whose dispensation, or silence, did save
them. With these preuious dispositions of doctrine, the matter Great
controversies in the Council about residence
was proposed in the Council, as has been said: which because it produced a
small controversy in the beginning, a greater in the progress, and in the end
(which was in the years 1562. and 1563.) greatest of all, it will not be
unseasonable to make some recapitulation, and to recount some particular
occurrences.

Therefore though the Articles first proposed, were but to add greater bonds,
and punishments, to the precepts, to remove the impediments, and A
controversy whether residence be de iure Divine.
facilitate the execution, and all agreed, alleging persuasions out of the
old and new Testament, Canons of the Councels, doctrine of the Fathers, and out
of the inconveniences which sprang from the non-residencie, yet the mayor part
of the Divines, especially the Dominicans, did determine that the obligation
was by the Law of God. Friar Bartholomew Caranza, and Friar Dominicus Soto,
Spaniards, were the most principal authors. The most grounded reasons they
brought were, that Bishoprics are founded by CHRIST, as ministeries and
works, and so require a personal action, which a man absent cannot perform,
that CHRIST, describing the quality of a good shepherd, says, that he
gives his life for the flock, knows the sheep by their names, and walks
before them. The Canonists and Italian Prelates did dispute, that the
obligation was by the Ecclesiastical law, alleging that anciently never any
non-resident was reprehended as a transgressour of the Law of God, but of the
Canons only. That Timothy, though Bishop of Ephesus, was long in his journey,
by order of S. Paul. That it was said to Saint Peter, Feed the Lambs; which
is understood of all, and yet he cannot be every where present: so the Bishop
may fulfill the commandment of feeding; without residence. They answered the
contrary reasons, that the conditions of a Pastor, proposed by CHRIST, do
agree to none but CHRIST himself.

Friar Ambrosius Catarinus, though a Dominican, was contrary to the rest. He
said, the Bishopric instituted by CHRIST is one only, which the Pope has:
the institution of the others is by the Pope; who, as he divides the quantity
and number of the sheep to be fed, so he prescribes also the manner and
quality. Therefore it belongs to the Pope, to appoint every Bishop, to
attend the flock, by himself, or his substitute, and may allot unto him
either much or little, and deprive him also of the power of feeding. Thomas
Campeggius, Bishop of Feltre, answered another way, that the Bishop, as Saint
Ierom testifies, is the institution of CHRIST, but the division of
Bishoprics was after instituted by the Church: that CHRIST gave the charge of
feeding to all the disciples, but tied them not to a place, as the actions of
the Apostles, and of their Disciples do show; the assigning of this portion of
the flock to one, and that to another, was an Ecclesiastical institution, to
govern better.

These things were handled by the Bishops with much passion. The Spaniards did
not only adhere to, but cherish the opinion, that it was de The Spanish secret
in this point.
iure diuino, having a secret, which they communicated only amongst
themselves, to make great the Episcopal authority. For if it were once decided
that they had the charge from CHRIST to govern their Church, it would be
decided also, that they have from him authority necessary for it, which the
Pope could not restrain. These designs were smelled out, by those that leaned
to the Court, therefore in regard of the importance of the matter, they also
encouraged the maintainers of the contrary opinion. The Legates thought it
better to withstand the danger, by dissembling their knowledge of it: and,
aiming at this mark, said for the present, that the matter was hard, and had
need of greater examination; that where the controversy is between the
Catholics, they ought not to condemn one part, for fear of making a schism,
and sowing contentions, that they may jointly endeavor to confute the
Lutherans. Therefore, that it were better to defer the declaration, by what
right it is due, until another Session. Some thought it sufficient to renew the
old Canons and Decretals in this matter, and said, they were severe enough,
because they inflicted deprivation for a punishment, and reasonable enough,
because they admitted lawful excuses. There remained to find a way that
dispensations might not be granted, and that was sufficient. Others thought it
necessary to add new punishments, and remove the impediments; which was of the
greatest importance, because those being taken away, residencie would follow;
and that it was no matter from whence the obligation came, so it were executed;
and that this being done, the matter would be better discussed. It pleased the
mayor part that the one and the other should be done: whereunto the Legates
g(...); upon condition, that the dispensations should not be spoken against,
but, to cause them not to be desired, that the impediments should be taken
away, which come by exemptions wherein there was as much spoken, and with no
less con(...), between those which held every exemption for all abuse, and
those who thought them necessary in the Church, and reproved only the excesses.

S. Ierom witnesses, that in the first beginnings of Christianity, the
Churches A discourse of the Author concerning exemptions.
were governed by a kind of Aristocracy, by the common counsel of the
Presbytery: but to withstand the divisions which were brought in, the
monarchical government was instituted, giving all the superintendency to the
Bishop, whom all the orders of the Church did obey, neither (...) any one
think to withdraw himself from under the authority. The neighbor Bishops,
whose Churches, because they were under one Province, had commerce, did govern
themselves also in common by Synods; and to make the government more easy,
attributing much to the Bishop of the principal City, they made him as it were
Head of that body: and by a more ample communion, which all the Provinces of
one perfecture or great government held together, the Bishop of the City where
the Ruler did reside; gained a certain superiority, by custom. These
prefectures were, the Imperial City of Rome, with the Cities adjoining; the
prefecture of Alexandria, which governed Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis: of
Antioch, for Syria, and other Provinces of the East: and in the other lesser
prefectures, called in Greek, (...) the same was observed. This government,
brought in, and approved by custom only, which found it commodious; was
established by the first Council of Nice under Constantine, and ordained by a
Canon that it should continue: and every one was so far from putting himself
out of this order; that the Bishop of Jerusalem having many honorable
preheminences, perhaps because it was the place where our Savior Christ
conuersed in the flesh, and was the fountain of Religion, the Council of Nice
did ordain that those honors should still remain, but so that nothing was
detracted from the Metropolitan, then Bishop of Cesarea. This government;
which has bin ever held in all the Churches of the East; was altered in the
Latin, because many great Monasteries being built, governed by Abbates of
great fame and worth, who by their conspicuous virtues, made the Bishops
afraid, there arose some emulation between these and those: and the Abbates,
to free themselves from these inconveniences, whether real, or fained, and to
cover their ambition, to withdraw themselves from the subjection which they
owed, did obtain of Popes to be received under the protection of Saint Peter,
and immediately under the subjection of the Pope. This being profitable for the
Court of Rome, because he that obtains privileges, is bound to maintain the
authority of him that grants them, suddenly all the Monasteries were
exempted. The Chapters also of Cathedral Churches, consisting for the most
part of Regulars, by the same pretenses, did obtain exemption. Finally, the
Cluniacensian and Cistersian Congregations were all wholly exempted, With great
enlargement of the Popes authority, which came to have subjects in all places,
defended and protected by the Papacy, and interchangeably defenders and
protectors. The invention was not commended by Saint Bernard, who lived in that
time, and was of the Cistersian Congregation: yea, he admonished Pope
Eugenius; to consider thereof, that all were abuses, that it ought not to be
well taken if an Abbat did refuse to obey the Bishop, and the Bishop the
Metropolitan: that the militant Church should take example by the triumphant,
where no Angel ever said, I will not be under the Archangel. But Bernard would
have said more, if he had lived in the times following, when the Mendicant
Orders, obtained, not only a general exemption, from the Episcopal
authority, but power also to build Churches, in any place whatsoever, and to
administer the Sacraments in them. But in these last ages the abuse went on so
far, that every petty Priest did obtain, with a small charge, an exemption
from the superiority of his Bishop, not only in causes of correction, but also
to be ordained by whom he lists, and in sum, not to acknowledge the Bishop
at all.

This being the state of the cause, and the Bishops requiring remedy, some
that were more vehement, returned to the things spoken in the Congregations,
that were before the other Session, against the exemption of Friars. But the
wiser sort thinking it impossible to obtain any thing, so long as the number
and greatness of the Regular Orders continued, and favor of the Court, they
were contented to remove only the exemptions of the Chapters; and particular
persons, and demand a reuocation of them all. But the Legates, treating with
them in particular, and putting then in mind that all the reformation could not
be made by that Session, that it was fit to begin, and leave something for
future times, made them rest contented, that the exemption of particular
Priests, Friars, not inhabiting in the Cloisters, A small reformation in matter
of exemption is made.
and of Chapters, only in criminal causes, should be removed (from whence the
greater disorders do arise,) as also faculties to give Clericall Orders to him
that resideth not in his own diocese: promising to provide against the other
abuses in another Session.

While these things were handled in Trent, the Pope having received advice Card
Farnese the Popes Legate with the Emperor, is recalled.
from the Cardinal Farnese, considering with how small reputation an
Apostolic Legate did remain in Ratisbon, when his soldiers were in the
field, he recalled him: and, with him, a great number of Italian Gentlemen,
which were of the Popes troops, did depart. In the midst of October, the two
armies were so near, at Santhem, that there was but a little river between
them. And standing so, Octauius Farnese, sent by the Emperor The two Armies
are near together, and Daueuert is taken by Octauius Farnese.
with the Italians; and some Dutchmen, took Daueuert in the sight of the
enemy, who having done nothing while he was in Sueuia but hindered the
Emperor, was constrained in November to abandon the Country, by reason of a
great diuersion, made by the Bohemians, and others of the Imperial High
Germany is left to the Emperors discretion.
faction, against Saxony, and Hassia, places belonging to the two Protestants
Heads; who retired to defend their own Countries, leaving High Germany at the
Emperors discretion; and this was the cause why many Princes and Cities
combined, did incline to composition with him, having honest caution to hold
their religion. But he would not make mention thereof in writing, lest the war
should seem to be made for that cause, which would offend those that followed
him, make others more unwilling to render themselves, and give suspicion to the
Ecclesiastiques of Germany, who hoped to see the Roman Rites restored in
every place. Yet his Ministers promised them all, that they should not be
molested in the exercise of religion, excusing their Master, if, for many
respects, he could not satisfy them, to make a capitulation thereof: and he
so carried himself, that his resolution appeared to give them content, by
conniuencie; By these deditions the Emperor gained much artilery, drew much
money from the Cities, to the value of many hundred thousands, and, which was
of greatest importance, was absolute Lord of all High Germany.

This happiness made the Popeiealous, and think to provide for himself The
pope is jealous of the Emperor, and recalleth* his forces.
before all Germany were subdued. His soldiers under the conduct of his
grandchild Octauius, were much diminished in number, by reason of those who
parted with the Cardinal Farnese, and of others who did run away by whole
ranks, for the incommodities they suffered. The residue, in the midst of
December, the Emperors Army being lodged near the Village of Sothen,
departed, by order from the Pope, from whom Octauius had commandment to
return into Italy, and to tell his Uncle, that the six months being ended,
the Pope could no longer bear so great a charge: that the time of the
obligation was ended, and that effected for which the league was made, that is,
Germany brought into obedience. The Emperor complained, that Whereof the
Emperor complains.
he was abandoned when he had most need of help. For nothing was done, so long
as the Heads were not oppressed, who could not be said to be subdued, but
retired only, to defend their own Territories; and being delivered from
fear, it was to be doubted they would return with greater forces, and better
order then before. But the Pope justified his not continuing in the The Pope
justifies his action.
league, and the departure of his men, by saying, that he was not made
partaker of the composition with the Cities and Princes, which could not be
established without him; and especially, because it was made with much
prejudice of the Catholic faith, tolerating heresy, which might have been
rooted out. That according to capitulation, he had not been partaker of the
profits of the war, nor of the money the Countries paid which did compound;
that the Emperor complained, when himself was offended and disesteemed, even
with damage of religion. Nor content with this, he forbade the Emperor to
receive money of the Churches of Spain, longer then the six months: and
though the Emperors Ministers made many effectual treaties with him, showing
that the cause continuing, for which they were granted, it required that the
grant also should continue, and that all would be in vain, and without fruit,
if the war were not ended, yet they The Fiesehi make a co^spiracie against
the D^rij in Genua, for which the Pope is blamed by the Emperiour.
could not remove him from his resolution.

In Genua, the family of the Fiesehi, making a dangerous conspiracy (which had
almost taken effect) against that of the Dorij, which followed the Emperors
side, the Emperor was assured that the Popes son, the Duke of Piacenza was
author of it, and believed that it came from the Pope, and refrained not 1547
PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1.
to add this complaint to the others. The Pope believed the Emperor would be
busied in Germany a long time, and not be able to offend him with temporal
forces: but feared he might trouble him by making the Protestants go to the
Council. To separate the Council seemed too violent and scandalous a remedy,
especially having continued seven months in a treaty, whereof nothing was
published. He was of opinion to publish the things already digested, seeing
that by that declaration, either the Protestants would The Popes resolution
concerning the proceeding in Council.
refuse to go thither, or, if they went, would be constrained to accept it;
wherein the principal point of all the controversies consisting, the victory
would be his own. And if there were no other reason to do it, this was
sufficient to prove it was good for him, because the Emperor would not have
any controversies decided. For the counsels of those that have contrary ends,
ought to be contrary. He saw well, that the Emperor would not take it for an
affront. But the distastes between them were already so great, that little
could be added to them; and the Pope, when he was pressed with reasons, which
did persuade and dissuade, was wont to use the Florentine saying, A thing done
has an head; and so to execute that which was necessary. Therefore he wrote to
the Legates in Christmas, that they should hold a Session, and publish the
decrees already framed. This commandment being received, they called a
Congregation the third of January, in 1547
which having determined, by the uniform consent of all, to imitate a Session
for the thirteenth, in regard it was tedious to all, to remain there so long,
and resolve of nothing; the Legates did propose the publication of the Decrees
framed. For those of faith, the Emperors Prelates opposed, and said, that
there was no opportunity as yet, and that it sufficed to publish the
reformation. But the Papalins urged the contrary; alleging it was known to
all the world, that the point of grace and justification had been discussed
seven months together, and that the Decree was established; and that it would
be a derogation to the faith, if the Council should seem to fear the
publishing of the truth, which was decided. And because these were more in
number, their opinion, assisted by the Legates, prevailed. The two next
Congregations were spent, in reading again the Decrees, as well of faith as
The Session is held the 13 of January, and the Decrees of faith and reformation
are published.
reformation: the which, some small matters being corrected, by the advice of
those who were not present at the first, pleased them all. The Legates,
accompanied with the Prelates, went to the Church with the usual ceremonies,
on Thursday the thirteenth of January, and held the Session; where Andreas
Cornarus, Archbishop of Spalato, sang Mass, Thomas Stella; Bishop of Salpi,
did preach; and the Decrees of faith and reformation were read.

The first contained sixteen heads, with their prohemes, and thirty three
anathematismes. After it had forbid to believe, preach, or teach, otherwise
then was constituted and expressed in that Decree, it declared in substance: 1.
That neither Gentiles, by natural means, nor Jews, by the letter of Moses,
has been able to free themselves from sin. 2. Whereupon GOD sent his Son,
to redeem the one and the other. 3. Who, though he died for all, yet those
only enjoy the benefit, unto whom his merit is communicated. 4. That the
justification of the wicked, is nothing but a translation, from the state of
the son of Adam, into the state of the adopted son of God, by IESV CHRIST,
which, after the publication of the Gospel, is not done without Baptism, or
the vow thereof. 5. That the beginning of justification, in men of age,
proceeds from preventing grace, which inuiteth to dispose themselves,
consenting, and cooperating with it freely: which they do willingly and might
refuse. 6. The manner of the preparation, is first to believe, willingly, the
divine revelations, and promises, and knowing ones self to be a sinner, to
turn from the fear of Gods Justice to his mercy, to hope for pardon from
him, and therefore to begin to love him, and hate sin: and finally, purposing
to be baptized, to begin a new life, and keep the commandments of God. 7.
That justification follows this preparation, which is not only a remission
of sins, but sanctification also; and has 5. causes: the final, the glory
of God, and eternal life: the efficient, God: the meritory, CHRIST: the
isntrumental, the Sacraments: and the formal, justice, given by God, received
according to the good pleasure of the holy Ghost, and according to the
disposition of the receiver, receiving, together with remission of sins,
faith, hope, and charity. 8. That when Saint Paul says, that man is justified
by faith, and gratis, it ought to be understood, because faith is the
beginning, and the things that precede justification are not meritorious of
grace. 9. That sins are not pardoned to him that vaunteth, and reposeth
himself only in the confidence, and certainty of the remission. Neither ought
it to be said, that only faith does justify, but every one as he should not
doubt of the mercy of God, the merits of CHRIST, and efficacy of the
Sacraments, so, in regard of his own indisposition he may doubt, because he
cannot know by certainty of infallible faith, that he has obtained grace. 10.
That the just are more justified by observing the Commandments of God and the
Church. 11. That it cannot be said, that the Commandments of God are
impossible to the just, who, though he fall into venial sins, yet cease
not to be so; that no man ought to rely on faith only, nor say, that the just
sins in every good action, or commits sin, if he do any thing for
reward. 12. That no man should presume he is predestined, believing that the
justified can sin no more, or sinning, can promise himself repentance. 13.
That no man can promise to himself absolute certainty to persevere until the
end, but should put his hope in the assistance of God, who will continue, if
man fail not. 14. That those that are fallen into sin may again receive
grace, being stirred up from above to recover it by repentance, which
differs from baptism, because it contains not only contrition, but
sacramental confession, Priestly absolution, at the least in vow, and
satisfaction besides for the temporal punishment, which is not always
remitted altogether, as in baptism. 15. That the grace of God is lost, not
only by infidelity, but by any mortal sin, though faith be not lost by it.
16. It proposes to the just the exercise of good works, by which eternal
life is gained, as grace promised by the mercy of God, and a reward due to
good works by the divine promise. And it concludes that this doctrine does
not establish any justice of our own, refusing the justice of God, but the
same is said to be ours, because it is in us, and of GOD, being infused by him
for the merit of CHRIST. In fine, to make every one understand, not only the
doctrine to be followed, but that also which is to be avoided, it adds
Canons, against him that says. 1. That a man may be justified without grace,
by the strength of humane nature, and doctrine of the Law. 2. That grace is
given to live well with greater facility, and to merit eternal life, as if
free The Canons
will can do it, but with difficulty. 3. That a man may believe, love, hope
or repent, as he ought, without the prevention, or assistance of the holy
Spirit. 4. That free will, excited by GOD, does not cooperate, to dispose us
to grace, nor can dissent, though it would. 5. That after the sin of Adam
free will is lost. 6. That it is not in the power of man to do ill, but as
well bad as good works, are done, not only by Gods permission, but by his
own proper working. 7 That all works, done before justification, are sins,
and that a man sins the more, by how much the more he labors to dispose
himself unto grace. 8. That the fear of hell, which makes us abstain from
sin, and to fly to the mercy of GOD, is sin. 9. That the wicked is justified
by faith only, without preparation, proceeding from the motion of his will.
10. That man is justified without the justice by which CHRIST did merit for us,
or is formally just by that. 11. That he is justified only by the imputation
of the justice of CHRIST, or only by remission of sins without inherent
grace and charity; or that the grace of justification is only the favor of
GOD. 12. That justifying faith is nothing but confidence in the mercy of GOD,
who remitteth sins for CHRIST. 13. That, for remission of sins, it is
necessary to believe they are remitted not doubting of ones own indisposition.
14. That man is absolved and justified, because he does firmly believe it.
15. That he is bound by faith to believe that he is in the number of the
predestined. 16. That one may be certain he has the gift of perseverance,
without special revelation. 17. That only that the predestined obtain
grace. 18. That the Commandments of God are impossible to the just. 19. That
there is no other Evangelical precept but of faith. 20. That the just and
perfect man is not bound to observe the Commandments of God and the Church, or
that the Gospel is a promise without condition of observing the Commandments.
21. That CHRIST is given for a redeemer, not for a lawmakers. 22. That the
justified may persevere without the special assistance of GOD, or cannot with
it. 23. That the just cannot sin, or can avoid all venial sins, without a
special privilege, as the Church holds of the Virgin. 24. That justice is
not preserved and increased by good works, but that they are fruits only or
signs. 25. That the just sins mortally, or venially, in every work. 26.
That the just ought not to expect a reward for his good works. 27 That there
is no mortal sin but infidelity. 28 That grace being lost, faith is lost
also; or that the faith remaining is not true nor of a Christian. 29 That man
sinning after baptism, cannot be lifted up by the grace of God, or may recover
it by faith only, without the Sacrament of penanace. 30. That every fault and
punishment is wholly remitted to every penitent man, there remaning no
temporal punishment, to be endured in this life, or in Purgatory. 31. That
the just sins, if he do good, only in hope of an eternal reward. 32.
That the good works of the just, are the gifts of God, and are not withal the
merits of the justified. 33. That this doctrine is derogatory to the glory of
God, and merits of CHRIST, or that their glory is not made more illustrious by
it.

When I had made this short narration of the Decree, I began to think it
superfluous, seeing all the decrees of that Council are printed in one volume,
The authors reason why he rehearses the decrees though they be printed in a
volume apart.
and in every man's hands, and that in the composition of the Acts that follow,
I might refer my self to that book: and I was about to tear this leaf.
But considering that some might desire to read the whole continuation in one
book only, and that if any thought it better to see the original, he might
omit this mine abbreuiation, I resolved not to change, but to observe the same
style in the matters following: and the rather, because I am grieved, when, in
Zenophon and Tacitus, I see the narration of things, most known to their
times, omitted, which remains unknown to me, because there is no means to
know it again: and I hold it for a maxim, that one ought never to refer
himself to another. Therefore I come to the sum of the Decree of reformation.

Which did contain in substance; 1. That the Synod being willing to The Decree
of reformation.
amend the depraved manners of the Clergy and people, thought fit to begin
with the governors of the greater Churches. Therefore trusting in God, and his
Vicar on earth, that, that charge shall be given to worthy men, exercised from
their youth in Ecclesiastical discipline, it does admonish them to perform
their duty, which cannot be executed without residing in the place, where it
is to be done: Yet many, leaving the flock, and care of the lambs, wander in
Courts, and apply themselves to secular business. Therefore the Synod does
revive all the ancient Canons against non-residents, and does constitute
besides, that every governor of a Cathedral Church, of what title or
preeminencie soever, who shall remain six months together out of his
Diocese, without a just and reasonable cause, shall lose the fourth part of
the revenues, and if he persevere six months more, shall lose another fourth
part, and the contumacie increasing, the Metropolitan, upon pain of not
entering into the Church for three months, shall delate him to the Pope, who,
by his supreme authority, may inflict greater punishment, or provide the
Church of a more profitable Pastor. And if the Metropolitan shall likewise
offend, the most ancient Suffragan shall be bound to denounce him.

2. But others, inferiors to Bishops, tied to residence either by law or
custom, shall be compelled thereunto by the Bishops, abrogating every
privilege which gives a perpetual exemption from residing. But dispensations
granted for a time, for a reasonable cause, true, and proved before the
Ordinary, shall remain in force, and the Bishop, as Delegate of the Apostolic
Sea, shall take care that a sufficient Vicar be provided for the charge of
souls, with a convenient portion of the revenues, notwithstanding any
privilege or exemption.

3. Beside that no Clerk, by personal privilege, or regular dwelling out of
the Monastery, by privilege of his order, shall be exempt from being
punished, if he offend, or visited, or corrected by his Ordinary.

4. Likewise that Chapters of Cathedral and other Collegiate Churches, shall
not, by virtue of exemption, customs, oaths, and agreements, be freed from
the visitation of their Bishops, and greater Prelates, when there shall be
need.

5. In fine, it did ordain that no Bishop might exercise Pontifical acts in
the diocese of another, by pretense of privilege, without his leave, and The
next Session to be held the third of March.
only over his subjects. And the day of the next Session was appointed the
third of March.

In Rome, the Decree of faith ministered no matter of discourse, in regard it
was not new, as well because it had been seen, and examined publicly (as
has been said) as because all men knew that the Germane opinions were to be
condemned. But the Court Bishops, who had been afraid a long time of the
Article of residencie, which was handled, did rest content, assuring themselves
that the Decree of the Council, could work no greater effect, then the Popes
Decretals had done before. But the inferior The inferior Courtiers are
discontented with the reformation.
Courtiers were discontented, seeing the Bishop had power to compel them. They
lamented their own misery, who were to serve all their life to gain their
living, and after so much pains taken, for a reward, must be confined in a
village, or, by a base Canonry, subjected to a greater slavery, in obeying the
Bishops, who will not only keep them, as it were, tied to a stake, but with
visitations, and pretense of corrections, will bring them to a miserable
subjection, or hold them in perpetual vexations, and charge.

But elsewhere, and especially in Germany, when the Decrees were seen, The
Decrees are censured in Germany.
that of faith was more spoken of: which must be read over and again, with
much attention and speculation, because it could not be understood without a
perfect knowledge of the inward motion of the mind, and without knowing in whom
it is active, in whom passive, things most subtle, and, for the diverse
appearance they make, ever accounted disputable; all the doctrine of the
Council turning upon this hinge, whether the first object of the will work
upon the will, or the will upon the object, or whether they be both active and
passive. Some pleasant wits said, that if the Astrologers, not knowing the true
causes of the celestial motions, to salve the appearances, have invented
Eccentriques, and Epicicles, it was no wonder if the Council, desiring to
salve the appearances of the super-celestiall motions, did fall into
excentricitie of opinions. The Grammarians did not cease to admire and scoff
the artifice of that proposition, which is in the fifth Chapter; Neque homo
ipse nihil omnino agat; which they said was not intelligible; and without
example. For if the Synod would signify: Etiam homo ipse aliquid agat; it
might say so plainly, as is fit to do in matter of faith, where the more
simple expression is the better; and if they would use an elegancie, they might
say, Etiam homo ipse nihil agat. But the word (omnino) being interposed, that
speech is incongruous and without sense, as all are which have two negatiues
that cannot be resolved into an affirmative. For to resolve that, one must say,
Etiam homo ipse aliquid omnino agat, which is incongruous, and not to be
understood, what aliquid omnino may signify here. For it would say that a man
has an action in a certain kind, which in another kind is no action.

The Fathers were defended, by saying, that to examine the form of Speech so
severely, was nothing but to cavil. Whereunto they replied, that a gentle
interpretation was due unto usual forms of speech, but that it is a public
vtility to discover the artifice of him, that, leaving the clear and usual
phrases, inuenteth those that are incongruous, and contain in them
contradiction, to cavil, and to play on both sides.

Those that understood Theology said, that the doctrine, that a man may
always refuse divine inspirations, was contrary to the public, and ancient
prayer of the Church. Et ad te nostras etiam rebels compelle propitius
Uoluntates: Which is not fit we should say is a vain desire, but that it is
made by faith, as S. James says, and granted by God to his elected. They added
that one could no more say with S. Paul, that it comes not from man which
does separate the vessel of wrath from those of Gods mercy, that which
separateth being that humane, Non nihil omnino. Many did consider that place of
the seventh Chapter, where it is said, Justice is given by measure, according
to the good pleasure of God, and the disposition of the receiver; both which
things cannot be true. For if it pleased God to give more to him that were
less disposed, it would not be by measure of the disposition; and if it be
by the measure of that, there is always the motive by which God works, and
does not use his good pleasure. They marueiled that those were condemned, who
said that the Precepts of God were impossible to be kept; seeing that the same
Council, in the Decree of the second Session, exhorts the faithful
assembled in Trent, that, repenting, confessing, and communicating, they should
observe the Commandments of God, Quantum quisquis poterit. Which modification
would be impious, if the justified could keep them absolutely; and they noted
that the same word, Praecepta, was there, to take away all cavil.

Those that were read in the Ecclesiastical Story, said, that in all the
Councels, held in the Church, from the Apostles time until now, there were
never so many Articles decided, as in this Session only; in which Aristotle
had a great part, by having exactly distinguished all the kinds of causes,
which if he had not done, we had wanted many Articles of Faith.

The Politicians also, though they ought not to examinematters of Religion, but
simply follow them, yet found matter of discourse in this Decree. For seeing in
the tenth Chapter, the Obligation of obeying the Commandments of GOD and the
Church, and the same replied in the twentieth Canon, they were scandalized,
because there was no mention of Obligation to the commandments of Princes and
Magistrates. They said that obedience unto these is more plainly set down in
the Scripture; that the old Law is full of it; that the doctrine is clear in
the new Testament, expressed, and handled at large by CHRIST himself, by Saint
Peter, and Saint Paul. That there is found an express Obligation to hear the
Church, but none express to obey it. He is obeyed who commands of his own
power, and he is heard who does promulgate that which belongs to another
man. Neither were these men satisfied with the excuse, that the commandments
of Princes are included in those of God, and that obedience is due unto them,
because God has commanded they should be obeyed. But they replied that, by
this reason, the Church rather ought to be omitted; and said that the Church
was expressed, and the Princes passed over in silence, to breed (according to
the ancient scope of the Ecclesiastiques) that pernicious opinion, that men are
bound to obey them for conscience sake, and Princes and Magistrates only for
fear of temporal punishments, and that otherwise their commandments may be
transgressed without respect, and so to cause every government to be hated,
accounted tyrannical, and subverted, and, by describing the subjection unto
Priests to be the only principal way to gain heaven, to draw all jurisdiction
to themselves, and by consequence, all authority.

The Decree of reformation was said to be a mere illusion. For to trust in
God and the Pope that provision should be made of persons worthy to govern
the Churches, belongs rather to him that prays, then to him that reformeth.
To renew the ancient Canons with one word only, and one so general, was more
to confirm the disuse of them: but if they would restore them in earnest, they
should remove the causes which have buried them in silence, give them strength
by penalties, and deputation of those that should put them in execution, and
should use other means which do revive, and preserve Laws. In fine it was
said to have done nothing but establish that one might be absent all the
year, by loosing half the revenues, or rather one was taught how he might
not reside eleven months and more, without any punishment, by interposing
those thirty days or fewer, in the midst of the other time of the year; and
that the Decree was wholly destroyed, with the exception of just and reasonable
causes, which no man is so simple as not to find, being to have Judges for whom
it will be profitable not to have residencie practiced.

This place requires that mention should be made of a particular accident,
which, then begun, though it ended not until after four months, belongs
wholly to the present Session, and makes known what the Council was, and in
what estimation it was had, by those that assisted in it. For the understanding
whereof, I will repeat that Friar Dominicus Soto, who had (as has been said) a
great part in the Synod, in framing the Decrees of original sin, and
justification, having noted all the opinions and reasons used in Soto and
Catarinus publish Books one again^ another, concerning the meaning of the
Council, and the Fathers are much divided.
those discussions, thought to communicate them unto the world, and to draw the
words of the Decree to his own meaning, printed a book containing the whole
together, and did entitle it; De natura and gratia: and did dedicate it, with
an Epistle, to the Council, to be (as he said in the dedication) a
Commentary of the two foresaid Decrees. Coming to the Article of the
certainety of grace, he said in a long discourse; that the Synod had
declared, that a man cannot know he has grace by so great certain(...)e, as
is that of faith, excluding all doubt. Catarinus, newly made Bishop of Minori,
having defended the contrary, and still perseuering, did print a little book,
with an Epistle Dedicatory to the same Synod; the scope whereof was, to
maintain that the Councels meaning was not to condemn the opinion of him that
says a just man may know he has grace, as certainly as he knows the
Articles of Faith to be true: yea, that the Council has decided that he is
bound to believe it, because, in the six and twentieth Canon, it has
condemned him that says that the just man ought not to hope for, and expect a
reward, it being necessary, that he that ought to hope as a just man should
know he is so. In this contrariety of opinions, both writing affirmatively to
the Council, either of them did not only say, that his opinion was the
opinion of the Synod, but afterward wrote also and printed Apologies, and
Antipologies, making complaints to the Synod the one of the other, of
attributing that to it, which it never said, bringing diverse testimonies of the
Fathers to prove their own opinion: who bare witness; some for one, some for
another; so that the Fathers were all divided into two parts, except some good
Prelates, who as neutrals, said, that they understood not the difference, but
gave consent to the Decree, in the form as it was published, because both the
parties were agreed. The Legate Santa Croce did testify for Catarinus. Monte
said, he was of a third party. This seemed to put all men out of hope to
understand the meaning of the Council, seeing the principal men that were
present in it, did not agree. And it does raise a difficulty, what that Synod
was that determined the Article, unto which, Soto and Catarinus did write and
appeal, each thinking it was on his side; so that it was necessary, that
either one of them, or both should be deceived And what shall one think of
the others, when it so happened to these? It might be said, it was the
aggregate of all together, unto which the holy Ghost giving assistance, made it
to determine the Truth, though not understood by him that did determine it, as
Cataphas did prophecy, because he was high Priest, not understanding the
prophecy, as the Bishop of Bitonco said in his Sermon. But this answer had
two oppositions, the one, that God made the reprobate and infidels prophecy,
without understanding, but the faithful, by illuminating their mind; the
other, that the Divines do uniformly say, that Councels do not deliberate of
faith by divine inspiration, but by humane disquisition, which the Spirit does
assist, to keep them from errors, so that they cannot determine, without
understanding the Councels do deliberate of faith, not by divine inspiration,
but by humane disquisition.
matter. Perhaps he should hit upon the truth, that should say, that, debating
the contrary opinions in framing the Decree, every party did refuse words
contrary to his opinion and all rested in those which he thought might be
fitted to his own meaning: so that the expression of the matter became
capeable of diverse interpretations. But this would not serve to resolve the
doubt proposed, and to find what the Counsel was: because it is to give it
unity of words, and contrariety of meanings. But that which has been related
in this All agreed in condemning the Lutheran opinions.
particular, and perhaps did happen in many matters, occurred not in condemning
the Lutheran opinions, (...) did agree, with an exquisite unity.

One advertisement of the sante Catarinus concerning his ma(...) written An
advertisement given by Catarinus.
to the Synod in the (...) book, is not to be (...) the Author (...) uing
not to be defrauded of his (...)) (...) that it was (...) pugnancie, to say
that (...) certain he has it, because no man can receive a thing (...), which
he knows not to be given him, and without being sure he has received, it
(...)

But to return to the Council, the day after the Session a general
Congregation was assembled, to deliberate of, and put in order the matter to be
digested in the next Session, and, for matter of faith, it being already
determined to follow the confession of Ausburg, the first point was of
Ecclesiastical ministry, which the Lutherans say is authority to preach the
Gospel, and to administer the Sacraments; and some resting upon the first part,
did propose that the Ecclesiastical authority should be handled, declaring
all those functions, spiritual and temporal, which God has given them over
the faithful, and are denied by the Lutherans. And this did generally please
the Prelates, because it was a matter of an easy understanding, without any
crabbednesse of the School, and where themselves might have a part. But it was
not grateful to the Divines, because those things were not handled in the
Schools; so that they should have nothing to dispute, and must refer
themselves for the most part to the Canonists. They said that the Augustanes
do not handle all Ecclesiastical authority, but that only of preaching;
whereof there was as much decreed in the last Session as was sufficient; but in
the second part there was matter that did cohere with justification, The
subject of the next Session is the Sacraments. The Legates desire to prevent ye
handling of the authority of the Council and Pope.
that is, the Sacraments, which are the means to be justified, and said it was
more fit to make these the subject of the next Session. The Legates, and their
dependants adhered hereunto, in show for the same reasons, but indeed for
another more potent, because, in the other consideration, they might have
handled the authority of Councels, and of the Pope, and proposed many hard
matters, not fit to be moved.

Having resolved to handle the matter of the Sacraments, it was considered that
it was various and ample, not possible to be comprehended in a Session, nor
easy to be determined into how many parts it ought to be divided. The
Augustans made it short by taking away four Sacraments, of which they ought to
treat more exactly, to reestablish them: therefore that it was good to begin
to discuss the Sacraments in general, and charge was given to put in order
the Articles drawn out of the Lutheran doctrine, descending also to the
Sacraments in particular, of as many as seemed easy to discuss: and that the
reformation might follow the definition of faith and doctrine, the abuses,
occurring in the minister of the Sacraments, should be put together, ordaining
a Congregation of Prelates and Canonists to discourse of the remedies, and to
frame the Decrees, with order, that if they both happened on the same day, Santa
Croce should be President of the Theologues, and Monte of the Canonists, and
both together in the general Congregation. But beside this, in regard of the
promise to continue the matter of residencie, some of the most principal
Articles thereof were to be handled. In this it was not so easy to agree,
because the Legates and their adherents had contrary ends to the other Bishops.

These began to hope, and to aim, almost all, but especially the Spaniards,
The Spanish Prelates hope to regaine Episcopal authority.
to regaine the Episcopal authority, which anciently every one did exercise
in his own Diocese, when the reseruations of Benefices, of Cases, or of
Absolutions, Dispensations, and the like were unknown, which they were wont to
say in private discourse, when few were present, that ambition and avarice had
made proper to the Court of Rome, under a fained color to manage them better,
and more to the public service of God, and the Church, throughout all
Christendom, then the Bishops could do in their own Cities, in regard of
their imperfection and ignorance. But it was not so, because dissolution and
ignorance did not enter into the Episcopal order, until they were compelled to
go as servants to Rome. But if bad government were then seen in the Bishops,
which caused their authority to be taken Card. Monte does cu^ningly divert the
decision of residence.
away, now it may be seen to be worst of all in the Court of Rome; so that,
by the same reason, that mannagement ought to be taken away which is not
proper to it, but much abused by it.

The decree, that residencie was required by the Law of God, was esteemed by
these Prelates the best remedy for the disease past, and preservative against
hereafter. For if God has commanded Bishops to reside perpetually with the
flock, it follows necessarily that he has also prescribed them the charge,
and given them power to exercise it well. Therefore the Pope cannot call them,
or busy them in ought else, nor dispense with them, nor restrain their
authority, given them by God. Therefore they desired to proceed to the
determination, saying, it was necessary to resolve the Article, because it was
sufficiently discussed. The Cardinal of Monte having premeditated before, let
them speak who were most earnest, that part of the heat might exhale; then he
opposed himself dexterously, and said, it was necessary to do it, because the
world did expect it, but that they ought to do it in a fit time; that the
difficulty was handled with too much heat, and that in some it had stirred
more passion then reason; so that it was necessary to let the feruor be
cooled, and to interpose a little time, that, the contentions being forgotten,
and charity revived, place may be given to the holy Ghost, without which the
truth cannot be decided. That the Popes Holiness, who has understood, to his
grief, the former contentions, desires the same, that himself also may
discuss the matter in Rome, and assist the Synod with his counsel. He
concluded, with more resolute terms, then so modest a beginning ought to
infer; that no more speech should be had of it before the Session, because
the Popes will was resolutely so, but that they should attend to reform the
inconveniences which have caused the abuse of not residing. This mixture of
remonstrances and power made some of the Fathers, who afterward did print
treaties concerning this matter, say, and put in print, that the Legates did
forbid to speak of this question; and others denied it, with an inuectiue
against the first, saying, they derogated from the liberty of the Council. In
the end of the Congregation it was resolved to resume the things that remained
to be discussed in the last Session, and to treat of remoouing the
impediments, which are the causes of not residing. Amongst which the most
principal being plurality of Benefices, in regard it was impossible to
reside in many places, it was resolved to treat of that.

But to avoid confusion, I will relate withal that which belongs to the
Sacraments, where the consideration, for the most part, was speculatiue and
doctrinall, not to interrupt the order of the matter of Benefices, wherein some
things happened which did open a way to important and dangerous actions. Articles
were framed by the deputies in matter of the Sacraments, and the manner of
speaking of them was prescribed to the Divines, communicated to all in a sheet
of paper, with order that they should say, whether they were all heretical or
erroneous, and ought to be condemned by the Synod; and if any deserved not
that sentence, they should allege their reasons and authority; and after
should declare what was the opinion of Councels, and of the holy Fathers, in
all those, and which of the Articles have been reproodued already, and which
remain to be condemned: and if in this matter any one should find out some
other Article worthy of censure, he should give notice thereof, and avoid
impertinent questions in all, wherein one might dispute on both sides, without
prejudice of faith, and all other superfluity and tediousness of words.

Of the Sacraments in general there were fourteen Articles, 1. That
Fourteen Articles of the Sacraments in general.
the Sacraments of the Church are not seven but fewer, which may be called
truly Sacraments. 2. That the Sacraments are not necessary, and that men may
obtain the grace of God without them, by faith only. 3. No Sacrament is more
worthy then another. 4. That the Sacraments of the new Law do not give grace
unto those, who do not resist. 5. That the Sacraments have never given grace
or remission of sins, but only the faith of the Sacrament. 6. That
immediately after the sin of Adam, the Sacraments were instituted by God, by
means whereof grace was given. 7. By the Sacraments, grace is given to him
only, who believes that his sins are remitted. 8. That grace is not given
always in the Sacraments, nor unto all, in respect of the Sacrament it self,
but only when and where it pleases God. 9. That in no Sacrament a Character
is imprinted. 10. That a bad Minister does not confer the Sacrament. 11. That
all Christians of what sex soever, have equal power in the ministry of the
Word of God and Sacraments. 12. That every Pastor has power to make long, or
short, or change at his pleasure, the forms of the Sacraments. 13. That the
intention of the Ministers is not necessary, and works nothing in the
Sacraments. 14. That the Sacraments have been instituted only to cherish
faith.

Of Baptism there were seventeen Articles. 1. That in the Roman Seventeen
Articles of Baptism.
Catholic Church, there is no true Baptism. 2. That Baptism is free, and
not necessary to salvation. 3. That it is not true Baptism which is given by
Heretics. 4. That Baptism is repentance. 5. That Baptism is an external
sign, as the red mark in the Lambs, and has no part in justification. 6.
That Baptism ought to be renewed. 7. That true Baptism is faith, which
believes that sins are remitted to the penitent. 8. That in Baptism sin
is not rooted out, but only not imputed. 9. That the Baptism of CHRIST and
John, have the same virtue. 10. That the Baptism of CHRIST has not made void
that of John, but has added the promise unto it. 11. That in Baptism the
immersion only is necessary, and all other things being free, may be omitted
without sin. 12. That it is better to omit the baptism of children, then
baptize them while they do not believe. 13. That children ought not to be
baptized, because, they have not proper faith. 14. That those that are baptized
in their childhood, coming to the age of discretion, ought to be rebaptized
because they have not believed. 15. That those that have been baptized in
their infancy, when they come to age, ought to be interrogated, whether they
will ratify that Baptism, and, if they deny, ought to be left in liberty. 16.
That sins committed after Baptism are remitted, only by the memory and
faith that one has been baptized. 17. That the vow of Baptism has no other
condition but of faith, yea, nullifieth all other conditions.

Of Confirmation there were four Articles. 1. That Confirmation is not a
Sacrament. 2. That it is instituted by the Fathers, and has no promise Four
Articles of Confirmation.
of the grace of God. 3. That now it is an idle ceremony, and formerly was a
Catechism, when children, coming to age, gave an account of their faith,
before the Church. 4. That the Minister of Confirmation is not the Bishop
only, but any Priest whatsoever.

In the Congregations, all the Divines agreed, in affirming the number of
seven; and condemning the contrary opinion as heretical, in regard of All
agree that there are seven Sacraments, but not that there are no more. Reasons
to prove the number of seven.
the general consent of the Schools, beginning from the Master of the
Sentences, (who spoke definitiuely thereof) until this time. To this they
joined the Decree of the Florentine Council for the Armenians, which
determines that number, and; for greater confirmation, the use of the Roman
Church was added; whence they concluded, that it ought to be held for an
Apostolical tradition, and article of Faith. But, for the second part of the
Article, all did not agree, some saying it was enough to follow the Florentine
Council, which passed no further. For to decide that the proper Sacraments are
neither more nor fewer, does presuppose a decision of the true and proper
essence, and a definition of the Sacrament; a thing difficult, in regard of the
many definitions, brought not only by the Schoolmen, but by the Fathers
also, of which one will make that to be a Sacrament, which another does not.
That it is a question also amongst the Schoolmen, whether the Sacrament can
be defined, whether it have unity, whether it be real, or intentionall: and
that it is not reasonable, in such ambiguity, to tie conclusions with so strong
a bond. It was remembered, that Saint Bernard, and Saint Cyprian, accounted the
washing of feet a Sacrament, and that Saint Austine made every rite, by which
GOD is honored, to be a Sacrament: and elsewhere understanding the word more
strictly then the propriety does comport, makes Sacraments only those, which
are expressly mentioned in the New Testament; which are Baptism, and the
Eucharist only, though he doubts in one place, that there is another.

For the other part it was said, that it was necessary to establish for an
Article, that the proper Sacraments, are neither more nor less, to repress
the boldness as well of the Lutheranes, who make them sometimes two, sometimes
three, sometimes four, as also of those who exceed seven; and if sometimes a
greater number, and sometimes a less, be found in the Fathers, it was because
then, before the determination of the Church; it was lawful to use the word in
a more large, or more strict signification. And here, to establish the
sufficiency of this number of seven, as the Schoolmen speak, that is, that
they are neither more nor less, they were tedious in recounting the reasons
deduced from seven natural things, by which life is gained and preserved; from
the seven virtues; from the seven capital vices; from the seven defects, which
came from original sin; from the six days of the creation of the world, and
seventh of rest; from the seven regions of Egypt; from the seven Planets; from
the famousnesse of the number of seven, and other congruities, used by the
principal Schoolmen, for proof of the conclusion; and many reasons why the
consecration of Churches, of the vessels of Bishops, Abbats, Abbesses, and
Monks, are not Sacraments, nor holy water, nor the washing of feet, as Saint
Bernard said, nor Martyrdom, nor the creation of Cardinals, nor the Coronation
of the Pope.

Some said, that, to bridle the Heretics, it was not sufficient to condemn
the Article, if every one of the Sacraments were not particularly named, for
fear some bad spirit might exclude some of the true, and substitute some
false. Afterward, another essential point, for the Article, was called to
mind, that is, to determine the Institutor of all the Sacraments; which is
CHRIST; to condemn the heresy of the Lutherans, who ascribe to CHRIST, the
ordination of Baptism, and the Eucharist only. And that CHRIST ought to be
held, by faith, for the Institutor, Saint Ambrose Saint Austine, and above all,
the Apostolical Tradition was alleged: from which no man dissented. But some
said, they ought not go on so far, and that it was enough, to keep within
the bounds of the Florentine Council; and the rather, in regard that the
Master of the Sentences held, that Extreme Unction was instituted by Saint
James, and Saint Bonauenture, with Alexander, that Confirmation began after
the Apostles. And the same Bonauenture, with other Divines, makes the Apostles
authors of the Sacrament of Penance. And many have said of Matrimony, that it
was instituted by God in Paradise. And CHRIST himself, when he spoke of it,
in a place fit to name the author, does attribute the institution thereof, not
to himself, but to the FATHER in the beginning. For these respects, they
advised not to add that point, for fear of condemning the opininion of the
Catholics. The Dominicanes on the contrary, did affirm, with some
bitterness of words, that those Doctors might be expounded and salued, with
diverse distinctions, and that they would ever have referred themselves to the
Church; but the Lutherane boldness ought not to pass without condemnation,
who have brought in those falsities, with contempt of the Church; and that was
not to be tolerated in the rash Lutherans, which might be endured in the holy
Fathers.

In the second Article, of the necessity of the Sacraments, some would The
necessi of the Sacraments.
not have the condemnation to be absolute, but a distinction made, in regard it
is certain, that all are not absolutely necessary. There was another opinion
also to be condemned, which said, That the Sacraments were not necessary in
the Church, because it is certain, they are not necessary to every one, yea,
that some are incompatible, as Order, and Matrimony. Yet the more common
opinion was, that the Article should be condemned absolutely, for two reasons:
one, because the necessity of one is sufficient to make the Article false, as
it lies; the other, because they are all necessary in some sort some
absolutely, some by supposition, some by conueniencie, and some for greater
utility. But many maruailed, that Articles of Faith should be established, in
such multiplicity of equivocation. For whose satisfaction, when the Canons,
were composed, there was added, condemning him that held the Sacraments not to
be necessary, but superfluous; enlarging by this last term the signification
of the first.

Many were of opinion that the other part of the Article ought to be omitted,
because it was defined in the last Session, that faith only was not
sufficient: and Marinarus said that the distinction of the Sacrament in vow,
was used by the Schoolmen, but was unknown to antiquity, and full of
difficulties. For in the Acts of the Apostles, when Cornelius the Centurion was
instructed, the Angel said, his prayers were acceptable to God before he knew
the Sacrament of Baptism, and other particulars of Faith; and all his family,
hearing the Sermon of Saint Peter, received the holy Ghost before they had been
instructed in the Doctrine of the Sacraments: and after the holy Ghost
received, they were instructed concerning Baptism, by Saint Peter; so that
having no knowledge of it, they could not receive it in vow; and the Thief
upon the Cross, then only illuminated by the virtue of CHRIST, knew not the
Sacraments, nor could make any vow of them. And many holy Martyrs, converted in
the heat of persecution, by seeing the constancy of others, and presently
taken and put to death, one cannot say, but by divination, that they knew the
Sacraments and could make a vow. Therefore it was better to leave that
distinction to the Schools, and to put it in the Articles of faith. The common
opinion was to the contrary, saying, that although the words of the
distinction were new and scholasticall, yet one must believe that the thing
signified was taught by CHRIST, and is an Apostolical tradition: and for the
examples of Cornelius, the Thief, and Martyrs, it is to be understood, that
there are two sorts of vows of the Sacrament; the one explicit, the other
implicit; and, at the least, this second is necessary: that is, that they had
not the vow actually, but would have had it, if they had been informed. These
things the others granted to be true, but not obligatorie, as Articles of
faith. The difficulties, in which they could not agree, where referred to the
Synod, that is to the general Congregation.

As it happened also in the third Article; which, though every one thought to be
false, yet all did agree, that, in regard of the necessity and utility,
Baptism Concerning the dignity of the Sacraments.
does proceed; in regard of the signification, Matrimony; in regard of the
dignity of the Minister, Confirmation; in regrad of divine worship, the
Eucharist: but because one cannot say, without a distinction, which is more
worthy, it is better to omit the Article, which cannot be understood without
subtlety. Another opinion was, that all the respects of dignity ought to be
expressed. And another, that the clause should be added to the Article; that
is, according to the diverse respects. This opinion was most followed, but did
much displease those, who could not endure that the Synod should abase it
self to these scholasticall fooleries, (for so they called them) and believe
that CHRIST would have these weak opinions brought into his faith.

Although that the fourth Article ought to be condemned; yea, that it was
necessary to amplify it, condemning the doctrine of Zuinglius in particular;
The fourth Article is generally condemned.
who will have the Sacraments to be but signs, by which the faithful are
discerned from infidels; or Acts, and exercises of the profession of Christian
faith, having no other relation to grace, but as signs that one has received
it. After they treated of condemning those who deny that Sacraments do
confer grace, to him that puts not a bar, or do not confess, that
grace is contained in the Sacraments and conferred, not by virtue of faith, but
Ex opere operato. But coming to expound how they are contained, and their
causalitie, every one did agree, that grace is gained by all Whether the
Sacraments do confer grace Ex opere operato.
those actions that excite devotion, which proceeds not from the force of the
work it self, but from the virtue of devotion, which is in the worker; and
these are said in the Schools, to cause grace, Ex opere operantis. There are
other actions which cause grace, not by the devotion of him that works, or of
him that receives the work, but by virtue of the work it self. Such are the
Christian Sacraments, by which, grace is received, so that there be no bar of
mortal sin, to exclude it, though there be not any devotion. So by the
work of Baptism, grace is given to the infant, whose mind is not moved
toward it, and to one borne a fool, because there is no impediment of sin.
The Sacrament of Chrisme does the like, and that of extreme unction, though
the sick man has lost his memory. But he that has mortal sin, and does
persevere actually, or habitually, cannot receive grace, by reason of the
contrariety, not because the Sacrament has not virtue to produce it Ex opere
operato, but because the receiver is not capeable, being possessed with a
contrary quality.

Though they all agreed in this, yet they differed, because the Dominicans did
affirm, that how be it grace is a spiritual quality, created immediately by
GOD, yet it is an isntrumental and effectiue virtue in the Sacraments, which
causes a disposition in the soul to receive it. And therefore it is said that
they contain grace; not that it is in them as in a vessel, but as the effect
in the cause, alleging a subtle example, as the chezill is active, not only
in scabling the stone, but in giving form to the Statue. The Franciscans The
Franciscans and Dominicans cannot agree about the manner ho(...) the Sacraments
do contain grace.
said that it could not be conceived, how God, being a spiritual cause, can
use a corporal instrument, for a spiritual effect, as is grace; they did
absolutely deny all effectiue or dispositiue virtue in the Sacraments; saying
they have no virtue, but by the promise of God, that so often as they shall be
administered, he will give his grace to them. Therefore it is said they do
contain it, as in an effectual sign, not by any virtue of their own, but by
a Divine promise, of infallible assistance to the ministry. Therefore it is a
cause, for that the effect does follow, not by any virtue of its own, but by
the promise of God, to give grace at that time; as the merit is cause of the
reward without any actiuitie. This they proved not only by the authority of
Scotus, and Saint Bonauenture, their Divines, but by Saint Bernard also who
says that grace is received by the Sacraments, as a Canon is invested by the
book, and a bishop by the ring. The reasons were expounded on both sides, with
great prolixitie and sharpness. And they censured one another. The Dominicans
said, that the other opinion was near to Lutheranisme, and the others, that
theirs, being impossible, gave occasion to the heretics to calumniate the
Church. Some good Prelates desired though without effect) to make peace,
saying, that in regard they agreed in the conclusion, that the Sacraments
contain and are cause of grace, it did little import in what manner, and that
it was better, not descending to particulars, to stand in the general. But the
Friars replied that they spoke not of words, but of establishing, or
annihilating the Sacraments. There would never have been an end, if the Legate
Sancta Croce had not given order that they should pass to that which remained,
and that afterward they should return to examine whether it were necessary to
decide the point, or to leave it.

The Legates called unto them the generals of the orders, and prayed The
Legates use means to repress the dangerous liberty of the Friars.
them to cause the Friars to treat with modesty and charity, without
partiality to their own sect, showing they were called to speak against
heresies, and not to make new arise by disputes. And they wrote thereof to
Rome, showing how dangerous the liberty was which the Friars did assume, and
to what it might come. And they told the Pope that a moderation was necessary.
For there being a fame spread of those dissensions, and censures which one
party pronounced against the other, it must needs raise scandal, and small
reputation of the Council.

It was thought fit to omit the fifth Article, as decided in the former
Session. But Friar Bartholmew Miranda called to mind that Luther, by that
paradox of his, that the Sacraments do not confer grace, but by exciting
faith, drew also a conclusion, that those of the old, and of the Evangelical
law, are of equal virtue; which opinion was to be condemned, as contrary to
the doctrine of the Fathers, and the Church; all having said, that the old
Sacraments were only signs of grace, but the new contain it and cause it. No
man did contradict the conclusion, but the Franciscans proposed: that it should
not be said of the old Law, but of Moses Law, in regard that Circumcision it
self did cause grace: but it was not a Mosaicall Sacrament; for CHRIST also
said, it was not of Moses, but of the Fathers; and also because other
sacrifices, before Abraham, did confer, and cause grace. The Dominicans
replied that Saint Paul said plainly, that Abraham had received the
Circumcision only for a sign; that he being the first unto whom it was
given, it is as much as to say it was instituted only for a sign. And the
questions of the manner of containing, and causing grace, returned into the
field. Friar Gregory, of Padua, said hereupon, that it was a clear case in
Logique, that things in the same kind have identitie and difference among
themselves. If the old Sacraments and ours had only difference, they would not
all be Sacraments, but equiuocally; if only identitie, they would be
absolutely the same thing. Therefore they must beware to put difficulty in
plain matters for some diversity of words; and that Saint Augustine had
said, that these and those, are diverse in the sign, but equal in the thing
signified. And in another place, that they were diverse in the visible species,
but the same in the intelligible signification; and that else where he puts a
difference, that those were promissiue, and these demonstratiue: which another
does express in another term, that those were prenunciatiue, and these
contestatiue. Whence it plainly appears, that they agree and differ in many
things; which no sensible man can deny: and therefore it was wisdom, not to
put that Article in the beginning, neither was it to any purpose to touch it in
the present Decree. Another opinion came forth, that the opinion of the
Lutherans, and Zuinglians, was to be condemned, without descending to the
particulars. For they say, there is no difference, between the old and new
Sacraments, but in the Rites. But it has been showed, that there are other
differences; and therefore, they are to be condemned for this only, without
descending to show what those differences are.

But the sixth was censured by the Dominicans, who said it was proper to the
Evangelical Sacraments to give grace, and that the old did not give it, but
only by the virtue of devotion: and that this was the opinion of Saint Thomas.
They alleged, for a principal ground, the determination of the Florentine
Council, that the Sacraments of the old Law did not cause grace, but did
figure, that it must be given by the passion of CHRIST. But Because S.
Bondaenture, and Sootus did maintain, that the Circumcision did confer grace
Ex opere operato, Scotus adding, that, immediately after the sin of Adam, a
Sacrament was instituted, in which a grace was given to babes by virtue of it,
that is, Ex opere operato, the Franciscans said the Article was true, and could
not be censured, and that if, as Saint Thomas said, children, before CHRIST,
were saved by the fathers faith, the state of Christians was worse. For now the
fathers faith does not help the children, without Baptism; and Saint Austine
says, that the child that is carried by the father to be baptized, if he die
in the way, is damned. So that if faith only did then suffice, the condition
of the sons of Christians is now worse. In these difficulties, many did
propose, that the Article, as probable, should be omitted.

To leave out the seventh and eighth, there was a great agreement. But in
Concerning the Character imprinted by the Sacrament.
the ninth of the Chalacter, Friar Dominicus Soto, endeavored to declare, that
it has foundation in the holy Scripture, and has ever bin held in the Church
for an Apostolicull Tradition: and though the name has not been used by the
Fathers, yet the thing signified is most ancient. Others did not grant him so
great a scope, because it did not appear, that Gratian, or the Master of the
Sentences, had made any mention thereof. Yea, John Scotius said, that it was
not necessary, by the words of the Scripture, or of the Fathers, to affirm it,
but only by the authority of the Church; a thing usual with that Doctor, to
deny things with a kind of courtesy. It was worth the knowing what thing
they meant it should be, and where situated, in such multiplicity of
Schoole-opinions: some making it a quality; and amongst those were four
opinions, according to the four kinds of the qualities; some a spiritual
power; some an habit or disposition; others a spiritual figure; and the
opinion that it was a sensible metaphorical quality, did not want abettors.
Some would have it a call relation, some, a fabrique of the mind; who were to
declare how far it differed from nothing. The same variety, of opinions
concerning the subject, was trouble some; some placed it in the effende of the
soul; some in the understanding; some in the will, and there wanted not, who
gave it place in the hands and tongue. Jerome of Portugal, a Dominican Friar,
thought that the Sacraments did imprint a spiritual quality, before the
coming of grace; and that it was of two sports: one bib which can never be
abolished, the other which may be lost, and regained; the former whereof is
called a Character, and the later a certain ornament. The Sacraments which
give the first, cannot be reiterated, because their effect ever remains; the
others may, when their effect is lost. This carried a fair show, but was not
approved by many, because there was no other author to be found of that
ornament, but Saint Thomas; who also, though he begat it, yet did not think it
worthy of education. But howsoever, all agreed in this general, that three
Sacraments have the Character; yet some did say modestly, that it was to be
approved as more probable, not as necessary: Three Sacraments have a Character.
others on the contrary, that it was an Article of Faith, because Innocentius
the third, made mention of it, and was so defined by the Council of Florence.

The Article, that the honesty of the Minister was not necessary, was so
discussed by Saint Austine, in so many books, against the Donatists, that the
Divines did all agree: and besides it was alleged, for a principal ground,
that the Article was condemned, by the Council of Constance, amongst the
errors of John Wickliefe.

They all condemned the eleventh Article, as contrary to the Scripture,
Tradition, and use of the universal Church.

The twelfth, of the forms of the Sacraments, was distinguished, as receiving
two senses: understanding by form, either the essential words, as it is said,
that every Sacrament has, for matter, the sensible element, and, for form,
the word; or understanding, by form, all the form and rite of the Ministry,
which includes many things not necessary, but decent. And they thought fit to
make two Canons thereof; by the first, condemning him of heresy, that says,
that the form may be changed, being instituted by CHRIST. But, for the second
sense, though accidental things may receive mutation, yet when any rite is
brought in by public authority, or received and confirmed by common use, it
should not be in every man's power to change it, but only in the Popes, as Head
of the Church universal, when it is convenient for some new respect.

In the thirteenth, of the intention of the Minister, they could not dissent
from the Council of Florence, which holds it necessary: but what intention
Concerning the intention of the Minister in the administration of the Sacrament.
was required, was hard to express, in regard of the variety of opinions about
the efficacy and virtue of the Sacraments: because there cannot be the same
intention of two, who have diverse opinions. The common answer was, that the
intention to do as the Church did, was sufficient. Notwithstanding this
exposition, the difficulties remained, for that men's opinions what the Church
is, being diverse, their intention in administering the Sacrament, would prove
various also. It seemed they might say, it was not different, when all had the
same aim, to do that which has been instituted by CHRIST, and observed by
the Church, though a false Church be taken for a true so that the rite of the
one and the other be the same.

In this particular, the Bishop of Minori proposed a thing worthy to be
repeated A discourse of the Bishop of Minori about the intention of the
Minister.
here, and esteemed by all to deserve great consideration. He said, that to
the Lutherans, who give no other virtue to the Sacraments, then to excite
faith, which notwithstanding may be stirred up some other way, it did little
import to receive the true Sacrament. Whereupon they say it is not necessary,
and think it not convenient, that the malice of a wicked Minister, who has no
intention to confer the true Sacrament, should be able to hurt, because we
are to regard what the faithful receives, and not what is given. But amongst
the Catholics, who do truly attribute to the Sacrament power to give grace
to him that does not resist it, seeing it happens very seldom, that grace
is obtained by any other means, surely little children, and many who have but
small understanding, are saved no other way. And ordinary men have so weak a
disposition, that it would not suffice without the Sacrament. And those few,
who, as Phonixes, have a perfect disposition, yet do receive greater grace by
the Sacrament. Therefore it much concerns a Christian to be assured, that
he receives that which is true and effectual. If a Priest, having charge of
four or five thousand souls, were an infidel, but a formal hypocrite, and
in absoluing the penitent, baptizing of children, and consecrating the
Eucharist, had an intention not to do what the Church does, it must be said
that the children are damned, the penitent not absolved, and that all remain
without the fruit of the Communion. Neither is it enough to say, that faith
supplyeth; because it does not help children at all, according to the
Catholic doctrine, nor others, so much as the Sacrament: and to attribute so
great virtue to faith, were to take all virtue from the Sacraments, and to fall
into the Lutheran opinion.

He considered how a tender Father would be afflicted when his son was about
to die, if he doubted of the intension of the baptizing Priest. So he that
feels himself of a weak disposition, and is to be baptized, what anxietie
will he have, that perhaps the Priest is a counterfeit Christian, and mocketh
him, not meaning to baptize him, but only to wash him in jest. And the same
may be feared in confession, and receiving the Eucharist. He added, if any
said these cases were rare, would to God it were so, and that, in this corrupt
age, we had not cause to doubt they were many. But suppose they are very few,
or but one only. Let there be a knave Priest, who fayneth, and has not an
intention to administer the true Baptism to a child, who after, being a man
grown, is created Bishop of a great City, and lives many years in that
charge, so that he has ordained a great part of the Priests; it must be
said, that he, being not baptized, is not ordained, nor they ordained, who are
promoted by him. So, in that great City, there will be neither Eucharist, nor
Confession, because they cannot be without the Sacrament of order, nor order
without a true Bishop, neither can he receive order who is not baptized.
Behold millions of nullities of Sacraments, by the malice of one Minister, in
one Act only. And he that thinks that God supplyeth by his omnipotency,
and provides against these daily occurrences by extraordinary remedies, will
sooner make one believe that God, by his providence, has provided that such
accidents should not happen. Therefore the Bishop said to every inconvenience;
God has made provision herein, by ordaining that to be a Sacrament which is
administered, according to the rite instituted by himself, though the Minister
have another inward intention. And he added that this does not cross the
common doctrine of the Divines, or the determination of the Florentine
Council, which requires intention, because the inward intention is not to be
understood, but that which is manifested by the external work, though
inwardly it be contrary. And so all inconveniences are removed, which
otherwise are innumerable. He brought many reasons for proof, and at last the
example written by Sozomene; That the children of Alexandria, being at play by
the Sea side, did imitate, in jest, the actions used in the Church, and
Athanasius, created Bishop of the play, did baptize other children not baptized
before; whereof Alexander, of famous memory; Bishop of Alexandria, being
Athanasius being a child did baptize other children.
aduertized, he was troubled at it, and called the children, and asked what
their Bishop had done, and said unto them: and understanding that all the
Ecclesiastical rite was observed, by the Counsel of other Priests, did
approve the baptism; which could not be maintained, if such an intention, as
others spoke of, were required, but might well be in that manner that himself
did express it.

The Divines did not approve this doctrine, yet were troubled, and The opinion
of the Bishop of M(...) was not received. But a year after he published a
little Book to show that the Synod was of his mind.
knew not how to resolve the reason: But they still defended that the true
intention of the Minister was necessary, either actual, or virtuall, and that
without it the Sacrament was not of force, notwithstanding any external
demonstration. I must not refrain to show also (though it be an anticipation
of the fit time) that howsoever the Synod did after determine absolutely that
the intention of the Minister is necessary, yet this Prelate remained firm,
and, in a little Book that he wrote of this Subject a year after, did say
that the Synod of Trent was of his opinion, and that the determination ought
to be understood in his sense. There was no difficulty in condemning the last
Article, by reason of that which has been said by others.

The matter of Baptism, in the third Article, gave them greater trouble, what
that Baptism is, which is given by the heretics. All grounded themselves upon
the Schoole-doctrine, received by the Florentine Council, that a Sacrament
requires matter, form, and intention, and that water is the matter, the
expression of the Act in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
the form; and to do what the Church does, the intention. Whereupon they
established an undoubted conclusion, that those heretics have true baptism,
and agree with us in these three things; which they said was received by an
Apostolical tradition, established long before by Pope Stephanus the first, in
the beginning of the third age, and approved by all the Church following. But
those that understand antiquity do know, that this was not the opinion of
Stephanus, in whose time, matter, form, and intention were not heard of. For
that Pope did think absolutely that those who were converted from any heresy
whatsoever, ought not to be rebaptized; though, in those times, the heretics,
except some few Montanists, were Gnostiques, who used extrauagant baptismes, by
reason of the exorbitant opinions which they held, of the divinity, and person
of CHRIST. And it is certain that those Baptismes had not the form which is
used now, and yet the Church of Rome did the receive to repentance, every sort
of heretics indifferently, without rebaptizing them. The Bishops of Africa and
Cappadocia were directly opposite, saying, that all (...) were to be
rebaptized. In the Council of Nice a middle course was (...) is, that the
Cathari should not be rebaptized, but the Paulianists and (...)ists should:
The Council of Constantinople did name many heretics which were to be
rebaptized; and others to be received to baptism with them, in whom it would
be hard to show that the same form was used. But (which is of more
importance) Saint Bernard does witness, that the Nouations, Eucratiques,
Saccofors were not rebaptized in Rome, whom notwithstanding he did rebaptize;
neither did that Saint think this diversity to be absurd: only he said, it
would be good to assemble many Bishops to resloue upon an uniform proceeding.
But giving no more heed to these things then to fables, they held the current
doctrine, that an heretic does truly baptize, if he uses the words, and has
the intention of the Church.

The fourth Article; that Baptism was Repentance, in regard of the force of
the speech, was held by many not to be false, alleging the Evangelist, who
says, that John preached the Baptism of Repentance; and that Paul, in the
sixth to the Hebrews, calls Baptism by the name of Repentance. And so many
Fathers have said the same, that the Article could not be condemned, except it
did say: that Baptism was the Sacrament of Penance. But because it seemed in
this sense to be the same with the sixteenth Article, many thought fit to
leave it.

The 9. and 10. belonging to the Baptism of John, many were of opinion that
they ought to be omitted. For not speaking of those of the old law, it was
less fit to speak of that which was in the middle, in regard their scope was
to handle the Sacraments of the new law. But others said, that the heretics
mind was, not to exalt the Baptism of John, and to make it equal Whether the
Baptism of John and Christ be equal.
with that of CHRIST, but to abase that of CHRIST, and to make it equal with
John's baptism; inferring, that, as this did not give grace, but was a pure
signification, so was ours also, which is a most formal heresy.

In the eleventh of the Rites, some would have the substantials distinguished
from others, and said, that those only cannot be omitted without sin. Others
would exclude the case of necessity only, and that otherwise it was not
lawful to omit any whatsoever; for in regard the Church, governed by the holy
Ghost, has ordained them, they are necessary by the precept, though not by the
substance of the Sacrament. They alleged many Chapters of the Popes, and
Councels, all which would prove vain, if every one might change as he
lists. That part which speaks of immersion, though it be a more express
figure of the death, burial, and resurrection of CHRIST, yet it was condemned
by all, and many places of the Prophets were alleged, where aspersion, or
effusion of water is spoken of, all which, they said, ought literally to be
understood of baptism.

All set themselves against those three which speak of the baptism of
children, alleging the doctrine of the ancient Fathers and Schoolmen; and
many inuectiues were made against Erasmus, attributing unto him the Erasmus is
taxed.
invention of the fifteenth, saying, it was impious and pernicious, and would
open a way to abolish all Christian Religion: adding, that if the children of
the uncircumcised Jews, coming to age, were bound to keep all the law, and
were punished for transgressing it, it was (...) compel the sons of the
faithful to observe the Christian law; that th(...) had deservedly condemned
the Article, and so ought the Synod to ded.

They concluded, that the sixteenth was contained in the former Articles,
because it did take away Penance, one of the seven sacrament. But all said,
that the last was contrary to the proper ministry of baptism, in the very
beginning whereof the catechized is admonished; that if he will have eternal
life, it is necessary to observe all the commandments.

In the Articles about confirmation, there was no difference; and all, Of
Confirmation, Chrisme, and Unction.
for their ground, did allege the Council of Florence. And that which is said
in the third Article, that young men did formerly give an account of their faith
in the presence of the Church, was generally decided, that, not being used in
these times, one ought to believe it was never used before; for the Church
would never have intermitted that ceremony. Many places of Councels and
ancient writers were alleged, making mention of Chrisme, and Unction, which
cannot agree to instruction or examination. Therefore they concluded, that it
was a most vain ignorance, to change so principal a Sacrament, against the
common meaning of all the Church, into a rite perhaps used in some particular
place, but never universally, as the Unction of the Chris(...)

Upon the last article there was much difficulty, in regard Saint Gregory,
Whether only the Bishop be minister of Confirmation.
the Pope, did grant the ministry to simple Priests. The Franciscans,
according to the doctrine of Saint Bonauenture, followed by John Scotus, and
their order, which does attribute the ministry to the Bishop only, as Pope
Adrian the sixth did also maintain, answered, that it was a permission only
for that time, and against the Popes will, to avoid the scandal of those
people: or else that the Unction, permitted by Gregory, was not the Sacrament
of confirmation. Which answer not pleasing Saint Thomas; because it did not
wholly free the Pope from having erred, he found a temper, and said, that
though the Bishop be the minister of Confirmation, yet, with the Popes
permission, it may be administered by the Priest. Others opposed, and said that
the doctrine of the Roman Church was absolute, that the ministers of
Sacraments are instituted by CHRIST, whom though the Pope can command to the
exercise of the ministry, yet he cannot make the Sacrament to be of force
that is administered by others, nor nullify that which is conferred by the
minister, instituted by CHRIST, though against his commandment. And therefore
if CHRIST has instituted the Bishop for minister, the Pope cannot make that
grant to the Priest; if CHRIST has granted that the Priest may do it, the
Pope cannot hinder him. For it would seem a strange thing, that in the other
Sacraments, being all of greater necessity, CHRIST should prescribe the
minister, without leaving any liberty unto men, and in this, which may at any
time be deferred, use a singularity, whereof, for six hundred years, until
the time of Gregory, no man had made any mention, building an Article of faith
upon four words, spoken by occasion: and if the epistle had been lost, no man
would ever have invented that distinction, unusual in such a matter, nor to
be applied to any thing but to this place of Gregory.

Others, being not satisfied with the resolution of either party, did propose,
that the words of the Florentine Council should be taken. Some thought fit,
only to condemn him that would say, that the Priest, and not the Bishop
only, is the ordinary Minister; giving by the word (ordinary) power to
infer, therefore there is another extraordinary, or to say, that there can
be no other, because the Sacraments have no Minister, but Ordinary.

While the forenamed Articles, were discussed by the Divines, in the
Congregation A Decree of Reformation containing six heads.
of the Canonists, assembled to collect, and remedy the abuses, concerning the
Sacraments in general, and, in particular, of Baptism, and Confirmation, a
Decree was made containing six heads: which said thus in substance. That the
Synod, desiring to remove the abuses, brought in by men or time, and to teach
the Ministers of Churches, and all the faithful, how to govern themselves in
observing, ministering, and receiving the Sacraments, does ordain. 1. That the
Ecclesiastical Sacraments, shall be freely conferred, without taking or
demanding any thing for them, under any pretense whatsoever, and no chest,
vessel, cloth, or any such thing shall be showed, by which a demand may be
intimated; nor the Sacrament shall be denied, or deferred, upon pretense of
any long and ancient custom, not to confer them before some certain stipend
be paid, or satisfaction of some debt, considering that neither custom, or
length of time, does diminish the sin, but rather increases it: and the
offenders shall be punished according to the laws, made against symoniacall
persons. 2. The Sacrament of Baptism, shall not be conferred in profane
places, but in Churches only, except in case of necessity, and when the
children of Kings, and Princes are to be baptized, according to the
constitution of Clement the fifth; which shall not take place in all that have
dominion, but only in great Princes. Neither shall the Bishop give the
Chrisme, but in seemly ornaments, and in the Churches, sacred places, or
Episcopal houses. 3. The Sacrament of Baptism shall be administered by able
Priests, in the mother Churches only, except, by reason of great difficulty to
go to them, the Bishop think fit to grant it to other Churches, or that it
has been granted time out of mind: in which Churches, holy water, taken from
the mother Church, shall be kept in a clean and decent vessel. 4. In
Baptism and Chrisme, there shall be allowed but one Godfather, who shall
neither be infamous, nor excommunicated, nor interdicted, nor under age, nor a
Monk, nor any that cannot perform what he promises. And in Chrisme, he
shall not be received for a godfather, who has not received Chrisme
himself. 5. To take away the abuse, practiced in many places, to carry about
the water of Baptism, or christened children, with their forehead bound, to
make many godfathers, by washing of the hands, or loosing the forehead, the
Priests, in regard no compaternity is contracted by these means, shall not
permit the water of Baptism to be carried out of the Church, but shall cause
it to be cast into the Sacrary, and the Font to be shut up. And the Bishops,
when they give the Chrisme, shall make two clerks stand at the Church door,
to untie and wash the foreheads, of those that have received the Chrisme, not
suffering any that is tied to go out of the Church. 6. The Bishops shall be
diligently careful, not to confirm any who is excommunicated, interdicted, or
in mortal sin.

And though the Canonists did more easily agree in these Decrees, then the
Theologues in their discussions, yet some differences were amongst them; for
resolution whereof, because after long disputation, they could not agree, they
put them inform, and referred the decision to the general Congregation. The
first doubt was, whether unto these words, that Difficulties referred to the
general Congregation.
is, that nothing shall be required or demanded, it should be added, or
received. The second, whether they should add these words; under pretense of
any custom whatsoever. The third, whether they should use some words, to
signify, that the Synod does not prohibit valuntary oblations, or does
prohibit them only, when they are given in regard of the Sacrament, and not
for other respects of piety, or whether the Decree should be left in its
universality.

But there was the same difficulty, in the general Congregation, impossible In
which they could not be decided.
to be reconciled. Those that required the additions, not to receive, or
pretend custom, alleged the Gospel; Freely you have received, freely give;
and many Canons, anathematizing him that gives or receives a temporal thing,
for a spiritual. That custom, against the law of God and nature, is
corruption, and cannot take place. That in the title of simonie, the custom of
giving, or receiving, for possession of benefices, benedictions of marriages,
for burials, benediction of the Chrisme, for oil, or for the ground of the
burial, is reprehended and condemned. Which the rather ought to be applied to
the Sacraments, in regard, if that be not prohibited, nothing is done, because
the corruption is used in all places, and every one will excuse himself with
it. That as the custom of receiving any thing before, is condemned in the
Decree, so the custom to receive after, ought to be condemned, by the same
reason; or else, by condemning that, this is approved. And for voluntary
oblations, they would have it generally forbid, to give or receive any thing a
little before, or a little after, for any respect whatsoever; because, in
respect of the time, one may presume that it is given for the Sacrament. And
here the gloss was alleged, which says, that howsoever it is a work of
piety, to put money into the box, yet to do it in time of receiving the
Sacrament, breeds suspicion of simonie: and therefore that the time is to be
respected, which may make a thing seem evil, which otherwise may be
accounted good. That God does command, to take away all occasion of scandal,
and to abstain from all appearance of evil. And therefore that the Sacraments
may be purely administered, they would have voluntary oblations absolutely
forbid, in time of administering the Sacraments, exhorting the faithful, to use
them, in other times and occasions.

On the other side was alleged, that the fourth Council of Carthage grants
the receiving of what is offered for baptizing of Children; and that the
Divines, having determined that no temporal thing shall be received for the
Sacrament, do consent withal, that one may receive for the pains in
administering them, and much rather when it is given or received, not in respect
of the Sacrament, but by way of alms, or else the Laity would have no
occasions to exercise works of charity, and the poor Curates would not be
able to live. They alleged the authority of Saint Paul, That it is not
lawful to muzzel the Ox that treads the corn, and that he that serves at
the altar should live by it. That it should never be confessed that any custom
is introduced to give or receive any thing, for the ministering of the
Sacraments; because it being generally used, it would be as much as to say,
that a pernicious abuse has been tolerated, yea approved in the Church
universal. Therefore that they ought not to speak of breaking a custom that
was never in use; least thinking to remedy that which is not evil, but so
esteemed by the tenderness of some men's consciences, the Church should receive
a mortal wound. Their principal reason was that Innocentius the third, in the
general Council, in the Chapter, Ad Apostolicam, does not only declare the
custom of making oblations, in the administration of Sacraments, to be
lawful, and ordain it should be observed, but that the Bishop should be
punished, in case he should go about to change it. Therefore to determine the
contrary now, would be to condemn, very scandalously, a Pope and a general
Council, as approuers and defenders of a pernicious error.

It was replied by the other side, that the Statute of the Council of Carthage
does condemn, severely, the exaction, and does tolerate the voluntary
oblation: but that it was amended by the Council of Heliberum, which
forbids the use, observed in those times, that the baptized should put some
money into the font. That the invention of the Divines, distinguished the
ministry of the Sacrament from the pains in administering it, and the
distinction to receive in respect of the Sacrament, or of some thing else, and
that of the first and second intention, are metaphysicall, and chimericall,
considering the words of the Gospel, are delivered in absolute terms, not
subject to cavil, or glosses, which do mar the Text: That God by Moses and
Saint Paul, prohibiting the muzzell, does mean that food should not be denied
to the hungry beast, yet that he should not be filled with superfluity. That
the poverty of the Clergy could not be pretended, having not only
competent, but abundant revenues. That the abuse is that the governors of
Churches reside not in their benefices, and yet will receive all the fruits,
hiring the incertaintie to poor seely Priests, who are forced to sell all to
keep themselves alive. That they should rather make provision that all should
reside, by which means they would have more then enough for their maintenance,
and should not need to sell the Sacraments. And by this occasion they began
again to dilate of residencie, and of the good that would follow declaring it
to be, De iure diuino. That if any benefice with cure of souls be small,
provision should be made, by uniting other simple benefices, and in case there
were no other way, by causing the people to contribute for their maintenance.
That it is better, and pleases God more to confess the error past, and to
redress it, then to defend it, and persevere. And the Cardinal of Monte, who
otherwise did not seem inclined to reformation, was peremptory in this,
answering those that alleged the authority of Innocentius the third, and the
general Council, that they did great wrong to that Pope and those Fathers, to
say they defended so great an abuse, and that they showed their ignorance. For
if they read the 3 chapter of the same Council, which is the third before
that which they have alleged, they might have seen the meaning very plainly,
and how those Fathers did forbid all exactions, condemning also the custom to
the contrary. And, in that Chapter, the customs to give any thing for
administering the Sacraments are not allowed, but others, being lawful, honest,
and in favor of the Church, are permitted, as tenthes, first fruits,
oblations usually made to the altars, canonical portions and such other
laudable vsances; alleging that the Chapter was so understood by Bartolus and
Romanus.

The Fathers deputed to make the decrees in matter of faith considering
Anathematismes framed.
the opinions of the Divines, and the conclusions in which they agreed, leaving
and distinguishing the Articles according to their direction, and ranging them
in a better order, framed 24. Anathematismes, concerning the Sacraments in
general, ten of Baptism, and three of Chrisme: which were expressed in such a
form, as that no Catholic opinion was condemned, and all parties satisfied.
But in composing the Heads to express the doctrine, It was hard to express
the doctrine, and to displease no persons,
as was done in justification, it was not possible to use the terms of one
opinion, but that another seemed to be disallowed; which neither pleased the
Doctors for the affection they bare to their own sect, nor the Legates and
Neutrals, for fear of sowing new divisions: But not being able to express
the doctrine so nicely, but that more then one of the parties would be lost,
they referred it to the general congregation, to define how the Sacraments do
contain and cause grace.

The Congregation was no less perplexed then the Deputies. One part inclined
to omit wholly the matter of doctrine, and to pass with the Anathematismes
only, as they did in original sin. Another part would have the doctrine by
all means, alleging the reasons used, when they treated of justification;
that it was necessary to follow the example then begun: and that all diligence
should be used to satisfy all parties. But at the last they said it must be
done, and that there was no danger of division. For the Divines, present in
Council, though they sharply defend their own opinions, yet they do refer
themselves to the Synod, which the absent will assuredly do also. Therefore
they should not refrain to do the business exactly, that the heretics may
be convinced. This opinion had prevailed, but that John Baptista Cigala, bishop
of Albenga, and Auditor of the Chamber, did strongly oppose: who said, it was
never found in any Story, that ever any man was willing to have his opinion
condemned, and though all the Catholics refer themselves to the judgment
of the Church of Rome, yet, if their opinion were rejected, they would not
refer it, but defend it more obstinately, fortifying themselves the more by
reason of opposition; by which means, of sects, heresies do spring.
Therefore that the best way was to tolerate all the opinions, and to take care
that none condemn another, but that all may live in peace. Neither is there
such contrariety between them, that using this moderation, any inconvenience
can arise; whereas, without it, every verbal difference or little trifle is
able to divide the whole world. That many opinions of the modern innouators
might have been tolerated, if they had been modestly maintained, without
condemning the Church of Rome, and the doctrine of the Schools. This
constrained Leo to retor^ against Luther those arrows, which he had first shot
against the Apostolic Sea. In sum, the wife Prelate said, that the usual
protestations of the Doctors to refer themselves to the Church, were terms
of good manners and reverence, which should be answered with as much respect, by
keeping themselves neutrall between the contrarieties. That it is fit, that he
that would be respected should give respect again: and one ought never to
believe that he that says he does refer himself and submit, has a
purpose to do it, if The protestations of Doctors, that they refer
themselves to the Church are but terms of good manners.
occasion were offered. Of this Luther is a manifest example, who, while he had
to do only with the Friars, who were Pardon mongers in Germany, in matter of
Indulgences, as also with the doctors of Rome, did always say he referred
himself to the Pope. And when Leo took the promise for real, which was made
only in show, Martin did not only keep it, but inueighed more against his
Holiness, then he had done against the Pardoners in Germany.

The Legates sent a copy to Rome of all things that were deliberated, and The
Legates send to Rome.
of the difficulties remaining, as well in matter of Faith, as in reformation
of the abuses, desiring to have order what they should resolve, reexamining in
the mean space the same matters; but most seriously the matter of the
plurality of Beneficies, proposed long before, as has been said, and
handled in part at the same time, all the substance whereof I will continuately
relate in this place.

In the Congregation of the fifteenth of January, when the Articles of the
Sacraments were given out, the matter, begun the day before, continuing still,
in regard many do not reside because they are not fit to exercise the charge,
with the plurality of Benefices they handled the qualities and conditions
required in Bishops. They began with that which Saint Paul requires in bishops
and Deacons, insisting much upon the words, irreprehensible, The qualities and
conditions required in Bishops.
given to hospitality, not covetous, not new in Religion, and esteemed by
strangers. Afterward other conditions, required by many Canons, were
alleged, wherein there was no difficulty, all uniformly declaiming against
the vices and defects of the Prelates and Clergy. This displeased not the
Legates, being content to see the Prelates entertain themselves with this
shadow of liberty. But in the heat of speaking, John Salazar bishop of
Lanciano, attributed the beginning of all to the Court of Rome, which, in
distributing bishoprics, regarded not the sufficiency of the persons, but
services performed. Whereunto the bishop o Bitonto, who spoke a little after,
replied with much feeling, and said, that the fault of others was unjustly
attributed to the Court. For in Germany bishoprics are given by election, in
France, Spain, and Hungary, by the Kings nomination; and in Italy many do
belong to particular Patrons; and to those that are free, the princes do
recommend, and will not be denied, taking all liberty from the Pope. But he
that will not be transported by opinion, but judge sincerely, will see that
those who are made freely at Rome are the best of all Europe. Plurality of
benefices, unknown to the first ages, has not been brought in by the Court
of Rome, but by bishops and Princes, before the Popes took upon them to
regulate the matter of benefices throughout all Christendom: and, but for the
provisions which are to be found in the body of the Canon Law, the disorder
would have been already mounted to the height. Some were pleased, and some
displeased at (...)is ^ontention* according* to their affections. But every one
discovered that the matter could not be handled without danger, as the
treaties of the next Congregations did show.

But because this particular deserves to be well understood, it v^ill be fit
to show how the abuse began, and came to this growth* Yet I will not speak A
discourse of the Author concerning plurality of Benefices.
of those happy times when the name of the Church was common to all the
congregation of the faithful, unto which did belong the use and propriety of
the goods which are called Ecclesiastical, when the poor, and their ministers
had their food and apparel from one common Mass, and those were more
principally provided for then these. Neither will I mention the time when they
did fall one degree, and of one Mass made ^4 parts, putting that of the poor
in the lowest place, which, according to the former use, ought to be in the
first. But I will begin from the time when the Name of the Church was
appropriated to the Clergy only, all other Christians being excluded; when
that was applied to few, which belonged to all, and to the rich, that which
first served for the poor. I say in the beginning of those times, the Clergy
having divided amongst themselves all the revenues of the Church, the charges,
which before were called ministeries and offices of spiritual care, the
temporalitie being now most esteemed, were named benefices. And yet so long as
the old Canons remained, that one man should not be ordained unto two titles,
none could have more then one Benefice. But the revenues being by wars or
inundations diminished, and become not sufficient for their maintenance, one
man might hold two, yet so as that he should attend them both. This was begun
in fauour^ not of the man beneficed, but of the Church, which, because it could
not have a proper minister, might have at the least some other service. Upon
pretense of the insufficiency of the Benefices, and that none could be found
to serve in them, they began to grant more of them unto one, though no
necessity appeared, for the service of the Churches, and the mask being taken
away by little and little, they were not ashamed to do it in favor of the man
beneficed. But the world being scandalized hereat, there was a moderation
used; whereupon the distinction began of men tied to residencie, and not tied,
and of benefices compatible and not compatible calling those of residencie
incompatible one with another, and the other compatible with these and with
themselves. Yet the gloss of the Canonists always declared How the
distinction of Benefices compatible and incompatible began.
(to make a show of honesty) that many benefices should not be given to one,
but when one is not sufficient for maintenance. But they cut this sufficiency
very large, proportioning it not to the person but to the quality, not
esteeming it sufficient for an ordinary Priest, if it were not enough for
himself, the family of his parents, three servants, and an horse: and more, if
he were noble or learned. And it is strange how much they allowed for a
Bishop, in regard of the Decorum he is to keep. For Cardinals, it is
sufficient to note the common saying of the Court, that they are equal unto
Kings; by which they conclude, that no reuenew is too much for them, except it
be more then enough for a King. The custom being begun, and neither the world,
nor equity being able to resist it, the Popes reserved to themselves power to
dispense with the incompatible* and to have more then two of the others. But to
find a colourble way to put this in practice, they laid hold on Commendaes, a
thing instituted at the first to good purpose, but after used to this end
only. For when, by reason of wars, pestilence, and other such causes, the
election or provision could not be made so soon, the superior did recommend
the vacant Church, to some honest and worthy man, to govern How Commendaes
began*
it, besides the care of his own, until a Rector were provided; who then had
nothing to do with the revenues, but to govern them, and consigne them to
another. In progress of time the Commendataries, by diverse pretenses of
honesty and necessity, made use of the fruits, and, to enjoy them the longer,
sought means to hinder the provision. For remedy whereof, order was taken,
that the Commenda should not last longer then six months* But the Popes, by the
plenitude of their power, did pass these limits, and commended for a longer
time, and at the last, for the life of the Commendatarie, giving him power to
use the fruits, besides the necessary charges. This good invention; so
degenerated, was used in the corrupted times, for a cloak of plurality:
observing the words of the law, to give but one benefice to one man, contrary
to the sense; in regard that a Commendatarie for life, is the same in reality
with the titular? Great exorbitances were committed, in the number of the
benefices commended; so that, after the Lutherane stirs began, and all men
demanded reformation, Clement the seventh in the year 1534. was not ashamed to
commend unto his Nephew Hippolitus, Cardinal de' Medicis, all the benefices of
the world, secular, and regular, dignities, and parsonages, simple, and with
cure, being vacant, for six months, A large Commenda gauen to Hippolitus,
Cardinal de Medicis Clement the 7.
to begin from the first day of his possession, with power to dispose of, and
convert to his use all the fruits. This exorbitancie was the height of all,
which in former times the Court durst not use, though it gave in Commenda a
very great number unto one.

Therefore the Union, formerly used for a good end, was invented to palliate Of
Union (...) Benefices
Plurality. This was practiced when a Church was destroyed, or the revenues
usurped, that little which remained together with the Charge, being
transferred to the next, and all made one benefice. The industry of the
Courtier found out, that besides these respects, benefices might be united, so
that by collation thereof, Plurality was wholly covered, though in favor of
some Cardinal or great personage, thirty, or forty in diverse places of
Christendom were united. But an inconvenience did arise, because the number of
benefices did decrease, and the favor done to one, was done afterward to
many, without merit or demand, to the great damage of the Court and Chancery.
And this was remedied, with a subtle and witty invention, to unite as many
benefices as pleased the Pope, only during the life of him upon whom they were
conferred, by whose death the union was understood to be dissolved, ipso
facto, and the benefices returned to their first state. So they showed the
world their excellent inventions, conferring a benefice, which was but one in
show, but many in deed; as one confessed he had stolen a bridle, concealing
it was upon a horse head, which he stole with it.

To remedy plurality, it was necessary to remove the abuse of these three
pretenses. This the wiser sort of Prelates understanding, agreed uniformly at
the first propose, to inhibite all, of what condition soever, to have more then
three benefices. And some added, when two amount not to the vallew of four
hundred ducats of gold: and that if one were worth so much, no man whatsoever
should have any more, nor more then three, though they were not worth so much.
Of this there was much disputation; and A dispute about the remedy of
Pluvalitie.
much more when Aluise Lipomano, Bishop of Verona, proposed that this decree
might touch them also, who were now possessors of more; who, without exception
of any, should be constrained to renounce those that were supernumerary,
within six months if they were in Italy, and within nine if in other places:
which if they did not they should be deprived, without any further
declaration, notwithstanding the benefices were United, or commended, or
possessed by any othertitle. To this opinion the Bishop of Feltre did adhere,
but did moderate it, by distinguishing Dispensations, Commendaes, and Unions:
saying, that some were made for the good of the Churches, and some in favor of
the possessor: desiring that the former should remain in force, and the other
should be regulated. The Bishop of Lanciano did not admit this distinction:
saying, that he that would make a lasting law, must not put exceptions into
the body of it, in regard the malice of man is apt to invent them, and to free
themselves from the rule. The Bishop of Albenga made a long oration to show,
that good laws do regulate Laws ought to look forward only, and not
backward.
the future only, and that he, who, not containing himself within the bounds
of reason, will amend that which is past, does ever raise tumults, and in stead
of reforming, make a greater deformation: that it were strange to deprive men
of their possessions, and persuade them to be content. He added, that he
foresaw, that if such a Decree were made, either it would not be received, or
if it were, would cause colorable and simoniacall resignations, and greater
mischiefs then plurality could. For hereafter, the provision seemed unto him
superfluous: for no man being to have more benefices but by the Popes
dispensation, it sufficed that he was resolved not to dispense.

In that Congregation, amongst many tragical exclamations, made by diverse men,
Bernardus Dias, Bishop of Calabora, said that the Church of Vicenza was so
disordered, as all men knew, that it required rather an Apostle then a Bishop;
taxing the Cardinal Ridolfi, who possessed that Bishopric, besides many
other benefices, not governing it, nor having the Episcopal order, never
seeing it, nor knowing any thing but the rents. And every one spoke against the
inconvenience, that famous Churches should never see their Bishops, because
they were employed in other Bishoprics, or more beneficial dignities. Some
said, that the Pope only might provide against this, and were of the opinion
of Albenga, that he alone might make the reformation. This pleased the Legates,
as well for the Popes dignity, as to free themselves from taking pains in this
matter, which, in regard of the variety of opinions and interests, they
thought would be of an hard digestion: hoping that when they had gone so far
as to leave this reformation to the Pope, they should easily leave also unto
him the point of residencie, which was as hard to be concocted, for that it was
popular, and drew with it the regaining of the Episcopal authority and
jurisdiction. Therefore the Legates, being in hope that it might be obtained,
especially if it were proposed as a thing done, not to be done, they presently
sent the Pope word of it, who was glad of the news, because both the Court and
himself were doubtful where the attempts and designs of the Prelates might
end. And thinking fit to strike the iron while it was hot, he made a greater
stride then the Legates would have had him, and dispatched a Bull, by which he
recalled unto himself the whole business of the Reformation. But in Trent
whilst an answer was expected from Rome, they proceeded in the treaty begun,
and made a draught of the Decree, that no man should have more then one
Bishoprike, and he that had more should quit the rest; that hereafter
whosoever shall obtain many inferior incompatible Benefices, shall be
deprived without further declaration; and he that formerly has possessed more
then one, shall show his dispensations to the Ordinary, who shall proceed
according to the Decretall of Innocentius 4. Ordinarij. In giving their voices
upon these points, many desired to have dispensations forbid. The showing of
the dispensations, Of dispensations for Plurality.
and the proceeding according to the Decree of Innocentius, pleased but few;
because it was a kind of approbation of them all, and an increasing of the
mischief. For Innocentius says, that if the dispensations be found good,
they shall be admitted, if there be any doubt, recourse shall be had to
Rome, in which case no man doubted, but that any of them might be doubted of,
and receive a declaration at Rome, conformable to the grant. Many feared that
when they were examined and approved, there remaining no doubt, the abuse would
be confirmed; and therefore would have had them prohibited absolutely. Others
said they have always been in the Church, and were necessary, and that all
was in using them well.

Marcus Vigerius, Bishop of Sinigaglia, was of an opinion, which, if it had
been received and believed, would easily have reformed the whole Clergy. He
said the Synod might remove all inconveniences, by declaring, that a lawful
cause was necessary for a dispensation, and that whosoever does otherwise
grant it, does sin, and cannot be absolved, but by reuoking it; and that
he who obtains it, is not secure in his conscience, notwithstanding the
dispensation, and continues in sin until he quitteth the Benefices so
gotten. This opinion wanted not contradictors. For some stood up and said, that
he who grants license of Plurality, without a lawful cause, does sin,
yet the dispensation is good, and the dispensed is secure in his conscience,
though he knew the unlawfulness of the cause. And the difference continued
many days; these saying, that it was to take all authority from the Pope, and
those, that the Popes authority stretched not so far, as to make that evil
should not be evil. From this they went to another doubt, whether Plurality
was forbid by the Law of A doubt moved by what law Plurality is forbid.
God, or of man. Those who maintained residencie to be by the Law of God, said
that Plurality was forbid by the same Law, and therefore that the Pope could
not dispen^e: others said it was forbid by the Canons only. The Legates did
hardly appease the contradiction, and held it dangerous, as well for setting on
foot the point of residencie, as because it touched the Popes authority,
though he was not named: and the rather, because that subtle discussion of
the force of them did put them all in hazard. There being much confusion, Diego
di Alano, Bishop of Astorga, said that in regard they could not agree about
Dispensations, they should prohibit Commendaes, and Unions, which are
pretenses to palliate the abuse; and he spoke much against the one and the
other. He said that Unions and Commendaes for term of life were full of
absurdities, because by them it was confessed, that regard was not had of the
good of the Church, but of the person, that they were most scandalous to the
world, invented a little before, to satiate avarice and ambition, and that it
was a great indignity to maintain an abuse so pernicious, and notorious. But
the Italian Bishops, who were for the most part interested in one of these, did
not willingly hear such absolute propositions, thinking fit some provision
should be made against them, but not such as should take them quite away.

In the beginning of February, the Topes answer and Bull came from The Pope
sends a Ball to the Legates which displeases them.
Rome; which the Legates thought was too ample. But yet to make use of it, they
proposed the matter again, causing the same determination to be repeated by
their adherents, that, in regard of the difficulties and variety of opinions,
it were good to free themselves, and refer all to the Pope. The Imperialists,
even those who formerly seemed not auerse, did now strongly reply, and said it
was not honorable for the Council. To which opinion the mayor part inclined,
returning to that which was said before, and raising a greater confusion: in so
much that the Legates saw that they could not make use of the Bull, and wrote
back, that they were out of hope to remit the whole reformation to his
Holiness, nor more then that which is proper unto him, that is, the moderation
of the Dispensations and Privileges, and Reformation of the Cardinals: which
if he were resolved to make, it were good to use prevention, and to publish a
Bull in Rome, under the name of the Reformation of the Court. For no man could
say that the Pope was not to reform his own Court, and that which belongs
to himself. Neither was it necessary to publish this Bull in the Council,
which, if it did handle all other matters, would be fully satisfied. And they
aduertized his Holiness, that the Synod would never be quiet, until
provision were made, not only against the future, but also against the present
grants which are scandalous.

When the Congregation was ended, the Spanish Prelates, with their followers,
to the number of twenty, the Cardinal Pacceco being the chief, The
Spaniards do desire that the manner of proceeding in Council should be
changed.
did uniformly conclude, that, as the Congregations were carried, no firm
resolution could be made. For all the good that was spoken, was either
dissembled by him, who governed the actions, or obscured by contentions.
Therefore that it was necessary to change the manner, and to give their demands
in writing, that so they may come to a conclusion. And they made a Censure upon
the points proposed, and put it in writing, presenting it to the Legates in the
Congregation held the third of February.

The Censure contained eleven Articles. 1. That between the quality of Bishops
and Parish Priests, all those conditions should be put, which are The Spanish
Censure.
set down in the last Lateran Council, it seeming that too large a gate is
opened to Dispensations, which are necessarily to be now quite removed, by
making a more strict Reformation, in regard of the heresies which they cause,
and the scandals which they give to the world. 2. That it be plainly
specified, that Cardinals are bound to reside in their Bishoprikes six months
in the year at the least, as formerly has been commanded to other Bishops. 3.
That the residencie of Prelates be first declared to be iure diuino. 4. That
the Plurality of Cathedral Churches be declared to be a great abuse, and
every one admonished (specifying the Cardinals also) to be content with one
only, and to quit the rest within some short time, and before the Council
end. 5. That the Plurality of the lesser Churches be taken away, prohibiting
it not only for the future, but for the time past also, reuoking all
Dispensations granted, not excepting Cardinals or others, but for just and
reasonable causes to be produced and proved before the Ordinary. 6. That
Unions for life, even those that have been made long since, be all revoked,
because they induce Plurality. 7. That every one who has a Benefice with
cure, or other Benefices which require Refidencie, be deprived if he reside
not, without any Dispensation to be granted, but in cases permitted by the
Law. 8. That whosoever has a Benefice with Cure, may be examined by the
Bishop, and being found to be illiterate, vicious, or otherwise unfit, may be
deprived, and the Benefice given to one that is worthy, by a rigorous
examination, not at the will of the Ordinaries. 9. That hereafter Benefices
with Cure be not given before examination and inquisition. 10. That none be
promoted to a Cathedral Church without process, to be made in Partibus, at
the least concerning his birth, life, and manners. 11. That no Bishop may
ordain in the Diocese of another, without leave of the Ordinary, and, in
that case, may ordain persons of that Diocese only.

The Legates were troubled, not only for that many Articles were set The
Legates are troubled with the (...)ter of the (...) the manner.
on foot, all aiming to restrain the authority of the Pope, and make that of
the Bishops greater, but for the importance of the beginning, to give their
petitions in writing; and because many were joined in the same demand, not
showing what their meaning was, but only alleging the weight of the things
proposed. They took time to think of it, saying, they would not be idle in
the mean while, but establish other points of Reformation. And give the Pope a
^^ct account of all
They gave the Pope a strict account of all things past, adding, that the
Prelates did every day take more liberty, not refraining to speak of the
Cardinals without respect, and to say openly, that it was necessary to moderate
them, and with small reverence of his Holiness, that he gave nothing but
words, and used the Council to keep the world in hope, and not to make a true
Reformation; that hereafter it would be hard to keep them in order, because
they had many private assemblies amongst themselves. They proposed to his
consideration, that it would be good to make some effectual Reformation in
Rome, and publish it before the Session. They sent also the Censure of the
Spaniards, desiring him to consider the importance of their attempt, and
whither it might arrive, in regard it was not likely they would be so bold,
without they were vpheld, and perhaps incited by some great Prince. And they
desired to receive commandment what they should do* saying, their opinion was
to persist, and not to yield one lote, as well for the importance of the matter,
as not to open this passage, that the Prelates may obtain, by sed(...)on and
force, that which is not willingly granted them. For that would be to depend
on their favor, and incur the danger of some sinistrous accident. That, for
matter of dispensation, they would not suffer themselves to be over come: but
in the end, if the opposites will not yield, all must come to voices, which
are not weighed, but numbered. Therefore, not to hazard themselves, but to be
sure to overcome in the Session, it would be necessary to command straightly,
those that are gone to Venice, upon pretense to spend the beginning of Lent in
their own Churches, but with intention to come no more, that they suddenly And
desire him to send unto them more of his dependants, that they may oue come by
number.
return, without reply. For the whole importance of the Reformation will
consist in the next Session, and as the Mutiners shall then succeed, they will
resolve either to oppose in other occasions, or to remain quiet and obedient.

This advise being sent to Rome, the Legates, in the next Congregations,
proposed the Reformation of diverse abuses. The first was of those who take a
Benefice and title without orders, or consecration answerable to them. All
detested the abuse, and desired a remedy. But the Cardinal Pacceco said, that
all remedy would be in vain, if Commendaes and Unions were not removed, it
being manifest, that a Cathedral Church might be commended to a Deacon, and
he that would have a Parish Church without orders, may cause it to be united
to a simple benefice, which requires them not, and so will hold the one in
consequence of the other, without being consecrated. The other Reformations
were concerning diverse Exemptions from the Visitations of Bishops, from their
examinations, from the hearing of civil causes, and from the reuision of the
government of Hospitals. Herein the Legates thought to gain the favor of the
Bishops, by enlarging their authority. But he that pretends right to all, is
commonly offended by the restitution of half. So the Bishops, (especially the
Spaniards) thought they were wronged, because the Reformation was not
complete. Yet they spoke more reseruedly, in regard the number of the
Italians, who adhered to the Legates, did increase, and because they expected
an answer concerning their propositions from Rome, having discovered that they
were sent thither.

The Pope having received the advice, wrote most effectual, but, withal, most
loving letters to his Nuncio at Venice, to make the Prelates return, who were
almost all in that City. Who performed the business in such sort, that all
took the journey for a favor, in regard they were to do his Holiness so
great service. The Pope commanded the Deputies to consult of the Spanish
Censure; and the residue, which was of greater importance, together with other
things, whereof he was aduertized before, he reserved to his own determination.

The Deputies, weig^ing the business, did consider that the proposition The
determination made in Rome concerning the Spanish censure.
made by the Legates, was more honorable, and more profitable, if it did
succeed, but if not, more per(...)cious: that it was not wisdom to ruune so
great hazards, in matters of so great moment: and that to deny all, or to
grant all, was equally dangerous. Their conclusion was, that if the Legates
were not more then certain to overcome, they might grant part of, or all the
underwritten modifications, as occasion was offered in handling of the
business: which were digested by way of answer to every article of the
Spanish Censure. To the first, to renew the Laterane Council, in the two
points, it seems that the Prelates may be satisfied, so that in the residue,
the Canons that shall be made be reasonable. To the second, to bind the
Cardinals to residencie, for those who remain in Rome, and actually serve the
universal Church, it is not convenient, and for the others, his Holiness will
make provision, as is said in the letters. To the third, to constitute that
residencie is required by the word of God, first the Decree being applied to
particular Churches, would perhaps not be true: then for the effect, it cannot
choose but make greater confusion, there being a contradiction, that the
Decree should be made, and the contrary permitted, at the least tacitly, for
half of the year. To the fourth, to declare the plurality of the Cathedral
Churches to be an abuse, the same answer may be made as unto the third, and
for the Cardinals, his Holiness will provide, as has been said before. To
the fifth, of the plurality of the lesser Churches, the provision proposed by
the Legates, seems to be sufficient, and yet, if for the time past it be
thought fit, to make it more severe, his Holiness is contented: who does
aduertize them, that too much severity in this part, may work a contrary
effect, by the resistance which is like to be made, by those who are in
possession: and does consider withal, that simply to leave the judicature of
the dispensations to the Ordinaries, may cause abuse, and bring forth no other
effect, then the increase of their authority. To the sixth, to revoke the
Unions for life, howsoever his Holiness thought to make a fit provision
therein, yet if it be desired to take them all away, it may be granted, so
that a convenient time be given to the possessors, to dispose of the
Benefices. To the seventh, that non-residencie in Benefices with Cure, should
precisely carry with it Deprivation, without any Dispensation to be granted,
but in cases permitted by the law, is too rigorous, and would be observed very
hardly, in case it should be determined. To the eight, that he that has a
Benefice with Cure, if it be found he is unlearned, or vicious, may be
deprived by the Ordinary, it being understood of such inhability, as by the law
does deserve it, it may be granted; otherwise the demand is not honest,
because all would be left to the conscience of the Ordinaries. To the ninth,
that Benefices with Cure, be not given before diligent examination, in regard
it is necessary to leave the manner and quality thereof, to the conscience of
him who is to confer the Benefices, it seems that to make any other Decree
herein, is superfluous or unprofitable. To the tenth, to make the Process in
partibus, concerning those who are promoted to Cathedral Churches, there
appears no fruit of this diligence, it being as easy to find a false
witness in partibus, as at Rome: where, because every thing may be
sufficiently examined, it is superfluous to seek further. To the eleventh,
that none be ordained but by his own Bishop, it seems that the Bull may
suffice, because it does provide many ways, against the inconveniences,
pretended in this point.

The Pope, did presently dispatch the answer to Trent, leaving it to the
discretion Is dispatch^d to Trent*
of the Legates to resolve, by the counsel of their friends, what they thought
fit tog^ant according to occasions, either, part, or all, so that they
contained themselves within the limits set down by the Deputies in Rome: or to
deny all, in case they found themselves able to do it. He advised them of the
request made to those in Venice, and that they should hold the Session in the
due time, wholly omitting the doctrine of the Sacraments, and publishing the
Anuthematismes only, in which they are all agreed, because the doctrine cannot
be expounded without danger. That they should leave wholly the Decree of the
abuses of the Sacraments, of Baptism and Confirmation, it being impossible to
touch that string, without offending the whole order of poor Priests and
Friars, and giving the Heretics too great a conquest, by confessing they had
formerly approved such notable absurdities. He concluded, that they should
labor to make the Session as quiet as was possible, but yet with the honor of
the Apostolic Sea.

Afterward the Pope, considering with himself and with his inward The Pope is
troubled with the aduises sent from the Council, and fro^^us Nuncio in Germany.
friends, the aduises sent unto him from Trent, and from his Nuncio in
Germany, was full of suspicion, that the Council would produce some great
monster, to the prejudice of himself, and the Papacio. He considered the
factions amongst the Divines, especially Dominicans and Franciscans, ancient
enemies, and contrary in doctrine, and feared that, taking courage in the
Council, they would go beyond the bounds of those contentions, which have
been hardly composed by the wiser sort: whose differences being no less then
those with the Lutherans, and themselves very bold in taxing one another,
except pains were always taken to make them agree, there would be danger of
some great inconvenience. He was much troubled with the disputation of
Residencie, whether it be required iure diuino, and with the boldness of
Friar Bartholomew Caranza, who, being encouraged by many, dared to call the
contrary opinion, the doctrine of devils. He saw how easily such another
mischief as that of Luther might arise, and that, if an article of faith were
made of residencie, the Papacy was reduced to nothing. He considered, that all
the reformations aimed to restrain the Popes authority, and to enlarge the
power of the Bishops, and how little himself was esteemed, in that, the
Council having given hope to refer the Reformation to him, whereof he had
framed a Bull, and recalled the whole matter to Rome, they had after treated
thereof more sharply, without any respect of his authority. He had great
suspicion of the spirit and courage of the Spaniards, considering the qualities
of that wise Nation; that it does not work by chance, that it makes greater
show of reverence then it bears, that it stands united in itself, and
steppeth not one foot forward, without looking a great way before them. It
seemed to him a great matter, that they met together, and had made a common
censure; and thought it probable that this web was secretly spun by the
Emperor, in regard his Ambassador did daily treat with them. He suspected
the Emperor also for his present prosperity, which ordinarily does make men
not able to set bounds to their designs. He considered his conniuencie at
religion, and thought it was to gain the Lutherans favor. He remembered the
complaints used not only by the Emperor, but by his Ministers also, when the
Italian Soldiers departed, that he was abandoned in time of need; and he
knew that he attributed the sedition of Genna to his son, the Duke of
Piacenza But he weighed above all, his words used to the Nuneio, that he had
no greater enemy then the Pope. He feared that when he had established an
absolute authority in Germany, he would think to do the like in Italy,
making use of the Council to suppress the Papacle. He saw that all was in his
power, in regard of the incurable indisposition of the French King, and his
approaching death. Of the Dolphin, being young, and not experienced, he knew
not what to promise himself: and was assured that the Prelates, who did until
then, adhere to the Court of Rome, whenever the Emperor should unmask
himself, would profess to be on his side, either for fear of greater power,
or for emulation at the Popes greatness: which they would discover, when they
should see a secure way laid open to moderate it.

These respects made him resolve to secure himself in some sort of the And
after consul ation resolves to translate ^^be Synod to Bolonia.
Council. To end it, did not seem seasonable, in regard there did remain so
many things to be handled. The Suspensson did require some great cause, and
would be to little purpose, in regard he should be presently desired to take
it away. To translate it to a place where himself had absolute authority,
seemed the best counsel. And seeing this was to be done, heo would so do it,
as that all danger should be prevented: which could not be, if the council,
were not celebrated within his own territories. He did not think Rome was
fit, because it would raise too much discourse in Germany. Bolonia seemed the
best place, because it was neore the Mountains, fertile, and of great receipt.
For the manner, he resolved to conceal his own person, and to cause it to be
done by the Legates, by the authority given them in the Bull; dated the 22. of
February, and sent unto them in August. 1545. For doing so, if the Translation
were opposed, the Legates would be blamed, and himself, as not interessed, might
the more easily uphold them: and if, by accident, he should change his
opinion, he might do it without dishonor. Being thus resolved, he sent a
private Gentleman of the family of the Cardinal of Monte with letters of
credit, to do this embassage to hoth the Legate^: commaun^ding him, not to
ariue there before the Session and then to give them authority to translate
the Council to Bolonia, making some apparent cause to arise, or making use of
some cause already in being; putting it in execution so quickly, that, after
the enterprise begun, they should conclude before any impediment could be
interposed.

But in Germany, a great part of those Cities about the Rhine, having made The
Emperor does leave to temporize with the Archbishop, of Collen.
composition with the Emperor, and the Elector Palatine caused h^^ ministers
to de^^t, the Emperor seeing himself now able to exclude the Archbishop of
Collen, sent two Commissaries, to assemble all the orders of his Sat, and to
cause them to abandon him, and to receive for their Arch bishop, Prince
Adolphus, his coaiutour, ye^lding obedience; and swearing side* litievnto him.
The Clergy was ready to do it, for the causes before recited: but the
Nobilite and Ambassadors of the Cities refusing, saying they could not abandon
a Prince unto whom they had sworhe. The Duke of Cloves bordering upon him, sent
to the Arch bishop, and caused (...) ^^of the Nobility to go thither also, to
pray him to find a mea(...) that the whole State might not be dissolved, with
the great damage of the neighbor 1547 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6. FRANCIS
1. Who does generously renounce his state.
Countries. The Archbishop moved with compassion, to free the State from
war, and that the innocent people might not suffer, did generously renounce
the State, and absolve his subjects from the oath; and so Adolphus, was
received for his successor, whom he had always loved as his brother, and
communicated to him whatsoever he had done for reformation of the Church; who
was now of another opinion, either because he was truly changed, or for some
other respect.

In February, news came to Trent of the death of the King of England, Thanks
given to God, and great joy in Trent, for the death of the K. of England
which happened the month before. The Fathers gave thanks to GOD, and went
almost all to the Bishop of Worcesten, congratulating that himself and the
kingdom were (as they said) delivered from the tyranny of a cruel
persecutor, saying, it was a miracle that he had left a son of but nine
years of age, that he might not be able to tread in his Fathers steps. And it
is true that he did not tread in them all. For Henry, though he had wholly
taken away the Popes authority, and punished his adherents capitally, yet he
did ever constantly retain all the residue of the doctrine of the Church of
Rome. But Edward (for so his sons name was) governed by his Uncle on the
mothers side, the Duke of Somerset, who was inclined to the doctrine of the
Protestants, changed religion, as shall be said in its place.

The Popes letters being come, the Cardinal Sancta Croce was of opinion, that
it was good to mollify the Prelates combined, by granting some of the
petitions, which were granted from Rome, thinking, they would easily be
pacified with that determination. The Cardinal of Monte said, that to
condescend to an inferior (especially to a multitude) was to make them pretend
a greater satisfaction; that first he would try his friends, and when he found
he was fortified with the greater number, he would not retire an inch; but if
he found it otherwise, he would use art. After many discourses, as it happens
between Colleagues, Sancta Croce yielded to Monte, who was more passionate.
They received advise, that the absent Prelates would be returned before the
end of February, whose minds were sounded, and many of them were found to
adhere to the Pope. These being confirmed with hope, and others ensnared with
the same bait, that the Pope would take notice of every A decree containing
15. heads, is proposed in Congregation.
ones merit, they caused the decree to be made, with fifteen heads, and
proposed it in Congregation.

By this, greater difficulties were raised. In the Proheme, by this exception;
Saving always the Apostolical authority, in all things. Every fool saw at
what it aimed, and that it inferred a pertinacious obstinacy, in the abuses
which they ought to remedy, by preserving their causes. Yet none durst oppose,
but the Bishop of Badacoz, who said, it had need of declaration, because And is
there opposed.
the Council ought not, nor could impeach the authority of any, much less of
the Apostolic Sea, acknowledged for Head of all the Catholics. But it seemed
that the words there placed did signify, that in Rome the proceeding should be
in those things as before, and that the moderation should not have power over
dispensations, and other inventions, by which the authority of the old Canons
has been always weakened. In defense of the exception it was said, that the
Laws of Councels are not as the Laws natural, where equity and rigor are
the same thing, that they are subject to the common defect of all Laws, which
by reason of their universality, ought to be moderated by equity in cases not
foreseen, when it would be unjust to put them in execution. But because there
is not alwayesa Council, to which recourse may be had, nor it being possible
to attend this, when there is one, the Popes authority is necessary. It was
replied, that though all Laws have the defect of universality, yet all were
published without exceptions, that so they should now do, or otherwise it were
as much as to say, that ordinarily and not only in rare cases, and not
foreseen, the Pope might dispense with the contrary.

This opinion was not openly approved by all, who in their conscience But the
opposers are (...)ced.
thought it true; whereupon the Legate Monte taking courage, said it was a
subtlety, not to attribute as much to the Apostolic Sea, as they were bound,
and so he made them all silent. The Bishop of Badacoz demanded, that mention
should be made in that Proheme, that the Article of residencie was not quite
left off, but deferred only. The Legates answered, that this was a distrust of
their promises, and a vain Obligation to do that which was always in their
power: Yet, to satisfy so great a desire, he said it should be added in the
Proheme, that all was decreed in prosecuting the point of residencie, which
they had begun; whereby it would appear, that it was not ended in the other
Session, and that part did remain to be handled.

Concerning the Heads of the qualities of Bishops and other Curates, the
Discourses above the qualiues of Bishops and Curates:
Archbishop Torre said, that they did not only remedy the corruptions
brought in, but did weaken the ancient remedies. For with such general terms
of age, manners, knowledge, ability and worth, every one might be canonized
for an able man, and to allege the decrees of Alexander was to nullify all
other Canons, which prescribe other conditions. For when one is always named
and the others purposely concealed, it seems that there is some derogation to
these, that it was necessary to say plainly what this gravity of manners,
and knowledge of letters is: which if it Were done, every Courtier would be
excluded for ever. That the manners requisite are well repeated by Saint Paul,
and yet not regarded. The learning and Doctorship, which Paul requires is the
knowledge of Christian Doctrine, and of the holy Writ: that Honori^s the third
is not to be imitated, who deprived a Bishop of the lower Sax^^e, because he
had not learned Grammar, nor ever read Donatu^. For the gloss, says he, could
not teach the people grammar; as if Sermons were to be made by Grammar rules,
and not according to the Gospel. The Bishop of Huesca added that neither the
reference to, nor the allegation of the Decretals or constitutions did please
him. For it is done either to give greater authority to them, or to received
it from them, or to make one aggregate of these, and the Synod, of greater,
force; and that all those ways (...) was unfit because the authority of both
would be diminished* That then it was fit to do it when the constitution was
too long to be repeated: but when it did co^^ine but the same thing there was
no cause for it, in regard it would cause vndeterminable contentions, by
disputing whether those constitutions be approved as the letter, does simply
found, or with the limitations and ampliations of the Doctors, and with the
diverse interpretations; which is to confound the world. That they have need of
Decrees which may cause peace, charity, and poserious reformation in the
Church, not which may give occasion of strifes, and new inconuenienc. To what
purpose were it now to inflict upon the Ordinaries, the punishments of the
Chapter; Grave nimis, the execution whereof is committted to the Provincial
Councels, which are disused, if order be not taken to bring them in use
again? Then the Benefices conferred by the Ordinary, by reason of diverse
reseruations, being fewer then a tenth part, why should provision be made in
this, and the abuse suffered to run in the nine tenths, which the Court does
confer? Likewise in matter of Plurality, to approve the constitution, De
multa, is to establish it the more, because dispensations are permitted in that.

The Articles were much disputed on. The Spaniards did require, that the
Cardinals should be specified; but answer was made, that it was not A dispute
whether the Cardinals ought to be specified in the reformation.
convenient, in regard of the greatness of the Order, being the chiefest in
the Church, and replenished with men of singular merit, to show so plainly
that there were corruptions in it, worthy of amendment, and that they did not
amend themselves. But it was sufficient to do it in general terms, which
should include them also; as to command every one, of what dignity, degree, or
preeminence soever. Others said to the contrary, that the Canonists have
declared, that the Cardinals are not contained under any general terms, if
they be not expressed by name, and therefore that there was no other way to
provide against the bad example which the world takes, but to reform them in
particular. That there is small need to reform the inferior Clergy, whose
corruptions are but small, and themselves, as it were, compelled to imitate the
greater Prelates. That in curing a sick body, one ought to begin with the
greater diseases, and the more principal parts, which being healed, the others
will heal of themselves, or will need but light medicines. For the abuse of
perpetual Unions, they said it was sufficiently provided, by referring to the
Bishops the examination of those which are already made, and by presuming them
to be surreptitious, which are not grounded upon reasonable causes. But all
was overthrown by the modification following, that is, if the Apostolic Sea
should not think otherwise: for this was to establish them, and to put the
Bishop to trouble and charge. It was desired again, that Unions for life
should be prohibited, and those nullified which are already made.

But the mayor part did approve the Decrees as they were proposed, some for the
good affection they bare to Rome, and some because they had been persuaded,
and some good men also, who were promised, that the Pope, by his Bull, would
take away both these and many other disorders: but that, for reputation of the
holy Sea, he ought to do it himself, and not seem to be compelled to
receive laws from the Synod, against his will. And these put together were
three quarters of the whole number of the Synod. The time of the (...)
approaching, and the (...)athematismes being read over again, some required
that the doctrine should be added, and some demanded why the Decree of the
abuses was not resolved on. To these it was said, that the matter was not well
discussed, and that it was more fit to handle them after all the Sacraments,
giving remedy withal to the abuses occurring in the ministry of every one,
and to the general abuses of them all. In giving a reason why the doctrine was
omitted, the most concluding argument was, that so it was done in the Session
concerning original sin, and that a doctrinall declaration is necessary,
when the anathematismes cannot be understood without it; therefore that it was
necessary in the Decree of justification; but in this of the Sacraments, the
anathematismes be so plain of themselves, that they may serve also for
doctrine. The approaching of the time, and the consent of the mayor part, made
them resolve for this opinion, and compelled them to be silent who demanded the
doctrine, and the reformation of the forenamed abuses.

The Decrees being made, though with these difficulties, and the third The
Session, March the 3.
of March being come, and the Prelates, according to their usual order,
assembled in the Church, to celebrate the Session, James Coccus, Archbishop of
Corfu, said Mass, Coriolanus Martiranus, Bishop of Saint Mark, was to make
the Sermon, who for the distastes received in the Congregation, thinking he
could not well be present, and not persist in the same opinion, in regard it
was not secure to contradict in public Session, he made choice to feign some
indisposition, and so to be absent: by which means there was no Sermon that
morning: as if amongst sixty Bishops, thirty Friars, exercised in preaching,
not one was able to speak four words with premeditation of four hours. And
it was noted in the Acts, that there was no Sermon, because A jesting act
concerning the Bishop of S. Mark.
the Bishop of Saint Mark, deputed to, make it, was hoarse, and so it was
Printed. Which as it ought to be attributed only to the pleasant vain of the
Secretary, who wrote it, so it is a sure argument, that they did not then
think the time would come, when all the actions of that Assembly, should be
esteemed equal to those of the Apostles, when they met together, expecting the
coming of the holy Ghost.

When the Mass, and other ceremonies were ended, the two Decrees were read.

The first concerning Faith, contained in substance. That for complement The
Decrees are read.
of the doctrine, defined in the former Session it was meat to handle the
Sacraments; and, the better to extirpate the heresies, the Synod did for the
present, constitute the Canons following, meaning to add others afterward,
when time should serve.

The Canons, or the Anathematismes of the Sacraments in general, were
thirteen. The Canons of the Sacraments in general.
1. Against him that says, that the Sacraments of the new Law, have not been
all instituted by CHRIST, or that they are more or less then seven, or that
any of them is not truly, and properly a Sacrament. 2. And that they differ
not from those of the old Law, but in the ceremonies and rites. 3. And that
none of them is, in no respect, more worthy then another, 4. That they are not
necessary to salvation, and that the grace of God, may be gained by faith
alone, without them, or without any purpose to receive them. 5. That they are
ordained only to nourish faith. 6. That they do not contain in them the
grace signified, or do not give it to him that does not resist, but are
external signs of justice, and Characters of a Christian profession, to
discern the faithful from Infidels. 7. That grace is not always given by the
Sacraments, nor unto all, for as much as belongs to God, though they be
lawfully received. 8. That by Sacraments Grace is not given, in virtue of the
administration of them; called, Opus operatum: but that it suffices only to
believe the promise. 9. That in Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, no indeleble
Character is imprinted in the soul, for which cause they can be received but
once. 10. That all Christians have power to administer the Word and all the
Sacraments. 11. That in ministering the Sacraments, the ministers intention, at
the least to do what the Church does, is not necessary. 12. That the
minister, who is in mortal sin, gives not the true Sacrament, though he
observe all things necessary. 13. That the usual rites, approved by the Church
may be despised, or omitted, or changed for others, by every Pastor.

Of Baptism there were fourteen Anathematismes. 1. Against him The Canons of
Baptism.
that says the baptism of John had the same virtue with that of Christ. 2.
That true and natural water is not necessary to baptism. 3. That in the
Church of Rome, which is the Mother and Mistress of all the Churches, there is
not to be found the true doctrine of baptism. 4. That Baptism, given by
heretics, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, with intention to
do what the Church does, is not true baptism. 5. That the baptism is free,
that is, not necessary to salvation. 6. That the baptized cannot loose Grace,
though he sin, so that he leave not to believe. 7. That the baptized are
bound only to believe, and not to observe the Law of CHRIST. 8. That they are
not bound to observe the Laws of the Church. 9. That by the memory of
baptism, all vows made afterward are of no force, but derogate from faith,
and baptismall profession 10. That sins committed after baptism, by faith
and memory thereof, are remitted, or made venial. 11. That baptism is to be
renewed in him, who has denied the faith. 12. That none should be baptized
but in the age of CHRIST, or at the time of death. 13 Against him who puts
not children baptized in the number of the faithful, or says they must be
rebaptized at the years of discretion, or that it is better to omit their
baptism until then. 14. That children baptized, when they come to age, ought
to be required to ratify the promise made in their name, and to be left to
their will if they refuse, not compelling them to Christian life, but by
denying them other Sacraments.

Of Confirmation there were three Canons. 1. Against him that says it is an
The Canons of Confirmation.
idle ceremony, not a Sacrament properly, or that it was formerly used, that
children might give a public account of their faith. 2. That to give virtue to
the Chrisme, is to wrong the holy Spirit. 3. That every simple Priest is the
ordinary minister of Confirmation, and not the Bishop only.

After this, the decree of reformation was read, which, in the Acts bare The
decree of Reformation.
this title. A Canon concerning residencie. And it contained in substance; 1.
That no Bishop be created but of lawful matrimony of ripe years, learned,
and of good behavior. 2. That none may have or keep more Bishoprics then
one, in Title, Commenda, or any other way, and whosoever has now more then
one, shall choose one, and quit the rest within six months, if they be of the
Popes free collation, or else within a year: otherwise all shall be accounted
void but the last. 3. That other benefices, especially with Cure, be given to
worthy persons, able to take charge of souls: otherwise the ordinary Patron is
to be punished. 4. That hereafter whosoever shall receive many incompatible
Benefices, by way of Union for life, perpetual Commenda, or otherwise; or
shall keep those that he has received against the Canons, shall be deprived
of all. 5. That the dispensations of those who have many Benefices with Cure,
or incompatible, shall be showed to the Ordinaries, making provision
afterward for the cure of souls, and other obligations. 6. That perpetual
Unions, made within forty years, shall be reviewed by the Ordinaries, as
delegates, and those that are unjust shall be nullified, and those that have
not been in possession, or shall be made hereafter, shall be presumed to be
surreptitious, if they be not made for reasonable causes, and with citation of
all that be interested; and nothing to the contrary of this, shall be declared
by the Apostolic Sea. 7. That Benefices with cure, united, shall be visited
by the Ordinaries every year, and shall have Vicars a signed, perpetual or
temporal, with such a portion of the fruits as to them shall seem meet,
without respect of Appeals or Exemptions. 8. That the Ordinaries shall every
year by the Apostolic authority, visit the Churches exempted, providing for
the care of souls, and other duties, without respect of Appeal, Privileges,
or Customs prescribed. 9. That Bishops shall be consecrated within the time
set down by the Law, and all prolongations for more then six months shall
be void. 10. That the Chapters of Churches, in vacancie of the Bishopric,
shall not grant Dimisories for Orders, but to him that is obliged to take them,
because of a Benefice. 11. That licenses to be promoted by any Bishop shall
be void, if a lawful cause be not expressed, for which they may not be
promoted by their own Bishop, and, in that case, they shall be promoted by a
Bishop that resideth in his Diocese. 12. That Faculties not to receive due
Orders shall not serve for longer time then a year, but in cases expressed in
the law. 13. That men presented to Benefices, by any Ecclesiastical person
whatsoever, shall not be instituted before examination; made by the Ordinaries,
except those who are presented by Universities, Colleges, and general
Studies. 14. That in the causes of the exempted a certain form shall be
observed, and where the question is of reward, or concerning those who sue in
forma, pauperis, the Exempted also, who have a Judge deputed, shall be
conuented before the Ordinary but those who have no Judge deputed, shall be
conuented in all causes. 15. That the Bishops shall take care of the Hospitals,
that they be well governed by the administrators, though Exempted, observing a
certain form.

The Prelates who opposed in the Congregations, did the same in the Session, A
modest opposition is made, but not regarded by the Legates.
but with greater modesty: desiring that the degrees of the persons
comprehended might be expressed, and that besides the provisions against future
evils, remedies might be added for the present, which are more hurtful, and
dangerous. But the Legates, hearkening unto those words as unto idle talk,
concluded the Session, and appointed the next for the (...) of April. The
credence concerning the Translation is delivered.


The same day the Popes messenger, concealed until then, even from the Legates,
did appear, and declared to them his credence; and immediately went from Trent
to Ispra^ The Card Santa Croce was confounded; but Monte, being without fear
said, that he ever knew the Pope to be a wise Prince, and that he then saw in
him the height of judgment, that it was necessary to do so, if they would
preserve the authority of the Sea* Apostolic: and therefore that it was fit to
serve his Holiness with fidelity, secrecy, and diligence. And it happened fitly
that many in the families of the Prelates were sick, either by the disorders of
the Carnoual, or because the air had been moist many days before. Monte
suborned some to ask the Physicians whether those infirmities were not The
pretense for the Transl^non.
contagious. The Physicians, who in their Prognostiques, always say the worst
they can, because if they prove true, they seem learned* in having foreseen
them, if not, they seem more learned in remedying or preventing them, spoke
some ambiguous word, which was studiously spread abroad, and believed by some
of the meaner sort Some others also were credulous of it, especially those who
were willing to depart, and therefore wished it were true. And after the
Session, a Bishop dying opportunely, interred with the obsequies of the whole
Council, made the matter more conspicuous. Whereupon all Trent was full, that
the disease was con^agious, and* the same was spread in all the bordering
places. The Legates, to show they had no finger in dispersing this fame, held a
general congregation the next day after the Session, to digest what should be
discussed concerning the Eucharist, and, the week following, the Congregations
of the Divines did begin. But the fame being increased, Monte gave order to
Hercules Seuerolo, Proctor of the Council, to make a Process concerning the
posti^ent infirmity. The Physicians were examined* and Ieronymus Fracastorius
amongst others, who had the title of the Physician of the Council, and other
persons besides. It was reported that the neighbor places would have no more
commerce with the City: which made many Prelates ask leave to depart, either
for fear, or for desire to go from thence by all means. Monte gave leave to
some, that their departure might be alleged as one of the causes; others,
with whom he was more familiar, he persuaded to tarry, indeed, not to want
adherents when he should propose the Translation of the Council, but* in show,
that the council might not dissolve; and therefore he wished them to require in
the Congregations, that some order might be taken. The Process was prosecuted
until the 8. day, when news came, either true or fained, that Verona would
traffic no more with them: which troubled them all, because they should be as
it were all in prison.

Therefore the, day a general Congregation was held concerning this: in which
the Process was read, and a proposition made, what remedy might be found that
they might not be confined, with a disease in their houses, and deprived of
victuals and other necessaries. Many protested they would depart, and could not
be hold, and, when much had bin spoken, Monte proposed the translation of the
Council, saying he had Apostolic authority to do it from the beginning; and
caused the Popes Bull to be read, directed to the 3. Legates, The Bull of the
Translation is read.
Monte, Santa Croce, and Poole. In which, having declared that he had
established the Council in Trent, and sent them ^hither, as his Legates, and
Angels of peace to the end that so godly a work might not be hindered by the
incommoditie of the place, he gives power to any two of them, in absence of
the third, to translate it into some other city, more commodious, opportune,
and secure; and to command the Prelates, upon censures and punishments, not to
proceed any further in Trent, but to continue it in the City, unto which they
shall transfer it, and to call thither the Prelates, and other persons of the
Council of Trent, upon pain of perjury, and other censures, set down in the
letters of the convocation, and that he will ratify whatsoever they shall do,
any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. The Emperors Prelates answered
immediately, that the disease and the dangers were not so great, that the
timorous might have leave to go, until the opinion were past, which, by the
help of God, would vanish quickly, and if the Session were deferred, it was no
matter: that many departed the year before, for the suspicions of war, and
the Session was deferred The Emperors ministers do discover the plot.
more then 6. months, and that they might do so now, if there were occasion.
And other such reasons they brought. The disputation concerning this was long.
When the Congregation was ended, the Imperialists, conferring among themselves,
and seeking curiously that which before they cared not to know, they smelt out
that it was not a general disease, but a pretense.

The next day a Congregation was called to consult upon the same matter. It was
found, that 11. Prelates were already parted, and they began to speak of the
place whither to go. That it should be in Germany, all did abhor. It could
not be in the State of any Prince, because they had treated with none. There
remained only the State of the Church. The Legates proposed Bolonia; which
pleased all those that approved the Translation. The Imperialists did
contradict, and some did almost protest: but the mayor part consented. Some
doubted the Pope would take the Translation ill, because it was made without
his knowledge. But Monte said, that sudden chances, and perils of life are free
from these respects, and that he would undertake the Pope should be
contented. Consideration was had of the Emperor, and other Princes, and it was
concluded, that if they made mention of them in the Decree, they gave
satisfaction to the reverence which they did owe them: and to satisfy, in some
sort, those, who approved not the translation, they made some mention of
returning. The Decree was proposed by way of deliberation. Does it please you
to declare that this disease is manifest, in regard of the predictions, and
other things alleged so notoriously, that the Prelates cannot remain in this
City, without danger of their life, nor can be kept here against their will;
and because of the departure of many, and protestations of others, by whose
departure the Council would be dissolved; and for other causes alleged by
the Fathers, notoriously true and lawful; Does it please you to declare,
that, for the security of the Prelates lives, and prosecution of the Council,
it ought to be transferred to Bolonia, and is now transferred, and that the
Session intimated, for the 21. of April, shall be celebrated, and all things
prosecuted there, until the Pope and Council shall think fit to reduce it
into this or some other place, by the advice of the Emperor, the French King,
and other Christian Kings and Princes?

The next day the Session being held, and the Decree read, 35. Bishops, and A
Session is held to read the Decree of the Translation to Bolonia.
three Generals did assent. But the Cardinal Pacceco, and 17. other Bishops
opposed. Among those that consented, there was not one of the Emperors
Subjects, but Michael Saracenus, a Napolitan, Archb. of Matera. But amongst
those that consented not, there was Claudius della Guische, Bishop of Mirpois,
and Martelli, Bishop of Fiesole, and Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sintgaglia,
whom the Cardinal of Monte did vpbraid, that his uncle being drawn from a
base estate to the height of the Cardinality, from whence the greatness of his
house and his own Bishopric did proceed, he did ill requite the Apostolic
Sea. For answer he used the words of S. Paul, God is not mocked. The Legates
departed, with the Cross carried before them, accompanied with the Bishops of
their faction, with ceremonies and prayers.

The Imperialists were commanded by the Emperors Ambassador, not to depart
until his Majesty were informed, and gave them order. In Rome the Court was
glad they were delivered from danger. For there was already great confusion and
sale made by the possessors of many Benefices, who sought to unburden
themselves, but so as that they would lose no commodity. The Pope said, that
having given his Legates power to translate the Council, and promised to
ratify what they should determine, and cause it to be executed, and they
having judged the infection of the air to be a lawful cause, he Which is
approved by the Pope.
could not choose but approve it, and the rather, because the mayor part of the
Prelates did consent.

But none was so simple, as not to believe that all was done by his
commandment, it being certain that nothing, how little soever, was handled in
the Council, without order first had from Rome. For which purpose letters
coming once every week, and some weeks twice, it was not credible, that a
matter of that importance, was hatched in the Legates brains. Besides, only to
bring so many persons into a City, so jealous as Bolonia, without consent of
the Prince thereof, seemed to be a thing which the Legates would never have The
date of the Bull is suspected by many.
attempted. Many did believe that the Bull had not a true date, but was newly
made, though the date were old, and with the name of Cardinal Poole, to give
greater reputation: otherwise that clause, in which authority is given unto
two of them, the other being absent, to translate the Council, would seem a
kind of Prophecy, that Poole should depart a year after; and the liberty to
trans^erre it to what City they listed, seemed too large, and improbable,
considering the suspicion always fixed in the mind of the Popes, that the
Council should be celebrated in an unfaithful City, showed more then ever
by Pope Paul, when he did call it. So that it was incredible that he would,
unnecessarily, expose himself to the discretion of another, in a matter of so
great weight. Yet, following the notes which I have seen, as I have said
before, I assure my self, that it was made two years, and sent 18. months
before this time. But that which could not be concealed, and which did
scandalize It appears by the Bull, that the Council was not free.
every one, was, that, by that Bull, it appeared that the Council was in
servitude. For if the two Legates could command all the Prelates, at once, to
part from Trent, and compel them by punishments, and censures, let any man say
that can, what liberty they had? The Emperor, hearing the news, was much The
Emperor is offended with the Translation.
displeased, because, it seemed, he was despised, and because he saw a weapon
taken out of his hand, by managing whereof, according to opportunity, he
thought to set Religion at peace in Germany, and so to put it under his The
French King dies.
obedience. The news came not to the French King, who the 21. of the same
month, changed this life for a better.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
I Am not ignorant of the laws of Histories, 1547 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6.
HENRY 2.
and how they differ from Annals, and Diaries. I The censure of the Author
concerning this work.
know likewise, that the narration of uniform accidents, breeds satiety in
the Writer, and tediousness in the Reader: and that to recount small matters
too particularly, deserves the name of a foolish knowledge. Yet I observe
frequent replies, and little narrations, in Homer, and that, in the expedition
of Cyrus the younger, Xenophon does more ravish and instruct the mind, by
reciting the serious and merry discourses of the soldiers, then by relating
the actions and counsels of Princes. I am of opinion, that every matter has
his proper form, and that this of mine, cannot be composed with ordinary
rules. I assure my self, that this work will be read by few, and is of a
short life; not so much for want of form, as for the nature of the Subject.
And I am so persuaded, by that which I see happen in the like things. But not
regarding perpetuity, or continuance of time, it shall suffice me that it will
please some one, to whom I will show it, because I know he will make use of
it; and I am assured that* for hereafter, that will happen to it which the
coniunctures shall comport.

The Prelates remaining in Trent, were in great suspense, until letters The
Emperors Prelates remain in Trent.
came from the Emperor, commending them for contradicting the Translation, and
abiding in Trent, with express order not to part from the City. They
consulted among themselves, whether they should do any Conciliarie Writings
pass between the Prelates of Trent and of Bolonia.
act: and it was uniformly resolved, that it would make a schism, and
therefore was not to be attempted: but that they ought to study the points, and
to expect what opportunity would bring. There passed some writings between the
Divines of Trent, and of Bolonia. These did, with affectation call it the
Synod of Bolonia; and those, the holy Synod, be it wheresoever it will. And
some of them remain still in Print in Bolonia. The Legates, and other
Cardinals of Rome, made diverse requests in private, unto some of those who
remained in Trent, to cause them to go to Bolonia, or, at the least, to make
them depart from thence. But they gained none, but Galeatius Florimante, Bishop
of Aquila. They labored to bring to the Session, all their friends that parted
from Trent, and that more should come also: which was easy to do by reason of
the commodious passage from Rome thither. Diverse Congregations were made, in
which nothing was handled, but how they might defend the Translation to be
lawful, and to show that those of Trent, were bound to join with them.

The 21. of April being come, the day appointed for the Session, with great
concourse of all the people of Bolonia, and much solemnity, the Legates, The
first Session in Bolonia.
accompanied with thirty four Bishops, went to the Council house; where
nothing was done, but a Decree read, which said, that, it being resolved in
Trent to translate the Synod to Bolonia, and to celebrate the Session that
day, publishing Canons in matter of the Sacraments, and of reformation, yet
considering, that many Prelates of the Council, were employed in their
Churches, by reason of the holy days of Easter, hoping they will return ere
long, that all may be done with honor and gravity, the Synod has deferred
the celebration of that Session, until the second of June, reserving power to
themselves to abreuiate the term. It was decreed also, to write letters in the
name of the holy general Synod, to the Fathers remaining in Trent, exhorting
them to go to Bolonia, and to unite themselves with the Body, from which being
separated, they cannot be called an Ecclesiastical Congregation, but do give
much scandal to Christendom. These letters, being received in Trent, were
thought not to be discreet, and did rather exasperate then mollify their
minds. Therefore they resolved not to answer, for fear of making a
contention, and so to let the attempt fall; which was ascribed to the Cardinal
of Monte his too much liberty, not to the moderation of that Assembly.

The Emperor, who was in Saxony with a puissant Army, in the very face The
Elector of Saxony is taken prisoner in battle, and the Landgraue of Has(...)
th yield
of that Elector, wholly busied in martial affairs, had laid aside all
thoughts of the Council. And the 24 of the same month, having put his Army
in order, upon the river Elb, called by the Latins Albi, came to a set
battle; where the Duke Elector was wounded and taken prisoner, and his Army
defeated. The Protestant forces being weakened hereby, the Landgraue was The
Saxon is condemned to (...), but his (...) is ^^uen upon hard conditions.
enforced to yield, and some few days after, by the mediation of his son in
law Mauritius, and the Elector of Brandeburg, did wilingly make his personal
appearance. The Duke was first condemned to die as a traitor, and then his life
was given him, upon diverse hard conditions; all which he accepted, but his
submission to the Council, in matter of religion. And Caesar was content, that
the others being observed, this should be omitted. Other conditions were
proposed also to the Landgraue; amongst which one was to obey the Decrees of
the Council of Trent; whereunto he consented not, but subscribed to refer
himself to a godly and free Council, where the Head and the members might be
reformed, which also the Duke Maurice, and the Elector of Brandeburg would do.
They were both imprisoned, the Saxon for ever, and the Landgraue during the
Emperors pleasure. Caesar being made Lord of Germany by this victory, became
Master of a great deal of Artilery, and drew much money from the Cities and
Princes; and to give a peaceable form to what he had achieved by war, he
ordained a Diet in Ausburg.

These things did much afflict the Pope, who considered that Italy was without
help, and remained at the Emperors discretion. Yet he was comforted, The Pope
is afflicted in mind with the Emperors prosperity.
that having gotten the conquest by force, he would be compelled to maintain
it by the same means, and could not remove his army from thence very soon. In
the mean space he had time to treat and agree with the new French King, and the
Italians, and to secure himself. In all these troubles he was consolated,
being delivered from fear of the Council. He commended above measure, the
resolution of the Cardinal Monte, to whom he attributed this benefit. He
resolved to send into France, Ieronymus Boccaferrius, a Roman, Makes a
confederation with the new French King.
Cardinal of Saint George, in show to condole with the King, for the death of
his father, and to give him joy of the beginning of his kingdom, but with
Commission to make intelligence, and confederation with him. The Pope gave the
Legate most ample power to grant the King all his demands, in matter of
Benefices, without regarding the Decrees of the Tridentine Council. And sends
a Legate into Germany.
And, to be ready to embrace all occasions, which might arise in Germany, to
trouble the Emperor, and that no resolution might be taken in the Diet to his
prejudice, he sent Francis, Cardinal Sfondrato, for Legate, with instruction
to treat with the Clergy, and to keep them in devotion; to make diverse
propositions to the Emperor, to establish the Council in Bolonia; which, if
it were not in a place of his own subjection, he feared more then the
Emperors Arms in Italy.

At this time there was a great sedition in Naples, because the Viceroy D. A
great commotion is raised in Naples, by bringing in the Inquisition.
Pedro di Toledo, desired to bring the Inquisition into the kingdom, according
to the custom of Spain. The Napolitans resisted, and made a seditious cry
throughout Naples, God save the Emperor, and confound the Inquisition: then,
being assembled, they chose a Magistrate to defend them saying, That when they
yielded their obedience to the Catholic King, they made an express
capitulation, that causes of heresy should be censured by ordinary
Ecclesiastical Judges, and that the particular office of the Inquisition
should not be brought in For this cause the Spaniards and Napolitans did
seditiously take Arms, and many were slain, and there was danger of
rebellion. When all things were set in order, fifty thousand men being put in
Arms, assembled by the sound of Bells, the Spaniards being retired into the
Castles, and the people fortified with Artillery, in convenient places, there
was, as it were, a formal war, between the City and the Castles. The
tumult lasted from the end of May, until the midst of July, and more then
three hundred persons were slain on both sides. In which interim the City
sent Ambassadors And nourished by the Pope.
to the Emperor and the Pope, offering to yield, if they might be received.
It was enough for the Pope to nourish the sedition, which he did with much
dexterity, having not forces to maintain the enterprise. But the Cardinal
Theatinus, Archbishop of that City, promising them the adherence of all his
kindred, who were many, and potent, and his own pains also, who, to that
purpose, would go in person, did effectually exhort them not to let slip an
occasion, so profitable for the service of the Church, gaining unto it so great
a kingdom. The Spaniards, calling succors from diverse parts, became more
potent, and letters came from the Emperor, that he was content there should be
no Inquisition, and pardoned the City, except nineteen, all which he named
but one, whom he would discover when time served: yet the City paid for a fine
an hundred thousand crowns. These conditions were of necessity received, and
those few of the nineteen who could be found, were put But appeased by the
Emperor.
to death; and so the tumult was appeased.

In Bolonia the Legates did not well know as yet what to do; and the Pope The
Council in Bolonia proceeds slowly.
had commanded them not to proceed to any action, which might be opposed, or
make a division, but to go on slowly, deferring the Sessions, and making some
Congregations, to show they were not idle. But it was not easy to make them in
a good form, to discuss the point of the Eucharist, in regard the principal
Divines, accustomed to handle matters of faith in The reformation is wholly
forgotten.
Trent, were wanting. Yet some Congregations were held, and diverse Divines did
speak, but no Decree was framed. There is no cause to speak any more of the
Reformation, because it was then buried in deep silence.

The second of July being come, the Session was celebrated with the same The
second Session is held and nothing done.
ceremonies; where they did nothing but prorogue it, with a decree like to that
of the form, showing that the Synod had deferred it until that day, because
the Fathers were absent and expected: whereupon, being desirous to deal
lovingly with them, they added another Prorogation, until the fifteenth of
September, not ceasing in the mean space to examine the points of doctrine and
Reformation, reserving to themselves power to abbreuiate or prolong that term,
though in a private Congregation.

In France it was not hard for the Legate to obtain of the King whatsoever A
strong alliance is made between the Pope and the French King.
the Pope desired. For he also was no less jealous of the Emperors fortune,
and there was good intelligence between them, and very secret propositions did
pass. Amongst the public, one was, that the King should send to the Council
of Bolonia, as soon as might be, as many Prelates as was possible. Marriage was
contracted between Horatius Farnese, the Popes Nephew, and Diana the Kings
bastard daughter, of the age of nine years. The King sent nine French
Cardinals, to remain in the Court, to give the Pope reputation; and to nourish
friendship between them. The Pope created Two Cardinals are created at the
Kings instance.
Cardinals the six and twentieth of July, at the Kings instance, Charles di
Guisa, Archbishop of Reins, and Charles of Vandosme, of the blood royal.

In the end of August, Caesar went to Ausburg, to celebrate the Diet there, The
Emperor holds a Diet in Austburg.
having about the City, the whole Army of Spaniards and Italians, and some
companies of foot within the City. It began the first of September, where the
Emperor desiring principally to pacific Germany, did impart what he had
formerly done in diverse Diets, to reconcile it, and how, for this end, he had
caused the Counsel to be called, and to begin in Trent: but that his pains
auailing nothing, he was constrained to pass to another remedy. And because
it pleased God to give a happy issue to his resolution, reducing Germany to
those terms that he was assured to reform it, he had assembled the Princes
for that end. But for that the difference of religion was cause of all those
troubles, it was necessary to begin there. The opinions of the Princes in that
Diet were diverse; for amongst the Electors the Ecclesiastiques desired, and
urged, that the Council of Trent should be held, and demanded no condition.
The Seculars, adhering to the Lutherans, were content, with these conditions,
that it should be free, pious, that the Pope should not preside, neither in
person, nor by his Ministers, should release the oath by which the Bishops In
which the Princes differ in opinion.
are bound unto him, that the Protestant divines should have a deciding voice,
and that the Decrees already made should be reexamined. The other Catholics
demanded that the Council should be continued, and the Protestants have safe
conduct to go thither, and speak freely, and be enforced to obey the Decrees.

While the Pope was in expectation of the success of the Diet in Germany, The
Popes son is murdered in his own palace, and his city Piacenza possessed by
the governor of Milan.
the 10. of September, his son, Petras Aloisius, Duke of Piacenza, was slain
in his own palace, by conspiracy, and his body ignominiously exposed; and,
some few hours after, soldiers came from Milan, sent by the Vice-Duke,
Fernandus Gonzaga, who made themselves Lords of the City. This afflicted the
Pope above measure, not so much for the death of his son, and the ignominy,
as for the loss of the City, and because he saw plainly that all was done
with the Emperors knowledge.

But the Legates in Bolonia thought, that in this affliction and business of
the Pope, it was not fit to write two letters every week, of what did pass in
the Council, as they were wont, and therefore that it was convenient to
prorogue the Session for a long time, and to intermit all Acts of the
Council; which would be done with honor enough, if the Session, intimated
for the fifteenth, were celebrated, and the next deferred. Yet the public
grief for the Dukes death, requiring that no solemnity should be made, they
deemed it was better to anticipate, and defer it in a Congregation. Therefore
the fourteenth, the Prelates being all called into the house, where the
Cardinal of Monte was lodged, he spoke unto them, thus in substance. C. Monte
makes a speech to the Fathers in his own lodging for prorogation of the
Session.
That the morrow was appointed for the Session; but every one saw in what
staits the Synod was; that not many Prelates are arrived, who are in their
journey, especially the Frenchmen, and those who are lately come, are not well
informed, yea, even those who have been present the whole Summer, at the
disputation of the lesser Divines, are not well in order: whereunto was to be
added the cruel murder of the Duke, which held every one in suspense, and
themselves busied in providing for the security of the Cities belonging to the
Church: that he was glad he had reserved power to prorogue the Session, that
they may be freed from the pains of going to the Church to celebrate it: that
his advice was, yea, that it was necessary to make use of that reservation,
prolonging the Session now, and not celebrating it to morrow. The prorogation
pleased all the Fathers. the Cardinal added, that, having considered much of
it, they were not able to set down a certain day whereon to rest: that when
they were in Trent, thinking to dispatch the Decree of Justification in
fifteen days, they were feign to sweat in the business seven months
together, oftentimes making two Congregations every day: that where the
question is of faith, and confounding the heretics, one ought to go with
leaden feet, and often to employ much time in discussing a little word; that
one cannot know whether it will be necessary to celebrate the Session within
few days, or not within many months; therefore that his opinion was to
prorogue it during pleasure of the Council; and that this resolution was
undoubtedly the best. And if any say, that, the prefixed time being known,
one might better dispose of his business, these may assure themselves, that it
will appear within few days, what course and progress the Synod is like to
have. All were content it should be prorogued, during the Councels pleasure,
and so they had leave to depart.

The Prelates of Germany, assembled in the Diet the very same day, wrote The
Prelates assembled in the Diet write to the Pope to restore the Synod to Trent.
to the Pope, for so the Emperors pleasure was, demanding that the Council
should be brought back to Trent. In the letter was mixture of prayers and
threats. It expounded the bad estate and danger of Germany, against which
provision might have been made, if the remedy of the Council had been applied
in time, and held in Germany, as was desired. For having ample jurisdictions,
they could not long remain in remote places, for which cause none went to
Mantua, or Vicenza, and but few to Trent, a City which belongs also rather
to Italy, especially in time of war. Now, all things being in peace, they
conceived great hope, that the ship was safe in the haven, when, beyond all
expectation, they understood the Council, in which all their hope consisted,
was translated to another place, or rather divided. Therefore being deprived
of this remedy, there did nothing remain, but to have recourse to the
Apostolic Church, praying his Holiness, for the safety of Germany, to
restore the Council to Trent; which if he did, there was no service which he
might not promise himself from them; and that otherwise they knew not whither
to flee for aid, against the mischiefs and dangers that were imminent; that
therefore he would vouchsafe to consider of their demand, and think that if
he made not provision, it was very possible they should think of other
courses, to put an end to these difficulties: Praying his Holiness to take
their Letter in good part, being compelled to write thus, by their own duty,
and by the condition of the times.

Moreover, the Emperor used all diligence that all should submit to the The
Emperor obtains of the Princes and Granuel of the Cities a conditional
submission to the Council.
Council, urging, praying, and desiring them to rely upon his credit. His
prayers to the Elector Palatine were a kind of threats, in regard of his
former offense, lately pardoned. Maurice, Duke of Saxony, was necessarily to
yield, because of so great benefits, newly received from his Majesty, and
because he desired the enlargement of the Landgraue, his wives father.
Therefore the Emperor, having promised they should have due satisfaction, and
desiring them to trust unto him, they finally consented, and were followed by
the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandeburg, and by all the Princes. The
Cities refused (because they thought it very dangerous) to submit themselves
indifferently to all the Decrees of the Council. Granuel did negotiate very
much, and very long, with their Ambassadors, holding them obstinate, in
refusing what the Princes had approved, adding some threats, to condemn them
in a greater sum then they had already paid. Therefore they were compelled,
in fine, to condescend to Caesar's will, yet with caution of observing the
promises. Being called before the Emperor, and demanded if they would conform
themselves to the resolution of the Princes, they answered, they should be too
bold, if they went about to correct their answer, and, withal, gave up a
writing, which contained the conditions, with which they would receive the
Council. This was taken, but not read, and they were commended, in the
Emperors name, by his Chancellor, for that they had referred all to Caesar,
as others had done, and relied upon him: and the Emperor himself made show to
be well pleased with it: so the one and the other party was willing to be
deceived.

The Cardinal Sfondrato failed not of his duty, in proposing many advantages
The negotiation of Card. Sfondrato, with the Emperor.
to the Emperor, in case he would consent to the Council in Bolonia; he
showed him in what confusions England was, being under a King who was a
child, whose governors were at variance, and people in distrust one of
another, because of religion: he discovered unto him the intelligence which the
Pope held in that Kingdom, all which should be to his favor, and that he
would assist him in that enterprise with men and ships, and would give him
leave to make use of the Ecclesiastical rents of all his States. The Emperor
knew the Popes aim was to entangle him in a new enterprise, and so to trouble
him in that which he had already brought to a conclusion. Therefore he
answered, that he would be united with the Pope in religion, but, in point of
war, was resolute to proceed alone, and not to be his Captain, who would
abandon him in the best time of service, as he had done in the war of
Germany. And, on the other side, he proposed diverse advantages to the Pope, in
case he would consent to the return of the Council to Trent. The Legate
having answered, he had no commission herein, the Emperor sent, indiligence,
the Cardinal of Trent to the Pope, to negotiate the restitution of the
Council, and other particulars, which shall be related. The Pope, having
heard him often, and not being able to discover his intention, did finally
answer him, that he should speak hereof in the Consistery.

The Cardinal having, the ninth of December, in presence of the whole And of
the Cardinal of Trent with the Pope.
College, declared what pains and dangers, the Emperor had undergone, only
to maintain the dignity of the Councelll and how finally, by this diligence
and authority, he had induced all the Princes and States of Germany, to
adhere, and submit themselves unto it; he prayed his Holiness, in the name of
Caesar, Ferdinand, and the whole Empire, that, for the love of God, he would
cause the Bishops who were at Bolonia, to return to Trent, to finish the
necessary work begin, and would be pleased to send one or two Legates into
Germany, with full Pontifical power, not keeping from them any Faculty, that
the manner of living, until the Council began, might be set down by their
advice, and the Clergy reformed, that he would have consideration, and
determine, if the Sea were vacant, during the time of the Council, whether the
Fathers thereof, or Cardinals, should elect the Pope, that, in case it should
happen, no new stirs might arise. This third The Pope is put in mind of his
old age.
point was added, to put the Pope in mind of his old age, and approaching
death, and so to make him condescend more easily, that his posterity might not
inherit the displeasure which the Emperor took at (...). The Pope, in
answer of these propositions, commended the Emperors good will, and his
pains, for public service of the Church, concluding he would have such
consideration of these propositions, as they deserved, and resolve, as GOD
would inspire him. The Cardinal, having in diverse private audiences, assayed
in vain to have some good resolution from the Pope, leaving the instruction to
Don Diego di Mendoza, whom the Emperor had caused to The Card of Trent
retureth, leaving Don Diego in his room.
go for that purpose to Rome from Siena, where he was to accommodate the
differences of that Republique, he departed, and returned to Ausburg. Don
Diego, in public Consistory, assembled to give the cap to the Cardinal of
Guise, where all sorts of men might be present, presented himself before the
Pope, and expounded unto him the same things, which the Cardinal had done;
adding, that he had commission, in case his Holiness did interpose any delay
or excuse, to protest that the Synod of Bolonia was not lawful. The Pope
answered, that he would first understand the opinion, and the reasons The popes
answer concerning the return of the Council.
of the Fathers of the Council of Bolonia, and impart the proposition to the
Kings and Princes of Christendom, that he might resolve maturely, for the
service of God, and satisfaction of all.

The Cardinal of Guise made a public discourse in the same Consistory, The
discourse of the Cardinal of Guise in the consistory.
in the name of the French King, and spoke thus in substance. That King Francis
had never spared any cost or danger, to maintain the liberty of other Princes.
In conformity whereof, Henry, not degenerating from the virtue of his
ancestors, so soon as he left to mourn for his Fathers death, was willing to
declare his observance toward the Sea of Rome. That the merits of the Kings of
France toward the Pope, were famous, and exceeded all those of other Nations:
but this was above all which the King now does, promising all his forces to
preserve the Papal dignity, now when it is so contemned. He prayed the Pope to
receive the King for his son, and to promise to himself all assistance from
him, and to take care that the Church should receive no damage or shame, in
regard, that from small beginnings, great factions have risen, which have
brought the Popes into great calamities. He exemplified in many Popes,
afflicted, who were defended, and raised by the Kings of France, concluding
that the present King will not yield to his ancestors, in preserving the
dignity of the Apostolic Sea.

Many did think that the Pope made Guise speak so, to encourage the Cardinals
his dependants, and to daunt the lofty spirits of the Imperialists, and to make
them see they could not enforce him. And to execute what he had said to Don
Diego, he wrote to Bolonia, to the Cardinal of Monte, the proposition made
unto him, and his own determination, giving him order, that so soon as might
be, inuocating the holy Ghost, he should deliver all to the Fathers and when
he had understood their opinion, should write back what the Council thought.
The Legate, the Fathers being assembled, declared The manner how the spirit did
work in this Council.
the Commissions, and gave his own voice first, which all the others followed.
For the spirit which was wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did,
and he Bishops to believe as the Legates, did work as formerly it had done.
The voices being collected, the Cardinal, by the consent and is the name of
all, answered that the Synod, when the lawful decree was made, to translate
it from Trent to Bolonia, having admonished all to put themselves into the
journey, and, after that they were arrived in Bolonia, understanding that some
remained in Trent, having again lovingly exhorted them to part from thence,
and join with the body of the Council, they made none account thereof,
continuing still in that City, with contempt of the Council, and scandal of
many, as if they pretended to be a lawful Council, or were not bonnd to obey
this; and therefore that the Fathers The answer sent from Bolonia concerning
the return of the Council.
did not know how the return to Trent could be treated of, with the honor
and reputation of the Synod, if those who remain there do not first go to
Bolonia, to unite with the rest, and acknowledge the power of the Council.
When this is done, the return, in contemplation of Germany, may be handled,
if that Nation will give sufficient security to obey the Decrees, as well to
be made, as made already. He added that there was a fame spread, that when the
Council returned to Trent, the proceeding should be popular, and licentious.
Therefore the Fathers thought it necessary to have good security, that the
order, continued in the celebration of Councels from the Apostles time; until
this age, should be observed; desiring also caution, to stand secure, and to be
able to depart, and translate also the Council, when it shall seem fit to the
mayor part, and to end it when they shall judge that they have attained the end
for which it was called; desiring his Holiness not to compel them to that
which would be against the honor of God, and liberty of the Church.

The Pope having received these letters, when the Mass was ended on Which the
Pope does communicito to the Cardinals in Consistory; and to the Emperors
Ambassador.
Saint John the Evangelists day, being returned to the Chamber of the robes,
with the Cardinals, did communicate the Councels answer unto them: which
being approved by the mayor part, he caused Mendoza to be called, and
related unto him the opinion of the Synod, approved also by the Cardinals,
adding that there was nothing that he was not willing to do for Germanies
sake: that the Emperor was a good witness hereof; that he was sure that the
demand, which he the Ambassador had made, in the name of Caesar, Ferdinand and
the Empire had a condition annexed, that is, if it may be with the peace and
profit of other Nations, and liberty of the Church: which being assembled in a
general Council, seeing it has judged otherwise, and that the College of
Cardinals was of the same opinion, he could not choose but repute it
iuridicall, and reasonable, and approve it, as he also did. That, for his
fatherly affection, toward the Emperor, and the King, he wished he could
give a more acceptable answer; but from a Pope, Head of the Church, nothing
could be expected, but what the well governing of the public did compel him
to resolve: that he knew the Emperors wisdom, and his filial love, and was
confident he would receive this for good, which was thought necessary by so
many Fathers, and would command the Spanish Prelates in Trent, to go presently
to Bolonia, and labor to make Germany receive the conditions proposed by the
Council, and send, as soon as might be, the Duch Prelates, and give the
Synod caution that the conditions proposed should be observed. Mendoza,
understanding the Popes resolution by his answer, would instantly have
protested, that the assembly of Who would have protested, if he had not been
dissuaded by the Car. of Trent:
Bolonia was not a lawful Council, and that his Holiness, if he brought it
not back to Trent, would be cause of all the mischances that should happen to
Christendom, and that, he failing, the Emperor, as Protector of the Church,
1548 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6. HENRY 2.
would make provision. But the Cardinal of Trani, Deane of the College, and
some other Cardinals, interposing, he was content to relate the answer to
Caesar, and expect order from him.

The Pope, considering the action of Mendoza, thought that this business might
make some difference between him and the Emperor, in which case he thought it
not fit to have the Prelates of Germany ill affected to him. At the receiving
of their letter, whereof mention was made before, he was offended with the last
particle, that they would think of other course, holding it to be a plain
threat, and resolved to give them no answer, and continued three months in
that opinion: but now, better advised, he doubted, that, if they held
themselves to be contemned, they would take some rash resolution, to which the
Emperor would give way, that he might be entangled in greater difficulties.
Therefore being resolved to prevent the danger, by honoring The Pope writes
to the Prelates of Germany in answer of their letter.
them with an answer, he made it very modest and artificial, yet not without
a convenient sense of his own honor. The letter began with commendation of
their piety, which appeared in their care to remedy the heresies, and
seditions, and that himself was no less sollicitous, in regard of his
pastoral office, so that he has not suffered, nor does suffer any time to
pass without thinking of some remedy, and had, from the beginning of his
Popedom, recourse unto that which has been mentioned by them, that is, unto
the Council. And here relating what happened in the convocation of it, and
the impediments, why it came not presently to execution, he added that, it
being assembled, many Decrees have been made as well to condemn a great
number of the heresies, as to reform a great part of the Church; that the
Council parted from that City without his knowledge, but the Synod having
power to do it, he presupposes the cause was lawful, until the contrary
does appear: and that although some few have dissented, yet it cannot be
said that the Council is divided. He added that it is not translated into a
City far remote, and not safe, and that the being of it subject to the
Church, does make it secure for Germany, which has received Christian
religion, and many other benefits from it. That he cared not whether the
Council were celebrated there or elsewhere, and would not hinder the Fathers
to choose another place, so they were not forced. But what did hold them from
returning to Trent, they might see by the letters of Bolonia, whereof he sent
them a copy. That he has deferred to answer their letters, because the
Cardinal of Trent coming unto him in Caesar's name, and afterward Don Diego
di Mendoza, he was willing to answer the Emperor first. That, by the letters
of the Fathers of Bolonia, they will see what is fit to do before the return
be resolved on. Therefore he prayed them to come or send Proctors to Bolonia,
and to assist in the Council. His conclusion was, that he was not troubled
with that point of their letters, where they intimate that new courses shall
be taken, being conscious to himself not to have omitted any part of his
duty, and to have embraced Germany with all charity. That he promised
himself from them and Caesar, that they would do nothing without maturitie;
but if courses shall be attempted against the authority of the Sea of Rome,
he cannot hinder it, CHRIST having foretold as much, when he founded it, yet
he feared not that their attempts would succeed, because it was grounded upon
a most sure rock. That others had oftentimes endeavored the like, but their
plots were ever overthrown: and that GOD gave example in those, what others,
who would tread in the same steps, might hope for. And if the miseries past,
will not move those that are present to desist, yet he is sure they will
remain constant in their ancient piety and faith, and in their Congregations
will not give place to counsels contrary to the dignity of the Church.

The Emperor, being advised by his Ambassador of the conditions The Emperor
perceives ye Popes cunning, and sends Ambassadors to Bolonia, Vargas, and
Velasco.
proposed by those of Bolonia, and the Popes resolute answer, though he saw
plainly that his Holiness covered himself with the name of the Council, and
Fathers of Bolonia, who did notoriously depend on him in all matters, and
receive all motion from him, to let the world know that he omitted no means to
set the Council on foot again, he sent Francis Vargas, and Martino Velasco
to Bolonia. These coming into the assembly, the sixteenth of January, where
there were no more Fathers with the Legates, the Cardinals of Monte and Santa
Croce, then in the last Session, they presented the Emperors letters, which
were thus addressed: Conuentui Patrum Boloniae. Which being read, and Vargas
beginning to speak, Monte interrupted him, and said, That though the holy
Synod was not bound to hear him, in regard the letters were not addressed to
it, because it was not a Convent, Vargas is twice interrupted in his speech.
but a Council, yet they refused not to give him audience, with Protestation
that it should not prejudice them, or give advantage to others, and that it
should remain free to the Fathers, to continue the Council, and to go on,
and proceed against the obstinate and rebollious, by inflicting the punishments
of the Laws. Vargas required, that an instrument should be made of the
Protestation, before the Proposition was understood; then he prayed the
Fathers, in the name of all Christendom, to proceed with equity, because,
persisting in their opinion, not wisely and maturely embraced, it must needs
end with some great public calamity; but yielding to the Emperor, all would
succeed well. He went about to show how dangerous an error it would be, not
to change their determiination, and how well Caesar was affected to the service
of God, and the Church. In these words he was again interrupted by Monte, who
said, I am here President of this most holy Council, and Legate of Paul the
third, successor of Peter, and Vicar of CHRIST on earth, together with these
most holy Fathers, to prosecute, for the glory of GOD, the Council, lawfully
transferred from Trent, and we pray Caesar to change opinion, and to assist us
herein, and to curb the perturbers of the Council, in regard his Majesty
knows that he who hinders holy Councels, be he of what degree soever,
incurreth most grievous punishments of the Laws; and we are resolved, that,
whatsoever happens, we will not care for any threats, nor will be wanting to
the honor and liberty of the Church, of the Council, and our own.

Then Valasco read the Protestation, which he had written in his hand; The
Emperors protestation against the Counced in Bolonia.
the sum whereof was. That Religion being shaken, manners corrupted, and
Germany separated from the Church, the Emperor had demanded a Council of
Leo, Adrian, Clement, and at last of Paul the third, and showing the
impediments and difficulties in calling it, he touched the things handled in
it, and added, that while his Masestie made war, principally for Religion,
and put Germany in quiet with his virtue, having great hope to make them go
to the Council, who until then had (...)sed, they, most reverend Legates,
against the expectation of all, without the Popes knowledge, making a light
fained cause to arise, proposed to the Fathers the translation of the Council,
without giving them time to think on it; whereunto some godly Bishops
opposing, protesting they would remain in Trent, they, with the consent of a
few Italians, decreed the said Translation, and parted the next day, and went
to Bolonia. That the Emperor being victorious, solicited the Pope many ways,
praying him to make them to return to Trent, showing the scandals and imminent
dangers, if the Synod did not end in that City, and, in the mean space,
endeavored, in the Diet of Ausburg, to make all the Dutchmen submit themselves
unto it. Finally, that he sent the Cardinal of Trent to his Holiness, to
signify this unto him, and to pray him to make the Council return to Trent.
That he caused also Mendoza to go to Rome to negotiate the same thing: and
that the Pope has taken time to treat with them in their assembly; who have
given a vain answer, captious, full of deceit, worthy to be condemned by
the Pope, who notwithstanding has approved it, calling the unlawful
Congregation of Bolonia by the name of a general Council, giving them so
great authority, that he knows not how to arrogate so much to himself.
That it was certain, that the Council could not be translated, but by urgent
necessity, diligent discussion, and consent of all; that, for all this, they,
who call themselves Legates, and others, did rashly run out of Trent, fayning
certain Fevers, and infections of the air, and testimonies of Doctors, which
the event has showed to be causes not so much as of any vain fear. That in
case of any such necessity, it was fit to treat first with the Pope, and the
Emperor, who is Guardian of Councels. But their haste was so great that they
did not so much as consult with themselves. That it was meet to hear and
examine the contradictions and opinions of those Fathers who did speak for
conscience sake; who, though not so many in number, ought to be preferred, as
more wise. That, in case it were fit to depart, they ought not to quit the
Country, but, according to the Decrees of the holy Councels to choose another
place in Germany. That the choice of Bolonia, subject to the Church, could no
way be defended, because it was certain that the Germans would not go
thither; and that every one might refuse it, for many reasons: which was to
dissolve the Council, without warning. Therefore the Emperor, to whom it
belongs to defend the Church, and protect general Councels, to compose the
dissentions of Germany, and also to reduce Spain, and his other Kingdoms and
States, to a true Christian life, seeing that the unreasonable departure from
Trent does disturb his whole purpose, he desires them, who call themselves
Legates, with the other Bishops, to return to Trent, from whence they parted.
That they cannot refuse this, because they promised to do it when the
suspicions of the pestilence did cease: which if they will do, it will be
most acceptable to all Christendom. But if not, they, the Emperors Proctors,
by special mandate, do protest that the Translation or recesse is unlawful,
and void, together with all the things that do, or will follow, and that the
authority of them, pretended Legates, and of the Bishops there present, is not
sufficient to give a law to all Christendom, in matter of Religion, and
reformation of manners, especially to those Provinces whose manners and laws
are not known unto them. Likewise they protest that the answer of his
Holiness is not good, but unlawful, full of deceit, illuforie, and that all
the damages, tumults, ruins, wastings of Countries which have happened, do,
or may happen, ought not to be imputed to Caesar, but to that Congregation
which calls themselves a Council, it being able most easily and canonically
to give remedy thereto. Protesting also that the Emperor, in the defect,
fault, or negligence of them, and the Pope, will make provision with all his
forces, not leaving the protection and care of the Church, which belongs unto
him as Emperor, and King, according to the laws, consent of the holy Fathers,
and of the whole world. In fine, they demanded a public instrument of
whatsoever was handled by them, and to have the Emperors mandate, and their
protestation inserted in the acts of the pretended Congregation.

Valasco, after the protestation, presented the same writing which he had
Card. Monte answers with great resolution.
in his hand, and required again that the instance should be registered. The
Cardinal of Monte with consent of the Synod, did most gravely protest, that
they would rather die, then suffer such an example to be brought into the
Church, that the Secular power should call a Council. That Caesar is son of
the Church, not Lord, or Master. That himself, and his Colleague, are Legates
of the holy Apostolic Sea, and refuse not to render an account to God and the
Pope, of their Legation, and that they would answer, within few days, the
Protestation read unto them.

Mendoza in Rome, having received the Emperors answer, that he should The
Emperors Ambassador in Rome protests also.
go on, and protest to the Pope, in presence of the Cardinals, and
Ambassadors of Princes, and understanding what was done in Bolonia, by Vargas,
and Velasco, appeared in Consistory, and kneeling before the Pope, read the
Protestation, which he held written in his hand. He began with the Emperors
vigilancie and diligence, to reunite Christendom, divided into diverse opinions
of religion. He showed what requests he had made to Adrian, Clement, and Paul
himself, to persuade them to call the Council; unto which the rebels of
Germany refusing to submit, he had compelled them to obedience, by force of
arms; wherein, though the Pope (to show he would not be wanting to the
public cause) did contribute some small assistance of men, yet it may be
said, that the war is finished only by the Emperors forces. In which, while
he was busied, behold the good work begun in Trent, was interrupted by a
pernicious attempt of transferring the Council, upon pretenses, neither true
nor probable, to this purpose only, that public quiet might be hindered,
notwithstanding the more godly and sound part of the Fathers did oppose, and
remain in the place. That the name of the Council should be given to those,
not to those, who are retired to Bolonia, honored by his Holiness, with the
name of his adher^nts, whose will he prefer (...) before the prayers of the
Emperor; and Ferdinand, and Princes of the Empire, not regarding the good of
Germany, nor the conversion of those (...), to reduce who^^ seeing they are
content to submit to the Council of Trent, (...) remains nothing but to
reduce it to that City* For which being requested, in the foresaid names, by
him the Ambassador, he has given an answerefull of c^^nning; but void of
reason. Wherefore seeing that the Evangelical requisitions, made by him, the
Emperors Ambassador, to his Holiness, the 14. and 27. of December, and, the
16. of January, by other Proctors of his Majesty in Bolonia, have been
neglected in both places* he did then protest, that the departure from Trent,
and Translation of the Council to Bolonia, were void and unlawful, will bring
contention into the Church, and put the Catholic faith and religion in
danger, and do for the present give ^eandall to the Church, and deforme the
state thereof. That all the ruins, scandals; and dissentions, which will
arise* ought to be imputed to his Holiness, who, though he is bound to
provide against them, even with the loss of his blood, yet does favor and
cherish the authors of them. That the Emperor, in defect and fault of his
Holiness, will employ all his forces, to make provision herein, according to
the form set down by the holy Fathers, and observed by consent of the whole
world. Then turning to the Cardinals, he said, that, the Pope refusing to take
care for the peach of religion, uniting of Germany, and reformation of manners
if they also will be negligent, he made the same protestation unto them; and
leaving the writing, which he had in his hand, he departed.

The Pope considering the Protestation of Mendoza, and aduising of the
business with the Cardinals, saw he was in a strait, and that to be taken for
The Pope (...) ^^te to make himself Neutrall and Judge in the cause.
a party, and to have the contention turned against him, was much against his
reputation; neither was there any remedy, but by finding a way to make himself
Neutrall, and Judge between them who approve, and who oppugn the
Translation. To do this, it was necessary to decline the Protestation, that it
might seem not to be made against him but, before him, against those of
Bolonia, in which not being able to dissemble sufficiently, he resolved to
lay to the Ambassadors charge, the transgressing of his Masters Manda(...),
thinking that the Emperor, seeing his dexterity in blaming his Minister, that
he might not break with his Majesty, would imitate him, and proceed as if
he had protested against those of Bolonia, acknowledging the Pope for Judge.
Therefore, on Wednesday, the first of February, calling Mendoza into the
Consistory, he made a very long answer, and said in substance. That to
protest, was a thing of bad example, used by those who have shaken off
obedience, or are not constant in it: That himself and the College of
Cardinals, are sorry for that unexpected action, in regard of the fatherly love
he has always borne the Emperor, and because it was done when it was least
looked for, having made war, and gained The answer of his Holiness to the
Protestation.
the victory against his own and the Churches enemies, and been assisted by
the Popes men, maintained with his immense charge: which succors were great,
and came in fit time, and deserved not such a reward after victory; that is,
that the end of the war, should be the beginning of protesting against him.
But he did ^itigate his grief, because the Ambassador had exceeded the bounds
of the Emperors Commission, in which he ha^^ commanded his Proctors at
Bolonia, to protest to the Legates; and to him, to protest against the Council
of Bolonia, in presence of the Pope and Cardinals* but not against the Pope,
That the Emperor had done the office of a modest Prince, knowing the Pope to
be the only lawful Judge in the cause of Translation, which if he should
refuse to determine, then the Protestation against him should take place; and
therefore that it was more fit, that if the Fathers, remaining in Trent, had
cause of complaint against those of Bolonia, they should make the process
before him. But the Ambassador had perverted the order, leaving the petition
which ought to be made, and requiring an undue proiudi^e against the Council,
so that, the act of the Pro^estation falling of it self, there was no need of
an answer, Yet to clear all men's minds, he would make one. And first, for
that he taxes him as negligent, and commend^th the Emperor as industrious,
he said he would not detract from the good meaning and actions of his Maiostie
but yet, that he did precede him, as in age, so in diligence. He said, he
had ever desired the Council, and showed it by effects. And here he
discoursed of all his actions, done to this end, and how others did cross him
and sometimes the Emperor himself, with diverse wars. He added, that to judge
whether the causes of the Translation be lawful or no, was reserved to
himself. That to praise those of Trent, was to praise those who were separated
from the Church. That he refused not, nor ever did, that they should return to
Trent, so that it might be done lawfully, and without offense of other
Nations. That to think only Trent fit to celebrate the Council was to wrong
the holy Ghost, which is worshipped, and present in all places* Neither ought
regard to be had, that Germany has need of a medicine for by that reason,
there should be a general Council held in England, and also where. That a
commodious place is not sought for those, for whom the laws are make, but for
those who make them, which are the Bishops. That often times Councels have
been made, out of the Provinces where the heresies have reigned. That he
knows why he was displeased with the answer given him, that is, that the
Decrees made, and to be made, are received, and that the manner, used ever
since the Apostles time, is observed* That he will avoid all negligence in
providing for the Church, and if Caesar will be diligent, let him keep
himself within the limits, prescribed to him by the laws and Fathers* The
functions of them both being distinct; will be profitable to the Church. And
concerning the Translation, whether it were lawful or no, he called the cause
to him, and deputed 4. Cardinals; (...), Burg^is, Poole, and Crescentius, to
hear it commanding every one that; until it was ended, they should attempt no
nouitie, giving the term of a mo(...) to the Fathers of Bolonia and Trent to
produce their reasons. And he (...)ed this decree to be Written by the
Secretary of the Consistory, in the accustomed judicial form of the Court*
inhibiting the Prelates of Bolonia and Trent* to innouate any thing, while the
cause depended.

The Imperialists did laugh extremely at the Popes distinction, of protesting
against the Pope, and before him. But Diego made a new Protestation, saying he
had a special mandate from the Emperor, to protest as he had done. The Popes
inhibition being received in Bolonia, and no more assemblies of Bishops, or
Congregations of Divines being made, all departed by little and little, except
the Popes stipendaries, who could not do it with their honor. Those of Trent
moved not, according to the Emperors will, that Don Dieg^ mak^th a new
prot^station.
they might keep there some sign of the Council, and hold the Catholics of
Germany in hope, and the Protestants in their duty and that their promise to
obey the Council of Trent, might not be void, there being none at al.

The Pope caused his answer given to Mendoza, to come to the knowledge of the
Fathers of Trent, and expected fifteen days that some ouerture would be made
by him of them, that he should be Judge, as he had desseigned. But seeing
nothing succeeded, he wrote a Brief to the Cardinal Pacceco, The Pope wri^eth
to the Fathers in Trent by way of c^^ation.
and to the Arch bishops and Bishops of Trent, in manner of a citation: in
which having delivered the causes, which moved him to intimate the Council,
and the impediments and delays, which happened in calling it, and the joy he
had to see it begun, which was increased by the happy proceeding, hoping that
in a short time provision would be made against the evils of the Church, he
added, that he received as much sorrow from the contrary encounters; so that
understanding the departure of his Legates, and mayor part of the Bishops from
Trent, some remaining still there, he was grieved, for that it might hinder
the progress of the Council, and give fcandall to the Church. This being as
well known to them as to him, he marueiled why, if the Translation of the
Council seemed just unto them, they went not in company with the others; if
unjust, why they made not their complaint to him. That it was a clear case,
whereof they could not be ignorant, that they were bound to do the one or the
other; either of which, if it had been embraced, would have taken away all
occasion of scandal. That he could not choose but write to the^ with grief;
that they were defectuous in the one or the other, and that he was sooner
advised by the Emperor of their complaints, then by any of them, so much as by
letter, or messenger: and that, for this negligence, he had more cause to
complain of the Cardinal, who was more obliged, by reason of his
Cardinalitie. But because that which they should have done, was prevented by
Caesar, who has complained by his Ambassador, that the Translation is void
and unlawful, he does readily offer unto them, that which should not have
been denied, if they had made the case kowen, that is, to hear their
complaints, and take knowledge of the cause, And though he ought to presuppose
that the Translation is lawful, yet to do the part of a just judge, he
willingly offers to hear them and their reasons, which they shall bring to
the contrary: that herein he would hold and esteem of the Spanish Nation, and
of their persons, not suffering the great presumtions to prevail, which ought
to be had against them. Therefore having by advise of the Cardinals, called
the cause of the Translation of the Council unto him, and given commission to
some of them to relate it in Consistory, all that pretend interest being cited,
and the Prelates of Bolonia and Trent inhibited to attempt any thing, while the
cause depends, as was contained in the writing, whereof he sent them a copy,
desiring to conclude the cause as soon as may be he commands them, that
pretending the Translation to be of no force, they send three at the least;
well instructed, to assist in judgment, and to allege their pretensions, and
to render their presence, as soon as may be; concluding, that the
presentation of the Brief to the Cardinal, or to two or three of them,
affixed at the Church door of Trent, shall bind them all, as if it had been
personally Who answer thus.
intimated to every one. The Pope sent also to those of Bolonia to intimate the
same Decree, who sent immediately to Rome.

But the Cardinal Pacceco, and the other Spaniards in Trent, who were in
number thirteen, having first sent to know the Emperors mind^, answered the
Popes letter the three and twentieth of March, thus in substance. That they
trusted in his benignity and wisdom, which will easily know that, in
contracting the Translation, in being silent, in remaining in that City, they
thought of nothing less, then of offending his Holiness; yea, that the
principal cause, why they dissented, was, because a matter of so great weight
was handled, without his knowledge: wherein also they desired, that so small
account should not be made of the Emperor. That it seemed clear to them, that
the Translation would not be well expounded, nor easily approved by his
Holiness, whom they prayed not to believe that the Emperor had prevented
their complaint, exacted by his Beatitude, because they had complained first to
him, but that he did it of his own motion, who thought the protection of the
Church belonged to him: that they should never have thought that his Holiness
would have desired to have been assisted by them, to whom they believed an
absolute account was given by his Legates, in regard what they spoke was in
public, and written by Notaries; that it seemed enough for them to deliver
their opinion, and then to be silent. Therefore they did not believe their
presence was necessary in ought else. That if there be any defect, yet their
plain meaning is clear. That they thought it enough to dissent from the
Translation, and for modesty and humility, not to trouble his Holiness, whom
they supposed would not be wanting, to perform what he thought fit, for the
good of the Church. That they saw not why they should depart with the Legates,
who promised, in the general Congregation, and in the public Session, to
return to Trent, so soon as the suspicion of the sickness did cease,
especially if Germany would submit to the Council. That they remained there,
believing they would return, especially when they understood, that, by the
grace of God, and virtue of the Emperor, Germany did submit it self. And
that some have received scandal by their abiding in Trent, as his holiness
says, it is sufficient for them that they have not given it; and on the other
side, the departure of others has troubled many. That the successor of Saint
Peter has ever been very venerable to their nation; wherein themselves have
not been defectuous. They pray his Holiness, that they may not be blamed for
what they have done to a good end* and do humbly beseech him not to consent
they should be put into a suite, in regard the cause is not theirs, but Gods;
saying* that if it were theirs, they would be content to endure any wrong; but
being Gods, and CHRIST'S, as it is, it belongs more to none then to his Vicar.
In fine, they prayed his holiness to set the interrupted Council on its feet
again, and cause the Legates and Fathers to return to the same place, and to
do this by a Brief, without treating of Translation. They prayed him to take
their words in good part, not spoken to signify what the duty of his
Holiness was, but what they hoped from him.

The Spaniards answer being received by the Pope, it was sent to the The reply
of the Proctors of the Fathers of Bolonia the Spaniards answer.
Cardinals, to whom the cause was committed; by whom it was communicated to the
Proctors of those of Bolonia, that they might proceed. These answered, that
they were glad that the Spaniards do acknowledge the judgment and the Judge,
and that they will not be a party. Yet it was necessary to retort some things
delivered in their answer, to make the Truth appear. In that they say his
Holiness should first have been advised with, it was superfluous, in regard a
special Bull was then read. That the Emperor had been neglected, it cannot be
said, because so great esteem has been held of his Majesty, as of the Pope,
the cause it self not comporting any delay, seeing it was necessary to
dissolve, or translate the Council, in regard of the progress which the
pestilent sickness made in the City, and borders, of the actual and eminent
departure of many Fathers, of the Doctors oath, especially of Fracastorius, who
had a public stipend, and of the fear that the commerce of the neighbor
Cities would be taken away. All which appears in the acts transported to
Rome, by his Holiness commandment. That the Legates, after the Decree,
exhorted them to go to Bolonia, and being arrived there, did admonish them by
letters, so that they cannot say they ought not to follow the Legates, because
they confented not to the Translation, for the suffrages of all in the Council
being free, they might dissent with a safe conscience: but the mayor part
having made a Decree, it was meet the lesser part should yield, or else,
never any thing would be determined. That the return has been promised is
true; but it may be seen in the Decree, in what form the promise was made.
If they tarried, believing that the others would return, why did they not
answer the Legates letters, who admonished them to go to Bolonia. But when
they say the suspicion of the Pestilence was pretended, it is probable they
spoke it by chance; otherwise having nothing to say against the Translation,
and not sending, according to the Popes Decree, they should incur the
Censures. Neither is that division ought worth, if the cause be theirs, or of
God. For as it belongs to them, no man will do them wrong, as unto CHRIST,
seeing the question is of the fact, it is necessary to clear that which is
not manifest in the fact. Whereupon the Emperor having calling the Legates
pretended, and the Fathers of Bolonia not a Council, but a private assembly,
and uttered many opprobrious terms against the Translation, it was reasonable
the Pope should assume the cause, not to cherish, but to appease contentions.
Whether scandals have risen by the Translation, or by their remaining in Trent,
may be seen by this only, that their remaining is the cause why the return
cannot be. And when they pray his Holiness to cause the interrupted Council
to return, if they understand it of the usual Congregations, they have never
been intermitted; if of the publication of the Decrees, this has been
referred for their sake: and so many things are already discussed in Bolonia,
as well of faith as reformation, that a long Session may be made thereof.
Therefore they pray his Holiness, to give sentence, considering that no
Council, but in time of schism, has lasted so long as this, so that the
Bishops are desired by their Churches, unto which it is fit they should be
restored. This writing was presented in the end of April.

After which there was no further proceeding in the cause, for that the deputed
Cardinals knew not how to conclude. To pronounce the Translation The Cardinals
deputed in this cause, knew not how to proceed.
lawful, in the absence of the contradictors, was to make a schism, having no
means to enforce them to receive the sentence; and they saw less means to
force them to assist in the cause. The Pope was much troubled, seeing no way to
compose the difficulty, without form of judgment.

While these things were in question, after the death of the Duke his son,
the Pope did continually demand the restitution of Piacenza, and of other
places, usurped in the District of Parma, making use of the interests of the
Emperors daughter, wife to Duke Octauius; son of him that was dead. But the
Emperor, purposing to join that City to the Dukedom of Milan, and to
recompense his son in Law in something else, delayed the time with diverse
answers and offers, hoping that the Pope, being eighty years of age; and
grieved for his sons death, and having many other distasts, would end all the
controversies by his death. But the Pope seeing he Differences between the
Pope and Emperor, about the restitution of Piacenza.
was deluded with delays, molested with requests for the return of the
Council to Trent, and offended by the remaining of the Spaniards in the City,
to make a diuersion at the least, he let the Emperor know, that the usurpers
of Piacenza, a Town belonging to the Church, had incurred the Censures; to the
declaration of which he would proceed: fulminating also more of them, if
within a certain time prefixed, it were not restored to him. The Emperor
wrote back a sharp letter, aduising the Pope not to cherish the fugitives of
Naples; showing that all the practices were known unto him, and that he did
understand the calumnies raised against him, that he procured a schism, when
he demanded a Council in Trent, to unite Christendom; and for Piacenza, that
it was a member of the Duchy of Milan, many years unjustly usurped by the
Popes: and if they have title to it, let it be showed, and he will not fail
to do justice. The Pope seeing his spiritual weapons would do no good,
without the temporal, changed his opinion, and sought to make a strong League
against the Emperor: wherein he found many difficulties, not being able to
persuade the Venetians to enter into it, and the Frenchmen requiring the
consent of the Consistory, in regard of the Popes decrepite age, and a pawn of
money; which the Pope was not willing to lay down, in regard of the great
charge he was at, fearing it would be greater, for which cause, he had laid as
great burdens His Holiness endeavors to make a strong league against the
Emperor, but finding difficulties in it, knows not what to do.
on his subjects as they were able to bear, and sold and pawned as much as he
could, and given order for granting of all sorts of dispensations, and favors,
to whomsoever would give money, to supply the wants of the Apostolic Sea. For
the Council, he was most resolute not to let it be out of his own
Territories, and besides other urgent reasons, that of his own and the
Popedomes reputation was added, that the Emperor should not compel him. But
he knew not how to induce him and Germany, to give consent. To let it vanish,
sometimes seemed good unto him, and sometimes not, and he often discoursed
thereof with the Cardinals, both in Consistory, and privately. But finally, he
resolved to put to hazard the determination, for which he knew he was
insufficient, not only for the reasons before alleged, but for other weighty
respects, which passed in Germany. For Caesar, at the return of the Cardinal
of Trent to Ausburg, understanding the Popes mind, and the answer he gave to
Mendoza, at the end of December, (which caused him to give over for the
Protestation, as has been said) and thinking that the Pope, by requiring the
restitution of Piaconza, sought to divert all speech of the Council, was
assured, that, so long as he lived, either the return would not be, or the
resolution would be protracted, and therefore thought fit, before he disarmed,
to set Germany at peace, in matters of religion. Hereof a proposition was made
in the Diet, and order taken, The Emperor resolves to settle a peace of
religion in the Diet.
that choice should be made of persons, fit for this good work. Those were
chosen who were esteemed the best; who not agreeing, all was referred to
Caesar. He elected three, Julius Flugius, Michael Sidonius, and Johannes
Islebius. These after long consultation, composed a form of Religion, which
was often examined, reuiewed, and changed, first by themselves, and then by
diverse persons, unto whom the Emperor caused it to be showed; Therefore a form
is composed, called the Interim.
and some of the principal Ministers of the Protestants were also called, that
they might approve it. But it had so many alterations, additions, and
diminutions, that it appeared to be the work of many men, who had contrary
ends. Finally, it was reduced into that form in which it now is; and the
Legate sent a copy thereof unto Rome, by the Emperors consent, who was
willing to understand the Popes opinion, and by the counsel of the mayor part
of the Prelates, who seeing the controversies between the Pope and the
Emperor, feared that the Emperor would obey him no longer; a thing much
abhorred by them, for the inbred, and inueterate opinion of the Dutchmen, to
maintain the dignity of the Pope, which is the only counterpoise of the
Emperors authority, whom without his assistance, they were not able to
resist; if, according to the use of ancient Christian Princes, they would keep
them within their bounds, and remove the abuses of the renowned liberty of
the Clergy.

The Book contained twenty five heads. Of the state of man in innocence. Of
the state of man after sin. Of the redemption by CHRIST. Which contemeth 25.
heads.
Of Justification. Of the fruits thereof. Of the manner how it is received. Of
charity and good works. Of belief of the remission of sins. Of the Church.
Of the signs of the true Church. Of the authority thereof. Of the Ministers
of the Church. Of the Pope and Bishops. Of the Sacraments. Of Baptism. Of
Confirmation. Of Penance. Of the Eucharist. Of extreme Unction. Of Order. Of
Marriage. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Of the memory, intercession, and
invocation of Saints. Of the Communion. Of the Ceremonies, and use of the
Sacraments. To recite here the substance of them would be too long, tedious and
unprofitable, because the consequences which began from that Does not continue
long
book, lasted not long. It had the name of the Interim, prescribing what to
believe, until all was established by a general Conncell.

When the copy came to Rome, every one was amazed; first in general, that a
temporal Prince, in a secular assembly, should meddle with religion, and not
in one Article only, but in all. The learned called to mind the (...) of
Zeno, the (...) of Heraclius, and the (...) of Constance, and what divisions
these Imperial constitutions in matter of religion made in Christendom, And
is censured in Rome.
and said, that, until then, there were three names, unlucky to the Church,
bringing into it many divisions, under pretense of unity: to which might be
added this fourth, the Interim of Charles the fifth. They doubted that this
beginning of the Emperor would end, where Henry the eight, King of England did
arrive, to declare himself Head of the Church: which would have so much more
compass, as Spain, Italy, Germany, and other adjacent Countries were greater
then one Island, which, in appearance, did make show to contain one Catholic
doctrine, but was very far from it. Descending to particulars, they
reprehended that, in the points of original sin, justification, the
Sacraments, Baptism, and confirmation, the doctrine determined by the Council
was not set down: and that collection being made to be observed until the
Council, in regard the Council, concerning those points, was made already,
what else could be said, but that it was precisely to be observed? But to have
published another doctrine, was to annihilate the Counsel, and that the
Emperors cunning was more to be suspected then ever, seeing that he made so
earnest a request, that the Council should return to Trent, and did at the
same time, take away all authority from whatsoever was constituted by it. They
condemned the whole body of that doctrine, for that it contained ambiguous
speeches, which superficially considered, did receive a good sense, but,
inwardly, were full of poison, that, in some parts, it did purposely stand
only upon the general, that the Lutherans might expound it for themselves:
but in the Article of concupiscence, it spoke just as the Lutherans did; as
also of justification, placing it in the belief of the promises, and
attributing too much, yea, all, to faith. In the Article of good works,
nothing was said of the merit of condignitie, which is the principal point in
that matter. In the Article of the Church that it has not derived unity from
the visible Head, which is essential; and, which is worse, has made a Church
invisible by charity, and then made the same visible. That it is a secret
Artifice to destroy the Hierarchy, and establish the Lutheran opinion. That to
have made notes of the Church, soundness of doctrine, and the lawful use of
the Sacraments, has given a way to all sects to hold, obstinately, themselves
to be the Church; concealing the true mark, which is the obedience to the
Pope of Rome. That the saying, that the Pope was appointed for remedy of
Schism, and Bishops by the Law of God, was not to be endured. That the
Sacrament of Penance was made most Lutheran-like, in that it was said, that
believing to receive with this Sacrament that which CHRIST has promised, it
happens to every one as he believes. That the principal point of
Sacrifice, is concealed, that it is expiatorie, and propitiatory for the living
and the dead. That having granted wives to Priests, and the Cup in the
Communion of the Laity, every one might see, that with those two abuses the
whole Catholic faith was overthrown. All the Court laid with one voice, that
the principal point was in question; that the foundations of the Church were
shaken; that it was necessary to employ all their forces, to excite all
Princes, to send to the Bishops of all nations, and; by all means, to resist
this beginning, from whence would undoubtedly follow, not the ruin of the
Church of Rome (for that was impossible) but a greater deformation, and
dishonor, then ever.

But the old Pope, being most sensible, who, with the acuteness of Where the
Pope differs in opinion from all others.
his judgment, saw more then them all, did immediately penetrate to the
bottom, and judged that the enterprise would be good for him, and pernicious
for the Emperor. He marvelled much at the wisdom and counsel of so great a
Prince; that, by one victory, he should think he was made judge of all
mankind, and presuppose he was able to contest with both parties. That a
Prince, adhering to one might oppress another, but to contend with both, was
too much boldness of vanity. He foresaw that the doctrine would generally
more displease the Catholics, then the Court and the Protestants most of all,
and that it would be impugned by all, and defended by none: wherein there was
no need of his pains, because his enemies would work for him, more then
himself could do; and that it was better to permit the publication of it,
then to hinder it; and rather being in this state in which it is, then when it
is reformed, that it may more easily fall. Only there was need of three
things. That the Emperor should not know this. That he should be put upon the
business as soon as might be. And that the first blow should be against the
Protestants. To effect the first, it was fit to make a light opposition, in
some things: for the second, to set on foot the interests of the Germane
Prelates: and for the third to make it cunningly appear, that this doctrine
was collected, not to unite both parties, but only to curb the Protestants;
by which means a great point was gained, that is, that a secular Prince did
not make Articles of faith for the faithful, but for those that erred.

Therefore he sent instructions to Cardinal Sfondrato, to make some His
instructions to his Legate in Germany.
opposition, and, when the doctrine should be published (that he might not be
present) to take leave and be gone. The Cardinal, according to his
Commission, declared, in the Popes name, that the permission to continue the
receiving of the Cup in the holy Communion, though he that receives it is not
to be reprehended, (the custom of receiving the Sacrament under both kinds
being abrogated long since) was a thing reserved to the Pope; as also the
granting of marriage to Priests: and the rather, because, it has never been
used in the Church: and the Greeks and Eastern people, who do not bind them
to a single life, do grant that married men may receive Orders, and keeping
their wives, may exercise the ministry, but do not, nor ever did, permit them
to marry, who were in Orders before. He added, that, without doubt, if his
Majesty would grant these things to be lawful, he should grievously offend
the Majesty of God: but holding them unlawful, he might permit them to the
heretics, as a lesser evil. It is tolerable, and belongs to the wisdom of
a Prince, when all evils cannot be removed, to suffer the least, that the
greater may be rooted out. That his holiness perusing the book, saw it was
only a permission to the Lutherans, that they may not without end, pass from
one error to another: and that it is not granted to the Catholics to believe
or do any thing, but according to the prescript of the holy Apostolic Sea,
which only, as Mistress of the faithful, may make Decrees in point of
Religion. And being assured that this was his Majesty's purpose, he told him it
would be necessary to make an express declaration thereof, and not to give the
raines so much to the Lutheranes, especially in the power of changing
ceremonies, considering that, in the last point, he seemed to give them too
much liberty, where he grants, that the Ceremonies, which may give cause of
Superstition; should be taken away. He added, that the Lutherans would hold it
lawful to retain the Ecclesiastical goods, and jurisdiction usurped, if they
were not commanded to make restitution: wherein a Council was not to be
expected, but execution presently made, and that, the spoils being notoriously
known, he need not observe the nice points of Law, but proceed summarily, and
with his Princely power.

This censure was imparted by Caesar to the Ecclesiastical Electors, who The
Ecclesiastical Electors approve the Popes ce^sure of the Interim, especially
concerning restitution of goods usurped by the Protestants.
did approve it; but, particularly, for the point of restitution of
Ecclesiastical goods, they affirmed it was necessary, without which the
worship of God could not be restored, nor Religion preserved, nor peace well
assured. And that because the spoil was manifest, justice did require a short
proceeding. All the Bishops were of the same opinion. The Secular Princes were
silent for fear of offending the Emperor; and, by their example, the
Ambassadors of the Cities spoke but little, and of that little, little account
Wherefore the Emperor makes a proheme to the Interim.
was made. In regard of the Legates remonstrance, the Emperor caused a Proheme
to be made to the book, to this purpose. That, aiming at the peace of
Germany, he found it was impossible to make it, until the differences of
Religion were composed, from whence all the dissentions and heartburnings have
risen; and perceiving that a general Council in Germany, was the only remedy
herein, he had caused it to begin in Trent, and persuaded all the States of
the Empire to adhere, and submit unto it: but thinking not to leave things in
suspense, and confusion, until the Council be celebrated, a form was
presented to him by some great, and zealous persons, which, some learned having
examined, by his appointment they have found it not abhorring from the
Catholic Religion, it being understood in a good sense, except two Articles,
the Communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priests. Therefore he requires the
States, who until then have observed the Laws of the universal Church, to
persevere in them, and, as they have promised, not to change any thing; and
those that have innouated, either to return to antiquity, or to conform
themselves to that confession, if, in any thing, they have exceeded it, and to
be contented with it, not teaching, writing, or printing to the contrary, but
expecting only the declaration of the Council. And because, in the last
point, leave is given to take away superstitious Ceremonies, he reserueth the
declaration thereof to himself, and of all other difficulties that should
arise. The fifteenth of With which the Protestants are distasted, though they
accept it for fear.
May the Book was read in the public assembly. The voices were not taken
according to the use; but only the Elector did rise, and thanked the Emperor
in the name of them all; who took the thanks for a general approbation and
assent. No man spoke then a word: but the Princes, who did long since follow
the confession of Ausburg, when they wereby themselves, did say they could not
accept it: and some of the Cities spoke words which signified the same, though
not openly, for fear of the Emperor. The book was printed in Latin and
Dutch, by order from Caesar, and afterward translated, and printed in Italian
and French.

Besides this, the Emperor published, the fourteenth of June, a reformation
The Emperor publishes a reformation of the Clegie containing 23 heads.
of the Clergy, which had been maturely digested and collected by learned and
religious men. It contained 23. points. Of ordination and election of
Ministers. Of the office of the Ecclesiastical Orders. Of the office of Deans
and Canons. Of canonical hours. Of Monasteries. Of Schools and Universities.
Of Hospitals. Of the office of a Preacher. Of the administration of the
Sacraments. Of the administration of Baptism. Of the administration of
Confirmation. Of Ceremonies. Of the Mass. Of the administration of Penance. Of
the administration of Extreme Unction. Of the administration of Matrimony. Of
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. Of the discipline of the Clergy and people. Of
plurality of Benefices. Of the discipline of the people. Of Visitations. Of
Councels. Of Excommunication. In these points were contained about an hundred
and thirty precepts, so just, and full of equity, that if one should say,
never any reformation before was made more exact, and less partial, without
cauils and traps to ensnare the unadvised, he could not easily be reproved,
and if it had been made by the Prelates only, it would not have displeased at
Rome, except in two points, where it gives authority to the Council of Basil,
and in some other places, where it medleth with dispensations, and exemptions,
and other things reserved to the Pope. But being made by the Emperors
authority, it seemed more unsupportable then the Interim. For it is a
fundamental Which being made by secular authority, is judged in Rome more
unsupportable then the Interim.
maxim of the Court of Rome, that the Seculars, of what degree or honesty
soever, cannot give a Law to the Clergy, though to a good end. But, because
they could not choose, they supported the tyranny (for so they said) which they
were not then able to resist.

A little after the Emperor gave order, that the Diocesan Synods should The
Emperor gives order for Diocesan Synods.
be held at Saint Martins day, and the Provincial before Lent. And because the
prelates desired that the Pope should consent, at the least to those points,
which seemed not to diminish hisauthority, the Emperor offered them, by his
handwriting, dated the eighteenth of July, to use all diligence to persuade
his Holiness not to be wanting in his duty. This reformation was printed in
many Catholic places of Germany, and also in Milan, the same year, by
Innocentius Ciconiaria. The Diet of Ausburg ended the last Concludes the Diet.
of June, and the Recesse was published; in which the Emperor promised that
the Council should be continued in Trent, and that he would take order And
promises the resumption of the Council in Trent.
that it should be reassumed quickly; in which case he commanded all the
Ecclesiastiques to be present, and those of the Augustan confession to go
thither with his safe conduct, where all should be handled according to the
word of God, and doctrine of the Fathers, and themselves should be heard.

The Cardinal of (...) and other Prelates, jealous (...) beginnings of
confessions and reformations, made and (...), the Popes authority, would be
(...) out of Germany, (...) Emp(...) (...) ^he Po(...) to (...), (...) the
Decrees; (...) it would be (...) (...) to fa^ili(...) who still (...) Pope,
will (...) willingly* when they see ^i* au(...)ti^ (...) The (...) ^eeing
(...)swaded that, when the stirs of ^eligion (...) (...)* Germany (...) (...)
^is obedience* did (...), thinking the (...) should be (...) plea^ed hi(...) He
(...) ^ee (...) to the Pope* of what is(...) was done fo(...) invited (...) ^^nd
(...) the Bishop The Pope sends the Bishop of Fan^ for his Nuncio into
Germany.
of ^ to (...) will (...); (...) propose the restitution of Pia(...), and to
(...) Spaniards froth^ Trent. But having received the first answer from (...),
and cons (...) (...) (...) Cardinals, he soon resolved that it was not (...)
for him to send a Minister, to execute the Emperors (...)* Yet, for the
reason, which moved the Cardinal of Ausburg, he took a middle way, to send
Nuncij, nor for that and, which the Emperor deseigned; but to grant
absolutions and graces, thinking it would, do miracles, for maintenance of his
authority, without prejudice of consenting that another should assume the
power, which he pretends to belong only to himself.

Therefore after (...)* he sent the Bishops of Verona; and Ferentino, for his
And afterward two Bishops more to whom he gives ample Faculties by his Bull.
Nuncij into Germany* to whom, by advise of the Cardinals, he directed a Bull,
dated the last of August, giving them commission, to declare to all that will
return to the Catholic truth, that he is ready to embrace them, and will not
be hard in pardoning them, so that they will not give, but receive laws
referring to the conscience of his Nuncij, to remit something of the old
discipline, if they think it may be done without public scandal, giving
them Faculty to absolve fully in both (...) persons, though Kings and Princes,
Ecclesiastical, and Regular, Colleges, and Communities, from all
excommunications (...), and even from temporal punishments incurred for (...),
though they be relapsed it and to dispense (...), for (...), and (...),
absoluing the^ (...), and homag^^ made* (...), (...) (...) for(...) s(...)* and
to absol^^ (...) the Re(...) from* (...) giving (...) ^ to (...) by(...), (...)
fasting days; by the counsel (...) the corporal Physician; or spiritual
only, or without any, if it (...) and to moderate the number of feasts, and
for those (...) the communion of the Chalica, if they will humbly de(...) is,
(...) that the Church does not err in denying it to the Laity, to grant it
unto them for life, or for so long as they shall think fit, so that it be done
neither in the same time nor place with that which is done by decree of the
Church. He granted them power also, to unite Ecclesiastical Benefices to
Studies, Schools, or Hospitals; and to absolve the usurpers of Ecclesiastical
mooueable goods, after the restitution of the immooueables, compounding also
for the fruits usurped and mooueables consumed, with authority to communicate
these Faculties, to other persons of note.

This Bull passed in all places, being printed upon the occasion which Which
is censured in Germany.
shall be related, and affoorded matter of discourse. First for the proheme;
where the Pope said, that, in the troubles of the Church, he was comforted by
the remedy left by CHRIST, that the Corn of the Church winnowed by Satan,
should be preserved by the faith of Peter, especially after he had applied
the remedy of the general Council, as if the Church had no foundation but
upon him, and sixty persons of Trent. Then they thought it a great presumption
to restore Kings and Princes to honors, fame, and dignity. There was also
observed a contradiction, to absolve from unlawful oaths, which need no
absolution, and from true oaths no man can absolve. And it was thought another
contradiction, to grant the Chalice only to him, who believes the Church does
not err, in forbidding it to the La^tie. For how is it possible to believe so,
and to desire not to be comprehended in the prohibition? But they could not
forbear laughing, when they read the condition, to absolve the Friars who
forsook their cloisters, to wear the habit covered, as if the kingdom of
GOD did consist in a color, or vestment, which being not worn in show, yet it
was necessary to have it in secret. But though the Nuncij were soon deputed,
yet their dispatch was deferred until the next year, because the Emperor was
not pleased with the manner of it, in which no mention was made to assist, or
authorize the provisions Why the dispatch of the two Nuncij was deferred.
made by him; neither would the Pope ever be persuaded that any minister of
his should be present.

The Emperor being parted from Ausburg, used all diligence, that the The
Emperors Interim does please neither the Protestants nor the Catholics.
Interim might be received, by the Protestant Cities; but found resistance and
difficulty every where, because they did detest it more then the Catholics.
They said it was a total establishment of the Papacy. Above all, they found
fault with the doctrine of Justification, and that the communion of the Cup,
and marriage of Priests was questioned. John Frederick Duke of Saxony, though
prisoner, said freely, that GOD and his conscience, unto which he was bound
above all, did not permit him to receive it. Where it was admitted, diverse
accidents, varieties, and confusions did succeed, so that it was brought into
some places diversely, with so many limitations, and conditions, that one may
say, it was rather rejected by all, then accepted by any. Neither did the
Catholics care to help forward the business, because they did not approve
it themselves. That which did hinder the emperor most, was the modest liberty
of a little weak City, which desired him, that, being Lord of their goods and
life, he would suffer that their conscience might belong to GOD: that if the
doctrine proposed to them, were received by himself, they should have a great
example to follow. But if his Majesty would compel them to accept of, and
believe that which himself thought not true, they knew not how it could be
done. In September the Emperor went into low Germany, where he found greater
difficulties. For the Cities of Saxony used many excuses, and (...) did oppose
with a kind of scorn. Wherefore it was (...) by the Emperor, and sustained a
long war, that maintained the fire alive in Germani^, which burned his
Trophies; as in its place shall be said. By reason of this confusion, and to
give order that the flemings should swear (...) to his son, the Emperor,
quitting Germany, went into Flanders; and though he severely forbad, that the
doctrine And (...) (...) against by both.
of the Interim should be impugned by any, or written, taught, or preached
against, yet many Protestants did write against it. And the Pope, thinking it
fit for his affairs to do it, gave order to (...), General of the
Dominicans, that assembling the most learned men of his order, by their opinion
and paints, he should make a strong, and sound confutation. Many in France
wrote against it also: and in a short time there was, as it were a whole
quodron of Writers against it, Catholics, and Protestants, especially of the
Hanse-townes. And that did follow which does ordinarily happen to him that will
reconcile contrary opinions, that he makes them both agree to impugn his, and
every one more obstinate in defending his own. There was also some cause of
division among the Protestants. For those A division among the Protestants.
who had in part yielded to Caesar against their wills, and restored the old
ceremonies, excused themselves, and said, that the things done by them were
indifferent, and by consequence, that did not concern their salvation to
reprove or receive them, and that it was lawful, yea, necessary, to tolerate
some servitude, when no impiety was joined with it; and therefore that, in
these, the Emperor was to be obeyed. Others, whom necessity had not
compelled, said it was true that indifferent things concern not salvation yet,
by means of them, pernicious things are brought in; and, going on, they framed
a general conclusion, that Ceremonies and Rites, though by nature indifferent;
do become then bad, when he that uses them has an opinion Which was never
well reconciled.
that they are good, (...) And hence arose two Sects, and afterward more
differences amongst them which were (...) well reconciled.

And in England there were no less (...) for Religion. For Edward Earl of
Harford, (...), by the (...)* of (...) (...) King, having Troubles in England
about religion.
gained authority (...) gether with Thomas (...), Archbishop of Canterbury, did
(...) the Protestants, and brought in some of their own Doctors* and having
laid some foundation of doctrine, especially amongst the Nobility, they
assembled the States of the Kingdom, which they call a Parliament, and by
public decree of the King, and of that, banished the Mass: For which a (...)
popular sedition being made by those who required the restitution of the
Edicts of Henrys (...) of the old Religion (...) and (...) arise in the
Kingdom.

Saint Martins day being come, (...) were great, the (...) Council were held
in many Cities* and the (...) reformation of the Emperor was received,
changing th(...) only, as it (...) med to agree best to the manner of
decreeing in every (...), yet without provision made for the execution; and all
(...) for 1549 ^ 1549 The Diocesan Councels are held, and the Emperors
reformation is received. The (...) (...) Council of Collen.
^ only the (...) (...) of (...) The ^ The Decrees where of the ^ the Low
Coutreys, as being subject to that Sea.
(...) of ^ should (...) charging the Magi(...) to (...).

(...) same style, who, the third The Provincial Council of Mentz.
w^^ke (...) of* his Pr(...), made 48. Decrees in doctrine of (...) In the
points decided by (...) doctrine; in others, the more (...) points are
remarkable, where In (...) point^ (...)
(...) to be (...), or have D(...) me(...) (...) be ^ do show how much the
opinions of (...) (...) the (...) after ^ which (...) may (...) that Religion
cannot be handled in a National Council. And though one may ground himself
more upon diverse Provincial Councels of Africa, Egypt, of Syria, and other
parts of the East, yet this, being modern, though not of such consequence,
will perhaps more provoke the Reader to mark it. The Elector of Triers did
celebrate also his Synod: and other Metropolitanes, not departing from the
Communion of the Pope, did all publish the Imperial Edicts of Ausburg, as well
for the Interim of Religion, as for the Other prouincial Council are held.
Ecclesiastical reformation.

The Nuncij, destinated by the Pope the year before, and deferred, for the The
Nuncij go into Germany, and are despised in all places.
causes aforesaid, began their journey for Germany; who, in every place where
they passed, were despised, even by the Catholics themselves: so odious was
the Popes name, and the very habit of his Ministers, in regard of his
differences with the Emperor, and of the courses he took. And finally, in
the end of May, they went to Caesar into the Low Countries, where, after long
discussion how to execute the Popes commandments, there being difficulty in
every proposition for one part or other, in fine the Emperor resolved, that,
having faculty from the Pope to substitute, they should substitute the Bishops,
every one in his own Diocese, referring all to their consciences. This match
was not readily made by the Nuncij; yet condescending at the last, a
substitution was printed, in the name of the three Nuncij, leaving a place for
the name of the Prelate, unto whom it was to be directed; and inserting first
the tenor of the Popes Bull, and, alleging for cause of the substitution,
their not being able to be in every place, they did communicate their
authority, with advice not to grant the Communion of the Cup, and use of eating
flesh, but with great maturitie and evident profit, prohibiting that ought
should be paid for those Graces. Caesar undertook to send them to whom, and
where it was fit, and to what place soever he addressed them, he gave them to
understand, that the proceeding should be with gentleness, and dexterity.
There was very little use of these faculties; for those Their Faculties did but
little good.
that continued in the Popes obedience, had no need of them, and those who were
aliened, did not only not care for them, but refused them also. A few days
after, Ferentino departed, Fano, and Verona remained with Caesar, until the
Archbishop of Siponto was sent by Julius the third, as shall be said in its
place.

At the same time the French King, making his first entry into Paris, the The
French King makes his first entry into Paris, and publishes an Edict in
favor of the Roman religion.
fourth of July, caused a solemn procession to be made, and published an
Edict, rendering a reason thereof, that he did it to signify unto all, that
he received the protection of the Catholic religion, and of the Apostolic
Sea, and the care of the Ecclesiastical order: and that he abhorred the
nouitie of religion, and testified to all his will to persevere in the doctrine
of the Church of Rome, and to banish the new heretics out of all his
dominions; and he caused this Edict to be printed in French, and sent it into
all parts of his kingdom. He gave leave also to his Prelates to make a
provincial assembly to reform the Churches; which being known at Rome was
thought to be a bad example, and might be a beginning to make the French
Church independent And uses much severity against the Lutherans.
of the Church of Rome. He caused also many Lutherans to be put to death in
Paris, himself being present at the spectacle: and in the beginning of the
next year he renewed the Edict against them, laying grievous punishments upon
the Judges, who were not diligent in detecting and punishing them.

But the Council in Bolonia having slept two years, the seventh of November,
the Pope, seeing a letter of Duke Octauius, his nephew, that he would make an
agreement with Ferrandus Gonzaga, to enter into Parma, which City the Pope
caused to be held in the name of the Apostolic Sea, he was so assaulted with
perturbation of mind and anger, that he swooned, The Pope dies with passion.
and, after some few hours, coming to himself, he fell into a Fever,
whereof he dyed within three days. This made Monte part from Bolonia, The
election of the new Pope.
to be at the Election of the new Pope, and all the other Prelates to retire to
their houses. The custom is, that the Cardinals do solemnize the Obsequies of
the defunct Pope nine days, and enter into the Conclaue the tenth. Then, by
reason of the absence of many, they entered not until the 28. of the month.
The Cardinal Pacceco left not Trent until the Emperor, understanding of the
Popes death, gave him order to go to Rome, where he arrived many days after
the Conclaue was shut up. The Cardinals being assembled to create the Pope, and
making capitulations, according to the custom, which every one swears to
observe, in case he shall be elected, the first was to prosecute the Council,
Every one thought the new Pope would have been elected before Christmas. For
the holy gate, for the Iubile of the next year 1550. being to be opened on
the Eve of the Feast, at which the Popes presence was necessary, and there
being that year a great concourse of people to that devotion, every one
believed that this would move the Cardinals to proceed quickly to the
election. These were divided into three factions; Imperialists, French, and
dependants on the dead Pope, and by consequence, on his nephews. The
Imperialists would have created Cardinal Card Poole was named to be Pope.
Poole; and the French, Saluiati: But neither of these parties was able to make
the election of it self, nor to agree, in regard of the contrary ends of their
Princes. The Dependants of the Farnesi were able to conclude the election, to
which part soever they adhered: and they were contented to choose Cardinal
Poole, for the goodness of his disposition, and his continual observance of
the Pope and the Cardinal Farnese. But Cardinal Theatino opposing him, and
saying he was blemished with Lutheranisme, made But not elected for suspicion
of Lutheranisme.
many retire. Farnese did not adhere to Saluiati, and was resolved not to
consent, but upon some creature of his uncle. The interests of the factious
were so great, that the respect of the holy year, and the expectation of so
much people, who were assembled all that day until night, could not preualle.

At the last, the party of Farnese, assisted by the Frenchmen, did overcome
Card Monte is created Pope.
and John Maria di Monte, Legate of the Council in Trent and Bolonia, was
created, upon whom Farnese did concur, thinking him a faithful servant to
him; and his grandfather, and the Frenchmen thinking he would favor their
King, and cross the Emperor, in regard of the Translation of the Council to
Bolonia. Neither were the Imperialists against him, because Cosmo, Duke of
Florence, made them believe that he favored the French no more then his
thankfulness to the Pope had constrained him, whose interests he thought he
was bound to maintain; so that this cause being removed, he would carry
himself uprightly. Many did love in him his 1550 IVLIV^ 3. CHARLES 5. --
EDWARD 6. HENRY 2.
natural liberty, free from hypoerisie and dissimulation, and open to all.
Immediately after the election, in conformity to that which was capitulated,
he did swear to prosecute the Council. He was elected the eight of February,
and crowned the 23. and the 25. he opened the holy gate.

The Emperor, perceiving that the affairs of religion in Germany, did not
go as he would have them, hoping to remove the difficulty by his presence,
1550
did intimate a Diet for that year in Ausburg, and sent Lewis d Aulla The
Emperor sends an Ambassador to the Pope to congratulate, and to desire a
restitution of the Council.
to congratulate with the Pope for his assumption, and to desire him to set the
Council on foot again. The Pope answering with as much courtesy, made great
offers of his good will. For the Council, his answer was in general terms
only, being not as yet resolved in himself: and spoke hereof with the same
irresolution to the Cardinal of Guise, who was to return into France, but
affirmed that he would not do it, before he had communicated every thing to
the French King. And to Cardinal Pacceco, and other Imperialists, who often
spoke thereof with him, he said, he would easily accord with the Emperor in
this particular, so that the proceeding were sincere, to confound heretics,
to favor the Emperors desseignes, and not to disfavor the Apostolic Sea:
whereof he had many considerations, which, in fit time, he would make known
to his Majesty. He presently gave a taste what his government would be,
spending whole days in gardens, plotting out delicious buildings, and showing
himself more inclined to pleasure then business; especially when any
difficulty was annexed. The Emperors Ambassador, Don Diego, having curiously
observed these things, The new Pope is more Inclined to pleasure then business.
wrote to the Emperor, that all the negotiations of his Majesty with the
Pope, would easily succeed; for that, being carried away with delights, one
might make him do what he would, by making him afraid. And the opinion was
more confirmed, that he would be more addicted to his private affection, then
to the public good, by the promotion of a Cardinal, which he made the last
of May, to whom he gave the Cap, according to the custom.

John Maria di Monte, when he was Bishop of Siponto, being governor of He
creates a strange Cardinal.
Bolonia, received into his house a boy of Piacenza, of unknown parents, and
loved him as if he had been his own son. It is recorded, that, being sick
in Trent, of a great and long sickness, whereof the Physicians thought he
would die, he sent him, by their counsel, to Verona, to change the Air;
where having recovered his health, and returning to Trent, the day of his
arrival, the Legate went out of the City for recreation, accompanied with
many Prelates, and met him near the gate, showing many signs of joy. This
gave matter of discourse, whether it were by chance, or whether the Cardinal,
going forth under another color, had a secret purpose to mere him. He was
wont to say, that he loved and favored him, as author of his own fortune,
because the Astrologers had foretold, he should have great dignity and riches,
which he could not have, if he did not ascend* to the Papacy. So soon as he
was created Pope, his will was, that Innocen(...)s (for so the young man was
called) should be adopted the son of Bold win di Monte, his brother, by which
adoption, he was called Innocenti(...) di Monte. Having given him many
benefices, on the day aforesaid, he created him Cardinal, giving subject of
discourse, and Pasquins, to the Courtiers, who did strive to show the true
cause of such an unusual action, by conjectures of diverse accidents past.

Charles, before he parted out of the Low Countries, established the
Inquisition there: whereat the Dutch and English Merchants, of whom there were
many in those parts, being much moved, had recourse to Queen The Emperor
establishes the Inquisition in the low Countries.
Mary, and the Magistrates, desiring a mitigation of the Edict, or, otherwise,
protesting they would depart. Those who were to execute the Edict, and
institute the Inquisition, found difficulty every where; so that the Queen was
enforced to go to Caesar, who was in Ausburg, to celebrate the Diet, to
persuade him that the populous Country might not be made desolate, and some
notable sedition arise. Caesar yielded very hardly; yet, in the end, he was
content to take away the name of Inquisition, and to revoke whatsoever And
reuoketh it as faare as concerns strangers.
in the Edict did concern strangers, all standing firm which belonged to the
Naturals of the place. The Emperor dealt with the Pope by his letters and
Ambassador, to reassume the Council of Trent, desiring a precise answer, The
Emperor requires from the Pope a precise answer concerning the Council.
not such as he gave to D' Auila, nor with such ambiguity as he used to treat
with Cardinal Pacceco, but that he would let him know the Capitulations which
he required, that he might resolve whether that medicine would cure the
maladies of Germany, or should think of other remedies, it being impossible
to continue longer in that State.

The Pope, considering with his inward friends, that this was the most
important deliberation which could happen in all his Papacy, did balance And
the Pope does seriously deliberate what answer to make.
the reasons which might persuade or dissuade it. First he considered, that,
remitting the Council to Trent, he condemned the Translation to Bolonia,
which was principally his deed, and so should plainly confess he had done
amiss, either willingly, or at the instance of another. And if there had been
nothing but the Translation, it had not been a matter of so great weight. But
having made himself a party to defend it, and so earnestly, he could not
excuse himself of malice, if he did so easily retract it. And, which imported
most, he should put himself into all those dangers, from which Paul, a most
wise Prince, thought fit to secure himself, and perseuered in that opinion
until his death: and that it was a manifest error to reenter into them. And
though many were not ill affected to him, being a new Pope, yet it is certain
that the mayor part do not pretend to be grieved at the Pope, but at the
Popedom: and, for this particular, no man can be sure, that something may not
happen in the progress, which may raise him greater hatred, though without his
fault. Besides, all men are not moved with hatred, but those that hurt most,
desire to advantage themselves by depressing others, Therefore it may be
concluded that the same reasons, which moved Paul, would constrain Julius
also to the same resolution. He considered the great troubles that Paul
sustained 26. months, for this cause, and the indignities which he did
necessarily suffer, and the diminution of the Papal authority, not only in
Germany, but in Italy also. And if this did derogate from Paul, confirmed so
many years in the Papacy, and esteemed by all, it would do it from him much
more, being a new Pope, not having as yet made intelligences, and adherences,
necessary for the enterprise of contesting, and if a protestation should he
laid on his back, or a Decree, as the Interim, his authority would be
scorned by all. He was not to reckon of the pains in translating the
Council, and his constancy in defending it, because with the change of
fortune, whatsoever depends on it is changed, and the actions of John Maria
di Monte, do not appertain to Pope Julius, and those things which gave
reputation unto that man, do not give it unto this. Then it was fit to do as
he did, to show himself a faithful servant of his Lord; but now, being Lord
himself, the respect of constancy in serving well does quite cease, and
another does succeed, which requires wisdom, in applying himself to the
times. He considered how popular the Emperors request was, in regard the
reducing of Germany was in question, and how scandalous it would be not to
hearken unto it. The causes which moved to make the Council were plain and
manifest to all; those which dissuaded were secret, and known to few. Finally
the Oath made, and iterated, ought to be regarded, which though it did bind to
prosecute the Council, without prescribing the place, yet it was certain,
that, without the Emperors consent, being king of Spain, and Naples, Prince
of the low Countries, and having other adherences in Italy, it was impossible
to make a general Council; so that, to refuse to bring it back to Trent, and
not to prosecute it, was all one. He inclined to this part most, as most
agreeable to his disposition, desirous rather to fly present incommodities,
then avoid future dangers. For choosing to celebrate the Council, he was
delivered from the trouble which the Emperor would give him; and for the
dangers which it brought, he began to esteem them less. He thought the
Emperors fortune was not then the same as it was two years before. For at
that time the expectation of the victory, which he after obtained, gave him
reputation; which now seems rather to be burdensome to him, then any ease.
He holds two Princes prisoners, as wolves by the ears. The Cities of
Germany do openly inchne to rebellion. The Ecclesiastikes have a satietie of
that domination. There are also domestical crosses, in regard of his son,
brother, and nephew, who aspire to the Empire; a business, which perhaps may
give him trouble, beyond his forces. In fine, he concluded, according to his
disposition, Let us get out of the present difficulty, with hope that our good
fortune will not abandon us.

And concealing his resolution, he deputed a Congregation of Cardinals, He
co^cealeth his resolution until it be confirmed by a congregation of
Cardinals and Prelates.
and other Prelates, for the most part Imperialists, that they might fall upon
the resolution which he had taken, mingling some few of his trusty friends
amongst them, to govern the business according to his purpose. To these he
proposed the Emperors request; giving order that without all respect, every
one should speak what he thought convenient for the service of GOD, and the
Apostolic Sea. And in case they thought fit to condescend, they should think
how to do it with honor, security, and fruit. The Congregation, having often
consulted, related to the Pope, that they were of opinion the Council should
be prosecuted, because such an Oath was taken in the Conclaue, and by his
Holiness, after his assumption, and to take away scandal from the world,
which without doubt would be very great, incase i^ were not done. And it might
be prosecuted two ways; one by continuing it in Bolonid, another by remitting
it to Trent. It could not be continued in Bolonia, because Paul had called to
him the cause of the Translation, and inhibited to proceed any further. If his
Holiness did not first give sentence that the Translation was good, it was not
lawful to go on in that City: and if he did, he would give a lawful
pretense to be suspected, it being known that the Translation was made by
him, as being the prime Legate, and President. Therefore only the other way
remained, to remit it to Trent, and all occasion was so taken away from
Germany to spurn against it, and the Emperor was satisfied, which was a very
essential point. This advice, being brought to the Pope, was approved by him:
and so they passed to that which remained.

And first it was concluded, that the consent and assistance of the French The
difficulties (...)ting ye council to Trent are debated.
King was necessary, and the presence of the Prelates of his Kingdom,
otherwise the reputation of the Council would be very weak, and they should
be in danger to loose France, only to endeavor to regaine Germany, which is
lost: which were, according to the fable, to let the body fall, to get the
shadow. It seemed hard to persuade that King, and to take from him all
suspicion, if the Council were celebrated in a place subject unto the Emperor,
and near unto his army. But examining what those suspicions might be, they
could find none, but that the Council might determine something, in prejudice
of the government of that Kingdom, or against the privileges of that Crown,
or against the liberty of the French Church: in which, if he were secure, it
could not be doubted but that, for the hereditarie obligation to protect and
favor the Apostolic Sea, he would assist, and send his Prelates. The second
difficulty was, that the Italian Prelates, being poor, could not bear the
charge of that place, and the Apostolic Chamber, being exhausted, could ill
supply as much as was needful, besides the charge of maintaining the Legates,
and Officers of the Council, and other extraordinaries. Whereof thinking often,
they could find no way to hold the Council without expense, and that it was
necessary to drink of this Cup: but superfluities might well be cut off, by
dispatching the Council quickly, and not tarying there longer then was
necessary. The third difficulty was, that the Protestants would call into
question the things determined; wherein all the Congregation resolved readily,
that they should make their meaning plain, that they ought to be esteemed as
infallible, and not suffer them to be disputed on: and to declare this before
the Council, not deferring to make them selves understood until then.

The fourth and most important difficulty of all, was the authority of the Of
which the greatest is the danger of the Popes authority.
Apostolic Sea, as well in the Council, as out of it, and over it; which not
the Protestants only do impugn, but many Princes also would restrain, and
many Bishops did think to moderate. This was the chief cause why the former
Popes would not be persuaded to call a Council; and Paul who was brought to
it, did perceive it in the end, and provided against it, by the Translation.
This danger was seen by all; but none could set down a way to escape it, but
by saying, that God who had founded the Roman Church, and placed it above
others, would dissipate all counsel taken against it. This, some believing for
simplicity, some for their interest, some because they knew not what else to
say, seemed not sufficient.

But Cardinal Crescentius, grounding himself much upon this confidence, said,
that there was no humane action in which there was not some danger; that the
war did show as much, which is the chiefest, which is never enterprised,
though with never so much assurance of victory, but there is danger of loss
and total destruction; neither is there any business The fear whereof
Cardinal Crescentius remoueth
undertaken, with so much certainety of a good issue, which may not suddenly
fall into great inconveniences, for unknown, or lightly esteemed, causes. But
he that is forced, for avoiding other evils, to yield to some resolution,
must not care for it. Things are in such a state, that, if the Council be not
held, there is more danger that the world, and the Princes, being scandalized,
will aliene themselves from the Pope, and do more de facto, then, in the
Council, by disputations and Decrees. Danger is to be incurred either way,
and it is best to take the most honorable, and least dangerous part. But many
provisions may be made to divert it; as to keep the Fathers of the Council
busied, as much as may be, in other matters, and so to hold them in exercise,
that they may not have time to think of this; to keep many in amity,
especially the Italians, with persuasions and hopes, and by other means used
heretofore, to hold the Princes counterpoysed, nourishing some differences of
interests between them, that they may not jointly undertake such an
enterprise; and, if one do it alone, the others will oppose it: and a wise man
will find other remedies in the very fact, by which he will be able to
carry matters along, and make them vanish. This opinion was approved, and a
resolution taken, that no demonstration of fear should be made, but only
that it should be intimated to the Emperor, that this is foreseen, but that
no man cares for it, because there is a remedy prepared.

This consultation being maturely made, and a resolution taken to restore The
Pope sends Nuncij to the Emperor, and French King, to give an account of his
resolution.
the Council in Trent, the Pope gave an account thereof to the Cardinal of
Ferrara, and the French Ambassador, and dispatched an express currier to the
French King, to signify his purpose unto him, saying he would send a Nuncio
unto him, to relate more particularly the reasons which moved him. And, in the
end of June, he dispatched two Nuncij at once, Sebastianus Pighinus,
Archbishop of Siponto, to the Emperor, and Triulcius, Bishop of Tolone, to the
French King. To the first he gave instructions, to speak in conformity of
the resolutions taken in the Congregation. He gave order to Triulcius to go
by post, that he might The instructions of the French Nuncio.
advise what the Kings mind was, which he desired to know before he
proceeded any further. He gave him instruction to give a particular account of
the causes why he resolved to bring back the Council to Trent, because
Germany did submit to it; because the Emperor did desire it; because it could
not continue in Bolonia, for the cause before related; and that the Protestant
affairs might not be accommodated in some prejudicial manner, laying the
blame on the Pope, But that his first and principal ground was the assistance
of his most Christian Majesty, and the presence of the Prelates of his
Kingdom: which he hoped to obtain, because his Majesty was protector of the
faith, and an imitator of his ancestors, who never departed from the opinion
and counsels of Popes. That in the Council they would apply themselves to the
declaration and purifying of the points of doctrine, and reformation of
manners: neither should any thing concerning the States, Dominions, and
particular privileges of the Crown of France be handled. That to the
Emperors request, to understand, whether the Pope would prosecute the Council
in Trent, or not, the Pope had answered he would, with the conditions discussed
in the Congregation, all which he gave order to his Nuncio to communicate to
the King; whose mind he desired to know, as soon as might be, hoping to
find it conformable to the piety of his Majesty, to the love which he
bears to him the Pope, and to the confidence which he has in him. He also
charged the Nuncio to communicate all his instructions to the Cardinal of
Guise, and, with him, or otherwise, as he thought best, to declare it to the
King, and to whom else he thought fit.

He gave the like instruction to the other Nuncio, in particular, to tell ^he
instru(...)ns of the (...) who was sent to the Emperor.
the Emperor, that the Pope did really show the observation of whatsoever he
had promised to Don Pedro di Toledo; that is, to proceed with his Majesty
simply, plainly, and without artifice, and to represent unto him his willing
mind to prosecute the Council, for the glory of God, discharge of his own
conscience, and for the good which thereby might redound to his Majesty and
the Empire. And, to answer the Emperors motion, to make known the
capitulations which he required, he should tell him, that he never dreamed
to make any bargains or capitulations, for prosecuting the Council, but only
some necessary considerations, which he charged his Nuncio to expound to his
Majesty. And they were four. The first, that the assistance of the most
Christian King, and the interuention of the Prelates of his Kingdom, was
necessary, without which the Council would have but small reputation, and it
might be feared that a National Council would arise, or France be lost. That
they ought ^oure considerations proposed by the Pope to the Emperor.
not to deceive themselves. For as Trent was a secure place for his Imperial
Majesty, so it was too vnsecure for the most Christian King: and therefore
that it was fit to find a way to secure him. That he should communicate to
the Emperor the way which he had found out, which if it were not sufficient, it
would be necessary that his Majesty should add some thing else. The second
consideration was, the expenses which the Apostolic Chamber, exhausted, and
charged with debts, was to make, for the Legates, and other extraordinaries,
which the Council brings with it, and like wise for the expenses which the
poor Italian Prelates cannot bear in that place. Therefore that it will be
fit to calculate the time well, as well for the proceeding, as the beginning,
that an hour may not be spent in vain, otherwise the Apostolic Sea will not
be able to bear the charge, nor to keep the Italian Prelates from being
impatient, as former experience has taught. Besides, it is not honorable for
the Apostolic Sea to keep the Legates idle, and at anchor, without doing any
good. That it was necessary, that, before they come to the act, his Majesty
should be secure of the intention and obedience, as well of the Catholics in
Germany, as of the Protestants, establishing things again in the Diet, causing
authentical mandates of the Countries and Princes to be dispatched, his
Majesty and the whole Diet together, binding themselves to execute the Decrees
of the Council, that the pains and cost prove not vain and ridiculous, and
hereby to take all hope from whomsoever did think to disturb the Synod.
That, in the third place, his Majesty should consider, that it was necessary
to declare, that the Decrees already made in Trent, in matter of faith, and
those of other former Councels, may not, by any means, be questioned, nor
that the Protestants may demand to be heard concerning them. Lastly, that he
should tell the Emperor, that the Pope did believe, that his Majesty's good
will toward him, was reciprocal, and that, as he did readily condescend to
favor the affairs of his Majesty, and of the Empire, by holding the Council
in a place so fit for his purpose, so he desires that his sincerity and
realitie, may not bring a burden upon him. That he hops, if any one shall
attempt ought against it, by cauillations or calumnies, that his Majesty will
not marvel, if he use the remedies which shall occur, for defense of the
authority given immediately by God to him, and the Apostolic Sea, as well in
Council as out.

The Pope thought it profitable for his affairs, that his resolution should
be fully known in Italy and Germany; and bade Julius Cananus his Secretary,
making show to favor some Courtiers, his friends, to communicate the foresaid
instructions unto them, with obligation of secrecy: by which means they were
spread every where. The Pope had a speedy answer from his new Nuncio in
France. For that King, understanding the causes, why the The French King makes
large offers to the Pope.
Pope could have but little confidence in the Emperor, in regard of some
things past, thinking he was much inclined to France, made great demonstration
to be well pleased with the Nuncio, and his message, offered to the Pope
whatsoever he was able to do for him, promised to assist the Council, and to
send the Prelates of his Kingdom, and all favor and protection, for
maintenance of the Papal authority.

The Emperor, hearing the proposition of the Archbishop of Siponto, The
Emperors answer^ to the Pope.
and consulting maturely of it, did commend the ingenuity and wisdom of the
Pope, that, knowing the publiquenecessity, of holding the Council in Trent,
had found a convenient way to remit it, without further proceeding in the cause
of the Translation; a thing distasteful, of much difficulty, and of no profit.
He added, that the four considerations were all important, and reasonably
proposed by his Holiness. That, for France, he did not only commend what he
had consulted, but offered to join with him, to give all possible security to
that King. That it was reasonable to cut off superfluous charges, and not to
suffer the Council to be open, and idle. That a Decree was made in Ausburg, a
year since, that all Germany, even the Protestants also, should submit
themselves, a copy whereof he would give to the Nuncio, and cause it to be
confirmed in the present Diet. That he thought it not a fit time now to treat,
that the things already decided in Trent, should not be questioned, because it
would be done more opportunely in that City, when the Council was assembled.
And for the authority of his Holiness and the Apostolic Sea, as he has
formerly been a protector of it, so he will be hereafter, defending it with
all his forces, and even with his own life, if there were occasion. That he
could not promise his Holiness that no unquiet spirit should speak or treat
in the Council, but he gave his word, that, in case it did happen, he would so
oppose, that he should commend him for his pains.

The Emperor, as has been said, was in Ausburg, to hold the Diet; He
proposes the prosecution of the Council in the Diet of Ausburg, and other
things.
which, though it was not so compassed with arms as the former, yet it was
always armed. He proposed the prosecution of the Council of Trent, the
observation of the Interim, made in the last Diet, and the finding a way for
restoring of Ecclesiastical goods, and the renewing of jurisdiction. It
pleased the Catholic Princes, that the Council should be prosecuted; but the
Conditions required by the Protestants, concerning the Council.
Ambassadors of some Protestant Princes did not consent, but with these
conditions. That the things already determined in Trent should be reexamined;
that the Divines of the Augustane confession, should not only be heard, but
have a deciding voice; that the Pope should not preside, but should submit
himself also to the Council, and release the Bishops of their oath, that they
may speak freely. The Emperor complained of the Protestants, that his Decree
of the Interim, was not obeyed by them; and of the Catholics, that the
reformation of the Clergy was not executed. These excused themselves, some by
saying, that they were to proceed slowly avoiding dissensions; others, that
the exempt, pretending privileges, would not obey. The Protestants laid the
cause upon the people, who, in regard the matter concerned their conscience,
did mutin, and could not be forced. The Emperor, gave an account to the
Nuncio of all these particulars, showing not only the consent of the
Catholics, and of the greater number of the Protestants, but the limitation
also proposed by the others, lest, if he had heard of it by some other means,
it might have produced some bad effect. But he added, that he would not have
this limitation put into the acts, because those Princes had given him their
word, that they would do nothing against his will; and therefore he might
affirm to the Pope, that all Germany was contented with the Council.
Afterward, he treated more strictly with the principal Ecclesiastiques,
proposing that the beginning should be before Easter, and that they would go
thither in person. Which being promised by the Electors, he solicited the Pope
to make the convocation for Easter, or immediately after, because he was
assured of the consent of all The Emperor hastneth the convocation of the
Council, and desires to see the Bull before it be published.
Germany. Which the better to confirm, he prayed his Holiness, that when the
Bull was made, he would send him the draught, before it was published, that
(showing it to all in the Diet) he might, by that occasion, make a Decree, and
cause it to be received by all.

The Pope thought that nothing was concluded of what was proposed by him, so
long as it was not decided, that the Decrees already made should be received.
He would not, that, in the very beginning of the Council, this should be
disputed of; because the issue was plain, that is, that much time would be
spent, and nothing done, and in fine, all would be dissolved without
conclusion. It was plain to be seen, that the general dispute, whether they
ought to be received, did draw after it a particular of every one, and that
himself should not be able to interpose, because it would be alleged that he
was to be suspected, as having been president, and the principal author. To
insist more with the Emperor that this point might be decided would give him
more distaste, and cast all into insuperable difficulties. He was counseled,
that, without saying any more, he should take the point for decided, The Popes
resolution concerning the Decrees already made,
and presuppose in his Bull, that the Decrees already made should be accepted by
all. For the Bull going to the Diet with this tenor, either the Dutchmen will
be contented with it, and so he shall obtain his purpose, or will not accept
it, and so the dispute will begin in the Diet, and himself will be free from
care of it. The Council seemed unto him good, in conformity whereof he made
the Bull. And to satisfy the Emperor in part, he sent it to him, not in a
draught, because he thought it was against his honor, but framed, dated, and
sealed, yet not published. The date was the fifteenth of The Bull of the
Conocation was dated the 15. 8 November.
November.

In that Bull he said. That for the taking away of all differences of Religion
in Germany, it being expedient and fit (which the Emperor had also signified
unto him) to reduce the general Council into Trent, called by Paul the third,
begun, ordered, and prosecuted by himself, then Cardinal, and President and
many decrees of faith, and discipline, being constituted and published
therein, he unto whom it belongs to call and direct general Councels, for
the increase of the orthodoxe religion; and to restore peace to Germany, which
formerly has not yielded to any Province in obedience and reverence of the
Popes, the Vicars of CHRIST, hoping also that the Kings and Princes will favor
and assist it, exhorts and admonishes the Patriarques, Arch bishops,
Bishops, Abbats and others, who, by Law, The Council is to beg^^ne the first of
Ma(...)
custom, or privilege, ought to assist in Councels, to be in Trent, the
first of May^ in which day he has ordained, by his Apostolic authority, and
consent of the Cardinals, that the Council shall be reassumed in the state in
which it was, and prosecuted; whether he will send his Legates; by whom he will
preside in the Synod, in case he cannot be personally present, notwithstanding
any translation, suspension, or any thing else, especially those things which
Paul the third in his Bull of the Convocation, and others, belonging to the
Council, did ordain that they should not hinder; which Bulls his will is that
they shall remain in force, with all their clauses, and decrees, confirming
and renewing them, as much as is needful.

The Emperors Ministers, and other zealous Catholics, to whom the Emperor
did impart it, thought it would exasperate the Protestants, and give them
occasion not to accept of the Council, in which the Pope declared that he
would not only preside, but direct also. Besides, to talk of reassuming and
prosecuting it, was to put too many suspicions into their heads; and to speak
so magnificently of his authority was nothing but to provoke them. They
councelled the Emperor to enduour that the Pope should moderate the Bull, and
reduce it into such a form, as might not more alcinate the Protestants. The
Emperor treated thereof with the Nuncio, The Emperor desires an alteration of
the Bull.
and wrote to his Ambassador to do the like with the Pope, praying his
Holiness affectionately, and effectually, and for Christian charity, to make
those words more mild, which might diverse Germany from accepting the Council.
The Ambassador in Rome treated with a Spanish dexterity, and said, That as
wild beasts, taken in a snare, must be drawn gently, making show to yield
unto them, nor must be showed the fire, or arms, for fear of provoking them,
and putting them in despair, which will increase their forces, so the
Protestants must be used, who with Gentleness, and by instructing and hearing
them, must be brought to the Council, where being arrived, it will be a fit
time to show them the truth. That to condemn them before they were heard, was
to exasperate and provoke them more. The Pope answered, according to his usual
liberty, that he would not be taught to fight with a Cat shut up, but would
have it at liberty, that it might fly; that to The Popes answer.
bring the Protestants with fair words to the Council, where the deeds would
not be answerable, was to put them in despair, and make them take some rash
resolution; and therefore what was to be done, was to be told them plainly,
The Ambassador answered, that it was true in things necessary, or fit to be
spoken: but he saw not how it was then fit to say, that it belongs to him to
direct Councels. That these things are most true; but truth has not this
privilege to be spoken at al times, and in all places; and that it is good to
conceal it, when the uttering of it does produce a bad effect. That he should
remember, that, by the hot speeches of Leo the tenth, and his Legate, Cardinal
Caietan, the fire was kindled that now burns, which, with a gentle word,
might have been put out. That the Popes following, especially Clement and
Paul, wise Princes did often complain of it. If Germany may now begained with
dextrous usage; why should it be more separated with bitterness?

The Pope, as it were disdaining, said, That it was to be preached openly, and
inculcated, which CHRIST has taught, that his divine Majesty has made his
Vicar Head of the Church and the principal light of the world: that this is one
of the truths that must be spoken in all times, and places, and (as Saint Paul
says) in season and out of season, that to do otherwise would be against the
commandment of CHRIST, Hiding the Candle under a bushel, which should be set
on a Candlestick. That it was not honorable for the Apostolic Sea to use
artifice, and dissimulation, but that he ought to speak plainly.

The Ambassador, by way of a pleasant discourse, said; That to hide the rod,
and to make show of benignity, and to yield unto all, seemed unto him the true
Apostolic office, that he had heard it read in S. Paul, that being free, he
made himself servant of all, to gain all; with the Jews, a Jew, with the
Gentiles, a Gentile; with the weak, weak; to win them also: and that this
was the way to plant the Gospel. In fine the Pope, not to enter into dispute,
said, that the Bull was made according to the style of the Chancery, which
could not be altered; that he was adverse from nouities, and must follow the
steps of his Predecessors; that observing the usual form, whatsoever should
happen could not be attributed to him, but if he had invented a new, all the
mischief would be laid to his Charge. The Ambassador, to give him time to
bethink himself better, concludes that he would not take the answer for a
Negative, but hoping that his Holiness would take compassion on Germany, with
a fatherly affection, purposing to (...) Christmas be p^st; for the^ it was the
midst of December, and then to make a new assault upon him.

But the Pope resolute not to change (...) (...); said often; I will prevent,
and not be prevented; and to take away all trouble of (...) ^orse (...) Saint
Io^as day he made a Brief, in which having (...) declared the (...) (...) of
his foresaid Bull, pretending that some, (...) published, The Pope makes a
Brief, and cause th(...)th it, and the Bull to be published.
might allege ignorance, he ordained that (...) the Brief, and the Bull
should be bread, published, and (...) (...) (...) of Saint Peter and Saint
John of (...), with intention to send a Copy thereof printed to the Arch
bishops, that by them it might be intimated to the Bishops, and other Prelates.
All means was taken from the Ambassador (...) speak any more thereof with
the Pope; and therefore he presently dispatched in express Currier, to
signify all to the Emperor. Who seeing the Popes resolution, Which ^illeth
distaste both to Papist and Protestant a Germany.
and thinking on a remedy, caused the Bull to be be read in the public
assembly, which produced just the same effect which he foresaw, that is, that
the Protestants would recall their word to submit themselves, and the
Catholics refuse to go to the Council It pleased it the Catholics by reason
of the harsh and intractable style; the Protestants, for the causes aforesaith
which were, that it belongs to the Pope, not only to call, but also to
direct, and govern the Councels; that he was resolved to continue and
prosecute the things begun, which took away the reexamination of what was
already handled; that unseasonably, and without occasion, he had said, that
Germany had acknowledged the Popes (...) Vicar of CHRIST; that he had declared
himself president of the Council, and had called (...) but Ecclesiastikes, and
with many affected words, had confirmed the Bull of the Convocation of Paul.
They said that the Council, with these grounds, would be in vain, whereunto
to submit ones self, was to (...) against GOD and his conscience. The
Catholics said, that if there were no hope to reduce the Protestants, the
labor, and charge would be (...) The Emperor gave a temper to both parties,
saying, that the Council was general of all Christian Nations, all which
obeying the Pope but Germany, he had framed the Convocation as it did agree
unto them; that for (...) Who are pacified by the Emperor.
(...), they should leave all to his care, who knew how to handle the
business; that they should suffer other Nations to meet, and that himself
would go in person, if not thither, yet to some near place, and would take
order, not by words, but deeds, that all should pass with good terms, that
they should not regard what the Pope said, but what himself did promise upon
the word of an Emperor and a King, So he pacified their minds; and the 13.
of February a resolution was made, and a Decree published, the tenor whereof,
was:

That it being proposed in the former Diet, that there is ^o means to compose
the discards of Germany, in cause of religion, but by (...) and general
Council, all the States of the Empire have confirmed the propo(...) and
resolved to accept and approve the same Synod, and submit themselves ^o it;
which having not bin executed as yet; the same proposition and determination
And therefore a Decree in the Diet is made to this effect.
has been made, in the present Diet. For the Emperor having la(...)red, and
finally obtained of the Pope, that the Council should be remitted to Trent, the
first of May; the next year, and his Holiness having done it 1551 JULIUS. 3.
CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6. HENRY. 2.
and the Corporation having been read, and proposed in the Diet, it is fit
they should continue in the same resolution to expect the Council, with the
obedience, and to go to it, in which all Christian Princes will assist, and the
Emperor himself as advocate to the holy Church, and defender of the Councels,
will do what belongs to his charge, as he has promised Who therefore gives
not be into all, that his will is, that every one who goes to the Council,
shall be secured by the Imperial authority and power, to go, remain return,
and propose freely what he shall think in his conscience to be necessary. And
therefore that he will lodge in the Confines of the Empire (...) he can. And
he admonishes the Electors Princes, and States of the Empire, especially the
Ecclesiastiques, and those who have made innovation in Religion, that they
prepare to be there, well instructed, that they may be inexcusable, himself
taking care that all shall pass lawfully, and in order, and that every thing
be handled piously and Christianly, according to the holy Scripture, and
doctrine of the Fathers. And for the transgression of the Decrees of the
Inter-religion, and Reformation, being assured, that it was impossible to
overcome the difficulties, and that as o(...)o things grew worse, to the end
that greater confusion may not arise, he calls unto him the cognition of the
transgressions post, yet enioyning the Princes, and orders of the Empire, to
observance hereafter.

The world seeing this Decree, thought it, as it was, a just counterpoise Which
seems to be a counterpoise to the Popes Bull.
of the Popes Bull; in all parts. The one will direct Councels, the other will
take care that all be done in order, and iuridically; the one will preside,
and the other will have the decision according to the Scripture, and the
Fathers; the one will continuate, and the other will have power given to every
one to propose, according to his conscience. In sum, the Court could not
digest this affront, and complained that it was another Convocation of the
Council. But the Pope according to his usual pleasanthesse, said, the
Emperor has been even with me, for the publication of the Bull, made without
him.

The year 1551. being begun, the Pope, applying himself to the Council
intimated, had two principal ayes; to send trusty persons to preside, 1551
and to be at as little charge as was possible. To avoid charge, he The
Presidents of the Council are named.
thought to send but one Legate, but that was too great a burden for one,
because there would be none who had the same interests, on whom he might
safely rely, and because he should be esteemed the only author of
whatsoever was done. For which respects it was necessary to lay the burden on
more men's shoulders. The Pope found a middle way, to send one Legate, and two
Nuncij, with equal authority, thinking that so he should be better served,
because hope makes men more diligent. Casting his eye on all the Cardinals,
he found none more trusty, and withal more worthy, then Marcellus
Crescentius, Cardinal of S. Marcellus; to whom he joined for Nuncij,
Sebastianus Pigbinus, Archbishop of Siponto, and Aloisius Lipomannus Bishop of
Verona of the former he made choice, for the great confidence he had in him
before his Papacy; of the other, for the foam of his great piety, goodness,
and loyalty. Having had many secret parlies with these three, and opened veto
them the sincerity of his heart, and instructed them fully, he gave them an
ample Mandate, to be present in the Council, in his name; the tenor whereof
was,

It belongs to the father of a family, to substitute others, to do that The
tenor of their Mandat.
which he cannot commodiously do himself. Therefore, having reduced to Trent
the General Council, intimated by Paul, hoping that the Kings and Princes,
would afford their favor and assistance, he cited the Prelates, who usually
have voice therein, to be there the first of May, to resume the Council in the
state it was. But not being able to be personally present, according to his
desire, in respect of his old age, and other impediments, that his absence
might not be an hinderance, he appoints Marcellus, a zealous, wise, and
learned Cardinal, for Legate, and the Bishops of Siponto, and Verona, famous
for knowledge and experience, as Nuncij, with special Mandate, and fit
clauses. Sending them as Angels of peace, giving them authority to resume,
direct and prosecute the Council, and to do all things meet and necessary,
according to the tenor of his, and his predecessors letters of the
Convocation. The Emperor, whom the Council did more The Emperor gives a safe
conduct to the Protestants.
concern, holding it to be the only means, to make himself absolute Master
of Germany, send a safe conduct in an ample form, to all the Protestant
Orders of that Empire, for themselves, their Ambassadors, and Divines.

But while these foundations, were laid in Rome and Ausburg, to build the
Council of Trent upon them, webs were spunne in other places, which obscured
The Pope restores Parma to Octauius Farnese.
the dignity and authority of that Synod, and Engines were framed which did
shake and dissolve it. The Pope immediately after his assumption, to preforme
what he had promised in the Conclaue, restored Parma to Octauius Farnese, which
the Pope had taken into his hands, in the name of the Church, and assigned to
him two thousand crowns a month, to defend it. Octauius in regard of the
enmity of Ferrante Conzaga, Vice-Duke of Milan, and of many arguments which he
had, that the Emperor meant to be Lord of that City, the Pope also having
taken from him the provision of two thousand crowns, doubting that he was not
able to defend it with his own forces, treated with the Pope, by his brother
the Cardinal, either to assist him, or give him leave to provide for himself,
by the protection of some other Prince, able to maintain him against the
Emperor. The Pope, without thinking more of it, answered, that he should do
for himself the best he could. wherefore Octauius by means of Horatius, Who
receives a French Garrison (...) the City.
his brother, son in law to the French King, put himself under the
protection of France, and received a French Garrison into the City. This
displeased the Emperor his uncle, who persuaded the Pope, that it was against
his honor, who was supreme Lord of that City and Duke. Therefore the Pope
published a severe edict against him, citing him to Rome, and declaring him
traitor, if he did not appear, and demanding the Emperors Which occasioneth a
war between the Emperor and the French (...).
assistance against him; who declared that he did approve the Popes cause,
and would defend it with his arms. This was a beginning of a manifest war
between the Emperor and the French King, and of great distasts of this King
against the Pope. And in Saxony, upon the River Albi, discourses began,
between the Saxons and those of Brandeburg, to make a league against the
Emperor, that he might not wholly subdue Germany, as shall be said in its
place. Notwithstanding these seeds of war, which in Italy, in the beginning
of April, began to spring, the Pope would have the Legate A confederation is
made in Germany against the Emperor.
and Nuncij go to Trent, and gave them commission to open the Council, on the
first of May, the day appointed, with those who were there, yea though there
were none at all; by the example of the Nuncij of Martinus the fifth, who
opened the Council of Pauia alone, without the presence of any Prelate.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
THe Legate and Nuncij being come to Trent, accompanied The Preside^es of the
Council, and some Prelates strive in Trent.
with some Prelates, who followed them from Rome, and some other being arrived,
who, having been (...)llcited by the Pope, came thither a little after; they
assembled, the foresaid day, with the wanted Ceremonies, in the usual place
played, within the Cathedral Church, which was not pulled down, where the
Archbishop of Torre sang Mass, and the Secretary read the Popes Bull of the
Convocation, and the (...) of the Presidents; and he that said Mass, read the
Decree interrogatorily. Pleases the Fathers, that, according to the Popes
letters, the Council of Trent should be resumed, and prosecuted? And all
having given their voices, he said again; Please it you, that the next
Session The next Session is appointed for the first of September.
be held the first of September next? Whereunto all agreed. And the Cardinal,
Prime President, concluded, by the consent, and in the name of all the Synod,
that the Council is begun, and shall be prosecuted. Nothing else was done
that day, nor the next, though the Prelates were often assembled in the Legates
house, because the Congregations had no form, there being no Divines. Only
the thing dispared in (...) were read, to make the deliberation of that winch
was to be handled more (...),, especially in matter of reformation, which was
esteemed to be of the greatest moment.

In the end of the month the Pope sent (...) to the The Pope sends a Nunci^
to the Suisses.
Suisses, who before had been the Nuncio of Pope Paul to that nation,
principally to provide that the French King might not have Soldiers from them,
and to obtain of them a leule, the affairs of Parma. And, upon that occasion,
he wrote unto them the seven and twentieth of May, that as he had taken the
name of Julius the second, so affectionate to them, so he would follow his
example in loving them, and using (...) assistance: which he had begun to do
by taking a guard of their Nation, for the safety of his own person, and
another for Bolonia. Now the Council being intimated; and begun in Trent, the
first of May, he prayed them to send their Prelates against the first of
September when the second Session shall be held.

The French King sought to persuade the Pope, by Terms, his Ambassador, that
he had, upon good reasons, taken upon him the defense of The French King
excuses to the Pope his protection of Parma.
Parma, praying him to be contented with it; and to show him, that, doing
otherwise, and preferring war before peace, he should not only damnifie
Italie^, but hinder the prosecution of the Council, ^or cause it to dissolve.
And that though (...) did not fall out ye^, in regard no French Bishop could
go thither, it could not with reason be called a general Council. The Pope
offered to do any thing el^e which the King should desire* and after many
discourses, it being represented to him that the King could by no means
retire, and that, in case his Holiness would not be neutrall, but make
himself the Emperors minister, by whom the King was certain that he was
guided, his Majesty would be forced to use those remedies of reason and fact,
which his ancestors have used against partial Popes; the Pope grew angry or
fained to be so, and answered, that if the King took Parma, His Holiness is
angry.
from him, he would take France from the King; and if the King did take from
him his obedience, he would take from the King the commerce of all
Christendom; and ^he spoke of force, let him do the worst he could; if of
Edicts, and prohibitions, and such things, he let him know, that his pen,
paper, and ink were not inferior. But though the Pope spoke so high; yet he
was afraid; and therefore, to excite the Emperor, he signified unto him, by
his Nuncio, the Bishop of Imola, whom he had sent in place of the Archbishop
of Siponto, all these discourses with the French, and afterward told him,
that in Rome* there was doubt of another sack, in regard of so many rumors of
the Turks, and Frenchmen, and fear of National Councels. Therefore there
was need of Arms, to prevent these attempts, and to defend themselves, when
need required.

The King seeing it was impossible to persuade the Pope, wrote a public The
French King makes preparation for a National Council: from which, and from
the protection of Parma, he is dissuaded by the Pope.
letter to all the Bishops of his Kingdom, as well in France, as elsewhere,
commanding them to be at their Churches within six months, and to put
themselves in order there for a National Council; and the letter was
presented to those also who were in Rome; neither durst the Pope hinder them,
for fear of doing them, and his own reputation more hurt. But he sent
Ascanius della C^rna, his nephew, into France, to dissuade the King from the
protection of Parma: to make him understand that Octauius Farnese, being his
Vassal, he should by no means endure to be contemned by him, in regard it
would be an eternal infamy, and an example to others not to acknowledge him
for Pope. That his inclination to France and his Majesty was great, and his
mind auerse from those who were emulous of him, and that this is known to the
whole world. Yet the foresaid respect is so potent that, if his Mtie would not
give a remedy, it were enough to make him cast himself into the arms of him
that he would not. His instruction also was, that if the King would not be
persuaded to this, he should pray him to consider well how great inconveniences
a National Council would draw after it, and that it would be a beginning to
give his Subjects license, whereof he would repent him, and would presently
cause this bad effect to hinder the general Council, which would be the
greatest offense could be done to God, and the greatest damage to faith, and
the Church. He prayed him to send an Ambassador to Trent, assuring him he
should receive all honor and respect from the Presidents, and all the Prelates
who were his Holiness friends. Whereunto if he did not condescend, but
persevere in maintaining the Edict, he should, for taking away all scandal,
propose to him a temper, to declare, that his meaning was not to hinder the
general Council by that Edict.

The King, hearing the Embassage, showed also that his honor did constrain
But he continues firm in his resolution.
him to continue the protection of the Duke, and to maintain the Edict, but
with such words, as made it plain he was displeased with the distastes given
him, and that he had a desire to right himself. And to answer the Pope, he
sent the Lord of Monluc, the Elect of Bourdeaux, to him, not without some hope
to pacify the Popes mind. But do he what he could, he continued in the
same rigidnesse concerning the affairs of Parma, and sent the same Monluc
back, with commission to complain of the King, that he had sent the Edict of
the National Council, and letters, to the Prelates who were subjects to his
Holiness, even in temporalities (understanding the Bishop of Auignion) as
far as to Rome, which all the world did interpret to be done only to hinder
the general Council. And, in conclusion, he prayed the King, that seeing
they were both resolute, himself to correct Octauius, and his Majesty to
protect him, at the least their differences might be contained within Parma,
though his Majesty had already proceeded further, by taking the Cardinals and
Prelates from Rome; whose departure he would not hinder, hoping that his
Majesty, having exhaled his anger, should be illuminated by God, to change
his manner of proceeding. Neither these mutual offices, nor the respect of the
Council, could make either of these Princes remit any thing of their rigor.
The general consent was favorable to the King. For the Emperor having seized
on Piacenza, to leave Parma to him also, was to give all Italy into his hands;
and it seemed an indignity, that the postetity of Paul, who had so labored for
the liberty of Italy, should be abandoned by all: and if the Pope did not
complain that Piacenza was usurped, nor made any instance for the restitution,
why should he complain that the Duke should secure himself of Parma. And
this reason prevailed so much with some, that they assured themselves it was
well understood by Julius; but that, to make some thing arise which might
hinder the Council, which not proceeding from him, might be ascribed to
another, he desired a war between the King and the Emperor. It is certain
that he labored more with the Emperor to move arms against Parma, or
Mirandula, then with the King to accommodate the business. The King having
tried all means to pacify the Popes mind, passed to the extreme, which was
to protest by his And protests against the Council, then assembled in Trent*
Ambassador Terms, and particularly against the Council which was assembled,
hoping that respect would remove the Pope: the contents of which protestation,
because it was reiterated in Trent, shall be related upon that occasion.

But in Germany there was more speech of the Council then ever. For Maurice,
Duke of Saxony, seeing the Emperors resolution, to give him a sure argument
that he would obey him, in sending to Trent, commanded Philip Melancthon, and
some others of his Divines, to put together the points of The Protestant
Princes resolve to send to Trent.
doctrine, to be proposed in the Council, and to assemble in Lipsia all the
Doctors and Ministers of his State to examine them. And Christopher, Duke of
Wittenberg, who, a little before, succeeded his father, caused another
composition to be made by his people, which was the same thing in substance;
and the one part did approve that of the other; yet did choose not to proceed
jointly, that the Emperor might not suspect. Afterward Duke Maurice wrote to
the Emperor, giving him an account of his being in order with his Divines, and
of the writing which he had prepared; but added that his Safe Conduct seemed
not sufficient. For in the Council of Constance it was determined, that they
might proceed against those that came to the Council, though they had Safe
Conduct from the Emperor; and the And require a Safe Conduct from the Council.
Decree was approved by the death of John Husse, who went to the Council under
the public faith of Sigismond. That therefore he could not send any to Trent,
if those of the Council did not give Safe Conduct, as was done in that of
Basil, whither the Bohemians, for the example of Constance, would not go; but
under the public faith of the whole Council. Therefore he prayed the
Emperor to procure for them a Safe Conduct from the Ecclesiastiques of Trent,
in that form as those of Basil did grant it to the Which the Emperor
promises to procure.
Bohemians, because they were just in the same condition now, as the Bohemians
were then. Caesar promised to do it, and gave order to his Ambassadors, whom
he then dispatched to the Council, to procure it.

The Embassage consisted of three persons, to honor the Council, and to have
many ministers to treat; and this color was for the number, that one was for
the Empire, another for Spain, and the third for his other States, Who sends
three Ambassadors to the Council.
and yet all in solidum for all. The Mandate was signed the sixth of July: and
contained that Pope Julius, to appease the controversies of Religion in
Germany, having recalled to Trent, the first of May past, the Council called
by The contents of their Mandat.
Paul, began, and intermitted, himself, by reason of his indisposition, not
being able to be there in person, he has sent (not to fail of his duty)
his Proctors thither. Therefore trusting upon the faith, honesty, experience,
and zeal of Hugh, Count of Mountfort, Don Pedro di Toledo, and William,
Archdeacon of Campagnia he makes them his Orators, and Mandataries for his
Imperial dignity, Kingdoms, and hereditarie States, giving them, and each of
them faculty, to appear in the Council, to hold his place, consult; treat,
give counsel and voice, to decree in his name, and do every thing else which
himself could do if he were present: putting them in place of* his person,
and promising to ratify whatsoever shall be done by them* three, or by any
one of them. The Pope, though he much desired the Council should be opened,
yet after it began, he took no thought that the Prelates should go thither;
either because he was intent upon the war, which was on fire at Mirandula, or
because he cared but little for it. All the pains was taken by the Emperor,
who thrust forward, first, the Electours of Mentzs, and Triers, and afterward
of Cullen, together with five other principal Bishops, and the Proctors of
many who were hindered. He caused also some Prelates to come out of Spain,
besides those who had entertained themselves in Trent, and Italy, until then,
and out of his States in Italy besides which there were but few: so that, for
eight months that the Council The Ecclesiastical Electors go to Trent. The
number of the Prelates in the Council.
lasted, the Presidents and Princes being reckoned, the number did not exceed
sixty four.

The first of September, the day appointed for the Session, being come, they
went to the Church with the usual ceremonies. The order of precedence was
thus. First the Cardinal Legate, then the Cardinal Madruccio, the The second
Session is held.
two Nuncij, the two Electours, (that of Collen being not come) two of the
Emperors Ambassadors (the Archdeacon being not yet arrived) the Ambassador
In which the Legates make a long exhortation to the Fathers.
of the King of the Romans, and then the Archbishops. The Mass being sung,
and the Ecclesiastical ceremonies ended, the Secretary read an exhortation, to
the Fathers of the Council, in the name of the Presidents: to this purpose.
That, by the presence of the two Electours, being entered into hope, that many
Bishops, of that and other Nations, will assist in the Council, they thought
fit, in the mean time, in regard of the place they bare, to give a little
admonition to themselves, and them, (though they saw all were ready to do the
office of good Pastors) because the matters to be handled were of great
moment; that is, to extirpate heresies, to reform Ecclesiastical discipline,
from the corruption whereof heresies have risen, and finally, to pacify the
discords of Princes. That the beginning of the exhortation, ought to be taken
from the knowledge of their own insufficiency, flying to the assistance of
GOD, who will not fail them: whereof they see many arguments already, but
especially the coming of the two Princes. That the authority of General
Councels, was always very great, the holy Ghost presiding in them, and their
Decrees esteemed not humane, but divine. That an example hereof has been left
by the Apostles, and the Fathers following, seeing that, by Councels, all
heretics have been condemned, the life and manners of Priests and people
reformed, and the discords of the Church appeased. Therefore being now
assembled to do as much, they must awaken themselves, that they may regaine
the sheep that lept out of the Lords fold, and keep those which have not gone
astray as yet. Wherein the salvation of those only is not in question, but
their own too, in regard they must give an account to GOD, by whom, if they
perform their duty, they shall be rewarded, and all posterity will attribute
great praise to that Council; but they should not aim at that, but only at
their own duty, and charity toward the Church, which being afflicted,
wounded, and deprived of so many dear children, lifts up her hands to GOD,
and them, to restore them to her. That therefore they would handle the matters
of the Council with all gentleness, and without contention, as becomes so
great an assembly, using perfect charity, and consent of minds, knowing that GOD
does behold and judge them.

The exhortation being ended, the Decree was read by the Bishop that The
Decree of the Session is read.
said Mass; the substance whereof was; That the holy Synod, which, in the
Session past, did determine to proceed in this, having deferred to do it
until now, by reason of the absence of the Germane Nation, and the small
number of the Fathers, rejoicing for the arrival of the two Prince Electors,
hoping that many more of that and other Nations, will, by their example, hasten
their coming, does defer the Session for forty days, that is, until the
eleventh of October, and prosecuting the Council in the state in which it is,
having treated already of the seven Sacraments, of Baptism, and
Confirmation, does ordain to treat of the Eucharist; and, for reformation, to
handle those things which do facilitate residencie. Then the Emperors Proxy
being read, the Earl of Mountfort said, that the Emperor, after he had
obtained the reduction of the Council to Trent, never ceased to labor that the
Prelates of his states should go thither, which the presence of the Electours,
and the frequencie of the Fathers, does demonstrate. And to testify his mind
the more, he has sent Don Pedro of the Kingdom of Spain, another of his
patrimoniall States, and himself of Germany, though unworthy, Praying to be
received for such. John Baptista Castello, the Speaker, answered, in the name
of the Council, that they were glad to hear the Emperors Mandate, having by
it, and the quality of the Proctours, conceived how much they may promise
themselves; therefore that it hops for assistance from them, and does, as
much as it can, admit the Emperors Mandate. Likewise the Proxy of the King of
the Romans, in the person of Paulus Gregorianus, Bishop of Zagabria, and of
Frederick Nausea, Bishop of Vienna, was read, and this second did speak, and
was answered as those of the Emperor.

After this Iacobus Amiotus, Abbat of Bellosana, appeared in the name of the
French King, with letters of his Majesty, which he presented to the Legate, The
Abbat of Ballosana presents the French Kings letters, the inscriptio^ whereof
gives distaste to the Synod.
desiring they might be read, and his credency heard. The Legate receiving
them, gave them to the Secretary, to be read. The superscription was,
Sanctissimis in Christo Patribus Conuentus Tridentini. The Bishop of Orange,
and after him, the other Spaniards said aloud, that those letters were not sent
unto them, who were a general Council, and not a Convent; and therefore that
they ought neither to be read, nor opened in public Session, but, if the
Messenger had ought to say, he should go home. Much was spoken concerning the
signification of the word, Conuentus, the Spaniards persisting that it was
injurious. So that the Bishop of Mentz was forced to say, that if they would
not receive a letter from the King of France, who called them Sanctissimus
Conuentus, how would they hearken to the Protestants, who called them Conuentus
Malignantium? But the Spanish Prelates continuing still to be more tumultuous
then the rest, the Legate, with the Nuncij, and the Emperors Ambassadors,
retired into the vestry, and had a long disputation hereof. At the last,
returning to their place, they made it be told to the Speaker, that the Synod
does resolve to read the letters without prejudice, thinking that the word
Conuentus, is not meant in an ill sense; and, if it be, does protest of the
Nullitie. Then the Kings letter was opened, and read, which was dated the 13.
of August, and said in substance; That it seemed agreeable to the observance
which his ancestors have always used toward the Church, to signify to them
the causes why he has bin forced not to send any B. to the conu^nt, called by
Julius by the name of a public Council, being assured that they the fathers
will not condemn any man's fact before they know it, and that when they shall
understand what he has done, they will commend it. That he was compelled, for
preservation of his honor, to continue in his resolution to protect the Duke
of Parma; from which he would not refuse to depart, if Justice and Equity did
permit. That he writes to them as to Honorable Judges, praying them to
receive the letters, not as from an addersary, The contents of them.
or a person unknown, but as from the Prince and principal son of the
Church by inheritance of his Ancestors, whom he promises always to imitate,
and, while he defends himself from wrongs, not to lay aside his charity
toward the Church, but ever to receive whatsoever shall be constituted by her,
so that due order be observed in making the Decrees. The letters The Abbat
reads a protestation.
being recited, the Abbat read a Protestation, containing a narration of a
Protestation, made by Terms, in Rome, saying, That the King, after he had
taken upon him the defense of Parma, seeing that those laudable things which
he had done were reprehended, used great care that Paul Terms, his
Ambassador, should give an account of all to the Pope, and College of
Cardinals, to take from them all sinister opinion, showing that the taking of
the Duke into his protection, was the effect of a pious, humane, and kingly
mind, wherein there was no cunning or private gain, but respect only of the
Church; as appeared by the propositions of accord, which aimed at nothing but
that the Church might not be robbed, and Italy preserved in peace and liberty.
And if the Pope thought this a cause to put all Europe into war, he was
sorry; but it could not be imputed to him, having not only accepted, but
offered also all honest and fit conditions. Neither could the dissolution of
the Council assembled be prescribed to him, praying the Pope to consider what
mischiefs would accompany the war, and to prevent them with peace. Which if
his Holiness will not regard, but desire rather to set Europe on fire, and
hinder the Council, giving suspicion that it was called not for the good of
the Church, but for private interests, excluding from it a most Christian King,
he could not choose but to protest to him and the College, that he could not
send his Bishops to Trent, where the access is not free and secure, and that
he could not esteem that a general Council, but private from which he was
excluded, neither could the people or Prelates of France be obliged to the
decrees of it. Afterward he protested that he would come to the remedies used
by his ancestors in like occurrences; not to take away his due observance from
the Apostolic Sea, but to reserve it for better times, when arms shall be
laid down, which are dishonestly taken up against him, desiring of his
Holiness, that this Protestation might be registered, and giving him a copy
of it to peruse. These things having been already protested in Rome, he
desired should be likewise protested in Trent, with the same instance, that
they might be registered in the acts of that assembly, and that there being a
public instrument made of it, he might use it in time and place.

When the Protestation was read, the Speaker, having talked with the President,
answered in substance; That the Kings modesty in his letters was grateful to
the Synod; that it does not accept the person of the Abbat, but as it is
lawful, that warns him to be in the same place the eleventh of October, to
receive the answer which shall be made to the Kings letters; and forbids
the Nuncij to make an instrument of the present action, but jointly with the
Secretary of the Council. And nothing else being to be done, the Session was
ended. Then the Abbat demanded an instrument of the action, but could not
obtain it.

When Terms had protested in Rome, though many did not know of the The censure
of this Protestation.
act, yet it was believed that the Pope would defer the Council, because it
must needs bring forth new divisions, if such a principal Nation did resist.
But he deceived the world, not for any desire he had to celebrate it, but for
that he would not seem to be cause of the dissolution; being resolved, that if
it were separated without him, he would answer, with an open mouth, to
whosoever should desire it again, that he had done his part, and would do no
more. But the Protestation made in Trent, a place so conspicuous, was presently
published every where, and gave matter of discourse. The Imperialists esteemed
it a vainity, saying, That the act of the mayor part of the universality, is
ever esteemed lawful, when the lesser, being called, either cannot or will not
be present: that all are called to the Council, and the Frenchmen also might
have come without passing by the Popes territories; but in case they could not,
yet their absence does not derogate from the Council, because they are not
neglected, but invited. It was said to the contrary, that to call in words, and
to exclude in deeds, was not to inuit, and, for the Popes territories, one
might go from France to Trent without passing by them, but not without passing
by those of the Emperor, and the mayor part has full authority, when the
lesser cannot appear, and is silent, because it is presupposed to consent, and
when it will not appear, because it is accounted contumacious, but when it
does protest, it bath its place, and especially, if the impediment proceed from
him that calls the action, in absence, cannot be of force.

And the Counselors of the Parliament of Paris, said some thing more; The
Decrees of Councels do not bind the Churches absent.
That it is true, that the authority of the whole universality is transferred
into the mayor part, when the cause is common to all, and nothing belongs to
particular men: but when the whole belongs to all, and every one has his
part, the assent of every one is necessary, Et prohibentis conditio potior; and
the absent, not giving their voices, are not bound. Of this sort are
Ecclesiastical assemblies, and be the Council as populous as it will, the
absent Churches are not bound if they think fit not to receive it. This has
always been used in ancient times, that the Councels being ended, the
Decrees should be sent, to be confirmed, to the Churches that were absent, in
which otherwise they had no force; which every one that reads Hilarious,
Athanasius, Theodoretus, and Victorinus, who handle this particular, may see
plainly. And i^ happened sometimes, that some part of the Canons were received
by some Church, and some left out, as every one thought fit, for their
necessities, manners and uses. And S. Gregory himself does witness, that the
Church of Rome did not receive the Canons of the second Council of
Constantinople, nor of the first of Ephesus.

Wisemen, not considering the subtilties, said, that the King had given that
Council an incurable wound. For it having no other ground then Christian
charity, and the assistance of the holy Ghost, it would never be believed that
these were present in an assembly, against which a most Christian King,
persecutor of all Sects, with the adherence of a kingdom, not blemished in
Religion, did protest in that form. And they brought an experience for proof.
For they said, that the Presidents retyring to consult with the Emperors
Ambassadors, did show who guided the Council. And which was of more
importance, when these five had consulted, and imparted nothing to any body
else, the Speaker said, The holy Synod does receive the letters. And what was
that holy Synod? And likewise the Abbats exposition The Presidents take upon
them the authority of the Council.
being read, the answer, resolved on by the Presidents only, was given in
the same name. Neither can the difficulty be removed, by saying that the
matter was of no great importance; first, because it will be hard to maintain,
that it is not a most important matter, where the danger of division in the
Church is in question; then, be it as it will, no man can arrogate to himself
power, to declare what is of importance, and what not: and this is a
demonstration that things are carried just as the Pope says in the Bull, and
the Presidents in the Sermon read, that they were to direct the Council; for
they did so indeed. The adulse that the King had dismissed the Popes Nuncio,
and published a Manifest, did reiterate the same discourses; The French King
dismisseth the Popes Nuncio, and publis^^th a Manifest.
which Manifest was then printed and diuulged throughout. Where he shows at
large the causes why he took upon him the protection of Parma, blames the
Pope for the war begun, saying that he used this Artifice, that the Council
might not be held; Concluding in the end, that it is not meet that he should
have money out of his kingdom, to make war against him, whence a great sum
is ordinarily taken for vacancies, Bulls, Graces, Dispensations, and
Expeditions: and therefore, by the counsel of his Princes, he did for bid to
dispatch Curriers to Rome, and to answer money, or gold or silver not coined,
by way of bank, for Benefices or other Graces and Dispensations, upon pain of
Confiscation, as well for Ecclesiastiques as seculars, and these to be
punished corporally besides, giving the Promooters a third of the confiscation.
This Manifest was enrolled in Parliament, with a proposition of the Attorney
general of the King* in which he said, that it was no new thing, but used by
Charles the sixth, Lewis the eleventh, and Lewis the twelfth, and was
conformable to the common Law, that money should not be carried to the enemy,
and that it would be a hard case, if with the money of France, war should
be made against the King, and that it was better for the subjects of the
kingdom to keep their money, and not care for dispensations, which were not
able to secure the conscience, and are nothing but a shadow cast before the
eyes of men, which cannot hide the truth from GOD.

It could not be endured, neither at Rome, nor in Trent; that the King should
What the Apos^olike Sea is.
solemnly protest, and make war against the Pope, and still say, that he
bare the same reverence toward the Apostolic Sea, which is nothing but the
Pope. Whereunto the Frenchmen answered, that antiquity had not this opinion;
yea, Victor the third, who was one of the Popes that assumed much, said that
the Apostolic Sea was his mistress. The same was said before him by Stephen
the fourth, and by Vitalianus, and Constantinus, who were more ancient, it
plainly appears, that by the Apostolic Sea is understood the Church of
Rome; for if the Pope were the same thing, his errors and defects, would be of
the Apostolic Sea.

The French King, fearing that, by his dissension with the Pope, those that
desired change of religion, would make some innovation, which might The French
King waxes more severe against the Protestants.
prooueseditious, or that himself might come into the bad opinion of his
people as if his mind were auerse from the Catholic faith, and perhaps to
open a way for reconciliation with Rome, he made a most severe Edict against
the Lutherans, confirming all the others which he had published before, adding
greater punishments, more ways to discover the guilty, and greater rewards to
the Promooters.

The Emperor, considering that the French King, in regard of the number of the
French Cardinals, and other dependants of that Crown, had no less power in
the College then himself, and being combined with the Farnesi, did far
exceed him, though he had the Pope of his side, sent to Rome Don John
Manriques, to persuade his Holiness to create new Cardinals, to exceed, or
equalize the number of the French. The Pope was inclined hereunto; yet he saw
what difficulty there was, his Papacy being new, and exhausted, and in time of
stirs, when it is hard to have the consent of all the Cardinals; and to
create them without consent was dangerous. He was doubtful whether to make
many at once, or by little and little. He thought he should sooner obtain
consent for this second course, and that his trusty friends would remain in
hope, and that the Cardinals would more oppose a numerous promotion, and those
that were excluded would despair. He doubted whether it were fit to create
any of the Prelates of the Conucell; because there were many that deserved well,
and the three Electors were not to be passed over, especially the Elector of
Mentz who thought of it. On the other side, to send red Cappes to the Council,
he thought would move envy. He resolved not to expect Christmas, when all
come forth with their pretensions, and the places of common meetings are full
of wagers, but to execute this business some day before upon the sudden;
though afterward he found no fit time to create them, but Christmas.

But to return to Trent, the second of September, the day following the
Session, a general Congregation was made, and, in it, Fathers deputed to frame
the Articles of the Eucharist, to be given to the Divines, and to collect the
abuses in that matter. Afterward they discoursed of the Reformation; which
because it was to take away the cause why Bishops do not reside, many were
repeated, some proposed before in Trent and Bolonia, and some then first spoken
of. Finally, they insisted upon jurisdiction; saying that the Bishops were
wholly deprived of it, partly by auocation of causes, and partly by appeals,
but especially by exemptions: yea, that more often jurisdiction was exercised
over and against them by their Subjects, either by special commission from
Rome, or by virtue of Conseruatories, then by them over their subjects. And
Fathers were elected to frame the Articles concerning this matter. The
Presidents, considering the Popes instruction to avoid dangerous contentions
among the Divines, and their unintelligible disputes, in which they grow
bitter, and also their confusion in speaking they gave out the Articles framed,
which they were to begin to handle on Tuesday after dinner, and there added the
manner and order to be held in the Congregations, much limited, which did
compel them to speak soberly. The Articles were tonne; drawn from the
doctrine of the Zuingliani, and (...). That in the Eucharist the Body, Blood
Ten Articles concerning the Eucharist are proposed to be discussed by the
Divines.
and Divinity of CHRIST is not truly, but as in a sign 2. That CHRIST is not
given to be eaten Sadramentally, but spiritually and by faith (...). That in
the Eucharist there is the Blood and Body of CHRIST, but together with the
substance of the Bread and Wine, so that there is no T(...)tion, but an
hypostaticall union of the humanity, and of the substances of the Bread and
Wine; so that it may be truly said this Bread is the Body of CHRIST and this
wine is the Blood of CHRIST. 4. That the Eucharist is only for remission of
sins. 5. That CHRIST ought not to be worshipped in the Eucharist, nor
honored in feasts, not carried in procession, nor to the sick, and that the
worshippers are truly Idolaters 6. That the Eucharist ought not to be saved,
but spent, and distributed immediately and that he that does not so does abuse
this Sacrament and that it is not lawful for any to give the Communion to
himself. 7. That in the particles which remain after the Communion, the Body
of our LORD does not remain, but only while it is received, and neither
before nor after. 8. That it is de iure diuino, to give both kinds to the
people and children, and that they sin who force them to use one only. 9.
That so much is not contained under one, as under both, neither does he
receive so much, who communicates with one, as he that does communicate with
both 10. That only faith is a sufficient preparation to receive the Eucharist,
neither is confession necessary, but free, especially to the learned, neither
are men bound to Communicate at Easter.

After these Articles a precept was added, in this form. That the Divines Who
are prescribed an order how they shall proceed.
ought to confirm their opinions with the holy Scripture, Traditions of the
Apostles sacred and approved Councels, and by the constitutions and
authorities of the holy Fathers; that they ought to use brevity, and avoid
superfluolis and unprofitable questions, and perverse contentions. That this
shall be the order of speaking amongst them; first, those that are sent by the
Pope are to speak then those that are sent by the Emperor and, in the third
place, the Secular Diuiries, according to the order of their promotions; and
lastly the Regulars, according to the precedencie of their orders. And the
Legate and Presidents by the Apostolic authority granted them, gave faculty
and authority to the Divines, who are to speak, to have and read all
prohibited books, that they may find out the truth, and confute and impugn
false opinions. This order did not please the Italian Which does displease the
Italian Divines.
Divines; who said it was a nouitie, and a condemning of School divinity,
which in all difficulties, uses reason, and because it was not lawful to
treat as Saint Thomas Saint Bonauenture, and other famous men did. The other
doctrine which is called positive, and consists in collecting the sayings of
the Scriptures and Fathers, was only a faculty of the memory and a painet in
writing and was old but known to be insufficient, and unprofitable by those
Doctors who for these three hundred and fifty years, that de^^d the Church,
and that this was to yield the victory to the Lutheranes. For when the point
shall stand upon variety of reading, and memory, they will ever overcome, in
regard they know many congues, and read (...) Authors, where unto he that
will be a good Divine can not apply (...), who must exercise his wit, and make
himself able to weigh things, and not to number them. They complained, that
this was to shame themselves before the Dutch Divines, who? being accustomed
to contend with the Lutheranes, are exercised in this kind of Learning, which
is not used in Italy who, if they were to speak according to true Theology,
it would appear they knew nothing: But the Presidents being willing to please
them have done this shame to the Italians. Though many complained hereof, yet
it prevailed but little because generally the Fathers desired to hear men
speak with intelligible terms not abstrustly in the matter of justification,
and others already handled. And it is certain, that this order did (...) the
expedition.

In diverse Congregations all the voices, were comfortable. For the first
Article that it should becondemned for heretical, as formerly it had been
Opinions are delivered concerning the articles.
In the second there were three opinions. Some said it was to be omitted, for
that no heretic does deny the Sacramental Communion. Others held it only
for suspected and some would have delivered it in clearer terms. The common
opinion was, that the third was heretical; but that it was not fit to
condemn, or speak of it, because it was an opinion invented by Robertus
Tutciensis, more then four hundred years since, and never followed by any,
therefore to speak of it, would (contrary to the precept of the wise man)
move the evil, which being quiet hurted not. They added, that the Council
was assembled against the modern heresies, and therefore that they were not to
take pains in the old. Concerning the fourth Article, there were diverse
opinions. Some said, that the word, only, being taken away, the opinion was
Catholic, to say that the Eucharist is for the remission of sins, and that
word was not put by any of the heretics, and therefore they thought this
Article might to omitted. Some said it was heretical, though the word only
were removed, because the Sacrament of the Eucharist as not instituted for the
remission of sins. In the fifth, all agreed, and many amplifications were used
to persuade the worship, and many new ways proposed to enlarge it, as the
devotion of every one had found out. Likewise they allagreed in the sixth,
except in the last part, that is, that it is not lawful to give the Communion
to himself. Some said, that it being understood of the Laiques, it was
Catholic; and therefore it must be expressed, that it is to be condemned
only in regard of the Priest. Others said, that neither in regard of these it
was to be condemned for heretical because in the sixth Council, the hundred
and one chapter, it was not condemned. Others would, that, for the Laiques
also, the case of necessity should be excluded. In the seventh, all powered
themselves out into (...)ctiues against the modern Protestants, as inuentors
of a wicked opinion, never heard of before in the Church. Upon the eight all
made long discourses, though all to the same purpose. Their principal reasons
to condemn it were, because our Savior in the four and twentieth of Saint
Luke, did bless the bread only to the two Disciples: and because, in the
Lords Prayer, we ask our daily bread; and because, in the Acts of the
Apostles, in the second, and twentieth Chapters, Bread only is spoken of, and
Saint Paul in the ship, in the seven and twentieth, blessed nothing but the
Bread. Authorities of the ancient Doctors, and some examples of the Fathers
were brought, but they grounded themselves principally upon the Council of
Constance, and the custom of the Church, as also upon diverse figures of the
Old Testament, and drew many prophecies also to this sense. And, concerning
the children, all agreed that perhaps it might formerly be done by some
particular man, but was, by all others, known to be an error. In the ninth
Article, the first part, that as much is not contained under one Species as
under both, was thought to be heretical, by the Dutch Divines; but the
Italians said it must be distinguished, before it could be condemned. For if
it were understood in respect of the virtue of the consecration, it is clear
that under the bread there is the body only, and under the wine, the blood
only; but by consequence, which the Divines call Concomitancie, under the
bread there is the blood, soul, and divinity, and under the wine, there is
the body, and the other things; and therefore it is not to be condemned in so
general terms. But for the second, that as much is received by one as by
both, there was a difference; for many did think, that although no more of the
Sacrament, yet more grace was received; so that they did desire a declaration
herein. In the tenth some would have the first part expounded of dead faith,
because there is no doubt but that a lively faith is sufficient. For the
necessity of Confession, the Dominicans considered, that many learned and holy
Catholics held that opinion, so that to condemn that would be to condemn
them. Others proposed, for a temper, that it should not be condemned as
heretical, but as pernicious. Some would have this condition added, if there
were commodity for a Confessor. The last part, for communicating at Easter, it
not being commanded by the Law of GOD, but by the Church only, the common
opinion was, that it ought not to be condemned for heretical, it being a
thing not heard of, that one should be condemned of heresy, for not
approouing a particular humane precept. Many Divines did propose another
Article also, taken out of the writings of Luther, which was necessary to
condemn. And it was this: that although there was a necessity to recite the
words of CHRIST, yet they are not the cause of the presence of CHRIST in the
Sacrament, but the cause is, the faith of him who receives it.

After all the divines had spoken, the deputed Fathers did collect seven Out of
which 7. Anathematismes are composed.
Anathematismes, out of their opinions, which being proposed in the general
Congregation, it was first of all considered, that it was not fit to pass over
the matter with Anathematismes only; that this was not to teach, but only to
confirm; that the ancient Councels had not done so, which always had
expounded the Catholic opinion, and then condemned the contrary; that the same
succeeded well to this Council, in the matter of Justification; and although
it was forced, in the Session of the Sacraments, to change this course, for
urgent respects, yet that was rather to be imitated which was then done by
reason, then that which was after changed by necessity. This opinion was
cherished by the Italian Divines, who saw there was but one way to regaine
their reputation lost. For as the Dutch and Flemish Divines were of ability to
prove the conclusions by authorities, so to expound them, and find their
causes, there was need of School Divinity, in which themselves were well
seen. This opinion did prevail; and order was given, that the Heads of
doctrine should be framed, and Fathers deputed to see it done. The Heads were
reduced to the number of eight. Of the Real presence. Of the Institution. Of
the excellency. Eight heads of doctrine are proposed to be discussed.
Of Transubstantiation. Of worship. Of preparation to receive the Sacrament. Of
the use of the Cup, in the Communion of the Laity. Of the Communion of
Children. It was proposed also to make a collection of the abuses which did
occur, and to add the remedies. Then, in that Congregation, and some of
those that followed, the Fathers began to speak their opinion concerning the
seven Anathematismes: wherein nothing remarkable was said, but that, in
condemning those who confessed not the real presence of the Lords body, many
desired that the Canon should be more fat and pregnant (for so their words
were) that, in the Eucharist, there is the body of JESUS CHRIST, the same which
was borne of the Virgin, did suffer on the Cross, was buried, raised, and
ascended into heaven, sits on the right hand of GOD, and shall come to
judgment. And some of them called to mind, that there wanted one very
important point, that is, to declare, that the Minister of this Sacrament is
the Priest, lawfully ordained. Which they did, because Luther and his followers
do often say, that every Christian may do it, even a woman.

But the Earl of Montfort, perceiving that they treated of a matter much
controuersed, especially of the Communion of the Cup, which was the most
palpable, popular, and best understood by all, he thought that, if The
Ambassadors of the Emperor and Ferdinand dissw^de the discussion of the
Communion under one kind.
that were determined, the Protestants would never be induced to come to the
Council, and all the labor would be in vain. And having imparted this to
his Colleagues, and the Ambassadors of Ferdinand, they went all together to the
Presidents, to whom, when they had showed what pains Caesar had taken, both in
war, and in the negotiation to make the Protestants submit to the Council,
which they would never do if they went not thither, they showed that they
ought to apply themselves principally to this; and, to that end, the Emperor
had given them a Safe conduct. But they were not contented with it, alleging
that it was decreed in the Council of Constance, and really executed, that the
Council is not bound by the Safe conduct of any, whatsoever he be; and
therefore they required one from the Synod, which was promised to them by
Caesar, who gave charge to them his Ambassadors to obtain it of the Council.
Whereunto the Legate making a very complementall answer, and referring
himself to the Session which should be held, to gain time, that he might
give an account thereof to Rome, the earl added, that for the same cause, he
thought it not fit, that, before their coming, the controuersed points of the
Eucharist should be handled; that there wanted not matters of reformation to
be treated on, or others, in which there was no difference. The Legate
answered, that it was resolved long ago to handle the Eucharist, neither could
it be altered, because it was concluded before, that the Decrees of faith and
reformation should go hand in hand, and that the matter of the Eucharist did
follow that of reformation, which was handled last, before they went to
Bolonia. But he said, that this was more controuersed with the Zinglian
Suisses, then with the Protestants, who are not Sacramentaries; as those. The
Count spoke of the Communion of the Cup, and said, that if that point were
decided against them, which is understood by all the people, and a thing
whereon they stand most, it was impossible to reduce them. That, Caesar also in
the Decree of the Inter-religion, was forced to yield in this, and therefore
desired that they would be pleased to defer it until the coming of the
Protestants. The Legate did not refuse, but passed it over with general and
vnconcluding words, that he might first understand the Popes mind, unto whom
he gave an account of whatsoever was handled by the Divines, and of the
Anathematismes framed, and of that which was discoursed The Legate gives the
Pope an account of all.
in matter of reformation (whereof we will speak hereafter) and then he gave
advise of the two requests of the Emperors Ambassadors, desiring an answer.

The Pope put these things in consultation; and, for the lafe conduct, found
variety of opinions. Some would not have it given, alleging that Who causes
a consultation to be held.
it was never done but by the Council of Basil, which was not to be imitated
in any thing; and that it was a great prejudice to bind themselves to rebels,
though any thing might be endured if there were hope to gain them; but there
was none at all; yea rather, in stead of that, there was reason to fear that
some would be perverted, as Vergerius was, though not wholly, yet in some
part; from which contagion the most principal Prelates, and the most obliged
to the holy Sea, have not been exempted. On the other side it was said, that,
not out of hope to convert, but to leave them without excuse, it was fit to
give them all satisfaction; but the rather, because the Emperor for his own
interests, had made greater instance, whom it was necessary to please now,
because, France being aliened, they were wholly to depend on him: and it was
better to prevent, and do that willingly, which of necessity was to be done.
And, concerning the preiudices, it might be made in such a form, that it
should not bind at all, or very little. First, by not descending to name the
Protestants, but in general, the Ecclesiastikes and Seculars of the German
Nation, of every condition. For so, under the general words, it may be said
they are comprehended, or, that it is understood of the Catholics only, and
not of them, alleging that for them, a special and express mention was
necessary. Then the Synod may grant a safe Conduct for it self, and the Popes
authority will be reserved. Then Judges, concerning faults committed, may be
deputed, and the election And answers thus.
left to them, to avoid suspicion. So that vigor of discipline, and authority
of punishing would be retained, and no show made of yielding or remitting any
thing. This opinion prevailed with the Pope, who, according to that form, made
a draught of the safe Conduct, and answered the Legate, commending his wisdom
in the answers he had given, resolving that the safe Conduct should be
granted in the form he sent him, and that the matter of the Cup should be
deferred, and the Protestants expected, but not above three months, or little
more, not being idle in the mean while, but making a Session between, to
treat of Penance, which he would not have deferred above forty days, or
little more. He advertised them also, that the Canons, in matter of the
Eucharist, were too full, and that it were better to divide them.

While they consulted in Rome, in Trent they went on to handle the points of
doctrine; wherein they proceeded as easily, as before, in discussing the
Articles. But when they came to express the manner of existence, how CHRIST is
in the Sacrament, and the Transubstantiation, how the Body of CHRIST is made of
the Bread, and the Blood of the Wine, it could not be A contention a^s(...)
between the Franciscans and Dominicans concer(...) the real p^^sence
treated on without contention between the two Schools, Dominican, and
Franciscan; which did much trouble the Fathers, by the subtlety and small
fruit thereof, themselves not knowing how to explicate their own meaning. In
sum, the Dominicans would not have it said that Christ was in the Eucharist,
because he went thither from another place where he was before, but, because
the substance of the Bread is turned into his Body, the Body being in the place
where the bread was, without going thither; and because all the substance of
the bread is turned into all the substance of the Body, that is, the matter of
the Bread into the matter of the Body, and the form into the form, it is
properly called Transubstantiation. And therefore there are two sorts of the
existence of CHRIST our Lord, both of them real, true, and substantial, one,
as he is in heaven, whither he ascended, when he parted from the earth, where
he first conuersed; the other, as he is in the Sacrament, in which he is,
because he is where the substances of the bread and wine, converted into him,
were first. The first existence is called natural, because it agrees to all
bodies; the second, as it is singular, so it cannot be expressed with any name
agreeing to others, nor can be called Sacramental, which were as much as to
say, that it was not there really, but as in a sign, the Sacrament being
nothing but an holy sign, except by Sacramental one would understand a real
manner, proper to this Sacrament only. The Franciscans would have it said,
that one body may, by Gods omnipotency, be truly and substantially in many
places, and when it does get a new place, it is in it, because it goes
thither, not by a successiue mutation, as when it leaves the first place to
get the second, but in an instant, in which it gains the second, without
losing the first; and that God has so ordained, that where the body of CHRIST
is, there should remain no other substance, not by annihilation, because the
substance of CHRIST succeeds in place of it, and therefore it is truly
called Transubstantiation, not because the one substance is made of the other,
as the Dominicans say, but for that the one does succeed the other. The
manner of CHRIST'S being in heaven and in the Sacrament differs not in
substance, but in quantity only: because in heaven the magnitude of the body
possesses as much space as is proportionable to it, and it is substantially in
the Sacrament without possessing any place. Therefore both sorts are true,
real, and substantial, and, in regard of the substance, natural also: in
respect of the quantity the existence in heaven is natural, and in the
Sacrament miraculous, differing in this only, that in heaven the quantity is
truly a quantity, and in the Sacrament, has the condition of a substance.
Either party was so wedded to their own opinion, that they affirmed it to be
plain, clear, and intelligible to all, and opposed infinite absurdities
against the other. The Elector of Cullen, who, with Johannes Groperus, was
assiduous at the disputations, to understand this matter, in that which one
party opposed against the other, he gave a reason to them both, in that which
either of them affirmed, he said, he desired some probability, and that they
should speak as understanding the matter, not, as they seemed to do, by
custom and habit of the Schools. Diverse draughts were made by both sides, to
express these mysteries, and some were composed by taking some thing from
either party. But none gave satisfaction, especially to the Nuncio Verona, who
was the principal Superintendent in this matter. It was determined in the
general Congregation, to use as few words as was possible, and to make an
expression so universal, as might be accommodated to the meaning of both
parties: and the care hereof was committed to some Fathers and Pheologues,
with the superintendencie of the foresaid Nuncio.

In the end of this Congregation, it was proposed that a collection should The
abuses occurring therein rre noted.
be made, of the abuses occurring in this matter, with remedies against them,
and, in the Congregations following, many were recounted. That in some
particular Churches, the Sacrament is not kept, and in others, is kept very
indecently. That, when it is carried in the stree^e, many do not kneel to it,
and some scarce vouchsafe to put off their caps. That, in some Churches, it is
kept so long, that it becomes putrified. That, in administering the holy
Communion, great indecencie is used, by some parish Priests, who have not so
much as a cloth, for him that communicates, to hold in his hand. That, (which
is of most importance) the communicants do not know what they receive, nor are
instructed of the dignity, and fruit of this Sacrament. That Concubinaries,
Concubines, and other enormous sinners, and many who know not the Pater noster,
and A^^e Maria are admitted to the Communion. That money is demanded at the
Communion in the name of alms, and, which is worse, there is an use in Rome,
that he who is to communicate, does hold a burning candle in his hand, with
money sticking in it, which, together with the candle, after the Communion,
remains to the Priest, and he that bears not a candle, is not admitted to
the Communion. To remedy part of these, and other abuses, flue Canons were
made, And five Canons made to redress them.
which had a fair proheme. In which it was constituted, that the Sacrament
being lifted up on the Altar, or carried by the way, every one should kneel,
and uncover his head. That the Sacrament should be kept in every Parish
Church, and renewed every fifteen days, and have a lamp burning before it
night and day. That it be carried to the sick, by the Priest, in an
honorable habit, and always with light. That the Curates teach the people,
what grace is received in this Sacrament, and execute against them, the
penalties of the Chapt. Omnis Vtriusque sexus. That the Ordinaries should have
care of the execution, chastising the transgressors with arbitrary
punishments, besides those which are set down by Innocentius the third, in the
Chapt. Statuimus, and by Honorius the third, in the Chapt. Sane.

The reformation was handled, at the same time, when there was disputation in
matter of faith, but by other Congregations, in which the Canonists did assist;
which discussions, not to interrupt the matter, I have brought all together to
this place. And because the purpose was to reform the Episcopal jurisdiction,
this place requires (for the understanding of what will be said upon this, and
many other occasions hereafter) that the original should be declared, and
how, being mounted to so great power it became suspected to Princes, and
terrible to the people. CHRIST having commanded his Apostles to preach the
Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, he left also to them, in person of all
the faithful, this principal precept, To love one another, charging them to
make peace, between those that dissented, and, for the last remedy, giving
the care thereof to the body of the Church, promising it should be bound and
loosed in heaven, whatsoever they did bind and loose on earth, and whatsoever
two did ask with a common consent, should be granted by the Father. In this
charitable office to give satisfaction to the offended, and pardon to the
offender, the Primitive Church was always exercised. And, in conformity of
this, Saint Paul ordained, that brothers, having civil suites one against
another, should not go to the Tribunals of the Infidels, but that wise men
should be appointed to judge the differences; and this was a kind of civil
Judgment, as the other had a similitude of a criminal; but were both so
different from the judgments of the world, that as these are executed by power
of the Judge, who enforces submission, so those only by the will of the
guilty, to receive them, who refusing them, the Ecclesiastical Judge remains
without execution, and has no power, but to foreshew the judgment of GOD,
which, according to his omnipotent good pleasure, will follow, in this life, or
the next.

And indeed, the Ecclesiastical judgment did deserve the name of charity,
The Reformation is handled at the same time with the Doctrine, but in diverse
Congregations.
in regard that it only did induce the guilty to submit, and the Church to
judge with such sincerity, that neither in the one any bad effect could have
place, nor just complaint in the other; and the excess of charity in
correcting, did make the corrector to feel greater pain then the corrected;
so that, in the Church, no punishment was imposed, without great lamentation of
the multitude, and greater of the better sort. And this was the cause A
discourse of the Author concerning (...)opall Jurisdiction.
why to correct, was called to lament. So Saint Paul, rebuking the Corinthians,
for not chastising the incestuous, said, You have not lamented to separate such
a transgressour from you. And in another Epistle, I fear that when I come unto
you, I shall not find you such as I desire, but in contentions and tumults,
and that at my coming, I shall lament many of those who have sinned before.
The judgment of the Church (as is necessary in every multitude) was fit that
it should be conducted by one, who should preside and guide the action, propose
the matters, and collect the points to be consulted on. This care, due to the
most principal, and worthy person, was always committed to the Bishop. And
where the Churches were many, the propositions and deliberations were made by
the Bishop, first in the College of the Priests and Deacons, which they called
the Presbytery, and there were ripened, to receive afterward the last
resolution in the general Congregation of the Church. This form was still on
foot in the year two hundred and fifty, and is plainly seen by the
Epistles of Cyprian, who in the matter concerning those who did eat of meats
offered to Idols, and subscribe to the Religion of the Gentiles, writes to the
Presbytery, that he does not think to do any thing without their counsel,
and consent of the people; and writes to the people, that, at his return, he
will examine the causes, and merits thereof, in their presence, and under their
judgment; and he wrote to those Priests, who, of their own brain, had
reconciled some, that they should give an account to the people.

The goodness and charity of the Bishops, made their opinion for the most
part to be followed, and by little and little, was cause that the Church,
charity waxing cold, not regarding the charge laid upon them by CHRIST, did
leave the care to the Bishop; and ambition, a witty passion, which does
insinuate it self in the show of virtue, did cause it to be readily embraced.
But the principal cause of the change was the ceasing of persecutions. For
then the Bishops did e^ect as it were a tribunal, which was much frequented;
because as temporal commodities, so suites did increase. The judgment, though
it were not as the former, in regard of the form, to determine all by the
opinion of the Church, yet it was of the same sincerity. Whereupon Constantine,
seeing how profitable it was to determine causes, and that, by the authority
of Religion, captious actions were discovered, which the Judges could not
penetrate, made a Law that there should lie no appeal from the sentences of
Bishops, which should be executed by the secular Judges: and if in a cause
depending before a secular tribunal, in any state thereof, either of the
parties, though the other contradict, shall demand the Episcopal judgment,
the cause shall be immediately remitted unto him.

Here the tribunal of the Bishop, began to be a common pleading place, having
execution by the Ministry of the Magistrate, and to gain the name of
Episcopal jurisdiction, Episcopal audience, and such like. The Emperor
Valence did enlarge it, who, in the year 365. gave the Bishops the care over
all the prizes of vendible things. This judicial negotiation pleased not the
good Bishops. Possidonius, does recount that Austin, being employed herein,
sometimes until dinner time, sometimes longer, was wont to say, that it was a
trouble, and did divert him from the things proper unto him; and himself
writes, that it was to leave things profitable, and to attend things
tumultuous and perplexed. And Saint Paul did not take it to himself, as being
not fit for a Preacher, but would have it given to others. Afterward some
Bishops, beginning to abuse the authority given them by the law of
Constantine, that law was seventy years after, revoked by Arcadius and
Honorius, and an ordination made that they should judge causes of religion, and
not civil, except both parties did consent, and declared that they should not
be thought to have a Court. Which law being not much observed in Rome, in
regard of the great power of the Bishop, Valentinian being in the City, in
that year 452. did renew it, and made it to be put in execution. But a little
after, some part of the power taken away was restored by the Princes that
followed; so that Justinian did establish unto them a Court, and audience, and
assigned to them the causes of Religion, the Ecclesiastical faults of the
Clergy, and diverse, voluntary jurisdictions also over the Laity. By these
degrees the charitable correction, instituted by CHRIST, did degenerate into
domination, and made Christians loose their ancient reverence and obedience. It
is denied in words, that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is dominion, as is the
secular, yet one knows not how to put a difference between them. But S. Paul
did put it, when he wrote to Timothy, and repeated it to Titus, that a Bishop
should not be greedy of gain, nor a striker. Now on the contrary, they make
men pay for processes, and imprison the parties, as is done in the secular
Court.

But the Western Countries being separated, and an Empire made of Italy,
France, and Germany, and a kingdom of Spain, in these four Provinces the
Bishops, for the most part, were made Counselors of the Prince, which, by the
mixture of spiritual and temporal charges, caused their jurisdiction to
increase exceedingly. Before 200. years were past, they pretended absolutely
all judicature, criminal and civil, over the Clergy, and, in some things,
over the Laity also, pretending that the cause was Ecclesiastical. Besides
this kind of Judicature, they invented another, which they called mixed, in
which the Magistrate or the Bishop might proceed against the secular, which of
them took the cause in hand first; whereby in regard of their exquisite
diligence, never leaving place to the secular, they appropriated all unto
themselves; and those which remained out of so great a number, were
comprehended in the end by a general rule, established by them, as a ground of
faith, that every cause is deuolued to the Ecclesiastical Court, if the
Magistrate will not, or neglect to do justice. But if the pretensions of the
Clergy were contained within these bounds, the state of Christian Common
wealths were tolerable. The people and Princes, when they saw it mount to
these unsupportable terms, might with Laws and statutes have brought the
judgments to a sufferable form, as formerly upon occasion has been done.
But that which put Christendom under the yoke, took from it, in the end all
means to shake it from the neck. For after the year 1050. all the causes of
the Clergy being appropriated to the Bishops, and very many of the Laity,
under title of spiritualitie, and almost all the rest under the name of a mixed
judicature, and placing themselves above secular Magistrates, upon pretense of
justice denied, they came to say, that the Bishop had that power to judge, not
by the grant or conniuency of Princes, or by the will of the People, or by
custom, but that it was essential to the Episcopal dignity, and given to it
by CHRIST.

And though the Laws of the Emperors remain in the Codes of Theodosius and
Justinian, in the Capitulars of Charles the great, and Lewis the Deboneere, and
others of later Princes of the East and West, which do all show plainly, how,
when and by whom this power has been granted, and all Stories, as well
Ecclesiastical as profane, do agree in declaring the same grants and
customs, adding the reasons and causes, yet so notorious a truth has not had
such power, but that a contrary affirmation only, without any proof, has
been able to overcome it; which the Canonists have so far maintained, as to
publish those for heretics who do not suffer themselves to be hoodwinckt.
And not staying here they add, that neither the Magistrate, nor the Prince
himself, can meddle in any of those causes which the Clergy has appropriated,
because they are spiritual, and of spiritual things the Laiques are
incapable. Yet the light of truth was not so put out but that learned and
godly men, in those first times, did oppose that doctrine, showing that both the
Premises of that discourse were false, and that the Mayor, that is, that the
Laiques are incapable of spiritual things, was absurd, and impious. For they
are adopted by the heavenly Father, called the sons of God, brothers of
CHRIST, partakers of the Kingdom of heaven, made worthy of Divine grace. Of
Baptism, and of the Communion of the flesh of CHRIST. What other spiritual
things are there beside these? And if there were, how can he, who is partaker
of these which are the chiefest, be said absolutely in general terms to be
incapable of spiritual things? But they said that the Minor was false also,
that causes appropriated to the Episcopal judicature are spiritual. For all
either delicts or contracts: which, considering the qualities, given by the
holy Scripture to spiritual things, are as far from being such, as earth is
from heaven. But the opposition of the better part could not overcome the
greater, and so; upon the spiritual power, given by CHRIST to the Church, to
bind and loose, and upon the institution of Saint Paul, to compose contentions
between Christians, without going to the tribunal of Infidels, in much time,
and by many degrees, a temporal tribunal has been built, more remarkable
then ever was any in the world, and in the midst of every Civil government
another instituted, not depending on the Public, which is such a kind of
Commonwealth, as not one of as many as have written of governments would have
imagined could subsist. I will omit to speak how the pains of so many,
besides the obtaining of the wished end. To make themselves independent of the
public, have, before they were aware, raised an Empire, there being a more
difficult opinion sprung up, taking root with admirable progress, which gives
to the Pope of Rome, as much at once, as has, in 1300. years, been gained by
so many Bishops, by such extraordinary means, not making the power to bind
and loose the foundation of jurisdiction, but the power of feeding, and so
affirming, that all jurisdiction was given the Pope by CHRIST, in the person of
Peter, when he said to him, Feed my sheep. For so it will be said in the
third reduction of the Council, when great tumults were raised by this
opinion, which shall then be recounted. But by that which has been now
declared, every one may of himself, conceive what remedies were necessary, to
give a tolerable form to a matter, broken out into so great corruptions, and
compare them with these that were proposed.

In Trent there were two defects considered; that is, that the charity of the
superiors was turned into domination, and the obedience of the inferiors into
complaints, subterfuges, and lamentations; and they first thought of providing,
in some sort, against them both. But in prosecuting the first, which is the
fountain from whence the second is derived, they used only an exhortatorie
remedy to the Prelates to take away domination, and restore charity. And for
the inferiors, many subterfuges, being mentioned to delude justice, three
heads only were taken, Appeals, absolutorie graces, and complaints against
the Judges. Johannes Groperus, who assisted in that Council as a Divine and a
Lawyer, spoke honorably of Appeals, and said, that while the heat of faith
remained in the breasts of Christians, Appeals were not heard of. But charity
in the Judges waxing cold, and place being given to passion, they entered into
the Church, for A discourse of Johannes Groperus concern^ng Appeals.
the same reasons which brought them into the secular Courts, that is, for the
ease of the oppressed. And as the first iudicatures belonged not to the Bishop
only, but to him with the council of his Priests, so the Appeal was not
deuolued unto one man, but unto another Congregation. But the Bishops, taking
away the Synods, did institute Courts and officers, like the seculars. Neither
did the mischief stop there, but passed to greater abuses then in the
Secular court. For there the first Appeal is only to be immediate superior,
neither is it lawful to leap to the highest, nor permitted, in the articles
of the cause to appeal from the Decrees of the Judge which they call
interlocutories, but it is necessary to expect the end. But in the
Ecclesiastical Courts one may appeal from every act, which makes the causes
infinite, and immediately to the highest Judge, which carries them out of the
Countries, with great charges, and other intolerable mischiefs. This he said
he did declare, to conclude, that if they would reform this matter, which is
wholly corrupted, and does not only hinder residencie, as in the
Congregations of so many worthy Doctors and Fathers was considered, but
corrupts the whole discipline, and is a grieuance, charge, and scandal to
the people, it was fit to reduce it to its beginning, or as near to it as
might be, setting a perfect Idea before their eyes, and aiming at that, to
come as nigh to it, as the corruption of the matter does comport. That the well
instituted monastical religions have forbidden all appeal; that this is the
true remedy. He that has not been able to go so high, has moderated them,
granting them within their order, and forbidding them without; which succeeding
well, as appears, to keep those governments in order, it would work the
same effect in the public governments of the Church, if the Appeals were
confined within the same Province. And to effect this, and to bridle the malice
of the litigants, it is sufficient to reduce them to the form of the Common
laws, forbidding the Leap, that is, to go to the highest without passing by
the intermediate superiors, and by forbidding Appeals from the Articles, or
the interlocutory Decrees: with which provisions, the causes will not go
far, will not be drawn in length, will not cause excessive charges, and
other innumerable grieuances, and, that the sentences may pass with
sincerity, to restore the Synodals, which are not subject to so great
corruptions, removing those officers by whom the world is so much scandalized,
because it is not possible that Germany should endure them.

This opinion was not willingly heard, except by the Spaniards and Dutchmen.
But the Cardinal and the Nuncio of Siponto, were displeased that he went so
far. For this was to take away, not only the profit of the Court, but the
honor also, no cause would go to Rome, and by degrees, every one would forget
the superiority of the Pope, it being an ordinary thing with men, not to
esteem that Superior, whose authority is not feared, or cannot be used.
Therefore they caused John Baptista Castellus, of Bolonia, to speak in the
next Congregation, in the same matter, in such sort, as that without
contradicting Groperus, the appearance, which the reasons alleged by him did
make should be darkened. He began with the praises of the ancient ^n
opposition whereof, Johannes Baptista Castellus makes another discou^se by
direction of the Presidents.
Church, yet dexterously touching, that in those same times, there were
imperfections, in some part greater, then in the present. He thanked GOD that
the Church was not oppressed, as when the Arians did scarce suffer it to
appear: and said, that antiquity ought not so to be commended, as that
something in the latter age, may not be reputed better. Those who praise the
Synodall judicature, have not seen their defects, the infinite length in the
dispatches, the impediments in the diligent examination, the difficulty to
inform so many, the seditions made by the factious: it is to be believed that
they have been intermitted, because they did notsucceed well, and that the
Courts and Officers have been brought in, to remedy those disorders. It cannot
be denied, that these have some that deserve to be provided against; which is
fit to do, without restoring that which was abolished, because it was
intolerable. In Appeals, the custom was to pass by the intermediate
Superiors, and not, at the first, to leap to the highest; which was taken
away, because the Governors of Provinces and Countries, were become Tyrants
over the Church, and for a remedy, all businesses were carried to Rome. This
has its inconueniencies, the great distance of place, and charge; but they are
more tolerable then oppression, He that would reduce the first custom, should
find that in stead of redressing one evil he should cause many and every one
greater. But above all it must be considered, that the same public thing must
not always be ordered in one manner, but as time has mutations, so it is fit
to change the government. The ancient manner of governing will not be
profitable, except the ancient state of the Church do return. He that,
seeing how children are governed, and how the liberty of eating and drinking
any thing, at any time, is cause of health and strength, should think an old
man might do so, would find himself much deceived. The Churches were little,
compassed with Pagans, united amongst themselves, as being near the enemy;
now they are great, without any opposite to keep them in their duty;
whereupon the common things are neglected, and it is necessary they should be
cared for by one. If the causes did continue in every Province, within a few
years there would be such diversity, that one would be contrary to another,
and they would not seem to be of the same faith and religion. The Popes of
Rome took not upon them in ancient times many parts of government, when they
saw it was good, but reserved it to themselves when it was abused by others.
Many succeeding Popes were of holy life, and good intension, who would have
restored it, but that they saw, that, in a corrupt matter, it could not be well
used. His conclusion was, that to preserve the unity of the Church, it was
necessary to leave things as they are.

Neither did this please the Italian Prelates, who would have the Popes
authority preserved, yet withal, some thing restored to themselves,
especially being to reside; therefore they came to moderate the business. To
restore Synodall iudicatures was rejected by almost all, because it did
diminish the Episcopal and was too popular. To appeal by degrees, though it
was maintained by many; yet it was excluded by plurality of voices. To appeal
from the definitiues alone, was accommodated with a limitation, that it should
be only in criminal causes, others being left in the same state, though
perhaps they had more need to be reformed. For proceeding against the persons
of the Bishops, no man desiring to facilitate the judicature against himself,
the restoring of it to Parochial Synods, unto which it did formerly belong,
was not spoken of, but they desired to provide that, it remaining in the Popes
hands, it should pass with greater dignity of that order, moderating the
commissions which came from Rome, by which they were forced to appear, and
submit themselves to persons of an inferior rank. And this was so earnestly
desired by all, that it was necessary for the Legate to yield unto it, though he
was not pleased with any exaltation of the Bishops, because all was taken from
the Pope which was given to them.

The Dutch Prelates did propose, that the laws of the Degradations might be
moderated, as being intolerable, and giving much occasion of complaint in
Germany. For it being a pure ceremony which hinders Justice, and The Dutch
Prelates complain of the laws of Degradation.
they having desired a moderation, ever since the year 1522. in the one and
thirtieth of the hundred grieuances, to see that the abuse is continued, gives
matter of scandal to some, and of detraction to others, The ancient use of the
Church was, that if any Ecclesiastical person would return to the secular
state, to the end it might not appear that those who were deputed to the A
discourse about Degradation.
ministry of the Church, should serve the world, the Bishops did use to take
from him the Ecclesiastical degree; as in war, to hold themselves in more
reputation, it was not granted to a Soldier to return to civil functions,
and be subject to the civil Judge, if he were not first bereaved of his
military degree, which therefore was called Degradation, taking from him his
girdle, and arms, as with those he was created a Soldier. Therefore when any
Clergy man, either willingly, or by the laws was to return to secular
functions, or, for some faults, was made subject to that Court, the Bishops did
take from him the degree, with the same ceremonies with the which he was
invested, spoilng him of the habits, and taking out of his hand the
instruments, by the assignation of which he was deputed to the ministry.
Being apparelled just as if he were to minister in his charge, he was to be
stripped first of that, which was last in the ordination, and with contrary
words to those that were used in the promotion. And this was very usual in
those first times after Constantine, for three hundred years. But about the
year six hundred, a custom was brought in, not to permit Cleargie-men of
holy Order to return to the world, and to others it was granted to do it at
their pleasure; whereupon, by little and little, the Degradation of the lesser
was wholly disused, and that of the greater was restrained only to this case,
when they were to be made subject to the secular Court. And Justinian,
regulating the judicature of the Clergy, after he had ordained that, in
Ecclesiastical delicts, they should be chastized by the Bishops, and in
secular delicts, which he called Civil, by the public Judge, added that the
punishment should not be executed before the party guilty, were despoyled of
(...) Priesthood by the Bishop. And after that criminal judicature over the
Clergy was granted to the Bishops, the Degradation remained only when the
punishment was death, which, in regard of the dignity of their order, the
Ecclesiastiques would not have inflicted upon a Clergy man. But, in cases of
exorbitant wickedness, it seemed that it could not be denied, without
scandal; therefore they found a way to do that indirectly, which directly
they could not, saying, it was just that the offenses of the Clergy should be
punished with deserved death, but the Degradation was first necessary: which
they made so difficult, by circumstances of solemnity, that very seldom it
could be done. And this procured a greater reverence of the Clericall Order,
with whose blood justice had nothing to do, if so much solemnity did not
precede. It was justly ordered that the Bishops should not do it but in
public, apparelled with the holy vestments, and, which more imported, with
the assistance of twelve Bishops, in the Degradation of a Bishop, of six, in
the Degradation of a Priest, of three, in the Degradation of a Deacon, who were
to be present in their Pontifical ornaments. And it seeming strange, that a
Bishop, who might give a degree without company, could not take it away alone,
Pope Innocentius the third removed the marvel, with a maxim, which has not
much probability, saying, that temporal buildings are hardly erected, and
easily pulled down, but spiritual contrarily, are easily built, and hardly
destroyed. The vulgar held the Degradation for a necessary thing, and, when it
happened, ran to it, with unspeakable frequencie. But learned men do know
the bottom of it. For having determined, that, in the collation of the Order,
a sign is imprinted in the soul, called a Character, which is impossible to
blot out, or remove by Degradation, this remains a pure Ceremony, performed
for reputation only. In Germany, there being but few Bishops, it could not
be done without immense charge, to bring so many into one place. And those
Dutch Prelates, who were in the Council, for the most part Princes, did know
more then others, how necessary it is, for examples sake, to punish, with
death, the wickedness of Priests: wherefore they desired that provision should
be made therein. This particular was much discussed, and, in the end, it was
resolved not to change the Ceremony by any means, but to find a temper, that
the difficulty and the cost might be moderated.

The Legate, though every week he had given an account to the Pope of all
occurrences, yet he was willing to establish in Congregation the draughts of
the Decrees, that he might send a copy of them, and receive an answer before
the Session. Wherefore, the general Congregation being assembled, not making
mention of what was written to him from Rome, he made a relation of that which
the Earl of Mountfort had represented, adding that the request for a Safe
Conduct seemed reasonable, and also the deferring of whatsoever could be
deferred with honor. For having appointed already to speak of the Eucharist,
the first day of September, they could not choose but do it, but to omit some
point more important, and more controuersed, was a thing which might be
granted. And the voices being collected, all were of opinion, that the Safe
Conduct should be given, but concerning the matter to be handled, some
thought that it was not for their honor to defer it, if the Protestants did
not give security that they would come to handle it, and submit themselves to
the determination of the Council. Others said, that their honor was saved, if
it were done at their A dispute what points of doctrine are to be handled,
until the coming of the Protestants.
request; and this was the more common opinion. Then the Legate added that they
might reserve the matter of ministering the Cup to the Laity: and, to show that
they did not come for one Article only, they might join also with it the
Communion of Children. And order was taken to compose the Decree in this
particular. Which being read, some thought it was too little to reserve two
Articles, and therefore that it was better to divide the first into three, and
so reserve four, and to add the Sacrifice of the Mass; the controversies
whereof are great. For so it will appear, that many things are reserved, and
the most principal; and in this opinion all did agree. And when it was said
that the Protestants desire to be heard concerning these, a Prelate of
Germany stood up, and asked, by whom, and to whom this request was made;
because it did much import that this should appear; otherwise when they should
say it was not true, the honor of the Council would be much blemished. But
there being nothing but what Count Mountfort had said as of himself, and that
also not restrained to those four heads, nor to the matter of the Eucharist,
but in general of all the Controversies, they were much troubled how to
resolve. To show that this reservation was made by their own motion, besides
that it was an indignity, it did draw an objection upon them, that they ought
to reserve all. This way was found to be least ill, not to say that the
Protestants make request, but that they desire to be heard; whereof there can
be no doubt made, because they have said it upon diverse occasions; and though
they meant concerning all the controversies, yet it is no falsitie to speak
that of a part, which is spoken of the whole number, not excluding the rest.
Some thought that this was to hide themselves behind a thread; but yet it did
pass, because they knew not how to do better. For this cause, the matters
reserved being to be taken out of the Heads of doctrine, and the
Anathematismes, these which remained were, for more perspicuitie, divided, and
reduced to eleven, When they were to make the Decrees against the abuses, they
knew not where to put them. Amongst those of faith they were not to be placed,
being of Ceremonies and uses. With those of Reformation they did not agree, in
regard of the diversity of the matter. To rank them by themselves was a
nouitie, and did alter the order set down. After a long dispute it was
concluded to omit them now, and after to place them with the Decrees of the
Mass. The points of the Reformation were accepted without difficulty, having
been already established by themselves. There remained the form of the Safe
Conduct, which was referred to the Presidents to compose, by the help of those
who had experience in such things; which assisted the Legate to make that form
pass which was sent him from Rome.

The eleventh of October being come, they went to the Church, as they were
wont. The Bishop of Maiorica sang Mass, and the Archbishop of Torre made the
Sermon, which was all in the praise of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And
other usual Ceremonies being performed, the Decree of the doctrine was read by
the Bishops that did celebrate the Mass. The substance whereof was: That the
Synod assembled to declare the ancient faith, A Session is held.
and to remedy the inconveniences caused by the Sects, did desire, from the
beginning, to root cut the cockle, sowed in the field of the Eucharist.
Therefore, The Decree of doctrine concerning the Eucharist.
teaching the Catholic doctrine, ever believed by the Church, it does
prohibit all the faithful hereafter to believe, teach or preach, otherwise
then is declared. First, it teaches that in the Eucharist, after the
Consecration, CHRIST is contained, truly, really, and substantially, under the
appearances of the sensible things, notwithstanding he is in heaven, by a
natural existence, because he is present in his substance in many other
places, Sacramentally, in a manner of existence, which is believed by faith, and
can hardly be expressed by words. For all the ancients have professed, that
CHRIST did institute this Sacrament in the last Supper, when, after the
benediction of the Bread and Wine, he said, in clear and manifest words, that
he gave his Body and Blood, which having a most plain signification, it is
great wickedness to wrest them to imaginary figures, denying the truth of the
Flesh and Blood of CHRIST. Afterward it teaches, that CHRIST has instituted
this Sacrament in memory of himself, ordayning it should be received as a
Spiritual food of the soul, as a medicine for our daily faults, a
preservative from mortal sin, a pledge of eternal glory, and a sign of the
Body whereof himself is the Head. And though it be common to this Sacrament
with others, to be a sign of a sacred thing, yet it has this proper to it
self, that other having virtue to sanctify in the use, this does contain the
author of Sanctity before the use. For the Apostles had not received the
Eucharist from the hand of our Lord, when he said that it was his Body: and the
Church has always believed, that the Body of CHRIST is under the bread, and
the Blood under the wine, by virtue of the Consecration; but, by concomitancie,
as much is under either of the kinds, and every part of them, as under both;
declaring that by the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is made a
conversion of their whole substance into the substance of the Body and Blood of
CHRIST, which conversion the Catholic Church has called Transubstantiation,
by a fit and proper term. Therefore the faithful do give the honor of
Latria, or divine worship, due unto God, to this Sacrament, and it has been
religiously instituted to make a particular feast for it every year, and to
carry it in procession, in pubique places. Likewise the custom to keep it in
an holy place is ancient and has been observed from the time of the Nicen
Council, and to carry it to the sick is an old custom, being reasonable
besides, and commanded in many Councels. And if it be not fit that any holy
thing should be handled without sanctity, much more none ought to come to this
Sacrament without great reverence, and proof made of himself: which proof
must be, that none having mortally sinned, though he be contrite, may
receive it, without sacramental Confession, which the Priest also, who is to
celebrate, ought to observe, so that he can find a Confessor; and if he
cannot, he must confess immediately afterward. It does teach also that there
be three kinds of receiving the Eucharist. One Sacramentally only, as
sinners do; another spiritually, as those do, who receive it with a lively
faith, and desire; the third contains both kinds, as those do receive it,
who, having proved themselves, as aforesaid, do go to the Table. And there
is an Apostolical Tradition, and so it ought to be observed, that the Liaitie
should receive the Communion from the Priests, and the Priests should
Communicate Themselves. In the end the Synod prays all Christians to agree
in this doctrine. When the Decree was ended, the eleven Anathematismes were
read. 1. Against him that shall deny that, in the Eucharist, is contained
truly, The Anathematismes.
really, and substantially the Body and Blood, with the Soul and Divinity of
CHRIST, that is, whole CHRIST, and shall say that he is contained only as in a
sign, or figure, or virtually. 2. That in the Eucharist there does remain
the substance of the bread and wine with the Body and Blood of CHRIST, or shall
deny that admirable conversion of all the substance of the bread into the
body, and of the wine into the blood, there remaining only the form, which
conversion the Church most appositely calls Transubstantiation. 3. That, in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, under every kind, and under every part being
separated, all CHRIST is not contained. 4. That, the Conseoration being made,
he is not there, but in the use, and neither before nor after, and that he is
not in the particles, which remain after the Communion. 5. That, the
principal fruit of the Eucharist is the remission of sins, or that it has
no other effect. 6. That CHRIST in the Eucharist ought not to be worshipped
with the honor of Latria, nor honored with a particular feast, nor carried in
procession, nor put in a public place, to be worshipped, or that the
worshippers are Idolaters. 7. That it is not lawful to keep it in an holy
place, but that it should be distributed to the standers by, or that it is not
lawful to carry it honorably to the sick. 8. That CHRIST in the Eucharist
is eaten only spiritually, and not Saoramentally, and really. 9. That the
faithful being of age, are not bound to communicate every year at Easter. 10.
That it is not lawful to the Priest, who celebrateth, to communicate himself.
11. That faith only is a sufficient preparation to receive it: Declaring in
the end, that the preparation ought to be by the means of Sacramental
Confession, holding him to be excommunicate who shall teach, preach, affirm
pertinaciously, or defend in public disputation, the contrary.

The Decree of the Reformation contains first a long admonition to The Decree
of Reformation.
the Bishops, to use their jurisdiction moderately, and charitably; then
determines, that in causes of visitation, correction, and inability, and in
the criminal, none may appeal from the Bishop or his Vicar general, before
the definitive, or from an irreparable grieuance; and when there shall be
place of Appeal, and a Commission shall be granted in partibus, by Apostolic
authority, it shall not be granted to any but the Metropolitan, or his Vicar;
or, in case he be suspected, or far distant, or the Appeal be from him,
it shall not be granted but to a Bishop dwelling near, or a Bishops Vicar.
That the defendant appealing, shall be bound to produce in the second instance
the acts of the first, which shall beegiuen him, within thirty days, without
paying for them. That the Bishop, or his Vicar general may proceed against
any to condemnation, and verbal deposition, and may also degrade solemnly,
with the assistance of so many Abbats of Miter and postorals, if he can have
them, or of so many other Ecclesiastical dignities, as there are Bishops
required by the Canons. That the Bishop as delegate, may summarily take
knowledge of the absolution of every one of whom inquisition is made, and of
the remission of the punishment of every one that is condemned by him; and if
it shall appear unto him, that sentence has been obtained, by telling that
which is false, or concealing the truth, he may cause it not to be executed.
That a Bishop may not be cited to appear personally, but for such a cause for
which he may be deposed or deprived, by what form of judgment soever the
proceeding be. That testimonies, in a criminal cause, against a Bishop, may
not be received by information, but by witnesses, and those of good fame,
chastizing them grievously if they shall depose upon Passion: and the criminal
causes of the Bishops may not be determined but by the Pope.

After this another Decree was published; in which the Synod said, The Decree
concerning matters to be deferred until the coming of the Protestants.
That, desiring to extirpate all errors, it had handled four Articles
exactly. 1. Whether it were necessary and commanded by GOD, that all the
faithful should receive the Sacrament under both kinds. 2. Whether he that
receives but one, receives less then he that receives both. 3. Whether the
holy Church has erred in communicating the Laiques with the bread only, and
the Priests who do not celebrate. 4. Whether children ought to be
communicated. But because the Protestants of Germany, do desire to be heard
concerning these Articles, before the definition, and therefore have demanded a
Safe Conduct to come, remain, speak freely, propose and depart, the Synod,
hoping to reduce them into the concord of one faith, hope, and charity, by
yielding to them, has given them public faith, that is, Safe Conduct, as
far as it can, according to the tenor underwritten, and has deferred to
define these Articles, until the twenty five of January the next year;
ordaining withal, that the Sacrifice of the Mass be handled in that Session,
as a thing annexed, and that in the next, the Sacraments of Penance, and
extreme Unction, be discussed.

The tenor of the Safe Conduct was; That the holy Synod does, as The tenor
of the Safe Conduct.
much as it can, grant public faith, full security, that is, Safe Conduct,
with all necessary and fit clauses, though they require a special expression,
to all Ecclesiastical and Secular persons of Germany, of what degree, state,
or quality soever, who will come to this general Council, that they may with
all liberty, confer, propose, treat, come, remain, present Articles, by
writing or by word, confer with the Fathers deputed by the Synod, and
dispute without injury and ill words, and depart when they please. And the
Synod is further pleased to grant, that if, for their greater liberty and
security, they shall desire, that Judges be deputed for the offenses which
they have committed, or shall commit, though they be enormous, and savor of
heresy, The Embassage of the Elector of Brandeburg.
they may name those that they shall esteem favorable. After this, the
Mandate of I^achim, Elector of Brandeburg, was read, in the persons of
Christopher Strassen, a Lawyer, and John Osman, his Ambassadors, sent to the
Council. The former made a long Oration, showing the good affection and
reverence of his Prince, toward the Fathers, without declaring what his
opinion was in point of Religion. The Synod answered, (that is, the Speaker in
its name) that it heard with great content, the Ambassadors discourse,
especially in that part, where that Prince does submit himself to the
Council, and promises to observe the Decrees, hoping that his deeds will be
answerable to his words. But the Proposition of those of Brandeburg was noted
by many, because the Electour was of the Augustane confession, and it was
openly known, that his interests did move him to make such a fair show, that
his son Frederick, elected Archbishop of Magdeburg by the Canons, a
Benefice, unto which a very great and rich principallitie is annexed, might not
be hindered at Rome, and by the Catholics in Germany.

The answer which the Council gave, was much matueiled at, in regard An
artifice used by the Council, often practiced by the Church of Rome.
of the fair and aduantagious manner of contracting, pretending ten thousand
by virtue of the promise, when the bargain was but of ten. For there is no
more proportion between these two numbers, then was between the reverence
promised by the Electour, and the obedience received by the Synod. It was
replied for defense, that the Council did not regard what was, but what should
have been said, and that this is an usual and pious allurement of the holy
Church of Rome, which yielding to the infirmity of her children, makes show
to believe, that they have performed their duty. So the Fathers of the
Council of Carthage, writing to Innocentius the first, to give him an account,
that they had condemned Celestinus and Pelagius, desiring him to conform
himself to their declaration; he commended them in his answer, that,
remembering the old Tradition, and Ecclesiastical discipline, they had referred
all to his judgment, whence all ought to learn, whom to absolve, and whom to
condemn. And indeed, this is a fair gentle means, to make men speak that in
silence, which they will not in words. Afterward, according to the intimation,
made to the Abbat of Bellosana, to give him then an answer to the Letters, and
Protestation of his Master, they made the Apparitors demand, by proclamation;
at the Church door, whether any were there for the most Christian King. But no
man appearing, because it was so concluded by the Kings Counsel, not to enter
into the contestation of the cause, especially for that they could expect no
answer, but made at Rome, by the Pope and the Spaniards, the speaker did
desire, that the answer decreed, might be read publicly; and so it was, by
consent of the Presidents. The substance of it was; That the Fathers conceiving
great hope of the favors of the King, were exceedingly grieved for the The
answer of the Council made to the Abbat of Bellosans.
words of his Minister, which did much abate it; yet they had not quite lost
it, in regard they were not conscious of having given him any cause of offense:
and, for that he said, the Council was assembled for the profit of some few,
and for private ends, it had no place in them, who were assembled, not by the
present Pope only, but by Paulus the third, to extirpate heresies, and reform
discipline, then which causes none can be more common and pious: praying him
to let his Bishops go to assist this holy work, where they shall have all
liberty. And if his Minister, a private person, who brought unto them things
distasteful, was heard, with patience and attention, how much more welcome
shall persons be of so great dignity. Adding withal, that though they come
not, the Council will not want reputation or authority, having been lawfully
called, and for just causes, restored. And, for that his Majesty did protest,
to use the wonted remedies of his Ancestors, the Synod had good hope, that he
would not restore the things long since abrogated, to the great benefit of that
Crown, but looking back upon his Ancestors, on the name of the most Christian
King, and on his father Francis, who did honor that Synod, following that
example, he will not be unthankful to GOD, and the Church his mother, but
will rather pardon private offenses, for public causes.

The Decrees of the Session were immediately printed; which, being curiously The
Decrees are censured in Germany.
read in Germany, and elsewhere, raised much speech in many things concerning
the Eucharist. First, because treating of the manner of the existence, it said,
that it could hardly be expressed in words, and yet affirms after, that it
is properly called Transubstantiation; and, in another place, that it is a most
fit term: which being so, one cannot doubt but that it may be properly
expressed. It was further noted, that having declared that CHRIST, after the
benediction of Bread and Wine, said, that that which he gave, was his Body and
Blood, it came to determine, against the opinion of all the Divines, and of the
whole Church of Rome, that the words of consecration were not those; that is,
this is my body, because it does affirm that they were spoken after the
consecration. But to prove that the body of our LORD is in the Eucharist
before the use because CHRIST, in giving of it, said, before it was received by
his Disciples, it was his Body, did show that they did presuppose, that the
giving of it did not belong to the use; the contrary whereof was apparently
true. The manner of speech used in the fifth point of doctrine, saying that
divine worship was due to the Sacrament, was noted also for improper, seeing it
is certain, that the thing signified or contained, is not meant by the
Sacrament, but the thing signifying and containing: and therefore it was well
corrected in the sixth Canon, which said, that the Son of GOD ought to be
worshipped in the Sacrament. That also in the third Anathematisme was noted,
that all CHRIST was in every part, after the separation, because it seems one
may necessarily infer from hence, that it was not in every part before the
division.

The Priest complained of the reformation, and said, that the Bishops authority
The Priests complain of the reformation.
was made too great, and the Clergy brought into servitude. But the
Protestants seeing the point where it was said, that they desired to be heard
in four Articles only, did much wonder who should make that request in their
name, seeing they had said, and repeated so often, in public Diets, and by
public writings, that they desired a discussion of all the controversies, nor
would receive any of those things which were already determined in The
Protestants dislike the reservation of ye points of doctrine. And the form of
the Safe Conduct.
Trent, but would have all to be reexamined. They thought also that the form
of the Safe Conduct was very captious, because as well in the Decree to grant
it, as in the tenor thereof, there was this clause of reservation, as far as
belogneth to the Synod: for no man demands of another, but that which
belongs to him to grant. But this affected diligence to express and repeat
it, was a sign that they had invented a means to go against it, and to
excuse themselves upon others. And they doubted not but that the aim of the
Synod was to leave a gate open for the Pope, that he might do with his own
and the Councels honor, what he thought serviceable for them both. Besides,
the treating to depute Judges for things heretical committed, or to be
committed, seemed to them a kind of net, to catch those that were unwary; and
even the very Pedants did laugh at it, that the principal verb was more then
an hundred and fifty words distant from the beginning. The Protestants did
uniformly agree not to be content with it, or trust upon it, but to desire
another; just like that which was given by the Council of Basil, to the
Bohemians; which if it were granted, they did obtain one great point, that is,
that the controversies should be decided by the holy Scripture, and if it were
not granted, they might excuse themselves with the Emperor.

The day following the Session, there was a general Congregation, to set down
how to treat of Penance and extreme Unction, and to continue the reformation.
It was considered, that the manner of discussion prescribed, was exceeded by
the Divines, whence contentions did arise, for which they could not be united
against the Lutherans: and therefore it was thought necessary to renew the
decree, and not ^uffer any to use the reasons of the schools, but to cause them
to speak positiuely, and also to observe the order, which they thought fit to
establish again, as well because the not observing of it had bred confusion,
as because the Flemings did complain that none account was made of them, as
did also the Divines which came with the Prelates of Germany. To handle
Penance, and extreme Unction, was decided already, and something was said in
matter of reformation, and Prelates were deputed, who, with the Nuncio of
Verona, were to make the Articles in matter of faith, and, with the Nuncio of
Siponto, in matter of reformation. In matter of faith twelve Articles were
framed upon the Sacrament of Penance, drawn Verbatim out of the book of
Martin, and of his Schoolers, to be disputed by the Divines, whether they were
to be held for heretical, and condemned for such; which, in framing the
Anathematismes, after the Divines had given their voices, were so changed, that
no jot of them remaining, it is superfluous to recite them. To these Articles
were added 4. more of extreme Unction, answereable, in all points, to the
sour Anathematismes established. In Three Decrees are made concerning the
manner of proceeding in Council.
the same page where the Articles were set down, three Decrees were added.
That the Divines ought to give their opinions out of the holy Scripture,
Traditions of the Apostles, holy Councels, Constitutions, and authorities of
Popes, and holy Fathers, and out of the consent of the Catholic Church. That
the order of speaking should be thus: that first they should speak who were
sent by the Pope: secondly, those who were sent by the Emperor: thirdly, those
of Louaine, sent by the Queen: fourthly, those Divines who came with the
Electors: fifthly, the Secular Clergy men, according to their promotions:
sixthly, the Regulars, according to their orders. That there should be two
congregations every day, one in the morning from the foureteenth hour, until
the seventeenth, another in the afternoon from the twentieth hour until the
three and twentieth. The Articles of Reformation were in number fifteen, all
which answered the points which were after established, except the last; in
which a propose was made, to constitute, that Benefices should not be given in
Commenda, but to persons of the same age, which the law required in those who
might have them in title: which Article when it was spoken of, was easily
buried in silence, because it hindered many Prelates to renounce their
Benefices to their Nephews.

The Pope, who (as has been said) wrote letters to the Catholic Suisses,
inuiting them to the Council, did still make the same instance unto them, by
his Nuncio, Ieronymus Francus, wherein also he was assisted by the Emperor.
The French King did oppose, by his Ambassador, Marleus M(...) assisted by
Vergerius, who, knowing the searets and ends of the Romans, told Vergerius
discovers the secret ends of the Romanists to the Suisses and Grisons.
him how he should persuade that nation, and wrote also a Book in this
subject; so that in the Diet of Bada, which then was held, not only the
Evangelical, but the Catholic Suisses also were persuaded not to send any;
and the Crisons entering into suspicion upon the aduertisements of Vergerius,
that the Pope did plotte something to their prejudice, did recall Thomas Planta
Bishop of Coira, who was already in the Council.

In Trent the Congregations of the Divines were diligently hastened: who though
they spoke according to the order of the twelve Articles, yet all the matter of
Penance was handled, not as the Schoolmen only, but also as the Canonists do
handle it, following Gratian, who makes a question thereof, divided, for the
length of it, into six distinctions: and the manner prescribed by the
Presidents, to deduce and prove the conclusions from the The manner of
discussing the points of doctrine is censured.
five places aforesaid, caused not prolixity, superfluity, and unprofitable and
vain questions to be avoided, but gave occasion of greater abuses. For when
they spoke Scholastically, they kept themselves within the matter at the least,
and the discourse was all serious and severe. But in this new manner, which they
call positive (an Italian word, drawn from plain apparel, without
superfluous ornaments) they ran into fooleries. For, alleging the Divine
Scripture, they brought all the places of the Prophets, and Psalms, especially
where the word, Confiteor, and, its verbal, Confessia, are found; which does
signify in the Hebrew, praise, or rather, religious profession; and haled them
to the Sacrament of Confession: and, which was less to the purpose, figures
were drawn from the Old Testament, to show that it was prefigured, without
any regard whether it might be applied to it with similitude; and he was held
most learned who brought most of them. All the rites signifying humility,
grief, and repentance, used by those who confessed, were boldy called
Apostolical Traditions. Innumerable miracles were related, ancient and
modern, concerning things which sueceeded well to those who were devoted to
Confession, and ill, to those who were negligent, and despisers of it. All the
authorities alleged by Gratian were often recited, but various and diverse
senses given them, according to the matter; and others also were added. And he
that should have heard those Doctors speak, could not but conclude, that the
Apostles, and ancient Bishops did never any thing but kneel at Confession, or
sit to confess others. In sum, that, to which all did come, and which was
most to the purpose, was the Council of Florence. Among the memorials, there
does nothing appear worthy of particular mention, except that which is to be
spoken of when the substance of the doctrine must be recited. But thus much was
necessary to be delivered. Out of these sheaues of diverse sorts of corn,
carried into the barn, it is no marvel if a mingled grist were threshed. The
points of doctrine, by reason of the mixture, did absolutely please but few;
neither was it observed in this subject, as in others, not to condemn any
opinion of the Catholics, but, where the opinions of the divines were various,
to make the expression with such a temper, that al parties might be satisfied.
Which causes me not to observe my former order, but first to expound the
substance of the Decree, as it was established to be read in the Session, and
then to add that which the same persons of the Council did not approve.

The Decree was this. That although, in handling Justification, much The Decree
concerning Penance.
was spoken of the Sacrament of Penance, yet, to root out diverse heresies of
this age, it was fit to illustrate the Catholic truth, which the holy
Synod does propose to be perpetually observed, by all Christians; adding that
Penance was always necessary, in every age of the world, and, after CHRIST, to
those also who were to be baptized; which Penance is not a Sacrament. There is
another instituted by CHRIST, when, breathing upon his Disciples, he gave them
the holy Ghost, to remitte and retain sins, that is, to reconcile the
faithful, fallen into sin after Baptism. For so the Church has always
understood it; and the holy Synod does approve this sense of the words of
our Lord, condemning those who understand them of the power to preach the
Gospel. And this Sacrament differs from Baptism, not only in the matter
and form, but also because the minister of Baptism is not judge, whereas,
after Baptism, the sinner does present himself before the tribunal of the
Priest, as guilty, to be set at liberty, by his Sentence. And, by Baptism, a
full remission of sins is received, which is not received by Penance, without
sighs and pains. And this Sacrament is an necessary for sinners after
Baptism, as Baptism it self is to him that has not received it. But the
form thereof consists in these words of the minister; I do absolve thee:
unto which other prayers are laudably added, though they be not necessary. And
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, are, as it were, the matter of the
Sacrament, which are therefore called parts of Penance. The thing signified,
and the effect of the Sacrament, is, reconciliation with God, whence peace and
clearenesse of conscience do sometimes arise. And therefore the Synod does
condemn those who make horror of conscience and faith to be parts of Penance.
Contrition is grief of mind for sin committed, with purpose to sin no
more, and was ever necessary in all times; but in sinners, after Baptism, it
is a preparation to remission of sins, being joined with a purpose to do
whatsoever else is required, for the lawful receiving of this Sacrament. And
it is not only a ceasing from sin, or a purposing and a beginning of a new
life, but also an hate of the life past. And though Contrition be sometimes
joined with charity, and reconcileth a man to GOD, before the receiving of the
Sacrament, yet this virtue cannot be ascribed to it, without purpose to
receive the said Sacrament of Penance. But the action which arises, either by
reason of the filthiness of sin, or of the fear of punishment, with hope of
pardon, is not hypocrisy, but the gift of GOD, by which the penitent being
assisted, does go on to receive Justice; which although it cannot bring us to
justification without the Sacrament, yet it does dispose us to obtain grace
from GOD, in the Sacrament of Penance. By this, the Church has ever understood
that CHRIST has instituted the entire confession of sins as necessary, by
the Law of GOD, to those that fall after Baptism. For having instituted the
Priests, his Vicars, for Judges of all mortal sins, it is certain that they
cannot exercise this judgment, without knowledge of the cause, nor observe
equity in imposing punishment, if the sins be not particularly made known
unto them, and not in general only. Therefore the penitent ought in
Confession, to declare all his mortal sins, even the most secret, but the
venial, though they may be confessed, yet they may be concealed also without
offense. And hence it comes, that, in Confession, it is necessary to
explicate the circumstances, which alter the nature of the sin, because
otherwise, one cannot judge of the weight of the excesses, and impose a
condign punishment. So that it is wickedesse to say, that this kind of
Confession is impossible, or that it is the murdering of the conscience,
because nothing is required but that the sinner, having diligently examined
himself, should confess what he remembers, and the sins forgotten are
supposed to be included in the same Confession. And though CHRIST has not
forbid public Confession, yet he has not commanded it; neither would it be
good to command that sins, especially secret, should be confessed in
public. Wherefore the Fathers, having ever praised the Sacramental secret
Confession, the calumny of those is vain, who call it an humane invention,
excogitated by the Laterane Council; which did not ordain Confession, but
only that it should be made at the least once every year. Concerning the
Minister, the Synod does declare those doctrines to be false, which extend to
all the faithful, the ministry of the keys, and the authority given by
CHRIST to bind and loose, remit and retain public sins by correction, and
secret by voluntary Confession, and teaches that the Priests, though sinners,
have authority to remit sins; which is not a naked ministry, to declare that
sins are remitted, but a judicial act. Therefore let no man ground himself
upon faith, thinking that, without contrition, and a Priest, who is willing to
absolve him, he can have remission. But because there is a nullity in the
sentence, pronounced against him who is not subject, there is also a nullity in
the absolution of the Priest, who has not authority, delegate, or ordinary,
over the penitent: and the greater Priests do, with reason, reserve to
themselves some faults more grievous, and so does the Pope very justly; and
there is no doubt, but that every Bishop may do it in his Diocese. And this
reservation is not only for external policy, but is also of force before
GOD. Therefore it was always observed in the Church, that, in the hour of
death, any Priest may absolve any penitent, from any sin. Of satisfaction the
Synod does declare, that the sin being remitted, the punishment is not
pardoned, it being not convenient, that he should be so easily received into
Grace, who has sinned before Baptism and after, and be left without a
bridle, which may draw him from other sins: yea it is convenient he should
be like to CHRIST, who suffering punishments did satisfy for us, from whom
our satisfactions also receive force, as offered by him to the Father, and
received, by his intercession. Therefore the Priests ought to impose convenient
satisfactions, not only to keep the penitent from new sins, but also to
chastise him for the old: declaring likewise that Satisfaction is made, not
only by punishments, willingly received, or imposed by the Priest, but by
enduring also, with patience, the scourges sent from God.

In conformity of this doctrine, fifteen Anathematismes were made. 1. 15.
Anathetismes.
Against him that shall say, that Penance is not truly and properly a
Sacrament, instituted by CHRIST, to reconcile sinners after Baptism. 2. That
Baptism is Penance, or that is not the second table or board after shipwreck.
3. That the words of CHRIST, Quorum remiseritis peccata, are not understood of
the Sacrament of Penance, but of the authority to preach the Gospel. 4. That
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, are not required for, as it were, the
matter, and as parts of Penance, or shall say that the terrors of conscience
and faith are parts. 5. That Contrition is not profitable, but causes
hypocrisy, and is a forced, and not a free sorrow. 6. That Sacramental
Confession is not instituted, and necessary by the law of GOD, or that the
manner of confessing to the Priests in secret, is an humane invention. 7. That
it is not necessary to confess all mortal sins, even those that are hidden,
and the circumstances which do change the nature of them. 8. That this is
impossible, or that all are not bound to confess once a year, according to
the precept of the Laterane Council. 9. That the Sacramental absolution is
not a judicial act, but a ministry, to declare the remission of sins to the
believer, or that an absolution given in jest does help, or that the
confession of the penitent is not requisite. 10. That Priests in mortal sin,
have not power to bind and loose, or that all the faithful have it. 11. That
Bishops have not authority to reserve cases, but for external policy. 12. That
all punishment is remitted together with the fault, and that no other
satisfaction is required but faith, that CHRIST has satisfied. 13. That
Satisfaction is not made by suffering afflictions sent by GOD, by punishments
imposed by the Priest, and willingly taken, and that the best Penance is only
a new life. 14. That Satisfactions are not divine worship, but humane
traditions. 15. That the keys of the Church are only to loose, and not to
bind.

The Divines of Louaine opposed the reservation of cases, saying it was not
Some of which are opposed by the Dutines of Louaine and Collen.
so clear, because it cannot be found that any Father did ever speak of it;
and that Durand, who was a Penitentiarie, and Gerson and Caietan do all
affirm, that not sins, but censures are reserved to the Pope: and therefore
that it was too rigid, to esteem him an heretic who thought otherwise. The
Divines of Collen joined with them, and said plainly, that it could not be
found that any Ancient did speak of any reseruations, but of public sins,
and that it was not fit to condemn the Chancellor of Paris, so pious and
Catholic an Author, who wrote against them. That the heretics were wont to
say, that these reseruations were invented for gain; as also Card. Campeggio
said, in his reformation, and that it gave him occasion to write against it;
unto which the Divines would not have answered, nor been able to answer.

And therefore as well the doctrine as the Canon, ought to be moderated, that
it may not give scandal, nor offend any Catholic. The same men of Collen
said, that the meaning of the words, Quorum ligaueritis, condemned in the tenth
Canon, is expressly, and formally so understood by Theophilact, and that to
condemn it were to make the enemies rejoice. And that which was said in the
last, that the power to bind, is understood to impose Penance, they observed
that the ancient Fathers did not so understand it, but that to bind was to
make one abstain from receiving the Sacraments, until a complete
satisfaction. They demanded also that mention should be made of public
Penance, so much commended by the Fathers, especially by Cyprian, and Saint
Gregory the Pope; who, in many Epistles, shows it to be necessary by the
Law of God; which if it be not brought again into use concerning heretics
and public sinners, German will never be free: and yet the Decree, as well
in the doctrine, as the Canons, does not only not speak in favor of it, but
rather does weaken it, and detract from it. They desired also that some
certain external sign should be declared for the matter of the Sacrament,
for otherwise the objection of the adversaries will never be answered.

Two things did exceedingly displease the Franciscan Divines: the one And
others by the Francascans and by ^r^ar Ambrosius Pelargus.
for having declared Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction to be the matter
of the Sacrament, holding them to be necessary requisites, but not essential
parts of Penance. They said it was plain, that the matter should be a thing
applied to the receiver, by the Minister; and not an operation of the receiver
himself. That this appears in all Sacraments; and therefore that it is a
great inconvenience to put the acts of the Penitent for part of the Sacrament.
That it is certain that Contrition is no less required to Baptism, then it
is to Penance; and yet it is not put for part of Baptism. That the ancients
did require confession of sins before Baptism, as also Saint John did of
those whom he baptized, and they made those that were Catechized to stand in
Penance; and yet never any said, that these were parts or matters of Baptism*
Therefore to condemn this opinion, held by the ancient Divines of the
Franciscan religion, and now by the whole School of Paris, was to pass their
limits. They complained also that it was made heresy to say, that sacramental
Absolution is declaratiue, because Saint Ierom, the Master of the Sentences, S.
Bonauenture, and almost all the School Divines have clearly said, that the
Absolution in the Sacrament of Penance, is a declaration that one is absolved.
To this last, answer was made, that he was not absolutely condemned for an
heretic, who said that Absolution is a declaration that sins are remitted
but that sins are remitted to him that does certainly believe that they are
remitted to him* therefore only the opinion of Luther was comprehended. But
they were not so satisfied, saying, that, in handling of heresy, one should
speak plainly and that no man would make such an exposition of it: and they
demanded, that, as well in the point of doctrine, as in the Anathematisme, this
particular should be well declared. But Friar Ambrosius Pelargus, a Divine of
the Elector of Triers, considered, that the words of our Lord, Quorum
remiseritis, were perhaps not expounded by any Father, for an institution of
the Sacrament of Penance, and that by some they were understood of Baptism, by
others, of any other thing, by which pardon of sins is received. Therefore to
restrain them only to the Sacrament of Penance, and to declare them heretics
who understand them otherwise, would give a great advantage to the adversaries,
and cause them to say, that the ancient doctrine of the Church was condemned in
the Council. Therefore he exhorted them, before they made such a great
stride, to look upon the expositions of the Fathers, and, when those were
examined, to determine what should be said. Many of the Fathers thought the
remonstrances to be very considerable, and desired that the Deputies would
consultagaine, as they had done before, upon other occasions, to remove
whatsoever gave offense to any, and so to frame the Decree, as that every one
might approve it.

But Cardinal Crescentius opposed with a continuate speech, showing that But
all of the are crossed by Card. Crescentius.
to take the sinews and soul from the Decrees, to satisfy the humors of
particular men, was not honorable for the Synod. That they were maturely
established, and therefore it was fit to observe them. Yet, if his opinion did
not please all, he was content, that, before any thing else were done, this
general should be handled in a Congregation, whether it were good to make a
change or not, and then to descend to the particulars. But in this he did not
fully discover what his aim was, which afterward he did manifest to his
Colleagues, and trusty friends: that they should not suffer the use of
contending and speaking so freely; which would be dangerous when the
Protestants came, because they would do as much, in favor of their own
opinions. That, for the honest and reasonable liberty of the Council, it
suffices that one may deliver his opinion, while the matter is disputed; but
after, when all men have been heard, the Decrees framed by the Doputies,
allowed by the Presidents, seen, examined, and approved at Rome, to call them
into question, and to require an alteration, for particular interests, was too
much license. The Cardinal overcame, at the last, the mayor part of the
Fathers, being persuaded that the doctrine established was according to the
opinion of the most intelligent Divines, and most opposite to the Lutheran
nouities.

But because almost all is spoken that concerns matter of faith, in that
Session, it will not be amiss to add that little which remains, touching
the Sacrament of extreme Unction. Of which the Divines spoke with the ^ame
prolixitie, but without any difference amongst themselves. And out of their
opinions three points of doctrine, and four Anathematismes were framed. The
doctrine contained in substance. That the Unction of the The Doctrine co(...)ng
(...) Unction.
sick, is truly and properly a Sacrament, insinuated, by CHRIST our Lord, in
S. Mark, and published by the Apostle S. James: from whose words the Church
did learn, by an Apostolical tradition, that the oil, blessed by the Bishop,
is the matter, and the words used by the Minister, is the form of the
Sacrament; but the thing contained and the effect, is the grace of the holy
Ghost, which purifieth the relics of sin, and rayseth up the mind of the
sick, and sometimes, when it is profitable for the soul, gives health of
body. The ministers of the Sacramentare the Priests of the Church, the word
(...) being not understood for ancients, but for Priests. And this Unction
ought principally to be given to those who are at the point of death, who,
being recovered, and returned to the state of sickness, may receive it
again. And therefore an Anathema is pronounced. 1. Against him that shall say
that extreme Unction is not truly and properly a Sacrament, instituted by
CHRIST. 2. That it does not give grace, nor remit sins, nor case the sick,
but is ceased, as that which did formerly belong to the grace of health. 3.
That the rite used by the Church of Rome, is contrary to the saying of Saint
James, and may be neglected without sin. 4. That the Priest only is not the
minister, and that Saint James did understand the ancients for age, and not the
Priests, ordained by the Bishop.

But if any marvel why it is said in the first head of the doctrine, that 14.
Articles of reformation are handled, in which the Presidents of the Synod and
the Bishops have diverse ends.
this Sacrament is insinuated by CHRIST our Lord in Saint Mark, and published
in Saint James, whereas the antecedence, and consequence of the words did
require, that it should not be said, insinuated, but instituted, he may know
that it was first so written; but a Divine having observed, that the Apostles,
who anointed the sick, of whom Saint Mark speaks, were not Priests, because
the Church of Rome holds, that Priesthood was conferred upon them only in
the last Supper, it seemed a contradiction, to affirm, that the Unction which
they gave, was a Sacrament, and that Priests only are ministers of it.
Whereunto some, who held it to be a Sacrament, and at that time instituted by
CHRIST, did answer, that CHRIST commanding them to minister the Unction, made
them Priests concerning that act only. As if the Pope should command a simple
Priest to give the Sacrament of Chrisme, he made him a Bishop for that act.
Yet it was thought too dangerous to affirm it absolutely. Therefore, in stead
of the word Institutum, they put Insinuatum. Which word what it may signify in
such a matter, every one may judge who understands what Insinuare is, and
does apply it to that which the Apostles then did, and to that which was
commanded by Saint James, and to the determination made by this Council.

But in matter of reformation, as has been said, fourteen Articles were
proposed, all belonging to Episcopal jurisdiction: whereof when they had
understood the opinion of the Canonists in the particular Congregations, and
read all in the general, they came to frame the Decree. Herein the aim of the
B B* was to increase their authority, and to recover that which the Pope had
usurped from them, and of the Presidents, to grant as little as they could. But
both parties did proceed cunningly, and made show to regard only the service
of God, and the restitution of the ancient Ecclesiastical discipline. The
Bishops thought they were hindered in executing their office. For when they did
suspend any from exercise of their orders, or Ecclesiastical degrees, and
dignities, for causes known to themselves, or did refuse to let them pass to
higher degrees, all was retracted, by a License or Dispensation gotten at Rome:
which caused a disreputation of the Bishops, damnation of souls, and a total
ruin of discipline. Concerning this, the first head was made, that such
Licenses and Restitutions should not be offorce. But the President for the
honor of the Apostolic Sea, would not have the Pope named, nor the chief
Penitentiarie, nor any ministers of the Court, from whom such Licenses were
wont to be obtained. The titular Bishops did also hinder them; who being
deprived, by a Decree published in the sixth Session, of power to exercise the
pontifical office in the Diocesses without leave of the proper Bishop, did
retire themselves, into a place exempt from all Bishopriques, admitting those
to holy orders who were before rejected, as unfit, by their own Bishops; which
they did, by virtue of a privilege to ordain any that offered himself unto
them. This was prohibited in the second head, but with this moderation, that,
for reverence of the Apostolic Sea, mention should not be made, who granted
the privilege. And consequently in the third head, power was given to the
Bishops to suspend, for what time they pleased, any one ordained without their
examination, or with license, by faculty given by whomsoever. These things the
wiser sort of Bishops knew to be of small weight, because the Canonists do
hold that 344
Licenses, Privileges, and Faculties granted by the Pope, are never
comprehended in general words, without special mention be made of them. But
not being able to obtain more, they were content with this, hoping that time
might open them a way to proceed further.

It was also decreed in the same sixth Session, that no secular Clerk, by
virtue of personal Privilege, nor Regular, dwelling out of the Monastery, by
vigor of the Privilege of his order, should be exempt from the correction of
the Bishop, as Delegate of the Apostolic Sea. Which some thinking not to
contain the Canons of Cathedral Churches, and other Collegiate dignities,
who, not by privilege, but by ancient custom, or by sentences put in
execution, or by Concordates with the Bishops established and sworn, were in
possession of not being subject to Bishops, and others also restraining it
only to visitation, it was ordained in the fourth head, that, concerning
secular Clerks, it should be extended to all times, and all sorts of
excesses, and declared that none of the things aforesaid should withstand.

Another disorder as great did arise, because the Pope did grant a Judge, at
the election of the supplicant, to whosoever did seek it by the ordinary
means used in Court, with authority to defend, protect, and maintain him in
possession of his rights, and to remove the molestation given him, extending
also this favor to all his domestiques. And this sort of Judges were called
Conseruators; who did stretch their authority, in place of defending the
supplicant from molestations, to withdraw him from just corrections, and also,
at their instance, to molest and trouble the Bishops, and other ordinary
Ecclesiastical superiors, with censures. The fifth point made provision
against this disorder, ordaining that Conseruatorie graces should not help any
body, nor free him from inquisition, accusation, and conuention, before the
Ordinary, in criminal and mixed causes, and in civil also, in which he is
plaintiff: and, in other causes, if the Conseruator be suspected, or
difficulty arise between him and the Ordinary, who is competent Judge, that
arbitrators shall be chosen, according to the form of the Law, and that
Conseruatory letters which comprehend domestiques, shall be extended but unto
two, who do live at the charge of the Master of the family, and that these
and the like graces shall not continue above five years, and that the
Conseruators shall not have Tribunals. But the Synod did not mean to contain
in this Decree Universities, Colleges of Doctors, and Scholars, places of
Regulars, and Hospitals. Concerning which exception, when this point was
handled, there was very great contention, it seeming to the Bishops, that,
against all right, the exception was larger then the rule, because the number
of Doctors, Scholars, Regulars, and Hospitalaries, is greater then of all
others, who can have Conseruatorie letters, and that the provision against any
particular man was easy, but the disorders of Universities and Colleges, were
of the greatest importance. The Legate gave an account hereof to Rome: where
it being decided, by that which was consulted under Paul the third, that it
was necessary, for maintenance of the Apostolic Sea, that the Friars, and
Universities, should totally depend on Rome, there was no need of a new
determination: and immediately answer was made, that the Conseruatories of
these, should, by no means, be touched. Whereupon the Fathers of the Synod,
who were adherents of Rome, being entered into this opinion, the others, who
were fewer, were forced to be content with the exception, and there was some
hope, and some means used to pacify them.

The sixth point was concerning the Priests apparel: wherein it was easily
concluded to ordain, that all the Ecclesiastiques of holy Order, or Beneficed
men, should be bound to wear an habit fit for their degree, according to the
appointment of the Bishop, giving him power to suspend the transgressors, if,
after admonition, they shall not obey, and to deprive them of their Benefices,
if, after correction, they shall not amend; renewing herein the constitution of
the Council of Vienna; which notwithstanding was not much fitted to those
times, prohibiting upper garments laced, and of diverse colors, and frockes
shorter then the vestment, and red and green breeches chequered, things
disused, which have no need of prohibition.

The use of all Christian Nations was most ancient, that, to imitate the
mildness of CHRIST our LORD, all the Ministers of the Church should be neat
and clean from man's blood, never receiving to any Ecclesiastical order, any
person defiled with homicide, whether voluntary or casual: and, if any Clerk
committed any such excess, either willingly or by chance, all Ecclesiastical
function was immediately taken from him. This has been, and is now, inuiolably
observed by other Christian Nations, unto whom dispensations against the Canons
are unknown; but in the Latin, where rich men may easily make use of them, it
is observed only by the poorer sort. It being proposed in the fourth and fifth
Article to moderate the abuse, it was ordained in the seventh head, that a
voluntary homicide should for ever remain deprived of all Order, Benefice, and
Ecclesiastical office; and when there shall be cause to dispense with the
casual homicide, the commission of the dispensation, shall be directed to the
Bishop only, or, if there be cause to the contrary, to the Metropolitan, or
next Bishop. They saw that this Decree, did not serve to moderate the abuses,
but to make the dispensations dearer. For the Popes hands, were not tied
concerning voluntary homicide; and for casual, the decree was observed, in not
committing the cause to any but the Bishop, but to dispense directly, without
committing it to another, was not taken away, first making the proofs in Rome,
or dispatching the dispensations under the name of Motu proprio, or with other
clauses, with which the Chancery does abound, when it has cause to use them.

A certain sort of Prelates seemed to hinder much the authority of Bishops,
who, for their reputation, in the place where they dwelt, obtained power of the
Pope, to punish the faults of the Ecclesiastiques of that place; and some
Bishops also, pretending that their Priests received scandal and bad example
from those of the next Diocesses, obtained authority to chastise them. Some
desiring that this disorder should be remedied, by reuoking wholly such
authorities, and perceiving that it would distaste many Cardinals, and great
Prelates, who abused them, they found a moderation, that they should use them,
yet without prejudice of the Bishop, ordayning in the eighth point, that they
might not proceed but in presence of the Bishop, or his deputy. There was
another way to subject the Churches and people of one Diocese, to the Bishop
of another, by uniting the Churches of one, to the Churches or Benefices of the
other: which though it were prohibited in general terms, in the seventh
Session, yet it being not so plainly done as some desired, an express
declaration was demanded. Whereupon it was resolved in the ninth point, that
all perpetual unions of the Churches of one Dioces^e, to the Churches of
another, should be prohibited, under what pretense soever.

The Regulars made great instance to keep their Benefices, and to regaine
those which they had already lost, by the invention of perpetual Commendaes;
and many Bishops, for sundry respects, were willing to assist them. They were
desirous to propose, that these perpetual Commendaes should be quite taken
away; but, fearing to be contradicted, they were content only to desire they
should be moderated. The Presidents, on the other side, seeing the hazard,
that this matter, dangerous for the Court, should be set on foot, themselves
proposed a light remedy, to hinder all treaty of a better. And this was, that
Regular Benefices, usually given in title to religious men, when they shall be
vacant hereafter, shall not be conferred but upon men professed of that Order,
or to some person who is to receive the habit, and take upon him the
profession. This was the tenth point, which did not much import the Court of
Rome, in regard as many Commendaes were already made as could be; and the
Prelates had no great desire to obtain more, though it would have been an
honor for the Churches, if the regular Abbats had resided. But, in regard of
the favor extended to the Monks, not to take more from them then was taken
already, a counterpoize was added in the next point, ordaining that they could
not have secular Benefices, though with cure. Which howsoever it speaks only
of those who are translated from one order to another, ordaining that none
should be received, but with condition to remain in the Cloister, yet by
parity of the reason, or by an argument of greater reason, it has been
understood generally of all. And because the patronage of Churches, was
granted in Court by grace, and to make the grace the greater, power given to
depute an Ecclesiastical person, with faculty to institute him that is
presented; this disorder was remedied in the twelfth head, ordaining that none
should have right of Patronage, but the founded of the Church, or he that has
competenly endowed, with his patrimoniall goods, one already founded. And for
remedy of the second disorder, it was forbid in the 13. head, that the
Patron, though he had a privilege to do it, should not make the presentation
to any but the Bishop.

While these things were handled, Johannes Theodoricus Pleniagorus, and The
Ambassadors of the Duke of Wittenberg arrive in Trent, with commission to
present the confession of their faith.
Johannes Eclinus, Ambassadors, sent by the Duke of Wittenberg to the
Council, arrived in Trent, with order to present publicly the confession of
their doctrine, whereof mention has been made, and to say withal, that
Divines would come to expound it more at large, and defend it, if security and
safe conduct were given them, according to the form of the Council of Basil.
They went to the Count Montfort, the Emperors Ambassador, showed him their
Mandate, and told him they had commission to propose some things in the
Council. This being related by the Count to the Legate, he answered, that as
others Ambassadors did first present themselves to the Presidents in the name
of the Pope, and did signify to them the sum of their Embassage, so those of
Wittenberg ought to do: he therefore wished they Whereof the Legate gives an
account to Rome.
should come, and promised to receive them with all humanity. The Count related
the answer; wherewith the Ambassadors were not contented, saying, That it was
one of the points required in Germany, that the Pope should not preside; which
not being willing to contradict, without order from their Prince, they would
write; and expect an answer. The Count did cunningly assay to learn the whole
secret of their instructions, to advertise the Legate of it. But they stood
upon general terms, and would not specify any particular. The Legate sent
immediately advise hereof to Rome, desiring to know what he should do, and
the rather, because he understood that others would come also.

In the beginning of November, the Emperor, to be near the Council, The
Emperor goes to Ispruc, distant from the Council but three days journey.
and the war of Parma, went to Ispruc, distant but three days journey from
Trent, the way being so commodious, that if there were occasion, he might
hear from his Ambassadors in one day. The Pope had news at once of the
arrival of the Emperor, and of those of Wittenberg. And although he trusted
upon the Emperors promises made to him before the convocation of the Council,
and often reiterated, and saw the effects, because his Ambassadors curbed the
Spaniards, when they were too bold in maintaining the Episcopal authority,
and was persuaded he would persevere, in regard of their common interests
against the French King, yet having heard of Which makes the Pope somewhat
jealous of him,
some things handled in Germany, he was a little jealous, that, either for
necessity, or for some great opportunity, which occurrences might bring, he
would change his opinion. Yet he took courage; considering, that if there were
war in Germany, no account would be held of the Council, and during peace,
all the German Ecclesiastiques would be on his side, as also the Italian
Prelates; whose number he could easily increase by sending thither all those
of the Court: that the Legate being resolute, and hoping to be Pope, would
labor as for himself, and that the Nuncio of Siponto was most affectionate to
his person: that he might at any time be reconciled with France, because it was
desired by that King, by means of whom, and with the Prelates of his kingdom,
he might withstand all attempts made against his authority.

He answered the Legate, that he could give him but little instruction more;
that he was not only acquainted with, but principal Author of the The answer
of his Holiness made to the Legate.
Treaties made in framing the Bull of the Convocation, that he should remember
that the things decreed under Paul, were studiously approved therein; that it
was said that it did belong to the Pope, not only to call, but also to direct
Councels, and to preside by his ministers, and that he should not leave open
so much as a little chinke, in prejudice of any of these. For the rest he
should govern himself according to occasions, putting him in mind to fly, as
the Plague, all middle counsels, and moderations, when any of these were
handled, but so soon as the difficulty did arise, to break it off suddenly,
that the adversaries might not have time to look far into it. That he would
not lay on his shoulders the Translation, or dissolution of the Council, but
only that he should speedily advertise when he saw cause. Furthermore, that
he should set on foot as much matter of doctrine as he could, which would work
many good effects. For it would make the Lutherans despair of concord without
their total submission, would interest the Prelates more against them, would
not give time to these to think on the point of reformation, and make a sudden
dispatch of the Council, a matter of the greatest importance, because there is
danger of some inconvenience so long as it lasts. And when he saw himself
forced to give them some satisfaction, in amplifying the Episcopal authority,
he should condescend, and yet hold back as much as might be. For in case
some thing should be granted prejudicial to the Court, as formerly has been
done, yet so long as the Popes authority remains entire, there will be
means to reduce them easily to their first state.

Things standing thus, the 25. of November, the day appointed for the The
Session of the 25 of November.
Session, came. The Fathers met, and went to Church in the usual order: where
the ceremonies being finished, the doctrine of faith, the Anathematismes, and
decree of the Reformation were read by the Bishop that said Mass. The tenor
whereof being already recited, there remains nothing else to be spoken. And
finally, the last decree was read, to give order for the future Session; in
which it was said, that it being already appointed for the 25. of January, the
Sacrament of Order ought then to be handled, together with the Sacrifice of
the Mass. So the Legate would have it pronounced, that, according to the Popes
opinion, they might have matter of doctrine enough whereon to treat. The
Session being ended, the Legate used all diligence that the Decrees might not
be printed. And his order was observed at Ripa, The decrees are forbid to be
published, but are printed in Germany.
where the Press was, and where the other Decrees were printed. But no man
could hinder the sending of many copies out of Trent, whereupon they were
printed in Germany, and the difficulty and delay to let them see light, made
the Critiques curious, and diligent to examine them more exactly, to find the
cause of this secrecy.

That which was decided in the first point of doctrine, and the sixth Canon,
caused much speech: that is, that CHRIST, when he breathed on his Disciples;
and gave them the holy Ghost, saying, Whose sins you remit they are remitted,
and whose sins you retain, they are retained, did institute the Sacrament of
^enan^e. It was considered, that Baptism was first used by the Jews, for
legal cleanliness, afterward applied by Saint John for a preparation to go
to the Mess(...) which was to come, and finally by CHRIST, in express and And
there censured.
plain words, instituted a Sacrament, for remission of sins, and an entrance
into the Church: ordaining it should be ministered in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. Likewise in the captivity of Babylon a Postcenium was
instituted by the Jews, with bread and wine, for a thanks giving and a
memorial of their going out of Egypt, while being out of the land of promise,
they could not eat the Paschal Lamb: in imitation of which rite CHRIST
instiruted the Eucharist, to give thanks to GOD, for the general deliverance
of mankind, and in memory of himself, who was the Author thereof, by the
sprinkling of his blood. And howsoever like rites have been formerly used,
though for other ends, as has been said, yet the Scripture does express all
the singularities of them. Now that CHRIST would introduce a rite to confess
our sins in particular so exactly, as that no use was ever the like, it
seemed strange that he would be understood by words, from which it must be
drawn by a very unjointed consequence, yea by many consequences, very far
fetched, as was done by the Council. And they wondered, why the institution
being made by the word remitto, the form was not, I remit thy sins, rather
then Iabsolue thee. Others added, that if, by those words, a Sacrament of
absolution is instituted, with this form; Absoluo te: by which one is
absolved, one must say, by an irresistable necessity, that another, or the
same, is instituted, in which, this form should likewise be, Ligo te: because
it cannot be understood how the same authority to loose and bind, founded
upon the words of CHRIST absolutely alike, does require in absolution the
pronouncing of the words, Absoluo te, and that other of binding does not
require the pronouncing of the words, Ligo te: Nor by what reason, to execute
that which CHRIST has said, Quorum retinueritis, etc. and quaecunqne
ligaueritis etc. it is not necessary to say, Ligo te, but to execute Quorum
remiseritis, and quaecunque solueritis, it is necessary to say, Absoluo te.

Likewise the doctrine, inferred in the fifteeneth point, was censured by
critiques: where it is said, that CHRIST by the same words, did constitute the
Priests, judges of sins, and therefore that it is necessary to confess them
all absolutely, and in particular, together with the circumstances which alter
the kind, seeing that it does appear by the words of our Lord, that he has
not distinguished two sorts of sins, one to be remitted, and the other to be
retained, whereby it would be necessary to know of which the delinquent is
guilty, but one only which does comprehend all, and therefore the word
Peccata in general is only used. But he has distinguished two sorts of
sinners, saying, Quorum, and Quorum: one of the Penitent, unto whom remission
is granted, another of the obstinate; unto whom it is denied. Therefore they
are rather to know the state of the delinquent, then the nature and number of
the sins. But concerning the circumstances which alter the kind it was said,
that every honest man may swear, with a good conscience, that the holy
Apostles, and their disciples, most skillful in things celestial, not
regarding humane subtilties, did never know what were the circumstances which
alter the kind, and perhaps if Aristotle had not made this speculation, the
world would not have known it until now, and yet there is made of it an
Article of Faith, necessary to salvation. But as it was approved, that
Absoluo, was a judicial word, and reputed a good consequence* that if the
Priests do absolve, they are Judges, so it appeared to be an inconstancy, to
condemn those who say, it is a naked ministry to pronounce; it being plain,
that the office of a Judge is nothing but to pronounce him innocent who is so,
and the transgressor guilty, and that this metaphore of the Judge does not
bear, that the Priest can make a just man of a delinquent, as is ascribed to
him. The Prince may pard on offenders, and restore them to their good name; to
whom, he that makes a wicked man just, is more like, then to a Judge, who
does ever transgress his office, when he pronounces any thing but that
which he first finds to be true. But they were amazed most of all, when they
read the point where the specificall and singular confession of sins, with
the circumstances, is proved; because the judicature cannot be executed
without knowledge of the cause, nor equity observed in imposing punishment, if
the faults be known only in general, and afterward that CHRIST has
commanded this confession, that they may impose the co^digne punishment. They
said that this was plainly to mock the world, and think all men fools, and to
persuade themselves that all their absurdities should be believed, without more
to do. For who knows not, and sees not daily, that the Confessors enjoin
Penance, not only without weighing the merit of the faults, but without having
the least consideration of them. It would seem considering the words of the
Council, that the Confessors should have a balance, to make difference of
every grain; and yet oftentimes to recite five Pater nosters, shall be a
Penance, for many murders, adulteries, and thefts: and the most learned
Confessors and generally all in giving Penance, do say to every man, that they
do impose only part of the Penance. Therefore it is not necessary to impose
that exact Penance which the faults do deserve, nor to have a particular
enumeration made of the sins and circumstances. But what need one go so
far, when the same Council, in the ninth point of the doctrine, and the
thirteenth Anathematisme, does ordain, that satisfaction is made by voluntary
Penance, and suffering of adversities. Therefore it is not needful, yea not
just, to impose in Confession the punishment that is correspondent, and, by
consequence, not to make a specificall enumeration, which is said to be
ordained for this end. And they added, that, not considering any thing spoken
before the Confessor, though most learned, attentive, and wise, having heard
the Confession of an ordinary man, for one year, much more of a great sinner,
for many years, it is impossible he should judge aright, though he had
Canons of the punishment due to any sin whatsoever, without danger to err
more then half, to speak the least. For a Confessor seeing all in writing,
and considering many days of it, could not make a balance to decide justly,
much less hearing, and resolving presently, as the custom is. They said it
was not fit they should be so contemned, and held so insensible, as to believe
such absurdities. Of the reservation of Cases enough was said by the Divines of
Louine, and Collen, which was attributed to a desire of dominion and to avarice.

The next day there was a general Congregation, to give order for the The
Sacrifice of the Mass, the Communion of the Cup, and of children are handled.
discussion of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Communion of the Cup, and of
Children. And although the Decrees were already made, for the Session of the
eleventh of October, and deferred, yet they discoursed again, as if nothing
had been said, and did choose Fathers to collect the Articles to be disputed
on, and others to make the Decree. And because they made have, seven Articles
were suddenly framed, whereon they disputed, twice every day in which number
was the Ambassador of Ferdinand, and Julius Plugius, Bishop of Namburg, and
for greater reputation, the Electour of Collen, that all that doctrine might
seem to come from Germany, and not from Rome. They made also thirteen
Anathematismes, condemning those for heretics, who do not hold the Mass,
for a true and proper Sacrament, or do say it does not help the Living and
the dead, or do not receive the Canon of the Mass, or do condemnd private
Masses, or the ceremonies which the Church of Rome uses. And then four Heads
of doctrine were made. That in the Mass, is offered a true and proper
Sacrifice, instituted by CHRIST; of the necessity of the Sacrifice of the
Mass, and how it agrees with that of the Cross; of the fruits of that
Sacrifice, and the application thereof; of the (...) and ceremonies of the
Mass. All which were to be handled against Christmas, and are not related
here perticularly, because they were not published in the next Session.

While the Fathers do entertain themselves in the business of the Council,
The Ambassadors of Wittenberg receive letters from their Princes, with order
to proceed in their negotiation.
the Ambassadors of Wittenberg, did receive letters from their Princes, to
proceed, and to present their doctrine, in the best manner they could. There,
fore in the absence of the Earl of Montfort, they entreated the Cardinal of
Trent, to be a means, that the Presidents would receive their letters,
assemble the Fathers, and give them audience. The Cardinal promised all good
office, but said it was necessary to tell the Legate what they Would treat on;
it being so constituted by the Fathers, moved thereunto by the proposition
made by the Abbat of Bellosana. Therefore they imparted to him their
instruction, saying, they were sent to obtain a safe Conduct for their
Theologue, as it was given in Basil to the Bohomians, and to propose their
doctrine; that, it being examined by the Fathers* they might be ready to
confer with their Divines, when they came. The Legate, receiving this
reletion from the Cardinal, imparted to him what the Pope had written, and The
answer of the Legate to their propositions.
told him, that it was not to be suffered, that either they or any other
Protestants, should present their Doctrine, much less be admitted to defend
it, inregard there would be no end of contentions that it was the office of
the Fathers, which was observed until then, and ought to be continued* to
examine their doctrine, taken out of their Books, and condemn that which did
deserve it. If the Protestants had any difficulty, and did propose it humbly,
and show themselves willing to receive instruction, it should be given by
advice of the Council. Therefore he denied absolutely to assemble the Fathers,
to receive their doctrine, and said, he could not change this opinion, though
it should cost him his life. For altering the safe conduct, he said it was an
exorbitant indignity to the Council, that they should mistrust that which was
granted, and that to treat thereof was an unsupportable injury, and deserved
that all the faithful should spend their lives in opposing it.

The Cardinal of Trent would not give the answer so sharp to the
Ambassodors, but said: That the Legate was angry, that they would begin with I^
favorably related to the Ambsssadors by the Cardinal of Trent.
the presentation of their doctrine, in regard they were to receive from their
Superiors, with reverence and obedience, the rule of Faith, and not prescribe
it to others, with such an unseemliness, and absurdity. Therefore he advised
them to let that day pass, that the wrath of the Legate might be remitted, and
then to begin with some other point, that afterward they might fall upon
those two: that is, to present their doctrine, and desire a safe conduct. They
followed this counsel, and a few days after, the Cardinal being parted from
Trent, they desired the Emperors Ambassador to persuade the Legate to receive
their mandate, and hear their proposition, that understanding his mind they
might resolve, as they should have instruction from their Prince. The
Ambassador treated with the Legate, and had the same answer which was given
to the Cardinal of Trent; which did not proceed from disdain, but from a
resolved will. The Ambassador understanding the Legates mind, was of opinion
that the business could not then take place, and knowing that to relate the
answer was dishonorable for the Emperor, who had so largely promised, that
every one should be heard, propose freely, and confer, in stead of giving a
direct answer to those of Wittenberg, he found diverse excuses, to gain time,
which he did not so artificially, though he were a Spaniard, but that they were
discovered to be pretenses not to give a plain Negative.

At this time Ambassadors went to Trent, from Argentina, and five Cities more,
with instruction to present their doctrine. They employed Gulielmus Pictauius,
the Emperors third Ambassador; who not to fall upon the same difficulties
which his colleague did, took their Mandat and persuaded them to expect a few
days, until he had sent to Caesar and received an answer: because in so
doing, they should proceed upon a good ground. This made quiet those of
Wittenberg also. The Ambassador wrote to Caesar, telling him of the
Ambassadors resolution, sh^wing what an indignity it was to his Majesty,
that no account should be made of so honest, and so just a promise made by
him. The Emperor, to provide against this disgrace, and couningly to make use
of the Council, expecting the Ambassadors of the Elector of Saxony, wrote
that the others should be entertained until their arrival, assuring them
they should then be heard, and with all charity, conferred with.

The thirteenth of December* Maximilian, the Son of Ferdinand, passed
Maximilian pasteth by Trent.
by Trent, with his wife and children, and was met by the Legate, and the
Italian and Spanish Prelates, and some Germans also. The Prince Electors did not
meet him, but visited him in his lodging. The Protestant Ambassadors
complained to him, that, notwithstanding so many promises made by Caesar, they
could not have audience, and prayed him to have pity on Germany, because
those Priests, being strangers, did not care, for some small respects of their
own, to see it on fire, yea, by precipitating the determinations, and
Anathematismes, did make the controversies every day more hard. Maximilian
persuaded them to be patient, and promised to treat with his uncle, that the
actions of the Council might pass as he had promised, in the Diet, And
promises the Protestant Ambassadors to treat with the Emperor his uncle in
their behalf.
they should.

At Christmas the Pope created fourteen Italian Cardinals, and immediately
published thirteen of them, reserving one to be published when he thought
fit. And to honor so great a creation in the beginning of his Papacy,
especially there being eight and forty Cardinals in the College, The Pope
creates 14. Cardinals; and gives a reason of it.
which was then thought a great number, he pretended occasion to do it for
the enmity with the French King. Of whom he complained as well for the war
he made against the Apostolic Sea, as for the Edictes published, adding a
report which then came from Lions, and Genua, that he threatened to make a
Patriarch in France, which if it were true, he said it would be necessary to
proceed iudicially against him. Wherein he should meet with many difficulties,
in regard of the great number of the French Cardinals, to whom it was needful
to make a counterpoise, by creating new, men of worth, of whom the Apostolic
Sea might make use, in occasions of importance. The College was contented, and
the new Cardinals were received. The Bishop of Monte-Fiascone comes to the
Council with letters of credit.
After this he dispatched to Trent the Bishop of Monte-Fiascone, with letters
of credit to Cardinal Crescentius and the three Electors, whose coming he
did congratulate, and thanked them for their zeal and reverence toward the
Apostolic Sea, exhorting them to persevere. He gave him order to tell them
that he had created Cardinals, that he might have Ministers depending on
himself, in regard all the old did depend upon some other Prince, to excuse
him for the war of Parma, saying that he did not make it but that it was
made against him, and was forced to defend himself. To Cardinal Crescentius
he gave an account of the Cardinals made, promising to make them all
understand his mind, how they should demean themselves toward his friend,
unto whom he was so much obliged: And he made the Nuncio of Siponto be told
that he had disposed of him as the friendship between them did require, and
that he should not care to know wherein, but should continue to perform his
duty, as formerly he had done.

Christmas being ended, a general Congregation was made, to give form A
general congregation is held to set down a rule for the discussion of the
Sacrament of Order.
to the handling of the Sacrament of Order. They discoursed of the abuses
which, in this, were entered into the Church, and the Nuncio of Verona said,
that there was in all some abuse, worthy of amendment, but in this an ocean of
them. And, after many tragical exclamations were made, they resolved,
accordingly to their custom, first to propose the Articles drawn out of the
Lutheran doctrine, and then discuss which should be condemned for heretical,
and frame the Anathematismes and Heads of doctrine and in the end, speak of
the abuses. Twelve Articles were given to the Divines, whereon they discoursed,
morning and evening. Out of the opinions of the Divines, the Deputy Fathers
framed first eight Anathematismes, condemning for heretical to say, that Order
is not a true and proper Sacrament; or that it is 1552 JULIUS 3. CHARLES 5.
EDWARD 6. HENRY 2.
one only, which tends to Priesthood, by many means; to deny the
Hierarchy, to say that the consent of the people is necessary; to say that
there is not one visible Priesthood; that Unction is not necessary; that the
holy Ghost is not given in it; that Bishops are not De iure Diuino, and
superior to Priests. Upon these, four points of Doctrine were made; of the
necessity and institution of the Sacrament of Order; of the visible and
external Priesthood of the Church; of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; of the
difference of a Priest from a Bishop. This doctrine and Canons, being
approved by the general Congregation, were all put into one Decree, under the
same context: with that of the Sacrifice, to be published in a Session. Yet it
was not Why no mention is made of what was handled in the Congregations of
December and January.
done for the reasons which shall be declared. Therefore there is no particular
mention made of what did pass in the Congregations of December and January,
because the same things were discussed again under Pius 4: in the third
reduction of the Council: unto which when we shall come, the differences shall
be showed between the Decrees framed now, and those which were after
established under Pius.

But news coming to Trent that there were leuies made of Soldiers, The
Electors crave leave to depart.
throughout all Germany, and that there was fear of war, the three Electors
seeing their States were in danger, craved leave of the Emperor, by Letters
and Messengers, to return, that they might preserve them. Caesar, desiring the
Council should continue, answered them, in the beginning of the year 1552.
that the troubles were not so great as the fame; that he had sent 1552.
to know the truth, and that a few men only were in Arms; but that the
cities continued in their obedience, and Maurice, of whom the report was, that
he had raised some stirs, would shortly come unto him, and had sent
Ambassadors, who were already in Ispruc, and would shortly be in Trent; that
those few Soldiers, lodged in Thuringia, who made some excursions upon the
territory of the Bishop of Mentz, did mutin for want of pay only; that he had
sent one exppresly to pay them, and give them their pasport; that he knew
whatsoever was spoken and feared, and did not neglect any thing; that he had
some in every place to advertise him, and did spare no cost; therefore he
exhorted them not to abandon the Council, which would be in danger to be
dissolved with their departure, which would give a great blow to Religion: and
if their States want any provision, let them command their Ministers, and give
him notice, and he will give them all assistance.

Wolfius Colerus, and Leonardus Badebornus, Ambassadors for Maurice, Elector
The Ambassadors of Saxony come to Trent.
of Saxony, arrived in Trent the 7 of January; which gave great joy to the
Electors and German Prelates, being assured hereby, that Maurice did not
attempt any thing. They first treated with the Emperors Ambassadors, saying,
that their Prince, desirous of concord, determined to send to the Council some
godly Divines, men loving peace, which the other Protestant Princes would do
also; but that a safe Conduct was first necessary, in the Their negotiation.
form of that of Basil, and that, in the mean while, all treaty in the
Council should cease, and that, after their arrival, the things already
handled should be reexamined, it not being a general Council without the
presence of all Nations; that the Pope should have no power to preside, but
should submit himself to the Council, and release the oath to the Bishops,
that their voices may be free. They added, that, in the Congregation, they
would expound all more at large, which they desired should be assembled
quickly, because their Divines were within the distance of forty miles, and
did expect only to be called. The Emperors Ambassadors gave good words,
because the Emperor to entertain Maurice, commanded they should be well
used. These Ambassadors treated in the same manner with the Prince Electors,
and Cardinal of Trent, but refused to treat with Cardinal Crescentius, and
his Colleagues, that they might not seem to acknowledge them for Presidents.
They desired to be admitted in public, to present their Mandate, and to be
received as those of the Elector of Brandeburg had been; whereof the Emperors
Ambassadors gave them hope, and promise, that they might entertain them. But,
on the other side, the Legate and Nuncij did plainly refuse to alter the form
of the Safe Conduct, The answer of the Legate and Nuncij.
saying, it was too much dishonorable for the Synod, which represents the
Catholic Church, that four Sectaries should make difficulty to believe it;
neither would they stop the course of the Decrees, already put in order with
maturitie. And what hope can there be of the conversion of Germany, when they
come with these demands. And, for hearing them in public, it was just,
because it was promised; but being sent to the Council, of which they see and
know that the Legate and Nuncij are Presidents, they must acknowledge them for
such, or else they cannot be admitted; for so they had special Commission
from the Pope, when those of Wittenberg came; that to release oaths, and such
like impieties, they would rather die, then cause to be done: and that they
would sooner depart, dissolve the Council, and command the Prelates not to
assist at any act. The Emperor, informed Offends the Emperor.
hereof, who took the business to the heart, was offended with the obstinacy
of the Papalins, who, upon a nice point of honor, would disturb a business
of that consequence, and raise a war, which, in the end, might be their own
ruin. And he sent back order to his Ambassadors, and the Cardinal
Madruccio, to use all means, and his own authority also, to pacific the
Legate, first with entreaties, then with high words, if they could not find a
temper, which might satisfy both parties, and to force the Presidents, in a
civil manner, to yield to that which was just.

The Emperors Ambassadors, and Madruccio, aduising together, resolved not to
demand of the Presidents all at once, but first, only to receive the
Ambassadors; wherein they used long persuasions, which did all tend to show,
that when they were brought into the assembly, where themselves are Presidents,
it might be said, that their Presidencie was acknowledged though before no
particular complement had been used with them. To the persuasions, they added
entreaties in the Emperors name; mixed with some words, signifying that it was
not fit to abuse his clemency, nor to force him to use other remedies; that
necessity was a potent incitation, to him that had power in his hand. In the
end Crescentius suffered himself to be persuaded to receive them, not in
Session, but in a public general Congregation in his house, thinking that
thereby he should be acknowledged as Head. His edge being thus abated, they
came to speak of ceasing to treat of the points of doctrine. Toledo said,
that he had heard it often preached, that the saving of one soul was so dear
to CHRIST, that he would descend again, and suffer on the Cross to gain it;
and now that they refused to save all Germany, where was the imitation of
CHRIST? The Legate excused himself upon the absolute commands of the Pope,
which he must needs obey. But the Ambassador replying, that, to a Minister
instruction is given, in writing, At ye instance of whose Ministers they change
their opinion.
and matters of discretion are referred to judgment, the Legate said, that he
saw well, that this was a degree to demand a retractation of the things already
decided. The Ambassador gave his word that he would never speak of that,
yea, would deal effectually with the Saxons, to make them desist from that
request. In the end, the Legate, persuaded by the Nuncio of Verona, who
suffered himself to be overcome first, not to lay (he said) on the Popes
back, and the Councels, so great a burden, that so important a business
should be precipitated, and so small a delay denied, condescended to say, that
he was content, so that the Prelates, in the general Congregation, did
approve it; to whom also he referred himself for the Safe Conduct, which they
required.

The Congregation was called, to consult upon these particulars; and the delay
was easily granted, upon the persuasions of the Imperialists. For the Safe
conduct, the consultation was more hard, not only for the reason alleged by
the Legate, but because the name of the Council of Basil, and the referring
themselves to it, was abhorred; and, which did more import, they thought that
some things might fit those times, and not these, because the doctrine of the
Bohemians was not so contrary to the Church of Rome. Notwithstanding all these
oppositions, the authority of the three Electors, and of the Cardinal
Madruccio, and the negotiation of the Emperors Ambassadors prevailed.

But Petrus Tagliauia, Archbishop of Palermo, said, that one very principal
point was omitted, whether it should be allowed, that they should sit A
consultation about the manner of receruing the Protestants in Council.
in the Council or not, and what terms of honor should be given them, and
their Prince. For, to use them meanly would break off the business, and to
honor manifest heretics, would be a great prejudice. The same, and greater
consideration must be had, how to behave themselves toward the Divines which
are to come, who pretend to have a voice, and will be a party in disputations
and Consultations, nor will be esteemed, as the Church must esteem them, that
is, as heretics, excommunicated, and condemned, with whom it is not lawful
to treat, but only to instruct them, if they humbly crave it, and pardon them
by favor. Concerning this proposition, much was said of the variety of times,
unto which all laws must be accommodated; that the same Popes which did
constitute those Decretals, would not observe them in these occasions; that
nothing is more easily broken, then that which is most hard. Which reasons,
though they persuaded the mayor part, yet they knew not what to resolve. It
seemed, that to determine what rigor of the law was to be retained, and what
to be mitigated, was a matter of much and long consultation, not to be
resolved on without the Pope and College of Cardinals, which the straitness
of time could not suffer. When all were doubtful, the Bishop of Namberg
opportunely said, that necessity did excuse every transgression, and that in
the Colloquies and Diets of Germany, these things were naturely considered on,
and so decided. But, for more assurance, it was good to make a Protestation
before, that all was done for charity, and piety, which are above all law, and
to reduce those that wander, and that it is understood to be done without
prejudice; with those clauses which the Lawyers know how to find. This opinion
was readily embraced, first by the Dutch, then by the Spanish Prelates, and at
last, somewhat coldly by the Italians, the Legate remaining immooueable, and
showing plainly that he stood quiet, being forced by necessity. These
resolutions being settled; it was resolved, that, the 24. of the month, there
should be a general Congregation, to receive and hear the Saxon
Ambassadors, that the 25. day the Session should be held, wherein the
dilation, made until the coming of the Protestant Divines, should be
published, and Fathers elected, who, together with the Nuncio of Sponto, should
make the Decree, the Protestation, and Safe Conduct. The Emperors Ambassadors
desired to have the draught of the Safe Conduct, before it was published, to
show it the Protestants, that if it did not give them satisfaction, it might be
so amended, that they might not have occasion to refuse it as they did the
other.

The days following were spent in the things aforesaid; which being An
exhortation of the Emperors Ambassador Pictauius to the Protestants.
finished, the Emperors Ambassadors called the Protestants to them; and the
Ambassador Pictauius, having made an eloquent encomiastique oration, of the
goodness and charity of the Fathers, and exhorted them to give some little
part of satisfaction to the Council, as they received much from it, told them
that it was concluded to receive their Mandats and persons and to hear their
propositions, and to defer the conclusion of the points of doctrine, though
already discussed and digested, to expect the Divines, and hear them first.
That they should have a very ample Safe Conduct, as they desired, whereof the
draught was made. And he was copious in showing that these were memorable
favors and graces, saying, it was necessary to yield something to the time,
and not to desire all at once; that when they shall be entered into the
business, occasion will make them obtain many things, which before seemed
hard; that the Fathers do desire the coming of the Divines; that themselves,
the Emperors Ambassadors, have matters to propose of great moment, and do
stand only expecting that the Protestants should begin, that afterward they
may come forth themselves also. For this cause he prayed them to proceed
slowly, in their demand, that the Pope should submit himself to the Council.
For the Fathers do know, that there is some thing to be amended in the Papal
greatness, but withal, that they must go on cunningly; that themselves have
daily experience, what dexterity and Art must be used, in treating with the
Popes Ministers. Likewise the reexamination of the things already concluded,
was not to be proposed in the very beginning, because it would be too great an
infamy and dishonor to the Council. Therefore let their Divine come, who
should have a convenient audience in all things, and when they shall see
themselves wronged, it shall ever be free for them to depart. The Protestants,
retyring themselves, and considering, the draught of the safe Conduct, were not
content, because it was not like to that of Basil, in which four things more
were granted to the Bohemians. 1. That they should have a decisiue voice. 2.
That the holy Scripture, the practice of ancient Church the Councels, and
Interpreters conformable to the Scripture, should be Judges. 3. That they
might exercise their religion in their houses. 4. That nothing should be done
in contempt and disdain of their doctrine. Of Who are not content with the
form of the Safe Conduct.
these four, the second was different from that which was granted in this
draught, and the three others were totally left out. They suspected also,
because the Council did not promise them security in the name of the Pope and
College of Cardinals as did that of Basil. Yet they resolved not to make
mention of this but to demand the inserting of the other 4. clauses: and told
the Emperors Ambassadors plainly, that they could not receive it in this
form because they had this express commission in their instructions. Toledo
showed some disdain, that they should not content themselves, with that which
he, and his Colleagues, had obtained, with so much pains; that the chief
importance was in the security of coming and departing, and that the residue
appertained to the manner of their negotiation, which might more easily be
concluded by the presence of the Divines; that it was too much obstinacy to
yield in nothing, and to desire to give laws alone to the whole For which
cause Toledo the Emperors Ambassador is offended.
Church. But it not being impossible to remove them with these reasons, from
their resolution, they said, in the end, that they would refer it to the
Fathers, to whom they restored the draught of the safe Conduct, with the
additions which were required.

The Legate and presidents, understanding the request and resolution of the
Protestants, showed the Emperors Ambassadors how unjust and unmeet their
demands were. For in the form or that of Basil they never found that it was
granted to have a decisiue voice in the Council; but, that the Scripture,
practice of the Church, Councels, and Doctors, who ground themselves on it,
should be Judges, is said, because the practice of the Church is called by the
name of Apostolical Tradition: and when it is said, the holy Fathers, it is
understood that they ground themselves on the Scripture, because they have no
other gounds. The third, to exercise their Religion in their own houses, is
understood, with condition that it be not known, and done without scandal.
The prohibition, that nothing shall be done in contempt of them, is express
when it is promised, that, by no means, they shall be offended. Therefore
that it did appear that they complained without cause, only to cavil, and in
regard there is no hope to content them, there does remain nothing but to
give them the Safe Conduct, as it is made, and to leave them to their liberty,
to make use of it or not, The Earl of Mountfort replied, that nothing could
be more serviceable to the public cause, then to take from them all
pretenses and cauils, and to make them inexcusable to the world: therefore, in
regard there was no real difference between the Safe Conduct of Basil and
this, to stop their mouths, that might be copied out Verbatim, changing
only the names of the persons, places, and times. The Presidents moved with
that subtle and strict answer, looked one upon another, and the Legate, taking
the matter upon him, answered, that it should be referred to the Fathers, in
the Congregation, and resolved according to their determination. The Presidents
did recommend the cause of GOD and the Church, every one to his familiar
friends. To the Italians and Spaniards they said, that it was great injury to
be compelled to follow a company of Schismatiques, who have spoken
unadvisedly, and contrary to Christian doctrine, and bound themselves to follow
the Scripture only. But unto all in general, they said, it would be a great
indignity, if the Council should so speak, as that an inextricable dispute
should presently arise. For in setting down what Doctors do ground themselves
upon the Scripture, they should never agree: that it was honorable for the
Council to speak plainly, and that the expression made was just the
declaration of the Council of Basil. And such persuasions they used, as that
almost all were resolved not to change the draught, hoping that though the
Protestants desired it should be better, yet they would be content when they
saw all was done.

All being in order, the four and twentieth day the general Congregation The
Protestation of the Council concerning the admission of the Protestants.
was made; in which the Electors and all the Fathers met in the Legates house,
as also the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of Ferdinand, who were not wont
to be present in such kinds of Congregation. The Legate began briefly, and said,
they were assembled to begin an action, the most doubtful that ever happened
to the holy Church: therefore they were to pray GOD for good success, with
more then usual devotion; and, having, inuocated the name of the holy Ghost,
as the custom is in the Congregations, the Protestation was read by the
Secretary; whereunto all the Fathers having given consent, the Speaker desired
it should be registered in the acts, and a public instrument made of it. The
tenor whereof was thus in substance. That the holy Synod, not to hinder the
progress of the Council, by the disputes which would arise, when it should be
duly examined, what sort of persons should appear in the Synod, and what
sort of Mandats and Writings be presented, and in what places men should sit,
does declare, that, if any be admitted for himself, or as a deputy, which
ought not to be received by the disposition of the law, or use of the
Councels, or set not in his right place, or if Mandats, Instruments,
Protestations, or other writings, which do, or may, offend the honor,
authority, or power of the Council be presented, it shall be understood,
that the present or future general Councels shall not be prejudiced, it being
the Synods meaning to restore peace and concord unto the Church, by any means,
so that it be lawful and convenient.

Afterward the Saxon Ambassadors were brought in; where being entered,
Badehornus one of the Saxon Ambassadors makes an oration in the general
congregation.
and having made their obeisance to the assembly, Badehornus spoke, using these
titles, Most reverend, and most worthy Fathers and Lords. The substance of his
speech was this. That Maurice, Electour of Saxony wishing them the assistance
of the holy Spirit, and a happy issue of the action, did let them know, that
he had long since resolved, that if ever a general, free, and Christian
Council were celebrated, where the controversies of Religion might be decided
according to the holy Scripture, and all might speak securely, and a
Reformation be made in the Head and the members, to send his Divines thither.
That now thinking they are assembled to this end, he has called his
Theologues together, commanding them to choose some, to carry their Confession
to that Synod; which was not yet done, in regard of a certain constitution of
the Council of Constance, that faith or safe Conduct, given by the Emperor,
Kings, or others, to heretics, or persons suspected, ought not to be
observed; and of the example of the Bohemians, who would not go to Basil,
without security from the Council. Therefore that the Elector desired that
such a safe Conduct should be given to his Divines, Counselors, and their
families; that not long since a certain form of safe Conduct was presented to
him, much different from that of Basil, so that the Divines thought it
dangerous to come hither with it, because, by some Decrees made in Trent, and
already printed, it did appear, that they are accounted heretics and
schismatiques, though they never have been either called or heard. Therefore
the Prince demands, (he said) that his men may be excused and a safe Conduct
granted, in the form of that of Basil, and that, understanding that they would
proceed to the conclusion of the controuersed Articles, it seemed unto him a
thing prejudicial, and contrary to all law of GOD and Man, in regard his men
were lawfully hindered, for want of a safe Conduct. Who therefore prays them
that all may be deferred until his Divines be heard, who be but sixty Dutch
miles distant. That afterward it being related to him, that the Protestants
may not be heard concerning the controuersed Articles, defined the years past,
the greater part of which contain grievous errors, the Prince desires that
they may be reexamined, and his Divines suffered to speak, and that determined
which shall be conformable to the word of GOD, and believed by all Nations of
the Christian world. For the things determined have been handled by very few
of those who ought to assist in the general Council, as does appear by the
printed Catalogue; it being essential to a general Council, that all Nations
should be admitted, and freely heard. That the Prince also does remember,
that many controuersed Articles do concern the Pope; and the Councels of
Constance and Basil having determined, that the Pope, in points of faith, and
which concern himself, is subject to the Council, it is fit the same should
be done in this place, as also, which was constituted in the third Session of
the Council of Basil, that all persons of the Council should be absolved
from the oaths of Obligation to the Pope, as far as concerns the causes of
the Council. Yea, that the Prince is of opinion, that, without any further
declaration, by virtue of the constitutions of those Councels, all are free
from those bonds. Therefore prays the assembly, that they would first
repeat, approve, and ratify the Article of the superiority of the Council
above the Pope, especially in regard the Clergy has need of reformation,
which has been hindered by the Popes. For the abuses cannot be amended, if
the persons of the Council depend on the Popes nod, and be bound, by virtue
of oath, to preserve his honor, state, and power: and if it might be obtained
of the Pope to remit the oath willingly, it would be praiseworthy, and gain
great favor, credit, and authority to the Council, because the Decrees would
be made by free men, who might lawfully treat, and judge according to the word
of CHRIST. That in conclusion the Prince desires that his propositions may be
taken in good part, being moved to tender them, for the zeal of his own
salvation, charity toward his Country, and peace of all Christendom. Having
this discourse in writing, he presented it, and it was received by the
Secretary, and the Speaker said in the common name, that the Synod would
consider of it, and make answer in due time.

After these, those of Wittenberg were heard, who presented the Mandate of And
so do the Ambassadors of the Duke of Wittenberg.
their Embassage. Which being read, they briefly said; that they were to tender
the Confession of their doctrine, and that Divines would come to defend it, and
handle the same things more at large, so that judges might be indifferently
chosen by both sides, to take knowledge of the controversies. For their
doctrine being repugnant to that of the Pope and the Bishops his adherents, it
was unjust that either the Plaintiff, or the defendant should be judge:
desiring therefore, that what was done in the Council the years past, might
not have the strength of a law, but that the discussion of every thing already
handled should begin again, it being not just, that when two contend in law,
what is done by one, the other being lawfully absent, should be of forces and
the rather, because it may be clearly demonstrated, that as well in the last
actions, as in those of the years before, Decrees have been published contrary
to the word of GOD. And they presented their doctrine, and discourse in
writing: all which was received by the Secretary, but the doctrine was not
read. The Speaker answered in the name of the Fathers, that answer should be
given in time convenient.

When this was done, the Electours and Ambassadors departed, the The Fathers
resolve not to alter the Safe Conduct.
Prelates remaining with the Presidents, to give order for the Session. First,
the Decree was established, and then the Safe Conduct proposed, adding the
causes why the Protestants were not content. And consulting, whether that which
they desired should be added to the form, they did easily agree all in one
opinion, that nothing should be added, to avoid inextricable disputes, and
inevitable preiudices.

The next day, the 25. of January, deputed for the Session, they went to the
The Session.
Church with the usual Ceremonies, but with more Soldiers, called by the
Presidents, to make ostentation of the greatness of the Council, and with many
strangers, who came thither, thinking the Protestants should be received
publicly, and with singular ceremonies. The B. of Catanea sang Mass, and John
Baptista Campeggio, B. of Maiorica, preached, and, the usual Ri^es being
observed, the Decree was read by the Mass Bishop; the substance whereof was:
That the Synod, to perform the things already decreed having exactly handled
The Decree.
whatsoever belongs to the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Sacrament of Order, to
publish in the Session the Decrees concerning them, and the 4. Articles of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist deferred, thinking that the Protestants, unto whom
they had given safe Conduct, would have been arrived by this time, in regard
they are not come, but have made supplication that all should be deferred until
another Session, giving, hope that they will come long before the celebration
thereof, having received a safe Conduct in a more ample form, the Synod
desirous of quiet and peace, believing that they will come, not to contradict
the Catholic faith, but to understand the truth, and that they will be
satisfied with the Decrees of the holy mother the Church, has put off the next
Session, until the nineteenth of March, to give light to, and publish the
things aforesaid, granting them (to remove all cause of greater delay) a safe
Conduct, of the tenor as shall be recited, determining to handle, in the mean
while, the Sacrament of Matrimony, and to prosecute the reformation, that they
may publish the definitions of this, together with the definitions of the
things aforesaid. The substance of the safe Conduct was; That the Synod,
adhering The Safe Conduct.
to the safe Conduct already given, and amplifying it, does make faith to all
Priests, Princes, Nobles, and persons, of what condition soever, of the German
nation, which shall, or are already come to the Council, Safe Conduct to come,
remain, propose, and speak in the Synod, to handle and examine what they
think fit, give articles, and confirm them, answer the objections of the
Council, and dispute with those whom it does elect, declaring that the
controversies in this Council shall be handled according to the holy
Scripture, Traditions of the Apostles, approved Councels, consent of the
Catholic Church, and authority of the holy Fathers, adding, that they shall
not be punished upon pretense of Religion, or offenses committed, or which will
be committed, so that there need not be any cessation from Divine Service,
by reason of their presence, either in the journey, or in the City of Trent,
or in any place else, and shall return when it shall seem good unto them,
without let, with safety of their robe, honor, and persons, but with the
knowledge of the deputies of the Synod, that provision may be made for their
security: granting that, in this safe Conduct, all those clauses be held to
be included, which are necessary for real and full assurance: adding, that if
any of them, either in coming, or in Trent, or in returning, shall commit any
enormity, which shall nullify the benefit of this public faith, he shall be
punished by their own Judges, so that the Synod may be satisfied: and, on the
other side, if any other in coming hither, remaining here, or returning shall
commit any thing which may violate this Safe Conduct, he shall be punished by
the Synod, with the approbation of the Germans themselves, who shall be
present in Trent, the form of the assicuration remaining still in force,
giving leave to their Ambassadors to go out of Trent, to take the air, and
return, to send and receive aduises, and messengers, as often as they shall
think fit, yet accompanied with the Deputies, for their scecurity: which Safe
Conduct shall remain in force, so long as they be under the care of the
Synod, in coming to Trent, in their abiding there, and twenty days after
they shall ask leave to depart, or after it shall be granted to them, that
they may be rendered in a secure place, at their election: which things it
promises faithfully, in the name of all faithful Christians, of all the
Princes, Ecclesiastical and Secular, and likewise of all other persons
Ecclesiastical and Secular, of all conditions: faithfully promising withal,
that the Synod shall not seek occasion, publicly or secretly, that any thing
be attempted in prejudice of this Safe Conduct, nor to violate the same, will
use, or suffer any to use any authority, power, right, statute, or privilege
of Laws, Canons, or Councels, especially that of Constance, and of Siena:
which things in this behalf, and for this time, it does disallow. And if the
Synod, or any person in it, or any that belong to them shall violate the form
of this Safe Conduct in any point or clause whatsoever, and punishment be not
inflicted to their approbation, let them think that the Synod has incurred
all the punishments which the violaters of such Safe Conducts may incur by
the law of GOD, or man, or custom, without admitting excuse, or contradiction.
These things being read, the Session was ended. It is certain that the
Presidents, doubtful what might ensue, were willing to be prepared, if the
wind were prosperous, to decide the matter of the Sacraments, all in one
Session: and therefore having in a readiness all that belonged to the
Communion, the Mass, and Sacrament of Order, they were desirous to digest also
and put in order all that concerned Matrimony, that they might put all into
one bundle, and to handle succinctly, in another Session, Purgatory,
Indulgences, Images, Relics, and such small matters, (for so they called
them) and then to end the Council. And if any thing were opposed to this
deseigne, they might show that the fault was not in them.

Many, who read these occurrences, will marvel that the Pope, from whom all
consultations of far less moment were wont to proceed, is not named. Which
they will cease to do, when they shall know, that he was advised from point
to point, of all the accidents and deseignes, and that, when those of
Wittenberg were arrived, and news came that more were expected, he answered
his Legate, and Nuncij, that the Protestants should be entertained with as
much courtesy as was possible, knowing it was necessary in such cases, to
suffer some indignity; willing them to use discretion, because patience wins
honor in the end. That they should abstain from all public Colloquie in
matter of religion, either by writing, or by word of mouth. That they should
endeavor, by persuasions and hopes, to gain some of the Protestant Doctors,
and should spare no cost. The Pope was advised of every thing that was done,
yet nothing happened that might make him alter his purpose. But when he
understood that the Emperors Ambassadors had given the Protestants hope to
moderate the Papal authority and said that they expected to see a gate laid
open by their negotiation, that afterward they might second it, and bring in
those things which they had deseigned, and that the Fathers did hold it
necessary to restrain it, Why the Pope is aliened from the Emperor.
having other intelligence that all the Spaniards were of that mind, and that
the Emperor did deseigne to advance himself by debasing the Papacy, and did
cherish the Protestants, to show that it did not proceed from him, his mind was
aliened from him, and turned to the French King. He therefore hearkened to the
treaty of the Cardinal Tornon, in the Kings name, which being executed, the
dissolution of the Council would follow, without his pains, or without
showing that he did desire it.

The Session being made, the Protestants, though they perceived that the Safe
Conduct was not enlarged, as they desired, dissembling the knowledge of it, did
demand it, and an authentical copy was consigned by the Emperors
Ambassadors, to the Ambassadors of each Prince. Who, having read it, did
complain that promises were not kept, and required the Synods answer to their
expositions, and to their requests, made concerning the manner of proceeding in
the Council. The Imperialists persuaded them to go on with dexterity, saying,
as before, that with time they should obtain all, but seeking things
distasteful, and before there was opportunity, every thing would be more hard.
That it was not necessary to express in the Safe Conduct, that they might
exercise their religion in their houses, in regard it was understood to be
granted, because it was not forbid. That nothing should be done to their
disgrace was plainly expressed, in that good and real usage was promised,
and, besides that, public prohibitions will be made to all, which will be of
greater force. For the reasons to be alleged in Council, the same was said
in substance, that the Scripture shall be the ground, but when there is
controversy of the meaning of it, it will be necessary that the Council
should be judge. For it is dumb of it self, without soul, and, as civil
Laws, has need of a Judge to give it life; which, in matter of religion is
the Council, as has been observed ever since the Apostles time. The
Protestants received the Safe Conduct, but with Protestation, that they did it
only to send it to their Princes. The Protestants receive the safe conduct
with protestation. 33. Articles concerning Matrimony a^e given to be discussed.


The Presidents, to examine the Sacrament of Matrimony, as was decreed, making
a general Congregation, and choosing Deputies, gave forth 33. Articles, in
that matter, to be discussed by the Divines. They ordained also, that the
Deputies should make the Canons, as the particulars were examined. Some
Congregations were held, and six Canons framed. Whereupon the Protestants
complained to the Emperors Ambassadors, that the hope that with time they
should obtain a reuiew of the things decided, was quite taken away, because
they proceeded to new decisions, while their Divines were expected. The
Emperors Ambassadors could not obtain of the Whereof the Protestant
Ambassadors do complain
Presidents to stop their proceeding, which they hastened with all diligence,
that either the Protestants might not come to Trent, or, if they came, might
find all decided. For the reexamination, the Pope, the Court, and all the The
Papaline do desire to proceed the faster.
Prelates, were resolved to deny it constantly. And they thought that they
might with better ground deny the reuision of many things, then of a few. But
the Emperor, whom it did much concern, to bring the Protestants to Trent, but
nothing at all to have the matters reexamined, advised by his Ambassadors, of
what the Protestants complained, and how they were hindered But are stopped by
the Emperor.
to go to the Council, sent a man to Trent, with commission to go to Rome
also to negotiate, that all action might be deferred for some few days,
showing that that haste did precipitate the business, gave suspicion to the
Protestants, and made them more unwilling to go to the Council. He gave order
also, that his men should be commanded not to proceed, and should Protest
against the Papalins, if persuasions would not serve. This resolution of the
Emperor, signified in Trent, caused a general Congregation to be called,
where it was resolved, to desist from all Conciliary act, during pleasure of
the Synod.

But the Pope was displeased with that which was done, and disdaining Wherewith
the Pope is displeased.
at the Emperor for other causes also, wrote to Trent, that suspending the
actions as few days as was possible, they should, for reputation of the As
also with the attempt of Ferdinand, against the Bishop of Veradine.
Council, resume them without respect. Another cause, which, besides this, had
provoked the Pope and Cardinals, was, that Ferdinand desiring to possess
Transiluania, which was assaulted by the Turks on the other side; upon
pretense to keep it for the young son of John Vaiuode, George Martinaccio,
Bishop of Veradino, a man of excellent wisdom, and great reputation in that
Country, was willing to keep it in liberty, and, to avoid greater danger, not
being able to contest with the Turks and the house of Austria at once, made
choice to join himself with these, by whom counterpoysing the Turks, he held
all in an even balance. Those of Austria knowing that by gaining of this
Prelat, they should wholly obtain their purpose, Ferdinand, besides other
things which he did to oblige him more unto them, promised him a pension of
eighty thousand Crowns, and the Emperor obtained of the Pope with great
instance, to create him Cardinal, and (which was seldom used) to send the
Cap, and to give him leave to wear the scarlet habit, which was not lawful,
because he was a Monk of Saint Basil: all which was done in the midst of
October. But this vain show of honor being not esteemed by the Bishop, was
not willing to prefer the interests of the house of Austria, before his
Country, he was traitorously, and cruelly slain, by Ferdinands ministers, the
eighteenth of December, upon pretense that he held intelligence with the
Turks. This accident did exceedingly move the Cardinals, who thought
themselves most sacred and inviolable. They considered of what importance the
example was, that a Cardinal should be slain upon fained calumnies, or for
suspicion. And they incited the Pope, who was forward of himself, showing him
that the Cardinal was possessour of a great treasure, to the value of a
million, which belonged to the Chamber, being the goods of a Cardinal, dead
without a Will. For all these respects the Pope deputed Cardinals to take
knowledge of the crime, and Ferdinand, and all his Ministers of Transiluania,
were thought to have incurred the censures. Commissioners were sent to Vienna
to make Ferdinand and his Ministers were thought to have incurred the censures.
inquisition. And, not to return to speak of this again, I will say here,
by way of anticipation, that the heat being abated, as the custom is, because
that which was done could not be undone, not to raise any greater stirs, the
proceeding was with much conniuencie; and though the process was made as
Ferdinand would, yet nothing was proved against the dead man, and the purpose
to draw the inheritance to the Chamber died, because little was found, in
comparison of that which was thought, Martinuccio, a man bountiful, having
spent all in the public service, and that which was found being divided
amongst the Soldiers. The Pope declared Ferdinand, and all those who Ferdinand
is absolved, first, conditionally, and then absolutely.
were not present at his death, to be absolved, with this addition, if the
things deduced in the Process were true. Whereof the Emperors ministers
complaining, as if the integrity of Ferdinand were questioned, the Pope made
the sentence absolute, and those only, who were Authors of the murder, went
to Rome to be absolved; but so, as if they had done a good work. And in
Hungary and Rome it was held, that it was done by command from him who had
interest, according to the usual saying, that of every secret counsel he is
Author, who receives profit by it. Yet this did Ferdinand no good, who
shortly after for this and other causes, was chased out of Transiluania. But
because to speak thereof, belongs not to my purpose, I return to the matter
which I left.

The seventh day of February, the next Sunday before Septuagesima, the Gospel
of the Cockle being read, Ambrose Cigogna, or Storke, (for so his Dutch name
Pelargo is expounded) a Dominican Divine of the Archbishop of Triers,
preached; who, applying the name of Cockle to the heretics, said it was fit
to tolerate them, when, without danger of greater mischief, they could not be
nooted our. This was told to the Protestants, as if he had said, that it was
lawful not to observe the faith given: which raised a great tumult. He
defended himself that he spoke of heretics in general, and said no more
then what the Gospel it self does propose: but if he had said that it was fit
to extirpate them with fire, bonds, and halters, or any other way, he should
have done that which the Council in the second Session did command: that he
had spoken modestly, nor could a Sermon be made upon that Gospel without
saying as much. The Cardinal of Trent, and the Emperors Ambassadors did
pacify the commotion, but with difficulty, though it was manifest that the
Friar spoke not of keeping faith, not of the Protestants particularly, but of
heretics in general. The Elector made this his pretense to depart, which he
was resolved to do before, by reason of some secret intelligence, which he
held with the French King, as also to recover his health; and so he departed in
the midst of February, leaving The Elector of Triers departs from Trent.
an opinion, that it was with the good liking of the Emperor, and with promise
to return quickly. Yet he passed not by Ispruc, nor spoke with the Emperor.

The first day of Lent the Stations were, by affixion, published in Trent, in
the same manner as in Rome, by the Popes grant, to him that visited the
Churches; which gave entertainment to the Fathers and Divines, who, in regard
of the intermission of the Congregations, wanted business. And before, being
almost idle, they entertained themselves in private meetings, discoursing
variously, sometimes, of dissoluing, sometimes of continuing the Council,
according to the news which was brought. In the beginning of March, letters
came from the Electour of Saxony, to his Ambassadors, giving them commission
to prosecute their instances in the Council, and aduising that he was ready
to go to the Emperor in person; which put all men out of fear. But not long
after, a general rumor was spread, that the French King was confederate with
the Protestant Princes, to make war against the Emperor. The Electours of
Mentz, and Collen departed The Electors of Collen and Mentz depart from Trent.
the eleventh of March, and passing by Ispruc, had very secret conference with
Caesar; and the Ambassadors of Maurice, fearing some danger, went secretly out
of Trent, and returned home by diverse ways. Notwithstanding all this, four
Divines of Wittenberg, and two of Argentina came to Trent afterward, who, with
the Ambassadors of that Duke The Divines of Wittenberg and Argentina come to
the Synod.
did immediately desire the Emperors Ambassadors, that the Synod might
answer the proposition already made, and begin the conference. The Legate
answered, that the nineteenth of March, a day appointed for the Session,
approaching, it was necessary to give order for it, and to handle many other
things, of which one should be, to find a form how to treat.

Therefore that day a Congregation was made in the Legates house, and a The
Ambassador of Portugal is received in congregation.
resolution taken to prolong the Session until the first of May. In this
Congregation the Ambassador of Portugal was received, who presented his Mandat,
and made a speech, and was answered in the usual form, with praise and
thanks to the King, and words of Complement to the Ambassador. But those of
Wittenberg, seeing no answer was made to their propositions, and that the
Legate concealed the Confession, presented by them, which many desired to have,
and could not, having brought many printed copies, distributed them unto
diverse; which raised much noise, and some said the deserved The Ambassadors of
Wittenberg spread copies of their Confession.
served punishment. For he, unto whom Safe Conduct is granted, is bound to
give none offense unto him that grants it. And this was esteemed a public
offense. Yet in the end all was quieted.

The Protestants, together with the Emperors Ambassadors, desired often, that
the action should begin, which not withstanding was deferred, sometimes under
pretense, that the Legate was not well in health, sometimes under diverse
others. The Emperors Ambassadors used all means to make them begin, and
persuaded the Protestants not to desire an answer to the demands presented by
them, and afterward not to desire that the doctrine exhibited by them should
be examined. But as one difficulty was removed by the Protestants, so another
was still raised by the Presidents, sometimes about the manner of treating,
sometimes about the matter with which to begin. But in the end, the
Protestants, persuaded by Pictauius, were content to begin where the others
would. Yet, for all this, nothing was done. For the Legate, though very sick
of great passions of mind, was thought to feign, that he might find a
pretense not to begin. The Nuncij were irresolute, and the Bishops did not
agree among themselves. For the adherents of Caesar, Spaniards and others,
moved by the Emperors Ambassadors, desired to proceed: but the Papalins,
suspecting that the end of the Imperialists was to come to the reformation of
the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of delay. And because the Dutch
Bishops were already departed, by reason of the rumors of war, they expected
the like occasion also, especially because the aduices of the Arms of the
French King, and confederates of Germany against the Emperor, did continue,
Protests, and Manifests being published, which alleged, for a cause, the
defense of Religion, and liberty of Germany. The first of April, the Elector
of Saxony besieged Ausburg, which did render it self the third day, and the
sixth news there of came The Fathers of the Council, and the Protestants
depart from Trent, by reason of the rumors of war.
to Trent, and that all Tirol did arm, and meant to go to Ispruc, there
being an opinion, that the army of the confederates did purpose to possess
themselves of the passages of the Alps, to hinder strangers from coming into
Germany. Therefore in many of the Italian Bishops embarked, and went down the
River Adice, to go to Verona, and the Protestants determined to depart.

There remaining but few Prelates, and the Legate often doting, by reason The
Legate doteth, and the Nuncij send to Rome to know what to do.
of his great infirmity, nor being able constantly to resolve, the Nuncij
fearing they should be alone in Trent if they expected the first of May,
according to the order, wrote to Rome, desiring to know what they should do in
these great straits. The Pope, who already had concluded with France, nor
esteemed any more what the Emperor could do, having over come the
difficulties by which he was compassed, assembled the Cardinals, and proposed
to them the advice of the Nuncy, the mayor part of whom did concur, without
difficulty, that the Council should be suspended. The Bull was made, and sent
to Trent, and letters addressed to the Nuncij, giving them authority for the
suspension. Therefore, when they saw urgent necessity, they were commanded to
yield unto it, not putting the dignity of the Council in danger, which should
be restored, at another, more peaceable time, nor dissoluing it absolutely,
that they might keep it in their power, and use it upon occasions, but
suspending it, for some years. The Nuncij concealed From whence they receive
order to suspend the Council.
this answer, and consulted with the Emperors Ambassadors, and the principal
prelates, who desired that order should be expected from Caesar, and extenuated
the fear as much as they could. Notwithstanding the Prelates, though the mayor
part were Spaniards, fearing their own persons, and hating the Protestants,
and not hoping, that in so great straits, the Emperor could have time to
think of the Council, gave consent to a suspension. Therefore the Nuncij did
intimate the public Session for the 28. of April, so great was their fear
that they could not expect two days, the time appointed for it.

Those few that remained did assemble; and, after the Ecclesiastical
ceremonies were ended, (for the pompes were omitted for that time) the Nuncio
of Siponto caused the Decree so be read; by the Secretary. The substance Which
is executed in Session the 2. of April.
whereof was: That the Synod (the two Nuncij presiding in their own name, and
in the name of Cardinal Crescentius the Legate, grievously sick) is assured,
that all Christians do know, that the Council of Trent was first The Bull of
the suspension for two years.
assembled by Paulus, and after restored by Julius, at the request of Charles
the Emperor, to restore Religion, especially in Germany, and to correct
manners, and that many Fathers of diverse Countries did meet without sparing
any pains, or fearing any dangers, and that the proceeding was prosperous,
with hope that the innouators of Germany would come to the Council, and yield
to the reasons of the Church: but that, by the subtilty of the enemy, tumults
are suddenly raised, which have interrupted the course, taken away all hope of
proceeding, and given cause of fear, that the Synod would rather irritate the
minds of many, then pacify them. Therefore perceiving that every place,
Germany especially, is on fire with discords, and that the Dutch Bishops,
especially the Electors, were departed to make provision for their Churches, it
has determined not to contend with necessity, but to be silent until better
times. And therefore they do suspend the Progress for two years, with
condition, that if all be quiet before that time be ended, the Council shall
be understood to be restored; but if the impediments shall not cease at the
end of two years, it shall be understood that the suspension is taken away so
soon as the impediments are removed, without a new Convocation of the
Council, his Holiness, and the holy Apostolic Sea, having given consent and
authority to this Decree. And, in the mean time, the Synod does exhort all
Christian Princes and Prelates, as far as concerns every one, to cause all
the Decrees of the Council, made until then, to be observed in their
Dominions, and Churches. This Decree being read, was approved by the Italians.
The Spaniards, who were twelve, said, that the dangers were not so great as
they were made. That five years Is opposed by the Spanish Prelates.
since Chiusa was taken by the Protestants, when no commander, but Castelalto,
was in Tiral to defend it, and yet the Council did not disso(...). Now the
Emperor was in (...), by whose virtue those stirs would quickly ceast; that
the (...) should have leave to depart, as then they had, and those remain that
would; until the Emperor were advised; (...) being but three days (...)
might returness speedy answer. But the others opposing popularly* the
Spaniards protested against so absolute suspension* Who protest against the
suspension.
notwithstanding* the Nuncio of Siponto, giving his benediction to the Fathers
gave them leave to begin their journey. The Nuncij and Italian Prelates being
departed, in the end, the Spaniard departed also, and so did the Emperors
Ambassadors, and the Cardinal Crescentius was carried The Legate dies in
Verona.
to Verona, where he died.

For the last part of the Decree, the Nuncij were much blamed in Rome, The
Nuncij are blamed for the last part of the Decree.
that the Synod had determined the observation of the Constitutio(...) without
asking first the confirmation of the Apostolic Sea, alleging that this,
having been exquisitely observed by all former Councels, was a great usurpation
and offense against the Papal authority. Some also made a scruple that all
that assisted in that Session, had incurred the censure of the Canon, Omnes,
did. 22. having done a prejudice to a privilege of the Popes authority
pretending that the Decrees of the Council, were of force before the
confirmation. They said for themselves, that they had not commanded, but
persuaded the observation. But the answer did not satisfy, because to And
their defense is not esteemed good.
observe as a law, does presuppose an obligation, and in the Decree, the
exhortation is referred only to Princes and Prelates, who are exhorted to
cause the Decrees to be observed. And for the obseruers, a former obligation
is presupposed, and for matter of faith, they said the answer could have no
place. They might have excused themselves, and said, that euerything was
approved by the Pope, before it was published in the Sessions. Neither would
this have satisfied, because, thought it was true, yet it did not appear. This
gave occasion to wonder, that there should be such a contention, between the
Synod and the Protestants, concerning the things decreed, which the
Protestants would have reexamined, and the Synod would have to be held as
concluded. For if they were not perfectly established, they might be
reexamined. And they discoursed, that the Pope, who was to confirm them; was
to do it, either with taking knowledge of the cause, or without; if without,
the confirmation was a vanity, and according to the proverb, that none should
take a potion, and another be purged; if with it, then the Pope ought to
examine them, and so might every one, and refer himself to his Holiness. In
sum, if the force of the Decrees of the Council depends on the Popes
Confirmation, before that, they are in suspense, and may be questioned, and
discussed better, which was always denied to the Protestants. Some did
conclude, that the Decree was a declaration that the confirmation was not
needful. The Protestants thought not of these reasons, which the stronger they
are in the Doctrine of the Sea of Rome, so much the more the use of them would
endammage their pretensions. But because there was more speech of the validity
of this Decree in the year 156 when the Council ended, that which remains
shall be deferred until then.

Though the Protestants had the better in mannaging the war, yet Manrice
treated friendly with Ferdinand, yea, went to him into his own Territeries,
desiring nothing of him but the freedom of the Landgraue, his father in law,
the liberty of Germany, and peace of Religion. The Protestants Annos did still
proceed; and the Emperor, though he were not ready to make resistance, yet
thinking he had Germany under his yoke; he would not leave any part of the
domination which he had assumed: and Ferdinand, after he had treated with
Maurice, went to Ispruc, to persuade him. But the The Emperor flies from
Isprut.
enemies Army approaching that City, the simperour was forced to fly by
night, with all his Court, and after he had wandered in the Mountains of
Trent, he came to Vdlaco a City of Carinthia, at the confines of the Venetians;
where he was much afraid, because the Senate, to secure the frontiers, sent
Soldiers to that place, though the Venetian Ambassador did assure him that
they were at his service, if there were occasion to employ them. Before he
departed from Ispruc, he set John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, at liberty, to
And sets Frederick, Duke of Saxony at liberty.
take the glory of his delivery from Maurice: which pleased that Prince very
much, whom it concerned more to be favored by an enemy his Superior, then
by an enemy his equal, and emulous.

A few hours after the departure from Ispruc, Maurice arrived there the same
night; where not touching any thing that belonged to Ferdinand, or the Maurice
takes Isprue.
Citizens, he made himself Lord of the Emperors baggage, and of the baggage
of his Court. The Protestants seeing their advantage by this flight, published
another Manifest, signifying in substance; that having taken arms The
Protestants set forth a Manifest.
for Religion, and the liberty of Germany, as the enemies of the truth had no
other aim, but that the holy Doctors being first oppressed, the Popish
errors, might be restored, and the youth brought up in them, having imprisoned
some, and made others swear to depart, and not return again, which oath does
not bind, because it is wicked, they did recall them all, and command them to
resume their office of teaching, according to the Augustan Confession, and, to
remove all calumnies, did absolve them from the oath taken. The treaty of
peace still continuing, it was at last concluded in A Peace is concluded.
Passau, in the beginning of August, concerning all differences; and, for
Religion, it was thus ordered: that, within six months, a Diet should be
called, to consult how the discords in Religion might most easily, and
commodiously be composed, either by a general or National Council, or by a
Colloquie, or universal Diet of the Empire. That in that Diet, an equal
number of godly, humble and wise men of either Religion should be taken,
charging them to consider of and propose the most convenient means: and, that
in the mean space, neither the Emperor, nor any other may force any in matter
of Religion, against his conscience, or will, neither De facto, nor by form of
reason, nor do any thing in contempt, or to grieve any for that cause, but to
let every man live in quiet, and in peace: and likewise that the Princes of the
Augustan Confession may not molest the Ecclesiastiques or seculars of the old
Religion, but let them enjoy their goods, Lordships, Superiorities,
jurisdictions, and ceremonies; that in the Chamber justice be administered to
every one, without regard of what Religion he is, not excluding the
Confessionists from the places they are to have amongst the assessors, and that
it be free for the assessors, and for the litigants to swear by God and the
Saints, or by God and the Gospel. And though there be no means of composition
in Religion, yet this peace shall remain in force for ever. And so the Interim
was abrogated, which had been really executed but in few places. The Landgraue
of Hassia was delivered by virtue of this agreement, so that all difficulties
with the Emperor did cease; yet the war continued a whole The Interim is
abrogated, The Landgraue is set at liberty, and the Protestant Preachers are
recalled. The Diet is deserted.
year, in many parts, between diverse Princes and Cities of the Empire. But
the Cities recalled their Preachers, and Doctors of the Augustan Confession,
and restored the Churches, Schools, and exercise of Religion, and though, in
regard of the banishments and persecutions against the Doctors and Preachers,
there remained but few of them, and those concealed under the protection of the
Princes, yet, as if they had risen again, there wanted not to furnish all
places. The war hindered the assembling of the Diet disseigned, and deferred
it from one year to another, until February 1555. whereof we will speak in
the fit place.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
THe Pope, now freed from many cares, by the dissolution of the Council,
thought fit to prevent all occasions of relapse, and proposed in Consistory the
necessity to reform the The Pope makes a great show that he will reform the
Church.
Church. He said he had reduced the Council to Trent for this end, which having
not succeeded according to his desire, in regard of diverse accidents of war,
first in Italy, then in Germany, it was meet to do that in Rome, which in
Trent could not be done. He appointed therefore a great congregation of
Cardinals and Prelates, to consider of the business. He said, he elected
many, that resolutions might be more mature, and have greater reputation;
though his end was thought to be, that, by reason of the multitude, more
impediments might arise, and so all might come to nothing. And the event was
judge. For the Reformation was handled in the beginning with great heat;
afterward it went on, for the space of many months, very coldly; and, at the
last, was buried in silence. And the suspension of the Council, in The
suspension of ye council, made for two years lasts ten.
stead of two years, did continue ten; verifying the maxim of the
Philosophers, that the causes ceasing, the effects do cease also. The causes
of the Council were first the great instances of Germany, and the hope,
conceived by the world, that it would cure all the diseases of Christendom.
But the effects that were seen under Paul the third did extinguish The causes
of the two Conuocations of the Council.
the hope, and show to Germany that it was impossible to have such a Council
as they desired. Of the second reduction of the Synod there was another cause;
which was the great desire of Charles the Emperor to put Germany under his
yoke, by means of Religion, and to make the Empire hereditarie, by causing his
son to succeed him, and so to erect a Monarchy, greater then any since the
Roman, even then that of Charles the great. For this, the victories he had
obtained was not sufficient, 1553* I(...) 3. (...) CHARLES* (...) EDWARD* (...)
HENRY(...)
neither did he think he could supply what was wanting by new forces only:
but supecting the people unto him by Religion, and the Princes by treaties, he
had conceived a vast hope to immortallize his name. This was the cause why he
was so earnest with Iul(...) for the second Convocation of the Council, and of
his effectual pers^asions (not to call them violent) Charles uses means to
make the Empire hereditary*
to the three Electors to go thither, and to the Protestents, with whom he
had power, to send their Druines. But while the Council was celebrated,
Charles, having put all Christian Princes in jealousy, found the first
encounters in his own house. For Ferdinand, though he seemed formerly to have
consented to make the Empire common to them both (as it was to Marcus and
Lucius, with equal authority, an example followed by Dioclesian, and many
others afterward) and then to labor that Philip should be chosen King of the
Romans to succeed them, (wherein Charles had employed But cannot effect it.
his sister, the Queen of Hungary, to persuade him to it, for the advancement
of their house) yet, better advised by his son Maximilian, he began to
change his opinion. To effect this business, already set on foot, Philip was
called by his father, that he might be known to the Electors, in the Diet of
Ausburg in the year 1551. which made Ferdinand retire himself, and the
foresaid Queen to go thither, to make peace between the brothers. But
Maximilian, fearing that his father out of his good nature, would yield,
leaving the government of the Kingdoms of Spain, which the Emperor had given
him, in the hands of his wife, the Emperors daughter, returned suddenly into
Germany by whose persuasions Ferdinand remained constant in his purpose, and
Charles had nothing from the Electors but good words. By this opposition the
Emperors edge was abated, who sent his son back into Spain, without hope
ever to obtain the consent of Maximilian. And afterward being compelled, by
the foresaid war, to make an agreement, despairing of his sons succession,
he laid aside all thought of restoring the ancient Religion in Germany, and, by
consequence, all care of the Council, though he continued many years after in
the Empire. And the Court did care for it as little, because none did desire
it. But diverse accidents then happened, Which causes him to lay aside all care
of Religion and of the Council.
which though they seemed to make the suspension perpetual, yet, in the secret
providence of God, did minister causes for the third Convocation, which the
continuation of the story requires should not be passed over in silence, in
regard the knowledge of the causes does help much to penetrate the effects,
which happened after that the Council was resumed.

The Pope, seeing that the people of his obedience did not so much esteem him,
by reason of the alienation of Germany, did imitate Eugenius the fourth, 1553.
who maintained the reputation which the Council of Basil took from How ye
Pope maintained his reputation
him, by a show of Grecians, and a shadow of Armenians; and the late example of
his predecessor Paulus 3. who, when the contentions were ho^e, between him
and the Emperor, for the translation of the Council to Bolonia, for which the
people also did distaste him, received, with many ceremonies, on Steven, by the
name of Patriarch of Armenia the greater, with one Archbishop, and 2. Bishops,
who came to knowledge him for the Vicar of CHRIST, and general commander of
the Church, and to render him obedience. According to these examples, Julius
did receive with much public solemnity one Simon Sul^akam, elect Patriarch of
all the people which are between Euphrates and India sent from those Churches
to be confirmed by the Pope, successor of Peter, and Vicar of CHRIST. He
ordained him Bishop, and gave him the Patriarchall Robe with his own hands, in
the Consistory; and sent him back to his home, that the Churches might not
suffer in his absence, accompanied with some religious men, who understood the
Syriaque tongue. All the discourse was, not only in Rome, but throughout all
Italy, of the immense number of the Christians in those parts; and how much
the lists of the Apostolic Sea were enlarged. And particularly they spoke of
the great number of Churches in the City Muzal, which, they said, was the old
Assure, upon the river Tigris, from which Niniue, renowned for the preaching of
Jonas, was not far distant, situated beyond the river. Under this
jurisdiction they put Babylon, Tauris, and Arbela, famous for the battle
between Darius and Alexander, with many Countries of Assyria and Persia. They
found also the ancient Cities named in the Scripture, and Ecbatan, which the
stories do call Seleucia and Nisibi. They said that this man, elected by all
the Bishops, was sent to the Pope for confirmation, accompanied with seventy
persons, as far as Jerusalem, and from thence by three, of whom one died, and
another remained sick in the journey, and the third, called Calefi, came with
him to Rome. All these things were printed, and very curiously read. The Pope
received another also, named Marderius, a Iacobite of Assyria, sent by the
Patriarch of Antioch, to acknowledge the Apostolic Sea, and give it
obedience, and make profession of the Roman faith. But the world being
satiated with the former, did not care for this second.

After these shadows of obedience, which the Sea of Rome gained, there
succeeded one real, and of great importance, which did abundantly recompense
The King of, England dies
whatsoever was lost in Germany. The sixth of July 1553, Edward King of England
died, of the age of sixteen years. Fifteen days before, he made a Will,
with approbation of his Council, wherein having declared that it did belong to
him to name the Successor, according to the laws of the Kingdom, he excluded
his sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, because their legitimation was doubted of, and
all the posterity of Margaret, his fathers elder sister, as strangers, not
borne in the kingdom, and named her Queen who followed in order, that is,
Jane of Suffolk, grandchild to Mary, formerly Q. of France, and younger
sister to his father Henry 8. by her daughter, notwithstanding that the said
Henry had, in his last Will, substituted Mary and Elizabeth, which substitution
he said was pupillary, and did not bind him now he was of age. Jane was
proclaimed Queen in London, and Mary, retiring her self into Jane is
proclaimed Queen.
Norfolk, that she might commodiously pass into France, if there were
occasion, named her self Queen also, and was finally accepted by all the
kingdom, alleging in her favor the Testament of Henry, and that of a
Matrimony contracted bona fide, though there be a nullity in it, the issue is
legitimate. Jane and her adherents were imprisoned, and Mary entered into But
Mary obtains the Crown.
London, and was received with a general applause, and proclaimed Queen of
England and France, and had the title of Head of the Church. She presently set
the prisoners at liberty, which her father had put into the Tower, 1553 JULIUS
3. CHARLES 5. Q. MARY. HENRY 2. A sedition in London about Religion.
partly for Religion, and partly for other causes. A little after her entry
there arose a sedition in London, by occasion of one who took the boldness to
preach Popery, and of another who did celebrate the Mass. To appease this
trouble, which was very considerable, the Queen caused an Edict to be
published, that she would live in the Religion of her Ancestors, and therefore
would not permit that any thing should be preached to the people, but that
which formerly had been. Afterward, the eleventh of October she was crowned
with the usual ceremonies. The Pope aduertized hereof, considering that she
was brought up in the Catholic Religion, interrested in the respects of her
mother, and cousin by blood unto the Emperor, hoped he might make some entry
into the Kingdom, and therefore did make Cardinal Poole his Legate, thinking,
because he was of the blood royal, and The Pope makes Cardinal Poole his
Legate for England.
of an exemplary life, he was the only instrument to reduce that Kingdom to
the Church of Rome. The Cardinal, who had been banished by public Decree,
and deprived of his honor, thought it not fit to begin the enterprise, before
he fully understood the state of things, being assured that the mayor part was
still devoted to the memory of Henry. He therefore sent into England secretly,
Giouanni Francesco Comendone, to inform him, and wrote a Letter to the Queen:
in which, commending her perseverance in Religion in the times of her troubles,
he exhorted her to continue in the times of her happiness, recommended unto
her the salvation of the souls of those people, and the restitution of the
true worship of GOD. Comendone having observed every particular, and found
means to speak with the Queen though compassed and guarded on every side,
perceived she had never been auerse from the Roman faith, and had promise
from her that she would labor to restore it into the whole Kingdom, which
the Cardinal understanding, put himself into the voyage.

In England, after the Coronation, a Parliament was held, in which the A
Parliament is held, and the divorce of Henry the 8. declared to be unlawful.
divorce of the Queens mother, Katherine of Aragon, was declared to be
unlawful, the marriage good, and the issue legitimate; which was obliquely to
restore the Popes supremacy, in regard it could not be good, without the
validity of the dispensation of Julius the second, and by consequence, not
without the supremacy of the Sea of Rome. It was ordained also, that all the
constitutions in matter of religion made by Edward should be abrogated, and
Pope^y is established.
that religion observed which was in use at the death of Henry. In this
Parliament, they treated of marrying the Queen, though she were above forty
years of age: and three were named: Poole, who had not taken holy Orders, And
the marriage of the Queen is treated on.
though he was a Cardinal; and Courtney, both of the blood Royal, and first
Cousins of Henry the eight, in an equal degree, this of the white Rose, grand
child of Edward the fourth, by his daughter, and that of the red Rose, Nephew
to Henry the seventh by his sister; both acceptable to the Nobility of
England; Poole for wisdom, and sanctify of life, and Courtney for his loving
behavior, and carriage. But the Queen preferred Philip Prince of Spain
before these, as well for the treaties made by her cousin Charles the Emperor,
(her affection also inclining much more to the mothers side then to the
fathers) as because she thought she might better secure her own and the
Kingdoms peace with that marriage. The Emperor, who did much 1554 JULIUS 3.
CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. Until the conclusion whereof the Emperor hinders
Poole in going into England.
desire to effect it, fearing that Poole might disturb it, by his presence in
England, knowing he was departed Legate, made means by Cardinal Dandinus,
the Popes Minister with himself, that he should not part out of Italy so
soon, saying, that as yet an Apostolic Legate could not go into England
with honor. But the Letter of Dandinus not taking effect, and Poole being in
his journey as far as the Palatinate, he sent Diego Mendoza to stop him by
authority. It seemed strange to the Cardinal, and he complained that the
Popes Legation was hindered with the damage of Christianity, and of the
Kingdom of England, and joy of Germany. Therefore the Emperor, not to give
so much matter of talk, made him go to Bruxels, and entertained him in
Brabant, until the marriage was ended, and all things accommodated as he
would; and, for color, employed him to treat a peace between himself and
the French King.

In the beginning of the year 1554. the Emperor sent Ambassadors 1554.
into England to make the conclusion: and the Queen proceeding to favor the
old Religion, did the fourth of March publish other Laws, restoring the
Latin tongue into the Churches, forbidding married men to exercise holy
Functions, and giving order to the Bishops not to make them swear, who were to
be received into the Clergy, as Henry had appointed, that the King was
supreme Head of the Church of England, and that the Pope had no superiority
there, but was Bishop only of the City of Rome. She ordained also that the
form of Prayer, instituted by Henry, where, amongst other things, God is
prayed to deliver that Kingdom from sedition, conspiracy, and tyranny of the
Pope, should be razed out of all the Books of Rites, and forbid to be
printed. In April another Parliament was held, in which consent was given to
the contract of marriage: where the Queen proposed the restitution of the
Popes supremacy; which she could not obtain, because the Nobility did
resist, who considered not that they did vainly deny this demand, which was
vertually contained in their assent to the marriage. Philip, Prince of Spain,
arrived The celebration of the marriage.
in England the eighteenth of July, and on Saint James day the Nuptials were
celebrated, and he received the title of the King of Naples, and did
consummate the Matrimony. In November there was a new Parliament, in which
Cardinal Poole was restored to his Honor and Country, and two were sent to
inuit and accompany him; with whom he passed into the Island, and arrived at
London the three and twentieth of Cardinal Poole comes to London, with the
cross carried before him. And makes an Oration in the Parliment.
November, with a silver Cross carried before him. At his first entry into
the Parliament, he made a discourse in English before the King, Queen, and
Orders of the Kingdom. He thanked them very much that he was restored to his
Country, saying, that in exchange, he was come to restore them to the Country
and Court of Heaven* of which they were deprived, by departing from the Church.
He exh(...) them to acknowledge the error, and receive the benefit which God,
by his Vicar, had sent them. The discourse was very long and artificial* and
the conclusion was, that he had the Keys to bring them into the Church, which
they had shut, by making Laws against the Apostolic Sea: which when they
did revoke, he would open the doors unto them. The Cardinals person was well
accepted, and an apparent assent was given to his Proposition, though the Mayor
part did secretly abhor the quality of a Popes Minister, and were grieved to
come under, the yoke again. But they had suffered themselves to be carried so
far, that they knew not how to return.

The next day the reunion with the Church of Rome was decreed in The manner of
the reunion with the Church of Rome.
Parliament; and the manner was thus set down. That a Supplication should be
made in the Parliaments name, wherein it should be declared that they were
very sorry for having denied obedience to the Apostolic Sea, and for having
consented to the Decrees made against it, promising to endeavor hereafter that
all those Laws and Decrees should be abolished, and beseeching the King and
Queen to intercede for them, that they may be absolved from the crimes and
censures, and received, as penitent children, into the bosom of the Church, to
serve God, in obedience of the Pope and Sea of Rome. The last of November,
Saint Andrews day, their Maiestics, the Cardinal, and whole Parliament being
assembled, the Chancellor asked the generality whether they were pleased that
pardon should be demanded of the Legate, and whether they would return to the
unity of the Church, and obedience of the Pope, supreme Head thereof; and some
saying yea, and the others holding their peace, a Supplication was presented to
their Majesty's in the name of the Parliament; which being publicly read,
they rose to desire the Legate, who met them, and showed himself willing to
give them satisfaction; and causing the authority given him by the Pope to be
read, he discoursed how acceptable to God the repentance of a sinner was, and
how the Angels did then rejoice for the conversion of that Kingdom: and all
being on their knees, imploring the mercy of God, he absolved them; which
being done, he went to the Church with all the multitude, to give thanks to
God. The next day an Embassage was destinated to the Pope, to render him
obedience; Ambassadors are appointed to go to the Pope.
for which were named Anthony Brown, Vicount Mountacute, Thomas Thirlby,
Bishop of Ely, and Edward Cerne, who had formerly been Ambassador in Rome
for Henry the eight, and was now to be resident there again in that charge.
Advice hereof came to Rome For which Processions are made in Rome.
quickly, for which many Processions were made; not only in that City, but
through out all Italic, to give thanks to God. The Pope approved what his
Legate had done, and sent a (...) the four and twentieth of December,
alleging in the ^^ll for a cause, that, like the Father of the family,
having recovered his prodigal son, it was mee^e that he should not
onely-shew ^othesticall joy, but generally inuit all to the same Jubilee; and
he praised and extolled the action of the King, Queen, and people of England.
The Parliament continued until the midst of January (...). and to the ancient
Edicts of the Kings to punish heretics, and of the Jurisdiction of Bishops
were renewed, the Primacie, and all prehertinences of the Pop restored, all
contrary Decrees made within twenty years last past, (...) would Henry as by
Edward, abolished, the penal: Laws against heretics revived, and many were
burned, especially Bishops, who would persevere in the reformation abolished.
It is certain that one hundred seventy and six persons of quality were
burned that year, for Religion, besides many of the common sort, which gave
but little content to that people, who also were displeased that Martin Bucer,
and Paulus Fagius, dead four years before, were cited and condemned, as if
Many are burned in England for Religion.
they had been living, and their bodies dug up, and burned; an action,
commended by some as a revenge of what Henry the eight had done against S.
Thomas, by others compared to that which the Popes, Stephanus the sixth, and
Sergius the third, did against the Corpse of Pope Formosus.

Many also were at the same time burned in France for Religion: not And in
France also.
without the indignation of honest men, who knew that the diligence used
against those poor people, was not for piety, or Religion, but to satiate
Which was done to satiate the covetousness of Diana Valentina.
the covetousness of Diana Valentina, the Kings Mistress, to whom he had given
all the confiscations of goods made in the Kingdom for cause of Heresy. It
was wondered also that those of the new reformation, should meddle with blood,
for cause of Religion. For Michael Seruetus of Tarragona, made a Divine of a
Physician, renewing the old opinion of Paulus Samosatenus, and Marcellus
Anciranus, that the word of God was not a thing subsisting, and therefore that
Christ was a pure man, was put to death for Michael Seruetus is burned in
Geneua.
it in Geneua, by Counsel of the Ministers of Zuric, Berne, and Schiaffusa:
and John Calvin, who was blamed for it by many, wrote a Book, defending that
the Magistrate may punish Heretics with loss of life: which Doctrine being
drawn to diverse senses, as it is understood more strictly or more largely, or
as the name of Heretic is taken diversely, may sometime do hurt to him, whom
another time it has helped.

At that time Ferdinand, King of the Romans, published an Edict to all The
King of the Romans publishes an Edict against all innovation in Religion
the people subject unto him, that in points of Religion, and Rites, they
should not innouate, but follow the ancient customs; and particularly that, in
the holy Communion, they should be content to receive the Sacrament of bread
only. Wherein though many persons of note, the Nobility, and many of the
Cities made Supplication unto him, that, at the least the Cup might be granted
them, saying that the institution was of Christ, which might not be altered by
men, and that it was the use of the old Church, as was confessed by the
Council of Constance, promising all submission and obedience in all other
things, praying him not to burden their consciences, but to accommodate his
commandment to the orders set down by the Apostles, and of the Primitive
Church, yet Ferdinand perseuered in his resolution, and answered them, that his
commandment was not new, but an ancient institution, used by his Ancestors,
Emperors, Kings, and Dukes of Austria: and that the use of the Cup was a
nouitie, brought in by curiosity, or pride, against the Law of the Church, and
consent of the Prince. Yet he moderated the rigor of the answer, saying,
that the question being of a point that concerns salvation, he would think
of it more diligently, and answer them in fit time, but that, in the mean
while, he expected from them obedience, and observation of the Edict. He
published also a Catechism the fourteenth of And a Catechism.
August, made, by his authority, by some learned and pious Divines, 1555 PAVL
4. CHARLES 5. MARY. (...) HENRY 2. Which gave distaste to the Court of Rome.
commanding all the Magistrates of those Countries, not to suffer any
Schoolemasters to read any but that, either in public or in private,
because, by diverse Pamphlets which went about, Religion was much corrupted in
those Countries. This constitution distasted the Court of Rome, because it was
not sent to the Pope, to be approved by his authority, nor came forth in
the name of the Bishop of the Country, the secular Prince assuming the office;
to cause to be composed, and to Authorize Books in matter of Religion,
especially by name of Catechism, to show that it belonged to the secular
power, to determine what Religion the people should follow, and what refuse.

The two years of the suspension of the Council being expired, they treated
in the Consistory what was fit to be done. For although the condition in the
Decree was, that the Council should be of force again when the impediments
were removed, which did still continue, by reason of the wars of Siena,
Piemont, and others, between the Emperor and the French King, yet it seemed
that any man of an unquiet Spirit might say that those impediments were not
sufficient, and that it was understood that the Council was on foot again;
so that, to free themselves from those dangers, it might be good to make a new
declaration. But wiser men It is resolved in Rome not to speak of the Council
though the two years of suspension were ended.
gave counsel not to move the evil while it was quiet, while the world was
silent, while neither Prince nor People demanded the Council, lest by showing
they were afraid, they might excite others to require it. This advice
prevailed, and made the Pope resolve never to speak more of it.

In the year 1555. there was a Diet in Ausburg, which the Emperor 1555. A
Diet. (...) had in Ausburg to compose the differences in Religion.
had intimated, principally to compose the controversies of religion, in regard
this was the fountain of all the troubles, and calamities of Germany, with
the loss not only of the lives of many thousands of men, but of their souls
also. Ferdinand began the Diet, in the Emperors name, the fifth of February;
where he showed at large, the lamentable spectacle of Germany, in which men
of the same Baptism, Language, In which Ferdinand makes an Oration.
and Empire, were distracted by so various a profession of Faith, there arising
new Sects every day: which did show not only small reverence toward God, and
great perturbations of men's minds, but was cause also that the multitude knew
not what to believe, and that many of the principal Nobility and others were
without all faith, and honesty, making no conscience of their actions, which
took away all commerce: so that now it could not be said that the Germans
were better then the Turks, and other barbarous people; for which causes God
has afflicted it with so great calamities. Therefore it was necessary to take
in hand the business of religion. He said a general, free, and pious
Council was formerly thought the only remedy. For the cause of Faith being
common to all Christians, it ought to be handled by all: and the Emperor
employing all his forces herein, did cause it to be assembled, more then
once. But there was no need to say why no fruit came by it, it being well
known to all that were present. Now if they desired to prove the same remedy
again, it was necessary to remove the impediments, which did 1555 MARCDILVS
(...). CHARLES 5. MARY HENRY 2.
hinder them from attaining the wished end. But if, by reason of the accidents
that occur, they thought fit to defer this until another time, they might
treat of using other means. They knew not how to make use of a National
Council, because the manner, form, and name of them were disused. The
Colloquies, whereof they had often made proof, did no And proposes a
Colloquie.
good, because both parties aimed more at private gain, then public piety
and utility. Yet he said they were not to be despised now, if they would lay
aside the obstinacy of their private affections; and counseled them to try
them once more, if the Diet did not propose a better way.

This proposition was made by Ferdinand, with others, concerning the peace and
war with the Turks, that it might pass through Germany, and serve to
inuit men to the Diet, to which very few were come. But it was ill expounded,
in regard of his former Edict, published in his States, much contrary to this
proposition, and more, in regard of the execution of it, having chased more
then two hundred Preachers out of Bohemia. And it went to Rome also; where the
Pope, cursing, as he usually did, the Which displeases the Pope.
Colloquies, and inuentors of them, complained that there was no end of these
difficulties, and that he was to have a Council, a Colloquie, or a Diet
always on his back. He blamed those times for being so full of troubles,
praising former ages when the Popes might live quietly, not being in fear of
their authority. Yet he was comforted by the perfect subjection of England to
his obedience, by the decrees made in his favor, by the Who is consolated with
the obedience of England.
Letters of thanks which he received, and with the promise that a solemn
Embassage would come ere long, to thank him personally for his fatherly
clemency and benignity, and to promise him obedience. Wherewith being well
pleased, he could not choose but jest, and said, that he did enjoy some part
of happiness, in that he was thanked by those unto whom he owed thanks.

But though the Pope had little hope of Germany, yet, not to neglect it, nor
any ouerture that might be made, in proposing means to reduce to the Church
those that wandered, he sent Cardinal Morone. for his Legate, He sends
Cardinal Morone to the Diet.
to the Imperial Diet, with instructions ever to lay before them the example
of England, and, by that, to exhort Germany to know their disease, and receive
the same cure; and, above all, to divert all Colloquies, and treaties of
religion. The Cardinal was no sooner arrived in Ausburg, but Pope Julius died,
whereof he received advise eight days after. He therefore departed And dies
presently after.
the last of March, together with the Cardinal of Ausburg, to assist at the
election of the new Pope.

Before they came, Marcellus Ceruinus, Cardinal de Santa Croce, was Marcellus
Ceruinus is created Pope, and reteineth his name.
elected Pope in Rome, the ninth of April; a man grave, and severe by nature,
and of a constant mind, which he was willing to demonstrate in the first
action of his Papacy, by retaining the same name, showing the world that his
dignity had not changed him; contrary to that which so many of his
predecessors had done. For after the changing of the names began, because Dutch
men were made Popes, to whose names Roman ears were not accustomed, all that
followed observed the same use, signifying thereby that they had changed their
private affections into public and divine cares. But this Pope, to show that
in his private estate he had thoughts worthy of the Popedom, would, by
retaining the same name, show his immutabilitie. Another action of his also was
like to this. For the capitulations made in the Conclaue being presented to
him, that he might swear to them, he answered it was the same thing which
he had sworn a few days before, and that he would observe it by deeds and
not by promises. The holy week which then was celebrated, and Easter holy
days approaching, put the Pope, by the assiduitie of Ecclesiastical ceremonies
into an indisposition. Yet his thoughts were still fixed on the things he had
disseigned with many Cardinals, before his Popedom, to which he did ever
think he should ascend; and particularly he imparted his purpose to the
Cardinal of Mantua, to compose the differences of Religion by a Council,
which he said did not formerly succeed well, because a good course was not
taken. That it was necessary He purposes to make a reformation.
first to make an entire reformation, by which the real differences would be
accorded; which being done, the verbal would partly cease of themselves, and
partly would be composed with some small pains of the Council. That his
Predecessors for five successions, abhorred the name of reformation, not for
any bad end, but because they were persuaded that it was set on foot, to pull
down the Papal authority. But his opinion was contrary, and that nothing
could more preserve it then that; yea, that it would be a means to enlarge
it. For observing things past, every one might see, that only those Popes who
have made reformations, have advanced and enlarged their authority. That the
reformation did not alter any thing but that which was for show and vanity,
not only of no moment, but of charge and burden; as ryots, pomps, great
trains of Prelates, excessive, superfluous, and unprofitable charges, which
do not make the Papacy venerable, but rather contemned; which vanities being
cut off, the true power, reputation, and credit with the world will increase,
together with the revenue and other sinews of government, and above all, the
protection of God, which every one may assure himself does work in
conformity of ones proper duty.

These dissignes, published in Court, were, by his wel-willers, adorned And is
censured by the Court.
with the titles of Piety, love of Peace, and Religion; but some, that were
emulous, said the end was not good; that the Pope did ground himself upon
Astrologicall predictions (following his fathers steps, who became great by
that profession) which, as some times, either by chance or otherwise, they
succeed, so, for the most part, they are occasions of the fall of many.
Amongst the Popes particular dissignes, one was, to He purposed to institute a
religion of an hundred persons.
institute a Religion of an hundred persons, like unto a Caualarie: of which
himself would be Head, and make the election, taking them out of any other
Religion, or state of persons; every one of which should have yearly five
hundred crowns out of the Chamber, should take a very solemn and strict Oath
of fidelity to the Pope, should not be assumed to any other degree, nor have
any more revenue, except, for their deserts, they were created Cardinals, in
which case they were not to forsake the compunie. These only he would employ
for Nuncij, and ministers of businesses, Governors of Cities, Legates, and in
all other occasions of the Apostolic Sea. And many learned men, Inhabitants
of Rome, whom himself did know, were named, and others put themselves forward
to receive this honor. The Court was full of the expectation But dies be fore
anything was effected, having sat but 22. days.
of many nouities; which were all buried in silence, because Marcelius, first
weakened by the pains he took in the long great ceremonies, as has bin said,
afterward taken with an apoplexy, dyed the last day of the month, the other
astrologicall predictions of his father and his owhe, which were extended a
year after that time, being not verefied.

The Cardinals being assembled again in the Conclaue, he of Ausburg, assisted
by Morene, made great instance, that among the capitulations which the
Cardinals were to swear unto, one should be, that the future Pope should, by
counsel of the College, call an other Synod, within Two cap(...)lations, one
to call another S^ council within two years, another not to make above 4.
Cardinals within two years. John Peter Caraffa, called Paul the 4 41^ created
Pope.
two years, to finish the reformation begun, to determine the controversies of
Religion that remained, and to find a means to cause the Council of Trent to
be received in Germany. And the College of the Cardinals being full, it was
capitulated that the Pope should not create more then four within two years.
The three and twentieth day of the next Month, John Peter Caraffa, who called
himself Paulus Quartus, was created, the Imperialists resistng as much as they
could. For he was thought not to be the Emperors friend, in regard of the old
distastes which he received in the King of Spain his Court, where he served
eight years, in the life time of the Catholic King Ferdinand, and because
the possession of the Archbishoprique of Naples was denied him, a few years
before, by the common inclination of the Barons of that Kingdom. Whereunto was
added the seueritio of his manners, which made Of whose severity the Court is
afraid.
the Court fad, and put it in geater fear of reformation, then it formerly had
in the treaties of the Council. The strictness of his life, concerning his
person and family, he laid aside immediately after his creation. For being
demanded by his Steward what diet he would have provided for him, he
answered such as befitteth a Prince: and would be crowned with greater pomp
then was usual, affecting, in all his actions, to keep his degree with
magnificence, and to appear stately and sumptuous. To his Nephews and kinsmen
he was as indulgent as any of his Predecessors. He affected to hide his
severity toward others, by showing the greatest humanity, but within a short
time he returned to his own natural disposition.

He took it for a great glory that the three English. Ambassadors, The
English. Ambassadors are received in the first co^sistory after the coronation.
dispatched in the time of Julius, entered Rome the firstday of his Papacy: and
the first consistory after the Coronation, was public. The Ambassadors,
were brought into it, who prostrating themselves at the Popes feet, did, in
the name of the Kingdom, acknowledge the faults committed, relating them all
in particular (for so the Pope would have it) confessing they had been
ungrateful for so many benefits received from the Church, and humbly craving
pardon for it. The Pope did pardon them, took them up from the ground, and
embraced them: and, to honor their Majesty's who sent them, gave the title of
a Kingdom to Ireland, granting them this dignity by the authority which the
Pope has from God, being placed over all Kingdoms, to supplant those that are
contumacious, and to build new. Men of judgment, who then knew not the true
cause of that action, thought it a vanity, not seeing The Pope gives to
Ireland the title of a kingdom
what profit, either of authority or honor, it might bring to a King, to have
many titles in the Country which he possesses, considering that the most
Christian King is more honored by the only title of King of France, then if
his State were divided into as many Kingly titles as he has Provinces.
Neither did it then seem a fit time to say, he had power from God to build
up, and overthrow Kingdoms. But those that knew the true cause, did not think
it vain, but a secret, usually practiced a long time. Henry the Eight, after
his separation from the Pope, made Ireland a kingdom, and called himself,
King of England, France, and Ireland; which title, continued by Edward, was
assumed by Marie, and her Husband. The Pope so soon as he was created, entered
into a resolution that the title of Ireland should not be used by those
Princes, affirming constantly that it belonged only to him, to Which was taken
before without the consent of any Pope.
give the name of a King. But it seemed hard to enduce England to quit that
which two Kings had used, and the Queen, not thinking much of it, had
continued. Therefore he found a temper; that is, to dissemble the knowledge of
what Henry had done, and himself to crect the Island into a Kingdom, that so
the world might believe that the Queen Popes have often given that which they
could not take from the possessors.
had used the Title as given by the Pope, not as decreed by her Father. And the
Popes have often given that which they could not take from the possessors, and
to avoid contentions, some have received their own goods as gifts, and some
have dissembled the knowledge of the gift, or of the pretense of the giver. In
the private discourses between the Pope and the Ambassadors, he found fault
that the Church goods were not wholly restored, saying that by no means it was
to be tolerated, and that it was necessary to render all, even to afarthing;
because the things that belong to God can never be applied to humane uses, and
he that withholdeth the least part of them, is in continual state of
damnation. That if he had power to grant them, he would do it most readily,
The Pope commands the restitutio^ of Church goods in England.
for his Fatherly affection which he bears to them, and for the experience
he has of their filial obedience, but his authority was not so large, as
that he might profane the things dedicated to GOD, and let England be
assured that this would be an Anathema, and an contagion, which, by the just
revenge of God, would always hold the Kingdom of England in perpetual
infelicitie. He charged the Ambassadors to write thereof immediately, and was
not content to speak of it once, but repeated it as often as there was
occasion. He said also plainly, that the Peterperce ought to be paid, as
soon as might be, and that, according to the And the payment of Peter pence.
custom he would send a Collector for that purpose; that himself had
exercised that charge three years, having been sent into England for that
end, wherein he was much edified, by seeing the forwardness of the people to
contribute, especially of those of the meaner sort; and told them often that
they could not hope that Saint Peter would open heaven unto them, so long as
they usurped his goods upon earth. This relation made unto the Queen, with
many other treaties, continued succeesliuely from Rome, caused her to employ
all her spirits herein; but nothing could be done, because many of the
Nobility, and of the Grandies had incorporated many of The Queen makes
(...)tution, which her people ^^suse to do.
these revenues into their houses. For herself she restored the tenths, and
all other Ecclesiasticalligoods annexed to the Crown, by her brother, and her
Father. The Ambassadors parted from Rome, with much praise, and favor from
the Pope, for their submission, a means by which his good will is easily
gained.

Immediately after the Creation of the new Pope, tho Imperialists and French
men, did vie who should gain him. But the Cardinal of Loraine, who well knew
his humor, confirmed his affection toward the French, telling him in
Consistory, and in many private Treaties besides, that the King did know that
the Church of France had need of reformation, and was ready to assist his
Holiness, either by sending Prelates to the Council, if he thought fit, or
by any other means that should seem good unto him.

In the mean space the Diet of Germany was prosecuted, not without Contentions
do arise in the Diet of Ausburg.
contentions, which would have been greater if Cardinal Morone had remained
there, as well for the negotiations he would have made, as for the suspicions
conceived by the Protestants, that he was sent only to oppose their
commodities. And it was already published every where that Rome was full of
hope, that Germany would quickly come under the yoke, as England had done.
After the Cardinals departure, the first difficulty was; whether the points of
Religion should be discussed first of all; which though the Ecclesiastiques
did contradict in the beginning, yet it was finally resolved, by common consent
to begin there. Wherein there were two contrary Propositions; One to treat of
the means to reform it; the other to leave every one to his liberty: about
which point there was very great controversy. But in the end, all inclined to
the second proposition, not knowing how to root out the evil which did still
move, only hoping that when the humors were quiet, and the differences and
suspicions removed, many easy and commodious ways might be found out. For
this, it was necessary to establish a peace, that for cause of Religion there
might be no more war, and that it might be lawful for all the Princes and
States of the Empire to follow and cause to be observed in their Dominions
what Religion pleased them best. Which resolution, when it came to be
established raised greater controversies. For those of the Augustan Confession
did pretend, that it was lawful for all to accept their Doctrine, retaining
the honors, States, and Degrees which they possessed. On the contrary, the
Catholics would not have it permitted to the Ecclesiastiques to change their
Religion, and keep their degree, but that if a Bishop or an Abbot did embrace
the other Religion, he should loose his dignity. Neither would they have it
permitted to the Cities, which seven years since had received the decree of
the Interim made in Ausburg, to return to the Augustan Confession.

Writings passed on both sides concerning this, and, at the last, the rigor
1555 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY. 2. But at the last a peace of Religion is
established.
of either party was abated. The Catholics were content that the Cities
should do as they pleased, and the Protestants gave over their pretense
concerning the Ecclesiastiques. And the five and twentieth of September the
Recesse was made, that a General or National Council (neither of which could
be assembled in regard of many difficulties) being necessary to determine
lawfully the causes of Religion, until a way might be opened unto a friendly
agreement thoughout all Germany, the Emperor Ferdinand, the Catholic
Princes and States, should not force the Princes, Orders and States of the
Augustan Confession to forsake their Religion and Ceremonies already
instituted, orto be instituted in their Dominions, nor should do any thing in
contempt thereof, nor hinder them in the free use of that Religion: and those
of the Augustan Confession ought to behave themselves in the same sort toward
Caesar, Ferdinand, and the other Princes and States of the old Religion, as
well Ecclesiastical as Secular, every one having power to establish in his
own State what Religion he will, and to forbid the other. And if any
Ecclesiastique shall abandon the old Religion, it shall be no infamy unto him
but he shall presently loose his Benefices, which shall be conferred upon
others by the Patron; and the Benefices, which the Protestants have already
annexed to Schools and Ministeries of the Church shall remain in the same
state. That Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be exercised no more against
those of the Augustan Confession; but, otherwise, shall be exercised according
to the ancient custom. The Recesse being made, another difficulty arose, for
the remoouing of which, Ferdinand, using the absolute Imperial authority of
his brother, did declare with consent ofthe Ecclesiastical Order, that the
Titulars, Cities, and Communities, subject to Ecclesiastical Princes, who have
adhered many years to the Augustan Confession, and received long since the
Rites and Ceremonies thereof, and do observe them still, may not be compelled
by their Princes to change them, but may continue in them until a general
concord in Religion, which shall be concluded.

Pope Paul understanding of this Recesse of Ausburg, was exceeding Of which the
hope complains to the Emperors Ambassador, and Cardinal of Ausburg.
angry; He complained thereof to the Emperors Ambassador, and to the
Cardinal of Ausburg, reprehending Ferdinand for suffering a treaty in matters
of Religion, without the knowledge of the Apostolic Sea, and threatening that
in due time he would make the Emperor and that King know to their grief, how
they had offended him: he exhorted them to prevent it, by reuoking and
dissallowing the things granted, that he might have no occasion to proceed,
as he meant to do, not only, against the Lutherans, but even against them
also, as Abettors: offering to assist them, in case they should do it by
authority and arms, and to command all Christian Princes, upon pains and
censures, to aid them with all their forces. He was not satisfied with the
Ambassadors answer, who alleged the strength of the Protestants, the war
against Caesar, in which he was like to be prisoner in Ispruc, and the Oaths
taken. For the Oaths, he answered that he freed and absolved them, yea,
commanded not to observe them. To the rest he said, that in Gods cause, one
must not proceed according to humane respects. That the Emperor was in danger
by Gods permission, because he did not what he could and ought to do, to
reduce Germany to the obedience of the Apostolical Sea: that this is but a
token of Gods anger, and that he must expect greater punishment if he take
not warning by it: but carrying himself as a Soldier of Christ undauntedly,
and without worldly respects, he shall obtain all manner of victory, as the
examples of the times past do demonstrate.

The fame was that the Pope was moved to say so, not only by his own
inclination, but by the persuasion of the Cardinal of Ausburg, who was
displeased with the liberty granted to the Confessionists. It is certain that
Paul, being of an high spirit and vast thoughts, did assure himself that he
could redress all the disorders, by his Papal authority only, nor had need
of any Prince herein. Therefore he never spoke with Ambassadors but Paul had
vast thoughts, and was exceeding proud.
he thundered in their ears, that he was above all Princes, that he would not
that any of them should be too domestical with him, that he could change
Kingdoms, that he was successor of him who has deposed Kings and Emperors,
and did often repeat, for a beginning of authority exercised by him, that he
had made Ireland a Kingdom, and went on so far, that, in Consistory, and at
his Table publicly, in the presence of many, he said, he would not have any
Prince for his Companion, but all subjects under his foot (so he said,
striking it against the ground) as it is fit, and as it is his will who has
built the Church, and has placed them in this degree. And sometimes he would
say, that, rather then we would do any thing basely, we would die, overthrow
all, and set the whole world on fire.

Paul the fourth was naturally of a lofty mind and courage, and trusted much
in his knowledge and good fortune, which did accompany him in all his actions:
whereunto the power and fortune of the Papacy being added, he thought every
thing was easy. But two humors did flore in him by turns; one, which by
custom to make use of Religion in all his attempts, did induce him to employ
his Spiritual Authority: the other was put into him by Charles Caraffa, his
Nephew, who being valiant, and exercised in war, made Cardinal of a
Soldier, did retain his marrial spirits, and persuaded him to use his
temporal power, saying, that the one without the other is despised, but,
being joined, are instruments of great matters. The circumspect old man, knew
well that the Spiritual is made weaker, when it is manifested that there is
need of the Temporal. But being ever intent to make his name great, sometimes
he gave ear to his Nephew, and sometimes he believed himself more. In the
one lice concluded to use the Temporal secretly, and the Spiritual openly,
that proceeding with this, he might add, or omit the other, as he should
lice advised by the events. Therefore he treated most secretly, by his Nephew,
He trea^ced a League with the French King.
with the Cardinal of Loraine, a league with the French King, (...)ing almost
made, Loraine parted from Rome, to take away ^u^ption and the Cardinal Torrnon
went thither, with whom it was concluded, with the same secrecy. The principal
captiulation whereof was, the gayning of the Kingdom of Naples for a younger
son of the King, with great enlargement of the bounds of the Ecclesiastical
state; whose confines were to be S. Germano, Gerigliano, and, on the further
side of the Apennine, the River Pescara, beyong Beneuentum: and some things
besides were yielded unto for the Popes benefit.

The Pope also that he might have a prop to lean on in both courses, thought
it necessary to make a promotion of Cardinals, dependants on himself, men of
courage, who would not be afraid to prosecute hisdisseignes, and employ
themselves in any hard enterprise. He began to speak of this promotion but a
few days before he made it; which grieved And creates Cardinals, contrary to
his Oath.
the Cardinals, for that he would contradict the Capitulation which he had
sworn: and the Imperialists, above all, considering the quality of the
persons to be promoted, purposed to oppose. The twentieth of December, the Pope
being entered into the Consistory, said, so soon as he sat down, that he
would not give audience to any that day, because he had greater matters to
propose. Every one understanding by this that his meaning was to create new
Cardinals, the Cardinal of Saint James went to his seat, to speak with him;
and the Pope refusing, and the Cardinal not desisting, he set his hand on his
breast, and thrust him from him. All being set, the Pope began to complain of
those who reported he could make but four Cardinals, in regard of that which
he had sworn in the Conclaue, and said, that this was to bind the Popes
authority, which is absolute; that it is an Article of Faith that the Pope
cannot be bound, and much less can bind himself; that to say otherwise was a
manifest heresy; from the guilt whereof he did absolve those that were
faulty, because he thought they did not speak obstinately: but hereafter if
any shall say the same, or the like, against the authority given him by God,
he will give order that the Inquisition shall proceed. He added, that he
would make Cardinals, and would not have any contradiction, because he wanted
persons for employment, which he could not put upon them, because every one
had his proper faction: that it was fit to promote men of learning, and of
exemplarie life, to employ them for reformation of the Church, especially in
the Council, whereof it was high time to treat seriously, which he would
propose with the first occasion. But now he would name unto them the persons
to be promoted to the Cardinalitie (a thing not to be deferred any longer)
that they having a consultiue voice; might put to his consideration what was
for the good of the Church; wherein they should be heard; and that they should
not believe they had a decisiue voice, because that belonged only to him. He
proposed seven persons: in which number only one was his kinsman, and another
of the Theatine Congregration: the others were men of much fame, either for
learning, or for the negotiations of the Court Amongst these was Johannes
Groperus, of Collen, of whom often mention has been made; who knowing he
would not live long, thinking to honor his memory much more by refusing a
dignity, desired even by great Princes, then by keeping it a few days, which
would give matter of discourse to those that were emulous of him, he sent the
Pope many thanks, together with his excuse, and refusing the ornaments, would
neither have the name, nor the title. The Cardinals were created the next
Sunday before the league was concluded with France, which was the 15. of that
month.

At this time Cardinal Poole, who for many respects of succession, and Card
Poole, ordained Priest and made Archbishop of Canterbury
to show he was not so much obliged to the Papacy, would not receive
Ecclesiastical Orders, these causes being ceased, went out of the number of
the Deacon Cardinals, and was ordained Priest: and, four months after, the
Archbishop of Canterbury being burnt, having been first degraded with many
ceremonies, he was put into his place.

The people of Austria, in regard of the Recesse made in the Diet, and of
Ferdinands declaration in favor of the Cities, and Nobles subject to
Ecclesiastical Princes, entered into hope that themselves also might retain
liberty The people of Austria disire liberty of (...)ligion.
of religion. Therefore having called a Diet of his Subjects, to have a
contribution against the Turks who made war against him, they demanded
permission and freedom to live in purity of religion, and to enjoy the benefit
which was granted unto the Confessionists; telling the King that the scourges
of the Turks, are Gods visitations, to inuit them to amendment of life; that
Arms are in vain taken against the enemy, if the wrath of God be not first
appeased, who will be honored according to his own prescript, and not
according to the fancies of men. They beseeched him that they might not be in
worse estate then other Germans, and that Ministers of the Church might teach
and distribute the Sacraments, according to the Evangelical and Apostolical
doctrine; and that the Schoolmasters should not be banished until their
cause were heard, according to justice; offering, upon these conditions, to
adventure their lives and goods, to give him contentment.

Ferdinand answered, that he could not grant their demand, not for want To
whom Ferdinand answers thus.
of will to gratify them, but because he was bound to obey the Church, and
that himself and Caesar had ever detested the discords in religion; for remedy
whereof they had institured many Colloquies, and finally procured the Council
of Trent; which if it had not a happy success, it was not to be imputed unto
them, in regard it is known with what counsels and artifices it has been
hindered by others; that afterward an Edict was made in favor of the Augustan
Confession, in which themselves were partakers, because it was said therein,
that every Prince, not Ecclesiastical, might choose which of the two religions
he would, and the people follow the religion of the Prince, with which if any
be not content, he has liberty to sell his goods, and to go whither he
will; that therefore their duty was to continue in the old Catholic
Religion, which himself professes: but to yield to their desires as much as
he could, he was content to suspend that part of the Edict which concerns
the Communion of the Cup, yet with condition that they should change nothing in
the rites and ceremonies of the Church, until the Decree of the future diet.
And they, desiring nothing else, were content to contribute readily against the
Enemy.

The Bauarians also desired of their Duke, liberty of religion, demanding a
free preaching of the Gospel, marriage of Priests, the Communion Sub vtraque,
1556 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. The Bauarians also desire liberty of
religion. Which their Duke does grant unto them in some few points.
and to eat flesh every day, protesting that, otherwise, they would not pay
the heavy Subsidies, and contributions against the Turks. The Duke, seeing
that Ferdinand (his wives father) had granted his people the Communion of the
Cup, to obtain contributions of them, did likewise grant them that
Communion, and leave to eat flesh, if there were necessity, on fasting days,
until the causes of Religion were composed by public authority, the Edicts
made by him in matter of Religion still remaining in force; protesting, in many
and copious terms, that he would not depart from the Church, and religion of
his ancestors, nor change ought in the ceremonies, without consent of the Pope,
and the Emperor, promising to procure that his Metropolitan and Bishops should
approve this grant, and not molest any for these things. The whole Palatinate
did embrace The whole Palatinate does embrace the Augustan Confession
the Augustan Confession, because, the Elector being dead, his Nephew
succeeded, who had declared himself to be of that Confession many years
before; for which he had suffered many persecutions. And, now being made
Prince, he presently forbade the Masses, and Roman ceremonies throughout all
his Principality.

But the Pope having laid the foundations before rehearsed, applying himself
to spiritual matters, thought it necessary to gain credit with the world;
which could not be done, if it did not appear by deeds, not by words only,
that the Court of Rome was reformed. Therefore, being wholly bent to this, in
the end of January 1556. he erected a Congregation, 1556. The Pope erecteth a
congregation to discuss all doubts concerning Simonie.
in which were four and twenty Cardinals, and five and forty Prelates and
other persons, the most learned of the Court, to the number of 150. and divide
them into three ranks, in each of which were eight Cardinals, fifteen
Prelates; and others to the number of fifty. To these he committed the
discussion of all the doubts in matter of Simonie: which he printed, and sent
copies of them to all Princes, and said he had published them, that they might
come to the knowledge of the Universities, of general Studies, and of every
learned man, that all might have occasion to make known their opinions, which
he would not openly desire, because it was not honorable for that Sea, which
is mistress of all, to go about and beg them. He said, that, for himself he
had no need of the instruction of any, because he knew what CHRIST did
command; but that he had erected the Congregation, that, in a matter wherein
all are interested, it might not be said that he had proceeded of his own
head. He added that, having purged himself and his Court, it could not be
said to him, Physician cure thy self, and that he would make Princes know,
that there is greater Simonie in their Courts, which he would take away,
being superior as well to Princes, as Prelates.

In the first Congregation of the first rank, held the 26. of March, before In
the first meeting of which 3. opinions are broached.
Cardinal Bellai, Deane of the College, twelve persons did speak, and there
were three opinions. One of the Bishop of Feltre, who defended that for the use
of the Spiritual power it is not inconvenient to take money, when it is not for
a price, but for other respects: another of the Bishop of Sessa, that this was
by no means lawful, and upon no condition, and that it was absolutely
detestable Simonie, as well to give as to receive, nor could be excused with
any pretense: the third of the Bishop of Sinigaglia, in the middle between
these two, that it might be lawful; but in some certain time only, and with
certain conditions. The voices of that rank being all given, and brought to
the Pope after Easter holy days, he, seeing the diversity of the opinions,
did almost resolve to publish a Bull according to his own sense, The Pope
intends to publish a Bull according to his own opinion. The Bull is hindered.
that it was not lawful to take a reward, present, or alms, not only
demanded, but voluntarily offered, for any spiritual grace whatsoever, that
he would grant no more matrimonial dispensations, and was in a mind to
redress those that were already granted, as much as he could without scandal.
But there were so many delays and impediments interposed by diverse, that he
could not come to a resolution.

Some told him that it was necessary to handle such a thing in a general
Council, which he heard with great indignation, and said he had no need of a
Council, himself being above all. And Cardinal Bellai saying, that a
Council was necessary, not to add authority to the Pope, but to find a
means for execution, which cannot be uniform in all places, he concluded,
that, if a Council were necessary, it should be held in Rome, and that it was
not needful to go elsewhere; that he never consented that the Council His
opinion concerning the Council of Trent.
should be held in Trent; as was known to them all, because it was in the
midst of the Lutheranes, that the Council is to consist of Bishops only;
that other persons might be admitted for counsel, yet only Catholics,
otherwise the Turk also ought to be admitted; that it was a great vanity to
send into the mountains threescore Bishops, of the least able, and forty
Doctors of the most insufficient, as was twice done already, and to believe
that, by those, the world could be better regulated, then by the Vicar of
CHRIST, with the College of all the Cardinals, who are the pillars of all
Christendom, elected for the most excellent of all Christian Nations, and by
the counsel of the Prelates and Doctors which are in Rome, who are the most
learned persons in the world, and more in number then, by any diligence, can
be brought to Trent.

But when news came to Rome of the grant of the Cup, made by the He is much
distasted with ye grant made by the Duke of Bauaria.
Duke of Bauaria to his subjects, he entered into a great rage against him: and
he put this amongst other things, for which he desseigned to make provision
at once, being full of hope that every thing would be easy unto him, if the
Court were reformed, and was not troubled though he saw the number of abuses
to increase. For a few days after the Ambassador of Polonia, coming expressly
to congratulate his Holiness for his assumption to the Popedom, made five
demands in the name of the King and the Kingdom. To celebrate the Mass in the
Polonian tongue. To use the As also with the five demands made by the Poloman
Ambassadors.
Communion Sub vtraque specie. The marriage of Priests. That the payment of
Annates might be taken away. And that they might call a National Council to
reform the proper abuses of the Kingdom, and to reconcile the variety of
opinions. He heard these demands with unspeakable impatience, and set himself
to detest them most bitterly, speaking against them, one after another, with
infinite vehemency. And, for conclusion he said, that a general Council in
Rome would cause the heresies and bad opinions of many to be known, alluding
to what was done in Germany, Austria, and Bauaria. And being for these reasons
almost resolute in himself, (or at the least, willing to seem so) that it was
necessary to call a Council, he told all the Ambassadors that they should
signify to their Princes his purpose to make a Lateran Council, like unto
that which is so famous. And he sent Nuncij to the Emperor and the French
King, to exhort them to peace, Which makes him speak of holding a Lateran
Council.
though in France he had a more secret negotiation. He gave commission also
to treat with them of the Council; and said in the Consistory, in a long
discourse, (as he was very copious) that it was necessary to celebrate it
quickly, seeing that besides Bohemia, Prussia, and Germany, which were much
infected (for those were his words) Polonia also was in danger. That in France
and Spain they were well affected in Religion, but the Clergy was He is
angry with ye French King.
badly used. That which he principally reprehended in France, was the exaction
of the Tenths, which the King made the Clergy ordinarily pay. But he was more
incited against Spain. For Paul the third, and Julius, having And with the
Emperor much mo(...).
granted the Emperor Charles the half and quarter fruits, for a Subsidy of
the war of Germany, and he having revoked the grant, because he was not
satisfied with the Recesse of Ausburg, yet they perseuered in Spain, and
forced the Clergy to pay, by seques^rations and imprisonments.

He did not forbear to say, that the Emperor was an heretic; that in the
beginning he favored the innouators of Germany, to depresse that holy Sea,
and to make himself Lord of Rome, and of all Italy; that he held Paul the
third in perpetual trouble, and that he should not do the like to him. He
added, that although he might remedy all these inconveniences by his own
authority, yet, not to lay so great a burden upon himself alone, he would not
do it without a Council; that he had called it in Rome, and named it the
Lateran; that he had given Commission to signify it to the Emperor and
French King in courtesy, but not to have their consent or counsel, because
his will was they should obey; that he was assured it would please neither of
them, because it is not for their purpose, living as they do, and that they
will say many things against it, to disturb it. But he will call it whether
they will or no, and make known what that Sea can do, when it has a Pope of
courage. The 26. of May, the anniuersarie of his Coronation, all the Cardinals
and Ambassadors dining with him, according to custom, he began, after
dinner, to discourse of the Council, and that his resolution was to celebrate
it by all means in Rome, and that in courtesy, he gave notice thereof to the
Princes, and that the high ways may be made secure for the Prelates. But if no
Prelates would come thither, yet he would hold it with those only who are in
Court, because he well knew what authority he had.

While the Pope was busy about the reformation, news came to Rome, that a
truce was concluded the fifth of February between the Emperor But most of all
for the truce concluded between those two Princes.
and French King, by the mediation of Cardinal Poole, who did interpose in the
name of the Queen of England: which made the Pope amazed, and the Cardinal
Caraffa much more, having been treated, and concluded without them. The Pope
was displeased, principally for the loss of reputation, and for the danger
which it brought, if those two Princes were joined* at (...)cretion he must
needs stand. To the Cardinal, impatient of (...), it seemed that five years,
in the decrepit age of his Uncle, did quite take from him all occasions to
chase the Spaniard out of the Kingdom of Naples, whom he so much hated. Yet
the Pope, not loosing courage, made show of joy for the truce, but said he was
not fully satisfied with it, because a peace was necessary, in regard of the
Council, which he purposed to celebrate, which he was resolved to treat, and,
for that end, to send Legates to those Princes, being assured to conclude it,
because he would employ his authority. For he would not be hindered in the
government of the Church, committed to him by CHRIST. To the Emperor he sent
Notwithstanding he dissembleth his passion and sends Legates to them both, to
treat a peace, but intends nothing but war.
Scipio Rebiba, Cardinal of Pisa, and to the French King, Cardinal Caraffa,
his nephew. This went with all speed, and to the other order was given to go
slowly. Rebiba had instruction to exhort the Emperor to amend Germany, which
was not done until then, because none had proceeded a* right in that
enterprise. He knew the detects of his predecessors, who, to stop the
reformation of the Court, did hinder the good progress of the Council. But
contrarily he was resolved to promote the reformation, and to celebrate a
Council in his own presence, and to begin with this point; assuring himself
that when they should see the abuses taken away, for which they have separated
themselves from the Church, and remain contumacious still, they will desire,
and run to receive the decrees and constitutions which the Council will
make; where shall be reformed, not verbally, but really, the Head, members,
Clergy, Laity, Princes, and people. To do so good a work, a truce of five
years is not sufficient, because there are no less suspicions in truces then
in war; and one must ever be ready to provide against the time when they
end; that a perpetual peace is necessary* to remove all malice and
suspicions, that all may bend themselves jointly, without worldly respects, to
that which concerns the union, and reformation of the Church. He gave the
like instruction to Caraffa, and was content it should be published, by giving
out some copies of it.

The Court did generally think that the Pope spoke so often and so earnestly
of the Council, that no man else might propose it unto him, and did threaten
the Princes, and all the world with it, to make them abhor it. But afterward
it was known that he deseigned to free himself by another way, from the
trouble given to his predecessors. For when the reformation only of the Pope,
of the Court, of the exempted and privileged persons, dependants of the
Popedom, was proposed, every Prince, people and private man, in regard nothing
was to be handled that concerned them, was forward to solicit the Council;
but he proposing the reformation of the Clergy, Laity, and especially of the
Princes, with a most severe Inquisition, which he deseigned to institute, he
made them all equal so that himself was not in question only, but other
likewise* And this was a secret by which he meant to hold all men in fear,
and himself in reputation of integrity, and worth. And, concerning the
Council, he meant to govern himself according to the coniunctures, yet ever
holding this point constantly, to celebrate it in Rome.

But, to return to the Legates, he gave his nephew a large instruction, to
try the Kings mind, and, if he saw him resolute to observe the truce, to
thunder into his ears the same lesson of the Council: and to Rebiba he gave
order to govern himself as he should receive advice from his nephew. Caraffa
carried to the King, the Sword and Hat, which the Pope had blessed on Christmas
day at night, according to the custom. Of the Peace he made no mention, but
represented to the King, that howsoever the league was not violated by the
truce of five years, yet it was made of no force, to the great danger of his
Uncle and of his family, and that they had already some taste thereof, by that
which the Spaniards had done. He recommended to him, in most effectual terms
Religion, and the Papacy, to which his predecessors gave singular protection,
and the Pope himself and his family, much devoted to his Majesty. The King
was not auerse, but remained doubtful, considering the Popes age, who might
die when he should have most need of him. Caraffa perceived this, and found a
remedy, The French King breaks the truce at the Popes instance.
promising that the Pope should create so many Cardinals, partial for France,
and enemies to Spain, that he should ever have a Pope on his side. The
Cardinals persuasions, and the promise of the promotion, and the absolution
from the oath of the truce, which he gave in the Popes name, together with the
negotiation of the Cardinal of Loraine and his brother, made the King resolve
to move war, though the Princes of the Blood, and all the Grandies of the
Court abhorred the infamy of breaking the truce, and receiving absolution from
the oath. The conclusion being made, Caraffa recalled the Legate sent to the
Emperor, who was arrived at Mastric, and caused him to come into France,
though he was but two days journey distant from Caesar: which made the
Emperor, and the King his son believe, that in France, some thing was
concluded against them.

The Popes distasts, against the Emperor, and his son, did daily increase.
The Pope proceeds severely against the Colonnesi.
He made a most severe process against Ascanius Colonna, and Marcus Antonius
his son, for many offenses, which he pretended to be done against the
Apostolic Sea, so long since, as when Clement was besieged, and afterward
against Paul the third, and Julius, and by Marcus Antonius against himself,
and the State of the Church: and, relating in Consistory all the injuries done
of old, by the Colonnesi, against the Apostolic Sea, did excommunicate
Ascanius and Marcus Antonius, deprive them of all dignity and fee, with
censures against those that gave them assistance, or favor, and did confiscate
all their possessions within the State of the Church, and gave them to the
Count Montorius, his Nephew, with the title of Duke of Pagliano. Marcus
Antonius, retiring into the Kingdom, was received, and sometimes Who retire
into the kingdom of Naples, and make excursions upon their lands.
made excursions upon his own lands, with some few Soldiers, which much
provoked the Pope; who thinking his nods were commandments unto all, able to
terrify every one, he could not endure to be so little esteemed at Naples,
his Country, where he would have been thought to be omnipotent. He thought
in the beginning, by talking lauishly of the Emperor, and of the King, to make
them desist from favoring the Colonnesi, and therefore spoke very often
disgracefully of them, in the presence of all sorts of persons, but most
willingly when any Spanish Cardinal was present, and, at last, commanded it
should be written unto them.

None of these proofs taking effect, he proceeded further, and the three and
twentieth day of July made the Fiscal, and Siluester Aldobrandinus, the
Consistoriall Advocate, appear in the Consistory, who declared that his
Holiness having excommunicated, and deprived Marcus Antonius Colonna, and
prohibited under the same censures, all sorts of persons to assist or favor
him, and it being notorious that the Emperor, and King Philip, his The Pope
makes show that he will proceed against the Emperor, and his son.
son, had furnished him with horse, foot, and money, they were fallen into
the punishments of the same sentence, and had lost their Territories, which
they held in Fee. Therefore they desired that his Holiness would proceed to a
declaratory sentence, and give order for execution. The Pope answered that he
would advise of it, by the counsel of the Cardinals, and giving them leave to
depart, he proposed in Consistory what was fit to be done, in a case of so
great importance. The French Cardinals spoke with much honor of the Emperor,
and King Philip, but so that the Pope was more provoked. The Imperialists used
words of an ambiguous sense, fit to gain time. The Theatini, the Popes own
Cardinals, spoke magnificently of the Papal authority, and of the worth and
wisdom of his Holiness, who only knew how to find a remedy for that
malady, praising all that he had done, and referring themselves unto him for
all the rest. The Consistory being dismissed without a resolution, the Pope
knew that either he must yield, or come to a war; from which being not
auerse, in regard of his natural disposition, full of courage and hopes,
advice came fitly to him from his Nephew, of what was concluded in France. So
that the discourses of reformation and Councels were turned into parleys of
money, Soldiers, and intelligences; of which things, as not pertaining to my
purpose, I will only say as much as may show what the Popes mind was, and how
much he was addicted to a true, or, at least to a colorable reformation of the
Provides for war.
Church. The Pope armed the Citizens, and inhabitants of Rome, for the most
part, artisans, and strangers, to the number of 5000, distributing them under
the Heads of the Rioni, for so they were called: he caused many of his Cities
to be fortified, and put garrisons in them; and the French King sent Wards or
precincts.
him, at his instance, 3000. Gascons, by sea, that he might subsist while the
royal Army was prepared.

In these negotiations, and preparations for war, the Pope imprisoned And
imprisoneth many Cardinals and Barons upon suspicion, and King Philip his
Ambassador.
many Cardinals, Barons, and others, upon suspicion: as also Carsillasso di
Vega, Ambassador of Philip King of England, and Ioannes Antonius Tassis, the
Emperors Postmaster. And to the Duke of Alua, who sent to protest against
him, for maintaining in Rome the fugitives of the kingdom of Naples, for
laying hands on, and keeping in prison public persons, without reason, for
having opened the Kings letters (all which things he had done) adding that the
King, for preservation of his honor, and of the right of his people, could not
choose, in case his Holiness did persevere in such offensive actions, but
seek revenge for the injury, he sent back an answer, that The Duke of Alua
protests of the wrong done to his Master by the Pope, and receueth a proud
answer.
he was a free Prince, and superior to all others, not bound to give any
account, but to demand it of any whosoever; that he might entertain any
persons, and open any letters, which he thought to be written against the
Church: that if Carcillasso had done the office of an Ambassador, nothing
should have been done against him; but having made treaties, moved seditions,
1557 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2.
plotted against the Prince, to whom he was sent, he had offended as a private
man, and as such should be punished; that no danger should make him be
wanting to the dignity of the Church, and defense of that Sea, referring all to
GOD, by whom he was made shepherd of the flock of CHRIST. And the Pope still
continuing to make provision, the Duke of Alua being resolved that it was
better to assault then to be assaulted, sent another protestation against him,
that, the King having endured so many injuries, knowing that the intention of
his Holiness was to dispossess him of the kingdom of Naples, and being
assured, that, to this end, he had, made a league with his enemies, could not
continue in those terms: and therefore in regard his Holiness did desire
war, he did denounce it against him, and would begin it quickly, protesting
that the calamities thereof could not be imputed to him, and laying the blame
upon the Pope. But if he desired peace, he did offer it likewise unto him, with
all readiness. The Pope making a show to desire peace, but answering only in
general terms, to gain time, the Duke began to make war the fourth of
September, and in the year 1556. possessed himself of almost all Campania,
holding it in the For which cause he moves war against him.
name of the next Pope, and came so near to Rome, that he put all the City in
fear, and made them strengthen and fortify it. And the Pope, to teach the
Governors of strong places what they ought to do in such cases, compelled all
the religious persons, of what state or quality soever, to carry earth with a
dosser on their shoulders, to raise the bulwarks. Amongst other places which
had need of Rampards, one was near the gate of the people, at the end of the
way called Flaminia, where there is a Church of our Lady, The Pope armeth the
Regulars, and purposes to pull down a Church of great devotion.
of much devotion; which the Pope purposing to pull down, the Duke sent to
pray him to let it stand, giving his word and oath that he would make no use of
the opportunity of that place. But the greatness of the City, and other
respects and dangers, counseled him, not assayling Rome, to undertake smaller
enterprises.

It gave much matter of discourse, that, this year, Charles the Emperor The
Emperor quitteth the world.
parted from Flanders, and passed into Spain, to betake himself to a private
life in a solitary place; so that they made a comparison between a Prince,
trained up, from his infancy, in the negotiations and affairs of the world,
who at the age of little more then fifty years, had resolved to quit the world
and only to serve God, changed from a mighty Prince, to a mean religious
person, and one, who had formerly abandoned the Eiscopal charge, to retire into
a Monastery, and now, being at the age of 80. years, and made Pope, did wholly
addict himself to pomp and pride, and endeavored to set all Europe on fire
with war.

In the beginning of the year 1557. the Duke of Guise passed into Italy, 1557.
The Duke of Guise passes into Italy with an army.
with his army, in favor of the Pope, who, to observe the promise of his
nephew made to the French King, made a promotion of 10. Cardinals; which not
being according to the meaning, and the end agreed on, neither for the number,
nor quality of the persons, his excuse was, that he was so The Pope creates
ten Cardinals.
nearly conjoined with his Majesty, that his dependants would be as
serviceable to the King, as the Frenchmen themselves, and that he might assure
himself that they were all for him; and that he could not then make a greater
promotion, seeing the number was so great already, arriving to 70. which would
quickly be diminished, by remoouing some rebels, and putting honest men in
their rooms; which he meant of those who were already in the Castle, and
others against whom he had a desseigne, as well for matter of State, as of
Religion. For he was not so intent to the war, as that he did The
Inquisition is the principal mystery of the Papacle. Card. Morone and the B of
Morlena are imprisoned. And Card. Poole deprived of his Legation.
abandon the business of the Inquisition, which he said was the principal
secret and mystery of the Papacy. He had some information against Cardinal
Morone, that he held intelligence in Germany, and did imprison him in the
Castle, deputing four Cardinals to examine him severely, and Egidius
Foscararus, Bishop of Modena, as confederate with him.

He deprived also Cardinal Poole of his Legation of England, and cited him to
appear in the Inquisition at Rome, having already imprisoned his inward
friend, as one of his accomplices, Thomas S. Felice Bishop of Caua. And that he
might not pretend to stay in England, under color of his Legation, and the
affairs of those Churches, he created Cardinal at Whitsuntide William Peto,
Bishop of Salisbury, and made him Legate in the place of Poole. And although
the Queen and King, testifying what service he had done to the Catholic
Faith, made earnest intercession for him, yet the Pope would never remit one
jot of his rigor. Cardinal Poole obeyed, laying aside the administration and
ornaments of a Legate, sending Ormaneto to Rome, to give an account of his
Legation; but himself parted not out of England, alleging the Queens
commandment, because neither she, nor the King, thinking the Pope was
passionate, would consent that he should go. In England many were scandalized
for it, and aliened from the Pope, and many Wherewith many were offended.
in Rome thought it a calumny, invented to revenge himself for the truce
between the two Kings, treated by him being Cardinal and Legate, without
imparting it to him. And the opposition which he made against him in the
Conclaue, to hinder him from being Pope, was thought to have no better ground.
The new Legate, a man of great integrity, had the same conceits, who, though
he took upon him the name of Legate, not to anger the Pope, yet in nine
months that he lived, after he had the cross of the Legation, he did never
exercise the Charge, but bare the same respect toward Poole, as before.

The Duke of Guise being come into Italy, made war in Piemont, with purpose
to continue it in Lumbardie, and so to divert the arms taken up against the
Pope: But the Popes ardent desire to assail the Kingdom of Naples, did not
permit him. The Frenchmen knew the difficulties, and the Duke of Guise, with
some principal Commanders, went to Rome by post, to make the Pope understand,
what the reasons of war did persuade. In whose presence all being consulted
on, and the Popes resolution not giving place to any other deliberation, it was
necessary to yield unto him. Yet they did nothing, but assault Ciuitella, a
place situated at the entry into the Province The Duke of Guise receives a
repulse, by default of the Caraffi.
of Abruzzo, where the army had the repulse; and Guise complained much that
the Caraffi had not made the provisions which they had promised, and were
necessary. In sum, the Popes arms, as well his own, as auxiliarie, were not
much favored by God. But in the midst of August the army of the Duke of Alua
approaching Rome, not afraid of the French, which 1557 PAVL 4. FERDINAND. MARY.
HENRY 2. The Pope is terrified by the approaching of the Duke of Alua The
battle of S. Quintin.
was entertained in Abruzzo, and the Pope understanding the surprise and sack
of Signea, the slaughter of many, and the danger in which Pagliano was, he
related all in Consistory, with many tears; adding, that he did undauntedly
expect martyrdom, the Cardinals marueiling that he should paint out the cause
to them, who understood the truth, as if it had bin of CHRIST, whereas it was
profane, and proceeded from ambition, and say it was the principal sinew, and
mystery of the Papacy.

When the Popes affairs were in the greatest straits, the French Kings Army
had such a great overthrow near to S. Quintin, that he was forced to recall
the Duke of Guise, and his forces, for the safety of the Kingdom; letting the
Pope know his inevitable necessity, giving him leave to take what counsel
seemed best for him, and sending him back the hostages. The Pope refused to
let Guise return, whereupon there being a great contestation Makes the
French King recall the D of Guise, and his forces. Whom the Pope disimsseth
with bad terms.
between them, the Pope not able to keep him, bid him go, seeing he had
done little service to the King, less to the Church, and none at all to his
own honor. In the end of that month, the Duke of Alua approached Rome, which
he had taken but for want of courage. His retreat was ascribed to the baseness
of his mind, who publicly said, that he feared, that if Rome had been
sacked, the Army would have been scattered, and the Kingdom The Duke of Alua
might have taken Rome, and did not.
exposed to danger, without forces or defense. But secretly he said, that
being in the service of a King, who bare great reverence to that place, he
refrained to do it, because he knew not whether the action would have been
approved. Finally, a composition was made the fourteenth of September between
Alua and the Caraffi, the war having continued a whole But made a base
composition with the Pope.
year. In the capitulations the Pope would not have Colonna, nor any of his
subjects comprehended, nor any word inserted, to show, that he had offended in
imprisoning the Emperors Ministers, but maintained most constantly, that the
Duke of Alua ought to come to Rome to ask pardon, and receive absolution;
saying plainly, that before he would loose one iore of this due (for so he
called it) he would see the whole world ruined: that the question was not of
his own, but of Christ's honor, which he could not prejudice, nor renounce.
With this condition, and with the restitution of the cities taken, the
controversy was ended. It was esteemed a prodigy, that the very day that the
Peace was concluded, there was such a great inundation of the river Tiber, that
all the plain of Rome was drowned, and a great part of the fortifications of
the Castle S. Angelo was overthrown. The Duke of Alua went personally to Rome
to submit himself to the Pope, and receive absolution in the Kings name, and
his own. So it happened, And goes to Rome to demand absolution.
that the conqueror bare the indignity, and he that was overcome triumphed
more, then if he had been victorious. And it was no small favor that the Pope
received him with humanity, though he forbear not his usual haughty state.

The war was no sooner ended, but new troubles came upon the Pope. For advice
was sent out of France, that, the fifth of September at night, in Paris, about
two hundred persons were assembled in an house to celebrate the Communion;
which being discovered by the common people, the house was assaulted, and some
fled, but the women and weaker sort were taken, 1557 PAVL 4. FERDINAND PHILIP 2
K. of Spain. MARY. HENRY 2.
of whom seven were burned, and the greater part of the others reserved for the
same punishment, to be inflicted when the accomplices were found out. The Suisses
made intercession for these; and the King, in regard of his war with the King
of Spain (for so Philip was called after the resignation of his father) having
need of their assistance, gave order that the proceeding against them should
be moderate. The Pope was infinitely angry, and complained in Consistory, and
said it was no marvel if the affairs of the The Pope is angry with ye French
King for using moderation toward the Protestants.
King, did not succeed well, because he more esteemed the assistance of
heretics, then the favor of God. The Pope had forgotten that, in the time of
his war, the Cardinals of the Inquisition complaining that the Protestant
Grisons, brought to his pay, for the defense of Rome, used many scorns against
the Churches and Images, his Holiness did reprehend them, saying they were
Angels, sent by God, for the custody of the City, and of his person, and that
he had a strong hope that God would convert them. So men judge diversely of
their own interests, and of the facts of others. The Pope took occasion
hence, to call in mind two constitutions, which the King And for making two
co^stitutions in matter of religion.
had made the same year, which he said were against the liberty of the
Clergy, and therefore was resolute they should be abrogated. The one was
published the first of March, that Marriages made by sons before the age of
thirty years complete, and of daughters before twenty five, without consent of
the father, or of him in whose power they were, should be void. The other the
first of May, that all Bishops and Curates should reside, upon pain of loss
of the revenues, with an imposition of an extraordinary Subsidy, besides the
ordinary Tenths, to pay five thousand foot Soldiers. The Pope thought not of
these things when the news came, because he was then in war, and had need
of the King. But this reason ceasing, he complained that he had meddled even
with the Sacraments, and vnsupportably burdened the Clergy. He said it was
necessary to provide against these disorders, by a Council, which were greater
then could be objected against the Clergy; that it was fit to begin the
Reformation from hence; that the French Prelates durst not speak so long as
they were in France, but being in a Council in Italy, free from fear of the
King, their complaints would soon be heard. Amongst these distastes the Pope
received some joy, But is well pleased with the dissolution of the Colloquie in
Germany.
that the Colloquie, begun in Germany, to compose the differences in religion
(which troubled his Holiness and the Court, as all Colloquies had done) was
resolved into nothing. The beginning, progress, and end whereof, I think
necessary to recount, for the understanding of the things that follow.

Ferdinand having, in the Diet of Ratisbon, confirmed peace in Religion A
relation of the Colloquy.
until a concord were concluded, to find a way to make it, it was resolved in
the Diet the thirteenth of March, that a Colloquie should be held in Worms,
of twelve Doctors of the old religion, and twelve Protestants, in which the
differences should be discussed, to bring the parties to an agreement.
Ferdinand appointed for President of the Colloquie, the Bishop of Namburg, who
was so famous. The parties being met in the place the fourteenth of August, the
twelve Protestants were not absolutely of one opinion. For some of them,
desiring a perfect union of the Church, labored to reconcile 1558 PAVL 4.
FERDINAND. PHILIP 2. MARY. HENRY 2.
the doctrine of the Heluetians, which was different concerning the Eucharist;
and, for this end, the Ministers of Geneua had made a Confession in this point,
which did not displease Philip Melancthon, and six more of the Confession of
Ausburg, but did not satisfy the other five. This being perceived by the
Bishop, a man wise, and factious, whose end was that the Colloquie should be
dissolved without fruit, he made the Catholics propose, that the Colloquie
being instituted only between them, and the Confessionists, it was necessary
to condemn all the sects of the Swinglians, and of others; because the errors
being uniformly condemned, the truth would easily appear. The five
aforesaid, did consent it should be so. Melancthon, who perceived the cunning,
which was to sow division between them, and to make them at variance with the
Suisses the Prussians, and others, said that it was fit to agree upon the truth
first, and then by that rule, to condemn errors. The Bishop showing to the
five that they were contemned by the other seven, persuaded them to depart from
the Colloquie, and wrote the success to Ferdinand, concluding that they could
not proceed, in regard of the departure of these, and that those which
remained would not first condemn the sects. Ferdinand answered, that his
desire was they should proceed, and that the Confessionists should recall
those five that were departed, and the Catholics be in the mean space
content to begin and discuss the controuersed Articles. The Bishop seeing that
he had lost this point, persuaded the Catholic Collocutors to write to the
King, that it was not just to begin the treaty, if all the Protestants were
not united, because it would be necessary to treat again with the absent, that
which was concluded with the present, and so to take double pains. They all
retired, without expecting any answer, and each party blamed the other,
excusing it self upon the reasons aforesaid.

The Pope perceiving that, by the war past, he was deprived of the credit
1558. The Pope proceeds severely against his own family.
with which he thought to daunt the whole world, thought to regaine it by an
heroical action, and did, the six and twentieth of January, in Consistory
deprive Cardinal Caraffa of the Legation of Bolonia, and of all government,
and confined him to Ciuita Lauinia, and took from John Caraffa, the Cardinals
brother, the command and charge of the Army, exiling him likewise to Galessi.
He deprived the other Nephew of the government of Borgo, and banished him to
Monte-bello, commanding that their wives, family, and children should depart
from Rome, and themselves not depart from the places to which they were
banished, upon pain of rebellion. He deprived likewise all those of their
offices; to whom he had given them in contemplation of these. He spent more
then six hours, in complaining, and enueighing against their offenses, with
such fury, that he disdained at the Cardinals who spoke any good word to
pacific him. To Cardinal S. Angelo, who first commending justice, put him in
mind of a saying of Paul the 3. which he often used, that the Pope should
never take hope of favor from any, he answered, that his grand father Paul
the 3. should have done better to have proceeded against his father, and
punished his villainies. He instituted Instituteth a new government in Rome
a new government in Rome, and in the State of the Church, giving the charge of
all businesses to Camillus Orsinus, unto whom he joined the Cardinals of Trani
and Spoleto, affecting a fame of justice in these actions, and laying the blame
of all the grieuances, which the people suffered, upon the Nephews. Being thus
disburthened of the government, he applied himself wholly to the office of
the Inquisition, saying it was the true Ram to beat down heresy, and
defend the Apostolic Sea. And, not regarding what did befit the time, he
published a new Constitution, dated the fifteenth of February, which he made
all the Cardinals subscribe. In this he And applies himself wholly to the
office of the Inquisition. Making a new Constitution.
renewed every censure and punishment, pronounced by his predecessors, and
every Statute of Canons, Councels, and Fathers, in what time soever, published
against heretics; ordaining that those that were disused, should be brought
in use again. He declared that all Prelates, and Princes, even Kings and
Emperors, fallen into heresy, should be, and should be understood to be
deprived of all their Benefices, States, Kingdoms, and Empires, without
further declaration, and incapable to be restored to them, even by the
Apostolic Sea: and their goods, States, Kingdoms, and Empire, shall be
understood to be common, and to belong to those Catholics who can get them.
This did minister much talk, and if it had not presently been Which was
disesteemed by the world.
disesteemed by the world, it would have kindled a fire in all Christendom.

Another accident made the world know that he had not moderated the
haughtiness of his mind The Emperor Charles in the year 1556. by his
letters written to the Electors and Princes, did absolutely give to Ferdinand
all the administration of the Empire, without reserving any thing to himself,
commanding that he should be obeyed by all. Afterward he sent William, Prince
of Orange, with two colleagues, to the Diet in Germany, to transfer the name,
title, crown, and dignity upon Ferdinand, as if himself had been dead;
which, not seeming fit to the Electors, was deferred until the year 1558. in
which the fourth of February, the day of the Nativity, Coronation, and other
felicities of Charles, the Ceremonies of the resignation being made by his
Ambassadors, in presence of the Electors, Ferdinand was installed with the
usual rites. The Pope hearing this, fell into an excessive rage. Ferdinand is
installed in the Empire.
He pretended that as the Popes confirmation does make the Emperor, so the
resignation cannot be put into the hands of any but himself; in which case it
belonged to him to make what Emperor he pleased; alleging that the Electors
have power granted them by the Popes favor, to elect the Emperor in place of
him that is dead, but not in case of resignation, in which it remains still
in the power of the Apostolic Sea; as also to the disposition The Pope
refuses to acknowledge him.
thereof are annexed all dignities resigned unto it. Therefore the resignation
of Charles is void, and the whole authority to choose an Emperor is deuolued
to him, and was resolved not to acknowledge the King of the Romans for
Emperor.

Ferdinand, though he knew this, sent Martin Gusman, his Ambassador, to give
him an account of his brothers resignation, and his own assumption, to
testify unto him the reverence he bare him, to promise him obedience, and to
signify unto him that he would send a solemn Embassage, to treat of his
Coronation. The Pope refused to hear him, and referred the discussion And to
hear his Ambassador.
of the matter to the Cardinals: who related (for the Popes will was they should
do so) that the Ambassador could not be admitted, before it did appear
whether the resignation of Charles were lawful, and the succession of
Ferdinand just. For he being elected King of the Romans, and the election
confirmed by Clement, to succeed after the death of the Emperor, it was
necessary the Empire should be void by death. Besides there was a nullitie in
all the acts of Francfort, as made by heretics, who have lost all authority
and power. Wherefore it was necessary that Ferdinand should send a Proctor, and
renounce whatsoever was done in that Diet, and beseech the Pope, that he would
graciously be pleased to make good the resignation of Charles, and his
assumption to the Empire, by virtue of his plenarie power, from whom he might
expect all paternall grace and favor. The Pope resolved according to this
Counsel, and so declared himself to Gusman, giving him three months to put
it in execution, beyond which time he would hear no more speech of it, but
himself would create a new Emperor. Neither was it possible to remove him,
though King Philip, to favor his uncle, sent Francis Vargas expressly, and
after him John Figaroa, to entreat him. Ferdinand, understanding this, gave
order to Gusman, that, if within three days after the receipt thereof, he were
not admitted by the Pope, he should depart, and protest unto him, that
Ferdinand, together with the Electors, would resolve of that which should be
for the honor of the Empire: Gusman desired audience again, which the Pope
granted in private, not as unto an Ambassador of the Emperor; and, hearing
him relate what he had in his instructions, and that which was wrote unto him
from the Emperor, he answered, that the things considered by the Cardinals were
very important, and that he could not resolve on them so soon; that he would
send a Nuncio to the Imperial Majesty of Charles the fifth, and, in the mean
while, if he had commission from his Master to depart he might do it, and
protest what he thought fit. Therefore the Ambassador, having made his
protestation, departed. Who, having made a protestation, departs from Rome.
And although Charles died the same year the 21. of September, yet it was
impossible to remove the Pope from this resolution.

The number of those who call themselves Reformed being now increased in
France, their courage did increase also; and there being a custom amongst the
people of Paris, in the Summers euenings, to go out of the Suburbs of S.
German in great multitudes, to take the fresco, and to folace themselves with
diverse kinds of sportes, those of the new Religion, in stead of doing so,
began to sing the Psalms of David, in French verses. The multitude first
laughed at the nouitie, then, leaving the sports, joined themselves unto the
singers. And the number of those who came to that place began to increase more
then usually. The Popes Nuncio told the King of this nouitie, as of a thing
pernicious and dangerous, because the ministeries of religion, usually
celebrated in the Church, in the Latin tongue, by religious men only, were put
into the mouth of the common people, in the vulgar language, which was an
invention of the Lutherans; telling him that, if he did not resist the
beginnings, in a short time all Paris would be Lutheran. The King gave order
that the principal authors should be proceeded against; wherein they went not
very far, having found Antony, king of Nauar, and his wife, in that number: But
for hereafter it was forbid upon pain of death.

The Religion in England was also much changed this year. The Queen 1558 PAVL
4. FERDINAND PHILIP 2. ELIZABETH. HENRY 2. Mary Queen of England dies And
Elizabeth is crowned.
died the seventeenth day of November, and Cardinal Poole the same day; which
stirred up many, who were not satisfied with the former government, to restore
the reformation of Edward, and to separate themselves wholly from the
Spaniards: which they did the rather, because King Philip, to hold a foot in
England, had treated to marry Elizabeth, sister and successor of Mary, to
Charles his son: and when there was little hope of the life of Mary, he had
also cast forth diverse words, that he would take her for his own wife. But
the new Queen being wise, as she showed her self to be in all her
government, did first secure the Kingdom by oath, that she would not marry a
stranger, and was crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle, an adherent to the Church
of Rome, not making any open declaration what doctrine she would follow,
disseigning, so soon as she was settled in her government, to establish it,
by the counsel of the Parliament, and of learned and godly men, and to make a
constant reformation of the state of Religion. Therefore she exhorted the
chief of the Nobility, who desired a change, to proceed without tumult,
assuring them that she would not enforce any. She caused presently an account
to be given to the Pope of her assumption, with letters of credence written to
Edward Cerne, who was Ambassador to her sister, and was not departed from
Rome. But the Pope, proceeding according to his usual rigor, answered, that
that Kingdom was held in Fee of the Apostolic Sea; that she could not
succeed being With whom the Pope does presently contest.
illegitimate; that he could not contradict the declarations of Clement the
seventh, and Paul the third, that it was a great boldness to assume the name
and government without him; that, for this, she deserved not to be heard in
any thing; yet being desirous to show a fatherly affection, if she will
renounce her pretensions, and refer her self wholly to his free disposition,
he will do whatsoever may be done with the honor of the Apostolic Sea.
Many did believe that as he spoke thus by his own inclination, so he was
incited by the French King, who fearing a marriage between her and the King of
Spain might be made by the Popes dispensation, thought fit to assure himself
by cutting off the practices in the very beginning. But the new Queen
understanding the Popes answer, and wondering at the man's hasty disposition,
thought it not profitable, either for her, or the Kingdom, to treat any more
with him. So that the cause ceasing, she gave the Nobility leave to consult
what was fit to be done for the service of God, and quiet of the Kingdom. A
disputation was held in Westminster, in presence of all A disputation is held
in Westminster in matter of religion.
the States, between learned men, chosen on both sides, which began the last
of March, and lasted until the thirtieth of April: and, a Parliament being
assembled to this end, all the Edicts of Religion made by Mary were abolished,
those of her brother Edward restored, obedience taken away from the Pope, the
title of the Head of the Church of England given to the Queen, the revenues of
the Monasteries confiscated; and assigned some to the Nobility, and some to
the Crown, the Images taken out of the Churches by the people, and the Roman
Religion banished. Another accident happened also. For in the Diet of Ausburg
it appearing, by the acts of the Colloquie the year before, dissolved without
fruit, that there was no hope to do any good by that means, Ferdinand told
them he would procure the general Council to be restored, exhorting all to
submit themselves to the Decrees thereof, as being the way to remove
differences. The protestants answered, that they would consent to a Council,
called, not by the Pope, but by the Emperor, to be held in Germany, in which
the Pope should not preside, but should submit himself to the judgment
thereof, and release the Bishops and Divines of their oath; in which also the
Protestants Ferdinand promises to procure a general Council.
should have a deciding voice, and all should be determined according to the
holy Scripture, and whatsoever was concluded in Trent, should be reexamined:
which, if it cannot be obtained of the Pope, yet the peace of Religion should
be confirmed, according to the agreement of Passau, having known, by too
manifest experience, that no good can be drawn from any Popish Council. The
Emperor knowing the difficulty to obtain of the Pope a grant of the things
proposed, and that now he had no means to negotiate with him, in regard of
the controversy about the resignation of Charles, and his succession, he
confirmed the accord of Passau, and the Recesses of the Diets And confirms
the accord of Passau.
following.

The Pope having cut off all means to treat with the Emperor and Germany,
knew not what to say to this. Yet he was more displeased with Wherewith the
Pope is much displeased.
their discourse concerning the Council, then with the liberty granted by the
Recesse, being resolute not to call any Council but in Rome, whatsoever
should happen. In this respect another accident was as grievous as the former;
But more with the capitulations of the peace of Cambray.
that is, the peace made at Cambray the third of April, between the Kings of
France and Spain, which was well confirmed by the marriages of the daughter of
Henry to the King of Spain, and of his sister to the Duke of Sauoy. In which
peace, amongst other capitulations, it was agreed, that both the Kings should
make a faithful promise to labor jointly that the Council should be
celebrated, the Church reformed, and the differences of religion composed. The
Pope considered how goodly a show the title of reformation, and the name of a
Council did make; that England was lost, and all Germany also, partly by the
Protestants, and partly by his difference with Ferdinand; that these two united
Kings were much offended by him, the Spaniards by deeds and words, the French
by words at the least, there remaining none to whom he might have refuge, that
the Cardinals were weary of his government, and his people not well affected,
in regard of the incommodities of the war, and the taxes laid upon them.
These cogitations did so afflict the old Pope, that he was unfit to rule. He
could not hold the Consistories so often as he was wont, and when he did
hold So that he became unfit to rule.
them he spent the most part of the time in speaking of the Inquisition, and
exhorting the Cardinals to favor it, as being the only way to extinguish
heresies.

But the two Kings did not agree to procure the Council for any ill will, or
interests, which either of them had against the Pope, or Papacy, but to
provide against the new doctrines, which did exceedingly increase, being
willingly heard and received by all men of conscience: and, which was of more
The progress of the reformed religion; and ye means used to suppress it.
importance, the male-contented, and those who were desirous of innouations,
put themselves on that side, and did daily, under pretense of religion, make
some enterprises, as well in the Low Countries, as in France, in regard those
people did love their liberty, and had commerce with Germany, as bordering
upon it. In the beginning of the troubles some seeds were sowed, which that
they might not take root, the Emperor Charles the fifth, in the Low
Countries, and the French King, in his Kingdom, made many Edicts, and
commanded diverse executions, whereof we have spoken in their due places. But
after that the number of the Protestants did increase in Germany, and the
Euangeliques did multiply amongst the Suisses, and the separation was made in
England, by reason of the often wars between the Emperor and French King,
either party was forced to call Auxiliaries out of these three Nations, who
publicly professing and preaching the Reformed religion in their quarters, by
their example, and by other means, diverse of the people became of their
opinion. It is certain, that this compelled Charles the Emperor, to attempt
the bringing in of the Spanish Inquisition, seeing that other remedies did not
prevail, though he was partly forced to desist, for the causes before
related. And Henry the French King, gave the Bishops authority to punish
heretics; a thing never used before in that Kingdom. And although in the Low
Countries, from the first Edict of Charles, until this time of the peace,
there were hanged, beheaded, buried alive, and burned, to the number of fifty
thousand, and very many put to death in France, In the Low Countries 50000 were
executed for religion in a short time, and very many in France.
yet both places were then in worse case then ever. This made the Kings to
think jointly of finding a remedy, by the great persuasion of the Cardinal
of Loraine for the French, and of Granuel Bishop of Arras for the Spaniards,
who being in Cambray, from October until April, with other Deputies of the
two Kings, to treat a peace, did confer particularly amongst themselves, how
that doctrine might be rooted out; and were afterward the chief instruments
of whatsoever did happen in both States. The cause they Whereof the Cardinal
of Loraine and Granuel, Bishop of Arras were causes.
alleged to be the zeal of religion, and the service of their Princes: but it
was universally believed, that it was rather ambition, and a deseigne to enrich
themselves by the spoils of those who were to be condemned.

The peace being made, the King of Spain, to begin to give some order, not
being able to bring in the Inquisition openly, thought to do it obliquely, The
King of Spain erecteth Bishoprics in the Low Countries, that he might more
easily bring in the Inquisition.
by the Bishops. But there being but two Bishoprics in the Low Countries,
Cambray, and Vtrect, and the residue of the Clergy subject to the Bishops of
Germany, and France, and those two Bishoprics also subject to foreign
Archbishops, to whom appeals could not be denied, so that he could not work
his will by means of them, he thought fit to free all that Clergy from the
subjection of Bishops, who were not his subjects, and to institute three
Arch-bishoprickes in those Countries, Meclin, Cambray, and Vtrect, and to erect
into Bishoprics, Anwerp, Balduck, Gant, Bridges, Ipre, S. Omar, Namur,
Harlem, Middleburgh, Lewarden, Groninghe, Ruremond, and Dauenter; annexing unto
them, for revenues, some rich Abbeys. He caused the Pope to approve all this
by his Bull, dated the ninth of May the same year. The pretense for doing of
this was, that formerly those Countries, being not much inhabited, did not
need a greater number of Bishops, but now the multitude of people, and
dignity of the Cities did require they should be honored with
Ecclesiastical titles. Yet the Nobility and Comminalty did imagine it was an
art to bring in the Inquisition; in which opinion they were confirmed when they
saw the Popes Bull. For, according to the use of Rome, to enlarge their power
or profit in every bargain, he alleged, for a cause of that new institution,
that that Country was compassed, and, as it were, besieged by Schismatiques,
who did not obey him, the Head of the Church, so that the true faith was in
great danger by the frauds and insidiations of the Heretics, if new and good
Gardians were not placed over them. This occurrence made the Nobility to
adhere together, and to think how to make resistance before there was means
to compel them by force of arms. Which makes the Nobility to combine and
refuse to pay tribute.
They resolved therefore not to pay tribute, until the Spanish Soldiers were
removed out of the Country, and began to incline more to the new opinion, and
to favor it: which caused the other troubles which shall be spoken of.

But the French King, desirous to make provision that the Lutheran sect The
French King enters into the Mercuriall.
should not more increase in the Kingdom, understanding that some of the
Counselors of the Parliament were infected with it, in a Mercuriall (so they
call the judicature, instituted to examine and correct the actions of the
Counselors of Parliament, and Judges of the King) held in Paris the 15. of
June, where they were to treat of Religion, after the Congregation was
assembled, entered in person. He said he had established peace in the whole
world, by the marriages of his sister and daughter, that he might provide
against the inconveniences bred in his Kingdom about Religion, which ought to
be the principal care of Princes. Therefore understanding they were to treat
of this subject, he exhorted them to handle Gods cause with sincerity. And
having commanded them to prosecute the things begun, Claude Viole one of them,
spoke much against the manners of the Court of Rome, and the bad customs,
grown to be pernicious errors, which have caused the new sects. Therefore it
was necessary to mitigate the severe punishments, until the differences of
religion were removed, and the Ecclesiastical discipline amended by authority
of a General Council, the only remedy for these evils, as the Councels of
Constance and Basil have judged, commanding that one should be celebrated
every ten years. His opinion was followed by Ludouicus Faber, and some others.
Anne du Bourg did add, that many villainies were committed, condemned by the
Laws, for punishment whereof, the rope and fire were not sufficient; as
frequent blasphemies against God, periuries, adulteries, not only secret, but
even cherished with impudent license; making himself to be plainly
understood, that he spoke not only of the Grandies of the Court, but of the
King himself also; adding that, while men lived thus dissolutely, diverse
torments were prepared against those who were guilty of nothing, but of
publishing to the world the vices of the Church of Rome, and desiring an
amendment of them. In opposition of all this, Egidius Magister, the prime
President spoke against the new sects, concluding that there was no other
remedy, but that which was formerly used against the Albigenses, of whom
Philippus Augustus put to death six hundred in one day, and against the
Waldenses, who were choked in the caves, whither they retired to hide
themselves. When all the voices were given, the King said, he had now heard
with his own ears, that which before was told him, that the contagion of the
Kingdom does hence arise, 1559 PIUS 4. FERDINAND. PHILIP 2. ELIZABETH. HENRY
2. And commands some of the Counselors of Parliament to be imprisoned.
that there are in the Parliament who do despise the Popes authority, and his,
that he well knows they are but few, but the cause of many evils. Therefore
he exhorted those who are good subjects to continue in doing their duty, and
immediately gave order that Faber and du Bourg should be imprisoned, and
afterward caused four more to be apprehended in their houses: which did much
daunt those who embraced the new religion. For the Counselors of Parliament in
France, being reputed most sacred, and inviolable, who notwithstanding were
put into prison for delivering their opinion in public Assembly, they
concluded that the King would pardon none.

But examples of great fears are always joined with others of equal
boldness. 15^9 The Reformatists hold a Synod in Paris.
For at the same time, as if there had been no danger at all, the ministers of
the Reformed (for so the Protestants are called in France) assembled in Paris
in the suburbs of Saint German, made a Synod, in which Franciscus Morellus,
the chief man amongst them, was President, ordayning diverse constitutions, of
the manner of holding Councels, of remoouing the domination in the Church, of
the election and office of Ministers, of censures, of marriages, of divorces,
of degrees of consanguinitie, and affinity, that throughout all France they
might not only have an uniform faith, but discipline also. And their courage
did increase, because the fame of the severity used in France coming into
Germany, the three Electors, and And are encouraged by the intercession of the
Protestant Princes of Germany.
other Protestant Princes sent Ambassadors to the King, praying him to
proceed with piety and Christian charity against the professors of their
Religion, guilty of nothing but of accusing the corrupted manners, and the
discipline perverted by the Church of Rome, which had been done more then an
hundred years since by other godly Doctors of France. For that Kingdom being
now in quiet, the differences of Religion may easily be composed, by the
disputation of able men, desirous of peace, who may examine their confession by
the rule of holy Scripture, and of the ancient Fathers, suspending in the mean
time the severity of the sentences; which they will receive as a thing most
grateful, and remain much obliged to him for it. The King gave a courteous
answer in general words, promising Which did them no good.
to give them satisfaction, and to send one expressly to signify so much unto
them. Yet he remitted nothing of the severity, but, after the Ambassadors
were parted, he deputed four Judges, of the body of the Parliament, in the
causes of the prisoners, with the Bishop of Paris, and the Inquisitor, Antonie
de Mocares, commanding them to proceed with all expedition.

The Pope, unto whom all these things were known, as he was much discontented
with the progress of the new doctrine in the States of both the Kings, so he
was pleased that those Princes did think of it, and moved them, by his
Nuncij, and by their Ambassadors residing with him, to do so still. But he
would not have any other means then that of the Inquisition, which he thought
the only remedy, as he said upon all occasions, judging that the Council
would do as formerly it had done, that is, reduce all into a worse state.
While he was possessed with these cogitations, and weak of body, the King of
France died the second of July, by a wound in the eye, running at Tilt; for
which he seemed very sorrowful, and was so indeed. For although he
suspected, and with reason, the intelligence between the 1559. PAVL. 4.
FERDINAND ELIZABETH. FRANCIS. 2. Henry the second dies, the second of July.
two Kings, yet he had still hope to separate them. But the one being dead, he
saw he was at the discretion of the other alone, whom he more feared, because
he was more offended by him, and was of a more close nature, hard to be
sounded. He feared also that in France a gate would be set wide open to let in
sects, which might be confirmed before the new King could get so much
wisdom and reputation, as was necessary to oppose so great difficulties. He
lived some few days, afflicted with these cogitations; but now laying aside
all hopes, which had until then kept him alive, he died the eighteenth The
Pope Iyeth the 18. of August, recommending to the Cardinals nothing but the
office of the Inquisition.
of August, recommending to the Cardinals nothing but the office of the
Inquisition, the only means, as he said, to preserve the Church, exhorting
all to employ all their endeauours, to establish it in Italy, and wheresoever
else they could.

The Pope being newly dead, or rather still breathing, there did arise, by
reason of the great hatred conceived by the people against him, and his whole
house, such tumults in Rome, that the Cardinals were more troubled with these,
as being near and urgent, then with those that were common to all
Christendom. The City was all in sedition; the head of the Popes statua The
people show their detestation of him.
was beaten off, and drawn through the streets; the prisons broken open, and
more then four hundred prisoners set at liberty: and going to Ripeta, where
the Inquisition was, they did not only take out the imprisoned, but burnt the
place, and all the processes and writings kept there; and they had almost
burned the Convent of Minerua, where the Friars, employed in that office, do
dwell. The College of Cardinals had recalled Caraffa in the life time of the
Pope, and, in the first congregation which they held after his death, they
delivered the Cardinal Morone out of the Castle, who was ready Card, Morone
was set at liberty, who was ready to be sentenced for an heretic.
to be censured for an Heretic. A great question was made, whether he could
have a voice in the election, being opposed by those who thought him their
adversary. But at the last it was resolved on his side. The Cardinals were
forced to consent, that all the moveable arms and monuments of the house of
Caraffa should be torn in pieces, and the immovable demolished.

Being assembled in the Conclaue the fifth of September, eight days after the
just time, because they were hindered by those inconveniences, they made
capitulations, which, according to custom, were sworn to by all, that they
might give some order for the government, which was wholly confused by the too
great severity of Paul 4. Two of them did belong to the Capitulatio^s sworn
unto by the Cardinals in the Conclaue.
matter whereof we treat; one, that the difference with the Emperor, which
might hazard the loss of all the residue of Germany, should be composed, and
he acknowledged for Emperor; the other, that for the necessity of France and
Flanders, the Council; as the only remedy against heresies, should be
restored. The Papacy was vacant longer then the necessity of the time did
comport, not so much for the discords of the Cardinals, as for the interests of
Princes, who did interpose more then they were wont. While they were locked up
in the Conclaue, King Philip going from the Low Countries into Spain by sea,
with resolution never to remove thence, fell into a storm, in which almost
all the fleet was wracked, his household stuff, of very 1559 PIUS. 4.
FERDINAND. ELIZABETH. FRANCIS 2. King Philip is in great peril at sea, Who, at
his arrival in Spain, uses great severity against the Lutherans.
great value, lost, and himself hardly escaped. He said he was delivered, by
the singular providence of GOD, to root out Lutheranisme, which he presently
began to do. For the 24. of September, so soon as he was arrived in Seuil, to
give an example in the beginning of his government, and to leave no hope to
any, he caused Johannes Pontius Count of Bayleno, together with a preacher, and
many others of the College of S. Isidore, where the new religion was entered to
be burned for Lutherans; as also some Noble women, to the number of thirteen,
and last of all the statue of Constantinus Pontius, Confessor to Charles the
fifth, who served him in his retired life, and held him in his arms when he
dyed. This man dyed in prison a few days before, where he was put immediately
after the Emperors death, for imputation of Heresy: which execution, though
against an insensible statue, increased the fear, because every one concluded
that no conniuencie nor mercy could be hoped for from the King, who bare no
respect to him, whose infamy did dishonor the memory of the Emperor
deceased. Afterward he went to Validolid, where he caused twenty eight of the
prime Nobility of the Country to be burned in his presence and kept Friar
Bartholomew Caranza in prison, mentioned often in the first reduction of the
Council of Trent, who was Archbishop of Toledo, chief Prelate of Spain,
taking from him all the revenues. And it cannot be denied that these
executions, with others which daily succeeded, though not so exemplarie, kept
those Countries in quiet, while all other places were full of sedition. For
although the new opinions were sowed in the minds of many, especially of the
Nobility, yet they were concealed within their hearts, in regard of the close
nature of the Spaniards, who abhor dangers, never aduenturing upon hard
enterprises, but aiming to prooceed securely.

The Kings death in France, which they reformed did ascribe to miracle
increased their courage; though they durst not show themselves openly in Paris.
For his son Francis, the new king, after he was consecrated at Rhemes, The
young French King, imirateth the severity of his father.
the twentieth of September, gave order to prosecute the process of the
Counselors, who were in prison, and deputed the President of S. Andreas, and
the Inquisitor Antonius de Mocares, to discover the Lutherans. The Judges,
having gained some of the common sort, formerly professors of that religion,
had notice of the places where they did secretly assemble. Therefore many, both
men and women, were imprisoned, and many fled, whose goods were confiscated,
after a citation by three Edicts. And by the example of Paris, the same was
done in Poytou, Toulouse, and Aix of Prouence, by the instigation of George
Cardinal of Armignac, who, not to abandon that enterprise, would not go to
Rome to the election of the pope, using all diligence that those who were
discovered might be apprehended. The professors of that religion being stirred
up hereby, and imboldened, because they knew they were many, sent about many
writings, against the King and Queen, and those of Loraine (by whom the King
was governed) authors of the persecution, intermixing some points of doctrine,
which being willingly read by all, as things composed by public liberty, did
imprint the new religion in the minds of many.

In the end of the process against the Counselors, after along contestation,
all were absolved, except Anne du Burg, who was burnt the eighteenth of
December, not so much by the inclination of the Judges, as by the resolution of
the Queen, provoked against him, because the Lutherans did diuulge in many
writings, and libels spread abroad, that the King had been wounded in the eye
by the providence of God, for a punishment of his words, used against Anna
Borges is burned.
du Bourg, that he would see him, burnt. But the death and constancy of a man
so conspicuous, did make many curious to know what religion that was, for which
he had so courageously endured punishment, and made the number increase: which
augmenting also every day for other causes, those whose constancy gives an
increase to the reformed Religion.
who were interessed in their overthrow, either for love of the old Religion,
or as Ecclesiastiques, and authors of the former persecutions, thought it
necessary to discover them, before they were so many as that they could not be
suppressed. To this end they caused the pictures of the blessed Virgin, and of
Saints, to be placed in every corner throughout all France, and Means used in
France to discover the Reformatists.
especially in Paris, burning candles before them, making the porters, and
other vulgar persons sing the usual prayers of the Church, and appointing men
to stand there with little boxes, to ask alms for the buying of candles: and
he that did not honor the images in passing by, or did not stand with
reverence at those corners, or did not give the alms that were asked, wree
held suspected, and the least evil that did befall them, was to be abused by
the people, with boxes and spurnings: But many of them were imprisoned, and put
in suit. This provoked the Reformatists, and caused the great conspiracy of
Geffery Renaut, of whom we will speak hereafter.

In Rome, after diverse contentions and practices to create Pope, the Cardinals
of Mantua, Ferrara, Carpi, and Putea, finally the 24. of December at John
Angelo, Car(...) Medici, is created Pope.
night, John Angelo Cardinal of Medicis was created, and named himself Pius 4
who having appeased the tumults of the city, and secured the minds of all by a
general pardon of whatsoever was committed in time of their sedition, applied
himself suddenly to the execution of two capitulations, which he had sworn,
concerning the most common affairs: and the thirtieth of the same month
calling together 13. Cardinals, and consulting with them about the reiection of
the Embassage of Ferdinand, and the determination of Paul not to acknowledge
him for Emperor, the common opinion was, that he had received wrong. But after
a long consultation how to remedy this inconvenience, many things being
proposed and discussed, but no means found how to treat without danger of
greater incounters, in case the Electors should interpose (as it was impossible
to forbid them) the common opinion was, that they were to avoid all
negotiation, because it would conclude with the dishonor of the Pope, and that
it was better not to expect any request to be made from the Emperor. This was
approved by the Pope, who thought it wisdom to give that, which he could
neither He approoueth the resignation of Charles, and the succession of
Ferdinand.
keep nor sell. He therefore presently called for Franciscus della Torre, the
Emperors Minister in Rome, and told him that he approved the resignation of
Charles, A succession of Ferdinand to the Empire, promising to write unto him
with the usual titles, and bad him send advise hereof.

After this, he thought seriously of the Council, being assured he should be
importuned for it from diverse parts. Conferring with the Cardinal Morone, whom
he trusted for his wisdom and friendship, he much doubted, as himself said,
whether the Council were good for the Apostolic Sea, or not; and if not,
whether it were better to deny it absolutely, and freely oppose whosoever
should desire it, or to make show he was willing, and to cross it with some
impediments, besides those which the business it self And consulteth about
the Council.
would bring: and if it were fit to celebrate it, whether it were better to
expect until he were requested, or to prevent and require it himself He
called to mind the causes why Paul the 3, did dissolve it under color of
translation, and the hazards which Julius did run, if good fortune had not
assisted; that now there was no Emperor Charles to be feared, and that the
weaker the Princes are, the BB. are the more bold, who were the more to be
looked unto, because they cannot advance themselves but upon the ruins of the
Papacy. To oppose openly the demand of the Council was scandalous, in regard
of the glorious name thereof, and of the vain opinion which the world has,
that it must needs be profitable; as also because every one is persuaded, that
the Council is refused for fear of reformation; which makes the refusal a
greater scandal. And if necessity shall enforce to grant that which had been
absolutely denied, it will be a total loss of reputation, and incite the
world to debase him who has opposed. In these ambiguities the Pope was assured
that the Council could not be profitable for the Church, nor for the Kingdoms
divided, and must necessarily endanger the Papal authority; yet he could not
openly oppose it, because the world was incapable of this truth. But he was
uncertain, whether, in case the Kings or Kingdoms did require it the
coiunctures of the future affairs might be such, as that the secret
impediments might take effect. When he had thought of all, he concluded to
show himself ready, yea, desirous, and to prevent the desires of others, that
he might conceal himself the better in crossing them, and have more credit in
representing the contrary difficulties, referring to the superior causes that
deliberation, to which humane judgment could not reach. So much he resolved
of, and no more.

The coronation was made at the Epiphany; and the eleauenth of the same month
he held a frequent congregation of Cardinals, in which he declared his mind at
large, that he would reform the Court, and call a general Council, charging
them all to consider what things deserved reformation, and of the place, time
and other preparations of the Synod, that it might not bring forth the same
fruit that it had done twice before. And afterward he spoke of this in his
private discourses with the Cardinals and Ambassadors, upon all occasions; yet
did nothing which might manifest his intention more plainly.

News came to the Emperor at Vienna of what the Pope had intimated to his
Minister; who immediately deputed an Ambassador, and, before The Emperor
sends an Ambassador to Rome.
his departure, wrote to the Pope to give him joy of his assumption, and
thanks that he had wisely, and like a father, ended the difficulty, which
Paulus 4 had, against reason and equity, set on foot, giving him an account of
the Ambassador which he had appointed to come unto him. This was Scipio, Count
of Arco, who came to Rome the tenth of February, and fell into a great
difficulty in the very beginning. For the Emperor gave him commission to
render to the Pope reverence only, and the Pope was resolute he should render
him obedience, showing that the. Ambassadors of other Emperors had done so to
his predecessors, and said plainly, that otherwise, he would not admit him. The
Ambassador of Spain, and the Cardinal Pacceco advised him not to transgress
his commission, but the Cardinals Who, after some contestation, rendereth
obedience to the Pope, not reverence only.
Morone and Trent persuaded the contrary; whose opinion he followed, because
the Emperor had given him charge to consult with those two Cardinals in all
matters. After the ceremony was ended in the Consistery, with satisfaction of
the Pope, the Ambassador, begin to pray him in the first private audience, in
Caesar's name, to call the Council to compose the dissensions of Germany, was
prevented by him, with the Ambassadors great contentment; who believing that
he was to treat with the Pope, about an And is well pleased that his Holiness
begins to speak of the Council.
unpleasing business, was prepared to deliver in sugered terms, that it might
be heard more willingly. The Pope told him, that the Cardinals, being in the
Conclaue, consulted how they might set the Council on foot again, in which
consultation himself was a very principal party; and now being Pope, was more
confirmed in the same determination. Yet he would not proceed blindely, but so
as that he might avoid the difficulties, which happened before, and would be
sure of the necessary preparatories, that the desired fruit might succeed. He
said the like to the Ambassadors of France and Spain, and wrote to his Nuncij
to impart it to their Kings: he spoke of it also with the Ambassadors of the
King of Portugal, and of the Princes of Italy, which were in Rome. The Duke of
Sauoy demands the Popes have to hold a Colloquie.


After this the Duke of Sauoy sent one expressly to desire the Pope, that by his
favor, he might make a colloquie of religion, to instruct his people of the
Valleys, who were generally alienated from the old religion. These were a part
of the Waldenses, who, 400, years since, forsook the Church of Rome, and in
regard of the persecutions, fled into Polonia, Germany, Puglia, Prouence, and
some of them into the Valleys of Mountsenis, Luserna, Angronia, Perosa, and S.
Martin. These having always continued in their separation, with certain
ministers of their own, whom they called Pastors, when the doctrine of
Zuinglius was planted in Geneua, did presently unite themselves with those, as
agreeing with them in points of doctrine, and principal rites: and when
Piemont was under the Frenchmen, though they were forbid upon pain of death
to exercise their religion, yet by little and little, they made it public, so
that when Country was restored to the Duke of Sauoy, the exercise of it was
almost free. The Duke resolved to make them receive the Catholic religion, so
that many were burned, and put to death by other means, and more condemned to
the Galleys, at the instigation of the Inquifitor, Thomaso Iacomello, a
Dominican Friar. This made them consult whether it were lawful to defend
themselves with Arms; wherein their ministers did not agree. Some said they
might not oppose their Prince, though it were to defend their own lives, but
might carry away their goods and reure into the mountains. Others said they
might use force, in so desperate a case as this, especially it being not so
much against the Prince, as against the Pope, who abused the authority of the
Prince. Many of them did follow the first opinion, and the others stood upon
their guard; so that the Duke perceiving they had not rebellious thoughts, and
that they might easily be gained by instruction, received the counsel which
was given him, to institute a Colloquie to this end. But because he would not
displease the Pope, by proceeding without his knowledge, he gave him an account
hereof, and asked his consent. The Pope being angry that, in Italy also, even
under To instruct the people of his Valleys, whom before he had perseceted.
his nose, his authority should be questioned, answered that he would consent
by no means; but, if those people had need of instruction, he would send a
Legate, with authority to absolute them who would be converted, accompanied
with Divines who might give them instruction. But But his Holiness refuses to
grant it.
he said he had little hope to convert them, because the heretics are
obstinate, and whatsoever is done to exhort them to acknowledge their fault,
they expound to be a want of force to compel them. That it cannot be
remembered that any good was ever done by this moderation, but that experience
is taught, that the sooner justice is used, and force of Arms, when that other
is not sufficient, so much the better the success is. If he would proceed
thus, he would send him assistance; but if he thought it not fit, all might
be deferred until a general Council, which he would suddenly call. And
therefore the Duke takes Arms against them.
The Duke did not like the sending of a Legate, because it would have provoked
them more, and forced him to proceed according to the interests of others,
thinking it better to take Arms, which the Pope commended more, and promised
assistance. Therefore there was war in these Valleys all this year, and part
of the next, whereof we will speak in the time when it ended.

There was a great conspiracy in many parts of France, into which many A great
conspiracy in France, and the causes of it.
were entered, and the mayor part for cause of Religion, disdaining to see poor
people drawn every day to the stake to be burned, guilty of nothing but of
zeal to worship GOD, and to save their own souls. To these were joined
others, who, thinking the Guisards to be the cause of all the disorders of the
Kingdom, judged it an heroike act to deliver it from oppression, by taking
the public administration out of their hands. There were also ambitious
persons, desirous of change, who could not work their will, but in the midst
of troubles. Both these covered themselves with the cloak of Religion, to
gain more followers: and the better to confirm their minds, caused the
Principal Lawyers of Germany and France, and the most famous Protestant
Divines to publish in writing, that, without violating the Majesty of the King
and dignity of the lawful Magistrate, they might oppose with Arms, the
violent domination of the house of Guise, who offended true Religion, and
lawful justice, and kept the King as it were in prison. The Conspirators
prepared a great multitude, who should appear before the King, without Arms,
to demand that the severity of the judgments might be mitigated, and liberty
of conscience granted, designing they should be followed by Gentlemen, who
should make supplication against the government of the Guisards. The
conspiracy was discovered, and the Court retired from Blois, an open place fit
for the execution of such a purpose, unto The Conspirations are discovered, and
many of them executed and the rest pardoned.
Amboise, a strong fortress. This troubled the Conspiratours; who, while they
were thinking of a new course, some of them, who took Arms, were beaten and
slain, and others taken and sentenced to die; and to appease the tumult,
pardon was granted by the Kings Edict, dated the eighteenth of March, to all,
who simply moved with zeal of Religion, had entered into the conspiracy, so
that they disarmed within 24. hours. Afterward the King, by his Edict,
pardoned all the reformatists, until they returned to the Church. He forbade
all assemblies for Religion, and committed to the Bishops the hearing of the
causes of heresy. This displeased the Chancellor; though he consented, for
fear the Spanish Inquisition would be brought in, as the Guisards desired.

The humors moved were not quieted by the punishment of the Conspirators, and
the pardons published, nor the hopes laid aside, which they had conceived, to
have liberty of religion, yea, greater tumults of the people were raised in
Prouence, Languedoc, and Poitou, whether the Preachers of Geneua The
Protestants do increase by means of the Preachers of Geneua.
were called, and came willingly: by whose Sermons the number of the
Protestants did increase. This general and sudden combination made the
governors of the Kingdom resolute, that there was need of an Ecclesiastical
remedy, and that very quickly; and a National Synod was proposed by the
whole Council. The Cardinal of Armignac said, that nothing was to be done
without the Pope; that he alone was able to make provision; that they should
write to Rome, and expect an answer. To which opinion some few Prelates did
adhere. But the Bishop of Valence said, that a sudden remedy could not be
expected from the Pope, because he was far distant, nor a fit one, because
he was not informed of the particular necessity of the Kingdom, nor a
charitable one, because he was busied in making his Nephews great; that GOD
had given to all kingdoms, all things necessary to govern them; that France
had Prelates of its own to regulate the causes of religion, who better know the
wants of the kingdom; that it would be a great absurdity to see Paris burn,
having the rivers of Some and Marne full of water, and to believe that water
must be brought from Tiber, to quench the fire. The resolution A National
Synod is intimated in France.
of the Council was, that, there being need of a strong and sudden remedy,
the Prelates of the Kingdom should assemble, to find a way to hinder the
course of these great mischiefs: and the eleventh of April the Synod was
intimated, for the tenth of September.

But that the Pope might not take it in ill part, a Curriet was dispatched to
Rome, to give him an account of the resolution, and to inform him of the
necessity of that remedy, and to pray him not to take it amiss. The Ambassador
represented to his Holiness the infection of the kingdom, and the dangers,
and the hope which the King had of some good remedy by a general Convocation
of the Prelates, without which he saw no means to make an effectual pouision.
Therefore he was forced not to defer longer, nor to expect remedies from
places romote, which were uncertain, and long in coming, and to use that
which was in his own power: and he added that no constitution of that Synod
should be of force before it were confirmed by his Holiness. The Pope, on the
contrary, did grievously complain, that the King had pardoned the errors
committed against religion, even of The Pope blames the French King for
pardoning here^^kes.
those who did not ask it; wherein none had power but himself. And what King
is there (he said) who thinks he is able to pardon offenses against GOD?
That it is no marvel if, by the just wrath of GOD, there be so many tumults in
that kingdom, where the Sacred Canons are disesteemed and the Popes authority
usurped. He said that the assembling of the Prelates would do no good, yea,
would cause a greater division* that he had proposed a general Council which
was the only remedy that the cause why it was not essembled already proceeded
from them who would not have it, that he was resolved to celebrate it, though
it were desired by none, but And will not approve the National Synod.
would not by any means consent to the assembly of the Prelates, either in
France or elsewhere, that this was never tolerated by the Apostolic Sea* that
if every Prince should celebrate Councels of himself, a confusion and
separation of the Church must needs follow. He complained much that the
assembly was first intimated, and then his consent demanded which he must
needs think was done with small respect of the head of the Church* to whom
all Ecclesiastical affairs are to be referred, not to give him an account
when they are done, but to receive from him authority to do them; that the
Edicts published did infer an Apostasy in that kingdom from the Sea of
Rome; for remedy whereof he would send an express Nuncio, to make his will
known to the King.

He sent the Bishop of Viterbo, with instruction, to show him that a National
But sends a Nuncio into Spain to dissuade it.
Council of that Kingdom, would be a kind of Schism from the universal
Church, give a bad example to other nations, and make his Prelates proud,
assuming greater authority, which diminution of his own; that it is generally
known how earnestly they desire the restitution of the Pragmatique, which they
would first of all bring in, by which means the King would lose his whole
collation of the regalities, and the presentation of the Bishoprics and
Abbeys: whence it would follow that the Prelates, not acknowledging the power of
the King, would refuse to obey him. And yet, with all these inconveniences, the
evils which do now press him, would not be provided against. For the heretics
do profess already that they esteem not the Prelates, so that whatsoever
they should do would be opposed by the Protestant Ministers, if for no other
cause, because it was done by them* that the true remedy was to make the
Prelates, and other Curates reside and keep their flocks, opposing the fury
of the woolues, and to proceed in justice against those who are judged to be
heretics, by the judges of faith, and where it cannot be done in regard of
the multitude, to use force of arms to compel all to the performance of their
duty; before the contagion does increase, that all these things being done
now, all differences might be completely endded, by the celebration of the
general Council, which he would immediately intimate, that, if the King would
resolve to reduce the contumacious to obedience, before they did more increase
in number and strength, he promised to assist him with all his power, and to
labor that the King of Spain, and Princes of Italy should do the like. But
if he would not be persuaded to compel his Subjects by force, the Nuncio had
instruction to propose unto him, that all the mischief which troubles France,
and the poison, which infecteth that Kingdom, and the neighbor places,
comes from Geneua; that the extirpation of that root And to persuade ye King
to make ware against Geneua.
would take away a great nourishment of the evil; that making war out of the
Kingdom, he should euacuate those bad humors, which did trouble it* Therefore
he was to exhor^ the King to join with him in this good work promising that
he would ^d^ee the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoy, to do the like.

The Pope gave the bishop Commission also to negotiate the same thing with the
Duke of Sauoy, as he passed. He wrote to the King of Spain, and ^ealt with him
by his Nuncio, that he would labor to divert his cofin from the National
Council, which would be hurtful to France, and a bad example for Spain, and
worse for the Low Countries. The Duke of Sauoy hearkened to the proposition of
the war of Geneua, promising to employ himself wholly in it, so that those
two Kings would be content to assist him, and that the war were to be made
by him and for him. For that City belonging to his Dominion, it was not just,
in case it were won, that any should possess it but himself. Therefore if
his Holiness would come to the effect, it was necessary to make a league with
plain capitulations, lest some great inconvenience might arise, if either the
Kings should not agree, or himself should be abandoned, after he had provoked
the Suisses against him, who would undoubtedly defend the City.

For Geneua, the King of Spain considered, that France would not permit it
should be in the hands of any but Frenchmen, which was not good for his
service, in regard of the vieinity of the Franche County. Therefore he
answered that he thought it not a fit time to make attempt. But for the
National Council of France, he was persuaded it would be a dangerous example
to his States. Therefore he dispatched away Antonio di Toledo, Prior of Lions,
to signify to the French King, that the celebration of that Council would be
very hurtful, in regard of the division which might arise, the kingdom being
infected. He prayed him not to go on herein, The King of Spain disswadeth
ye French King from the National Synod.
and said, that nothing moved him to make this request, but only his love to
him, and his zeal to the glory of God. He left to his consideration, besides
the contentions which it might cause within his kingdom, the pernicious
example which other Provinces would take, and the prejudice it would bring to
the General Council, which was to be held, and was the only remedy for all
the evils and divisions of Christendom; that it would show there was not so
good intelligence between the Emperor and them as should be, and would make
the Protestants wax proud, in prejudice of the public cause. He added, that
he wanted not force to repress the insolences of his Subjects, and, if he
would make use of the forces of him the King of Spain, he would very
willingly employ them in this case, and his own person also, if there were
need, that his Subjects might not boast they had brought him to any
indignity: whereof he was to consider much now, in this beginning of his
reign. He gave commission also to his Ambassador, that, if he could not
obtain this, he should, for the same and other reasons, negotiate a
suspension of it, for as long a time as he could, and should treat with the
Cardinal of Lorayne, who, as he understood, had a great hand in this
Council, that, as a Prince of the Church, and as having a great part in the
government of that Kingdom, he was bound to consider the damage which might
redound to it, and all Christendom. He caused also the same request to be made
to the Duke of Guise, the Constable, the Queen mother, and to the Marshall
Saint Andrew. He gave him commission also to advise the Duchess of Parma, and
Vargas his Ambassador at Rome, of whatsoever he did. Likewise he gave the
Pope advice of the earnest request he had made by one expressly sent, and of the
need that King had of assistance. To this he added the necessity in which
himself was, the Turks having taken from him the year before, twenty
Galleys, twenty five And demands of the Pope a Subsidy from the
Ecclesiastikes.
round Ships, and the fortress of Gerbe; which forced him to increase his
Army* He therefore requested his Holiness, to grant him a large Subsidy of
the Churches, and Benefices of his Kingdoms.

The proposition of assaulting Geneua, was not well taken in France, because
The French men are distasted with the proposition of assaulting Geneua.
it would make the Hugonots (so the Reformatists are called) suspicious, and
unite themselves. Besides, none going to that war but the Catholics, the
Kingdom would be left open to the opposites. And to provoke the Suisses,
protectors of that City, seemed not good, in regard of the service they might
do that Crown. Therefore they answered the Nuncio only thus, that, while so
great confusion did afflict the Kingdom within, it was impossible to apply
themselves to matters abroad. But, for the National The French Kings answer
concerning the National Synod.
Council, the same answer was given to Toledo and the Nuncio, that the King
was resolved to keep himself and the kingdom in the Catholic union; that
he would make a National Council to separate himself, but to unite to the
Church those that went astray; that a General Council would more please, and,
in likelihood, be more profitable, if his urgent occasions would suffer him to
expect the time, which must needs be very long; that the National Council,
which he desires, shall depend on the Apostolic Sea, and the Pope, which
shall cease when the General shall be assembled, and shall incorporate with
it. And that his deeds may answer to his words, he desired the Pope to send
a Legate into France, with power to assemble the Bishops of the Kingdom, and
to settle the affairs of Religion.

The Pope cast forth the Proposition to make war against Geneua, not so much
for the hatred he bare to that City, as the Seminary of the Zuinglian
Preachers in France, or for fear of some innovation in Italy, as to prolong
the treaty of the General Council. For if the war had been kindled, it
would have lasted a year at the least, and in the mean while, the Council
would have been forgotten, or a good form would have been found for it. But
now, seeing that his proposition did not take effect, and that the French did
still persevere in their resolution for a national Synod, he thought it
necessary not to defer his determination for the general, and to stop the
Frenchmen with this, and with some grant of what they desired. He conferred
hereof with the Cardinals which were most intimate Makes the Pope hasten the
General Council.
with him, and particularly about the place, which seemed of most importance,
because, in conclusion, the Council does produce effect according to the mind
of him that is strongest in the place where it is celebrated. He would feign
have proposed Bolonia, or some other of his own Cities, promising to go
thither in person, but saw it would be ill construed by the world. He was
resolved not to accept of any City beyond the Mountains, no not to hear any
proposition of it. The Cardinal Pacceco proposed Milan, and he condescended,
so that he might have the Castle in his hands, during the time of the Council;
which was to refer himself to an impossible condition. He thought also upon
some of the Venetian Cities, but the Republique excused it self, lest they
should make the Turks suspicious, of whose forces they were then afraid. When
he had considered all, he found no fitter place then Trent. For the Council
having been held there twice before, every one had experience of what was good,
and what bad in that place, Who, after consultation, thinks Trent the fittest
place for the assembly.
and therefore would more easily consent to go thither then elsewhere. And
there was also some appearance of reason for it, because the Council,
celebrated by Julius, was not finished, but suspended. He thought to satisfy
the French men, by sending Cardinal Tornon into France, not in quality of a
Legate, but with power, when he was there and saw there need, to assemble And
sends Card. Tornon into France to hinder a National Synod there.
some of the Prelates of the Kingdom, such as the King and himself thought
fit, but not all, that there might be no appearance of a Council, and to
treat with these, but to resolve of nothing.

There were also two other accidents of no less consideration, which thrust
the Pope forward to speak more plainly of a Council; one far off, but
imported the loss of a Kingdom; the other concerned one person only, but was
of great consequence. The Nobility of Scotland, who had a Scotland reuolteth
from the Pope.
long time made war to chase the French men out of the Kingdom, and to take
the government out the hands of the Queen Regent, and had ever encountered
many difficulties, in regard of the great succors, sent her by her son in
law the French King, to maintain the kingdom for his wife; finally that they
might quite free themselves, they resolved to join with the English, and
incite the people against the Regent. To this end they gave way to liberty of
religion, to which the people was inclined. By this means they brought the
Frenchmen into great straits, and the old religion was little esteemed; for
which the Pope was blamed, because the world thought, that, if the Council had
been begun, all popular commotions would have been stopped. The other
accident was, that the King of Bohemia had, a long time, held intelligence with
the Protestant Electors, and Princes of Maximilian is, not without cause,
thought to be a Protestant.
Germany, and was formerly suspected for it by Paul the fourth, so that he
could not refrain to object to the Emperor, in private discourse which he
had with Martin Gusman his Ambassador, that his son was a favorer of
heresy. The same suspicion continuing in the Court after the death of Paul,
the Pope caused the Count of Arco to tell him, that if he would not live as a
Catholic, he would not confirm him King of the Romans, yea, would deprive
him of all Dominion. Notwithstanding this, advice came afterward to Rome, that
he entertained a Preacher, and heard him often, who had brought in the use of
the Cup in diverse places, but not in the City; and the King himself said, he
could not receive it otherwise: which although he put not in practice, yet
those words gave the Pope great suspicion, especially because, almost in all
places of Germany, the Communion of Which two accidents incite the Pope to
call the Council quickly.
the Chalice was used by all that would, and none hindered the Priests to
minister it. For all these former respects the Pope was resolute to make this
great iumpe.

The third of June he called the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of Spain,
Portugal Polonia, Venice and Florence; who appearing all before his Holiness,
except the Ambassador of Polonia, that was sick, he complained first, that
he could not call the French Ambassador for fear of some question of
precedencie, which was a cause to hinder the public benefit of consulting on
the common affairs of Christendom: but those two Kings being cousins, it was
necessary they should resolve to accommodate the difference, Wherein he
declares his purpose to all the Ambassadors residing with him.
for the good of the Christian Commonwealth, and especially of their own
Kingdoms. Then he said, that, the cause why he had called them, was the
celebration of the Council, which he was resolved to bring to effect,
remoouing all difficulties, which Princes, for their own ends, might set on
foot: that the place should be Trent, which having pleased twice, could now be
denied by none, in regard it was not a new place, and the Council celebrated
there only suspended. Therefore taking away the suspension, the Council is
open, as before; and many good Constitutions having been made there, it would
not be fit to call them in question, by making show of calling a new Council.
He added that it was necessary to do it quickly, because things grew worse
every day as appeared in France, where they treated of a National Council;
which he neither would nor could endure, because Germany, and every Province
would do the like; that he would give order to his Nuncij with the Emperor,
Kings of France and Spain, to treat hereof with their Majesty's, and did now
intimate the same to all them, that they might send their Princes word of it.
For although he could both resolve and execute of him self, yet he thought
fit to do it with their knowledge, that they might put him in mind of some
things for the common benefit, and reformation of the Church, and send
Ambassadors to the Council, and favor it by treating with the Protestants.
He added, that he did believe that some of the Princes of Germany would go
thither in person, and that he was sure the Marquisse of Brandeburg would.

Vargas made a long answer, relating what had been done in former Councels. He
discoursed of the manner of celebrating Councels, and then descended to the
place, and spoke of what was done in Trent, where himself was present. He
distinguished General Councels from National, much condemning that which was
intimated in France. The Ambassador of Portugal commended the Popes purpose,
and promised the obedience of his Master. The Venetian said, that, in times
past, never any better remedy was found then Councels, and thanked GOD for
inspiring his Holiness to do so pious a work, which was for the preservation
of Religion, and benefit of Princes, who could not hold their States in peace
in change of Religion. The Florentine Ambassador spoke in the same manner,
offering all assistance from the Duke. The Pope wrote to his Nuncio in Germany,
France, But alwyes utters something that may cross it.
and Spain, in conformity of that which he spoke to the Ambassadors, Yet he
never talked of the Council, but he cast forth some seed of a contrary
herb, which might hinder the birth of it, or choke it afterward, being
assured, that, when the affairs of the world did stand so, that the life of it
might do him service, he could root out that which he had sowed upon it.
He told the same Ambassadors apart, some more plainly, some in jest, that,
to call the Council with profit, it was necessary to think more of the end,
then of the beginning, and of the execution, then of the Convocation,
prosecution: that the Convocation belonged to him alone, the prosecution to him
and the Prelates, the execution to the Princes: and therefore that it was meet,
that, first of all, they should bind themselves to it, and make a league, and
elect a general Captain, to go against the disobedient, to execute the
determinations of the Council, considering that, without this, it would be
fruitless, and dishonorable to the Apostolic Sea, and to those Princes who
had sent Ambassadors, and afforded favor and assistance.

The Pope did not receive a conformable answer from his Nuncij. The The French
King does not think Trent a fit place for the Council.
King of Spain commended the Council, approved the place of Trent, promised
to send his Prelates to it, and to favor it by all other means; but added,
that it was not fit to do any thing without the good will of the Emperor, and
French King. The answer of this King was, that he approved the celebration
of the Council, but not the place of Trent, alleging that his Prelates could
not go thither, and proposing for places more fit, Constance, Triers, Spire,
Worms, or Aganoa. He intimated also, that they ought not to make a
continuation of the things begun in Trent, but to abandon Nor that the
doctrines, already discussed there, should be maintained without reexamination
them quite, and make a whole new Council. This answer troubled the Pope, who
thought it did not proceed from the Kings own motion, but from the Hugonots.

But the Emperor sent a long writing, in which he said, he could promise
nothing for the Princes of Germany, before he knew their opinion; which he
could not do without a Diet: which if he would call, it was necessary not to
name the Council, because the Princes would not go thither, but pretending
another cause to call it, he might afterward speak Of whose opinion the
Emperor is.
of it by occasion. He added, that, for his patrimoniall States, he had no
hope to bring them to the Synod, without granting them the Communion of the
Cup, and marriage of Priests, and without a good reformation were made; but
above all, that no mention ought to be made of a continuation of the things
begun in Trent. For the Lutheranes would never consent otherwise, yea, the very
name of Trent would make them refuse. And he proposed Constance or Ratisbon.
The Pope saw that the proposition of a Diet did require the time of a year,
and perhaps of two, and was glad of it, but was sorry that the occurrences of
France required haste. He told every one, to show his forwardness, that he
cared not for one place more then another, and would take Spire, Collen, or any
other City which pleased the Emperor, so that the Bishops might come and go
in safety, it not being convenient to secure those who have no voice in the
Council, and leave others without security who certainly have. But it was
not fit to speak of reuoking what was done in Trent, saying he would spend his
blood in maintaining it, it being a matter of faith. Concerning that which is
of humane constitution, as the Communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priests,
these prohibitions being made for a good end, as he would not take them away
of himself, which he had power to do, so he would refer all to the
Council, howsoever he saw they would never forsake their opinion whatsoever
was granted them. He complained of the Emperors weakness, who feared his
own son no less then others, and then desired the Prelates should be sent
into Germany; where he declared he had not power to secure them, that he
would go to Constantinople, so that he might have security, which could not
be expected from the Emperor, that the Germans were almost in Heretics, and
the King of the Romans more potent then his father; in the ^egarded not one
place more then another, so that it were in Italy, which only is secure for
the Catholics.

Therefore he answered the French King, and the Emperor, in general The Popes
answer to them both.
term, that he was content with any secure place, saying that the security
of the Council has always been esteemed necessary, and was now as much as
ever, without making particular opposition against the places named by them.
But, in his answer to the Catholic King, he commended his good mind, and
confirmed him in his purpose; and, for the subsidy he desired he interposed
diverse difficulties, as well to maintain the profits of the Church, as not to
offend him, and make him his opposite, in the time of the Council.

The affairs of the Catholics waxed every day more difficult. For the The
Low Country men wax peremptory against their King.
Hugonots in France grew stronger, and in Scotland liberty of Religion was
granted to all by public decree, and in Flanders the humors were prepared to
stir, upon the first occasion; which the King did appease by proceeding
slowly granting them what they would, though to his own loss and indignity.
First, they refused to contribute to the King before the Spanish soldiers were
removed out of the Country; when these were dismissed, they would pay to none
but to the people of their own Country, and only for the guard of strong
places, and those not to depend of the Kings Ministers. The King endured all,
knowing that every little distaste would make them set on foot the pretense of
Religion, and expected until the heat were extinguished; which he did the
rather, because it was discovered that the seeds of the new opinions in Spain
were not dead, but only covered for fear, and that in Sauoy there were more
heretics besides the old Waldenses.

But the Court of Rome was grieved most of all, that the Pope having, by his
nephew Marcus Altemps, who afterward was Cardinal, persuaded the King of
Bohemia to be a good Catholic, with many promises of honors and profits,
intimating the succession of the Empire, which he would hardly obtain in case
he should do otherwise, was answered by the King, that he The answer of
Maximilian to ye Popes nephew, concerning his Religion.
thanked his Holiness, but that his souls health was more dear to him, then
all the things of the world, which answer they said in Rome, was a Lutheran
form of speech, and signified an alienation from the obedience of that Sea,
and they began to discourse what would happen after the Emperors death. While
these accidents troubled the Popes mind, news was The Popes Subjects of
Auignion rebel against him.
brought him, that the Hugonots his Subjects in the territory of Auignion were
assembled, and disputed whether they might take Arms against the Pope their
temporal Lord, and resolved they might, because his succession was not lawful,
as well because that Country was not justly taken from Raimondus, Count of
Toulouse, as also for that the Ecclesiastiques cannot, by the commandment of
Christ, possess any temporal Dominion: and resolving to rebel, by the means of
Alexander Guilotimus, a lawyer, put themselves under the protection of Charles
de Montbrun, who was in Arms for Religion, and was much followed in Dolphinie.
Charles, entering the territory with three thousand foot, made himself Lord of
the whole Country, with much joy of the inhabitants. James Maria, Bishop of
Viuiers, Vice-Legat of Auignion, made opposition, and very hardly kept the
City. The Pope was much afflicted herewith, not so much for the loss of the
Country, as for the cause, which, being taken for an example, would touch the
very root of the Papacy. Therefore he sent Cardinal Farne^e, who was Legate,
to defend the City. But the danger was moderated, because Cardinal Tornon
(whose Need Charles had But all danger was taken away by means of Cardinal
Tornon.
married) who was then not far from that place, as he was going to the
Court, made him desist, and go to Geneua, by promising restitution of his
goods, confiscated for rebellion, and to be recalled shortly, with liberty of
conscience, if he would go out of France. So the Popes territory, deprived of
that protection, did remain in subjection, but full of suspicions, and ready
to embrace every nouitie.

The Protestants still increasing in France, and which was of more importance,
the dissentions and suspicions between the Grandies, the 21. of August 1560.
the King called a very great assembly at Fountainbleau, in which having 1560.
The French King calls an assembly at Fountainbleau.
briefly exhorted, to set down what was fit for his service, the necessities
of the Kingdom were declared by the Chancellor, which he compared to a man
sick of an unknown disease. Afterward Jasper Colignie gave the King some
petitions, which he said were delivered to him, by a multitude of people, when
he was in Normandy, unto whom he could not deny this favor, to present them
to his Majesty. The sum of them was; that the faithful Christians,
dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, did pray his Majesty to look on them
with a favorable eye; that they desired nothing but a moderation of the cruel
punishments, until their cause were heard; and that they might make public
profession of their Religion, to avoid suspicion by private assemblies. Then
John Monluc, Bishop of Valence, having declared the In which the opinions were
diverse.
infirmities of the Kingdom, and commended the chastising of the feditious,
said that the cause of the evil remained, yea still grew worse, so long as
religion might be taken for a pretense; against which, provision had not been
formerly made, because the Popes had no other aim, but to hold the Princes in
war; and the Princes, thinking to suppress the evil with punishments, have
not attained the wished end, nor the Magistrates and Bishops justly performed
their duty. The principal remedy was to fly unto GOD, to assemble godly
men out of the whole Kingdom, to find a way to root out the vices of the
Clergy, to forbid infamous and immodest songs, and in stead of them to command
the singing of Psalms, and holy hymns, in the vulgar tongue; and if the
common interpretation which goes about be not good, to take away the errors,
suffering that which is good to be used by all. Another remedy was, the
General Council, always used to compose such differences; that he could not
see how the Popes conscience could be quiet one moment, in regard so many
souls did perish every day; saying, that if a General Council could not be
obtained, they were to assemble a National, by the example of Charles the
Great, and Lewis the Deboneere; that they did grievously err who troubled the
public quiet with arms, upon pretense of Religion, a thing always abhorred
by antiquity; that their error was as great, who condemned to death those
that adhered 1560 PIUS 4. FERDINAND. ELTZABETH. FRANCIS. 2.
to the new doctrine, only for the opinion of piety; who, dying constantly,
and contemning the loss of their goods, stir up the minds or the multitude,
and make them desirous to know what faith that is, for which they endure so
great punishments.

Charles Marillac Bishop of Vienna, spoke in the same manner; commending the
General Council, but adding, that it might sooner be desired then hoped for,
considering the difficulties which do usually arise in such a business,
wherein Charles the 5. having taken great pains, has ever been deluded by the
Popes. Besides, the disease of France is so sharp, that there is no time to
call a Physician from far. Therefore they were to call a National Council,
as had been used from the time of Clodoue until Charles the Great, and
afterward until Charles the seventh, sometimes of the whole kingdom, and
sometimes of part: that now, the disease being urgent, they were to expect no
longer, nor to hold any esteem of the impediments which the Pope did
interpose; in the mean while that the Prelates ought to reside, and that the
Italians, who have a third part of the Benefices, were not to be suffered to
enjoy the fruits in their absence; to take away all Simonie, and ordain, as
was done in the Anciran Council, that alms should not be given in times of
administering the Sacraments; that the Cardinals and Prelates, deputed by Paul
the third, gave the same counsel, that Paul the fourth thought it necessary,
though afterward he gave himself to luxury and war, that if this were not
done, there was danger to see the prophecy of Bernard verified, That CHRIST
would descend from heaven to whippe the Priests out of the Temple, as he had
the Merchants. Then he spoke of the remedies for the other maladies of the
Kingdom. Colignl, when it was his turn to speak, said, that requiring those
who gave him the petitions to subscribe them, he was answered, that 5000. men
would subscribe, if there were occasion.

Francis of Guise, concerning the point of Religion, said, he referred
himself to the judgment of learned men, but protested that no Council should
have so great authority with him, as to make him decline one jot from the old
belief. The Cardinal of Loraine, having spoken of other particulars,
descending to that of Religion, said, that the petitions presented were most
proud, and that to grant the Orators public exercise, were to approve their
doctrine; that it was a clear case, that the greater part used Religion for a
pretense; and therefore his opinion was, they should be proceeded against with
more severity, mitigating the punishment of those who assemble without Arms,
only for Religion, instructing and admonishing them; and to this purpose to
cause the Prelates to reside, hoping that by these remedies, all will be
provided for, without either General or National Council. The voices being
not uniform, a Decree was made, the 27. of that month, that there should be
an assembly of the States at Meaux, the tenth of December, and, if the General
Council shall not be called suddenly, as the Pope has made show, the Bishops
shall assemble the 13. of January to treat The Decree of this Assembly.
of celebrating a National: in the mean while the punishments for cause of
Religion were suspended, except against those who took Arms.

The Pope, informed of the resolution of the assembly of Fountainbleau, wrote
to Cardinal Tornon to hinder the meeting of the Bishops, and, if he could not
return to Rome. And the three and twentieth of September he called the
Ambassadors, and told them the neceseitie of the sudden celebration of a
general Council, in regard of the determination of the Frenchmen, to call a
National; which though he had given order to Cardinal Tornon to hinder, yet
he did not hope it could be done. But he saw Causes the Pope to make show
that he is resolved to call the Council suddenly.
a necessity to celebrate the general Council, that it might not be said
that the Nationals were called, for want of it. Therefore that he must needs
open the Council of Trent, taking away the suspension; that the place was most
fit, being between Germany and Italy, though others propose Spire, Triers,
and other places, which he would accept if they were secure; being ready to
go to Constantinople, if he might with safety; that one could not trust
those who want faith; that no Catholic could be secure in those places, no
not the Emperor himself; that, if they refuse Trent, they may find places in
the Dukedom of Milan, the Kingdom of Naples, in the State of Venice, of the
Duke of Sauoy, or Florence. Concerning the reuocation of the things already
decided, it was not to be mentioned, that he would neither revoke nor
confirm them, but refer all to the Council, which, with the assistance of
the holy Spirit, will determine whatsoever it shall please God. He did much
ruminate upon the National Council of France, saving that Germany would
follow the example, and that some stirs would be raised in Italy, if order
were not taken; that they would submit the Papacy to the Council, and
whatsoever belongs to it. But his resolution was this: Pro fide and religione
volumus mori: Desiring the Ambassadors to speak their opinion, the Emperors
Ambassador said, it was better to take time, in regard the Emperors affairs
would not permit him to consent. The Pope seeming to be angry, the Ambassador
added, that it was good first to win the minds of the Princes of Germany.
The Pope answered more angerly, that there Wherein he is contradicted by the
Emperors Ambassador only.
was now no time to do it; and the Ambassador replying, that he feared that
by this means the heretics would be incited against Italy, the Pope said
aloud, that GOD would not abandon his own cause, and that he should be
assisted by the Catholic Princes, with men and money, for his defense. The
Spanish Ambassador commended the Popes purpose, and said that his King would
not fail to favor him, and that to this end he had already sent Antonio di
Toledo into France. The Ambassadors of Portugal, Venice, and others offered
the favor and assistance of their Princes, and in the end, the Pope gave them
order to signify his intention, and so dismissed them.

Afterward he received answer from Cardinal Tornon, that, having tried all
means, he was not able to remove the King, nor any of his Council, nor
could hope for any better success hereafter, yea, that he saw all things to
wax worse. The King of Spain, having sent to the Pope the final answer
given to Toledo, wrote withal, that the French King excused himself, that,
without a National Council, he could not remedy the disorders of his
kingdom, and that it was no marvel, if, to withstand inconveniences, Princes
do that alone, which they should do together with the Pope. This letter
troubled his Holiness thinking he did infer that he might do the same
also himself in Flanders. It was afterward discovered that the Popes purpose
was, if he could not absolutely avoid the Council, to defer it at the
least, until he had set in order his domestical affairs. For, being to hold
a Synod, it was necessary to give a good example in the mean space, and spend
excessiuely in maintaining poor Prelates, and officers, and The Popes secret
purpose was to avoid, or deserre the Council.
other things, necessary for the Synod, which would consume all the revenues;
and the business it self also would take up all his time, so that he could
not take care of his house. But he resolved, though against his will, not to
defer the Convocation any longer. Whereupon the twentieth of But makes a
contrary resolution against his will.
October he held a Congregation of Cardinals, in which he gave them an
account of the answer of the French King to Toledo, of the King of Spain his
letter to him, and of the negotiation of the Cardinal Tornon; adding a new
advertisement sent him out of France, that although the general Council were
opened, they would not go thither, if the Protestants did not consent to
receive it. These things put them in a great confusion, and all feared, that
though the general Council should proceed, yet France would And is much
troubled with. the occurrences of Trance.
make the National, whence, by consequence, an alienation from the obedience
of the Apostolic Sea would arise, and an example to the residue of
Christendom to do the like, either with, or without the consent of their
Princes.

Some thought much of the Protestation made to the Cardinal of Trent, that he
should not be too liberal in offering that City, but remember that the
Emperor is Lord of it, without whose consent he neither can, nor ought to
dispose of it in such a business; who had declared himself already, that, by
all means he would first make a Diet. They were also much troubled with that
which D. Antenio di Toledo wrote, that all the Grandies, yea, the Bishops
themselves did favor the new opinions, to settle and augment their own
estates. Notwithstanding all this, all the Cardinals, except the Cardinal of
Ferrara, were of opinion to open the Council, remoouing the suspension. The
Pope said the Council should begin at Saint Martins tide; and considering the
imminent dangers, and the hopes to overcome them, he His comfort is, that the
loss will be greater to the French King then to the Apostolic Sea.
resolved himself, and did comfort also the Cardinals and his other dependants
with it, that the loss would be great to France, and little to him. For the
Apostolic Sea receives yearly out of that Kingdom but five and twenty
thousand crowns, but on the other side, the Kings authority being great,
granted by the Popes, to dispose of Benefices, he would loose it all, in
regard the Popes authority being taken away, the Pragmatike would take place,
and the Bishops would be elected by the Canons, the Abbats by the Monasteries,
and the King bereaved of all this. Therefore he was sorry for nothing but for
the loss of so many souls. But if GOD would correct them for their faults and
infidelity, he could not help it.

In the beginning of November Letters came to Rome from the Emperor; The
Emperor writes to the Pope against the commuation of the old Council, and so
the convocation of a new.
in which he said, though in general terms, that, concerning the Council,
he would do, for his own person, whatsoever the Pope pleased; but added,
that, to hold a Council out of Germany, or to continue that of Trent, by
taking away the suspension, would do no good, but raise a greater hatred in
the Protestants, with danger that they would endeavor to hinder it with Arms;
in which kind he had heard of diverse treaties: but, making a new Council,
there was hope to persuade them to go thither. This caused variety of opinions
amongst the Cardinals, it being plain, that, if there were not a continuation
of the Council of Trent, all the things already determined would be vain and
void, having never been confirmed by any Pope. This was proposed in
Congregation by his Holiness, whereof they consulted Wherein the Cardinals are
divided in opinion.
and spoke much, without giving of voices; which being demanded in another
Congregation, Carpi showed at large, that it was necessary to continue the
Council, remoouing the suspension only, and was followed by Cesis and Pisano.
But the Cardinal of Trent, who was next, said, that in a matter where they
were to treat de summa rerum, full of so many difficulties, it was better to
think a little more on it. And this opinion was followed by all the other
Cardinals. And, fitly, the next evening a Currier came in haste, to Rome out of
France, with protestations from the King, that, if the general The
protestation of the French King sent to Rome.
Council were not called, he could no longer defer the National: and that
they were not to think of Trent, or any place in Italy, in regard the
Council having been desired so many years for the necessities of Germany, and
now the danger of France being added, it was meet to hold it in a convenient
place for both the nations: otherwise it would be in vain, if the Germans
and Frenchmen went not thither, adding, that if any place in France were
chosen, it should be most secure. In the end the Pope thought not fit to delay
it any more, but the fifteenth of November resolved in the Consistory to make,
the next Sunday, a Procession, in sackecloth and ashes, giving A Procession and
Iubelie for the determination to celebrate the Council.
a Iubelie, and singing the Mass of the holy Ghost, for the determination made
to celebrate the Council in Trent; concluding that if, after it was assembled,
it seemed commodious to translate it to another place, he would do it, and
go himself also in person, so that it were secure. He added, that he could
find Arms to use, if any went about to infringe the things determined, and
began to consider of the tenor of the Bull. Every day a Congregation A great
question in Rome whether the continuation should plainly be declared.
was held, to resolve whether they should plainly declare the continuation,
taking away the suspension (as he desired) that the things determined might not
be disputed on again, or examined. The Imperialists, and French men labored
much with the Pope and the Deputies, that it might be called a new Council,
that the Dutch and Frenchmen might go thither, saying, they might resolve in
it, that the things already handled might not be handled again, otherwise it
were in vain to speak of a Council to reduce the Protestants, giving them
occasion at the first to refuse it, and to say they could not submit themselves
to those who have condemned them before they were heard. On the contrary, the
Spaniards and Duke of Florence, who was then in Rome, labored that the
suspension only might be removed, and a continuation declared. The Pope and
deputies took a middle way hoping both parties would be satisfied. A Iubelie
was published and sent into all places, and the 24. day the Pope, with the
College of Cardinals, and all the Court, went on foot, with a solemn
Procession, from S. Peter's Church to Minerua, in which there was great
confusion. For the Ambassadors who were wont to go before the Cross,
perceiving that the BB. did follow, and after them the Duke of Florence between
2. minor Cardinals, they would have that place also. Whereupon there arose a
disorder; for co^posing whereof, after some contestation, the Pope gave them
place between himself and the Cardinals who went before him.

The 29. day the Convocation of the Council was published in the Consistory,
the Bull whereof was entitled, of the Intimation of the Council of Trent, the
Latin word was Indictionis. And it was so printed in many places, though
afterward when the whole body of the Council was printed, the word,
Celebrationis, was used. The tenor of the Bull was;

That the Pope, from the beginning of his assumption, did apply his mind The
Bull of the intimation of the Council.
to the rooting out of heresies, extinction of divisions, and amendment of
manners; for remedy whereof he resolved to celebrate a general Council, that
Paul the third, and Julius had assembled it before, but could not finish it;
and relating all the occurrences under those Popes, ascribes the success to
diverse impediments, promoted by the enemy of mankind, at the least, to defer
so great a benefit of the Church, which he could not absolutely hinder;
saying, that in the mean while the heresies and divisions were multiplied. But
it having pleased GOD to give peace to Christian Kings and Princes, he
conceived hope to put an end to the evils of the Church, by means of the
Council, which he would not defer any longer, that hee-might take away
schism, and heresies, reform manners, and preserve peace amongst Christians.
Therefore, by the counsel of the Cardinals, and advice of Ferdinand, Emperor
elected, and other Kings and Princes, whom he has found ready to help
forward the celebration, by the authority of GOD, and of the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, he does intimate a general Council, in the City of Trent,
to begin at Easter, remoouing all suspension whatsoever, exhorting, and
commanding, under the canonical punishments, all Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and others, who have a deciding voice by law, privilege, or
ancient custom, not being lawfully hindered, to be there before that day;
admonishing those also in the same manner, who have, or may have any interest
there; praying the Emperor, Kings, and Princes; to send their Proctors, if
they cannot be personally present; and to cause their Prelates to perform
their duty without excuse or delay, and to make the passage free and secure,
for them and their company, as himself will do within his Territories, having
no other end in celebrating the Council, but the honor of GOD, the reducing
of the dispersed sheep; and the perpetual peace of Christendom; ordaining
that the Bull should be published in Rome: and that by virtue thereof after the
end of two months, it shall bind all that are comprehended, as if it had been
personally intimated unto them.

The Pope thought he had satisfied himself, those who would have a Did not
please either party.
new Council intimated, and those who desired a continuation of the old. But
as middle counsels do usually displease both parties, so the Pope gave
satisfaction to none, as shall be declared. Presently after the publication of
the Bull the Pope sent Nicheto into France with it, with commission, if the
form did not please, to say, that they should not except against the word
Continuare, because it did not hinder them to speak again of the things
already proposed. He sent it also to the Emperor, and King of Spain. He sent
likewise Zacharias Delphinus, Bishop of Liesina, to the Princes of high
Germany, and Ioannes Franciscus Comendone, Bishop of Zante, to those of Low
Germany, with letters to them all, and with order, first to receive instruction
from the Emperor how to treat with them, and then to execute their embassage.
He sent also the Abbat Martinengo to the Queen of England, to inuit her and
her Bishops to the Council, being persuaded so to do by the forenamed Edward
Cerne, who promised him that his Nuncio should be received The Queen of
England is invited to the Council.
by one half of the Kingdom, by the Queens consent. And although the Pope
was put in mind to send Nuncij into England, and to Princes elsewhere, who do
profess open separation from the Sea of Rome, would be a disreputation to him,
yet he answered he would humble himself to heresy, in regard whatsoever was
done to gain souls to CHRIST, did beseem that Sea. For the same reason also
he sent Canobius into Polonia, with desseigne to make him to go into Moscouia,
to inuit that Prince and Nation to the Council, though they have never
acknowledged the Pope of Rome.

Afterward he returned to speak of the Council in Consistory, desiring to be
informed of the learned men, of good life and opinion, of diverse. Provinces,
fit to dispute and persuade the truth, saying he purposed to call many of
them; promising that, after he had used all possible diligence to make all
Christians come thither, and to unite them in Religion, though some, or many,
refused to come, he would not forbear to proceed. Yet he was troubled,
because the Protestants of Germany, unto whom a great part of France was
united, would deny to come, or would demand exorbitant things, which he could
not grant them, and doubted they might be able to disturb the Council with
Arms. Neither did he hope to be assisted by the Emperor against them, in
regard of his small forces. He confessed that the dangers were great, and the
remedies small, and was perplexed and troubled in mind. The Bull of the Council
going through Germany, fell into Protestants hands, assembled at the marriage of
the Duke of Salzemburg, who did intimate a Diet in Namburg, to begin the
twentieth of January.

Vergerius wrote a book against this Bull, in which, after a great inuectiue
Vergerius writes a book against the Bull.
against the pomp, luxury, and ambition of the Court, he said, that the
Council was called by the Pope, not to establish the doctrine of CHRIST, but
the servitude and oppression of poor souls; that none were called, but those
who were bound by oath to the Pope, so that not only all were excluded who are
separated from the Church of Rome, but also men of the greatest understanding
amongst themselves, taking away all liberty, in which only there was hope of
agreement.

At this time news came to Rome, that the French King had imprisoned The
Prince of Conde is imprisoned, and a guard is set upon ye King of Navarre.
the Prince of Conde, and set a guard upon the King of Nauare; which pleased
the Pope much, as a thing which might wholly disturb the National Council.
And his hope was the stronger that he should receive no distaste, because
advice came that the King was very sick, and in danger to die, which hindered
the assembly of the States in Meaux. And, in the end, there was great
alteration. For Francis, the French King, dying the fifth of December, and
Charles the ninth, of the age of ten years, succeeding, in regard of his
minority, The French King dies, and Charles the 9. succeeds.
the government fell principally upon the King of Navarre, as first Prince of
the Blood. The Queen in other adhered to him; to maintain called continue 1560
PIUS 4. FERDINAND. ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. The King of Nauar and Q. mother
govern France (...) Which makes the Protestants more confident.
the authority which she had taken in the life time of her other (...); and
Nauar was content to participate with(...), the better to maintain his own.
He did almost openly favor the new religion, and was wholly governed by the
counsel of Jasper Coligni, the Admiral, who did make profession of it; so
that the Protestants were more confident to obtain liberty of religion, as
they desired. They assembled almost publicly, with much discontent and
indignation of the people, and danger of section. Hereupon the Kings mother,
and the chief of the Counsel resolved to hold the States in Orliens, and
began to do it the 13. of December.

Amongst other things, there proposed for the benefit of the Kingdom, The
States are held in Orliens Where the Chancellor begins to speak.
the Chancellor said, that religion is the most potent weapon, overcomes all
affections, and charity, and is the forest bond of humane society; that
Kingdoms are more bounded and more divided by Religion, then by the confines
themselves; that he that is moved with Religion, contemns wife, children, and
kindred. If there be difference of religion in the same family, the father
agrees not with his sons, nor the brothers among themselves, nor the husband
with the wife. To remedy these disorders, there is need of a Council, which
the Pope has promised: but in the mean while, it is not to be tolerated, that
every one should shape out his own religion, and bring in new Rites at his
pleasure, and so trouble the public pence. If the Council fail by the Popes
default, the King will make provision another way: but it was necessary that
every one should amend himself, because a good life is a vehement orator to
persuade; that the names of Lutheranes, Hugonots, and Papists, no less
factious then those of the Guelphes and Ghibilines, were to be taken away, and
Arms to be taken against those who cover their avarice, ambition, and desire
of innovation, with the (...) of religion. John Angelo, advocate in the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, spoke for the third John Angelo speaks for the third
Order.
Order: he spoke much against the bad manners, and discipline of the Clergy,
noting their ignorance, avarice, and luxury, as causes of all the evils; and
did much discourse upon them: in the end, he demanded that all might be
redressed by a sudden celebration of the Council. James, Earl of Rochfort,
James, Earl of Rochfort, speaks for the Nobility.
spoke for the Nobility; who, amongst other things, said that all the evil
did arise from the large donations, made by the King and other Grandies, to the
Churches, especially of jurisdictions; a thing much inconvenient, that he that
ought to give himself wholly to prayer and preaching, should exercise power
over the lives and goods of the Kings subjects; and that it was necessary to
remedy these inconveniences. And, in the end, he gave a petition, demanding
in the name of the Nobility, to have public Churches for their religion.
Iacobus Quintinus a Burgundian, spoke for the Clergy. He said, Iacobus
Quintinus speaks for the Clergy.
the States were assembled to provide for the necessities of the Kingdom, not
to amend the Church, which cannot err, which is without blemish or wrinkle,
and will always remain without corruption, though the discipline, in some
small part, may need reformation. Therefore those are not to be hearkened
unto, who, renewing the Sects, long since buried, demand Churches apart from
the Catholics, but are to be punished as heretics, and do not deserve
that the King should hear them, who ought to force all his Subjects, to
believe and live according to the form prescribed by the 1561 PIUS 4.
FERDINAND ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9.
Church, that those who have forsaken the Kingdom for Religion, ought not to
be suffered to return, that those that are infected with here^i^, ought to be
proceeded against capitally; that the Ecclesiastical discipline will easily be
reformed, if the Clergy be fried from paimene of T^^lls, and elections
restored to the Chapters, it being observed, that, in the year 1517 wh^^^by
the Concordate, the nomination of Ecclesiastical dignities was given to the
The opinions of Luther began, when the Concordate was made.
King, the heresies of Luther began, who was followed by Zainglius and others
In the end, he demanded that all immunities and privileges of the Clergy
should be confirmed, and all grieuances removed.

The King ordained that the Prelates should put themselves in order to go to
the Council, which was intimated at Trent; commanded that all that The
Ordinations of the King.
were in prison for Religion, should be set at liberty, their Processes (...)
the void, their offenses, committed until that time, pardoned, and their goods
restored He constituted a capital punishment, for those who gave offense for
matter of Religion either in words or deeds. He admonished all to follow the
rites used in the Church, without making any innovation. The residue was
deferred until May next, when the petition presented by Rotchfort, was to be
considered of.

The Pope, understanding of the death of King Francis, together with the advice
of the Cardinal Tornon, that the Queen was joined with Nauar, was troubled in
mind, fearing the raines would be more given to the Protestants. Therefore he
sent Lorenzo Leutio, Bishop of Eermo, and caused the King of Spain to send Io
Manriques, to condele with the Queen; for the death of her son, and to pray
her to be careful of the Religion in which The Pope sends a Nu^cto to the
Q. mother, and the King of Spain an ambassador.
she was borne and bred, to remember the great benefits received from the
Apostolic Sea, by the means of Clement, and not to suffer schism to arise,
by too much license, nor to seek remedies elsewhere for the evils present and
imminent, but from the Church of Rome; for which end the Council was
intimated; that in the mean space, she would take care that the Kingdom
should not swerve from true piety, and that no prejudice should be done to the
Council intimated.

The year 1560 ended thus, leaving some seeds, from whence greater troubles
did spring. The next year Manriques came into France, and delivered 1561
his Embassage: Who having received from the Queen a piou^ and favorable
answer concerning Religion and the Council, and speaking again of the same
subject, as occasion was offered, did continually exhort her to proceed with
punishments against the Hugonots, adding threats also to his exhortations.
Navarre, contrary to all the Spanish desseignes, did oppose, The negotiation of
the Spanish Ambassador.
in regard of his pre^ensions to the Kingdom of Navarre. Manriques did combine
with the house of Guise, and others who had the same desseigne, to make him
favor the Catholics, the Pope, and the Council, to propose unto him the
patronage of the Catholic Religion in France, and that he would be divorced
from his wife, Joan of Alibert, Queen of Navarre, by inheritance, and would
retain right to the Kingdom by the Popes authority, of which she should be
deprived for heresy by his Holiness, and would take to wife Mary Queen of
Scots, by whom he should have the Kingdom of England, Elizabeth being
deprived by the Pope^ For effecting all this, the Guisards promised him the
Popes authority, and the forces of the King of Spain, who for Navarre, would
give him the Kingdom of (...) nia. These things they continually represented
unto him in (...) ^ormes; even until his death.

In Germany, the Princes of the Augustan Confession, assembled (...) The (...)
(...) (...) (...) to (...) concerning the Council.
especially in regard of the Council, being ashamed that their religion should
be esteemed a confusion for the variety of doctrines amongst the^ (...)
propose that they might first agree in one, and then resolve whether they ought
refuse refuse or accept the Synod. Concerning the first (...), (...) said,
that the difference was not essential, and that the Papists (...) (...)
substantially differ, dissenting even in the very foundations of Religion. They
laid the Augustan Confession was to be the ground of their doctrine; and if
they differed in any point not contained therein, it would be of small (...)
But there being diverse Copies of that Confession, which differed in regard of
diverse additions made in diverse of them, some approouing one, and some another,
many thought they ought to take that only which was presented to Charles in
the year 1530. Where unto (...) of the Pulatinate did not consent, except it
were declared, in a Proheme made unto it, that the other edition did agree with
it. The Duke of Saxony answered; they could not stop the eyes and ears of the
world, that they should not see and hear their differences, and that, if they
would make show of union, where they were at variance they should be convinced
of vanity and lying; and, after many contentions, they remained without
agreement in that point. For the Council, some thought fit to refuse it
absolutely, and others were of opinion, to send Ambassadors to make offer that
they would go to a free and Christian Council and to propose the exceptions,
of the suspicion of the Indges, of the inconueniencie of that place, and
others, often times proposed, to show they did not refuse the authority of a
lawful Council, and that the union of the Church was not hindered by them,
but by the ambition of the Coure of Rome: which would make the Germane
Catholics more favorable (...) them. And they concluded to make petition to
the Emperor in this form.

The two Nuncij, arriving in Austria at the same time, found the Emperor To
which place ye Popes two Nuncij are sent by the Emperor with three Ambasdors of
his own.
at Vienna, who gave them counsel to go both immediately to N^umburg, in
Saxenie, where the Protestants were assembled in a Diet, and to treat as
modestly with them as was possible, taking care not to exasperate or offend
them. For, if they went to each of them into their own States, they would be
posted from one to another, and would never have any certain answer, and when
they had both performed this office jointly, they might divide themselves, and
god apart to whom they were sent. He put them in mind of the Conditions with
which the Protestants did formerly condescend to the Council, that, if mention
were made thereof again, they might be prepared to reply, in the Popes name,
what they thought fit. The Emperor sent three Ambassadors of his own to go
with them to the Assembly, and the King of Bohemia did recommend them to the
Duke of Saxony, that they might go securely. The Emperors Ambassadors,
having had audience at the Diet, exhorted the Princes to assist in the
Council, and to put an end to the (...) of Germany. The Princes, after they
had consulted together; thanked Caser, and concerning the Council, said they
would not refuse it, if the word of GOD were to beiudge, if the BB. were
released of their oaths, made to the Pope and the Sea of Rome, and if the
Protestant Theologi^es might have (...) But seeing that the Pope admits no
Bishops to be in the Council but such as are sworn unto him, against which
they The Protestants answer to the (...) Ambassdor.
have always protested, they could hardly agree unto it; that they were
willing presently to represent so much to the Emperor with all respect,
deferring their absolute answer until the Princes, then absent, were
informed. Afterward the Popes Nuncij were brought in; who, having commended
the Popes (...) and Religion, in reviving the Council, to exti^pate (...), in
regard there are as many Religions and Gospels, as there are Doctors, said he
had sent ^^inuite them, to help forward so laudable an enterprise, promising
that all should be handled with Christian Charity, and that their voices shall
be free^. They presented also the Popes Briefes, written to each of them. The
next day all the Briefes, sealed as before, were sent back, and the Nuntij
called And to the Popes Nuntij
to receive an answer; which was to this effect: That they did not acknowledge
any jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome; that there was no cause to reveal
their pleasure concerning the Council to him, who had no power either to call
or hold it; that they had delivered their mind and determination to the
Emperor, their Lord; that to the Nuncij, who were nobly descended, in a
Commonwealth which they loved, they offered all good office, The Protestants
do intimate another assembly, to begin in April.
and would do more if they had not come from the Pope. Thus they did end the
assembly; and did intimate another, to begin in April to finish the (...) of
v^iting themselves together.

The Nuncio Delphinus, delivered his Embassage in diverse Cities as he returned.
The negotiation of Delphinus.
The Senate of Noremberg answered, that they would not forsake the Augustan
Confession, not accept of the Council, as not having the conditions required
by the Protestants. The Senates of Argentine, Francfort, Ausburg, and Vlma,
answered in the same manner. Comendone parting from the Of Comendone.
Diet, went to Lubec, from whence he sent to Frederic, King of Denmark, to
demand his Safe conduct to come to him, to deliver to him the Popes Embassage,
and, inuit him to favor the Council. He answered, that neither Christian,
his father, nor himself had ever any thing to do with the Pope, and therefore
he cared not to receive any Embassage from him. Both the Nuncij had a
favorable answer from the Prelates; Princes, and Cities Catholic, with
promise of devotion to the Pope, but, concerning the Council, they said they
were to treat with the Emperor, it being necessary to consult together, for
fear of the Lutherans. Ierolamus Martinengo, sent to Of Martinengo.
the Queen of England for the same cause, being in Flanders, received
commandment from her not to pass the Sea; and although the King of Spain and
Duke of Alua did make earnest entreaty that he might be admitted, and heard,
commending the cause of that Legation, that is, the union of all the Christian
Church in a general Council, yet the Queen did persevere in her first
resolution, answering that she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose
authority was excluded out of England, by consent of Parliament. Canobius, when
he had delivered his Embassage to the King of Polonia, by whom he was well
received, could not go into Moscouia, by reason of the war between that
Prince and the King. But going into Prussia, he was answered by that Duke,
that he was of the Augustan Confession, and could not consent to a Popish
Council. The Suisses, assembled in a Diet at Bada, heard the Popes Nuncio,
and, receiving the Brief, one of the Burgomasters of Zuric And of Canobius.
did kiss it. The Pope, advertised hereof, could not choose but tell it to all
the Ambassadors residing with him, with much joy. But, having consulted The
Pope rejoices that his Bull was kissed by a Burgomaster of Zuric.
of the business concerning the Council, the Catholics answered, that they
would send thither, and the Euangeliques that they would not accept of it.

The negotiation of the Nuncij in Neumburg being published in Rome, there was
a whispering against the Pope, for sending Ministers to the Diet of the
Protestants: wherein he excused himself, that it was not by his order, but by
the Emperors, to whose direction he did defer the Nuncij; for which he did
not blame him, in regard he did not care for nice points of honor, but only
for doing of good. The Emperor, having consulted The Emperor excepteth against
the Bull of the Council.
with his Divines concerning the Bull of the Council, wrote to the Pope, that
as Ferdinand, he could totally adhere to the will of his Holiness, and be
content with any form of the Bull, and endeavor that all Germany should
submit themselves to him; but as Emperor he could say nothing, until he was
informed what was done by the Nuncij, and his Ambassadors, who went to the
Diet of the Protestants in Neumburg. He was almost secure, that if the Pope
had not declared, that the convocation of the Council was not a continuation,
but a new Indiction, or that the points already decided might be reuiewed, and
handled again, the Bull would have been accepted. The French King wrote to his
Ambassador in Rome the last of January, And so does the French King.
that there were some things to be reformed in the Bull before he could
receive it. For although the word Indictio, was used in the title, yet in the
body of it there were words which did signify the remoouing of the suspensions
of the Council already begun, which Germany suspecting, would undoubtedly
require an interpretation of them: which would draw the Council in length, and
not giving the Emperor satisfaction, and them, would cause so many divisions
in Christendom, and so many difficulties, that it would be a Council in show
only, without fruit or profit. That, for his part he was pleased that Trent
should be the place, nor made any difference whether it were a new Indiction,
or a continuation, in regard his Holiness was willing, as he was told by
Nicheto, that the determinations already made may be disputed, and examined
again: wherein, as the real performance would give satisfaction to all, so to
take away fear, and secure every one, it was necessary to declare so much
before hand, taking care to satisfy the Emperor by all means, without whom
no good success of the Council could be hoped for. He said, that if all
this were not performed, he would, as the purpose of his brother was, call a
National Council, which was the only remedy for the necessities of his
Kingdom. He gave order to his Ambassador also to complain to his Holiness,
that his brother having procured with such earnest entreaty, the opening of the
Council, yet no honorable mention was particularly made of him in the Bull;
the reason whereof every one knew to be, because he would not name the French
King immediately after the Emperor. Notwithstanding all these respects, the
King, to promote the business of Religion wrote at the same time to the
Prelates of his Kingdom, to prepare themselves to go to the Council, and to
be there at the time of the Convocation: of which letter he sent a copy to
Rome.

The Rope was advertised by his Nuncio, that the King spoke against the To whom
the Pope answers.
Bull, by instigation of the Cardinal of Loraine, and, after he heard the
Ambassadors proposition, he answered, That he marvelled that the King, who
does not acknowledge any superior, would subject himself to the discretion
of another Prince, and not referr himself to the Vicar of CHRIST, to whom it
belongs to moderate whatsoever does concern Religion; saying, that his Bull
was approved by all others, and had no need of reformation, and that he was
resolved it should stand as it did. That, for naming the French King, he had
not thought of it, and that the Cardinals, to whom the composition of it was
committed, thought it sufficient to name the Emperor and all Kings in
general; otherwise, naming one in particular, it would have been necessary to
have done the like in all the rest; that himself took care only of the
substance of the Bull, leaving all the rest to the Cardinals. This answer did
not satisfy the Frenchmen, who thought their preeminence was not to be passed
over in general terms, in regard as well of their greatness, as of their
merits toward the Apostolic Sea. In the end, the Pope gave them contentment,
saying he could not have his eye upon all things, but would be careful not to
commit any error hereafter. Yet he made no great account of that kingdom,
seeing that, without any respect of his authority, they intermedled in things
properly belonging to him: as in pardoning heretics, and ordering things
Ecclesiastical, though reserved The Pope does not esteem France.
to himself. For the States assembled in Orleance in January, did ordain that
the Bishops should be elected by the Clergy, with the assistance of the Judges
of the King, twelve of the Nobility, and as many of the people; that no money
should be sent to Rome for Annats; that all Bishops and Curates should reside
personally, upon pain of loosing the fruits of their Benefices; that in every
Cathedral Church a Prebend should be reserved for a Reader in Divinity, and
another for a Schoolmaster, that all Abbats, Abbesses, Priors, and Prioresses
should be subject to the Bishops, notwithstanding any exemption; that nothing
should be exacted for administering the Sacraments, for Burials, or other
public functions; that Prelates should not use censures, but for public
faults and scandals; that women should not make profession to be of any
religious order, before the age of twenty years, nor men before the age of
five and twenty, until which time they might dispose of their goods to whom
they pleased, except to the Monastery; that the Ecclesiastiques should not
receive Legacies, or any thing left unto them or given them by last will. And
other things also were ordained, for better reformation of the Church, and of
the Clergy, which though they were not then published, yet the Nuncio sent
them to the Pope, and those that governed France, thought it sufficient to give
satisfaction in show only, to those that required a reformation, not caring
that any thing should be executed.

But, on the contrary, the Kings Divines in Spain did not approve the Bull,
because it did not plainly say, it was a continuation of the Council already
begun, yea, they thought, though the affectation of ambiguity were manifest,
that it was plainly a new intimation, and some of them held, that The King of
Spain excepteth against the Bull.
it might be drawn from the words of a clear consequence, that the
Determinations made already in Trent, might be reexamined; which they said was
dangerous, would embolden the Protestants, and might cause a new division
amongst the Catholics. The King would not publish or receive the Bull, upon
pretense that the words were ambiguous, and that it ought to be expressed
plainly, that it was a continuation of the Council, and that the things
already determined might not be called into question: but the And is angry
with the ^ope for receiving the Ambassador of the K. of Nauar in the Kings hal.
true cause was, for that the King of Navarre, having sent the Bishop of
Cominges to tender his obedience to the Pope, according to the custom, he
received him in the Kings Hall, and as Ambassador of the King of Navarre,
thinking it prejudicial to his possession of that Kingdom, to which he had
no title but by the excommunication of Julius the second, and because he gave
audience to Monsieur de Cars, who came to entreat him in the same Kings name,
to be a means that the Kingdom might be restored to him, or satisfaction
given him, and had promised his pains herein. The Pope sent the Bishop of
Terracina, expressly, into Spain, to justify and excuse what he For which
two causes the Pope sends a Nunci^ into Spain.
had done in favor of the King of Navarre, and to expound, as it were by
occasion, the meaning of the Bull. To those that were afraid, in regard of the
contrary opinions of so great Princes, he answered, that as a loving father,
he had invited all, but that he esteemed the Protestants as lost, and that
the Catholics of Germany could not adhere to the Council without making a
separation from the others, and raising a war: and if any Catholic Prince
would forsake him, he would proceed by his own authority, as did Julius the
third, without the French King. But he told his inward friends, that he
accounted all these troubles to be indifferent, in regard, not knowing the
issue of them, he might as well hope for a good success, as fear a bad. In
the mean space he saw that he received some benefit by this uncertain
Council, because it served him as a bridle for Prince and Prelate, in
attempting any nouitie, and for a color to deny unpleasing The vnccrtainty of
ye Council did stand the Pope in some stead.
suits, saying that the Council being opened, he ought to proceed warily,
and with respect, and not to be prodigal in bestowing graces and favors: and
when any great difficulty did arise, he did refer it to the Council. Only
he was afraid that the bad affection of the Protestants toward the Church of
Rome, might cause some excursion into Italy, which A difference about
precedence between the Dukes of Florence and of Ferrara.
would be derived wholly upon himself; and he saw an ouerture thereof by a
difference of precedence between the Dukes of Florence and Ferrara, who
descended to uncivil terms. Cosmo Duke of Florence, said he held the place
of the Florentine republique, which was ever preferred before the Dukes of
Ferrara. Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara, pretended that the Dukedom had continued in
the house of his progenitors for many successions, whereas Cosmo was the first
Duke of Florence, whose precedencie could not be maintained by the right of the
Republique, because it was no more in being. This Duke was favored by Francis,
as cousin to Henry the second: and brother in law to those of the house of
Guise. The other grounded himself upon a sentence of Charles the fifth, in his
favor. Alfonso made instance in Germany, that the Emperor, with the
Electors, would be judge of it in a Diet. The Pope thought it dangerous that
the Diet of Germany should give sentence concerning Italy, which did by
consequence import an execution, and danger of Arms. For remedy whereof, he
wrote to both the Dukes, that it belonged only to the Apostolic Sea, and
Vicar of CHRIST to give sentence in such causes, commanding them both to show
him their proofs, and to expect his determination. And to be prepared for all
events, he resolved to fortify the Castle of Rome, and the City Leonina,
commonly called Borgo, and other places in his State, as he thought
convenient, and imposed a tax, of three Iulij, upon every measure of corn
called a Rubie, throughout his whole Territory. And not to give cause of
jealousy to Princes, he called the Ambassadors of the Emperor, Spain,
Portugal, and Venice, to whom he imparted his determination, and his reasons,
commanding them to advertise their Princes of it: and said, that the Subsidy
laid upon his Subjects would be but small, less then that which was imposed by
Paul 4. when he commanded the celebration of the Chair of Saint Peter;
because by his imposition, the poor man paid but three Iulij a year, but by
the Feast of Paul 4. did lose five, and that days work.

The time prefixed to begin the Council approaching, the Pope, not to The Pope
appoints Presidents for the Council.
fail in any thing that was to be performed by him, deputed Legate to
preside, Hercules Gonzaga, Cardinal of Mantua, a man eminent, in regard of the
greatness of his house, of his brother Ferandus, and of his own virtue. He
used the Emperor to persuade him to accept, and was confident of his worth and
dexterity. To him he joined Iacobus Puteus, of Nizza, an excellent Lawyer,
who was exercised a long time, first in the Rota, and then in the Signature;
saying that he purposed to make three more, and that; if he could not find
able men in the College, he would create new Cardinals, Divines, and Lawyers,
men of honesty, for this employment. And he called a Congregation of Cardinals
and Prelates, to give order for all things necessary for the beginning of the
Council in Trent, at the time appointed: and letters came very fitly from the
French King; and, in conformity of The French King accepts the Bull.
them, his Ambassador, Mounsiear of Angolesme, did declare unto him, that he
was content with the Council upon any terms, being desirous to see the effect
of it, and that fruit which all Christendom did require. And he sent Mounsieur
de Ramboullet expressly unto him, to make the same request, and to represent
unto him the necessities of France, and to tell him of the instance made unto
him herein, by the States assembled in Orliens; signifying unto him, that, if
this remedy were not quickly applied, he should be constrained to receive a
medicine in his own Kingdom, by an Assembly of his Prelates, in regard there
was no means to compose the differences of Religion, but by a free General
Council, or, in defect thereof, by a National. The Pope answered that none
did desire the Council more then himself, the delay whereof proceeded not from
him, but from the diverse opinions of Princes, for whose satisfaction he had
given such a form to the Bull, as seemed most fit to content them all. They
changed their opinion in France, because, being in as bad a state as might
be, thought that every mutation made elsewhere would better their condition.

Viterbo wrote out of Spain that the King did approve his propositions, and
that, after some consultation with his Prelates, was finally resolved to accept
the Bull, without making any difficulty, and to send his Prelates as And so
does the King of Spain.
soon as the season was fit for travel, and an honorable Embassage, to
assist in the Council. He sent advice also that the Prelates of Portugal
were already parted from their houses, and that the King would send an
Ambassador; but that he had perceived that some of those Prelates had a
purpose, The Pope is troubled with the design of the Portugal Divines.
that the superiority of the Council above the Pope should be defined in the
Synod, which point they had studied, and caused many Divines to do the like.
The Pope was troubled with this advice, and considered what he might look for
when the Prelates were assembled in the Council, and did treat altogether,
who had such high thoughts before they parted from home, and feared that the
King and his Counsel had a finger in it. Yet, as a wise Prince, he
considered, that when the Council was held, not that nouitie only would be
proposed, but many more to the disadvantage of others as well as of himself:
saying that every weight had his counterpoyse, and that of the things that are
attempted, not one in a thousand does take effect.

He was more attentive to the enterprises of the Frenchmen, as being more
imminent, and of persons who are not flegmaticall in resolving, as the
Spaniards are. Therefore he imparted to the Ambassador every advice that came
unto him, and told him in diverse conferences, that they were not to think of
National Councels, assemblies, or Colloquies, in matter of Religion, because
he could not but esteem them all for schismatic; that he prayed the King
not to use those remedies, which would certainly reduce France, not only into
a worse condition, but into the worst of all; that the difficulties of Spain
being removed, the Council should certainly be celebrated, because those
which do continue in Germany are not considerable; that the Catholic
Princes and Bishops will consent and perhaps the Duke of Saxony also, as he
has made show, by separating himself from the others assembled in Neumburg;
that he hoped the Emperor would assist personally, if there were need, as
himself did promise to do, if he thought it fit, wherein he would not
subject himself to the judgment of any but himself.

Easter drawing near, which time was appointed to begin the Council, One of
the Presidents falls sick, and another is put in his place.
and Cardinal Puteus being very sick, he put in his room Friar Ierolamus,
Cardinal Seripando a Divine of much fame, and caused him to depart presently,
and to pass by Mantua, taking with him the other Legate, and to be at Trent
at the time appointed. Notwithstanding which commandment they came not thither
until the third feast of the resurrection, and found there nine Bishops who
were arrived before them. The Pope was diligent to make the Italian Bishops put
themselves in order; and therefore wrote effect all errors to the Viceroy of
Naples, and to his Nuncio there, and caused his Ministers to persuade the
Bishops of the State of Milan, to be ready for their journey to the Council,
as soon as might be. He desired also the State of Venice to send the Bishops
of their Territories in Italy, of Candia, Dalmatia, and Cyprus, with all
possible expedition, and to create Ambassadors, to assist in the Council in
the name of that Republike. The Italian Prelates were not easily moved, because
they knew the beginning could not be before the consent of the The Italian
Prelates are not so hasty to go to the Council as ye Pope would have had them
Emperor did come: which was still prolonged, because the Spaniards and
Frenchmen were expected, before whose arrival in Italy they thought it
superfluous to go to Trent. And many of them, especially the Courtiers, could
not believe but that the Pope did counterfeit. But the truth was that, being
assured he could not avoid the Council, he did desire to see it quickly. He
said he knew what incouenience the prolongation did cause, but knew not what
the celebration might do: and thought that the enemies of his own person, and
of the Apostolic Sea might do him more hurt in the time of the expectation,
then they could do in the Council it self. And being of a resolute nature,
he used the Proverb; It is better to prove the evil once, then always to
fear it.

While these delays were used, the Duke of Sauoy made a composition The Duke
of Sauoy makes (...) composition with the Waldenses of Montsenis.
with the Waldenses of the Valleys of Montsenis. For, having made more then a
years trial to reduce them by punishments, and, after they stood upon their
guard, as has been said, maintained Soldiers against them, for which the Pope
did assist him with money, howsoever they proceeded rather with skirmishes,
then any set war, because of the craggednesse of the Country, yet, at the
last, they came to a formal battle, in which the Duke had a great overthrow,
lost seven thousand men, and slew but fourteen of the enemies: and although
he did often repair his Army, yet he had always the worse. By reason of a
great overthrow.
Therefore considering he did nothing but make his Rebels more warlike,
consume his own Country, and spend his money, he resolved to receive them
into favor, and made an agreement with them, the fifth of June; in which he
pardoned all faults past, gave them liberty of conscience, assigned them
certain places, where they might make their Congregations, in other places
gave them leave to comfort the sick, and do other duties of religion, but
not to preach; gave leave to those that were fled to return again, and
restitution of goods to those that were banished. It was agreed also that the
Duke might send away which of their Pastors he pleased, and that they might
provide themselves of others; that the Roman Religion might be exercised in all
places, but no man enforced to profess it. The Pope was much distasted that an
Italian Prince, assisted by him, and not so potent but that Which gives
distaste to the Pope.
he might still have need of him, should permit heretics to live freely in
his state: and the example did trouble him above all, because it would be
alleged to him by greater Princes, when they would permit another religion.
He made a bitter complaint hereof in the Consistory, comparing the ministers
of the Catholic King with that Duke, who having, at the same time, discovered
three thousand Lutherans, who went out of Cosenza, and retired themselves to
the mountains, to live according to their doctrine, did hang some, burn
others, and put the rest into the Galleys; and he exhorted all the Cardinals
to think of a remedy. But there was great difference between oppressing a
few disarmed persons, far from help, and over coming a great number of
armed men in a place aduantagious for them, with potent succors at their
shoulders. The Duke sent to iustific his cause, and the Pope, not able to
answer his reasons was pacified.

In France, though the Queen and Prelates did desire to satisfy the Pope, in
referring the causes of religion to the Council, yet a congregation of the Who
was pacified by the (...). The Pope is offended with the Congregation of the
Prelates in France.
Prelates was put in order: in which, howsoever the Ambassador assured the
Pope, that nothing should be spoken of doctrine, nor any thing preludiciall to
his authority, but only a course set down how to pay the Kings debts, to
provide against some abuses, and to consult what was to be handled in the
general Council, yet his Holiness was not satisfied, yea was of opinion that
they thought, that to provide against abuses, was to hinder the profits of the
Court, and that to consult of the Council, was to join with the Spaniards
(whereof he had some intelligence) in the point of the supreme power of the
Council, even over the Pope. And, by reason of the dissentions between the
Grandies of the Court, spread also over all the Provinces because every one
sought to increase his faction, there being a great liberty of speaking; the
professors of the new religion were plainly discovered, and protected by the
greatest about the King, with much indignation of the Catholics. Whereupon
there were contentions and discords throughout the whole Kingdom, calling one
another, in scorn, Papists, and Hugonots, the Preachers making the people
tumultuous, and every one having diverse ends. He plainly saw, that if the
Catholic party had not all the same aim, some great inconvenience would
arise; for preventing whereof, and to cross those desseignes, he thought it
necessary to have a Minister there, a man of authority, and not a French man,
who would have more interest in the kingdom, then in the service of the
Apostolic Sea; and resolved to send a Legatethither. And casting his eye upon
all the Cardinals, he made choice Into which Kingdom he sends for Legate
the Cardinal of Ferrara.
of Ferrara in whom all necessary qualities did concur; singular wisdom,
dexterity in negotiations, nobility of birth, being allied to the Royal house
of France, brother in law to the Kings great Aunt, daughter of Lewis the 12,
and so near a cousin to those of Guise, (the Dukes wife being the Cardinals
niece) that they could not choose but favor him, in regard of their neerenesse
in blood. He gave him four particular Commissions; to favor the Catholics,
and oppose the Protestants; to divert the National Synod, and And gives him
four commissions.
assembly of the Prelates; to solicit the going of the Prelates to the
Council; and to cause an abrogation of the constitutions, made in matters
Ecclesiastical.

While the Legate was preparing to go, there fell our an accident which made
the Kings nearest friends fear the Catholics, as much as the Protestants.
For the fourteenth of July, Arthurus Defiderius was apprehended A supplication
sent out of France into Spain.
near to Orleans, who was sent into Spain with a Supplication, written in the
name of the Clergy of France, in which they demanded the assistance of that
King against the Protestants, because they could not be suppressed by a boy
and a woman, with other more secret instructions in cipher, to be imparted to
his Majesty. This man being imprisoned, and interrogated of the confederates,
discovered some, whom it was dangerous to make known: for which cause they
resolved to proceed no further, but condemned him to make honorable
satisfaction, to tear the supplication, and to be perpetual prisoner in the
Monastery of the Carthusians. But many of his confessions being divulged, the
Kings Counsel thought fit to give the other party some satisfaction. Whereupon
the King did prohibit the names of Hugonotes and Papists, ordaining that no
man, under pretense of discovering the Congregations for religion, which were
forbid, should enter with The King makes an ocdination in favor of the
Protestants.
many or few, into another man's house; that those who were in prison for
religion should be set at liberty, and that those which fled, since the time
of Francis the first; might return and repossesse their goods, in case they
would live like Catholics, or, if they would not, might sell them, and go to
another place. The Parliament of Paris did oppose, and said, it was a kind of
grant of liberty of religion, which was never known in France; that the
return of the fugitives would cause great troubles, and that the liberty to
sell their goods, and go to another place was against the laws of the
Kingdom, which do not give leave to carry foorthany great quantity of money.

But notwithstanding all these oppositions, the Edict was executed; so that the
Protestants being increased in number, and making more and greater assemblies
then they were wont, the King, with the Queen and Princes, went into the
Parliament to provide a remedy, by the mature counsel of men skillful in
matters of State and Justice. The Chancellor said, they were not to speak of
Religion, but of making provision against daily tumults, which did arise by the
means of it; lest being made licontious, by raising of stirs, they might lay
aside all obedience to the King. There were three opinions. 1. To suspend all
punishments against the Protestants, until the decision of the Council. 2.
That they should be capitally proceeded against. 3. That they should be
punished by the Eclesiasticall Court, forbidding their Congregations, either
public or private, and liberty to preach, or administer the Sacraments, but
after the Roman fashion. In conclusion, they took a middle course, and made
an Edict, which is called the Edict of July. That all should abstain from
doing injuries, and live in peace; The Edict of July.
that the preachers should not raise tumults, upon pain of death; that none
should preach or administer the Sacraments, but according to the Roman Rite;
that the Ecclesiastiques should be judges of heresy; that if the person
guilty were delivered to the Secular power, no greater punishment should be
inflicted then banishment, and this to continue till a General or National
Council did determine otherwise; that all those who have moved any tumult,
for the cause of Religion, should be pardoned, living hereafter in peace, and
like Catholics. Afterward treating how to accommodate the controversies, it
was ordained that the Bishops should meet in Poisi, the tenth A Colloquie is
ordained at Poisi.
of August, and that the Protestant Ministers should have a Safe Conduct to
come thither. This was contradicted by many of the Catholics, who thought it
strange, dishonorable, and dangerous to put the Religion of their
predecessors, received until that time, to compromise, and in hazard. In
which the Card of Loraine undertakes to confute the heresiques.
But they yielded at the last, because the Cardinal of Loraine promised
largely that he would confute the heretics, and take the burden upon
himself; wherein he was assisted by the Queen, who, knowing his desire to
make ostentation of his wit, was willing to give him satisfaction.

The Pope had news at once of these two Edicts; in which he found some thing
to commend, and something to blame. He commended the Parliament, for
maintaining the cause of religion; and blamed it, because they had ordered it
contrary to the Decretals, not to proceed to any greater consure then
banishment. His conclusion was, that when the malady is greater then the
remedy, it ought to be made lighter by patience. But the imminent danger of
the assembly of the Prelates, especially together with the Protestants, he
thought was intolerable, and said, he would do the best he could to hinder it;
wherein if he should not be able to prevail, yet he was without fault.
Therefore he treated effectually with the Ambassador, and with the King, by
his Nuncio, that, seeing the Assembly could not be omitted, yet at the least
the arrival of the Cardinal of Ferrara might be expected, that being made
in presence of an Apostolical Legate, with absolute authority, it might be
lawful. He wrote also to the Prelates, that their power did not extend so
far as to make Decrees in matter of Religion, or Ecclesiastical discipline,
and that if they went beyond their bounds, he would not only make all void,
but proceed against them with all severity. Neither the Nuncio nor the
Ambassador could prevail, in regard that not only the Popes adversaries did
oppose, but even the Cardinal of Loraine himself, with his adherents; and it
was told the Nuncio in the Kings name, that the Pope might rest secure, because
nothing should be resolved on, but by the opinion of the Cardinals.

But for all this, the affairs of the Church did precipitate: and in Rome The
Council of the French King determines that the Princes of the Blood ought to
precede the Cardinals.
it was thought to be a great fall, that there being a controversy for
precedencie between the Cardinals and Princes of the Blood, in the Assembly of
the States continued in (...)outoise, the Kings Counsel did determine it
against the Cardinals, and the Cardinals Chastillon and of Armignac did yield
though Tornon, Loraine, and Guise departed, disdaining and murmuring at their
Colleagues. And the Deputy of the third Order, who spoke against the Clergy,
was heard with applause, obiecting to them ignorance, and luxury, demanding
that all jurisdiction should be taken from them, and the revenues, and a
National Council held, wherein the King or Princes of the Blood should
preside; and that in the mean time those, who do not receive the Romish
ceremonies, might assemble, and preach, in the presence of a public Minister
of the King, that it might plainly appear that nothing is done against him.

They treated also of applying to the public a part of the Ecclesiastical
revenues, and many other things against that order; and the number of those
who did favor the Protestants, did still increase. The Clergy, to free
themselves, were forced to promise to pay the King four tenths yearly, for
six years, and so the humors, stirred against them, were quieted. And, The
pope is discontented with a letter sent unto him by the Queen mother.
which was the greatest precipice, the Queen wrote a long letter to the Pope,
dated the fourth of August, showing the imminent dangers for the differences of
Religion, and exhorting him to use some remedy; she said there were so many
separated from the Church of Rome, that it was impossible to reduce them,
either by law or force; that many of the Grandies of the Kingdom did draw
others by their example; that there being none of them who deny the Articles
of Faith, nor the six Councels, many did advise to receive them into the
Communion of the Church; but if this did not please, and that it seemed better
to expect a General Council, in the mean space, in regard of the urgent
necessity and danger of delay, it was necessary to vsesome particular remedy,
by making Colloquies of both parties, by admonishing them to abstain from
injuries, contentions, and offensive words, by clearing the minds of those who
were not aliened as yet, taking from the place of adoration the Images,
prohibited by GOD, and condemned by S. Gregory; by remoouing from Baptism,
spittle, and exorcismes, and other things, not instituted by the word of GOD;
to restore the use of the Cup in the Communion, and prayers in the vulgar
tongue; that the first Sunday in every month, or more often, the Curates
should call those who will communicate, and, singing Psalms in the vulgar,
should, in the same also, pray for the Prince, and Magistrates, for the
salubrity of the air, and fruits of the earth; then, expounding the places of
the Evangelists, and of S. Paul, concerning the Eucharist, they should come to
the Communion; that the Feast of Corpus Christi should be taken away, because
it is instituted only for pomp; that if the Latin tongue must be used in
prayers, yet the vulgar should be added, for the benefit of all; that the Popes
authority should not be diminished, nor the doctrine changed, in regard it is
not just to take away the ministry, because the Ministers have erred. It was
thought that she wrote these things at the persuasion of John Monluc, Bishop
of Valence, with too much French liberty, and they troubled the Pope very much,
considering the time, full of suspicions, when a National Council was spoken
of, and a Colloquie intimated in Poisi. Having well considered all, he resolved
to dissemble, and not to answer, but only that, the Council drawing near,
whatsoever was thought necessary might be there proposed, with assured hope
that no resolution should be made but for the service of GOD, and peace of the
Church.

These occurrences did confirm the Pope in his opinion, that the Council was
profitable both for himself and the Court, and that it was necessary to
celebrate it for his defense, against the preparations which were and might be
made. And he showed tokens of joy, for the letters which came unto him, the 24
of August, from the Emperor, in which he said that he But is comforted by
another, received from the Emperor.
did absolutely consent unto the Council, and that he did not declare
himself until then, that he might more easily win the Princes of Germany;
but now, not being able to do any more, he prayed him to continue his
endeauours, in hastening the celebration. Having called together all the
Ambassadors of Princes, and most of the Cardinals, so that it was almost a
Consistory, he showed the letters to them all, saying, it was worthy to be
written in letters of gold; that the Council would be most profitable; that
it was not to be deferred; that it would be sovniuersall that the City of
Trent would not be able to receive it, and that it would be necessary to
think of translating it to a place more large and fertile. His discourse was
approved by all that stood by, though some thought it dangerous to name the
translation in the beginning, in regard that every little suspicion might
either hinder or delay the Council. Others believed that this would not
displease the Pope, and that he cast forth that word to open a gate where the
difficulty might enter.

It being not only resolved, but generally known that none of the Dutch
Prelates would come to Trent, and a doubt made also, in regard of the Colloquie
instituted, that the Frenchmen would treat only amongst themselves, and that
the Council would consist of noen but Italians, except some few Spaniards, the
Italians were of opinion, that a few of them would serve the turn, so that
many of them used means to the Pope to be excepted; who told them plainly,
that he was assured that all the Vltramontans would come, The Italians desire
to be excused from going to the Council, but cannot obtain leave of the Pope.
full of hopes to subject the Popedom to the Council, which being the common
interest of Italy, whereby it is preferred before other Nations, they ought to
go all thither for the public defense; that he would not exempt any, but
rather take all hope from them, saying, that they might be assured thereof,
seeing how diligent he was in sending the Legates thither. For, besides the
Cardinal of Mantua and Scripando, he had sent Stanislaus Osius, Cardinal of
Varmia. The next day, having published the Emperors letters, he called a
general congregation of all the Cardinals, though it were Sunday. He treated
of many particulars concerning the beginning and progress of the Council; and
promised to assist the poor Prelates with money, but upon condition they should
go thither; and allowed them but eight days to begin their journey. He showed
how necessary the Council was, in regard Religion was banished, or endangered
in some place every day. And he spoke the truth. For in Scotland, in an
assembly of all the Nobility of The Roman Catholic religion is banished out
of Scotland.
the kingdom, it was constituted that there should be no more exercise of the
Roman Catholic Religion.

In August the Prelates did assemble in Poist, where they treated of the
reformation of the Clergy, without making any conclusion. Afterward, the
Protestant Ministers being come, in number fourteen, who were called, and
secured by a safe conduct, amongst whom Peter Martyr, a Florentine, who came
from Zuric, and Theodore Beza, who came from Geneua, were the chief, they gave
a petition to the King which had four parts. 1. That The Colloquie of Poisi in
France.
the Bishops might not be Judges in that business. 2. That the King with his
Counselors would preside. 3. That the controversies might be decided by the
word of God. 4. That that which was agreed on, and decreed might be written by
Notaries elected by both parties. The Queen would have one of the four
Secretaries of the King to write, and granted that the King should preside;
but so, that this should not be committed to writing, alleging that it was
not fit for them, nor profitable for the King, considering the present times.
The Cardinal of Loraine desired the Kings presence in the public assembly,
that it might be more frequent, and adorned, to make ostentation of his worth,
promising himself a certain victory. Many of the Divines persuaded the
Queen not to suffer the King to be present, that those tender cares might not
be enuenomed by pestiferous doctrine. Before the parties were called to the
combat, the Prelates made a procession, and did all communicate, except the
Cardinal Chastillon, and five Bishops. The other protested one to another,
that they meant not to handle points of doctrine, nor matters of faith.

The second of September they began, in presence of the King, Queen, Princes
of the blood, and the Kings Counselors, together with six Cardinals, and
forty Bishops. The King, as he was instructed, made an exhortation, that,
being assembled to remedy the tumults of the kingdom, and to In which the
King speaks biterely.
correct the things that were amiss he desired they should not depart before
all differences were composed. The Chancellor spoke more at large to the same
purpose, in the Kings name, and said particularly that the disease being And
the Chancellor at large.
urgent, did require a present cure; that the remedy which could be expected
from the Council, besides that it would be slow, would proceed from men,
who, being strangers, know not the necessities of France, and are bound to
follow the Popes will; that the Prelates present, knowing the needs of the
kingdom, and near in blood are more fit to execute this good work; that
although the Council intimated by the Pope were held, yet the like of this
has been done at other times, and is not without example; that in the time of
Charles the great many Councels were held at once and that, many times, the
error of a general Council has bin corrected by a National, as Arianisme
established by the general Council of Arimini, was condemned in France, by a
Council called by S. Hilarie. He exhorted all to aim at the same end, and the
more learned not to contemn their inferiors, nor these to envy those; to
avoid curlous questions; not to be auerse from the Protestants, who were their
brethren, regenerate in the same Baptism, worshippers of the same CHRIST. He
exhorts the Bishops to treat with them courteously, seeking to reduce them,
but without severity, considering that much was attributed to them, in that
they were suffered to be Judges in their own cause: saying, that this did
constrain them to proceed with sincerity, and that, in so doing, they should
stop the mouth of their adversaries, but, transgressing the office of just
Judges, all would be invaine, and to no purpose. The Cardinal Tornon rose up,
and, having thanked the King, Queen, and Princes, for the assistance they
affoorded to that assembly said that the Chancellors propositions were of great
importance, and not to be handled, or answered upon the sudden, and therefore
desired they might be committed to writing, the better to deliberate upon
them. The Chancellor did refuse and the Cardinal of Loraine did urge it.

The Queen, perceiving that this was required by the two Cardinals, to The
Queen mother commands Beza to begin.
draw the business in length, gave order to Beza to speak: Who, having prayed
on his knee, and recited the profession of his faith, complained that they were
accounted turbulent, and seditious, perturber of the public peace, though
they had no other end then the glory of GOD, nor desired to assemble themselves
but to serve him, and obey the Magistrates, appointed by him. Then he declared
in what they do agree with the Church of Rome, and in what they dissent, he
spoke of faith, good works, of the authority of Councels, sins of
Ecclesiastical discipline obedience to Magistrates, and of the Sacraments and
entering into the matter of the Eucharist, he spoke Who shows too much heat.
with such heat, that he gave but ill satisfaction to those of his own
party; so that he was commanded to conclude. And having presented the
Confession of his Churches, and desired it might be examined, he made an end.
The Cardinal Tornon, full of disdain, rose up, and said, that the Bishops,
even forcing their consciences, had consented to hear these new Evangelists,
fore seeing they would speak many injurious things against God, and that but
for the respect they bare to the King, they would have risen, and disturbed the
Whereat Cardinal Tornon disdaineth.
assembly. Therefore he prayed his Majesty, not to believe what they had
said, because the Prelates would disprooue it, so that he should see the
difference between the truth and a lie, and demanded a days time to answer,
requiring that all should be removed from thence, that they might not hear
those blasphemies. Wherewith the Queen, thinking her self to be touched,
answered, that nothing was done but by the advice of the Princes, of the Kings
Counsel, and Parliament of Paris, not to change or innouate any thing in
Religion, but to compose the differences, and to reduce those that wandered
into the right way; which the Bishops were bound in wisdom to procure, by all
good means.

The assembly being dissolved, the Bishops and Divines consulted amongst
themselves what to do. Some of them would have had a Confession of Faith
written, unto which if the Protestants would not subscribe, they should be
condemned for heretics, without any further disputation. Which opinion
seeming too hard, after much discourse, they resolved to answer two of the
points proposed by Beza; that is, of the Church, and of the Eucharist. The
Congregation being assembled again the sixteenth of the month, the The Card.
of Loraine speaks for the Catholics.
Cardinal of Loraine, in the presence of the King, Queen, and Princes, made a
long Oration, and said; That the King was a member, not head of the Church;
that it belonged to his care to defend it, and that, for matter of doctrine,
he was subject to the Ecclesiastical Ministers; that the Church did not
contain the elect only, any yet could not err; that when any particular
Church is in an error, recourse must be had to the Church of Rome, Decrees of
the general Councels, consent of the ancient Fathers, and, above all, to the
Scripture expounded in the sense of the Church; that the heretics, failing in
this, have run into inextricable errors; as the modernes, for example, in
the point of the Eucharist, in which, by an incurable itch of curious
questions, they have used that which was instituted by Christ for a bond of
union, to make an irreconciliable rent in the Church. And then he handled this
matter, and concluded, that, if the Protestants will not change their opinion
herein, there is no means of composition.

When he had made an end, all the Bishops stood up, and said they would live
and die in that Faith; they prayed the King to persevere in it; adding, that if
the Protestants will subscribe to this article, they will not refuse to dispute
the rest; but if not, they ought not to have any more audience, but to be
chased out of the whole kingome. Beza asked leave to answer presently; To whom
Beza was willing to answer and was not suffered.
but it seeming not fit to equalize a private Minister, to so great a Prince
Cardinal, the assembly was dissolved. The Prelates were willing the Colloquie
should have been thus ended; but the Bishop of Valence told them it was
dishonorable. Therefore the four and twentieth day it was assembled again in
presence of the Queen, and the Princes. Beza spoke of the Church, But speaks
another day.
and of the conditions and authority thereof; of Councels, showing they may
err, and the dignity of the Scripture. Claudeus Espenseus answered, that he
had always desired a Colloquie in matter of Religion, and abhorred the
punishments which the poor unfortunate people endured: but he much marueiled
by what authority, and by whom the Protestants were called into the
Ecclesiastical ministry, who had laid hands on them to make them And is
answered by Claudius Espenseus.
ordinary Ministers, and, if they pretended an extraordinary vocation where
were the miracles to demonstrate it. Then he treated of Traditions. He
showed, that there being a controversy of the sense of the Scriptures,
recourse must be had to the Fathers; and that many things are believed by
Tradition only, as the Consubstantialitie of the Son, the baptizing of
infants, and the virginity of the mother of Christ after his birth. He added,
that no general Council was ever corrected by another in point of doctrine.
Diverse replies and disputations passed on both sides, between the Divines, who
were present. And, there being a great contention, the Card of Loraine making a
silence, proposed the matter of the Eucharist, and said, that the Bishops were
resolute not to proceed any further, if that Article were not agreed on; and
then demanded of the Ministers, if they were prepared to subscribe the
Augustan Confession in that Article. Beza asked whether he proposed that in
the name of all, and whether himself, and the other Prelates would subscribe
to the other points of that Confession: and receiving no answer either of the
one or the other, he demanded, that that which was proposed to be subscribed
unto, should be put in writing, that they might consult of it; and so the
Colloquie was put off till the next day.

In which Beza, who began to speak, did much provoke the Bishops. For having
justified his vocation to the Ministry, he discoursed of the vocation Beza
speaks, again, and provoke the Bishops.
and ordination of Bishops, showing what Simonie was committed, and demanding
how it could be accounted lawful. The passing to the Article of the Eucharist,
and the point of the Augustan Confession proposed unto him, he said it ought
to be first subscribed by those who did propose it. The parties not being able
to agree, a Spanish Jesuit, one of the train of the Cardinal The saw^ines of
a Spanish Jesuit.
of Ferrara, who was at the Colloquie, having reproched the Protestants, did
reprehend the Queen for meddling in matters which belonged not to her, but to
the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops. This arrogancy troubled the Queens
Patience; but, for the Popes sake, and the Legates, she dissembled. Finally,
not being able to conclude any thing by this manner of parlie, it was A new
course is taken.
ordered, that two Bishops and three Divines, of the most moderate, should
confer with five of the Protestants Ministers, to see if they could find out
a way to make an agreement. They assayed to frame an Article of the Eucharist
Which does as little good as the former
in general terms, taken out of the Fathers, which might give satisfaction to
both parties, which because they could not do, they concluded the Colloquie.
This did minister much matter of discourse. Some said it was a bad example to
treat of errors once condemned, and that they ought no so much as to hear
those who deny the foundations of Religion, which has continued so long, and
been so much confirmed, especially in the presence of ignorant people; and
that, although nothing was resolved against the true Religion, it has made the
heretics bold, and grieved the Catholics. Others said, it would be
generally good to handle these controversies often, because the parties would
by this means become familiar; malice and other bad affections would cease,
and many ways of composition might be found, and that there was no other
course to extirpate the evil that had taken such deep root. For the Court
being divided under pretense of religion, it was impossible they should be
reconciled, except all obstinacy laid aside, they did tolerate one another,
and take that cloak out of the hands of unquiet and turbulent people, with
which they cover their bad actions.

The Pope, understanding that the Colloquie was dissolved without doing
Wherewith the Pope is well pleased.
any thing, was very glad, and much commended the Cardinal of Loraine, and
Tornon more. The zeal of the Jesuit pleased him, and said, he might be
compared to the ancient Saints, having, without respect of the King and Princes
maintained Gods cause, and vpbrayded the Queen to her face. On the contrary,
he reprehended the oration of the Chancellor, saying, The Chancellor of
France is blamed in Rome, together with the whole government of that kingdom.
it was heretical in many parts, and threatened to call him into the
Inquisition. The Court also, when it was diuulged to them, was distasted with
it, and coniectured that all the governors of the Kingdom had the same
disposition toward Rome; and the French Ambassador had much ado to defend
himself.

That which happened to the Cardinal of Ferrara is not to be omitted, as The
entertainment of the Cardinal of Ferrara in France.
being of affinity to the matter whereof I write. That Prelate was received at
the first by the King and Queen, with much honor, and having presented the
Popes letters of credence, was acknowledged for Legate of the Apostolic Sea,
by their Majesty's, by the Princes, and Clergy. But the Parliament, having
discovered that, amongst his Commissions, one was, to desire a reuocation, or
moderation, at the least, of the things accorded in the States of Orleance, the
last of January, concerning the distribution of Benefices, and, particularly,
the prohibition of paying Annates to Rome, and sending money out of the
Kingdom to obtain Benefices there, or other favors, did immediately publish
the Decrees, which had not been punished until that time, under the date of
the thirteenth of September, that the Cardinal might not obtain his purpose;
and did resolve not to give the Legate leave to use the Faculties given him by
the Pope. For the custom of that kingdom is, that a Legate cannot exercise
his office, if his Faculties be not first presented, and examined in
Parliament, and regulated and moderated by a decree thereof, and confirmed in
that form by the Kings Brief; so that when the Bull of the Faculties of the
Legation was presented, to be, as they say, approved, it was refused by the
Chancellor and Parliament, alleging that it was already determined not to
use any more dispensations against the rules of the Fathers, nor collation of
Benefices against the Canons. But the Cardinal had a greater affront, in that
Pasquins were made, and spread, both in the Court and City of Paris,
concerning the loves of Lucretia Borgia, his mother, and Pope Alexander the
sixth, his Grandfather by the mothers side, with repetition of the obscenities,
diuulged throughout all Italy in the time of that Popedom, which made the
Cardinal ridiculous to the people.

The first thing he undertook was to hinder the preaching of the
Reformatists, who after the Colloquie, did practice it more freely then before,
and used persuasions, and made secret promises to the Ministers. And because
he had no credit with them, in regard of his kindred with the house of Guise,
for which reason also he was held suspected by all the opposites of that
family, to gain reputation, he made acquaintance with the Nobles of the
Hugonot faction, and went to their feasts, and sometimes was present at their
Sermons His familiarity with the Hugonots.
in the habit of a Gentleman. By all which he gained nothing, because many
thought he did it as Legate, by consent of the Pope, and the Court of
Displeases the Court of Rome.
Rome was displeased with his actions.

The Queen of France, understanding that the King of Spain took the
Colloquie in ill part, sent Jacques de Montbrun expressly to him; who made a
large The Q. mother sends an Ambassador into Spain to excuse the Colloquie.
excuse, that all was done for necessity, and not in favor of the
Protestants, and that the King and Queen, without speaking any more of a
National Council, were resolved to send their Bishops to Trent, as soon as
might be. The King answered him in general words, and referred him to the
Duke of Alua; who, having heard his Ambaslage, said, that the King was sorry
that, in a kingdom so near, and so nearly allied to him in kindred, religion
should be so ill handled; that there was need of that severity which Henry
used, in a Mercuriall Congregation, and Francis in Amboise, not long since; he
prayed the Queen to make provision, in regard, the danger of France belonging
to him also, he was resolved by the advice of his Council, to employ all his
forces, and his life also to extinguish the common pestilence; whereunto he was
solicited by the Grandies and people of France. The wise Spaniards thought The
Spaniards would have cured ye maladies of Flanders, with the medicine of France.
to cure the maladies of Flanders, by the medicine of France; which were not
less, but only were less apparent, and tumultuous. The King of Spain could
never make the States assemble, to obtain a contribution or donatiue; but
private assemblies in Cambray, Valentia, and Tornay were discovered. The
Magistrate having forbid them, and imprisoned some of them, they put themselves
into Arms, with great danger of rebellion; and it seemed that the Prince of
Orange, and Count Egmont were open favorers of them, especially after that the
Prince had married Anne, daughter of Maurice, Duke of Saxony The Prince of
Orange marieth the daughter of ye Duke of Saxony.
deceased: which did much displease the King, foreseeing what issue such a
marriage might have, contracted by one of his Subjects, with a Protestant of so
great adherence. Yet the Spaniards spoke as if Flanders had been sound, and
that they feared infection in France only, which they would have purged with
war. And the Ambassador was answered concerning the King of Navarre, of
whose business he had Commission to treat, that he deserved nothing, for the
small care he had of religion, and that if he would have favor, he should
first move war against the Hugonots in France.

The Queen also excused the same Colloquie to his Holiness by the Kings
Ambassador in Rome, telling him, that, to put the Hugonots to silence, who
said they were persecuted before they were heard, and to appease their
commotions, the King was forced to grant them public audience, in the
presence of the Princes, and officers of the Kingdom, resolving that, if they
would not be overcome with reason, he would, after he had time to put himself
in order, overcome them by force. She caused him also to treat with the
Cardinal Farnese, Legate of Auignion, to resign that legation to the
Cardinal of Burbon, whereunto Fernese having given consent, the Ambassador
spoke of it to the Pope in the name of him, and of the King of Navarre, saying;
that his Holiness would be freed from charge, and the City secured from the
Hugonots, who would not attempt ought against it, being in the protection of a
Prince of the blood. Not only those who were skillful in the affairs of the
world, but every one of any mean judgment, knew that this was done to take
with ease the dominion of that City from Rome, and unite it to France.
Therefore the Pope denied it absolutely, and related the proposition in
Consistory, as if some great prejudice had been concealed under it, which did
not appear at the first sight. And he much complained of the Queen and King
of Navarre, who having often promised him that nothing should be done in
France against his authority, yet they did favor heresies, and were authors
of the Congregations of the Prelates, Colloquies, and of other prejudicial
things. He said his gentleness was ill required, and therefore, that he would
begin the Council suddenly, and by means thereof, make known the reverence
which secular Princes owe to the Church. He used the same complaint and threats
to the Ambassador; who having replied that the demand of the Legation was to a
good end, and that all the actions of the Queen were done with maturitie and
justice, added, that the Council was more desired by the King then by his
Holiness, hoping it would proceed with the same equity and respect toward
all Princes, not making difference of them. He used these words, to mock the
Pope, who had granted a little before a great Subsidy to the King of Spain,
to be paid by the Clergy, after he had obtained of him the simple Annates. But
the Pope, suspecting the petition of Auignion, and considering that the Vassals
of that City were all Protestants fearing it might be usurped by the King of
Navarre, did presently dispatch thither Fabri^ius Sorbellone, with two thousand
foot, to lie there in garrison, and gave the government thereof to Lorenzo
Lenci, Bishop of Fermo, as Vice-legate.

After the Colloquie was ended, and the Protestants departed, the Prelates
remained, to treat of the Subsidies to be given to the King; which the Queen
thinking would give suspicion to the Pope, in regard of his often complaints
assured him that they remained only to consult of the Kings debts, and that,
the congregation being ended, she would immediately give order to the Bishops
to put themselves in a readiness to go to the Council. Notwithstanding they
treated of the Communion of the Cup, the Bishop of Valence, A treaty in France
about the Communion of the Cup.
with consent of the Cardinal of Lorayne, proposing, that if it were allowed,
the prosperous course of the increase of the Protestants would be interrupted,
in regard that many, who do adhere unto them, do begin to believe them from
this point, who would not hearken unto them, if this were granted freely by the
Church. And those who understood the affairs of the world did consider, that,
by this means, a faction would arise between the Reformatists themselves.
Some few of the Bishops thought fit it should be constituted by the Edict, and
immediately executed, saying that the whole Communion was not taken away by
decree of the Church, but by custom only, and that there is no Ecclesiastical
decree which forbids the Bishops to return to the former use. But the mayor
part would not consent it should be done, but by grant, or, at the least, by
the favor of the Pope. Some few would not agree to any innovation, but were
forced to yield to the greater number. This was much urged by Loraine, who, to
obtain the Popes consent, thought it necessary to gain the favor of the
Cardinal of Ferrara; and to win him the better, he persuaded the Queeneto
hearken to his propositions, and to grant him something. The Cardinal had
proceeded so sweetly and courteously with every one, even of the contrary
religion, that he had gained the good will of many who did oppose him at the
first. And his negotiation being examined, it was granted, by a Brief of the
King, advised Leave is given to the Legate by the Kings Brief to exercise his
Faculties.
thereunto by the most intimate of his Counsel, that the capitulations of
Orleance concerning matter of Benefices should be suspended, and that the Legate
might exercise his Faculties; but so, as that he should first promise under his
hand writing, that he would not use them, and that he would be a means that
the Pope should provide against all the abuses and disorders which are
committed in the collation of Benefices, and dispatches of the Bulls in Rome.
Notwithstanding the Coancelor refuses to subscribe and Which the Chancellor
refuses to subscribe.
seal the Brief, according to the style of the kingdom; and, it being
impossible to remove him from his resolution, it was subscribed by the Queen,
the King of Navarre, and by the Principal officers of the Kingdom: wherewith
the Legate was content, more regarding the preservation of his own honor, then
the service of him that sent him. For this favor, he was content to th^nke
well of the Communion of the Cup, and to write thereof to Rome; which he did
with such a temper, that neither the Pope nor Court were distasted. The
Assembly of Po^si gives the K. power to sell Church lands to the value of
100000. Crowns.
In the conclusion of the assembly of Poisie, the Prelates granted power to
the King to sell 100000. crowns of the yearly rents of the lands of the
Chuch, so that the Pope would allow it.

The King gave order to his Ambassador in Rome to make request for it, showing
the necessity and vtility of the grant; which the Ambassador did, just the day
before letters came to the Pope from the Card of Ferrara, which gave him an
account of the difficulties overcome, and how he had obtained a suspension of
the capitulations of Orleance against the ecclesiastical liberty, and leave
to use the Faculties of a Legate; which things, he said, were more hardly
compassed, because the Cardinal of Loraine, from whom he expected favor, had
opposed him from the beginning. And he made a full narration The Legate
informs the Pope that there are but two ways to preserve religion in France.
of the state of Religion in France, showing the danger that it would be quite
extinguished, and the remedies to preserve it; which were only two. One, to
give satisfaction to the King of Navarre, and to interest him in the defense of
it. The other to grant the people generally the Communion Sub vtraque specie;
affirming that certainly, by this means, at the least two hundred thousand
souls would be gained. The Ambassador, in The French Ambassador desires the
Pope to grant the Communion of the Cup to the Frenchmen.
conformity hereof, beseeched the Pope in the name of the King, of the Church
of France, and of the Prelates, that they might be dispensed with to administer
to the people the Sacrament of the Euchar^st under both kinds, as a profitable
and necessary preparation, to dispose them to receive the determinations of
the Council with readiness, without which it is much to be doubted that this
remedy will find raw humors, which may causea greater disease.

The Pope, according to his natural disposition, suddenly answered, without
any premeditation, that he had ever thought that the Communion of both kinds,
and marriage of Priests were de iure poisi^in^, in the disposition of which
things he had as much authority as the whole universal Church: and therefore
was thought to be a Luth(...) in the last Conclaue. That the Emperor had made
the same request for his son, the king of Boh^^ia, whose Who glueth a
favorable answer.
conscience did induce him to be of this opinion; and had demanded the like for
the people of his patrimoniall Territories, but that the Cardinals would never
yield unto it. Notwithstanding he said he would not resolve of any thing
without proposing it first in the Consistory, and promised to speak hereof in
the next; which being intimated for the tenth of December, the Ambassador,
according to the custom of those at whose instance any business is handled,
went in the morning while the Cardinals were assembled expecting the Pope, to
mediate with them. The most discreet amongst them answered, that the demand
did deserve great deliberation, and that they durst not resolve until they had
well considered of it; others were passionate, as at news never heard of
before. The Cardinal of Cueua said, that he would never give his voice in
favor of such a demand, and that if it were so resolved by authority of his
Holiness, and the consent of the Cardinals, he would go to the top of the
stairs of Saint Peter, and cry (misericordia) with a loud voice; not
forbearing to say that the Prelates of France were infected with heresy. The
Cardinal Saint Angelo answered, that he would never give a Cup full of such
deadly poison to the people of France, in stead of a medicine, and that it was
better to let them die; then cure them with such remedies. To whom the
Ambassador replied; that the Prelates of France were induced to be of this
opinion with good grounds, and Theological reasons, which deserved not such a
contemptuous censure; and, on the other side, that it was not fit to give the
name of poison to the Blood of CHRIST, and to call the holy Apostles poysoners,
and the Fathers of the Primitive Church, and of that which followed for many
hundreds of years, who, with much spiritual profit, have ministered the Cup of
that Blood to all the people.

The Pope, being entered into the Consistory, having discoursed with For which
afterward he was sorry.
some Cardinals, and better thought of the business, wished he had been able
to recall his word. Notwithstanding he proposed the matter, related the
Ambassadors instance, caused the Legates letter to be read, and demanded
their opinions. The Cardinals who were dependants on France, commended with
diverse forms of words the Kings intention, but, concerning the request,
referred themselves to his Holiness. The Spaniards did all oppose; and used
great boldness of speech, some calling the Prelates of France heretics, some
schismatiques, and some unlearned, alleging no reason but that all CHRIST is
in both the kinds. The Cardinal Pacceco considered that all diversities of
rites, especially in the most principal ceremonies do end with schism and
hatred. For now the Spaniards in France go to the French Churches, and the
French men in Spain to the Spanish, but when they shall communicate so
diversely, one not receiving the Communion of the other, they will be forced to
make Churches apart; and so behold a division.

Friar Michael, Cardinal of Alexandria, said, that it could not by any means
be granted by the Pope de plenitudine potestatis; not for want of authority in
him over all which is de iurepositiuo, in which number this is but in regard of
the incapaci^^ of him that demands the favor. For the Pope cannot give
power to do enill; but it is an heretical evil to receive the chalice,
thinking it to be necesary; therefore the Pope cannot grant it to such
persons* And it cannot be doubted but that those who demand it do judge it
necessary, because no man makes any great matter of indifferent ceremonies.
He said that these men do hold the Chalice either to be necessary, or not:
if not, why do they give scandal, by making themselves differ from others? if
otherwise, then they are heretics and incapable of the grace. The Cardinal
Rodolpbo Pio di Carpi, who was one of the last that spoke, because the
inferiors do begin, concluded in conformity with the others, that not only
the saving of two hundred thousand souls, but one only was a sufficient cause
to dispense with any positive law, with wisdom and maturity; but in that
proposition one ought to take heed, lest, thinking to game two hundred
thousand, he lose two hundred millions. That it was manifest, that this would
not be the last demand of the French men in matter of religion, but a step to
propose another, that afterward they will demand the marriage of Priests, the
vulgar tongue in the ministry of the Sacraments: which will have the same
ground, because they are de iure positiuo, and must be granted for the
preservation of many. Of the marriage The inconvenience of the marriage of
Priests.
of Priests this inconvenience will follow, that having house, wife, and
children, they will not depend on the Pope, but of their Prince, and their love
to their children will make them yield to any prejudice of the Church. They
will seek also to make the Benefices hereditary; and so in a short space, the
authority of the Apostolic Sea will be confined within Rome. Before single
life was instituted, the Sea of Rome received no profit from other nations and
Cities, and, by it, is made Patron of many Benefices, of which marriage would
quickly deprive her. Of the vulgar tongue this incouenience would follow, The
inconvenience of the vulgar tongue
that all would think themselves Divines, the authority of Prelates would be
disesteemed, and all would become heretics. If the communion of the Chalice
were granted, so that faith were preserved, it would be of small importance;
but it would open a gate to demand an abrogation of all posi^ue constitutions,
by which only the prerogative given by CHRIST to The inconvenience of the
communion of the Cup.
the Church of Rome, is preserved, for by those which are de iure diuino no
profit does arise, but that which is spiritual. For these reasons it is
wisdom to oppose the first demand, not to be bound to grant the second and
all the rest.

The Pope, principally for these causes, did resolve negatiuely; and, to The
Poperesolueth not to grant the Cup to the French men.
make his resolution the less grievous, he caused the Ambassador to be
persuaded to desist of his own accord, who not consenting, he caused him to
be entreated, that, at the least, he would prosecute it gently, in regard it
was impossible to yield unto him, for fear of aliening all the Catholics.
The Ambassador still proceeding, the Pope first put him off with delay, and,
in conclusion, answered, that howsoever he could* yet he ought not to yield to
his request, because the Council was at hand, unto which he had referred the
Emperors petition, so he would do that of France, and, to gratify the King,
would handle that article first of all, and so dispatch it in as little time as
would be requisite to grant the grace with maturi^i^. The Ambassador repeating
this instance in every audience, the Pope added, that he was sure all the
Prelates did not make that request, because the mayor part in the Congregation
did resolve not to speak of it, saying that the name of the Prelates of France
was used, whereas the motion proceeded but from a few, and those incited by
others, meaning the Queen; against whom he bare a secret grudge, for the
letter she wrote unto him the 4. of August.

At the same time when the Petition of the French Prelates was published The
French Prelates are suspected in Trent, and Rome.
in Rome, news came out of Germany, that the same men had sent to the
Protestants there, to persuade them to persevere in their doctrine, promising
to favor them in the Council, and to draw other Prelates to do the like.
This was diuulged in Trent also; and caused the Frenchmen to have but small
reputation, both there amongst the Italians, and in the Court of Rome, where
they were esteemed to be men of an unquiet spirit, and desirous of innovation.
And it was said (as suspicions do always add something) in regard of the
disputes which that Nation has ever had with the Court of Rome, in very
important Articles, and of the present accidents, that certainly they would
go to the Council, with no other aim, but only to The Popes expenses in the
Council.
cause troubles and innouations. The Ambassador, that the popular rumor against
his Nation might not make an impression in the Popes mind, was willing to
secure him; who persuaded him ironically not to trouble himself, because it
was not likely, nor could he believe, that so small a number as are the
Frenchmen, could think of so great enterprises; and* if they did, that they
should find many Italians who would oppose them. But he said, he was
displeased that they had hindered the Council, which was assembled for their
sakes only; which showed but small care in them to cure that sickness,
whereof they complain; adding that he was resolved to open the Council;
either with them, or without them, and to prosecute and dispatch it; and that
his Legates and a great number of Bishops had been many months in Trent
already, to their great trouble and charge, not able to do any thing, while
the Prelates of France do so deliciously provide for their case at home.

In conformity hereof, he did recapitulate in Consistory the instances, and
causes, for which he had, just a year since, intimated the Council, by
advice of them the Cardinals* the difficulties which he encountered, and
overcame, in persuading the Princes, who were of contrary opinions to accept
the Bull; his diligence in sending presently the Legates, and those Prelates
with whom he was able to prevail, either with persuasions; or commands, that
all is already prepared by him only, seven months since, and is so chargeable
to him, that, amongst officers and poor Prelates, the Apostolic Sea does
spend above three thousand crowns a month, and that experience shows that
delay does bring on more expense, that the Dutchmen do invent some thing
every day, to oppose against this holy and necessary work; that heresies do
increase in France; and some Bishops are almost become re^ellious, by making
absurd petition for the Cup, which they do with such violence, that the
greater number* who are good Cat^oliques, are forced to yield; that all
Princes have appointed Abassadours; that there are so many Prelates in Trent
already, that they are not only sufficient to begin the Synod, but are more
then were in any of the two former conuocations thereof; and that nothing
remained but to begin, without expecting any longer. The Gardinals having
consented hereunto, and commended his resolution, he joined two Legates more
to the three former, Two presidents more are appointed for the Council.
Ludouicus Simoneta, a great Canonist, who had passed through all the offices
of the Court, and Marcus di Altemps, his sisters son. He commanded the
former to depart presently, and not to tarry any where in the journey, and, so
soon as he came to Trent, to cause the usual ceremonies to be made, and the
Mass of the holy Ghost to be said for a beginning of the Council. He said
afterward that the Synod was to continue still, not to terminate in
suspensions, or translations, as formerly it did, with notorious prejudice and
danger, but to have an absolute end. For effecting whereof, there was no need
to spend many months, in regard the most important points were already
determined and the residue was so set in order, by disputations and
examinations under Julius, that scarce any thing remained but publication; so
that all would be dispatched in a shorttime.

Simoneta arrived in Trent the niuth of December, and at his entry, sawa great
fire rise out of the earth, which passed over the City, like unto a falling
star, but only in bigness; whereof idle persons, of which number there were
many, made diverse pronognostiques, some presaging good, and some hurt, which
would be a vanlty to recount. The Cardinal found letters written after his
departure, that he should expect a new commission to open the Council. The
Pope compelled some Bishops who were at Court The number of the Prelates in
^^ent.
at the time of his departure, to go with him, so that the number of all,
beside the Cardinals, was 92.

The Nuncio, resident in France, returned to Rome in the beginning of December;
who having related the state of that Kingdom, the Pope wrote The Pope writes
to his Legate in France.
to the Legate that he should represent to the Kings Counsel, that the
Council was to be celebrated for France only, because neither Italy, nor
Spain had need of it, and Germany did refuse it; and tell them, that
therefore it did concern them to promote it; a thing neglected by them, but
performed by him in regard of his fatherly affection; and that the Legates
being in Trent already, and many of the Italian and Spanish Prelates, and the
rest in their journey, they should immediately send an Ambassador, and their
Bishops. Besides, he commanded the Legate to use all diligence to hinder the
preaching and assembling of the Protestants, and to encourage the Divines,
giving them Indulgences and spiritual graces, and promising them temporal
assistance also, but that himself should, by no means, be present at the
sermons of the Protestants, and avoid all banquets where any of them were in
company.

At the same time the Polonian Prelates came to Trent, who, having visited Two
Polonian Prelates cometo Trent.
the Legates, and showed the devotion of their Church to the Sea of Rome,
related how the Lutherans attempted to bring their doctrine into that kingdom,
and the foundations which were already laid in some parts; to oppose whose
plots the Bishops were always to be vigilant: that they were all desirous to
assist in the Council, and to promote the common cause, which not being able
to do, for the cause aforesaid, so important and necessary, they had sent
their Proctors to give voice, as if the* Prelates were present. And they
demanded to have as many voices as they had commissions from the Bishops, who,
for lawful causes, could not part out of the kingdom. The Legates answered in
general terms, meaning to resolve with mature deliberation: Who desire to
have as many voices as they have commissions from the Bishops. Their r^quest is
sent to Rome; where it was resected for fear of dangerous confequences
and the Pope, whom they had advised hereof, proposed it in Consistory; where
the Cardinals, without difficulty, concurred in the negative, because it was
determined before that the resolutions should be made as formerly they had
been, by plurality of voices, and not by Nations. Which was therather thought
to be necessary, because there was a fame that the Frenchmen, though
Catholics, came with Sorbonicall and Parliamentarie minds, fully bent to
acknowledge the Pope no further then they pleased. And it was known before,
that the Spaniards had some humor to subject the Pope to the Council; and the
Legates had often sent advice from Trent, The deseignes of the French, and
Spanish Prelates are suspected.
that some bad ambitious humors, to enlarge the Episcopal authority, were
discovered; and, in particular, the Spaniards did propose that it was necessary
to restrain the authority of the Pope, at the least so far as that he might
not derogate from the decrees of this Council, saying, that, otherwise, the
labor and cost would be all in vain, if, for small causes, and sometimes
without any, he might dispense with them, as he daily does with all the Canons.
The Cardinals saw no other means to oppose these attempts, but by sending a
great number of Italian Prelates, who, being united together, will overcome For
which cause the Pope resolves to send many Italian Prelates to Trent, to make a
mayor part.
all the Vltramontans. And this remedy would be to no purpose, if the voices
of the absent were admitted. For the Spaniards and Frenchmen would cause all
their Bishops to send proxies, and it would be as much as to give voices, not
by heads, but by Nations.

Therefore it was written to Trent, that they should make large promises to the
Polonians, but conclude, that the Council was a continuation, and the same
which was begun under Paulus the third, so that the orders then practiced, and
continuately kept, with good fruit, as did appear, must be still observed;
amongst which one was that the absent should have no voice, with which if they
did dispense, all other National would pretend the like, with much confusion;
that whatsoever request Polonia did make, for any thing The Polonian Prelates
seem to be satisfied with a courteous negative, but depart, and return no
more.
that was proper to it self, and would not raise any stirs in other
Countries, should be granted in regard of the merits of that most noble Nation.
The Polonians seemed to be satisfied with the answer, yet pretending
business at Venice, they departed; and returned no more.

A letter which the King of Spain wrote with his own hand, caused much joy in
Rome; in which he aduertized the Pope of the negotiation of Montbrun, sent
unto him by the Queen of France, and of the answer which he gave him,
promising to assist his Holiness to purge Christendom of heresy, John
Tancherel is condemn^d by the Parliament of Paris for defending in ye schools,
that the Pope may depose Kings.
with all the forces of his Kingdoms and States, and to send potent and speedy
aids to any Prince that would cleanse his Country of that contagion. But the
bad conceit which the Court had of the Frenchmen was increased, by an advice
sent from Paris, that the Parliament had, with much solemoitie, condemned to
recant one John Tancherel, a Bachelor of Divinity, because, with intelligence
of some Divines, he had proposed and defended public questions, that the
Pope, Vicar of CHRIST, is Monarch of the Church, and may deprive Kings and
Princes, who disobey his commandments, of their Kingdoms, States, and
Digmties; who being accused, cited, and having confessed the fact, did fly,
and the judges, as in a Comedy, caused the Beadell of the University to
represent his person, and to make a public satisfaction, and recantation,
forbidding the Divines to dispute such questions hereafter, making them go to
the King to ask pardon for having suffered so important a matter to be
disputed on, and to promise to oppose themselves always against that doctrine.
They spoke of the Frenchmen as of lost sheep, who denied the authority given
by CHRIST to S. Peter, For which the Frenchmen are much censured in Rome
to feed the whole flock, and to loose and bind, which does consist
principally in punishing the delicts which give scandal, or offense against
the Church in common, without difference of Prince or subject. The examples of
the Emperors, Henry the fourth and fifth, Frederic the first and second, and
Lewis of Bauaria, of the Kings of France, Philippus Augustus, and Pulcher, were
alleged; as also the famous sayings of the Canonists in this point: they said
the Pope ought to cite the whole Parliament to Rome; and that the conclusion of
that Divine ought to be sent to Rome also, to be examined before any thing else
were done, and approved, and the contrary condemned. The Pope did moderately
complain hereof, and thought it better But the Pope dissembleth his distaste.
to dissemble, because, as he said, the great sore of France did make this
insensible.

The Court was persuaded, that neither Ambassador nor Bishop would be sent out
of France to Trent, and discoursed what was fit for the Pope to do, to force
them to accept the determinations of the Council, which the Pope was, by all
means, resolved to open, at the beginning of the new year. He imparted this
determination to the Cardinals, exhorting them to consider, that it did not
stand with the honor of the Apostolic Sea, nor of that College, to receive
rules and reformations from others, and that the condition of the times, when
all cry out for reformation, not understanding what The Pope promises to make
a reformation in the Court.
it is, did require, that in regard of the glorious name thereof, it should not
be refused; that, in this contrariety of reasons, the best temper was, to
make, by way of prevention, a reformation of his own accord; which would not
serve to that purpose only, but win commendations also, by making himself an
example to others; that for this cause, he would reform the Penitentiary, and
Datary, principal members of the Court, and afterward consider of smaller
matters: and he deputed cardinals for one and the other charge. He discoursed
of the causes why the opening of the Council could And hastneth the opening of
the Council.
no longer be deferred. For it being discovered that the Vltramontans have bad
ends and disseignes, to abate the absolute power which GOD has given to the
Pope of Rome, the more time they have to think on it, the more their plots
will increase; and that there is danger, that, by time, some of the Italians
may be gained also; that therefore it is the safest way to use expedition, and
that, if the great expenses, which are made in maintaining the Prelates, be not
quickly ended, the Apostolic Sea, will not be able to bear them. Afterward
he gave the cross of the Legation to the Card. Altemps, with order to put
himself in readiness, and to be in Trent at the opening of the Council, if
it were possible. The cause why he revoked the order, given at the departure
of Cardinal Simoneta, to open the Council at his arrival, was the instance
of the Emperors Ambassador in Rome, that the Ambassadors of his Master might
be present at it. But afterward having aduertized his Holiness, that they
would be in Trent before the midst of January, he earnestly entreated the
Marquis of Pescara, whom the King of Spain had sent Ambassador to the
Council, to be in Trent, and assist at the opening of it. He solicited the
Venetians also to send their Embassage, being careful that that ceremony
should pass with reputation. Notwithstanding, he wrote to the Legates to open
the Council so soon as the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of the forenamed
Princes were arrived, and that if they came not by the midst of the month,
they should defer it no longer. And in this coniuncture the year 1561 did
end.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
THe Legates, 1562 PIUS 4. FARDINAND. ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9.
in conformity of that which the A general congregation is hell the 15. of
April; in which two great controversies did arise.
Pope had last commanded, the fifteenth of January made a general
Congregation, in which the Cardinal of Mantua, as prime Legate, made a
discourse, to show how necessary and fit it was to open the Council, and
exhorted the Prelates to promote so sacred and pious a work, with fastings,
alms, and frequent Masses. Afterward the Bull of the Legation was read, dated
the tenth of March; which was in general terms, with the usual clauses* that
he sent them, as Angels of peace, to preside in the Council, which was to
begin at Easten. After this, three other Briefes were read. The first dated the
fifth of March, and was a faculty to the Legates to give leave to the Prelates
and Divines to read, during the time of the Council, books prohibited. The
second dated the three and twentieth of May, that the Legates should have
faculty to absolve those who would secretly abjure for cause of heresies. The
third was dated the last of december, in which the Pope to take away all
controversy which might happen between the Prelates about precedencie, does
command that the Patriarchs should have the first place, the Archbishop the
second, and the Bishops the third, regarding only the time of the promotion,
not the dignity of the Sea, or of the Primacie, whether true or pretended.

This being read, Friar Bartholomew de Mar^iri, Archbishop of Braga in One
about precedence of the Prelates.
Portugal, exclaimed that the Council should begin with doing injury to the
principal Churches of Christendom, saying that his Sea, which had the
Primacie of Spain, should, by this sentence, be made inferior, not only to
three Archbishopricks, subject unto him, but also to the Archbishop of Rosano
who has no Suffragan, and to the Archbishops of Nissia and Antiuari who have
not any residencie, and scarce any Christians to govern; that it is not
equitable to make one law for ones self, and another for others, and to
pretend the preservation of ones own right, and to deprive others of theirs.
He spoke so earnestly, that the Legates were troubled, and did hardly pacify
him, though they caused a declaration to be written, that the Popes meaning,
and theirs was, that no man should gain or lose any right by that Decree,
neither in (...) possission, but that every Primate, whether true or pretended,
should, after the Council, remain in the same state in which he was before.
The Archbishop being with much ado appeased, the other Spaniards made
request, that the opening of the Council Another whether this Convocation of
the Council should be a continuation of the old, or a new Council.
might be declared to be a continuation of that which was begun under Paul, and
prosecuted by Julius le(...) any one might cavil, that it was a new Council.
The Bishop of Zante, who had been in Germany, and knew how that action would be
calumniated and how distasteful to the Emperor, replied, that as the things
already determined ought not to be questioned, but held as decided, so to
declare so much now without necessity, would cut off all hope from the
Emperor and French King to find such a coniuncture, as that the Protestants
would submit themselves to the Council, and assist in it. The Legates
especially Mantua and Varmiense, did second the opinion of the Bishop with many
discourses, and much was spoken on both sides very bitterly, and the Spaniards
said they would protest and return: yet, after many consultations, they
finally agreed to desist from their instance, not to oppose the Emperor, the
French King, the Dutchmen, and Frenchmen, nor to give matter of complaint to
the Protestants, so that no words were used to signify it was a new Council,
or to prejudice the continuation. The Cardinals promised in the Popes name,
that his Holiness would confirm whatsoever was done in Trent, in the two
precedent Councels, though this were dissolved without conclusion. The
Spaniards were content: and after long discoursing, it was concluded, that a
form of words should be used A decree for opening the Council.
to signify, that the Council did begin to be celebrated, all suspension
being removed; which though they were ambiguous, and might be drawn to
contrary senses, yet being sufficient to compose the present difference, they
were received, and they concluded to open the Council the next Sunday, being
the eighteenth of the month. In the end the Cardinal proposed, that the
Council being begun, the Prelates should frequent the public Chapels in the
time of Mass, and that there should be many Latin Sermons, which being to
be made sometimes by men that know not what does befit the time, place, and
auditorie, that it were good to depute a Prelate, who, as Master of the holy
Palace in Rome, should reuiew that which was to be The Bishop of Modena is
appointed to peruse whatsoever is to be delivered in public.
spoken, and so the Sermon to be repeated, according to his censure. The
proposition pleased them all; and Egidius Foscararus, Bishop of Modena, was
appointed to peruse every Sermon, and whatsoever else was to be delivered in
public.

The Congregation being dissolved, the Legates, by the help of their inward
friends, began to frame the Decree, and did conceive it in the form agreed
on; and observing diverse treaties amongst the Prelates, while they were idle in
Trent to propose some one provision, some another, all tending to enlarge the
authority of the Bishops, and diminish that of Rome, they thought to remedy
all in the beginning, before the humor began to stir, by decreeing that
none, but the Legates, might propose any matter to be discussed. They saw the
proposition was hard, and foresaw contradiction; therefore they thought it
necessary to use much Art, that it might be received sweetly, and at
vnawards. The negative, that none should propound, Why the Legates desire to
make a decree that none should propose any thing in Council, but themselves.
seemed hard and sharp; and the affirmative, that the Legates should propound,
which did virtually only, and not plainly contain an exclusion of others,
did please better, covering all with a pretense of keeping order, and giving
time of deliberation to the Synod. The Decree was so artificially made, that,
even at this present, one must be very attentive, if he will discover the
sense, and it is impossible to understand it at the first; which I will
rehearse in vulgar, in plain terms; but he that will see the Artifice, let
him read it in Latin.

Therefore in conformity of the resolution, when the eighteenth day was The
solemnities of the first Session, in which the Council was opened.
come, a procession was made of the whole Clergy of the City, of the Divines
and Prelates, who, besides the Cardinals, were one hundred and twelve, that did
wear Miter, accompanied by their families, and by many Country people armed
going from Saint Peter's Church, to the Cathedral; where the Cardinal of
Mantua sang the Mass of the holy Ghost, and Gaspar^ del Fosso, Arch bishop of
Rheggio, made the Sermon. His subject was the authority of the Church,
Primacie of the Pope, and the power of Councels. He said that the Church had as
much authority as the word of God; that the Church has changed the Sabbath,
ordained by God, into Sunday, and taken away Circumcision, formerly commanded
by his Divine Majesty, and that these Precepts are changed, not by the
preaching of CHRIST; but by the authority of the Church. Turning himself to
the Fathers, he exhorted them to labor constantly against the Protestants,
being assured that, as the holy Ghost cannot err, so they cannot be deceived.
And the Veni creator spiritus being sung, the Secretary, who was Bishop of
Tile^i, read the Bull of the Convocation, before alleged; and the foresaid
Archbishop interrogated the Decree for the opening the Council; saying,
Fathers, does it please you that the general Council of Trent should be
celebrated from this day, all suspension whatsoever being removed, to handle,
with due order, that which shall seem fit to the Synod, the Legates and
Presidents proposing, to remove the controversies of Religion, correct
manners, and reconcile the peace of the Church? They answered, Placet. Only
four prelates contradicted that part, Proponentibus Legatis: which words I
repeat in Latin, The words, Proponentibus Legatis, were much questioned.
because they must be often mentioned, in regard of the great controversies
and disputes which followed. The contradictors were Peter Guerrero, Archbishop
of Granata, Francesco Bianco, Bishop of Orense, Andreas della Questa, Bishop of
Leon, Antonio Colermero, Bishop of Almeria. They said they could not consent,
because they were new words, never used in any Council, and demanded that
their voices might be registered in the acts of the Council. No answer was
given them, and the next Session was intimated for the six and twentieth of
February. The Speaker of the Council required all the Notaries and
Protonotaries to make one or more Instruments of the things aforesaid; and so
the Session ended.

The Legates advised the Pope of what happened in the Congregation, and
Session, who imparted it to the Consistory. In which many were of opinion, in
regard of these first difficulties, that the Council would not proceed well,
especially considering the obstinate contradiction of the Spanish Bishops not
fit to compose the differences of Religion, although the Legates and Bishops of
Italy should use Art, and unity in temporizing and ouercomming them. The
Pope commended the wisdom of the Legates, that they had prevented, as he
said, there meritie of the innouators; and was not displeased with the
opposition of four, because he feared a greater number; he exhorted the
Cardinals to reform themselves, seeing they had to do with vnrespectfull
persons, giving order that the other Italian Bishops should be solicited to
depart. And he wrote to Trent that they Which the Pope will have to be
maintained by all means.
should maintain the Decree firmly, and put it in execution, without
relenting one jot.

In France the Queen of Navarre, Prince of Conde, Admiral, and Duchess
Tumults in France about Religion.
of Ferrara, having many months made request that places should be allowed to
those of the new Religion, for the Sermons and Ceremonies, and all these, and
many Grandies more, even in the Court it self, making profession thereof, the
inferior Reformatists, imboldened hereby, did assemble themselves apart, which
the Catholics not being able to support, very dangerous popular tumults were
raised in many parts of the Kingdom, with slaughter on both sides; which were
cherished by the Nobility of the Catholics, envying that the Hugonot
Princes, gayning a popular train, should exceed them. Two diverse tumults were
raised by Sermons; one in Dijon, and the other in Paris; notorious not only
for the death of many, but also for the rebellion against the Magistrates;
which made the Kings Counsel resolve to seek a remedy; and, that it might be
fitted to the whole Kingdom, the Presidents of all the Parliaments were
called, and a number of Counselors elected to deliberate with maturity what
was best to be done. The seventeenth of January, all these being assembled in
Saint German, the Chancellor declared in the Kings name, that they were called
to consult how to remedy the stirs raised in the Kingdom. He made a
recapitulation of all the things that happened, adding that the differences of
Religion should be referred to the Prelates, but when the peace of the
Kingdom, and keeping of the Subjects in obedience to the King is in question,
that this could not belong to the Ecclesiastiques, but to those whom the King
would appoint to consult of it. That he had ever commended Tulli, who was wont
to blame Cato, that, living in a most corrupt age, was so severe and rigid in
his determinations, as if he had been a Senator in Plato his Commonwealth.
That laws were to be fitted to the time and persons, as the shoe to the
foot. That this particular was then to be consulted of, whether it were good
service for the King to permit or prohibit the Congregations of the
Protestants; wherein they were not to dispute which Religion was the better,
because they took not in hand to frame a Religion, but to put in order a
Republique; and that it was not absurd to say, that many might be good
Citizens, and not good Christians, and that those who were of diverse religions
might live in peace.

In consulting hereof the opinions were diverse: but they prevailed who thought
that the Edict of July was to be remitted in part, and the Protestants to have
leave to preach. At the making of the Edict, which contained many points, the
Cardinals of Borbon, Tornon, Chastillon were present, as also the Bishops of
Orleans, and Valence. That the Protestants should restore the Churches
possessions, and other Ecclesiastical goods usurped. That they should forbear
to beat down Crosses, Images, and Churches, upon pain of death. That they
should not assemble themselves to preach, pray, or administer the Sacraments,
in public or in private, by day or by night, within the City. That the
prohibitions, and punishments of the Edict of July, and all others made before
should be suspended. That they shall not be molested in their Sermons made out
of the City, or hindered by the Magistrates, who ought to protect them from
injury, chastising the Seditions on both sides. That none shall scandalize
another for Religion, or use contumelious words of faction. That the
Magistrates and officers may be present at the Sermons and Congregations. That
they shall not make Synods, Colloquies, or Consistories, but with leave, and in
presence of the Magistrate. That they shall observe the laws for feasts, and
degrees prohibited for marriage. That the Ministers shall be bound to swear
to the public Officers, not to offend against this Edict, nor to preach any
doctrine contrary to the Nicen Council, and the books of the New and Old
Testament. The Parliament could hardly be brought to accept of this Edict.
Therefore the King did command again, that it should be published, adding
that it was to be understood to be made by way of provision, until the
determinations of the General Council were diuulged, or the King ordain
otherwise, not meaning to allow two Religions in his Kingdom, but that only
of the holy mother the Church, in which himself and his predecessors have
lived. The Parliament being not agreed for all this, the King commanded,
that, laying aside all delays and difficulties, the ordination should be
published. And so it was the sixth of March, with this clause, that the
Parliament did verify For appeasing of which an Edict is made, March 6.
the Kings letters to obey him, considering the state of the times, not to
approve the new Religion, but only by way of provision, until it be
otherwise ordained by the King.

But to return to Trent in the Congregation held the seven and twentieth Three
propositions in the Congregation of the 27. of January.
of January the Legates made three propositions. The first, to examine the
books written by diverse authors, since the heresies began, together with the
censures of the Catholics against them, to determine what the Synod should
decree concerning them. The second, that all that are interested in that
matter, should be cited by Decree of the Synod, lest they complain that they
have not been heard. The third, that a Safe Conduct should be given to those
who are fallen into heresy, with a large promise of great and singular
clemency, so that they will repent, and acknowledge the power of the
Catholic Church. And order was given that the Fathers, having considered on
the propositions, should deliver their opinions in the next Congregation, as
well how to examine with case the books and censures, as concerning all the
rest. And Prelates were deputed to examine the Mandates and excuses of those
who pretended they could not come to the Council.

This place does require a relation of the beginning of prohibiting books, and
with what progress it was come to that state in which it then was, and what
new order was then taken. In the Church of Martyrs there was no Ecclesiastical
prohibition, though some godly men made conscience of A discourse of the Author
concerning the prohibition of books.
reading bad books, for fear of offending against one of the three points of
the Law of God, to avoid the contagion of evil; not to expose ones self to
temptation, without necessity or profit; and not to spend time vainly. These
Laws, being natural, do remain always, and should oblige us to beware of
reading bad books, though there were no Ecclesiastical law for it. But these
respects ceasing, the example of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, a famous
Doctor, did happen, who about the year of our Lord 240. being reprehended by
his Priests for these causes, and troubled with these respects, had a vision
that he should read all books, because he was able to judge of them. Yet
they thought there was greater danger in the books of the Gentiles, then of
the heretics, the reading whereof was more abhorred and reprehended, because
it was more used by Christian Doctors for a vanity of learning eloquence. For
this cause S. Hierom, either in a vision, or in a sleep, was beaten by the
Devil; so that about the year 400. a Council in Carthage did forbid to read
the books of the Gentiles, but allowed them to read the books of the
heretics; the Decree whereof is amongst the Canons collected by Gratian. And
this was the first prohibition by way of Canon: but there are others, by
counsel of the Fathers, to be regulated according to the Law of God, before
recited. The books of heretics, containing doctrine condemned by Councels,
were often forbid by the Emperors for good government. So Constantine forbad
the books of Arrius; Arcadius those of the Eunomians, and Maniches; Theodosius
those of Nestorius; Martianus those of the Euticheans; and in Spain the King
Ricaredus, those of the Arrians. It sufficed the Councels and Bishops to show
what books did contain damned or apocryphal doctrine. So did Gelasius in the
year 494. and went no further, leaving it to the conscience of every one to
avoid them, or read them to a good end. After the year 800. the Popes of
Rome, as they assumed a great part of the politic government, so they caused
the books, whose authors they did condemn, to be burned, and forbad the
reading of them. Notwithstanding, one shall find but few books forbid in that
sort, until this age. A general prohibition of reading books containing
doctrine of heretics, or suspected of heresies, upon pain of
excommunication, without any further sentence, was not used. Martinus 5. does
in a Bull excommunicate all the Sects of heretics, especially Wiglesists, and
Hussites, not mentioning those who read their books, though many of them went
about. Leo the tenth condemning Luther, did withal forbid all his books, upon
pain of excommunication. The Popes following, in the Bull called In oena,
having condemned and excommunicated all heretics, did excommunicate those
also who read their books: and, in other Bulls against heretics in general,
did thunder the same censures, against the readers of their books. This did
rather breed a confusion. For the heretics not being condemned by name, one
was to judge of the books more by the quality of the doctrine, then by the
name of the authors, wherein diverse men being of diverse opinions, many
scruples of conscience did arise. The Inquisitors being more diligent, made
Catalogues of those whom they knew, which, not being conferred, were not
sufficient to remove the difficulty. Philip, King of Spain, was the first
that gave a more convenient form, in the year 1558, making a Law that the
Catalogue of books prohibited by Inquisition should be printed.

According to this example Paul 4. also ordained, that an Index should be
composed by that office, and printed; and so it was in the year 1559. in which
they did proceed many steps further then formerly they had done, and laid
foundations to maintain and make great the authority of the Court of Rome, by
depriving men of that knowledge, which is necessary to defend them from
usurpations. Until that time they contained themselves within the terms of
the books of the heretics, neither was there any book forbidden, if the
author were not condemned. This Index was divided into three parts. The first
contains the names of those, all whose works, of what argument soever,
though profane, are forbidden: and in this number are placed not only those
who have professed doctrine, contrary to that of Rome, but many also which
lived and dyed in the profession thereof. The second contains the names of the
books which are particularly condemned, others of the same authors not being
condemned. In the third, some books are condemned without a name, but only by
a general rule, that all those are forbidden which bear not the names of the
authors, written after the year 1519, and many Authors and books are
condemned which for 300. 200. and 100. years have been commonly read by the
learned in the Church of Rome, with the knowledge, and without the
contradiction of the Popes of those times; and, amongst the modernes, some of
those which were printed in Italy, even in Rome, with approbation of the
Inquisition, and allowed also by the Briefes of the Pope himself, are
forbidden; as the Annotations of Erasmus upon the New Testament^ which Leo the
tenth having read, approved by his Brief, dated in Rome, September The
annotations of Erasmus upon the New Testament, read and approved by Leo 10.
are, forbidden to be read.
10. 1518. But it is a thing considerable above all, that under color of faith
and religion, books are prohibited and condemned, with the same severity, in
which the authority of Princes and Temporal Magistrates is defended from they
surpations of the Clergy; and of Councels and Bishops, from the usurpations of
the Court of Rome; in which hypocrisies or tyrannies are manifested, by which
the people, under pretense of Religion, are deceived. In sum, a better
mystery was never found, then to use religion to make men insensible. That
Inquisition went so sarre, that it made a Catalogue of 62. Printers, and
prohibited all books printed by them, of what author, art, or idiome soever;
with an addition of more weight; that is, and books printed by such Printers
who have printed books of heretics; so that there scarce remained a book to
be read. And for the height of rigor, the prohibition of what book soever
contained in that Catalogue, was upon pain of excommunication (...)
sententiae, reserved to the Pope, deprivation and incapacitie of offices and
benefices, perpetual infamy, and other arbitrary punishments. Concerning this
severity, remonstrance was made to this Pope Pius, who referred the Index and
all the matter to the Council, as has been said.

Touching the Articles proposed there were diverse opinions. Ludouicus
Becatelli, Archbishop of Ragusi, and Friar Augustine Seluago, Archbishop of The
opinion of the Archbishop of Ragusi, and of Genua, concerning the Index.
Genua, thought that no good effect could proceed from handling the matter of
books in Counsel, yea, that it would rather hinder the conclusion of that for
which the Council is principally assembled. For Paul 4. by the counsel of all
the Inquisitors, and of many famous men, who sent him advice from all parts,
made a most complete catalogue, to which nothing can be added, except some
book come forth within these two years, which deserves not the labor of a
Synod. But he that would allow any that are prohibited in that collection,
would show that they have unadvisedly proceeded in Rome, and so would take away
all reputation from the Index already published, and from the Decree it self
which they would make; it being a common maxim, that new laws do remove
estimation more from themselves, then from the old. Besides (said Becatelli)
there is no need of books, the world has too many already, especially since
printing was invented: and it is better to forbid a thousand books without
cause, then permit one that deserves prohibition. Neither were it fit the
Synod should be troubled with rendering the causes of the prohibitions, making
censures, or approouing those which are already made in diverse places by the
Catholics. For it would be to call for contradiction. It belongs to a
Doctor to give a reason of his saying, a lawmakers if he do it, does diminish
his authority, because the subject does wrestle with the reason alleged, and
when he thinks he has resolved it, he thinks also that he has taken
all virtue from the precept. Neither is it good to correct or purge any book
for the same causes, for fear of making men say that something is omitted that
deserved, and something changed that did not deserve correction. Moreover the
Synod would incur the displeasure of all that are affectionate to the books
prohibited, and would induce them not to receive the other necessary Decrees,
which shall be made. He concluded, that, the Index of Paul being sufficient,
he thought it not fit to take pains in vain in doing of that anew, which is
done already, or undoing that which is done well. Many other reasons were
alleged in confirmation of this opionion, by many Bishops creatures of Paul
4, admirers of his wisdom in managing the Ecclesiastical discipline, who
maintained that it was necessary to preserve, yea, to augment the rigor
instituted by him, if they would preserve the purity of religion.

John Thomaso S. Felicio, was of a contrary opinion; that the Council should
treat again of books; as if there had been no precedent prohibition; The
opinion of John Thomaso S. Felicio
because that, being made by the Inquisition of Rome, is odious, for the name,
to the Vltramontans, and besides is so rigid that it cannot be observed; and
nothing does more easily bring a law into disuse, then the impossibility or
great difficulty in keeping it, and the great rigor in punishing the
transgressors; he said that, indeed, it was necessary to preserve the
reputation of that office, but that might be done conveniently enough, by
making nomention thereof, and by ordayning only things necessary, and moderate
punishments. And therefore his opinion was, that all consisted in setting down
the manner, and spoke what himself thought to be the best; that is, that the
books not already censured should be divided amongst the Fathers and Divines
of the Counsel, and those that were absent also, to be examined and censured,
and that a great Congregation should be deputed, to judge between the censure
and the book; and that this also should be observed in those which are
censured already, and then all should be proposed in the general Congregation,
to decree that which was best for the public good. For citing the Authors, he
said there were two sorts of them; some separated from the Church, and some
incorporated in it, of the former no account is to be made, seeing that, by
their separation, they have, as Saint Paul says, condemned themselves, and
their own works, so that there is no cause to hear them; of the others some
are dead, and some alive; of which the latter are to be cited and heard,
because their good name and honor being in question one cannot proceed against
they works, before the hearing of their reasons. Concerning the dead,
whatsoever the public good does require may be done, without danger of
offending any. Another Bishop added to this opinion, that the same form of
justice, used toward the Catholics alive, should be used also toward those
that are dead, because they have kindred and scholars, who do participate of
the fame of infamy of the dead, and are therefore interested, and in case
there were none such, yet the only memory of the dead cannot be judged, before
it be defended.

Some also did think it was not just to condemn the works of Protestants,
without hearing them. For howsoever the persons be condemned by themselves, yet
the laws do not permit the declaratory, without citation, though in a
notorious fact; and therefore it cannot be pronounced against a book, though
it does notoriously contain heresy. Friar Gregory, General of the Heremites,
said, he did not think it necessary to observe so many subtilties. For the
prohibition of a book, is as the prohibition of a meat, which is not a
sentence against it, nor against him that has prepared it, but a precept to
him that is to use it, made by him who has the charge of his health; therefore
the credit of the Victualer is not in question, but the benefit of the sick,
who is forbid to eat of a meat that is hurtful to him, though in it self, it
may be good. So the Synod, as a Physician, ought to forbid that which is
hurtful, or dangerous to the faithful; wherein none will receive wrong. For
howsoever the book may be good in it self, yet peradventure it may not agree
to the infirmity of the minds of this age. Many other considerations did
pass, which were finally resolved into one of these.

Concerning the third Article, to inuit the heretics to repentance with The
Legates and Prelates are divided concerning the general safe conduct.
promise of clemency, and grant of a safe conduct, there were diverse opinions,
even amongst the Legates themselves. Mantua was for a general pardon, saying,
that many would be gained thereby, and that it was a remedy used by all
Princes, in seditions, or rebellions, to pardon those whom they cannot
overcome, because, by that means, those that are least faulty, do retire,
and the others remain more weak; and although but few were gained, or but one
only, yet it was to be done; that though none at all could be gained, yet it
would be great gain to use and show clemency. Simoneta said, that this would
be dangerous for the ruin of others, because many are induced to transgress,
when they see it is easy to get a pardon, and that rigor, though it be hard
to him that feels it, does keep many in their duty; that it is sufficient
to show clemency to him that desires it, but to carry it after him that
does not demand; or does refuse it, does make men more careless of
themselves; and heresy will be thought to be but a small fault, when men see
it is so easily pardoned. In these two opinions the Prelates were divided; and
those who did not approve the Safe Conduct, said, it was not given to any in
the first Convocation of this Council, which would have been done if it had
been necessary or convenient, because the Pope that sat then was most wise,
and the Legates the chiefest of the College; that it was given in the second
Convocation, because Maurice Duke of Saxony, and other Protestants did desire
it, and the Emperor also in their behalf: but now it being demanded by
none, Germany saying aloud, and protesting that it does not hold this Council
to be lawful, a Safe Conduct would but give them matter, to make some bad
exposition of the Synods meaning. The Spanish Prelates would by no means
consent to a general Safe Conduct, because it would prejudice the Inquisition
of Spain, in regard, so long as that lasted, every one might profess himself
to be a Protestant, and make himself ready for the voyage, and could not be
arrested by that office. The Legates thought the like might happen to the
Inquisition of Rome and Italy. All The resolution of the general Congregation
concerning the Index, and Safe Conduct
being considered, concerning the Index, it seemed sufficient for that present,
to make Deputies, and to let those that were interested understand, by some
little part of the Decree, that they should be heard, and inuit all to the
Council; and, for the Safe Conduct, to refer themselves, in regard of the
difficulties, to a further consideration.

While these things were handled, the Popes Nephew, Cardinal Altemps, the fifth
Legate, came to Trent, and withal the news of the Edict of France before
rehearsed: which put them all into a confusion, that Princes should permit, by
public Decree, those nouities which the Council was then assembled to
condemn. The next day Antonius Miglicius, Archbishop of The Emperors
Ambassador is received in Congregation.
Prague, Ambassador for the Emperor, was received in a general Congregation,
and his Mandate read. The Archbishop made a long Oration, reserving the residue
to Master Sigismond Tonn, his Majesty's second Ambassador, who was to come. The
Synod answered, that they were very glad to see the Emperors Ambassadors,
and that they did admit his Mandate. The Ambassador would have preceded the
Cardinal Madruccio, alleging the reasons and pretensions of Don Diego, in
the first Council; but by the Legates answer, who told him how that business
was ended, he was satisfied, and sat below.

The ninth of this month Ferdinandus Martinez Mascarenius, Ambassador of
Portugal, was received, and the Kings letter of credence and Mandat The
Portugal Ambassador is received, and a doctor, who came with him, makes an
Oration.
read. A Doctor that came with him made a long oration; in which he showed the
benefit which the Church reapeth by Councels, and the necessity of this
present, the crosses which it formerly endured, and how the wisdom of Pope
Pius has now overcome them. He said the authority of Councels was so great,
that their Decrees were to be received, as divine Oracles; that the King hoped
that the differences of Religion should be decided in that Council, and the
manners of the Clergy directed to Evangelical sincerity; that therefore he
promised all obedience, whereof the Bishops arrived already, and those who
were to come, could give testimony; he showed the piety and religion of
those Kings, and the pains they have taken to subject so many Provinces to the
government of the Apostolic Sea; of which heroically pious works they might
expect an imitation in King Sebastian. He set forth, in few words, the
Nobility, and virtue of the Ambassador, and finally prayed the Fathers to
hear him, when he should speak in the behalf of the Churches of that
kingdom. The Speaker briefly answered, that the Synod was well pleased with
the Kings Mandate, and his Oration, and that the piety and Religion of his
Majesty and of his Ancestors was generally known, and their glory
conspicuous, for maintaining the Catholic Religion in that kingdom in these
turbulent times, and spreading of it in places far remote: for which the
Synod did give thanks to GOD, and receive the Kings Mandate with due respect.

In the congregation of the eleventh, the other Ambassador of the Emperor The
Emperors second Ambassador is received in Congregation.
presented himself: who was received without much ceremony, because the
Mandate had bin read before, so that there was time to treat of Conciliarie
matters; whereof some thing being spoken, liberty was given to the Legates to
elect Fathers to consider of the Index, and others to frame the Decree, against
the next Session. For the business of the Books, Censures, and Index, the
Legates named the Ambassador of Hungary, the Patriarch of Venice, four
Archbishops, nine Bishops, one Abbat, and two Generals.

The thirteenth the Emperors Ambassadors came to the Legates, and The Emperors
Ambassadors make five requests to the Legates.
made five requests; which they left in writing, that they might consider on
them. That the word Continuation should not be used, because it would make the
Protestants refuse the Council. That the next Session should be deferred, or
at the least, matters of small weight handled. That the Confessionists should
not be exasperated in the beginning, by condemning their books. That a large
safe conduct should be given to the Protestants. That whatsoever was handled in
the congregations, should be concealed, which hitherto had been diuulged,
even to the common people. And having offered all favor and assistance in the
Emperors name, they added, that they had order from his Majesty, that if they
were called by their most Reverend Lordships, they should give their advice in
matters of the Council, and employ his authority to favor them.

The Legates answered the seventeenth day, that it being necessary to give To
whom the Legates answer.
satisfaction to all, as they would not name the Continuation at their request,
so, not to provoke the Spaniards, it was necessary to abstain from the
contrary; that they would spend the next Session in general and light matters,
and allow a long time for others; that they would not then condemn the
Augustan Confession; that they would not then speak of the books of the
Confessionists, but would make the Index in the end of the Council; that a
large safe conduct should be given to the Germans, when it was decided whether
it should be given to them apart, or together with other Nations; that they
would take a good course for secrecy, and impart unto them whatsoever they
shall handle, being assured of the Emperors good affection and that the
Ambassadors are correspondent to the piety and Religion of their Master.

George Droscouitius, Bishop of the five Churches, the Emperors third
Ambassador, who came to Trent the month before, presented his Mandate in The
Bishop of five Churches, the Emperors third Ambassador is received in
congregation.
the general Congregation, the four and twentieth of February, and made an
Oration, in which he enlarged himself in the praises of the Emperor, saying,
that God had given him to these times, to provide against so many miseries; he
compared him to Constantine in favoring the Church; showed what pains he had
taken for the convocation of the Council, and that having obtained it, he had
before all other Princes sent Ambassadors, two for the Empire, kingdom of
Bohemia and Austria, and himself for the Kingdom of Hungary. He presented
his Mandate, and thanked the Synod for giving him place, fitting the quality
of an Ambassador, before they saw the purpose of his embassage. The Decree was
made in general terms, and read, as well to satisfy the Imperialists, as
because the matter was not well digested.

Which being done, Mantua gave a modest and grave admonition to the Fathers, to
keep secret what was handled in the Congregations, as well to avoid
opposition, as because things are held in greater reputation and reverence when
they are not known to all. Besides, that it would be dishonorable for that
assembly, if any thing were published, (as might happen often) without
convenient circumspection, and fit seemelinesse. He added that there was no
College or Council, Secular or Ecclesiastical, small or great, which had not
its secrets, to be observed by oath, or upon penalties: but that Synod,
consisting of wise men, ought not to be tied but by the bonds of their own
judgment; that, in saying thus, he spoke no more to the Fathers, then to his
colleagues, and to himself, every one being obliged to admonish himself in
every thing that is seemly. Then he spoke of the difficulty of the Safe
conduct, and exhorted every one to think exactly of it, saying, that if it
could not be determined before the Session, an addition should be made to the
Decree, that it might be granted in Congregation. This was agreed on amongst
the Legates, because having discovered the difficulty, especially in regard of
the Inquisition of Rome and Spain, they had written whatsoever had been spoken
as well concerning this point, as the Index, and expected an answer from Rome.

Where the Pope was in a rage for the Edict of France, and impatient because
they did nothing in the Council. He said it was not good that the Bishops
should be long out of their residencie, especially to handle superficially
points already decided in other Councels; he had formerly suspected the
Spanish Prelates, and did it then much more, because he thought their ill
affection was increased, for giving the King leave to sell four hundred
thousand crowns of yearly rent of the Ecclesiastical revenues for ten
years, and thirty thousand crowns of the revenues of lands held in vassalage
of the Church: which seemed to be a great diminution of the greatness of the
Church of Spain.

Lewis S. Gelais, Lord of Lansac, sent out of France expressly to give the
Pope an account of the State of the Kingdom, came to Rome, and said, that the
King seeing the great care of his Holiness concerning the Council, had
elected for his Ambassador to that place Monsieur di Candall^, and caused
four and twenty Bishops to go thither, of whom he gave him a list. He
related what had happened in France since the death of Francis, and the An
Ambassador is sent out of France to give the Pope an account of the state of
the kingdom.
necessity to proceed with moderation, as well because their forces were not
sufficient to use rigor, as also because (if they had been) they should have
embrewed themselves in the blood of the greatest of the Nobility; which would
have aliened the whole Kingdom, and brought all matters to a worse estate; and
that the King had no hope but in the Council, in which all Nations, even the
Germans themselves, would assist. For Religion being established in Germany, he
did not doubt to do the like in France, but thought it impossible to make
those who will not be present in the Council, to accept the Decrees thereof;
and that the French Protestants cannot be separated from the Dutch. Therefore
he entreated his Holiness, that, to give them satisfaction, only for the
security of the place and form of proceeding, he would be pleased to yield
unto them, in regard of the great benefit which would ensue. The Pope
answered, first concerning the Council, that, from the To whom the Pope
answers.
beginning of his Papacy, he was resolved to call it, that he has been
hindered by the Emperor and King of Spain, both which notwithstanding have at
this present Ambassadors and Prelates there; that none remain but the
Frenchmen, who have most need of the Council; that he has omitted nothing to
inuit the Dutch Protestants, even with the indignity of that Sea; that he
will continue, and will give them what security they can require; that he
thought it not honest to subject the Council to their discretion, and that, if
they refused to come, especially having been invited, they ought to proceed
without them. But, for the things done in France, he briefly said he could not
commend them, and prayed God to pardon the Authors of so great inconveniences.

And the Pope would have passed those bounds, if he had known what was in
doing in France at that same time, when Lansac made relation unto him of what
had been done. For, the fourteenth of February, the Queen gave order in S.
German, that the Bishops of Valence and of Seez, and the Divines, Butiglier,
Espensous, and Picorellius, should consent what might be done A treaty in
France about a concord in Religion.
for a beginning of concord; who proposed the points following. That it should
be absolutely forbidden to make an image of the holy Trinity, or of any person
not named in the Martyrologies, accepted by the Church. That the images should
not have any crowns or garments put upon them, or vows or oblations made unto
them, nor should be carried in procession, except the sign of the holy Cross;
wherewith the Protestants seemed to rest content, howsoever concerning the
sign of the cross they made some resistance, saying that Constantine was the
first which did propose it to be worshipped, contrary to the use of the ancient
Church. But Nicholaus Magliardus, Deane of the Sorbon, together with other
divines, did oppose, and defend the adoration of images, though he confessed
there were many abuses in it. In the same month the King of Navarre wrote to
the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Wittenberg, and Philip of Hassia, that
howsoever they could not agree in the Colloquie of Poisi, nor in this last
about images, yet he would still labor to reform religion, not so, as to
trouble the public quiet of the Kingdom, but bringing it in by little and
little.

At the same time the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of Loraine went to Tavern, a
Castle belonging to the Bishop of Strasburg, and there met Christopher The King
of Navarre writes to the Protestant Princes of Germany. A Parley between the
Guisards and the Duke of Wittenberg.
Duke of Wittemberg, with some Ministers of the Augustane Confession. They were
together three days; and those of Guise expounded to the Duke what favor was
done to the Augustan Confession in the Colloquie of Poisi, and the difficulty
which the Reformatists of France did make in accepting it, desiring that
Germany would join with them to hinder the doctrine of Zuinglius: not that the
amendment of religion (which they much desired) might be delayed, but that a
pestiferous poison might not take root, not only in France, but in Germany
also. This they did, that, the war now approaching, they might more easily
have assistance, or, at the least, that it might be denied to their enemies.
This Parlie be got great suspicions in Rome, Trent, and France. The Cardinal
and his adherents justified themselves, that it was for the good of
Christendom, to have the favor of the Protestants of Germany against the
Hugonots of France. And there was a fame, that the Cardinal did truly desire
an union in religion with Germany, and that, as he detested the Confession of
Geneua, so he inclined to that of Ausburg, and desired to see it planted in
France. It is certain that, after the Council of Trent was ended, he said he
had formerly believed that Confession, but that afterward he was satisfied
with the determination of the Council, and thought that all good Christians
ought to do the like. Concerning the Sermons publicly made in France, though
there were seditions in many places, which did hinder the increase of the
Reformatists, yet there were then 2150. assemblies, which 2150 reformed
Churches in France
were called Churches.

The six and twentieth of February being come, the Session was held in Trent.
Antonius Helius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, said Mass, and Antonius The Session
February 26.
Coccus, Archbishop of Corfu, made the Oration. When the Mass was ended, A
question between the Ambassadors of Portugal and Hungary, about the precedence
of their Masters (...)
the Mandats of Princes being to be read, there grew a question between the
Ambassadors of Hungary and Portugal, each pretending that his should first be
read, as of the more eminent King: There was no difficulty in the Precedence
of the Ambassadors themselves, because that of Portugal, as a secular, sat at
the right side of the Temple, and the other, as an Ecclesiastike, at the left.
The Legates, having consulted hereof, said, that the Mandats should be read in
the order as they were presented, not according to the dignity of the Princes.
The Popes brief, referring the matter of the Index to the Council, was read
also. This Index had been made in Rome by Paul the fourth, as has been said,
with which if the Council had meddled, it might have seemed to challenge
superiority above the Pope. Therefore they thought fit that the Pope should
voluntarily give leave, to prevent that prejudice. The Mass Patriarch read the
Decree, the substance whereof was. That the Synod, The Decree concerning the
Index.
meaning to restore the Catholic doctrine to its purity, and correct manners,
in regard the number of pernicious and suspected books was increased, because
the censures made in diverse Provinces, and Rome, have done no good, has
determined to depute some father to consider hereof, and to relate to the
Synod, in time convenient, what they think fit to have done more, to separate
the cockle from the good corn, to remove all scruples out of men's minds, and
to take away all cause of complaints; ordaining that this should be published
with that Decree, that if any have interest in the business of the books, and
censures, or any other to be handled in Council, he may know and be assured
that he shall be courteously heard. And because the Synod does heartily
desire the peace of the Church, that all may acknowledge their common mother,
it does inuit all who do not communicate with her, to reconciliation and
concord, and to come to Trent, where they shall be embraced with all offices of
charity; and further, has decreed that a safe conduct may be granted in a
general Congregation, and shall be of the same force and strength, as if it
had been granted in public Session. The Decree being read, the title whereof
was: Of the holy Ecumenicall, general The title of the Council is questioned.
Synod, lawfully assembled in CHRIST, the Archbishop of Granata required that
these words (representing the universal Church) should be added, as has
been observed in all the later Councels. Antonius Peragues, Archbishop of
Caglieri, made the same request; and these two were followed by almost all the
Spanish Prelates, desiring that this request might be noted in the acts. No
answer was made, but, for conclusion, the next Session was appointed to be the
14 of May.

The Decree was printed, not only because it was the custom, but because The
Decree is censured.
it was made of purpose to be published to all; and it was censured by all
sorts of persons. It was demanded how the Synod did call those, who were
interested in the things which were to be handled in the Council, if they
were not known; and said that formerly all things were handled besides
expectation, and who could prophecy what the Legates would propose, because
they knew not themselves, still expecting Commissions from Rome. Those who were
interested in any book, how could they know that any thing would be spoken
against it? The generality of the citation, and incertaintie of the cause
might induce every one to go to Trent, because every one has interest in some
particular, which might perhaps be treated on. It was concluded generally that
they were called in show, and excluded indeed. Notwithstanding, these things
which they could not praise, they commended the ingenuous confession of the
Synod, that the former prohibitions had begot scruples in men's minds, and given
cause of complaints. In Germany that part was suspected, where the Synod
gives authority to itself, to give a safe conduct in a general
Congregation. For they understood not any difference, in regard the same
persons met in both assemblies, but only that they did wear Miters in the
Sessions, and Caps in the Congregations; nor why, if the safe conduct could not
then be granted, they could not make a Session expressly for it. In sum, they
thought that there was some great mystery covered in it, howsoever the most
understanding men did believe that the Synod was assured that no Protestant
would come to Trent, with any safe conduct whatsoever, except it were by force,
as it happened in the year 1552. because of the resolution of Charles, a thing
which could no more be put in practice.

The Pope wrote back to the Legates, that the heretics should not be invited
to repentance with promise of pardon; because, it having been done by Julius,
and, another time, by Paul the fourth, no good issue came of it. Amongst the
heretics, those who are in a place of liberty will not accept it. and those
who remain where the Inquisition has power, if they fear to be discovered,
will receive the pardon fainedly to secure themselves of that The Popes answer
to the Legates.
which is past, with purpose to do worse more warily. For the Safe Conduct,
he was content it should be given to all who are not under the Inquisition;
but so, as that the exception should not be expressed; in regard that when
Julius granted his pardon, except only to those who were subject to the
Inquisitions of Spain and Portugal, much was spoken against it, and it passed
with small reputation, as if the Pope had not the same power over that
Inquisition, as over others. But for the manner of expressing it, he did
refer it to the Synod. For the form, he commended that which the Council
gave to Germany in the year 1552, in regard that was seen already, and that
so many Protestants came that year to Trent, upon that security. Concerning
the Index, he ordained that the deputies should proceed, until an occasion
were offered to make a public Decree without the opposition of any Prince.

The answer being come, the second of March and the day following
Congregations were held, to resolve whether the general pardon ought to be
published, and a Safe Conduct granted, and what form was to be given to the
one and the other; and the fourth day, after long disputations, all was
concluded, the Legates having made the determination fall where they aimed,
without interesting the Popes authority. To inuit the heretics to repentance
was omitted, for the reasons alleged in Rome. It was much disputed, whether a
Safe Conduct was to be given by the name of the French, English, and Scottish
men; and some spoke of the Greeks, and other Nations of the East. It was
presently seen that these poor men, afflicted in servitude, could not,
without danger and assistance of money, think of Councels; and some said that,
there being a division of the Protestants, it was good to let them alone, and
not to name them, alleging that it was dangerous to move in a body ill
humors which were at quiet. To give a Safe Conduct to English men which
neither they, nor any of them do require, would be a great indignity. They
were content it should be given to the Scots, because the Queen would demand
it, but so, as that the demand should first be made. For France, there was a
doubt made whether the Kings Counsel would take it well or not, because it
would be thought to be a declaration that the King had rebels. Of Germany
none could doubt, because it had been formerly granted to them; and if it
were granted to that Nation alone, it would seem that the others were
abandoned. Many thought fit to grant it absolutely to all Nations; but the
Spaniards did oppose, and were favored by the Legates, and others who knew the
Popes mind, to the great indignation of those, who thought that an inference
might be made that the Council was not above the Inquisition of Spain. In
the end all difficulties were resolved, and the Decree framed with three
parts. In the first a Safe Conduct was given to the Germans, just word by word,
as it was made in the year 1552. In the second, it was said that the Synod
does give Safe Conduct in the same form and words as it was given to the
Dutchmen, to every one who has not communion of faith with her, of every
Nation, Province, City and place where any thing is preached; taught, or
believed, contrary to that which is believed in the Church of Rome. In the
third it was said, that although all nations The Decree of the Safe Conduct.
do not seem to be comprehended in that extention, which has been done for
certain respects, yet those who repent, and return to the bosom of the
Church, are not excluded, of what nation soever they be, which the Synod
desires should be published to all. But because it must be maturely consulted
on, in what form the Safe Conduct must be given them, they have thought fit
to defer that point until another time, thinking it sufficient, for the
present to provide for the security of those who have publicly abandoned the
doctrine of the Church. The Decree was presently printed, as was fit, it being
made only to be published. Yet the Synod did not keep promise, to consult
of the form of the Safe Conduct, to be given to those of the third kind, and
in printing of the body of the Council, this third part was left out, leaving
it to the speculation of the world, why they did promise to provide for those
also, and publish it in print, with a desire to have all men know it, and
afterward not to do it, and labor to conceal that, which then they did
desire to manifest.

The Emperors Ambassadors solicited the Legates to make the reformation, and
to write to the Protestants, exhorting them to come to the Council, as was
done to the Bohemians, in the time of the Council of Basil. The Legates
answered that, for these forty years, all, both Prince and people, have
desired reformation, yet never any part thereof was handled, but themselves did
cross and hinder it, so that they have been constrained to abandon the work;
that now they will endeavor to make a general reformation of all
Christendom, but for one particularly for the Clergy of Germany, which does
most need it, and which the Emperor does principally expect, they saw not
how they could make it, seeing that the Dutch Prelates were not come to the
Council; and for writing to the Protestants, in regard they have answered the
Popes Nuncij with such exorbitant unseemliness, they could not but expect
that they would make a worse answer to the Letters of the Synod.

The eleventh of March the Legates proposed twelve Articles in the general
Twelve Articles to be discussed.
Congregation, to be studied and discussed in the next Congregations.

1. What provision might be made, that Bishops and other Curates may reside in
their Churches, without being absent, but for causes just, honest, necessary
and profitable for the Catholic Church. 2. Whether it be expedient, that
none be ordained but unto a title of some Benefice, in regard many deceits are
discovered which arise from ordination to a title of the Patrimony. 3. That
nothing be received for Ordination, either by the Ordainers, or their
Ministers, or Notaries. 4. Whether it ought to be granted to the Prelates,
that in the Churches where there are no daily distributions, or so small as
that they are not esteemed, they may convert one of the Prebends to that use.
5. Whether great Parishes which have need of many Priests, ought to have many
titles also. 6. Whether small Benefices with Cure, which have not a competent
revenue for the Priest, ought to be reformed, making one of many. 7. What
provision is to be made concerning Curates ignorant, and of a bad life, whether
it be fit to give them coadiutors, or able Vicars, assigning them part of the
revenues of the Benefice. 8. Whether power ought to be given to the Ordinary
to incorporate into the mother Churches, ruinated Chapels, which, for poverty
cannot be rebuilt. 9. Whether it ought to be granted to the Ordinary that he
may visit Benefices held in Commenda, though they be regular. 10. Whether
secret marriages, which shall be contracted hereafter, ought to be made void.
11. What conditions ought to be assigned, that a marriage may not be esteemed
secret, but contracted in the face of the Church. 12. What provision ought to
be made concerning the great abuses, caused by the Pardoners.
After these the point following was given to the Divines to be studied, One
Article more concerning clandestine marriages.
and discussed in a Congregation appointed for that only.

Whether, as Euaristus, and the Lateran Council have declared, that
clandestine, or secret marriages are reputed not good, both before the Judge,
and in estimation of the Church, so the Council may declare that they are
absolutely void, and that secrecy ought to be put amongst the impediments,
which do make a Nullitie in the marriage. In the mean space, it being The
Protestants of Germany treat a lea^ue, and raise Soldiers.
discovered that the Protestants of Germany did treat a league, and make some
leuies of Soldiers, the Emperor wrote to Trent, and to the Pope also, that
the Council might surcease, until it did appear whither the motion did tend.
For this cause, and because of holy days the residue of this month was spent
in ceremonies only.

The sixteenth day Franciscus Ferdinandus d'Aualos, Marquis of Pescara, The
Spanish Ambassador is received, and an oration is made in his name.
Ambassador of the Catholic King, was received in a general Congregation;
and, his Mandate being read, an Oration was made on his name; the substance
whereof was; That the Council being the only remedy for the evils of the
Church, Pius the fourth has, upon good reason, thought it necessary in these
times; in which Philip, King of Spain, desired to have been personally
present, to give example to other Princes: but, because he cannot, he has
sent the Marquis, to assist and favor it as much as possibly he can, knowing
that howsoever the Church is defended by God, yet sometimes it has need of
the assistance of man. That the Ambassador does not think it needful to
exhort the Synod, knowing their incredible and almost divine wisdom; that
he sees good foundations laid already, and the things now treated on, managed
with art, which does mitigate, and exasperate; so that hoping that their
future actions will be correspondent, he will only promise all good offices,
endeauours and favors from the King. The Speaker answered, in the Councels
name, that the coming of an Ambassador from so great a King, had given
courage and hope of the Synod that the remedies, which it shall use for the
evils of Christendom, will be profitable, therefore it does embrace his
Majesty with all good affection thanketh him offers to requite his merits,
and to do whatsoever it can for his honor; and does, as it ought, receive the
Mandate. In The answer of the Speaker.
the Congregation of the 18. the Ambassador of Cosmo, Duke of Florence and
Siena, was received; who, after his Mandate was read, made an Oration; The
Ambassador of Florence is received, and makes an Oration.
in which he showed at large the affinity of his Duke with the Pope, exhorted
the Fathers to purge the Church, and declare the light of the truth, taught by
the Apostles, offering all possible assistance from his Duke, as he had done
before to the Pope, for preservation of the Majesty of the Sea of Rome. The
Speaker thanked him in the Synodes name, and, having made a reverent
commemoration of Leo the tenth, and Clement the seventh, added that they were
assembled only for this end, and thought of nothing but of composing all
dissension, chasing away the darkness of ignorance, and manifesting the
truth.

Melchior Lusi, Ambassador of the Catholic Suisses, and Ioachimus Propostus,
The Ambassadors of the Catholic Suisses are received.
an Abbat, in the name of the Abbats, and other Ecclesiastiques of that Nation,
were received in the Congregation of the 20. In whose name an Oration was made
to this purpose. That the Consuls of the 7. Cantons, in regard of their filial
duty toward the Church, have sent Ambassadors to assist in the Council, and
to promise obedience, and to make known to all, that they do not yield to any
in their desire to assist the Sea of Rome, as formerly they have, in the times
of Julius 2, and Leo 10, as also when they fought with the neighbor Cantons,
for the defense of Religion, slaying Zuinglius, the most wicked enemy the
Church had, whose body they sought amongst the dead, and burnt it to testify
that they ought to have irreconciliable war with the other Cantons, so long
as they continue to be out of the Church, in regard they are situated at the
confines of Italy, as a Castle to resist the Northern evil, that it cannot
penetrate within the bowels of that Country. The Synod answered by the
Speaker, that the piety and good deeds of the Heluetians toward the
Apostolic Sea, were many and great; but no obedience or office more opportune
then the Embassage sent; and the offer made to the Synod; that they were glad
of the coming of the Ambassadors, and had, beside the protection of the
Emperor, Kings, and Princes, much confidence in that famous Nation.

In the Congregation of the sixth of April, Andreas Dudicius, Bishop of The
Orators of the Clergy of Hungary are received.
Tinia, and Johannes Collosarinus, of Canadia, Orators of the Clergy of
Hungary, were received. The first made an Oration, and said; that the
Archbishop of Strigonium, the Bishops and Clergy, had received great joy for
three things; for the assumption of Pius 4. to the Papacy, for the convocation
of the Council of Trent, and for the deputation of the Apostolical Legates to
preside in it. He showed the observance of the Prelates toward the Catholic
Church, and called the Cardinal of Varmia for a witness thereof, who did
know them, and conuersed with them; he expounded the devotion of the
Hungarians, and the service they do to all Christendom, in maintaining war
against the Turks, and the particular diligence of the Bishops, in opposing
the plots of the heretics. He related the common desire of them all to be
present in the Council, if their presence had not been necessary at home, to
defend their castles against the Turks, who are at their confines, and to
keep watch against the heretics; so that being forced to perform this duty
by them their Orators, they recommended themselves to the protection of the
Council, offering to receive and observe whatsoever should be decreed by it.
The Secretary answered in the Councels name, that the Synod was assured of the
joy which the Hungarians conceived for the celebration of the General
Council; that they ought to pray God for the happy issue of it, that they
desired to have seen the Prelates in person, but seeing they are hindered by
the causes proved by the Cardinal of Varmia, it does accept their excuse,
hoping that Christian Religion will receive profit by their presence in their
own Churches; and the rather because they have recommended their actions to
them the Orators, being honest and religious Fathers, and therefore that they
do embrace both them and their Mandates.

In the Congregations daily held from the seventh day until the 18, the Fathers
The Article of residence is set on foot again, and causes a contention.
spoke of the 4. first Articles, but very confusedly of the first, concerning
Residence. Of those who assisted in the first Council, when this point was
handled, which was done with some difference, or rather controversy, there
were but five Bishops in this, and yet, at the first proposing hereof, they
presently divided themselves into parts, as remembering the ancient contention;
which happened in no other question, neither at that time, nor in the time of
Julius, nor at this present. Some say the cause was, for that the other
discussions, being theological, were not well understood, and were handled
speculatiuely by the learned, without any passion but of hatred against the
Protestants, who did trouble them, by setting on foot those questions. But this
touched the Prelates in their own persons. The courtiers were moved with
ambition, or obliged to follow that opinion, which was most commodious for
their Patrons. Others were carried away with envy, who not hoping to raise
themselves to that height in which the courtiers were, desired to pull them
lower, and so to become equal. In this Article every one labored according to
his passion, and kept a strict account of his own voice delivered in the
Congregations, and of all the voices of others, which were any way remarkable.
Of this number 34. came into my hands, in that form as they were delivered,
and of the others I have understood the conclusion only: but here nothing is
to be related but that which is of note.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem said, That this Article had been handled, and The
Suffrage of the Patriarch of Jerusalem concerning Residence.
discussed in the first Council, and concluded, that, to cause residence,
there are two provisions: One, to constitute punishments for those who do not
reside; another, to remove the impediments which do hinder residencie. The
first was fully ordered in the sixth Session, neither can any thing be added,
in regard the loss of half the revenues is a very great pecuniary punishment,
then which a greater cannot be imposed, without making the Bishops beggars. If
the contumacie be excessive, there can be no greater punishment, except
deprivation; which requiring one to execute it, which must needs be the Pope,
in regard the ancient use of the Church was, to reserve to that Sea the hearing
and determining of the causes of Bishops, that sixth Session referred it to his
Holiness to find a remedy, either by means of a new provision, or
otherwise, and bound the Metropolitan to advise him of the absence. For the
second they began to make provision, and, in that, and other Sessions, many
Decrees were made, to take away many exemptions, which hindered the Bishops to
exercise their charge. Therefore it now remains only to continue, and to
remove the residue of the impediments, electing a certain number of Fathers,
as then was done, to make collection of them, that they may be proposed, and
provided for.

The Archbishop of Granata added, that a more potent and effectual remedy The
suffrage of the Archbishop of Granada.
was proposed in that Council; that is, that the obligation of Residence was
by the Law of God, which was handled and examined ten months together; and
that if that Council had not been interrupted, it would have been decided as
a necessary, yea, as a principal article of the doctrine of the Church, and
was then not only discussed, but the reasons used by diverse were put in print
also, so that the matter is prepared and digested, and nothing now remains,
but to give it perfection. When it shall be determined that residencie is de
iure Diuino, all hindrances will cease of themselves; the Bishops
understanding their duty, will think on their own conscience; they will not
be reputed hirelings, but Pastors, who knowing that the flock is given to them
by God, to whom they must make an account, without laying the fault on others,
and being assured that dispensations will neither save, nor help them, they
will apply themselves to perform their duty. And he proceeded to prove, with
many authorities of the New and Old Testament, Is approved by the mayor part.
and exposition of the Fathers, that this was the Catholic truth. This opinion
was approved by the mayor part of the Congregation, the maintainers whereof
labored to bring authorities and reasons.

Others did reject it, and said it was new, never defended, neither by
antiquity, And rejected by others.
nor by this age before Cardinal Caietan, who set the question on foot, and
maintained that part, which notwithstanding he did abandon in his old age,
because he took a Bishopric, and did never reside; that the Church has
ever held, that the Pope might dispense, that Non-residents have always been
punished, and reprehended as transgressors of the Canons only, and not of the
Law of God; that, indeed, it was disputed in the first Council, but the
disputation was held to be so dangerous by the Legates, men of great wisdom,
that they did cunningly cause it to be buried in silence; that this example
ought to be followed, and that the books which have been written since, have
given great scandal to the world, and made known, that the disputation
proceeded from partiality. For the authorities of the Scripture and Fathers,
they are only exhortations to perfection, neither is there any substantial
proof but out of the Canons, which are Ecclesiastical laws.

Some held opinion that there was neither place, nor time, nor opportunity to
handle that question, and that no good could come by the determination of it,
but danger of many inconveniences; that the Council was assembled to extirpate
heresies, not to make Schism among the Catholics, which would happen by
condemning an opinion, followed, if not by the greater part, yet by one half
at the least; that the authors of that opinion have not invented it for
trueths sake, but the more to urge men to reside, with small ground of reason,
in regard that the Laws of GOD are not more diligently observed then the Laws
of the Church; that the precept for keeping of Lent is more strictly observed,
then those of the Decalogue; that if to confess and communicate at Easter were
commanded by GOD, The laws of the Pope are more strictly observed then the
laws of God.
more would not do it then now do; that to say Mass with Copes is an
Ecclesiastical law, and yet no man does transgress it, he that does not obey
the penal commands of the Canons, will transgress much more when he fears
only the justice of GOD: neither will any Bishop be moved with that
determination, but it will give occasion to plot rebellions against the
Apostolic Sea, to restrain the Popes authority, and (as some have been heard
to whisper) to depresse the Court of Rome; that that was the ornament of the
Clergy, which is respected in other places, only in regard of it, that if it
should be depressed, the Church would every where be less esteemed; and
therefore that it was not fit to handle such a business, without imparting it
to his Holiness and College of Cardinals, to whom it does principally belong.

The opinion of Paulus Iouius, Bishop of Nocera is not to be omitted; who The
Suffrage of Paulus Iouius, Bishop of Nocera.
said in substance. That certainly the Council was assembled to cure a great
wound, which is the deformation of the Church, the cause whereof, as all are
persuaded, is the absence of the Prelates from their Churches; which being
affirmed by all, is perhaps not sufficiently considered by any. But it is not
the part of a wise Physician to take away the cause before he be well assured
that the remoouing of it will not cause greater diseases. If the absence of
Prelates has been the cause of the corruptions, there will be less
deformation in those Churches where they have resided. The Popes, for these
hundred years, have continually sat in Rome, and used all diligence to
instruct the people: yet we do not see that that city is better governed then
others. The great capital Cities of Kingdoms are most out of order, where the
Prelates have always resided; on the contrary, some poor cities, which have
not seen a Bishop in an hundred years, are less corrupted; that amongst the
ancient Prelates here present, who have continually resided in their Churches,
of which number there are some, not one can show that his Dioces is better then
the next, which have continued without a Bishop. If any say they are a flock
without a shepherd, let him consider that not Bishops only, but Parish Priests
also have cure of souls, and that there are mountains which having never
seen Bishops, may be a pattern to Episcopal Cities. That the zeal and care
of the Fathers of the first Council is to be commended, and imitated, who, by
penalties, have incited the Prelates to remain in their own Churches, and
begun to remove the impediments which did hinder them; but they were deceived
if they did hope that this residencie would be a sufficient reformation* yea,
they ought to fear, that as residencie is now required, so posterity, seeing
the inconveniences that arise from thence, will desire their absence. That they
ought not to make such strong bonds as cannot in time of need be loosed, such
as Ius Diuinum would be, which they now begin to allege, 1400 years after
CHRIST Where there is a pernicious Bishop, as was that of Collen, he will
defend himself by this doctrine, in not obeying the Pope, when he shall cite
him to give an account of his actions, or keep him far off, that he may not
cherish the evil. He added, that he saw that the Prelates who were of the
contrary opinion had a good zeal, but did believe also that some of them would
be content to make use of it, to withdraw themselves from the Popes obedience,
which the stricter it is, the more it does hold the Church united. He put them
in mind also, that what soever they do herein, will turn to the favor of
Parish Priests also, to withdraw themselves from obedience to their Bishops.
For the Articles being thus expounded, they will make use of it, and say, that
the Bishop cannot remove them from their Churches, nor restrain their
authority by reseruations, and, being Pastors immediately sent by God, they
will pretend that the flock does more belong to them then to the Bishop, and
no answer can be made against it. And as hitherto the government of the Church
has been preserved by means of the Hierarchy, so this will cause a
Popularity, and an Anarchie, which will destroy it.

John Baptista Bernard, Bishop of Aiace, who though he believed that
residencie The suffrage of John Baptista Bernard Bishop of Aiace.
was de iure diuino, yet thought it not fit to speak of that question,
delivered a singular speech, saying; That, not aiming to establish one opinion
more then another, but only so to enforce residencie, as that it may be
really executed, he thought it vain to declare from whence the obligation
came, or whatsoever else, and that it was sufficient only to remove the cause
of absence; which is, that Bishops do busy themselves in the Courts of
Princes, and in the affairs of the world, being Judges, Chancellours,
Secretaries, Counselors, Treasurers; and there are but few offices of State
into which some Bishop has not insinuated himself. This is forbidden by S.
Paul, who thought it necessary that a soldier of the Church should abstain
from secular employments. Let Gods command be executed, and them for bidden to
take any charge, office, or degree, ordinary or extraordinary, in the affairs
of the world; and then there being no cause for them to remain at Court, they
will go to their residencie, of their own accord, without command or
penalty, and will not have any occasion to depart from thence. In conclusion,
he desired that the Council would constitute, that it should not be lawful
for Bishops or others, who have cure of souls, to exercise any secular office
or charge.

The Bishop of five Churches, the Emperors Ambassador, opposed and Is opposed
by the Bishop of five Churches, the Emperors Ambassador.
said, that if the words of S. Paul were to be understood according to the
sense which was given them, the whole Church was to be condemned, and all
Princes, since the year 800, until now, for that for which they principally
deserve to be commended, these in giving, and those in accepting temporal
Jurisdictions; which also have been exercised by the Popes, and by Bishops
placed in the Catalogue of Saints. The best Emperors, Kings of France, Spain,
England, and Hungary have ever had their Counsels full of Prelates, all which
must be condemned, if Gods precept do forbid them to exercise those charges.
He that thinks Paul his command does comprehend Ecclesiastical persons
only, is deceived: For it is directed to all faithful Christians, who are the
Soldiers of Christ, and infers, that as the worldly soldier does not
busiehimselfe in the Arts by which life is maintained, because they are
repugnant to his profession, so the Soldier of Christ, that is, every
Christian, ought to abstain from those things which are repugnant to Christian
profession, which are sins only; but whatsoever may be done without sin,
is lawful for every one. The Prelates that serve in those affairs, cannot be
reprehended, except it be said that they are sins. The greatness of the
Church, and the esteem the world makes thereof, proceeds most from
Ecclesiastical dignities, placed in persons of Nobility and of great blood,
and from Prelates exercised in charges of importance; which if they should be
incompatible to the Clergy, no person nobly descended would enter into that
order, no Prelate would be esteemed, and the Church would consist only of
people basely borne, and living basely. But, on the contrary, the good doctors
have ever maintained, that those Statutes are against Ecclesiastical liberty,
which exclude from public administrations Ecclesiastical persons, to whom
they belong by right of birth; as also the prohibitions that public charges
cannot be given to Priests. This was heard with applause of all the Prelates,
even of those who thought that residence was deiure Diuino; so potent are the
affections of men, that sometimes Who gains an applause.
they suffer them not to discern contradictions.

Of the other Articles a light discussion only was made; yet something A
brief discourse of the Authoar concerning ordination to the title of the
Patriimonie.
was said worth the noting. For the second, for prohibiting ordinations to the
title of the Patrimony, it is certain, that since the Church was constituted
and established, and necessary ministeries deputed in it, no man was ordained,
in the good times of it, but unto some proper ministry. But this good use was
quickly turned into an abuse. For in regard of the exemptions of diverse, and of
other worldly respects, and because the Bishops desired to have a great
Clergy, they ordained whosoever came unto them for it. Therefore this sort of
ordination was forbidden in the Council of Chalcedon, which was then called
absolute, or loose, (for so the Greek word does properly signify) commanding
that none should be ordained but unto a particular charge, and that the loose
ordinations should beenullified, and made void. This was afterward confirmed
by the Canons, so that this rule remained as a Maxim, established in the
Church, that no man could be ordained without a title; and in the ancient and
good times, by a title was understood a charge, or ministry to be exercised.
But after that corruptions were entered, a title was taken for a revenue to live
upon, and that which was constituted to this end, that amongst the Clergy no
person might be idle, was thus transformed, that no person might want, and be
forced to work for his living. And the true sense of the Canons being covered
by this interpretation, Alexander the third did establish it in his Lateran
Council, saying, that none should be ordained without a title, by which he
may receive provision, necessary for his life, with this exception, if he had
no inheritance of his own, or from his father; which would bevery reasonable
if a title were required only to maintain life. For this cause many, showing
they had a Patrimony, by false proofs, were ordained; others, after they were
ordained to a true patrimony, did aliene it; and others, borrowing a sufficient
patrimony until they were ordained, did afterward restore it to him that had
lent it; so that there were many poor Priests, and many inconveniences caused,
which required that provision should be made for them.

This Article being proposed to the Synod, there were diverse opinions. In
which point diverse opinions are delivered in Council.
Some said, that it being established that residencie is de Iure diuino, and
every one exercising his charge, the Churches will be perfectly served, and
there will be no need of Clergy men not beneficed, or of ordinations to the
title of patrimony or any other, and all inconveniences will be remedied. For
there will be no idle person in the Clergy, from whom innumerable mischiefs
and bad examples do come, there will be no beggar, nor any forced to use base
trades. They said, that no reformation was good, but that which did reduce
things to their beginning; that the primitive Church did continue many years
in perfection, and that the integrity thereof could by this means only be
restored. There was another opinion, that none should be denied to take holy
orders, who, for honesty or sufficiency, did deserve them, although they were
poor, alleging that the poor were not excluded in the Primitive Church,
which did not dislike that Clerks and Priests should live by their labor, by
the example of S. Paul the Apostle, and of Apollo the Evangelist, who lived by
making Pauilions. And after that Princes became Christians, Constantius the
son of Constantine, gave, in his sixth Consulship, a privilege to the
Clergy, that they should not pay any Subsidy for that which they did
traffic in shops and worke-houses, because they gave some of their gains to
the poor. The instruction of S. Paul to the faithful was observed, that they
should labor in honest works, that they might have whereof to give to the
poor. They said that an idle and wicked life was unseemly in the Clergy,
because it gave scandal; but to live of ones labor was honest, and tended to
edification; and if any were forced to beg because of sickness, it was no
shame, no more then to the Friars who hold it for a glory to be accounted
beggars; that it was not a Christian proposition, that to labor to live by
ones hands, to beg in case of impotencie, was indecent to the Ministers of
CHRIST, and that nothing was unseemly but vice. And if any thought that want
was cause of theft, or other sins, he shall find, when he thinks better
on it, that these be sins of the rich rather then of the poor, and that
avarice is more impotent, and untamed, then poverty, which, being always
busy, does take away occasions of doing ill. An honest man and a poor man are
compatible, but not an honest man and an idle man. The great benefit which the
Church militant in this world, and that which is Purgatory does receive by
Masses, celebrated by poor Priests, and not by rich, is both written and
preached; of which number if none were, the faithful living, and the souls of
the dead would be deprived of great suffrages; that it were better that a
strict order should be made, that persons of honesty and sufficiency should
be ordained without a title, seeing that now the cause does cease for which
Antiquity forbade it, which was, for that those who had titles, laboring in
their Ecclesiastical functions, did edify, and the others, being idle, did
give scandal, whereas now those that have titles do, for the most part,
disdain the Ecclesiastical ministry, and live in pleasure, and the poor
perform the functions, and do edify.

This opinion was not followed by many. But a middle opinion had great
applause; which was, that the use should be still observed, not to ordain
without a title to an Ecclesiastical benefice, or a sufficient patrimony,
that Priests might not dishonor their order by begging, and that it should be
constituted, to remove all fraud, that the Bishop should provide that the
patrimony, to which the Clerk is ordained, might not be alienated. Gabriel
de Veneur, Bishop of Viuiers, contradicted this, and said, that the patrimony
of Clerks is a secular thing, concerning which the Clergy cannot: possibly
make any law: besides many occasions may arise, for which the Law, or the
Magistrate may lawfully command it to be alienated. And it is generally true
that the patrimoniall goods of Clerks, for prescriptions, and all sorts of
contracts, are subject to the civil laws, and therefore that they ought to
consider well of the business, before they assume authority to break a
civil contract.

The occasion of proposing the third Article was, because the precept of
Concerning Simonie.
CHRIST, that all spiritual graces should be freely conferred, as they are
freely received from him, was many ways transgressed in the collation of
Orders: which abuse was not new, but greater in former times. For, in the
beginning of Christianity, charity abounding, the people who received
spiritual things, from the Ministers of CHRIST, did not only, according to
the divine precept expounded by S. Paul, contribute to them as much as served
for their necessities, but enough also to maintain the poor, never thinking
that the temporal was a price of the Spiritual. But after that the temporal,
which was held and inioyed in common, was divided, and a revenue applied to the
titles, called a Benefice, the ordination being not then distinct from the
collation of the title, and by consequence of the Benefice annexed to it, but
both being given and received together, it seemed to the ordainers, that,
beside the spiritual thing, they gave also a temporal, for which they might
receive another temporal thing in recompense, which he that would obtain,
was forced to accommodate himself to the will of him that could give it, so
that open buying and selling was easily brought in, which, in the oriental
Church, could never be corrected, though many Canons and censures were made
against it. Yet it was much diminished, because God took from them, by the rod
of the Saracens, a great part of their goods. And, in the West, though it was
much reprehended by good men, yet it continued, in some places more, in some
less, until, about the year 1000. the ordination was divided from the
collation of the Benefice, for which cause that did begin to pass for
nothing, and Simony did still continue in this, and that more openly then
before. And this abuse did always increase, though under diverse names of
Annates, small services, writing, seal, and other pretenses, which the Church
still uses, with small hope that they can ever be taken away, until CHRIST
come again, with his whip, overthrow the tables of the money changers, and
chase them out of the Temple. But the ordination, which, being separated from
the Benefice, had the fortune to be conferred freely, did enjoy it but a small
time. For the Bishops esteeming it unprofitable and base, and regarding more
the other which yielded fruit, left off, by little and little, to administer
the ordinations; so that titular Bishops were instituted, who performed the
Pontifical Ecclesiastical ministeries, and the true Bishops busied themselves
in the temporal only. Those, having no revenues, were forced to maintain
themselves by the administration of those functions. Whereupon he that
received Order was compelled to contribute, first by the name of alms or
offering, afterward, to make it more honorable, by the title of donatiue or
present, and, proceeding further, that it might not be omitted as being a
duty, it was covered with the name of reward, not of the Ordayner, but of his
servants, or of the Notarie, or of some other who served him in the ordination.
Therefore in this Article it was proposed, that the abuse occurring in the
collation of Benefices should not be spoken of; as being an infirmity; not
curable with any remedy but death.

Concerning which the Prelates were divided, not by opinions, or affections,
but by quality of persons. The rich Bishops condemned the receiving of any
thing; either for themselves or their officers, or Notaries, as Simonicall, and
sacrilegious, bringing the example of Iehesie servant of the Prophet Elizeus,
and of Simon Magus, and of the severe commandment of CHRIST, Give freely as
you have received. They alleged also many exaggerations out of the Fathers
against this sin, saying, that the names of a voluntary donatiue, or alms,
are vain colors repugnant to truth, because the gift is bestowed for the
Order, without which it would not have been given. And if it be an alms, why
is it given upon that occasion only? let it be made at another time, and
Orders conferred without the interuention of any thing. But the mischief is,
that if one should tell the Ordainer that he gave him an alms, he would hold
it for an injury, nor would receive it at another time. Therefore they ought
not to believe, that they could deceive God and the world. They concluded that
an absolute Decree ought to be made, that nothing should be given, though
willingly, or under the name of alms, nor received, not only by the Ordainer,
but also by any of his, or by the Notarie, under the name of writing, seal,
pains, or any other Pretense whatsoever.

But the poor Bishops and the Titular said to the contrary, that as to give
order for a price was a wicked sacrilege, so to take away alms, so much
commended by CHRIST, did destroy charity, and wholly deforme the Church. That
there was the same reason absolutely for Ordinations, which is for Confessions,
Communions, Masses, Burials and other Ecclesiastical functions; and therefore
no cause why that should be forbidd in Ordination, which is allowed in all
these; and the allegation, that if it be an Alms, let it be given at another
time, is of as much force in all the other functions. The Church has used,
from the beginning, to receive oblations and alms, upon these occasions, which
if they shall be taken away, the poor religious persons, who live of them,
will be forced to take some other course, the rich will not perform the
offices, as does, and, for the space of five hundred years, has plainly
appeared, so that the exercise of Religion will be lost, and the people,
remaining without it, will fall into impiety, and diverse pernicious
superstitions. And if thousands of crowns are given without reprehension for
the vestments which the Apostolic Sea gives to the Metropolitans, how can a
small acknowledgement be reprehended, which the Bishop receives from the
inferior Orders? What reason is there that things of the same kind should be
ordered by contrary laws? That cannot be called an abuse which was instituted
in the beginning. And it remains still in the Pontifical, that wax candles
are presented, by those that are ordained, to the Bishop ordaining, at the
offering place, in time of the Ordinations, which be temporal things, and, if
they be great, and well adorned, may cost much. It is not therefore so bad as
it is painted out, neither can the opposites game, by the infamy of poor
Bishops, the name of reformers, imitating the Pharisees, in observing moathes,
and straining at gnats.

Some said also that it could not be constituted, as being contrary to the
decree of Innocentius the third, in the general Council, where the use of
giving and receiving a temporal thing, in the ministry of the Sacraments, is
not only approved, but the Bishops are commanded to compel the people, by
censures and Ecclesiastical punishments, to observe the custom, giving the
title of laudable to those things, which now some go about to condemn as
sacrilegious.

But Dinisius, Bishop of Milopotamus, made a long digression, to show how the
faithful would be edified, if the Sacraments were administered by the Clergy
for pure charity, expecting no reward but from God only. He affirmed that
necessaries were to be allowed them, and greater provision also; but that this
was sufficiently and superaboundantly done, by the assignation of Tithes,
because they, not being the tenth part of the people, do receive so great a
portion, besides other possessions which are double as much. Therefore it is
not just to demand that which is already received an hundred fold; and if the
Bishops be poor, it is not because the Church is poor, but because the
riches are ill divided. With an even distribution every one might be fitted;
and that might be given without counter change, for which more then the just
price has been already received. He added, that, if this multitude of abuses
could not be taken away altogether, it would be good to begin with that of
Ordinations, not restraining it to the only action of conferring the
Sacraments, but extending it also to the precedent. For it would be a great
absurdity that one should pay too dear, in the Chanceries of Bishoprics,
for dimisorie letters, by which the Clerk has leave to find out one that
will ordain him, and in Rome to be ordained out of the times appointed, and
lay the reformation only upon the Bishops that do ordain. This opinion was
approved by many, in respect of the dimisories of Bishops; but concerning the
Faculty given at Rome, the Cardinal Simoneta said, that the Pope would
provide for it, and that it was not a thing to be handled in Council.

Concerning the reward of Notaries some thing was said. For some esteeming it
an office purely secular, thought that their pay ought not to be stopped.
Others held it for an Ecclesiastical office. Antonius Augustinus, Bishop of
Lerida, an antiquarie, said, that in the ancient Church the Ministers were
ordained in presence of all the people, so that there was no need of letters
Patents or testimonial, and after they had gained a title they did not change
Diocese; and if, for any cause, they did make a journey, they had a letter
from the Bishop, then called Formata. The use of letters testimonial began
after that the people left to be present at the Ordinations, and the Clerks
began to be vagabonds, and, being introduced in supplement of the presence of
the people, is to be esteemed a temporal office; but, because it is applied
to a spiritual matter, it is to be used with moderation. Therefore his
opinion was, that some reward should be allowed for them, but moderated, and
limited.

That which was proposed in the fourth point belongs only to the Concerning
distributions.
Collegiate Churches; which having by their institution, this function, amongst
others, to assemble themselves in the Church to praise God, at the hours
appointed by the Canons, which therefore are called Canonical, rents were
annexed to them for the maintenance of the Canons, distributed amongst them in
one of these four manners. For either they lived at a common table and charge,
as the Regulars, or every one had his portion of rents assigned to him; (which
therefore was called a Prebend) or, the service being ended, all was
distributed amongst them, either in meat, or money. Those that lived in common
continued in that discipline but a small time, but came to division, either
into Prebends, or distributions to the Prebendaries, excusing those from
performing those divine offices, who, by reason of infirmity, or some
spiritual business, could not be present. It was an eafie thing to find a
pretense, and begin an use of being seldom in the Church, and to enjoy the
Prebend notwithstanding. But he, unto whom the measure was distributed, after
the work was done, could not be excused; so that discipline, and frequencie
in the Offices remained longer in this second kind, then in the first. For
this cause the faithful, when they gave or bequeathed any thing to the
Churches, ordained it should be put in distributions: and experience showed,
that the greater the distributions were, the better the Offices were performed,
and that the negligence of those who did not assist in the offices might be
redressed, by taking part of the Prebends, and making distributions thereof.
This was much commended by many of the Prelates, thinking the worship of God
would be much enlarged hereby; whereof there could no doubt be made, because
it did appear already by experience. And this was all which was spoken for a
ground of this opinion.

But Lucas Bisantius, Bishop of Cataro, a godly man, but poor, spoke to the
contrary, that rather the Prebendaries should be forced, by censures, and
deprivations of part, or of all the fruits, and of the Prebends themselves,
but that the first form should not be altered. For almost all these
institutions being made by the last will of the faithful, they ought to be
observed inuiolably, and without alteration, not only upon pretense of better,
but not for that which is truly and certainly better, in regard it is not
just to meddle with that which belongs to another, because he does not use
it well. But, which is of more importance, to exercise a spiritual function
for reward is undoubted Simonie, so that by driving out one evil, another would
enter far worse, making negligent men to become Simoniacall. The other part
answered, that the Council had power to change last wills; and, for assisting
at divine Offices for gain, one must distinguish, that the gain is not the
principal, but the secondary cause, and therefore there is no sin in it; for
the Canons will go to Church principally to serve God, and secondarily for the
distributions. The others replied, that they saw not how the Council had
greater power over the goods of the dead, then of the living, which no man is
so impertinent as to pretend; and besides the doctrine is not so secure as it
is affirmed, that it is lawful to serve God for gain secondarily. And if it
were, it is not a secondary, but a principal cause, which first moves, and
without which the work would not be done. This opinion was not pleasing, and
raised much murmuring in the Congregation. For every one being conscious to
himself that he received the title and charge only in regard of the rents,
did think he was condemned. Therefore the Article had great applause that the
Prebends should be turned into distributions, to incite men to serve God, in
the best manner they could.

These Articles having been thus discussed, Fathers were deputed to make
Fathers are deputed to frame the Decrees.
the Decrees; and it was proposed that, in the next Congregations, they should
speak of six more, leaving that of secret marriage for another Session. The
next day the Legates and Deputies met, to collect the substance of the opinions
of the Fathers; and, concerning the first Article of Residencie, they dissented
amongst themselves. Simoneta favored the opinion The Legates dissent in
opinion concerning Residence.
that it was de iure positiuo, and said, that the greater part, even those who
held it was de iure diuino, thought fit that the question should be omitted.
Mantua, without manifesting his own opinion, said that the greater number did
demand a declaration of it. Of the other Legates, Altemps followed Simoneta,
and the other two, though with some caution, adhered to Mantua. And this
difference did not pasle without some bitterness, though modestly expressed.
For this cause the Legates held a general Congregation, the 20. day; in which
the demand following was read out of a paper: that is; Because many Fathers
have said that residence is de iure diuino, some have said nothing, and others
spoken against the making of the declaration, to the end, that those who are
deputed to make the Decrees, may make them quickly, easily, and securely, your
Lordships may be pleased to deliver your opinions, only with the word placet,
whether you approve or disprooue the declaration, that residencie is de iure
diuino: because, according to the custom of this holy Synod, the Decree shall
be made as the greater number shall give their voices; which because they had
been formerly delivered in great variety, they desired that they would all
speak distinctly, one after one, that their suffrages might be noted.

All having given their voices, ^8. said, Placet absolutely: 33. Nonplacet
Andso do the Prelates.
absolutely. 13. said Placet, consulto prius Sanctissimo Domino nostro: and 17.
answered, Nonplacet, nisi prius consulto Sanctissimo Domino nostro. The 13. did
differ from the 17. because they did absolutely approve the declaration, yet
were ready to change their opinion, if the Pope thought otherwise: the 17. did
absolutely not approve, yet were content to be of the Popes opinion, if he
did like it. This was a very subtle difference, and used only where every one
does think to do his Master the best service. The Cardinal Madruccio would
not precisely answer to the interrogation, but said, he referred himself to
his voice, delivered in Congregation, which was in favor of Ius diuinum. And
the Bishop of Budua said, that he held the affirmative as already concluded,
and that he thought fit it should be published. The voices being collected and
divided, and it appearing that the greater part, by one half, did approve the
declaration, that a fourth part only did dislike it, and that others, though
conditionally, were with the first, they came to words of some bitterness, and
the residue of the Congregation was spent in discoursing hereof, not without
much confusion. Which the Cardinal of Mantua perceiving, made a silence, and,
exhorting the Fathers to modesty, gave them leave to depart.

The Legates consulted what was fit to be done; and agreed to give the Whereof
the Legates give the Pope an account.
Pope an exact account of all, and expect his answer, and in the mean while
to prosecute in the Congregations the Articles remaining. Mantua would have
sent his Secretary, Camillus Oliuo, by post, with letters of credence, and
Simoneta would have all expressed in the letters. They concluded to temper
these two opinions: that is, to write a very large letter, and refer that
which remained to the Secretary: who the same day parted from Trent, in the
evening. This, though secretly carried, came to the knowledge of the Spaniards;
To the great coffeehouse of the Spanish Prelates.
who much complained that they saw a beginning made of an unsupportable
grieuance, that every treaty should not only be sent, but consulted of and
resolved also at Rome; that the Council assembled twice before in that City,
was dissolved without fruit, yea with scandal also, because nothing was
resolved by the Fathers, but all in Rome; so that a blasphemous Proverb was
generally used, that, the Synod of Trent was guided by the holy Ghost, sent
thither, A blasphemous proverb was used against the p^oceeding of the Council.
from time to time, in a cloake-bagge from Rome. And that those Popes, who
absolutely refused the Council gave less scandal, then those who have
assembled it, and hold it in servitude. The world was in hope that, if once a
Council might be obtained, all inconveniences would be redressed; but having
observed how things were carried, under two Popes before, and how they are
governed now, all hope of any good is extinguished, nor any more to be hoped
for from the Council, if it must serve to be a minister of the interests of
the Court of Rome, and move or stand still at their pleasure.

This gave occasion, beginning in the next Congregation to discuss the
Articles proposed, briefly to speak of the point of Residencie. The Cardinal
of Varmia said, that that matter was sufficiently treated on, that the Decree
should be framed to resolve it; which being proposed every one might say what
he thought fit: but he could not quiet the humors that were moved. Therefore
the Archbishop of Prague, the Emperors Ambassador, made a continuate speech,
to exhort the Fathers to proceed peaceably and with less passion, admonishing
them to consider what did become their persons, and that place: But Julius
Superchius, Bishop of Caurle, answered cholerikely, that nothing does less
beseem the Council, then to lay a law upon the Prelates, especially when it is
done by one who represents a Secular authority; and used some biting terms:
so that the Congregation was like to be divided into parts. Varmiense, who was
President in it, seeking to moderate them, diuerted the speech upon other
Articles, appointed for that day, and proposed that some means should be used
to set at liberty the English Bishops, who were in prison in England, that,
coming to the Council, it might be said, that that noble Nation was present
also, and not wholly aliened from the Church. This pleased all: but the common
opinion was, that it might sooner be desired then hoped for. They concluded
that A consultation in the Council to set at liberty the English Bishops who
were in prison.
the Queen having refused to receive a Nuncio, expressly sent from the Pope,
it could not be hoped that she would hearken to the Council. Therefore all they
could do was to persuade Catholic Princes to mediate for them. The 25.
being S. Marks day, the Venetian Ambassadors were received, The Venetian
Ambassadors are received in Congregation.
in the general Congregation, whose Mandat being read dated the 11. of the
same Month, and an Oration made by Nicolas di Tonte, one of them, an answer
was given in the usual form.

In those few days, the wisest amongst the Prelates, considering what a
disreputation it would be to the Council, and themselves, if those stirs were
not pacified, endeavored to pacify men's minds by showing that if the
Conciliary actions were not prosecuted without tumult, besides the scandal and
the shame, the dissolution of the Council, without doing any good, would
necessarily follow. This remonstrance took effect; and caused them to treat
peaceably of the six Articles remaining; of which there was not much to be
spoken. For the fifth, the provision was thought necessary; but there was a
difficulty concerning the manner, because the division of Parishes was first
made by the people, when a certain number of inhabitants, having received the
true faith, built a temple for exercise of their religion, hired a Priest, and
did The division of Parishes.
constitute a Church, which, by the neighbors, was called a Parish; and when
the number was increased, if one Church and Priest were not sufficient, those
who were most remote did build another, and fit themselves better. In progress
of time, for good order and concord, a custom began to have the Bishops
consent also. But after that the Court of Rome assumed by reseruations the
collation of Benefices, those who were provided of them from Rome, when the
division of great Parishes, and, by consequence, a diminution of their gain
was in question, opposed themselves by the favor of the Pope, so that nothing
could be done herein, without going to Rome: which when it happened, especially
beyond the Mountains, in regard of the impediments of Appeals, and other
suites, it was a thing of great charge. To provide against these inconveniences
in Council, the Prelates thought, that where one Church was sufficient for a
people, but not one Rector, the titles should not be multiplied, because where
many Curates are, there must needs be diversity of opinions; but that the
Bishop should compel the Parish Priest to take other Priests to assist him, as
many as were needful: but where the largeness of the habitations did
require, he should have power to erect a new parish Church, dividing the
people and revenues, and compelling them to make a sufficient reuenew by
contribution. Only Eustathius Bellai, Bishop of Paris, who came not long
before, told them, that in regard of the la^t part, the Decree would not be
received in France, where they do not consent that the Laity may be
commanded, in a temporal matter, by Ecclesiastical authority, and that it
was not for the reputation of a general Council to make decrees, which would
be rejected in any Province. Friar Thomas Casellus, Bishop of Caua, replied,
that the French men do not know that this power is given to the Council by
CHRIST and S. Paul, who have commanded that maintenance should be allowed by
the people, to those that serve them in spiritual things, and that the
Frenchmen, if they will be Christians, must obey. Bellay replied, that until
he had understood that which CHRIST and Saint Paul do grant to the Ministers
of the Gospel, to be a power to receive maintenance from him that does
voluntarily give it, and not to constrain any to give; and that France would
ever be Christian. And he passed no further.

The sixth and eighth Articles would not have needed a decree, if the Bishops
had kept their authority, or if it had continued in the Parish Priests, or in
the people, to whom such provisions did formerly belong, as has been said, and
should do still by all reason. But the necessity of handling these matters
proceeded from the reseruations made to Rome. The Prelates were all of the same
opinion, that provisions were requisite, yet some would not consent they should
be made, because they would not m^ddle with the Popes authority; by treating
of things reserved to that Sea, especially in so great a number. Leonard,
Bishop of Lanciano, spoke of it as of a poin^ of justice, that all the offices
of the Apostolic Chancerie being sold, it was not fit to diminish the
dispatches made there, because it would take away part of the profit, without
the consent of the buyer; and therefore that these provisions ought to be made
in Rome, where the interest of all would be considered. And this Bishop would
have proceeded further, in regard of the interests himself and his friends had
in those offices, if the Archbishop of Messina, a Spaniard, who sat next, had
not told him that nothing should be resolved before it were consulted of, and
consented to in Rome. They called to mind that which was done in the first
Council, when authority was given to Bishops, concerning things reserved to
the Pope; that is, to add, that they should do it as delegates of the
Apostolic Sea; which counsel was followed in all decrees, made concerning
such matters.

In the 7. though every one thought fit that the people should be served by
persons sufficient for the ministry, and of good behavior, yet they said it
was enough, and very much, to provide for the future, because those laws which
look back and dispose of things past, are ever accounted odious, and
transcendent. Therefore they thought it sufficient to provide fit persons for
hereafter, tolerating those who are in possession already. The Archbishop of
Granata said, that the deputation of any unfit person to the ministry of
CHRIST, was not ratified by his divine Majesty: and therefore was void the
possessor having no right: and that they were bound to remove him that was
unfit, and to put another sufficient person in his place. But this opinion was
not followed, as being too rigid, and impossible to be executed, because there
was not a just measure of necessary sufficiency. Therefore the middle way was
taken, not to exceed the proposition of the Article, but making a difference
between the ignorant and scandalous, to proceed against the former with less
rigor, as being less culpable. And as it belongs to the Bishop by all
reason, to make provision when the collations came not from the Pope, so, in
this case also it should be granted unto him, as Delegate of the Apostolic
Sea.

To treat of the visitation of Benefices commended, in the ninth article,
occasion was given by a good use, degenerated into a great abuse. In the
incursions which the Barbarians make upon the Western Empire, it often happened,
that the Churches were deprived of their pastors, when those unto How
Commendaes began.
whom it did canonically belong to make provision of successors, could not do
it, as being hindered by inuasiont, sieges, or imprisonments: whereupon, that
the people might not continue long without spiritual government, the
principal Prelates of the Province, or some of the neighbors, did recommend
the Church to some Clergy man, conspicuous for piety, and honesty, and fit
for government, until, the impediments being removed, a Pastor might be
canonically elected. The Bishops and next parish Priests did the like, when the
like vacancies happened in the Countries; and always he that did commend
another, did seek to employ a man of note, and he that was commended, did
labor to answer the expectation; so that great fruit did ensue, to the
satisfaction of al: But as always some corruption will in time creep into good
things, some of the Co^mendataries began to think not only of doing the Church
good, but to draw some profit to themselves also, and the Prelates likewise to
commend Churches without necessity. The abuse increasing, a Law was made, that
the Commenda should not last above six months, nor the Commendatarie
participate of the fruits of the Benefice commended. Howsoever, the Popes,
pretended to be above this law, did not only commend for a longer time, and
grant an honest portion to the Commendatarie, but did commend also for term of
life, granting all the fruits unto the person commended, as unto the titular.
Yea, they made the form also quite contrary. For whereas it was formerly said
in the Bulls, We do recommend unto thee this Church, that it may be well
governed in the interim: they began to say, We recommend unto thee such a
Church, that thou may maintain thy state, with a greater dignity. And
moreover they ordained, that if the Commendatarie died, the Benefice should
remain at their disposition, so that they could not be hindered by the Patron.
And the Commendataries being placed by the Pope, the Bishops could not meddle
in those churches, and every one in Court was more willing to get Benefices in
Commenda, then in the Title to exempt themselves from the subjection of the
superior Prelates; so that the Bishop was deprived of authority over the
greater part of the Churches of his Diocese, and the Commendataries, not
subject to any Superintendencie, suffering the buildings to fall, and
diminishing, or wholly taking away other necessary expenses, having no other
end, then according to the proeme of the Bull, to maintain their own state,
let all go to desolation. It seemed an indecencie, that the Bishop should
meddle with that which was recommended by the Pope to another and therefore
they thought fit to make a manerly provision against this disorder, granting
the Bishops authority to visit and superintend, but as Delegates of his
Holiness.

The twelfth proposition was made to remedy the abuses of the Collectours, The
abuses and impieties of Collectors.
because the ancient institution was degenerated also. For Hospitals, Spittles,
places for education of Orphans, and such like, being instituted in diverse
places for necessity, without any maintenance but the arms of the faithful,
some godly persons undertook the charge to go about and ask them at men's
houses, and for their credit, had letters testimonial from the Bishop. Others,
that they might not be hindered by the Bishop, obtained faculty from the Pope,
with letters of recommendation; which were easily granted, in regard of the
profit which came to the Court, for the dispatch of the bulls. This institution
was immediately turned into excessive abuses, and the least part of the arms
collected was bestowed in the right course. Those also who had obtained power
to collect, did substitute also base and infamous persons, dividing the alms
with them. The Collectours likewise, to gain as much as they could, used a
thousand sacrilegious and wicked artifices, wearing a certain form of habit,
carrying fire, water, belles, and other instruments to make a noise, that they
might amaze the vulgar and breed superstition in them, telling false miracles,
preaching false indulgences, asking alms with imprecations and threats of
evil and misfortunes, against those that would not give, and using many other
impieties like to these, so that the world was much scandalized; but no
provision could be made, in regard of the Apostolical grants. The Prelates
enlarged themselves in this matter, relating the abuses and impieties
aforesaid, and many more, showing that remedies had been formerly used, but
without effect; and so would all others prove that should be attempted: only
one remained, which was to abolish wholly the name and use of Collectors; in
which opinion all concurred. At this time the Ambassadors of the Duke of
Banaria came, who refused The Ambassadors of the Duke of Banaria contest for
preceed^ce with the Ambassadors of Venice.
to present themselves in Congregation, except they might have precedence of
the Ambassadors of Venice. Whereunto they denying to yield, the Legates
interposed a delay, that they might receive answer from Rome.

The Pope understanding how the voices were given in the Congregations
concerning residencie, and that the Spaniards did all hold together, made a bad
Prognostique, and thought that union could not be without the Kings knowledge.
He said he had a long time known, by great experience, The Pope and his Court
are much perplezed with aduices, sent unto them from Trent and Spain.
that the Vltramontan Prelates do envy the greatness of Italy, and of the
Apostolic Sea, and, for the suspicion which he had of the King, was ill
satisfied with him, as if he had failed of the promise which he made unto him
to preserve his authority. The Conclusion of all his discourses was, that if
the Princes will abandon him, he will have recourse to heaven; that he had a
million of gold, and knew where to get another; and besides, that God will
provide for his Church. The Court also did perceive, with great passion, in
what danger they were, and thought that these nouities did aim to make many
Popes, or none at all, and to hinder all the profits of the offices of the
Chancerie. Advice came to him also, from his Nuncio in Spain, that the King
was ill pleased with the (Proponentibus Legatis) constituted in the first
Session: and the Pope was so much the more pleased with it, because by the
distaste of others, he perceived they had desseignes to propose something to
his prejudice. Yet he caused it to be excused to the King, that it was done
without his priuitie, howsoever he thought it necessary to repress the
petulancy of unquiet spirits, saying, that the Council would be like the tower
of Babel, if every turbulent person might move humors as he listed; that the
Legates were discreet, and did reverence his Majesty, and would propose
whatsoever should please him, and give satisfaction to all wise and godly
persons. But with the Kings Ambassador residing with him, who spoke thereof,
he proceeded somewhat roughly. First, he complained, that he had done bad
offices herein; then, relating how the Spanish Prelates, as it were seditiously,
proceeded in the Council, he showed that the Decree was holy and necessary,
and that no prejudice was done to any, insaying that the Legates shall propose.
Vargas answered, that if it had been said only, the Legates shall propose, no
man would have complained, but that ablative (Proponentibus Legatis) did
deprive the Bishops of power to propose; and therefore that it was fit to
change it into another kind of speech. Whereunto the Pope answered, with some
disdain, that he had something else to do, then to think Cuius generis, and
cuius casus. The Popes suspicion did not want ground, having discovered that
the Ambassador had sent many posts into Spain, and unto Trent, exhorting the
Spanish Prelates to maintain their liberty, and defiring the King that the
Council might not be held in subjection.

But, in the Court, many Prelates having written to their friends from Trent
diversely, according to their affections, there was a great tumult, or rather an
astonishment, every one thinking he did already see Rome empty of Prelates,
and deprived of all prerogative and emine^cie. It did appear plainly, that
the Cardinals residing in Rome, should be excluded from having Bishoprics;
that plurality of benefices was forbid, that no Bishop or Curate might have
any office in Rome, and that the Pope might not be able to dispense in any of
the things aforesaid, which are the most principal of all that are in his
power, so that his authority would be much diminished. And they remembered the
saying of Liuie, that the Majesty of a Prince is hardly brought from the
height to the middle, but is easily cast headlong from the middle to the
bottom. They discoursed how much the authority of Bishops would be enlarged,
who would draw unto them the collation of Benefices, denying the Popes
authority for reseruations, that the Bishops beyond the Mountains, and some
Italians also, have ever showed a bad mind toward the Court, for envy, and
because they can not so easily have place in it; and that they were to take
heed of those who remanie in places the most remote from Rome, for conscience
sake, because they would do worse then all the rest, in case they were able;
that these hypoctiticall Purstans have a greater ambition then the rest, though
covered, and would feign advance themselves by the ruins of others, as Paul
the fourth did very well show by effects. And because the Spaniards were united
in this, and exhorted by Vargas to persevere, many did whisper that the King
was the first moouer, who, to gain Subsidies from the Clergy, having two
difficulties to overcome, one in having the Popes consent, the other in taking
away the resistance made by Chapters and Colleges, who being the prime of the
Nobility, exempted from Bishops, and most of them having received Benefices by
the Popes collation, do oppose themselves without respect, did purpose to
advance the Bishops who do wholly depend on him, and receive their
Bishoprics by his presentation, by freeing of them from subjection to the
Pope, and subiecting the Chapters and Colleges unto them, and so, by their
means; to gain an easy and absolute dominion over the Clergy.

The Court did generally complain of all the Legates for proposing the article,
or suffering it to be proposed, saying, that it was formerly ordained with
great art, that they only should propose, only to resist the attemps of
those who were ill affected to Rome, and that they could not be excused,
because they had an example of a disorder, which this dispute caused in the
first Council. Above all, they complained of Mantua and Seripando, and
especially of Mantua, because with his reputation and credit, he might easily
have withstood all inconveniences. They said it was necessary to other Legates,
more inclined to the common good, not Princes, nor Friars, but such as had
passed through the degrees of the Court. And the general voice did desseigne
John Baptista Cigala, Card. of S. Clement, in the first place, because he had
showed himself a stout champion for the Popes authority, in the offices of
Referendarie and Auditor of the Chamber, with much commendation and increase of
the affairs of Rome; who, being superior to Mantua, ought to hold the first
place, which would make him retire.

The Pope caused many congregations to be held by the Cardinals, deputed to
consult of the affairs of the Council: who having thought of diverse remedies
to stop the current of this evil, he began to speak of the businesses much
more quietly and correctly then before. He did not condemn the opinion of
those who said, that residencie was de iure diuino, yea he commended them for
speaking according to their conscience; and sometimes he added, that perhaps
that opinion was the better. But he complained of those who referred
themselves unto him, because the Council was assembled, that every one may
deliver his own opinion, and not lay the things of difficulty upon the back
of another, that themselves might avoid hatred and envy. The differences
between his Legates did displease him, which they ought not to have published,
with scandal, but, concealing them, to have composed them between themselves,
or referred them to him. And as he was pleased that every one should deliver
his opinion freely, so he blamed the practices which many used, to subvert
others, with deceipts, and almost with violences. And he could not choose but
be troubled with that which was spoken concerning the liberty of the Council
and that to consult of the matters thereof at Rome was to violate it; saying it
was a strange thing, that he, who was Head of the Church, and the Cardinals,
who were principal members, and other Prelates in Rome, who have voice in the
Council, should be accounted strangers, and may not be informed of what is
handled, and speak their opinion, whereas those who have no lawful part in
it, hold it lawful to entermeddle, and that in an ill sort; that it is plain,
that the Prelates went to Trent, with commission from their Princes, according
to which they proceed; that the Ambassadors, by letters and persuasions, do
compel them to follow the interests of their Masters, and yet, for all this,
no man says, which (should be said) that the Council is not free. This he
amplified, in all his discourses, with much vehemency; adding, that to say the
Council was not free, was a color used by him who was not willing to see a
good end thereof, hoping to dissolve it, or to take from it all reputation; all
which he held to be secret favorers of heresy.

Finally after he had conferred and often consulted with all the Ambassadors
residing with him, of this particular, the ninth of May assembling all the
Cardinals, he caused the aduices sent from Trent to be read, and declared the
sum of the former consultations, and the necessity to walk cunningly and
constantly in this business, intimating that many had conspired against the
Apostolic Sea. Afterward he caused the answer to be read which he purposed
should be sent to Trent; which in substance did contain two points. That the
Counsel was free on his part, and ever should. The Popes answer sent to Trent.
That it was fit he should be acknowledged for head, and receive that respect
which is due to the Apostolic Sea. He asked the opinion of all the Cardinals:
who did uniformly commend the Answer. Some told him that, in regard of the
differences between the Legates, it were good to send others, some of the most
extraordinary persons; and others said that the importance of the business did
require that his Holiness and the whole College should go to Bolonia, that
they may be near to Trent, and to give better assistance, as occasion should
be offered. Whereunto the Pope answered, that he was ready to go, not only
to Bolonia, but to Trent also, if there were need, and all the Cardinals
offered to follow him. They consulted of sending A Consultation in Rome about
sending other Legates.
other Legates, and resolved not to speak any more of it, as yet, because
Mantua would depart, which would be a great prejudice to the reputation of the
Council, in regard of the opinion which the Emperor, King of Spain, and
almost all Princes have of his honesty, and of the credit he has with the
greater part of the Prelates of Trent.

The letters being dispatched, he dealt with the Ambassadors of Venice The
Pope makes plots to maintain the greatness of the Apostolic Sea.
and Florence, that their Princes would recommend the cause of the Papacy to
their Ambassadors in Trent, and command them to cause the Prelates of their
States, not to be present in the Parlies against the Apostolic Sea, and not
to be so earnest in the point of Residencie. Afterward he called all the
Bishops remaining at Court, and showed them what service their presence might
do in Trent, and the necessity thereof. He loaded them with promises, gave
money to those who were poor, and dispatched them to the Council. This he did
to increase the number, against they should speak of Residencie, and because
40. Frenchmen were expected, from whom he could not Prognosticate any good.
And not to have France his opposite, whose Ambassadors would be in Trent very
shortly, he resolved to give the King 100000. crowns, and to lend him as much
in the Name of Merchants, upon sufficient assurance for the principal and the
interest, so that he would in earnest, and without dissimulation, revoke the
Edicts, and make war for religion, that with that money Suisses and Germans
might be levied to be under the conduct of his Legate, and the colors of the
Church, that no Hugonot should be pardoned without his consent, that the
Chancellor, the Bishop of Valence, and others, to be named by him, should be
imprisoned, that in the Council nothing should be handled against his
authority, and that his Ambassadors should not make mention of the Annats. Yet
he promised to accord with the King in that matter, and to reform it, to the
satisfaction of his Majesty.

Afterward the Pope consulted on the point of Residence, that, when there was
occasion, he might speak thereof correctly, without prejudice to himself, or
scandal to others. And having well discussed the reasons, he settled his
opinion to approve it, and cause it to be executed upon what He consulteth on
the point of Residence.
law soever it were grounded, whether Canonical, or Evangelical. And so he
answered the French Ambassador, who spoke to him of it; adding, that he alone
is deputed to see the execution of all the Evangelical precepts. For CHRIST
having said to S. Peter, Feed my Lambs, has ordained that all the orders
made by his divine Majesty, shall be executed by means of him only, and that
he would make a Bull thereof, with a penalty of deprivation of the
Bishoprics; which should be more feared then a declaration which the Council
might make, de iure Divine. And, the Ambassador insisting upon the liberty of
the Council, he said, that, if all liberty were granted unto it, they would
extend it to reform not only the Pope, but Secular Princes also. And this
form of speech much pleased his Holiness, who was wont to say, that nothing
was worse then to stand upon the defense only, and that, if others did
threaten him with the Council, he would play with them at the same weapons.

At this time, to begin to execute that which he had requested, and promised,
And reformeth the Court in petty matters only.
that is, to reform the Court, that the Council might not meddle with it, he
first published a reformation of the Penitentiary, a very principal member,
giving out a report, that he would shortly also reform the Chancerie, and the
Chamber. Every one did expect that the things belonging to the salvation of
souls should have been regulated, which are managed in that office, but in
the Bull there was not any the least mention made of repentance, conscience, or
any other spiritual thing: only it took away the Faculties which the
Penitentiary does exercise, in diverse causes beneficial, belonging to the
exterior discipline of regular Friars; not expressing whether that provision
was made to give those Faculties to some other officers, or whether he
esteemed them abuses indecent, and would banish them from Rome. But the event
did immediately take away the doubt. For the same things were obtained from the
Datary, and by other ways, only with greater charge. And this was the fruit
of the reformation.

But to return to Trent, the Fathers having delivered their opinions, and the
deputies framed nine Decrees (for the Articles of Matrimony, as already
decided, and of residencie by consent of the Legates, and of some of the
Fathers, persuaded thereunto, were omitted) they proposed them to be
established in Congregation, and to be read in the Session at the time
appointed. By reason of this omission, the demands of those that favored
residency Another contendon about Residence.
were stirred up. Whereunto the Legates answering, that that Article was not well
discussed, nor was fit to be proposed in that Session, but that it should be
done in time convenient, they were more earnest then before, alleging that
there would never be a greater opportunity, murmuring that it was a trick
never to conclude it. But they were forced to relent, seeing the Legates
resolute not to handle it then, and because those of the contrary opinion,
encouraged from Rome, did labor more effectually to the contrary. Therefore
speaking of the other Articles only, with some few alterations, the nine heads
were framed.

The Maquis of Pescara made earnest suite, in the Kings name, that that Council
might be declared to be a Continuation of the Council begun under Paul 3. and
prosecuted under Julius. He was assisted by the Spanish Prelates, The Spanish
Ambassador makes siut to have the Continuation declared.
and others, who followed them, alleging that it was to be done, for
necessity of faith; and that otherwise the determinations, already made, would
be questioned, which would be a notable impiety. The Emperors Ambassadors used
strong persuasions to the contrary, saying they would presently depart And is
opposed by the Emperors Ambassadors.
and protest. For the Emperor having given his word to Germany, that that
Convocation should be a new Council, he could not endure so great an affront.
They said they would not by this means, reexamine the things decided, but that
while there was hope to reduce Germany, they would not cut it off, especially
with so much disgrace of the Emperor. Card. Seripando had no other aim but
that it should be determined to be a continuation, and formerly, in making the
Bull of the Convocation, did labor therein, and did now effectually further the
Spaniards request. But Mantua did constantly resist, that such an injury might
not be done to the Emperor, without necessity; and he found a temper to
pacify the Spaniards; saying, that having already held 2. Sessions without
making mention of this proposition, it will be no prejudice to defer it also
to another. The resolution of the Emperors Ambassadors to depart, and the
persuasion of the Card. caused Pescara to proceed more rimisly. And letters
came very fitly from Lewis de Lansac, chief of the Ambassadors sent to the
Council from the French King, who, being in his voyage not far distant,
wrote to the Legates and Fathers, to pray them that the Session might be
prorogued, until he and his Colleagues were come. Mantua, making use of this
occasion, proposed the prorogation of the Session, for which though they would
not consent, in regard of maintaining the dignity of the Synod, yet they
resolved (some for one respect, some for another, and some because the humors
of residence were not well quieted) to celebrate it, without proposing any thing.

The 14. day being come, they met in the public Session, with the usual A
Session is held.
Ceremonies: where the Mass and the prayers accustomed being ended, the
Secretary read the Mandats of Princes, according to the order in which the
Ambassadors presented themselves in Congregation: Of the Catholic king, of the
Duke of Florence, of the Suisses, of the Clergy of Hungary, and of the
Venetians. And the Speaker did in a few words thank all those Princes, for
having offered their assistance for the security and liberty of the Council.
Afterward the Masse-Bishop pronounced the Decree, in this substance: That the
Synod, for some just and honest causes, has determined to defer the I^
which nothing is done
promulgation of the decrees appointed for that time, until the fourth of June,
for which day it does intimate the next Session. And nothing else was done in
this meeting.

So soon as the Session was celebrated, the Marquis of Pescara parted The
Spanish Ambassador parts from Trent 2. days before the arrival of the
French Ambassador.
from Trent, saying he must return to his government of Milan, because of
some new stirs, raised by the Hugonots, in the Delphinate. But it being
known that those forces were not able to issue out of the Country, and that
the Duke of Sauoy was between Milan and them, many believed, that he had
commission from his King so to do, who, desirous that the Council should
proceed, would not have it interrupted by the controversy of precedence, which
could not have been avoided, if his, and the French Ambassadors had been in
Trent together. Lewis S Gelais, Lord of Lansac, chief of the French Embassage,
arrived two days after the departure of the other, and was met The French
Ambassadors come to Trent.
upon the way by many of the Prelates, and partieularly by the Spaniards. The
next day Arnold de Ferrieres, President of Paris, and Guido Faber, Lord of
Pibrac, gowned men, Colleagues of the Embassage, did ariue also.

At this time advice came to the Council how the Pope, Cardinals, and Court of
Rome, had censured the Fathers for the point of Residence, and many received
letters from the Cardinals their Patrons, full of complaints, The Popes
indignation against the Cardinal of Mantua is renewed.
reprehensions, and exhortations, which letters they showed to many. On the
other side, news came to Rome of what hapened in Trent afterward. The Pope
did renew and augment his disdain against the Cardinal of Mantua, for having
omitted the occasion to declare the Continuation, being requestd to do it by
the Ambassador and Prelates of Spain. He was sorry to see that Cardinal
joined with the Spaniads in the point of residence, and opposite to them in the
Continuation; which was to cross him in all things. For no man, though of a
dull wit, would have forborne to have made that declaration, because if it had
succeeded well, it had been much in the favor of the Catholic Church, if
not, the Council had been dissolved; a thing of no less benefit. They began
in Rome to consult again of sending other Legates, and particularly the
Cardinal of Saint Clement; dessigning to lay the principal charge, and the
instruction upon him: and not to take the first place from Mantua, and so to
give him occasion to depart, they thought to ordain him Bishop, news being
come a little before of the death of Francis Tornon, Deane, by which one of the
six Bishoprics was void.

The Emperor, advertised of the proposition to declare the Continuation, was
moved, and sent the Pope word, that whenever it was done, he would recall
his Ambassadors from Trent, whom he commanded, that, if the resolution were
made, they should presently depart, not expecting the publication. Therefore
his Holiness was in hope that, by this means the Council might be ended, and
was so much the more angry with the Cardinal of Mantua for suffering such an
occasion to pass, and began to think how it might be revived. The Court,
as well to imitate their Prince, as for their own interests, continued their
complaints, and murmures against the Prelates of the Council, and most of all
against that Cardinal, and against Seripando and Varmiense; and, on the
contrary, the Prelates in Trent, and especially the Spaniards, complained of
the Pope and the Court. Of him, for holding the Council in servitude, to which
he ought to leave free power, to handle and determine all things, and not to
meddle himself; and yet, besides that, nothing is proposed but what The
Prelates of the Council compl(...) of the Pope.
pleases the Legates, who do nothing but that which is commanded from Rome,
when a proposition is made in which 70. Bishops do uniformly agree, they are
hindered, even to speak thereof, that the Council ought to be free, and exempt
from all prevention, concurrence, and intercession of any other power; and yet
laws are given them what to handle, and limitations, and corrections made of
the things handled and decreed; which continuing, they cannot truly be called
a Council. That there were amongst them more then forty stipendaries of the
pope, some receiving thirty, some sixty crowns a month; and that others
were terrified by the letters of Cardinals, and other Courtiers. They
complained of the Court, that, not enduring a reformation, they held it lawful
to calumniate, reprehend, and censure that which was done for the service of
God. That, having seen how they proceeded against a necessary and small
reformation, they must needs expect a great commotion, and contradiction, when
they shall be more touched at the quick; that the Pope ought to bridle the
tongues of the passionate, and make show at the least, seeing that he would
not beetied really, that the council may proceed with sincerity and liberty.

Paulus Emilius Verallus, Bishop of Capoccio, came to bad terms with the
Bishop of Paris, in a meeting of many Bishops. For Paris having disliked A
passage concerning the equality of Bishops.
the course of determining by plurality of voice, and the other answering that
all Bishops were equal, Paris asked him how many souls were under his charge;
who answered that he had five hundred: then Paris replied, that, in regard of
his person, he yielded unto him, but in respect of those who were represented
by the one and the other, he that spoke of five hundred, ought not to be made
equal to him that spoke of five hundred thousand.

Things standing in these terms, there was no Congregation made until the 20.
day: in which the French Ambassadors (who had imparted their instructions to
the Imperialists, and held correspondence, according to the The French
Ambassadors are received in congregation, and one of them makes an Oration.
command of their Master) presented themselves. The Mandat of their Embassage
being exhibited and read, Guide Faber made a long Oration, in which, having
expounded the continual desire of the King, that the Council should be
assembled in a fit place, not suspected, and the request he had made to the
Pope and all Christian Princes for it, he told them what fruit might be
expected from the opening of it. He added, that as those do much err who
would innouate all therites of the Church so to maintain all of them
obstinately, not considering the state of the present times, and the public
good, deserves no less reprehension. He declared very particularly the
temptations which the Devil would use, to divert the Fathers from the right
way, saying, that if they gave ear to him, they would make Councels lose all
authority; adding, that many Councels have been held in Germany and Italy,
with no fruit, or very little, of which it was said that they were neither free
nor lawful, because they were governed by the will of another; that they ought
to be careful to use well the power and liberty given them by God. For if, in
private causes, they deserve severe punishment, who do gratify any man
against justice, they deserve it much more, who, being judges in causes divine,
do follow a popular applause, or suffer themselves to be made gowned slaves to
the Princes, to who^ they are obliged; and said that every one should examine
himself what passion does possess him. And because the defects of some former
Synodes have made a prejudice to this, it is fit to show that those things are
past, that every one may dispute without being burned, that public faith is
not broken, that the holy Ghost is to be called for from heaven only, and that
this is not that Council which was begun by Paul 3. and prosecuted by Julius
3. in turbulent times, and in the midst of arms which was dissolved without
doing any thing that was good, but a new free, peaceable, and lawful Council,
called according to the ancient custom, to which all Kings, Princes, and
Republiques, do give consent, to which Germany will run and bring with the
authors of the new disputes, the most grave and eloquent men which it has. He
concluded, that they the Ambassadors did promise, to this end, the assistance
of the King. It seemed that some of the Fathers, and of the Legates themselves,
did not take those words well, to which the Speaker not knowing To which the
Speaker knows not what answer to make.
what to answer, nor what complement to make, the Congregation ended with the
Oration.

The next day, the same Ambassadors went to the Legates, assembled for that
purpose, where they excused the French Prelates for not coming, in regard of
the tumults, promising that when they were ended* as they hoped The French
Ambassadors demand of the Legates a declaration that the Council is new.
they would be shortly, they should come with speed. Afterward they declared
that the Hugonots do suspect the continuation of the Council, and do require
a new, that the King had treated hereof with the Emperor, who desired the
same, at the instance of the Confessionists; that he had demanded the same
also of the Pope: who answered that the difference was only between them and
the King of Spain, and that it concerned not him, but referred it to the
Council. Therefore they demanded a declaration, in plain terms, that the
Indication is new, and not in these words, Indicendo continuamus, and
continuando indicimus, which is an ambiguity not befitting Christians, and
implies a contradiction; and said, that the Decrees already made by the
Council, are not received by the French Church, nor by the Pope himself, and
that Henry 2. did protest against it: that concerning this point, they were
addressed to them the Legates, because the Pope has often said that the
question of Indiction or continuation was not his, and that he referred it to
the Council. And having delivered this petition by word, they left it also in
writing. The Legates, after they had consulted together, answered in writing
also, that they admitted the excuse of the Bishops absent, but that they could
To whom the Legates answer.
not defer the discussion of that which was to be handled in the Council
until their coming, because the Fathers who were present, would be
incommodated too much, that they have not power to declare that the Indiction
of the Council is new but to preside only, according to the tenor of the
Popes Bull, and the will of the Synod. The Frenchmen were contented with the
answer for the present, having determined, together with the Imperialists, not
to proceed further, so long as in the acts mention was not made of
continuation, considering that the Spaniards having made requests in the first
Session that the continuation should be declared, and received much
contradiction, there was danger that the Council would have been dissolved. But
the answer of the Legates published by the French men, that their authority was
to preside according to the will of the Synod made the Spaniards say, that
those words did subject the Legates to the Council, whereas indeed they made
themselves Lords over it. And Granata said, that it was an absolute dominion to
make use of the quality of a servant, and of a Lord also.

The Legates proposing nothing for the next Session, the Prelates, who favored
residencie, began to discourse again of it, and persuaded the Ambassadors
of the Emperor, Kings of France, Portugal, and all the others, to move the
Legates, that it might be decided in the next Session; alleging, The Spaniards
require a determination in the point of Residence.
that it having been proposed and disputed, it would be a great scandal to
leave it undecided, and would show that it was for some particular interest,
seeing that the principal. Prelates of the Council, and the greater number did
desire the determination of it. The French men, together with the Imperialists,
made instance that the points of doctrine might not be handled The Ministers
of the French King and Emperor demand of the Legates that ye points of doctrine
may be deferred until the coming of the protestants.
in absence of the Protestants who do impugn them, until their contumacie be
manifest, in regard the disputation is superfluous, where there is none to
contradict, especially there being matter enough besides, in which the world
does agree, that is, a good reformation of manners; that the English
Ambassador in France had declared, that his Queen would send to the Council;
whence it would follow that the other Protestants would do the like; so that a
general reunion of the Church would succeed: and that one might assure
himself to see this effected, if a good reformation were made. Cardinal
Simoneta answered this second proposition, that the business seemed easy, but
was not so, because all consisted in the disposition of Benefices, in which the
abuses proceed from Kings and Princes. This troubled all the Ambassadors,
because of the nominations, and dispositions which Princes do exercise, and
especially the French King. But the proposition of the Residence did molest the
Legates more; nor were the Fathers pacified with the excuses formerly used, that
the matter was not sufficiently digested, that there was not time enough before
the Session to make it clear, and for other considerations. And the heat grew
so great, that some of the Vltramontans were agreed to protest, and depart. And
this was the cause of stopping the motion. For the Ambassadors, fearing that
the Council would be interrupted, and knowing that the Pope would cherish
every occasion, ceased to make any further instance, and persuaded the Bishops
to he contented to expect; and, for the same cause, they labored with But they
do all surcease, because the Pope would take occasion hereby to dissolve the
Council.
the Ministers of Spain, that they should not insist any more to have the
continuation declared: who not only were pacified, but protested also to the
Legates, that they did not then demand it; saying, that, if others seek to put
the Council into the stock, there is no reason their purpose should be
covered with the cloak of the King of Spain. The protestation pleased the
Legates, who were engaged by their word to the Marquis, and knew not how to
acquit themselves. Neither was it less grateful to them to defer the point
of Residence; and, that none might change opinion, they drew a writing, which
they read in Congregation, that it might there be approved, that in the next
Session they should do nothing but defer these matters until another, and
that for good respects: and they thought they were disburthened of two great
weights. The Session approaching, many who thought themselves much pricked with
the oration of the French Ambassador, desired the Legates to make a sound
answer, when the Mandate was read in the Session; and Cardinal Altemps did
persuade, that by all means it should be so, saying that the insolency of
that Palace man was to be repressed, who was accustomed to speak to mean
people. The charge hereof was given to 10. Baptista Castello, the Speaker, with
order only to defend the dignity of the Synod, without touching any man's
person.

The Pope, after long consultation, resolved that the Continuation should The
Pope resolves that the continuation shall be declared; but soon after waueth
his opinion.
be declared; let the Emperor do what he could; thinking that it must needs
succeed well: and dispatched a Currier to Trent with this Commission. This,
being arrived the second of June, troubled the Legates very much, in regard of
the confusions which they saw would arise, and of the disorder in which the
Council was; and all resolving uniformly to inform the Pope better
signifying unto him the things that have been handled, and the Decree already
published, and showing him the impossibility to perform his order, the
Cardinal Altemps, who before had leave to go to Rome for other causes, went
away by post the next day, to deliver the message in person. But at night
another Currier came with letters, that his Holiness did refer all to the
wisdom and judgment of the Legates.

The fourth of June being come, the Session was celebrated, with the usual The
Session is celebrated; in which the Speaker makes an answer to the ocation of
Pibrac.
ceremonies; and the Mandates of the Archbishop of Salzburg, and of France,
were read. Which being done the Speaker made an answer; and said, that there
was hope provision would be made against all the disorders of Christendom, by
the remedy, which the Pope thought necessary, that is, this Council, begun by
the assistance of the holy Ghost, and consent of Princes; amongst whom the
French King has sent men of conscience and religion, to offer not only
assistance, but obedience also to this Synod, which does not less deserve it
then other Councels, against which ill affected persons have falsely opposed,
that they have not been lawful, not true, though men of piety have ever held
them to be Councels, having been called by him that has authority, howsoever
calumnies have been spread by others, that they were not free; against which,
as also against the present Synod, the treacheries of Satan copiously and
acutely repeated by them, the Ambassadors, did not prevail; that the Council
will not make a bad interpretation of their diligent and free admonition not to
regard popular applause, or follow the will of Princes, but as it does esteem
it not to be necessary, or rather to be superfluous, so it is willing to
believe that it does proceed from a good mind, that it may not be forced to say
any thing against its mild and pious purpose, and usual custom. But to free
them the Ambassadors from that vain fear, which they would seem to have,
and assure them of their true purpose, he does foretell them that the effects
will show that the Council will postpose the desires, will, and power of
whosoever to her own dignity and authority; and promises to King Charles
what it is able to do, saving faith and religion, for preservation of his
dignity, kingdom, and state. The Frenchmen were ill satisfied with this
answer, but knew they had deserved it. Afterward the Decree was read by Which
does not please the Frenchmen.
the Masse-Bishop. That the Synod, in regard of diverse difficulties risen, and
to define the points of doctrine, and reformation both together, does appoint
The Decree.
the next Session to be held the tenth of July, to handle what shall be
thought fit both of the one and the other matter: reserving power to abridge or
prolong the time in a general Congregation. And there were 35. Prelates who
desired that the point of Residence should then be handle. Some proposed also
that the continuation should be declared, which was thought to be done, to
raise some tumults, to make the Council dissolve. For they were of those who
were most obliged to Rome, and therefore did repent that they had spoken their
opinion so freely in the point of Residence, so much abhorred by the Court. But
all the rest being silent, the Session ended.

The sixt^ day a general Congregation was held; to give order for that Order
given for the matter of the next Session.
which should be handled in the next Session; and the Articles concerning the
communion were proposed. Whether all the faithful are necessarily, and by Gods
Commandment, bound to receive both kinds in that Sacrament? Whether the
Church does upon good ground communicate the Laiques with the bread only, or
has erred herein? Whether all CHRIST and all his graces are received as well
under one kind as under both? Whether the reasons which have moved the Church
to give to the Laity the Communion of the bread only, ought to induce it
also, not to grant the Cup to any? If it shall appear that it may be
granted to some for honest causes, upon what conditions it may be done?
Whether the Communion be necessary for infants, before the use of reason? The
Fathers were demanded if they were pleased that that matter should be handled,
and whether they would add any thing unto it. And although the French
Ambassadors, and many of the Prelates did think fit that the points of
doctrine should not be handled, until it did appear whether the Protestants
would come or not, it being evident, that, in case they, should be
contumacious, the discussion would be in vain, as not necessary for the
Catholics, and not accepted by the others, yet none opposed, at the earnest
persuasions of the Imperialists, who hoped to obtain the Communion of the Cup;
which would be a beginning to give Germany satisfaction. It being resolved
that the six Articles should be handled, and the Divines speak first, and
then the Prelates, it did appear that all the time until the Session would be
spent in this only, eighty eight Divines being to speak, and many Prelates to
give their voices. Therefore some said, that there was no need of any great
consideration to be had of these points, because they were fully discussed in
the former assembly under Julius, but that a brief and sound examination might
serve, so that they may be determined in a few days, and all the other time
may be spent in the reformation. They said that Article of residencie had been
already proposed, and examined in part, and that it was meet that it should
once be ended. This opinion was openly followed by thirty Fathers, and it
appeared that it was secretly approved by many more, who would have showed
themselves in the conclusion. But Cardinal Simoneta, desiring to interpose a
delay, by saying that it was not meet to handle that matter until men's minds
were pacified, which had been moved by the former difference, which will not
suffer them to discern the truth, opened a gate to John Baptista Castagna,
Archbishop of Rosano, and to Pompeius Zambeccarus Bishop of Sulmona; both which
speaking hotly and sharply, raised such a tumult that they feared some
inconvenience. For remedy whereof the Cardinal of Mantua prayed those of the
residence to be quiet, promising, that in another Session, or when they handled
the Sacrament of order, this should be discussed. The tumult being thus
appeased, and it appearing, that the resuming of the points handled under
Julius, would spend more time, and The Card. of Mantua promises that the point
of Residence shall be discussed.
be more difficult then to examine them again, as happens to a judge who is
to frame his sentence upon a process made before another, a resolution was
taken, that the Divines should speak of them, and a congregation be held
twice a day, in which two of the Legates should assist (so dividing their
charges, that they might make an end the sooner) and of the Prelates as many as
would; and that they should have two days to study, and begin the third. With
this conclusion the Congregation ended. But Simoneta was offended Wherewith
Card Simoneta is much offended.
with the promise which Mantua made, without consent or participation of his
colleagues, and made an open quarrel. Mantua was blamed by the Prelates who
favored the Court, and calumniated to be ill affected; but, by the sincere,
was commended for his wisdom, who, in a dangerous necessity, took a course
to withstand the divisions and protestations which were prepared, and blamed
Simoneta for being offended, because Mantua, much more eminent then he,
trusting upon the consent of Seripando and Varmiense, whose opinion he knew,
might think that a resolution taken by necessity, ought to have been ratified
by him also.

The next day the Emp. Ambassadors having obtained, as they desired, the
proposition of the Chalice, for which until then they had proceeded with
respect, came to the Legates, and presented to them, according to the
instruction of their Prince, twenty points of reformation. 1. That the Pope
would The Emperors Ambassadors propose to the Legates twenty points of
Reformation.
be content to make a just reformation of himself and the Court of Rome. 2.
That if the number of Cardinals cannot be reduced to twelve, yet that it be
brought at the least to the double of it, with two supernumerary, so that they
may not exceed six and twenty. 3. That no scandalous dispensations may be
granted hereafter. 4. That the executions against the common Laws may be
revoked, and all the monasteries subjected to the Bishops. 5. That plurality
of Benefices be taken away, and Schools erected in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, and that Ecclesiastical offices may not be bought and sold. 6 That
Bishops may be compelled to reside, and not exercise their office by Vicars,
and if they be not sufficient, that the charge may not be committed to one
Vicar, but to many persons, and that the Visitations, and Dioecesan Synods, may
be made every year. 7 That every Ecclesiastical Ministry be exercised
freely, and that rich Benefices, without cure, may be incorporated to those
that have cure, and small revenues. 8. That the Canons against Simonie may be
revived. 9. That the Ecclesiastical constitutions be abridged, the
superfluity cut off, and not made equal to the obligations of the Law of GOD.
10 That excommunication be not used but for mortal sin, or notorious
irregularitie. 11. That Divine Service be so said, as that it may be
understood by him that faith it, and by him that hears. 12. That the
Breuiaries and Missals be corrected, and those things taken away which be not
found in the Scripture, as also the prolixitie. 13. That in celebrating the
divine offices in Latin, prayers be intermingled in the vulgar. 14 That the
Clergy and Monastical order be reformed, according to the ancient
institution, and that so great riches may not be administered so ill. 15 That
it be considered whether it be expedient to remit so great obligations of the
positive Law, abating some of the rigor, in the difference of meats and fasts,
and granting marriage of Priests to some nations. 16. That, to take away the
diversity of opinions, the diverse Postils be forbidden to be read, and one
made by public authority, and likewise a new Ritual, which may be followed
by all. 17. That a way be found, not to chase away bad Parish Priests, because
that is easy, but to substitute better. 18 That in great provinces many
Bishoprics be erected, converting rich Monasteries to this use. 19. That,
for Ecclesiastical goods usurped, perhaps it was better at that time to pass
them over with dissimulation. In the end to say something to please the Pope,
and to pacify him if he were angry for these propositions, he added: 20 That
the Legates should endeavor, that no unprofitable questions, which breed
scandal, as whether Residence be de iure diuino, and the like, should be
proposed; and that the Fathers should speak without choler, and not make
themselves a fable to the adversaries. Concerning the 17. they gave some
particular notes, to reduce those who were lest obstinate amongst the
Sectaries, by sending them to some University where they may be instructed,
in a short time, and giving order to the Bishops, who have no University, to
make a College in the next, for the youth of their Diocesses, to make a
Catalogue of the Doctors which are to be read in the Schools, prohibiting
that any others be read.

The propositions being understood, the Legates, retiring first, and consulting
Who answer that they cannot be proposed in the next Session.
together, returned and made answer; that it was not possible to propose them
the next Session, having, at their instance, that matter of the Chalice upon
their hands, of great importance and difficulty; that the things proposed are
diverse, and concern diverse subjects, which cannot be all digested together;
that therefore they would communicate to the Prelates, as occasions were
offered, those which had affinity with the other reformations. The
Ambassadors knew that they spoke this that they might not publish their
writing in congregation, that, by gaining time, they might delude the Emperors
expectation. But yet, at that time, they said no more. Afterward, consulting
together, they held it expedient to inform the Emperor well, as well of this
particular, as generally of the manner how they proceeded in the Council. And
to do this, the Bishop of Prague rode post, that The Bishop of Prague goes by
post to inform the Emperor of the State of the Council
he might return before the Session. The Legates, perceiving that the Council
stood upon bad terms, in many respects, but especially for the distaste and
suspicion of the Pope, thought it necessary to inform him fully of all that
was past, and imminent. For this, Friar Leonardus Marinus, Archbishop of
Lanciano, was chosen, because he was a man of spirit and acceptable to And the
Archbishop of Lanciano to inform the Pope.
the Pope, promoted and much favored by him, and a friend also to Seripando,
whose instruction was to inform the Popefully, to excuse the Legates and to
pacify his Holiness. He carried the common Letters of the Legates for his
credence, to which Simoneta made much and long difficulty to subscribe, nor
would have done it, but that they agreed that every one should write particular
letters of his own. Simoneta wrote; that he did think to send the Archbishop
of Rosano, for his particular, to give a more exact information, but that,
being better advised, he afterward resolved to expect the event of Lanciano
his journey.

The mutual distasts; and detractions of the Romans against the Trentines, and
of these against those, did increase at the arrival of every Currier. In
Trent, the favorers of residence did bewail the miseries of the Church, the
servitude of the Council, and the manifest desperation to see the Church
reformed in Rome. The opposites lamented, that a Schism was plotted in the
Council, yea, an Apostacy from the Apostolic Sea. They said that the
Vltramontans, for malice and envy against the Italians, did aim not so much
at the depression, as at the abolition of the Papacy; which being the
foundation of the Church, because CHRIST has made it so, the total
destruction of the whole building must needs ensue. The Pope, receiving new
aduices daily, and always worse, as every day some nouity did happen in Trent,
besides the accidents occurring in Germany and France, contrary to his
affairs, was still more displeased. The opinion of the mayor part for
residencie, did not so much trouble him, as the practices which were made,
especially by the Ambassadors, perceiving that the Princes were interested in
it against his authority. He saw the Emperor was wholly bent to make his son
King of the Romans, and ready to give all satisfaction to Germany; and
therefore had caused these Articles of reformation to be presented to the
Legates, and called to him the Amb. Prague, to find a way how to propose them in
Council, and establish them. He knew the French King was exhausted, compassed
with infinite difficulties, and in danger to be forced to compound with the
Hugonots, which if it happen, the French Prelates may run to the Council,
join with the Spaniards, and make themselves authors of other propositions
against the Papal authority. He thought to calm the tempest, which he saw
prepared against him, both with deeds and words, by leuying four thousand
Suisses, and three thousand Dutch horsemen, he sent to Auignion Nicolas
Gamba^a with five hundred foot, and an hundred The Pope treats a common
league of all Catholic Princes against the Protestants.
light-horsemen; gave money to the Duke of Sauoy, to put himself in arms, and
oppose, if the Hugonots would descend into Italy. And to engage al Princes, he
resolved to treat a league defensive of all Catholics, against the plots of
the Protestants in every place, holding it to be an easy thing to make them
condescend, if for no other cause, yet for this, at the least, to free
themselves from suspicion. In Italy he thought it not hard to induce all. For
the Duke of Florence was wholly his; In Sauoy he had interest, for the
succors he sent him, and for the danger he was in; the Venetians desired to
keep the Vltramontans out of Italy; the King of Spain had need of him for
Naples, and Milan, and France for the actual necessity in which it was.
Therefore he made the proposition in Rome to the Emperors Ambassador, and the
Venetians, and sent the Abbat of Saint Saluto for this end into France, and the
Lord Odescalco into Spain; to whom also he gave instruction; to complain to
the King that the Spanish Bishops were united against his authority, and to
show him that the propositions of the Emperor were fit to make a Schism. It
was easy to foresee the issue of that project, to any that did know, though
but superficially, the ends of the Princes: The Emperor would by no means
condescend to any thing that might give suspicion to the Protestants; the
French King was so far from hindering the passage to the Hugonots in Italy,
that he would have been content to have seen his whole kingdom rid of them;
Spain having great possessions in those parts, But cannot effect it.
did more fear and abhor an union of Italian Princes, then desire the ruin
of the heretics; the Venetians and Duke of Florence could not consent to any
thing, which might trouble the peace of Italy. And so it happened that the
proposition of the league was not embraced by any of the Princes, every one
alleging a particular cause, and all one common, that it would hinder the
progress of the Council; which many believed would not have displeased his
Holiness: and the rather because he again proposed in Consistory the
declaration of the Continuation, and that himself would make a declaration
concerning Residencie. Which things he did not perform, in regard of the
opinion of Cardinal Carpi, followed by the greater part of the other
Cardinals, that it would not be good service for his Holiness, nor the
Apostolic Sea to make himself author of odious things, which might aliene
the minds of one party, and that it was better to leave them in the liberty of
the Council for that time.

Notwithstanding he did not forbear to complain in Consistory of all the
Ambassadors. Of the French he said, that Lansac seemed to be an The Pope
complains of the Ambassadors.
Ambassador of the Hugonots, by his propositions, desiring that the Queen of
England, the Protestants of Suisserland, Saxony, and Wittemberg, should be
expected at the Council, who are declared enemies and rebels, and have no
other end then to corrupt the Council, and make it Hugonor; which he said
himself would preserve, and have forces to do it. That he also and his
Colleagues defended some, who disputed the authority of the Council to be
above the Pope, which opinion is heretical, and the favorers of it are
heretics, threatening to persecute and chastise them. He said they lived like
Hugonots; that they did no reverence to the Sacrament; that Lansac, at his
table, in the presence of many Prelates invited, had said, that there would
come so many Bishops out of France and Germany, that they would chase the Idol
out of Rome. He complained of one of the Venetian Ambassadors, and sent his
Masters word of him. He said of the Cardinals, Mantua, Serepando, And of three
of the Legates.
and Varmiense, that they were unworthy of the Cap. Of the Prelates he spoke as
occasion was offered, and persuaded the friends of each of them to write unto
them. All this was done and said by him, not because he believed it, or for
intemperance of his tongue, but by Art, to force every one, some for fear,
some for shame, some for civility, to make his Apology to him, which he did
most easily receive, and readily believe. And its incredible That he might
force them to make their Apologies.
how his affairs were advanced by this means. For he gained some, and caused
the others to proceed more warily, and remisly. Whereupon his natural courage
reviving in him, which still was full of hope, he said, that all were united
against him, but that, in the end, he would make them all be reunited in his
favor, because they have all need of him, some demanding assistance, and some
graces.

Amongst the Prelates which the Pope sent last to the Council, from Rome, as
has been said, there was one Charles Visconte, Bishop of Vintimiglia, who had
been Senator of Milan, and employed in many Ambassages, a man fit for
negotiation, and of an exact judgment. Having loaded this man with promises
(which he performed also, creating him Cardinal in the first promotion after
the Council) he desired to have him in Trent besides The Bishop of
Vintimiglia^ is the Popes secret minister in the Council.
the Legates, as a secret Minister. He gave him commission to speak that to
diverse which was not fit to be committed to writing, to mark well the
differences between the Legates, and the particular causes thereof, to observe
exactly the humors, opinions, and practices of the Bishops, and to write to him
particularly all matters of substance. He charged him to observe the Cardinal
of Mantua above all the Legates, but to hold intelligence with Simoneta, who
knew his mind, and to labor that there should be no more any demand made for
the declaration concerning residencie; or, if it could not be hindered, that
it should be deferred until the end of the Council; and that, if that also
could not be obtained, he should delay it as long as it was possible, using
all means which he thought expedient for this end. He gave him also a list
of the names of those who favored the Roman part in that matter, with
commission to thank them, and encourage them to continue, and to promise them
recompense: referring to his discretion, entreating with the opposites, to use
some kind of threats, without sharpness of words, but strong in substance,
and to promise to those that would relent, oblivion of all that is past, and to
give particular advice to Cardinal Boromeo of whatsoever did happen: which he
did. And the register of the letters written by him, with much acuteness and
iudgemens, has been showed me, out of which a great part of those things which
follow has been drawn.

But having received advise of the promise made by Mantua, he saw it was hard
to divert the handling of that Article, and thought that the dissension
between the Legates would produce greater evils, and esteemed this to be the
most principal point, as well in deed, as for reputation. For how could he
hope to repress the attempts of the ministers of other Princes, when he could
not govern his own? Therefore he thought it necessary to use the strongest
medicines, for a disease that had seized on the vital parts; and resolved to
show openly how ill he was satisfied with Mantua, which he thought would
either make him alter his course, or ask leave to depart, or by some means,
to retire from Trent: and if the dissolution of the Council did ensue, it was
so much the better. He gave order that the dispatches to Trent, The dispatches
from Rome are no more addressed to the Cardinal of Mantua.
formerly addressed to him, as prime Legate, should hereafter be directed to
Simoneta; he removed, from the congregation of Cardinals, who were to consult
of the affairs of Trent, the Cardinal Gonzaga, and caused Frederico Boromeo
to tell him that the Cardinal, his Uncle, did think to ruin the Apostolic
Sea, but should effect nothing but the ruin of himself, and of his house. He
related to the Cardinal S. Angelo, who was a great friend to Mantua,
whatsoever had happened, and showed himself most cholerique against him; and
as much against Camillus Oliuus, the Cardinals secretary, as not having
performed the promise he made unto him, when he was sent to Rome. Which cost
the poor man very dear. For howsoever the Pope and the Cardinal were
reconciled, yet after his death, returning to Mantua, with the corpse of his
Master, he was imprisoned by the Inquisition, upon diverse pretenses, and
troubled a long time^ whom, after his persecutions were ^nded, I knew my self
to be a person very virtuous, and that he had not deserved such misfortunes.

When the Pope was thus affected, Lanciano came to Rome; and amongst Whose
Secretary also, Camillus Olluus is in disgrace with the Pope.
other things, presented to his Holiness a letter subscribed by more then
thirty Bishops, in favor of residencie. In which they complained of his
distaste against them, protesting they did not think their opinion was
contrary The negotiation of the Arch bishop of Lanciano with ye Pope.
to his authority, which they would defend against all, and maintain it
inviolable in all parts. This made a miraculous disposition in the Popes mind
to receive kindly the letters of the Legates, Mantua, Seripando; and
Varmiense, and to give care to the relation of the Archbishop, who gave him a
particular account of all occurrences, and made him a great deal less
suspicious. Then he began to excuse the Cardinals, that, in the beginning, not
being able to foresee that any inconvenience could happen, they did discover
the opinion which in their conscience they did hold, and after that
contentions did arise, without their fault or defect, their adherence to that
part was honorable for his Holiness and the Court. For now it could not be
said, that the Pope and all the Court were opposite to an opinion, which the
world held to be pious and necessary. And this has succeeded well. For hereby
they have gained credit and authority with the Prelates, and have been able to
moderate the rashness of some, who, otherwise, would have made a great
division, to the great damage of the Church. He related the frequent and
effectual persuasions, which they made to quiet the Prelates, and the affronts
also which they received from some, who told them they could not be silent
against their conscience. He showed the dangers and necessity which forced
Mantua to make the promise. He added, that the greater part of the Prelates,
to take all suspicion out of the mind of his Holiness, did offer to declare
in the next Session, that he was Head of the Church, and had given him
commission to deliver the Embassage to him, which, for many respects, they
thought not fit to commit to writing; and named so many of them, that he made
the Pope marvel, and say; that bad tongues, and worse pens had painted those
Fathers in other colors. Then he showed him the union, and resolution of the
ministers of Princes to maintain the Council, and the disposition of the
Prelates to support any thing, that it might continue, and no occasion arise to
dissolve it; that the point of residence was so advanced, and the Fathers so
interested, in regard of their conscience and honor, and the Ambassadors for
their reputation, that it was impossible to deny the handling and defining of
it. He gave him an account, and a copy of the propositions of the Emperors
Ambassadors, showing they did all aim to subject the Pope to the Council, and
that the Cardinal of Mantua did dexterously decline the proposing of them in
congregation. He concluded, that, it being impossible to recall that which was
past, his Holiness might attribute much unto chance, pardoning, according to
his usual benignity, that which formerly had happened, not by malice, but by
negligence of some, and might make better provision for hereafter, because all
were resolved not to propose or handle any thing, before it was consulted and
determined by his Holiness.

The Pope, weighing the remonstrance well, sent presently back the
Archbishop, with letters to the Legates, and to some of those who had
subscribed The Archbishop is sent back to Trent with letters and instructions.
the letters to him, in answer of the letters which he brought, and gave him
commission to tell them all in his name, that his will was the Council should
be free; that every one should speak, according to his conscience; that they
should make Decrees according to truth; that he was not displeased because
the voices were given more after one manner then another, but in regard of the
attempts and practices to persuade and violence others, and of the contentions
and bitterness between them, which things do not become a general Council.
Therefore that he does not oppose the determination of residence, but
advises them to lay aside their heat, and that when their minds are quieted,
and do aim only at the service of God, and benefit of the Church, they may
handle it with profit. He was content it should be told Mantua that he was
glad to understand of his innocence, and affection, and that he will give a
demonstration thereof; praying him to labor that the Council may be quickly
ended, because, by the discourse he has had with Lanciano, he has understood
that it may be concluded in September. And, in conformity hereof, he wrote a
letter to the Legates, that, following the steps of the Council under Julius,
and taking the points already digested by it, they should immediately determine
them, and make an end.

At that time they were busied in Trent, in hearing the Divines speak in the
Congregations, concerning the sixteen Articles, who began the ninth, and ended
the three and twentieth of the month; and howsoever they were in number 60.
yet nothing worthy observation was delivered by any, in regard the matter
being new, never handled by the Schoolmen; defined in the Council of
Constance at the first onset; and maintained by the Bohemians by force of
arms, rather then by reason and disputation, they had nothing to study but
what was written in the last forty years, by some few, excited by the
disputations of Luther. Therefore they all agreed, that there The communion of
the Cup is discussed.
was no necessity or precept of the Cup; and, for proof, they alleged
places of the new Testament, where bread only is named; as in Saint John, He
that eats this bread shall live for ever. They said that, until the time of
the Apostles, bread only was in use; as it is read in Saint Luke, that the
disciples in Emmaus knew CHRIST in breaking of bread, where there is no mention
of wine. And Saint Paul, ready to suffer ship wrack at the Sea, does bless
the bread, and speaks not of wine. In many of the old Canons mention is made
of the communion of the Laity, as differing from that of the Clergy, which
difference could not consist in any thing but in the Cup. To these were added
the figures of the old Testament. Manna, which signifies the Eucharist, has
no drink in it. Jonathan, who tasted the honey, did not drink; and such other
congruities. And it was a matter of great patience to hear them all repeat
the same things. I ought not to omit one particular, seriously delivered by
James Payua, a Portugal, that CHRIST, both by precept and example, has
declared that the bread is due to all, and the Cup to the Priests only. For
having consecrated the bread, he gave it to his disciples, who then were
Laiques, and represented the whole people, commanding they should all eat of
it; afterward he ordained them Priests, in these words, Do this in
remembrance of me; and, in the end, he consecrated the The opinion of James
Payua a Portugal.
Cup, and gave it to them now consecrated Priests. But the wiser sort did
lightly pass over this kind of arguments, and confined themselves to two.
One, that the Church has power from CHRIST to change the things Two principal
arguments against the communion of the Cup.
that are accidental in the Sacraments, and that to the Eucharist both kinds
are necessary, as it is a sacrifice, but as it is a Sacrament, one only, so
that the Church has power to ordain the use of one alone. Which they
confirmed, because it did once, in the beginning, change in Baptism the
invocation of the Trinity into the invocation of CHRIST only, and returned
afterward to the divine institution. The other reason was, that the Church
cannot err; but she has suffered the use of bread only to be brought in;
and finally has approved it, in the Council of Constance, and therefore it
must be said that there is no divine precept or necessity to the contrary.
But Friar Antonius Mandolphus, a Divine, belonging to the Bishop of Prague,
having first affirmed that he was of the opinion of others in this, that there
was no divine precept, observed, that it was as contrary to the Catholic
doctrine to give the Cup to the Laiques by divine precept, as it was to deny
it to them by divine precept. Therefore all those reasons, which did so
conclude, were to be laid aside, and those of the disciples in Emmaus, and of
Saint Paul in the ship, because by them it would be concluded that it was not
sacrilege to consecrate one kind without the other, which is contrary to all
the Doctors, and meaning of the Church, and overthrows the distinction of the
Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice, and as it is a Sacrament. That it was plain
also, that the distinction of the Laicall and Clericall Communion in the Roman
Ordinary was a diversity of places in the Church, not of the Sacrament
received, because otherwise this reason would conclude, that, not only those
who say Mass, but all the Clergy should have the Cup. Of the authority of the
Church in changing the accidental things of the Sacraments, no man can doubt;
but he said it was not a time to dispute whether the Cup were accidental, or
substantial. He concluded that this Article might be omitted, as already
decided in the Council of Constance, and that the fourth and fifth Articles
might be exactly handled, because, granting the Cup to all Nations that desire
it, all other disputations are superfluous, yea hurtful. John Paul, a Divine
of the Bishop of five Churches, spoke also to the same purpose, and both of
them did displease, because it was thought they spoke against their conscience,
at the instance of their masters.

Concerning the second Article, the Divines were also uniform in the
affirmative, and all their reasons were reduced to three Heads. The congruities
of the old Testament, when the people did participate of the meat offerings in
the sacrifices, but never of the drink offerings. To take away from the
vulgar, occasion to believe that one thing is contained under the bread,
another under the wine. The third the danger of irreuerence. And here the
reasons recited by Gerson were brought; that the blood might be shed, either in
the Church, or in bringing of it, especially over the Mountains in winter,
that it would hang in the beards of the Laikes, that it would be sower if it
were kept, that there would want vessels to hold enough for ten thousand or
twenty thousand persons; that, in some places, it would be too great a charge,
in respect of the price of wine; that the vessels would not be kept clean;
that a Lay man would be of equal dignity with a Priest. Which reasons it
was necessary to say that they were just and good; otherwise the Prelates and
Doctors, for so many ages, would have taught an untruth, and the Church of
Rome, and Council of Constance erred. All these reasons (except the last) were
thought ridiculous, because those dangers might be more easily withstood in
these times, then they could in those 12. first ages, when the Church was in
greater poverty. And the last seemed to be of no force to show that the change
was reasonably made, but was good to maintain it after it was made. The two
Divines before named did advise that this Article also might be omitted.

In the third Article, that all CHRIST is received under one kind, the
doctrine of concomitancie, delivered by the Divines, was taken for an argument.
For the body of CHRIST being under the bread, by virtue of the consecration,
CHRIST having said, by words omnipotent and effectiue, This is my body, and the
body being alive, it must needs have blood, soul, and divinity: so that all
CHRIST was undoubtedly received under the bread. But some inferred hereby, that
therefore all graces are received in it, seeing that he who has all CHRIST
wants nothing, because he is abundantly sufficient. Others said to the
contrary, that the illation was neither necessary, nor probable. For those who
are baptized, are filled with CHRIST, as St. Paul says, and yet other
Sacraments are given unto them. And because some avoided the force of the
reason by saying, that the other Sacraments are necessary in respect of sins
committed after baptism,, it was replied that the ancient Church did
immediately communicate the baptized, so that, as from being filled with all
CHRIST in baptism, it cannot be inferred that the Eucharist does not confer
other graces, so from having received all CHRIST under the bread, it cannot be
inferred that no other grace is to be conferred by the blood; neither can it be
said, without great absurdity, that the Priest in the Mass, having received
the body of our LORD, and, by consequence, all CHRIST, does not receive any
grace in drinking of the Cup: for otherwise to drink of it, would be a work
indifferent and vain. Moreover it is decided, by the common doctrine of the
Schools, and of the Church, that by every sacramental action, by virtue of
the work it self, which they call, Ex opere operato, a degree of grace is
conferred. But it cannot be denied that to drink the blood of CHRIST is a
sacramental action, therefore it can not be denied, that it has a special
grace annexed. In this controversy the greater part of the Divines held, that,
not speaking of the quantity of grace, answerable to the disposition of the
receiver, but of that which the Schoolmen call sacramental, it was equal in
him that received one kind only, and in him that received both. The other
opinion was defended, though with the smaller number, yet more earnestly. Friar
Amante Seruita, a Brescian, a Divine of the Bishop of Sebenico, a favorer of
this second opinion, passed very far, I know not with what aim or end; who,
alleging the doctrine of Thomas Caietane, that blood is not part of humane
nature, but the first aliment, and adding that it could not be said, that the
body does necessarily draw in concomitance its aliment, did infer that the
thing contained under both kinds is not absolutely the same: and he added,
that the blood of the Eucharist, according to the words of CHRIST, was blood
spilt, and, by consequence, Friar Amante concurreth in opinion with the
Lutherans
out of the veins, in which if it remained, it could not be drink, so that
it could not be drawn in concomitancie with the vain, and that the Eucharist
was instituted in memory of the death of CHRIST, which was by separation, and
effusion of blood. Whereat there was a noise raised amongst the Divines, and a
cracking of the benches. Therefore, recalling himself, But presently
recanteth, and asks pardon
he retracted, and said that the heat of dispuaion had carried him to allege
the reasons of the adversaries, as if they had been his own, which
notwithstanding he purposed to resolve in the end; and he spent the residue
of his discourse in resolving them; and, in conclusion, asked pardon of the
scandal given, because he had not spoken with such caution, as to show
plainly that those reasons were captious, and contrary to his own opinion.
And he made an end without speaking of the other 3. Articles.

But, concerning the fourth Article, the Spanish Divines, and dependants The 4.
Article that the Cup is not to be allowed to the people, is st^o^gly
maintained by the Spanish Prelates.
on Spain, were maruellously united, in giving counsel that, by no means,
the use of the Cup should be permitted to Germany, or others. The substance of
that which they said was; That none of the causes which formerly moved the
Church to take it from the people being ceased, yea being now more urgent,
and others more strong and essential annexed, it was fit to persevere in the
determination of the Council of Constance, and of the Church before and after.
And discoursing of the dangers of irreuerence, which was the first kind of the
causes, they said they were now more to be feared, then in former times. For
then there was none who did not constantly believe the real and natural
presence of CHRIST in the Sacrament, after the consecration, so long as the
kinds did last, and yet the Cup was taken away, because men had not such
regard to the blood of CHRIST, as was necessary; and therefore what reverence
can be hoped for now, when some do deny the real presence, and some will
have it only in the use? Besides there is not so much devotion amongst good
Catholics, diligence in humane affairs, and negligence in divine being much
increased; so that it may be feared, that a greater neglect may produce a
greater irreuerence. To make a difference between Priests and others, is now
more necessary then ever, because the Protestants have exposed them to the
hatred of the people, and spread a doctrine which takes from them their
exemptions, subiecteth them to lay Magistrates, detracteth from their power of
absoluing from sins, and says also that they should be called to the
ministry by the people, and be obnoxious to be deposed by them; which should
force the Church to preserve exactly all those rites, which may give them
reputation. The danger that the vulgar may receive an impression of false
belief, and be persuaded that some thing is in the Cup which is not under the
bread, is now more urgent, in regard of the new opinions spread abroad. Many
said, that the Church did prohibit the Chalice, to oppose the error of
Nestorius, who did believe that all CHRIST was not under one kind; which being
the opinion of some of the heretics now, the prohibition is to be maintained
still. What they would infer by this I cannot express better, having never
read that Nestorius did speak in this subject, nor that the Modernes do
handle it with those terms. But the third danger that the authority of the
Church would be debased, and a conclusion made that it has erred in taking a
way the Cup, may be called not a danger, but a thing that would certainly
happen; neither was the request made by the Protestants, but to conclude, that
the Synod having confessed the error past, has corrected it, by this grant;
so they will publish the victory, and demand a change also in other
constitutions of the Church. They said they were deceived, who thought the
Dutchmen would be satisfied with this, and submit themselves to the decrees
of the Council; yea, they will take away fasts, difference of meats, demand
marriage of Priests, and an abolition of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the
exterior Court, which is the mark at which they all do aim; that it is not
credible they are Catholics who desire the Cup, because the Catholics do all
believe that the Church cannot err, and that no devotion is acceptable to God
if it be not approved by it, and that obedience to the Church is the height of
Christian perfection; that it is certainly to be believed, that he that does
demand the Cup thinks it necessary, and he that thinks so, cannot be a
Catholic; that none does demand it believing that he may not lawfully use
it without the grant of the Council, but that they may not be hindered by
their Princes, who, if they were alone; would usurp it, without any allowance;
that of this every one may be assured, observing, that, not the people, but
the Princes do entreat, who will not suffer a nouitie without a lawful
Decree, not because the people would not bring it in of themselves, more
willingly, then seek it of the Council.

And this argument was so pressed, that Friar Francis Forier, a Portugal, A
petulant saying of a Friar against the Princes, who demanded the Cup.
used a conceit, which the auditors thought to be not only bold, but
petulant also; that the Princes would make themselves Lutherans, by permission
of the Council. The Spaniards exhorted them to consider, that, if this were
granted to Germany, Italy, and Spain would demand the like, to whom it
could not be denied; from whence also these Nations would learn not to obey,
and to desire a change of other Ecclesiastical Laws; and that to make a most
Catholic country Lutheran, there was no better mean, then to give it the
Cup. Franciscus Della Torre, a Jesuit, repeated a saying of the Cardinal
Saint Angelo, the chief Penitentiarie, that Satan, who was wont to
transform himself into an Amgell of heaven, and his Ministers into Ministers
of light, does now under the cover of the Chalice, with the blood of CHRIST,
exhort to give the people a cup of poison.

Some added, that the providence of God, guiding the Church, inspired the
Council of Constance, in the former age, to establish the taking away of the
Cup, by a decree, not only for the reasons which were then of force, but
because if it were now in use, there would be no external sign, to
distinguish the Catholics from the Heretics, and this distinction being
taken away, the Protestants would be mingled in the Church with the faithful,
and that would follow which Saint Paul says, that A little leaven does quickly
make sower a great lump; so that to grant the Cup would be nothing else
but to give the heretics greater opportunity to hurt the Church. Some also,
who knew not the petition had been presented to the Pope, and by him, (to
unburden himself, and draw the matter in length) referred to the Council,
did expound it ill, that the request was then made to the Synod, and not to the
Pope, suspecting it was to this end, that they might enlarge every grant with
unfit interpretations, and so cause a necessity of another Council.

But those who thought they might condescend to the requests of the Emperor,
and of so many other Princes and people, gave counsel to proceed with less
rigor, and not to make such bad interpretations of the godly prayers of the
weak brethren, but to follow the precept of Saint Paul, to transform
themselves into the defects of the imperfect, to win them, and not to have
worldly aims of reputation, but to govern themselves by the rules of charity
which treading under foot all others, even those of humane prudence, and
wisdom, has compassion, and yields to every one. They said they saw no
considerable reason adduced by the others, but only that the Lutherans would
say that they had proved that the Church has erred, and would make other
demands. But he is deceived who believes that a Negative will make them hold
their peace. They have said already that an error has been committed, they
will say hereafter, that obstinacy is added to it; and where humane
ordinations only are in question, and alteration will not seem strange, nor
misbeseeme the Church. Who knows not that the same thing cannot agree to all
times, that there are innumerable Ecclesiastical rites established and
abolished; and that it is not against the honor of the Council to have
believed that a rite has beenegood, which experience has showed to be
unprofitable. To persuade ones self that this demand will beget others,
argues too much suspicion, and desire of advantage; but S. Paul says, that
simplicity and christian charity does not think evil, believes every
thing; supporteth all, hops well.

It belonged to these only to speak of the first Article, because those of
the absolute negative had nothing to say of it. But these were divided into two
opinions. One which was the more common, that it should be granted, upon such
conditions as Paul the third did grant it, of which we have spoken in their
place. The other of some few, that if they would grant the Cup, to make them
stand fast in the Church, who now do stumble, it is meet so to temper it, as
that it may produce the effect desired; which those conditions cannot do, yea
would undoubtedly make them fall headlong into Lutheranisme. It is certain,
that the penitent man ought rather to choose any temporal evil then to sin;
yet Caietan gave counsel, not to come to any specificall comparison, and say,
that it is better to be put to death with pincers, or upon the wheel, etc.
because by this means one should tempt himself without necessity, and fall
from a good disposition, presenting horrors to himself to no purpose. So, in
the present occasion, these ambiguous men, when the Councels favor shall be
brought unto them, will rest satified, and thank GOD, and the Church, and will
think no more of it, strengthening themselves by little and little. It is the
precise commandment of S. Paul, to receive the weak in faith, not with
disputations, or prescribing them opinions and rules, but simply, expecting
opportunity to give a more ample instruction. He that should now propose a
condition in Germany, to believe this, or that, would trouble them much, while
their minds do waver, so that, thinking whether they ought to believe it or
not, they will fall into some error, on which they world not otherwise have
thought. To this reason they added, that howsoever it is maintained, that the
Church has, for just causes, taken away the Cup, if afterward it does grant
it upon other conditions, without providing against those inconveniences, for
which it was first removed, it is confessed, that it was taken away without
cause. Therefore they concluded, that it was fit to constitute for conditions,
all the remedies to the inconveniences, which first caused the prohibition,
that is, that the Cup should never be carried out of the Church, and that the
bread only should be sufficient for the sick, that it should not be kept, to
take away the danger of sowernesse, that they should vselittle pipes, to avoid
effusion, as formerly was done in the Roman Church. This being done, it will
appear that the provision was first made upon good reason, reverence will be
stirred up, people and Princes will be satisfied, and the weak will be tempted
no more. A Spaniard said, that it was not so easily to be believed, that the
Catholics did, with such heat of devotion, desire the Cup, and therefore that
it were good to send into Germany, to be informed who they be that demand it,
what their faith is, and what be their motives, that the Synod, receiving the
relation, may have a foundation to proceed on, and not ground an self upon the
words of other.

In the sixth Article they al expressed themselves in few words, because there
was not much to be said. For the Eucharist not being a Sacrament necessarily,
and Saint Paul commanding that he who is to receive it, should examine himself
whether he be worthy, it does plainly appear, that it cannot be administered
to any that has not the use of reason; and if the contrary has been
practiced in ancient times, it has been where and when the truth was not so
well declared as now it is. Therefore the Synod ought to determine that the
present use should be maintained. Some well observed that they ought to speak
of Antiquity with more reverence, and not say that they wanted the knowledge
of the Truth. Desiderius a Carmelite Friar of Palermo, had an opinion by
himself, that the Article ought to be omitted; saying, that the difficulty
being not moved by the Protestants of these times, it was not good, by
handling of it, to set a nouitie on foot, that the matter was probable on both
sides, and that when it should be known that it was handled in the Council, it
would excite the curiosity of many to think on it, and give them occasion to
stumble. For some might be persuaded to believe that the Eucharist is a
Sacrament of necessity, as well as Baptism, because the ground of that are
the words of CHRIST, He that shall not be borne again of water and the Spirit,
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven and of this, If ye eat not my flesh
and drink my blood, ye shall not have life. And the exception of children
cannot plainly be grounded upon the precept of S. Paul, to examine our selves,
which children cannot do, because the Scripture does likewise command, that an
instruction in the doctrine of Faith ought to precede Baptism: which if it be
applied to men of age, without excluding children of baptism, who cannot
learn, the examination preceding the Eucharist may also be applied to men of
discretion, without excluding children from it. His conclusion was that he did
approve the use not to give them the communion, but would not have the
Council to handle that which no man opposes.

The congregations of the Divines being ended, the Legates did incline to The
Legates do incline to grant the Cup to Germany.
grant the Cup to Germany, with the conditions of Paul the third, and some
more; and, consulting with their inward friends, framed decrees concerning the
first, fourth, and fifth points, deferring the others until they had better
considered how to avoid the difficulties concerning them, related by the
Divines. And calling a congregation of the Prelates, they demanded whether the
three decrees should be proposed, that they might speak their opinions of them
in the first congregation. Granata, who had found the Legates intention, and was
most opposite to the grant of the Cup, contradicted, And are opposed by the
Spaniards.
and said, that the order of the Articles was to be followed; which was
essential, it being impossible to decide the fourth and fifth, until the
second and third were decided. Thomas Stella, Bishop of Capo di Istria,
opposed, and said, that in the council they ought not to use Logic, and
artifices, to hinder good determinations. Granata replied, that himself
desired the same; that is, that propositions might be made to the Synod in
order, that they might not stumble, by walking in confusion. Granata was
assisted by Matthias Callinus, Archbishop of Zara, and the other by John Thomas
of S. Felix, Bishop of Caua, but using ridiculous jests, rather then any
serious discourse; which gave some distaste to the Spaniards, and made a great
whispering amongst the Prelates. This caused the congregation to be dismissed;
and the Cardinal of Mantua exhorted the Archbishops to read and consider of
the draughts made, that the order of proceeding might be resolved on in the
next Congregation.

This place requires, that, because the Congregations were often ended by
reason of some distasts given to some great Prelate, the ordinary cause thereof
should be related. It has been showed before that there were many Bishops in
the Council, Pensioners of the Pope, who did all depend on Simoneta, because he
was most interested for his Holiness, and had the most secret instructions.
He being a man of an acute judgment, made use of them, according to the
capacity of every one. Amongst these, he had some that were bold and witty,
whom he employed in the Congregations, to cross those who entered into matters
contrary to his ends. These were exercised in the Art of jesting soberly, to
provoke others, and make them ridiculous, themselves retaining their gravity,
and not being moved at all. The service they did to the Pope, and the Cardinal,
does deserve particular mention. These were the forenamed Bishops, Caua, and
Capo di Istria, Pompeius Zambeccarus of Bolonia, Bishop of Sulmona, and
Bartholomeus Sirigus, of Candia, Card. Simoneta the Legate, makes use of 4.
jesting Bishops in the Council.
Bishop of Castellanetta; each of which, to the common qualities of their
Country, had joined the perfections which are gained in the court of Rome
These did exasperate also the distasts between Mantua and Simoneta; before
mentinoed, by speaking ill, and detracting from Mantua, as well in Trent by
words, as by letters to Rome; which was attributed to Simoneta, because every
one saw he made much esteem of them. Whereof purging himself to the
Secretary of Mantua, and to the Bishop of Nola, he said, that for the small
respect they bare to such a Cardinal, he would not have had any more friendship
with them, but that he had need of them in the Congregation, to oppose the
impertinences of the Prelates.

Augustinus Pauugarner, Ambassador of Bauaria, having been in Trent The
Ambasdour of Bauaria is received in Congregation, and makes a protestation
about precedence.
two months, as a private man, by reason of his pretention to precede the
Venetians, had finally commission from his Prince, to appear in Public, and
was received in the Congregation of the 27 of June, sat after the Venetian
Ambassadors, and first made a protestation, saying, that as the right of his
Prince was most strong, so he was ready to defend it in any other place, but
that in the Council, where Religion is handled, he would not stand upon those
points of honor: and therefore was contented to yield, but so as that it
might be no prejudice to his Master, or other German Princes of the Electorall
blood of the Empire. The Venetian Ambassadors answered To which the Venetian
Ambassadors make answer.
the Protestation, that their Republique had right of Precedence, and that as
the Duke of Bauaria did then yield, so he ought to do in all places. The
Ambassador made a very free and long oration; in which he showed the state of
religion in Bauaria, saying it was compassed with heretics, who were also
entered into it; that there were whole Parishes of Lutherans, Zuinglians, The
Bauaria^ makes a long and free ora^tion.
Flacians, Anabaptists, and of other Sects which cockle the Prelates have not
been able to weed out, because the contagion is not only in the vulgar, but
in the Nobility also. The cause hereof has been the bad life of the Clergy,
whose great wickedness he could not relate, without offending the chaste
ears of the auditorie. But it suffices that his Prince does tell them, that
the amendment of Doctrine would be in vain and unprofitable, if first an
amendment were not made of manners. He added, that the Clergy is infamous for
lust; that the politic Magistrate does not suffer a Concubinary Citizen:
which fault is so common in the Clergy, that there are not above three or
four in an hundred, who are not concubinaries, or secretly married, or openly;
that the Catholics also in Germany, do prefer a chaste marriage before an
unchaste single life, that many have aba^doned the Church for the prohibition
of the Cup, saying, that the word of God and practice of the Primitive Church
does force them to use it; which until this present is observed in the Oriental
Churches, and formerly has been used in the Church of Rome. That Paul 3. did
grant it to Germany, and the Bauarians do complain of their Prince, that he
does envy it to his subjects, protesting that if the Synod do not make
provision, his Highness will not be able to govern his people, and will be
forced to give them that which he cannot withhold. For a remedy of the
scandals of the Clergy, he proposed a good reformation, and that in every
Bishopric Schools and Academies should be erected, to bring up good
Ministers; he demanded the marriage of Priests, without which it was impossible,
in that age to reform the Clergy; alleging that single life was not
commanded by GOD. He demanded also the Communion under both kinds, saying,
that if it had been permitted, many provinces of Germany had remained in the
obedience of the Apostolic Sea, whereas those who have continued in it until
now, do run away from it, like a torrent, together with other nations; that
the Duke does not desire the three remedies mentioned, hoping to reduce to the
Church the sectaries, and those that are strayed, but only to retain those
who are not divided as yet. He said it was necessary to begin with
reformation, or else all the pains taken in the Council would be in vain;
that, the Clergy being reformed, his Prince, if his opinion be asked in point
of doctrine, will be able to say something worthy of consideration; which is
not fit to be spoken now, because it is not convenient to treat of making war
against the enemy, before one has mustered his own forces at home. In the
course of his Oration he often interposed, that his Prince spoke this, not to
give a Law to the Council, but to intimate it with reverence, and with this
conceit also he made an end. The Synod answered, by the Speaker, that having
The answer to it.
long expected some Prince or embassage of Germany, but above all the Duke of
Bauaria, a Baracadoe of the Apostolic Sea in that Country, they were glad to
see his Ambassador, whom they do receive, and will labor as they have done,
to constitute whatsoever shall be for the service of God, and souls health of
the faithful. The Frenchmen, hearing this oration, were well pleased, because
they were not the only men that did freely admonish the Prelates of that which
was fit to be told them; but hearing the answer, they grew jealous, because
this was courteous, and theirs sharp. The difference was, because, howsoever
the Bauarian did acutely bite the Clergy in general, yet he spoke of the
Fathers with much reverence, whereas the French oration was especially directed
to reprehend those that heard them; besides the answer made to them was
premeditated, and that to the Bauarian extempore. But they were both used
alike, being heard with the ears only.

The Emperors Ambassadors, considering, that, in the last Congregations The
Emperors Ambassadors do present a writing in Congregation, concerning the grant
of the Cup.
of the Divines, the Spaniards, and most of the Italians had spoken against the
grant of the Cup, and that many of them had called them heretics who do
demand it, to answer to this and other objections, to promote the proposition
of the Bauarian, and to prevent the Prelates that they fall not into the
impertinencies used by the Divines, composed a writing, which they presented in
the same congregation, after the Ambassador had ended his Oration. The
substance whereof was. That, in regard of the place they hold, they have
thought fit to admonish the Fathers of some things before they deliver their
suffrages. That the Divines have these last days spoken well, as far as
concerns their own Countries, but not for other Provinces and Kingdoms.
They prayed the Fathers so to frame their opinions, that they might give a
medicine not to the sound parts, which have no need of it, but to the members
ill affected; which they will fitly do, when they shall know which be the
weak parts, and what help they desire. And beginning with the Kingdom of
Bohemia, they said there was no need to go far, nor to mention the things
handled in Constance, but only to add, that, after that Council, no
practice, force, or war, has been able to take the Cup out of that
Kingdom. That the Church did lovingly grant it unto them, upon certain
conditions, which Pius, did revoke, because they were not observed. But Paul
and Julius the third, to regaine that kingdom, sent Nuncij, to permit it unto
them, though the business, by reason of some impediments, was not brought to
perfection. Now the Emperor, having at his charge, instituted the
Arch-bishopricke of Prague and obtained in the Parliament of Bohemia, that the
Calistine Priests should not be ordained but by the Archbishop, and should
acknowledge him for a lawful Prelate, did beseech the Pope that such an
occasion, to regaine (...), might not be lost, which his Holiness having
referred to the judgment of the Council, it will remain in the power thereof
to, preserve that Kingdom by granting the Cup unto them. That those people
differ but little from the Church of Rome; that they never would admit of
married Priests, nor ordained by any Bishop out of the communion of the
Apostolic Sea; that, in their prayers they make mention of the Pope,
Cardinals, and Bishops; that, if they have any small difference in doctrine, it
may easily be rectified, so that the Cup be granted to them, that it is no
marvel if an ignorant multitude have conceived that opinion; seeing that men
learned, godly; and Catholic do defend that more grace is conferred in the
Communion of both kinds, then of one only. They exhorted the Fathers to take
heed, that their too great severity do not make them desperate, and cast
themselves into the arms of the Protestants. They added, that there were
Catholics in Hungary, Austria, Morauia, Silesia, Carintbia, Carniola, Stiria,
Bauaria, Sueuia, and other parts of Germany, who desire the Cup with great
zeal; which being made known to Paul the third, he gave the Bishops leave to
communicate them with it, which, for many impediments, was not effected. Of
those there is danger that, if the Cup be taken from them, they will turn to
the Lutherans. The Divines have, in their public disputations, made a doubt;
that those who desire the Cup are heretics; but his Majesty does demand it
for Catholics only. That there is hope to reduce, by this grant, many
Protestants also, as some of them have already protested they would return and
be converted, being satiated with nouities; otherwise the contrary is to be
feared. And to answer to him that asked a few days sinee, who he is that
does demand it, he may know that the Emperor does desire, that the
Archbishop of Prague may ordain Calistine Priests, and the Ambassadors for
the Clergy of Bohemia desire the same, for that kingdom; and if there were no
hope to obtain it, there would not be left so much as any little remainder of
Catholics. In Hungary they force the Priests to give them the Cup, by taking
away their goods, and threatening to kill them; and the Archbishop of
Strigonium having punished some Priests for doing it, the people remains
without Catholic Curates, has no Baptism, and is absolutely ignorant of
Christian doctrine, ready to fall into Paga^^sme. In conclusion, they prayed
the Fathers to have compassion, and to find a means to preserve those people
in the faith, and call back those that are strayed.

In the end of the congregation the Legates gave the draughts composed,
concerning the three first Articles, for fear of the opposition made in the
former congregation. The days following the Fathers handled them, and on the 3
they diseoursed very amply, speaking of the sacramental grace, whether more be
received in both kinds then in one: and some defended one part and some
another. Cardinal Seripando said, that the same difficulty having been
discussed in the Council under Julius, it was resolved that it should not be
discussed again. Yet some Prelates desired a declaration of it; but were not
hearkened unto, in regard of the contrariety of opinions, and because the
greater part did hold that both opinions were probable. But to avoid all
difficulty, it was concluded, that all CHRIST the fountain of all graces, is
received. Some of the Bishops prepared for their departure from Trent, Some of
the Prelates are about to depart from Trent, fearing they had spoken too freely
concerning residence.
who, having spoken with much passion and heat concerning residence, saw they
were hated, and feared some grievous encounter, in case they should persevere.
Amongst these was the Bishop of Modena before mentioned, a man very learned,
and of a sincere conscience, Julius Pauesi Archbishop of Surrento, the Bishop
of Viuiers, Peter Paul Costazzarus, Bishop of Aqui, and others, who had
obtained leave from the Legates: which Mantua gave them, that (in regard they
were his friends) he might set them at liberty, and the others, to take away
occasion of distastes. But the Ambassador of Portugal did remonstrate to the
Legates that this would be a disreputation to the Council, the cause being
known why they suffered and that it would be said there was no liberty,
which would also be dishonorable to the Pope. Thereupon they resolved to stop
them, and the rather, But are stopped.
because they understood, that so soon as they were departed, others would
ask leave also.

The Legates deferring to propose the other Articles, in regard of the
difficulties, which they foresaw, the third of July the Emperors Ambassadors
and the Bauarian desired that they would deliver their opinions concerning
them; and a Congregation being called the next day to this effect, the French
Ambassadors presented a writing, exhorting the Fathers The Ambassadors of
France and Bauaria present a writing to persuade the grant of the Cup.
to grant the Communion of the Cup, making this their ground, that in matters
of Positive Law, as this was, they ought to yield, and not to be so
obstinate, but to consider the necessity of the time, and not give scandal to
the world, by showing themselves so constant in observing men's precepts, and
neglecting GODS; by rejecting reformations. And in the end they required, that
what determination soever they would make, it might not prejudice the use of
the Kings of France, who receive the Cup in their Consecration, nor the custom
of some Monasteries of the Kingdom which do, at certain times, administer
it. Yet nothing else was done in that Congregation, but only sixteen points
of doctrine given forth, to be discussed in the Congregations following.

The Legates were astonished at the proposition of the Frenchmen, understanding
they were joined with the Imperialists, for which cause themselves The Legates
are troubled with the conjunction of the Frenchmen and Imperialists, in this
point of the Chalice.
were to walk more warily. And weighing well the motives of the Frenchmen to
derogate from the positive precepts, they observed that the grant of the Cup,
besides the difficulties proposed, did draw with it many more, in diverse
matters. They remembered the request for marriage of Priests, made by the
Bauarian, and that Lansac, in a feast two days before, in the presence of many
Prelates invited, exherting them to gratify the Emperor in the petition for
the Cup, said, that France did desire Prayers, divine Offices and Masses in the
vulgar tongue, that the images of the Saints should be taken away, and marriage
granted to Priests; and knowing that the beginning is more easily resisted then
the Progress, and that one may, with less pains, be hindered from entering
into an house, then driven forth, they resolved that it was not a fit time to
treat of the Cup. They persuaded Pagnauo, Agent of the Marquis of Pescara, to
desire that the determination might not be made before his King was advised
thereof. The Congregations of the six and seven days were intermitted, to
treat with the Imperialists, that they would be contended to defer the
matter, alleging diverse reasons: the most concluding whereof was, because the
time was too short, to make the And the^^ do cause treaty there of to be
^^ferred.
Fathers understand, that the grant was necessary. Finally, after long parley,
they were content, that all that part which concerns doctrine should be
deferred, where with the Legates not being satisfied, at the last the Ambassadors
consented, that that point only should be deferred, so that the dilation were
mentioned in the Decree, and a promise made to determine it another time. The
Frenchmen remained to be treated with; where they found more facility, then
they expected; who said, they had neither proposed nor required it, but only
assisted the Emperors Ambassadors. This difficulty being overcome, they began
to compose the Decrees; which to dispatch quickly, they let the Fathers know,
that if any of them would advise any thing, they should commit it to writing,
that the composition might not be foreslowed.

In the Congregation of the eighth day, Daniel Barbaro, Patriarch of Aquileia,
said, in delivering his suffrage, that news being come of the accord in
France, and therefore it being probable that many Prelates would come, it were
fit to defer the points of doctrine until their arrival: but the instance
being seconded by none, not so much as by the French Ambassadors themselves,
it did fall of it self. In the next Congregation Antonius Augustinus, Bishop
of Lerida, put them in mind, that it would be good to make mention of the
customs of France, according to the instance of the Ambassadors, by putting in
words which might preserve the privileges of that kingdom, adding that, after
the determination of the Council of Constance, the Grecians were not forbid to
communicate with the Cup, because they had a privilege, which he had seen,
but being seconded by none but Bernar do dal Been, a Florentine, Bishop of
Nimes, his proposition was laid aside also. After the Congregation, the
Ambassador Ferrier did curiously demand of Augustinus the tenor, Author,
and time of that privilege: who having referred it to Pope Damasus, the
Ambassador laughed, because it was certain, that, an hundred years after
that Pope, to abstain from the Cup was accounted sacrilege in the Church of
Rome, and that the Roman Ordinary does describe the communion of the Laity
always with the Cup, and that in the year 1200. Innocentius the third makes
mention that the women did receive the blood of CHRIST in the Communion.

The tenth day Leonard Aller, a Dutchman, titular Bishop of Philodelphia, who
came the week before, delivering his opinion concerning the Decrees, made a
digression in manner of a set speech, desiring the Legates and the Synod, that
the German Prelates might be expected, using diverse reasons, but principally
three; which were ill taken by the Congregation: that is, That it could not be
called a general Council in which a whole principal Nation of Christendom
was wanting. That to proceed without expecting them, would be accounted a
praecipitation. That the Pope ought to write to them, and call them
particularly. The good Father knew not that the Pope had dealt with them two
years before by Delphinus and Commendone, his Nuncij in Germany, nor what
answers were made by the Protestants and Catholics, the former of which said
they would not, and the later that they could not come to the Council. Some
thought he was moved by the Emperors Ambassadors, who, seeing that the
proposition of the Cup was deferred, were willing to prolong theresidue also.

In the next Congregation, nine points of reformation, formerly established,
were read, and, to the first, that nothing should be paid for Ordinations,
Nine points of reformation are read.
Albertus Duimius, Bishop of Veglia, who came the week before, and was not
present at the discussion of the matter, said; that he held that point to be
very imperfect, if they did not constitute withal, that likewise nothing The
Bishop of Veglia makes a resolute speech concerning some corruptions in Rome.
should be exacted at Rome for dispensations to receive Orders out of due
times, before the just age, without license and examination of the Ordinary,
and for irregularities, and other Canonical impediments. For in those things
great expenses were made, whereas to the poor Bishops, who have not whereon to
live, a small alms is given; which he would by all means have taken away,
yet so, as that they give not a scandal to the world to tithe rue, and steal
gold and silver. Upon this occasion he enlarged himself, and taxed the
payments made in Rome for all sorts of dispensations, and added that,
whenever any dispensations have been presented to him, either for
Ordinations or ought else, he has used to ask whether they have paid for
them, and, understanding that they have, he has never executed nor admitted
them; which he spoke publicly, because it was the duty of every Bishop so
to do. And being answered, that they had formerly treated of this in
Congregation, and resolved to refer the resolution thereof to the Pope, who
might with more honor, reform the Offices of Rome, he replied, that, the last
Lent, he had spoken of it in Rome, but particularly in the house of the
Cardinal di Perugia, in presence of many Cardinals, and Prelates of the Court,
and said the same things, who answered they were matters to be proposed in the
Council; but now, understanding the contrary, he will speak of it no more,
but leave it to God.

To the second of the Ordinations to title, the Bishop of Five Churches said it
was more necessary to provide, according to the ancient constitutions, that
none should be ordained without a title and Office, then without a revenue,
because it is an excessive scandal, that many are seen to be made Priests,
not to serve God and the Church, but to enjoy their ease, joined with much
luxury, and with a good revenue, that the Synod ought to think seriously
hereof, and to find a means that there may not be an Ecclesiastical person,
who shall not be dedicated to some ministry, because he has observed, that,
in Rome, in these later times, Bishopriques have been given to some, only to
promore them, who, within a short time, have resigned them, remaining titular
Bishops, only for ambition of dignity; which invention antiquity would have
detested, as pestiferous. To the fourth point, for division of great and
frequent Parishes, after he had commended the Decree, he added, that it was
more necessary to divide great Bishopriques, that they might be better
governed; alleging that, in Hungary, there are some which contain 200 miles
in length, which cannot be visited and directed by one man. These things were
not well expounded by the adherents of Rome, who thought that all were bent to
revive the treaty of residence.

The Bishop of Sidonia, a man of the same Country, gave worse satisfaction;
The Bishop of Sidonia proposes metaphorically a reformation of the Pope.
proposing, under metaphors, the reformation of the Pope himself; saying, that
darkness could not be taken from the stars, except it were removed from
the Sun, nor the sick body healed, so long as bad dispositions did remain
in the head, which does dispearse them to all the members. And for the last
point, concerning Receivers, he said, that it was not honorable for the
Council, nor profitable for the Church to begin with the reformation of the
smallest matters; that the matters of importance are first to be handled, the
superior orders to be reformed first, and the inferior afterward. Which
sayings seemed to please many of the Spanish Prelates, and some of the Italians
also. But partly by saying that those Decrees were already composed, and that
there were but three days to the Session, which short time did not comport the
digestion of new matters, partly by making such oppositions against the things
spoken as they were able, and by giving assurance, that the Pope would make a
most strict reformation in the Court, the remedies of the abuses whereof could
be better discerned and applied at Rome, where the infirmity is better known,
then in the Council, and by such like reasons, the provisions thought on these
and other Prelates, were deluded, and all were made content for that present
with the nine Articles.

But, the Congregation being ended, the Legates and other Papalins, remaining
The Lgats and other Papalins, do consult how they may repress the license of
the Prelates.
in the place together, to consider of what they heard, discoursed that the
boldness of the Prelates, in broaching new seditious matters, without respect,
did increase daily, which could not be called, liberty, but too much license;
and that the Divines, with tedious discourses, took up too much time,
contending amongst themselves about nothing, and often passing to
impertinences, which course if it did continue, the Council would never be
concluded. Besides there is danger that the disorder will increase, In which
consultatio^, Crescentius is reprehended by the Cardinal of Varmia.
and produce some sinister effect. John Baptista Castedo, the Speaker, who had
exercised the same office in the former reduction under Julius; told them,
that Cardinal Crescentius, when they digressed from the matters proposed,
without respect was wont to interrupt them, and to cut off also the file of
their discourse, to abreuiate those who were too profixe, and sometimes to
impose them silence; which being now done once or twice, the affairs of the
Council would be shortened, and occasions of impertinent discourses would be
taken away. Varmiense was not pleased with this; who said, that, if Crescentius
did govern so, it was no marvel that the Majesty of God had not given a good
progress to that Council; that nothing is more necessary to a Christian Synod
then liberty, and that, reading the Councels of the better times, one shall
find contentions and discords in the beginnings of them, even in the presence
of the Emperors, most potent in those times, which notwithstanding did, in the
end, turn, by the assistance of the holy Ghost, into a marvelous concord: and
that was the miracle which did pacify the world. He said there were infinite
contentions in the Nicene Council, and most exorbitant in the Ephesine, and
therefore no wonder if now there were some diversity of opinions ciuilly
carried, which he that would resist by humane and violent means, will let the
world know that the Council is not free, and take from it all reputation; that
it is good to refer the cause unto God, who will govern Councels, and
moderate those who are assembled in his name. The Cardinal of Mantua approved
the opinion of Varmiense, and disliked the proceeding of Crescentius; but said
it was not contrary to the liberty of the Council to moderate abuses with
Decrees, prescribing the order and time of speaking; and distributing to every
one his own part. This was commended by Varmiense, and they agreed to give
order for it, when the Sessions should be held.

The Imperialists were now out of hope to obtain the Chalice, and their
interests were ceased. But the French men, with some Prelates, labored much
that nothing might be done in the Session of the sixteenth day, but all
deferred until the next, as had been done twice before. The Legates, to avoid
the shame, did labor with all their force to establish the points, that those
four that concern communion, and the nine of reformation, might be published.
These therefore did seek to remove, and those to interpose difficulties.
There remaining but two days to the Session, a Congregation was held in the
morning of the 14. day; in the beginning where of Granata desired the Legates,
that, in regard of the importance of the matter to be handled, they would
protogue the Session; and made, as it were, an Oration, to show how many
difficulties were still on foot; necessary to be decided. The Legates,
resolute to the contrary, admitted no reason, and caused the examination of the
doctrine to begin: In reading of the first point, when they came to the place,
where it is said; that it cannot be inferred by the words of our Lord in S.
John. If you shall not eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink my blood,
etc. Granata began; and said, that that passage did not speak of the
Sacrament; but of Faith, under the Metaphore of nutrimont; alleging the Text,
and many Expositions of the Fathers, and of S. Austin in particular. Cardinal
Seripando expounded that place, as if he had read in the Chair; and it seemed
that every one was satisfied. But Granata replied more earnestly, and in the
end, desired that an addition might be joined to it; saying, that, by those
words, howsoever they were understood according to diverse Expositions of the
Fathers, the Communion of the Cup could not be inferred. This addition did not
please some of the Fathers, and others did not regard it; but it seemed
strange, that after things were concluded, one should come with unnecessary
additions, to disturb the points established; and there were 57. who said Non
Placet. But, to come to an end, the Legates were content, that the clause
should be added; ^and indeed it seems to be inserted by force, and does
begin in the Latin, Vtcunque inxta Varias.

In the second point of the authority of the Church over the Sacraments, when
they came to this place, that they might change the use of the Cup, by the
example of the form of Baptism, Iacobus Gibertus, Bishop of Alife, stood up,
and said it was a blasphemy; that the form of Baptism was immutable; that it
was never changed; that over the essence of the Sacraments, which consists in
the form and matter, there is no authority; and much being said Pro and
contra, in the end they resolved to take away that particle. It would be
tedious to relate all that was spoken by some to hinder the proceeding, and by
some not to be silent, when others spoke. It is natural, when a multitude is
in motion, for every one to strive to move most, neither was there ever any
College of Noblemen so absolute, but that it might be divided into persons of
honor, and of the common sort. The patience and resolution of the Legates
overcame the difficulties; so that, in the Congregation of the afternoon, the
points of doctrine, and the Anathematimes were established, howsoever the
Cardinal Varmiense did very zealously interpose a doubt, at the instance of
some Divines, who told him, that where as it is said in the third point of
doctrine, The faithful are not defrauded of any grace necessary to salvation,
by receiving one kind only; much cause of disputation was given, because the
Eucharist being not a necessary Sacrament, it might be inferred, by the same
reason, that the Church might take it away wholly. Many of the Prelates adhered
hereunto, demanding that it might be reformed, in regard the reason alleged
against it was evident, and unanswerable. Cardinal Simoneta did pacify them
with very much ado; saying, that a draught should be made in writing how it
should be reformed, and showed in the next Congregation.

In that the Bishop of the Five Churches gave new occasion of distastes. Who
having been told our of Congregation, that, in Rome Bishopriques were given
only to promote men, returned to that matter, and spoke of it at large. He
seemed to declare his mind by way of excuse, but indeed he confirmed the
things spoken, and the end of his discourse was an exhortation to the Fathers,
to deliver their opinions freely, without respect. Simoneta was much angry at
the occurrences of that Congregation, and, when it was ended, did remonstrate
to Varmiense, how contrary it was to the service of the Apostolic Sea, to
give care to the impertinencies of the Divines, men accustomed to books of
speculation only, and, for the most part, vain subtilties, of which
themselves make great esteem, though indeed they are but Chimerae, where of
one proof is, because they agree not among themselves: that, before many of
them did approve that point, without contradiction, and now some broach new
matters, which, in conclusion, will be opposed by others; that it is a plain
case that what word so uer is spoken, will be defended by those that favor
the Speaker, and oppugned by his adversaries. Neither will they much care
though it be somewhat dangerous to do it. But, having intimated two Sessions,
and done nothing, if the like should happen in this, the reputation of the
Council would irrecouerably be lost, and therefore that they must be careful
to do some thing. Varmiense was overcome; and answered that he had done
nothing but to a good end, and that those Divines were addressed to him by the
Emperors Ambassadors. Simoneta perceived that the honesty of that Prelate was
abused, by the subtlety of others, and told the other Legates, that he doubted
that the Imperialists might draw some secret from him, and agreed with them to
admonish him of it upon some good occasion.

The last day had some encounters also. For the Bishop of Nimes, at the
persuasion of the French Ambassadors, desired, that, in the first point of
reformation, where some fee is allowed to the Notary, for the Letters patents
of Orders, the custom of France might not be prejudiced, where nothing is The
Legates. about to part out of the Congregation, are stopped by the Bishop of
Girone.
given. He was followed by some Spaniards; and they were satisfied; by an
addition in the Decree, that the custom should be saved. Other mutations were
desired and granted, and all was in order for the Session, the next morning.
The Legates rising up to depart, Arias Gallego, Bishop of Girone, came and
stopped them, and desired they would set down again, and hear him. They
looked one upon another; but their desire to hold the Session taught them
patience. They sat down again, with the distaste of many Prelates,
especially the Courtiers. The Bishop causing the point of the distributions to
be read, said, that it seemed to him a hard thing that power should be given
to the Bishop to take the third part of the Prebends and convert them into
distributions; that formerly all was distributions, and that Prebends crept in
by abuse; that Bishops had authority to infringe bad customs; that it was not
just that the Council, by giving the Bishop a third part of the authority
which he has, should take two thirds from him. Therefore he desired it
should be declared that the Bishops have ample power to convert into
distributions as much as they think conuement. The Archbishop of Prague
confirmed this opinion with other reasons, and the Spaniards seemed by their
countenance to give consent. The Cardinal of Who makes a speech unto them
concerning distributions.
Mantua having much commended the piety of those Bishops, affirmed, that it
was a point worthy to be consulted on by the Synod, and promised, in the name
of the Legates, whose consent he first had, that it should be spoken of in the
next Session.

The sixteenth day being come, the Legates, Ambassadors, and Prelates went to
the Church with the usual ceremonies. The Sermon was made by A Session is
held. The Bish. of Tiniana preaches, the matter of whose sermon was the
Communion of the Cup, and Residence.
the Bishop of Tiniana: who, howsoever he was resolved not to speak then of
granting the Chalice, did not forbear to take that matter only for his
subject, and to discourse that the use of the Chalice was common so long as the
hear of charity did endure; but, that decreasing, and inconveniences
succeeding, by the negligence of some, the use thereof was not interdicted, but
only it was taught, that those who could hardly avoid irreuerence, should
less offend, if they did abstain from it: whose example in progress of time,
others did follow, that they might not tie themselves to diligence. In the
first he commended the memorable example of piety, and blamed the impiety of
the modern innouators, who to have it, have kindled so great a fire. He
exhorted the Pathers to charity, and to extinguish the flame, and not to
suffer all the world to burn by their default, to condescend to the
imbecillitie of their children, who demand nothing but the blood of CHRIST. He
admonished them, not to cast away so many Provinces and Kingdoms, to spare so
small a matter; that seeing that blessed blood is sought with so earnest a
desire, they would not fear the former negligence, for which it was omitted,
but grant it; that CHRIST would not have them so obstinate in their own
opinion, as to maintain so pernicious a discord amongst Christians, for that
blood which himself shed to unite them in a most strict bond of charity. He
passed dexterously from that matter to an exhortation to residence; and
concluded with the distaste of the others, who desired to have those matters
buried in silence.

When the ceremonies were ended, the Masse-Bishop read the doctrine, The
doctrine is read, contained in four heads.
expressed in four heads; containing in substance. That the Synod, in regard
of many errors which go about, concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, has
determined to expound that which belongs to the Communion SubVtraque, and of
children, prohibiting all the faithful to believe, teach, or preach otherwise.
Therefore, according to the judgment and custom of the Church, it does
declare, that the Laickes and Clerks, who do not say Mass, are not bound by
any divine precept to communicate Sub Vtraque, and that it cannot be doubted,
without prejudice of faith, that the Communion under one kind is sufficient;
that howsoever CHRIST has instituted, and given the Sacrament under two
kinds, it cannot be inferred from hence, that all are obliged to receive it
so; nor from the speech of our LORD, related in the sixth Chapter of Saint John,
where although there be words which name both kinds, yet there be also which
name that only of bread. Besides, it does declare, that the Church has ever
had power to make a mutation in the dispensation of the Sacraments, so long as
the substance remains: Which may be drawn in general from the words of
Saint Paul, that the Ministers of Christ are dispensers of the Mysteries of
God; and particularly in the Eucharist, concerning which power is reserved to
it, to give order by word of mouth. That the Church knowing this her authority,
howsoever the use of both kinds was frequent from the beginning, yet the
custom being changed for just causes, has approved that other, to
communicate with one only, which no man can change without the authority of
the same Church; it does declare besides, that All CHRIST is received under
either of the kinds, and the true Sacrament, and that he who receives one
only is not defrauded of any Grace, necessary to salvation, as concerning the
fruit thereof. Finally it does teach, that children, before the use of reason,
are not bound to Sacramental Communion, because Grace cannot be lost in that
age, not condemning antiquity for the contrary custom, observed in some
places, because it is to be undoubtedly believed that they have done it, not
for necessity of salvation, but for other probable causes. In conformity of
this doctrine four Anathematismes were read. 1. Against him that shall say,
Four Anathematismes are read.
that all the faithful are bound, by divine precept, or necessity of
salvation, to receive both the kinds in the Eucharist. 2: That the Church has
not had just causes to communicate the Laickes and the Clerks, who do not
celebrate the Mass, with the kind of Bread only, or that it has erred
herein. 3. Against him that shall deny that All CHRIST, the Fountain and
Author of all graces, is received under the bread only. 4. Against him that
shall say that the Communion of the Eucharist is necessary for children before
the use of reason. After this another Decree was read also, saying, that the
Synod will examine, with the first occasion, and define two other Articles,
not discussed as yet: that is, Whether the reasons for which the Church has
communicated under one kind, are good still, so that the Cup ought not to A
Decree is read concerning two points, to be handled hereafter.
be granted to any; and in case it does appear that it may be granted for
honest causes, with what conditions the grant is to be made.

During the time of the Mass, Alfonsus Salmeron, and Franciscus della Torre,
Jesuits, discoursed, the one with Varmiense, and the other with Madruccio, as
they stood behind their seats; that in the first point of doctrine, the matter
of the institution of the Sacrament under both kinds is obscurely expressed,
and that it is necessary to speak plainly, and say, that CHRIST did institute
it for his Apostles, and those that say Mass only, and not for all the
faithful; that it was necessary to insert this clause, to remove all doubt
from the Catholics, and all occasion of opposing and calumniating from the
heretics; that they, as Divines sent from the Pope, could not forbear to give
their advice in a matter of so great importance; and were both so earnest,
especially Salmeron, who talked with Varmiense, that the reading of the Decree
being ended, Varmiense first, and then Madruccio made the proposition; which
pleased many, but was rejected by the greater part, not for its own sake, but
for the manner of proposing it on the sudden, without allowing time to consider
on it. It did not please the other Legates, for the same cause also; yet in
regard of the honor of the place, they said, without any ado, that it should
be reserved to the next Session, in the handling of the two next Articles.

Afterward the nine points of reformation were read. That for collation of
Orders, Dimisories, Testimonials, Seal, or any thing else, neither the Bishop
Nine points of Reformation are read.
nor any of his Ministers shall receive any thing, though voluntarily offered.
That the Notaries, where there is custom not to receive, and where they have
no salarie, may receive the tenth part of a crown. That no secular Clerk
though sufficient, may be promoted to holy Orders, if he have not a Benefice,
patrimony, or pension, able to maintain him; and that the Benefice may not be
renounced, nor the pension extinct, nor the patrimony aliened without license
of the Bishop. That in the Cathedral or collegiate Churches, in which there
are no distributions, or very small, the Bishop may convert, to that use, the
third part of the profits of the Prebends. That in Parish Churches, where much
people is, the Bishops may compel the Rectors to take the assistance of other
Priests, and those that are large in compass may be divided, and furnished
with new Rectors, if there shall be need, and the people may be compelled to
contribute. That the Bishops may make a perpetual Union of Benefices, with
cure, or without, because of poverty, or other iuridical causes. That the
Bishops may give Coadiutors to Parish Priests that are unlearned, and punish
those that are scandalous. That the Bishops may join the Benefices of old
ruinous Churches to others, and cause the Churches to be built, compelling the
people to contribute to the fabrique. That they may visit all Benefices held
in Commenda. That the name, office, and use of Receiver be taken away in all
places. In the end, the Session was ordained for the seventeenth of September,
and a declaration made, that the Synod might abbreuiate or prorogue, at
pleasure, as well that Term, as any other, which shall be limited for the
future Sessions.

The actions of this Council were not in so great expectation in former times,
as at this present; in regard all Princes had agreed in demanding it, and sent
Ambassadors, and that a great number of Prelates were assembled, four times so
many as before: and had been begun now six months, and The actions of the
Council are censured.
those spent in daily and continual treaties and discussions, with dispatches
of many Curriers and Prelates from Rome to Trent, and from Trent to Rome. But
when the Session came out in print, the usual Latin proverb, of The birth of
the Mountains, was generally used by all. And particularly the delaying of two
Articles was noted; it seeming strange, that, having made four Articles of
faith, with four Anathematismes, they were not able to declare that of
granting the Cup, which is de iure Ecclesiastico. Some were of opinion, that it
ought to have been handled first, because if it had been granted all the
disputations had ceased. The third point of doctrine was much considered on in
the conclusion. For it being said that the faithful, who receives the body of
CHRIST only, is not defrauded of any necessary Grace, it First in matter of
doctrine.
seemed a confession that some grace, not necessary, is lost. And here a doubt
was made whether there be any authority of man which can hinder the
superabundant, and not necessary grace of God; and if it can, whether these
impediments be charitably used. Two things were much spoken of amongst the
rest; one, the obligation imposed to believe that antiquity did not hold the
Communion of children to be necessary; because where the truth of a story is
in question, it is a matter of fact, and past, in which there is no authority
that can alter the things done. Yet he that reads Austin will know that, in
nine places, not in a word, but with a discourse, he does affirm the
necessity of the Eucharist for children, and two of them do make it equal to
the necessity of Baptism; yea he says, more then once, that the Church of
Rome has held and defined it to be necessary for the salvation of children;
and does allege for it Pope Innocentius, whose Epistle does yet remain, in
which he says it plainly. And they marueiled why the Council would, without
necessity, trouble it self here in, to no end, when it might be said that
either it, or Innocention had erred. The other was the second Anathematisme,
with the declaration, that he is an heretic, who says the Church was not
induced upon just causes to communicate without the Cup: which was to ground an
Article of faith, upon a fact of man. And they held it a miraculous thing that
they would say, that one is bound to observe the Decree only iure humano, but
is bound iure Diuino to believe it is just, and to make Articles of faith in
things which may be changed daily. Others added also, that if the causes were
so just, they should say what they were, and not force men to believe by
terror, but induce them by persuasion, because that was to domineere over the
faith, which Saint Paul does so much detest. Concerning the points of
reformation, Secondly in point of Reformation.
it was generally said, that more light points could not be handled, nor more
lightly, and that they did imitate the Physician, who, in an Hecticall body,
labored to kill the itch. And to put their hands into men's purses, to
maintain Curats, or repair Churches, seemed a strange thing, both for the
matter, and for the manner. For the matter, because the Clergy was
luperfluously rich, and rather indebted to the Layne for diverse evident
respects; for the manner, because neither CHRIST, nor his Apostles, did ever
compel men to make contributions, but only gave power to receive those that
were voluntary. And he that reads Saint Paul to the Corinthians, and to the
Galathians, shall see the masters treatment of the Ox that treads the Corn,
and the duty of the catechized, toward him that does teach; yet so, as that
those laborers have no action or right by rigor of Law, nor any Chancerie to
relieve them.

The Session being ended, the Legates began to put in order those things A
reconciliation is made between the Cardinal of Mantua, and Simoneta.
which were to be handled in the next, purposing to anticipate the time, if it
were possible. Letters came to Trent from Alexander Simoneta, to the Cardinal
his brother, and from Cardinal Gonzaga, to his Uncle with most effectual
exhortations, in the Popes name, to accommodate the differences, and to hold
good intelligence together; for which cause the Sunday after the Session,
Simoneta dined with the Cardinal of Mantua, and made a perfect reconciliation
with him. Mantua began to discourse of some Prelates, who came much to his
house, whom he suspected to have done ill offices against him. But Simoneta
did stop him modestly, and said, that hereafter they should not speak so. They
consulted earnestly how they might give full satisfaction to the Pope, and the
Court, in matter of Residence, and what Prelates were fit to be employed to
persuade others. Those who had declared themselves to favor the interests of
the Pope and Court, howsoever they were otherwise able, they thought not fit,
because they wanted credit. They made choice of two men of sincerity, and
dextrous in negotiations, the Bishops of Modena and of Bressia. The same day
the Archbishop of The Archbishop of Lanciano presents the Popes Brief to
the Bishops, who had written unto him.
Lanciano, having called together the Prelates who had written to the Pope in
their own behalf, presented to them the Popes Brief, full of kindness,
humanity, and offers which pleased them all, and did much mitigate their heat
for Residence. Another accident also happened the same day, much in the Popes
favor. For the Marquis of Pescara sent unto his Secretary a copy of a
letter, written to him from the King; in which he told him, that, having
understood that the declaration of the Continuation would displease the
Emperor, and France, and might perhaps cause a dissolution of the Council,
he gave him commission to make no further instance for it, so that no
declaration The King of Spain will not have the continuation of the Council,
or the point of Residence spoken of.
were made for a new Indiction, and that the Council did proceed as it has
begun. Afterward he gave him order to let his Prelates know, that he had
understood the controversy and dispute concerning Residence, and the instance
they had made, that it might be declared to be de iure diuino, saying that
he commended their zeal and good intention, yet thought that the declaration
did not befit the present time, and therefore wished them to desist. The
Secretary showed the letter to the Spanish Pralats; and Granata, having
exactly considered of it, said, that it was well, seeing that the Pope did
dislike it; that the King did not know the importance of it; that he was
counseled by the Archbishop of Seuil, who never had resided, and by the
Bishop of Conca, who remained in Court; that he knew very well to what end he
did command it, that he would obey him 1562 PIUS 4. FERDINAND. ELIZABETH.
CHARLES 9. PHILIP 2.
in not protesting, but would never forbear to demand it, as often as there
was occasion, knowing well that he should not offend the King herein. That
point concerning the continuation was showed also to the Imperialists, and
French-mem: who answered, there was no need of that declaration to be made
expressly in words, seeing that it was executed in deeds.

In the next Congregation, held the twentieth day, the Sacrament of the Mass,
and the abuses consequent, were proposed to be handled. The Cardinal of
Mantua did admonish the Prelates to deliver their opinions, quietly and
briefly, in the Congregations, and without noise, and related the rules which
they had made for the Congregations of the Divines, to take away contentions,
confusion, and prolixitie; which, being read, were approved by the
congregation. Afterward Cardinal Seripando discoursed of the manner of
examining the points of doctrine, and the Anathematismes, in the congregations,
and put them in mind that they had been examined and discussed before in the
same Council, and established also, although not published; so that the
Fathers might very much abreuiate their meditations, in regard there was need
of nothing more then of expedition. Granata added, that, the Mass having been
handled before, and there remaining much time until the Session, the matter of
Order might be handled also. And the same was confirmed by the Bishop of Five
Churches; which some understood to be spoken ironically, and others, to this
end, that they might handle residence, according to the promise of Mantua. In
the end, the Articles, to be handled in the congregations of the Divines,
were given forth. The substance of the orders before mentioned was comprehended
Seven rules are set down, concerning the order of examining the points of
doctrine.
in seven rules. That, in every matter proposed, only four of the Divines
sent by the Pope, chosen by the Legates, should speak, two seculars, and two
regulars. That by the Ambassadors of Princes three of the secular Divines,
sent by them, should be chosen. That every Legate should choose a secular
Divine of his own family. That of all the other Secular Divines of the
families of the Prelates, only four should be chosen to speak, beginning
with those who were created Doctors first. That amongst the Regulars every
General should choose three of his own order. That none of the Divines shall
speak above half an hour, or, if they do, shall be interrupted by the
Master of the Ceremonies, and he that will be more brief, shall be more
commended. That those Divines who are not to speak, may deliver their opinions
in writing to the Deputies, concerning the things proposed. By these rules they
made account that four and thirty Divines were to speak, and that they might
all be heard in ten Congregations at the most. In establishing and
publishing this order, the difficulty was what inscription to give it. Some
thought that to call it a mean to be observed by the Divines, was to run
into the inconvenience objected by that Spartane to the Athenians, that wise
men did consult, and the ignorant give sentence. For avoiding whereof the
inscription was conceived thus; A mean to be observed hereafter in the points
which shall be examined by the inferior Divines, inferring that the Prelates
were superior Divines.

The Articles were thirteen. 1. Whether the Mass be only a commemoration of
the sacrifice of the Cross, and a true sacrifice. 2. Whether the sacrifice of
the Mass derogateth from that of the Cross. 3. Whether CHRIST did ordain
that the Apostles should offer his body and blood in the Mass, in those words;
Do this in remembrance of me. 4. Whether the sacrifice of the Mass does
only help him who does receive it, and may not be offered for others, as
well living as dead, nor for their sins, 13. Articles concerning the Mass
are propose to be examined.
satisfactions and other necessities. 5. Whether the private Masses, in which
the Priest alone does receive the Communion without other Communicants, be
unlawful, and ought to be taken away. 6. Whether the mingling of water with
wine in the Mass be contrary to the institution of our Lord. 7. Whether the
Canon of the Mass does contain errors, and ought to be abrogated. 8.
Whether the custom of the Church of Rome, to pronounce softly, and in secret,
the words of the consecration, be damnable. 9. Whether the Mass ought to be
celebrated only in the vulgar tongue, understood by all. 10. Whether to
attribute certain Masses to certain Saints be an abuse. 11. Whether the
Ceremonies, vestments and other external signs which the Church uses, ought
to be taken away. 12. Whether to say that our LORD is mystically sacrificed by
us, be the same as to say, that he is given us to eat 13. Whether the Mass
be a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving only or propitiatory for the
living and the dead. It was added, that the Divines should speak whether these
Articles were erroneous, or false, or heretical, and whether they deserved to
be condemned by the Synod; and that they should divide them, so that the
seventeen first, should speak of the seven first Articles, and the others,
concerning the six following.

The French Ambassadors thought still they had small reputation in the
Council, in respect of others; and after that the Decree aforesaid came forth
were more ielous then before, because mention was to be made of the Divines to
what King each did belong (which was not done concerning the Prelates) and none
would be present for France. They doubted also that, by this means, some
prejudice might arise to the prerogatives of the Kingdom. Therefore they did
presently, and afterward, upon other occasions, The French Ambassadors write
to their King for Prelates o^ Doctors to be sent out of France.
send advice into France, that the disputation would pass only between the
Italians, Spaniards, and Portugals; that France would have no part, if his
Majesty did not presently dispatch away some Prelate, or Doctor, especially
because matters of great importance, contained in the Articles proposed, were
to be handled; which also would be a means to obtain or hinder other
things, according to his Majesty's desire, and the contents of their
instructions; that until then they had proposed none of the Articles of
reformation, because, not having suffrages to maintain them, no account would
have been made of their remonstrances; that the Council will not hearken to
any thing that as prejudicial to the profit or authority of the Court;
because the Pope is Lord of the propositions, it having been determined in the
beginning, and ever since observed, that nothing And complain of the
proceeding in Council.
may be proposed but by the Legates; as also of the resolutions, because so
many Prelates are his pensioners, and stand at his devotion; that it is
resolved, that the Council shall not meddle with reforming the Court, but
reserve that whole business to his Holiness; that the Spaniards who were very
zealous for the reformation, are cooled and put in fear, by the reprehension
of their King; that there is no hope, so long as the case stands thus, to
obtain any thing but what pleases the Pope, because no instance made by all
the Ambassadors and Princes which are in Trent, has been able to persuade a
good reformation of the Ecclesiastical discipline, howsoever Articles,
conformable not only to the use of the primitive Church, but even to the
Decrees of the Popes themselves have been presented to the Legates; that, in
stead of those, they propose points of the present controversies of doctrine,
though they have been told it is superfluous, in absence of the Protestants,
and that, if they propose any thing concerning manners, it is of small
importance, and of no fruit.

The Pope, daily advised of the diverse occurrences in Trent, did fear that no
Decree would be published in the Session at the day appointed: but
understanding how happlily it passed, was exceeding glad; and the more, in
regard of the reconciliation of the Legates, and of the letter of the King of
Spain. He could not conceal his joy, but imparted it in Consistory, and
spoke of it to the Ambassadors, and thanked the Cardinal of Arragon, brother
of Pescara, to whom he did attribute this service. And being wholly bent to
conclude the Council quickly, and finding that nothing could prolong it, but
the points of residence, and of the communion of the Cup, he wrote to the
Legates, that he was wholly intent to the reformation of the Court; that they
should assure thereof the Ambassadors and Prelates who spoke of it; and that
themselves should dispatch the other matters: which they might do in three
Sessions more. He commended them for having reserved power to abbreuiate the
time prefixed, exhorting them to make use thereof. He added, that, knowing it
was hard to make a good resolution in the Council, in matter of residence,
because many Prelates, having delivered their opinion to a good end, were
interested in their honor, they should procure that it might be referred unto
him, and likewise should free themselves from instances made by Princes for the
communion of the Cup, by making the same reference. And if any difficulty,
hard to be resolved, shall happen, in any of the points, which remain to be
handled, they should propose the remitting of it to him also; because he can
more easily decide any thing in Consistory, calling some Doctors, if there be
occasion, then in Trent, where men's diverse interests make the resolutions
impossible, or very long.

The first Congregation of the Divines was held the next day in the afternoon,
The Jesuits will not observe ye rules.
in which the order of speaking but half an hour was so well observed, that
Salmeron the Jesuit spent the whole time himself, with much sauciness;
saying he was sent by the Pope, and that being to speak of important and
necessary matters, no time was to be prescribed unto him; and discoursing on
the seven Articles, spoke only common things, which deserve not particular
mention. The next morning he was imitated by his fellow Torre, who spent that
whole Congregation also, and rather repeated the things spoken before, then
added any thing of his own. But, which was worst of all, coming, in the end,
to the place of S. John, If you eat not, etc. he said, it must needs be
understood of the Sacramental Communion, and added, that, in the first point
of doctrine, published in the last Session, it seemed that doubt was made of
it, and therefore that it was necessary to declare in the next, that nothing is
spoken of in that passage but the Sacrament; and that if any were of another
opinion, he appealed to the Synod. The Legates were much offended at his
speech, as well because it crossed the determination With whom the Legates are
displeased.
of the Council, as because it showed a necessity of the Communion of the
Cup; but much more, because those Jesuits, howsoever they were the first,
would be excepted both from the general orders: with so much petulancy. They
called to mind the stirs raised by them in the Session, and Torre was
particularly noted by Simoneta, for having written against Catharinus in favor
of residence, that it is de iure diuino, with insolent terms, as the Cardinal
said. Therefore, the Congregation being ended, he told his Colleagues, that
it was fit to repress this boldness, and give example to others; and they
agreed so to do upon the first occasion.

In the discussions of the Divines all were uniform in condemning the The
discussion of the Articles.
Protestant opinions of heresy, in the Articles proposed, and did quickly
dispatch the others. The discourse of every one was long, in proving the Mass
to be a sacrifice, in which Christ is offered under the sacramental elements.
Their principal reasons were; That CHRIST is a Priest according to the order
of Melchisedec: but Melchisedec offered bread and wine; therefore the
Priesthood of CHRIST does require the sacrifice of bread and wine. Moreover,
the Paschall Lamb was a true sacrifice; and that is a figure of the Eucharist;
therefore the Eucharist also must be a sacrifice. Afterward the prophecy of
Malachie was alleged, by whose mouth God rejected the sacrifice of the Jews,
saying his Name was holy, great amongst the Gentiles, and that in every place,
a pure oblation is offered to him; which cannot be understood of any thing
else which is offered in every place, and by all Nations. Diverse other
congruities, and figures of the old Testament were produced, some grounding
themselves upon one, and some upon another. In the new Testament the place of
Saint John was brought, where CHRIST says to the woman of Samaria, that the
hour is come in which the Father shall be worshipped in Spirit and in truth:
and to worship in the holy Scripture does signify to sacrifice, as appears
by many places. And the woman of Samaria asked him of the sacrifice, which
could not be offered by the Jews but in Jerusalem, and by the Samaritans was
offered in Garizim, where CHRIST then was. Therefore they said the place was
necessarily to be understood of an external, public, and solemn adoration,
which could be no other but the Eucharist. It was proved also by the words of
CHRIST, This is my body which is given for you, which is broken for you. This
is my blood which is shed for you. Therefore there is a breaking of the body,
and an effusion of blood in the Eucharist, which are actions of a sacrifice.
Above all, they grounded themselves upon the words of Saint Paul, who puts
the Eucharist in the same kind with the sacrifices of the Jews, and of the
Gentiles, saying, that, by it, the body and blood of CHRIST are participated;
as in the Hebraisme, he that eats of the host, is partaker of the altar; and
one cannot drink the Cup of the LORD, and eat of his Table, and drink of the
cup of Devils, and be partaker of their table. But that the Apostles were
ordained Priests by CHRIST, they proved plainly, by the words spoken to them
by CHRIST our LORD; Do this in remembrance of me. For better proof, many
authorities of the Fathers were adduced, who do all name the Eucharist a
sacrifice, or, in more general terms, do testify that a sacrifice is
offered in the Church, Some added afterward, that the Mass was a sacrifice,
because CHRIST offered himself in the supper. And they brought this reason for
the most principal, and proved the ground thereof, because the Scripture
saying plainly that Melchisedec offered bread and wine; CHRIST could not have
been a Priest after that order, if he had not done the like, and because
CHRIST said, that his blood was a confirmation of the new Testament; but the
blood which does confirm the old, was offered in this institution: therefore
it follows, by a necessary consequence, that CHRIST himself also did offer
it. They argued also, that CHRIST having said, Do this in remembrance of me,
if he had not offered, we could not do it. And they said the Lutherans have
no other argument to prove the Mass to be no sacrifice, but because Christ
has not offered; and therefore that opinion was dangerous, as favoring the
heretical doctrine. It was also more effectually proved, because the Church
sings, in the office of the body of our LORD, CHRIST, a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec, has offered bread and wine. And in the Canon of the
Ambrosian Missal it is said, that instituting a form of perpetual sacrifice,
he has first offered himself as an host, and has first taught how to offer
it. Afterward many authorities of the Fathers were produced, to prove the
same.

On the other part, it was said with no less asseueration, that CHRIST, In
which the Divines are much divided.
in the supper, has commanded the oblation to be made for ever, in the
Church, after his death; but that he has not offered himself, because the
nature of that sacrifice did not comport it. And, for proof hereof, they said
that the oblation of the Cross would have been superfluous, because mankind
would have been redeemed by that of the supper, which went before. That the
sacrifice of the Altar was instituted by CHRIST, for a memorial of that which
he offered on the Cross; but there cannot be any memorial, but of a thing
past; therefore the Eucharist could not be a sacrifice before the oblation of
CHRIST on the Cross. They alleged also that neither the Scripture, nor the
Canon of the Mass, nor any Council ever said that CHRIST offered himself in
the supper, and added, that the places of the Fathers before alleged, ought to
be understood of his oblation on the Cross. They concluded, that, having to
define the Mass to be a sacrifice, as indeed it was, it might most
effectually be done by proofs out of the Scriptures and Fathers, without
adding such weak reasons. This difference was not between many and few, but
divided as well the Divines as the Fathers, into almost equal parts, and
occasioned some contention. The former went so far as to say that the other
opinion was an error, and required that it should be silenced by an
Anathematisme, condemning of heresy, those that say, that CHRIST has not
offered himself in the supper, under the sacramental elements. The others
said it was not a time to ground ones self upon things uncertain, and upon
new opinions, neither heard not thought of by antiquity, but that one ought to
insist upon that which is plain, and certain, both by the Scripture and by
the Fathers, that is, that CHRIST has commanded the oblation.

All the month of July was spent by the seventeen who spoke upon the first
Articles; the latter they dispatched in a few days, rather with injurious
terms against the Protestants, then with reasons. It is not fit to relate
the particulars, but only some few that are most notable.

In the Congregation of the ^4 of July, in the afternoon, Georgius di Ataide,
a Divine of the K. of Portugal, sought to overthrow all the grounds The
discourse of Georgius di Ataide.
of the other Divines; laid to prove the sacrifice of the Mass by the holy
Scripture; and said first, that it could not be doubted that the Mass was a
sacrifice, because all the Fathers have said it in plain words, and replied it
upon every occasion and he began with the Latins and Greeks of the ancient
Church, and with the Martyrs, and came, from time to time, until the present
age, affirming that there is no Christian writer who has not called it a
sacrifice. Therefore it must certainly be concluded that it has been so
taught by an Apostolical tradition, the force whereof is more then sufficient
to make Articles of faith, as this Council has maintained from the beginning.
But this true and solid foundation is weakened, by those who would build in
the air, seeking to find in the Scriptures that which is not there, giving
occasion to the adversaries to calumniate the truth, while they see it
grounded upon such an vnstablesand. And having thus spoken, he proceeded to
examine, one after another, the places of the old and new Testament, alleged
by the Divines, showing that no express signification of the sacrifice could
be drawn from them. To the fact of Melchisedec, he answered, that CHRIST was a
Priest of that order, as he was the only begotten, eternal, without
predecessor, father, mother, or genealogy. And this is proved too plainly by
the Epistle to the Hebrews, where Saint Paul discoursing at large of this
place, does handle the eternity and singularity of the Priesthood, and makes
no mention of the bread and wine. He repeated the doctrine of Saint Austine,
that when there is a fit place for any thing to be spoken and it is not
spoken, an argument may be drawn from the authority negatiuely. Of the
Paschall Lamb he said, that it could not be presupposed for a thing so evident
that it was a sacrifice, and perhaps to him that would take upon him to prove
the contrary, the victory would necessarily be yielded; and also that it was
too hard a metaphor, to make it a Type of the Eucharist, and not rather of the
Cross. He commended those Theologues, who, having brought the place of
Malachie, added that of Saint John, To worship in Spirit and truth, because
indeed, the one and the other did formally speak of the samething, and were to
be expounded alike, that no difficulty might be made concerning the word,
Adorare: which certainly does signify also a sacrifice, and the woman of
Samaria took it in the general signification. But when CHRIST added, That God
is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit, no man that is not willing to
expound all things in an improper sense, will say that a Sacrament, which
consists of a thing visible and invisible, is purely spiritual, but composed
of this, and the Elementary sign. Therefore he that will expound both those
places of internal adoration, cannot be convinced, and shall have probability
on his side; the application being plain, that this is offered in all places,
and by all Nations and is purely spiritual, as God is a pure Spirit. And he
proceeded, and said that the words, This is my body which is given for you, and
the blood which is shed for you, have a more plain meaning, if they be
referred to the body and blood in their natural eslence, then in their
Sacramental; as when it is said, CHRIST is the true Vine, which brings
forth the wine, it is not meant that the significatiue vine does bring forth
Wine, but the real. So, this is my blood which is shed, does not signify
that the Sacramental and significatiue blood was shed, but the blood natural
and signified. And that which Saint Paul says of taking part of the Sacrifice
of the Jews, and of the table of Devils, is understood of the Rites which GOD
did institute by Moses, and of those which the Gentiles did use in
sacrificing; so that it cannot hence be proved that the Eucharist is a
sacrifice; that it is plain in Moses, that, in the votiue sacrifices, the
oblation was all presented to GOD, and a part burnt, which was called the
Sacrifice; and that which remained belonged partly to the Priest, and partly to
him that offered, which they did eat with whom they pleased; neither was this
called, to sacrifice, but to participate of the thing sacrificed. The Gentiles
did imitate the same; yea, that part which was not consumed upon the Altar, was
sent by some to be sold; and this is the table which is not the Altar. The
plain meaning of Saint Paul is, that as the Jews, eating the part belonging
to him that offers, which is a remainder of the sacrifice, do partake of the
Altar, and the Gentiles likewise, so we, eating the Eucharist, are partakers of
the sacrifice of the Cross. And this is it which CHRIST said; Do this in
remembrance of me; and which Saint Paul said; As often as ye shall eat of
this bread and drink of this Cup, you shall profess that the Lord dyed for
you. But whereas it is said that the Apostles were, by the words of the Lord,
ordained Priests, to offer sacrifice, when he says, Do this, without doubt
it is understood of that which they had seen him to do. Therefore it must be
manifest first that he has offered; which cannot be, because the opinions of
the Divines are various, and every one confesses, that both the one and the
other is Catholic; and those who deny that CHRIST has offered, cannot
conclude by those words, that he has commanded the oblation. Then he brought
the arguments of the Protestants, by which they prove, that the Eucharist is
not instituted for a sacrifice but for a Sacrament; and concluded that it could
not be said that the Mass was a sacrifice, but by the ground of Tradition,
exhorting them to rest upon this, and not to make the truth uncertain, by
desiring to prove too much. Then he came to resolve the Protestant arguments,
and gave his Auditors ill satisfaction therein; for he recited them with
force, and good appearance, and answered weakly, so that he did rather
confirm them. This was ascribed by some to the shortness of time which
remained until night, and others thought he was not able to express himself
better, and Gives bad satisfaction to the Prelates.
the most intelligent were of opinion, that those answers did not satisfy
himself. The Fathers murmuring hereat, Iacobus Paiua, another Portugal
Divine, repeated, in the next Congregation, all his arguments, and resolved
them, with satisfaction of his hearers; saying, in excuse of his Colleague,
that he was of the same mind; and the testimonies of the Ambassadors and
Prelates of Portugal of his honesty, and soundness of doctrine, caused the
Legates not to be offended with him. Notwithstanding, he departed a few days
after; neither is his name in the Catalogues of the Divines, but only in those
which were printed at Brescia, and Riua, before that time.

The 28. of July, John Cauillone, a Jesuit, and a Divine of the Duke of
Baudria, spoke very clearly concerning the Articles; representing all, as it
were without difficulty, not by way of examination, or discussion, but
stirring up their affections to piety. He showed many miracles, which happened
in diverse times; affirmed, that from the time of the Apostles until Luther, no
man doubted of it; alleged the Liturgies of Saint James, Saint Mark, Saint
Basil, and Saint Chrysostom. Concerning the oppositions of the Protestants,
he said, they were sufficiently resolved, without which they ought to believe
they were but fallacies, because they come from persons alienated from the
Church. And, in the end, he exhorted the Legates not to permit, that in any
matter whatsoever, the arguments of the heretics should be proposed, without
adding a most evident resolution; which he that cannot do, must forbear to
relate them; because true piety requires, that the reasons contrary to the
doctrine of the Church should not be repeated, before the minds of the hearers
be prepared, by showing the perverseness and ignorance of the inuentors, and
that their arguments are not hearkened unto but by people of a weak brain;
which being done, they may succinctly be rehearsed, with the intermediate
proofs, adding the plain answer well amplified; and when it does seem that
some thing wants, the disputations is to be diuerted to another matter, for
fear of breeding scruple in the minds of the auditors, especially being
Prelates, and Pastors of the Church. His discourse did please very much the
greater part of the Prelates, and was commended for pious and Catholic, and
that it did deserve that the Synod should make a Decree, and command that all
Preachers, Readers, and Writers should observe the rules set down therein. But
it gave small satisfaction to the Ambassador of his Prince, who, after the
Congregation, in presence of the Imperialists, which came in complement to
thank him for his speech, said, that truly it did deserve to be commended,
for having taught how to use Sophistry, in the simplicity of Christian
doctrine.

Antonius of Valtelina, a Dominican Friar, one of the last which were to speak
The Rites of the Church of Rome are various.
of the six last articles of the Rites, said, that it was plain by all
histories, that anciently every Church had her particular Ritual of the Mass,
brought in by use, and upon occasion, rather then by deliberation and decree;
and that the small Churches did follow the Metropolitan, and the greater, which
were near. The Roman rite has been, to gratify the Pope, received in many
Provinces, though the Rites of many Churches are still most different from it.
He spoke of Mozarabo, where there are horses and fencings after the manner of
the Moors, which have a great mystery and signification; and this is so
different from the Roman, that, if it were seen in Italy, one would not
think it to be a Mass. But that of Rome also has had great alterations (as
will appear to him that reads the ancient book, which remains as yet, and
is called Ordo Romanus) which have been made, not only in ancient times, but
even in the latter ages also, and the true Roman rite, observed within three
hundred years, is not that which is now observed by the Priests in that City,
but that which is retained by the Order of S. Dominicke. For the vestments,
vessels, and other ornaments of the Ministers and Altars, it appears, not by
books only, but by statues, and pictures, that they are so changed, that if
the ancients should return into the world, they would not know them. Therefore
he concluded, that to bind all to approve the Rites which the Church of Rome
uses, might be reprehended, as a condemnation of antiquity, and of the uses
of other Churches, and might receive worse interpretations. He advised to
discuss the essence of the Mass, and not make mention of these other things.
He returned to show the difference between the present Rite of Rome, and that
which is described in the Ordo Romanus; and amongst other particulars, insisted
much upon this, that, according to that, the Laickes did communicate with both
kinds; and so began to persuade the grant of the Cup at this present. His
discourse displeased the Auditorie; but the Bishop of Five Churches protected
him, and said, that he had delivered nothing untruly, nor given any scandal,
because he spoke not to the common people, nor to fools, but in an Assembly of
learned men; to whom no truth can give bad edification, and that he that would
condemn the Friar, as scandalous or rash, did first condemn himself, as
incapable of the truth.

The same difference which was between the Divines, was also between The
Prelates are divided in opinion, about publication of the doctrine.
the Prelates, deputed to compose the Doctrine and the Anathematismes, to be
proposed in Congregation. For, in the doctrine, being to allege the proofs
and explications, some approved or disprooued one, and some another, according
to their affections. Martinus Peresius, Bishop of Segouia, who had been
present in the Council at the handling of this matter, in the end of the year
1551 was of opinion, that the same doctrine and Canons should be taken, which
were composed to be published in January 1552. and that they should be
reuiewed. But Cardinal Seripando did not approve it, saying, that there
appeared in that an incomparable piety and Christian zeal, but subject to the
calumnies of the adversaries; and that the end ought not to be the instruction
of the Catholics, as the aim of those Fathers seems to have been, but the
confusion of the heretics. Therefore that they ought to be more reserved in
all parts, and not to meddle with correcting the things ordained then; that it
was better to begin again, and not to give occasion that it may be said, that
they have reaped that which was sown by others. Granata dissented from all,
and would not have it said, that CHRIST made an oblation in the Supper, or did
institute the sacrifice, by those words, Do this in remembrance of me. For the
first, Seripando said, he did not think it necessary, and that it might be
omitted, it being sufficient that CHRIST has instituted the oblation; but yet
it was necessary to say by what words it was instituted, and there be not any
other but those before montioned. But Johannes Antonius Pantusa, Bishop of
Lettere, was very passionate to have the reasons of Malchizedec, Malachie, of
the adoration of the woman of Samaria, the tables of Saint Paul, the oblation
of CHRIST in the Supper, and every other reason alleged to be put into the
Decree. In the end, after the disputation of many days, they agreed to put all
in, that the Prelates might speak their opinions in the Congregations, and that
might be taken away which did not please the mayor part. They made also a
collection of the abuses, which daily happen, in the celebration of Masses,
which were but few in respect of those which were noted in the year 1551.

The thirteenth of August a general Congregation was held to receive The
Archbishop of Lanciano, and of Palerme, are contrar, in opinion.
the Proctors of the Bishops of Ratisbone and Basil, that they might honor
this second, to the shame of the City of Basil, which did contend with him for
the title, saying, he should not be called Bishop of Basil but of Bontruto.
The draught being giving forth, the Archbishop of Lanciano was of opinion, that
the Anathematismes only should be published, and the points of doctrine wholly
omitted. He alleged the example of other Counsels, in very few of which it
has bin otherwise observed, and that this same Council of Trent, in the matter
of Original sin, of the Sacraments, and of Baptism, did leave it out. He said
it was for Doctors to show reasons for their opinions, but the Judges (such as
Bishops in Council are) were to make their sentences absolute; that, if a
reason be added, not only the Decree, but that also may be impugned; without
which every one will think that the Synod has been moved by most potent
arguments, and every one will believe that it has been induced by those which
himself does most esteem; that it is not secure to use reasons, though most
evident, because the heretics will oppose them, and esteem them but little;
and the more is said, the more matter of contradiction is ministered. He added
also, that the coniunctures did require a sudden dispatch of the Council, and
did intimate, by words understood by the Legates and favorers of the Pope, that
by this means they should give satisfaction to his Holiness. Octauianus
Preconius, Archbishop of Palermo, who followed him in order, spoke to the
contrary; that the use of Counsels has been to make a Symboll of their own,
unto which the doctrine does answer, and then to add the Anathematismes.
That this having been observed in this Council under Julius, and now again
in the last Session, if it were not continued, it would be said, it was for
want of reasons. He said it was base, to shun the disputation of Heretics,
yea that their contradiction would make the doctrine of the Council shine more
brightly, and that they were not to take care to finish the Council quickly,
but to finish it well. These two Prelates were so tedious, that the night
concluded the Congregation, and they said it was no wonder if a Daminican of
Genua (for so Landiano was) should be contrary to a Franciscan of Sicilie.

The days following diverse practices were used, by some to finish, by others
to prolong the Council, and those who were interested used these and the like
reasons. But the matter being proposed once again in Congregation, the mayor
part thought fit to continue the order begun. This set on foot again the
disputation about residence, and the same men were desirous of the The Legates
v^ practices to (...)uert the ^^scussion of Residence.
conclusion of the Council, and of the omission of that matter. Which gave
occasion to Mantua and Seripando to use their endeauours, and to show the
Pope, by effects, that they did accommodate themselves to his pleasure,
according to the instruction which Lanciano had brought them by word of mouth.
They employed herein, to use good persuasions, the Archbishop of Ocranto, the
Bishops of Modena, Nola, and Brescia, who were not open Papalins, but newly
gained. They did overcome the Italians, inducing them not to change their
opinions, nor to contradict themselves, but not to urge that matter any more.
Many did promise that if the Spaniards would surcease, themselves would do the
like. These four Prelates made a note of all they had persuaded, and found
they had gained much; but with the Spaniards it was not possible to prevail a
jot, yea this made them combine the more. They wrote a common letter to the
King, in answer of that which his Majesty had written to the Marquis of
Pescara; first complaining of the The Sanish Prelates write a common letter to
their kin(...), and tell him that there is no liberty in the Council.
Pope, for not suffering the point of Residence to be decided, in which all
the reformation of the Church is to be grounded, and with a very fair and
reverend manner of speech; they concluded there was no liberty in the
Council; that the Italians did overcome with plurality of voices, of which
some for pensions, some for promises, and those who were least corrupted for
fear, did obey the will of his Holiness. They complained of the Legates, who
if they had suffered, as they ought, the point to be concluded, when the fit
time was, it might have been resolved for the service of GOD, with great
concord, before they could have written from Rome. That two thirds of the
Prelates did desire the definition; that all the Ambassadors did favor the
truth herein: yet proceeding with modesty and charity, they never had the
courage to protest; They beseeched his Majesty to consult with godly men about
this Article, assuring themselves, that, after mature deliberation, he would
favor the opinion, as being catholic, pious, and necessary for making a good
reformation.

This accident assured the Legates, and their adherents, that it was impossible
to bury this matter in silence, seeing that the Spaniards were not pacified,
either by the Kings letter, or by the persuasions used to them: yea, had
declared themselves again, by writing into Spain, which made them seem to be
insuperable. The Papalins therefore consulted together, and resolved to send to
the Cardinal of Ferrara into France, a Copy of the Catholic Kings letter to
Pescara, that he might procure such another from that King to the French
Ambassadors, as well to hinder their practices to the contrary, which they
daily made, as that the French Bishops, when they came, might not unite with
the Spaniards, as these did hope, and expect. And, to discredit the Spaniards
with their King, they resolved to write into Spain, that Granata and Segouia,
their Leaders, who make show of conscience, had promised their voices to the
Bishop of Five Churches, for the Communion of the Cup, not respecting his
Majesty, who does so much abhor it.

At this time, the Pope, considering in what imminent danger his authority
was, in regard of the difficulties and confusions of Trent, stirs of The Pope
makes leuies of Soldiers.
France, and of the Diet which was prepared in Garmanie, in which the Emperor
would be forced for his own interests to yield to the Protestants, thought fit
to secure himself by all means, and had given money a month before to ten
Captains, to raise soldiers, which were lodged in Romania and Marca and grew
very familiar with the Ministers of the Princes of Italy, and with the
Cardinals who were their near friends. This bred a suspicion in the Spaniards
and Frenchmen; and the French, Ambassador exhorted him to desist from making
provisions of war, for fear of disturbing the Council. The Pope answered,
that the English men and Protestants of Germany, having declared themselves
that they will assist the Hugonots of France, it was not fit for him to be
unprovided; that the world was full of heretics, and therefore it was
necessary to protect the Council, as well by force, as by authority. The
Spanish Ambassador went not the same way, but confirming that the proceedings
of the protestants were to be suspected, promised him all aid and assistance
in his Kings name; which he did to hinder the making of a league in Italy,
which would never have been pleasing in Spain. The Pope accepted the offer;
and, understanding at the And is pleased with his Legates.
same time the union of his Legates, and how zealous they were to do him
service, was much consolated. And he sent them word that they should hinder
all speech concerning residence, if it were possible, or, if they could not,
should make use of plurality of voices; but above all, that they should
dispatch (...)ckely, that they might conclude it before the coming of the
French men, and the assembling of the Dietin Germany, that the Emperor for the
great desire he has to make his son King of the Romans, may not suffer
himself to be persuaded by the Protestants, to propose in Council something
more prejudicial, then those things which have been proposed already.

The French Ambassadors, after they had often made a modest request, The
request of the French Ambassadors.
that their Prelates might be expected, did, the tenth of August, present it in
writing. The tenor whereof was, That the most Christian King, resolving to
observe and reverence the Decrees of Councels, which represent the universal
Church, does desire that the Canons of this may be received by the adversaries
of the Church of Rome, of which those who are not separated have no need; and
he thinks that those which are to be made, will be more acceptable, if the
Session be prorogued, that, unto so great a multitude of Italian and Spanish
Prelates, the French Bishops may be added, of whom, in the ancient Councels of
the Church, great account has been made. The cause of their absence, which
they the Legates have heard before, and judged necessary, will cease quickly,
as it is hoped, and, in case it should not, yet they will arrive before the
end of September, because they are so commanded by the King. And hereby it
will come to pass also, that the Protestants, for whose sake the Council was
intimated, who say every day that they will be present in it, will have less
cause to complain, because they cannot require more maturitie in this weighty
business, nor accuse them for too much precipitation. They demanded that,
while their Bishops were expected (that none might think that the King did
design that by this means the Council should be idle or dissolve) they would
treat only concerning manners, and discipline, and the two points remaining,
in matter of the Communion of the Cup. They added this last clause not to
displease the Imperialists, who had hope to obtain it in that Session. The
Legates, having consulted, answered in writing; that the prelates of France were,
before the Council was opened, expected almost six months, and after it was
begun, which was principally done in regard of France, they deferred to handle
any matter of weight six months more, into which because they are now entered,
it is not convenient to desist, because they could not so do, without
dishonouring the Council, and much incommodating so many Fathers; but to
prolong the day of the Session was not in their power to grant, without consent
of the Fathers; and therefore that they could not expect from them a more
determinate answer.

The Frenchmen then desired, that it might be granted to them to make their
proposition in the Congregation. But the Legates answered, that, before it had
been told them, and all the other Ambassadors, that they ^.
might negotiate with none but the Legates, and that it was formerly decreed in
that same Council that Ambassadors might not publicly speak in
Congregation, but only the day in which they are received, and their Mandate
is read. This made the Frenchmen complain much to the ^
Bishops, and especially to the Spaniards, and to say it was a great absurdity
that the Ambassages should be addressed to the Synod, and the Mandats presented
to it, and yet they might not treat with it, but with the Legates only, as if
they were Ambassadors to them, who are but Ambassadors themselves, as the Pope
who sends them is a Prince; and as he is a Bishop, and the first Bishop,
they are but Proctors of one who is absent, and have been always so esteemed
in ancient Councels. They alleged the example of the Councels of Nice;
Ephesus, Chalcedon, Trullus, of the second of Nice also, and that the breach
between the Pope and the Council of Basil was, because they pretended to
change this ancient and laudable institution. That this was a kind of grievous
servitude in the Council that they could not be heard, and an injury to
Princes, who could not treat with those with whom they were to manage the
affairs of their states; that the Decree alleged by them, was not showed,
and that it was fit to see it, and to know from whom it proceeded. For if the
Legates for the time being did make it, they did extend their authority with
great exorbitancie; if the Synod, it was necessary to examine how and when.
For it was an intolerable inconvenience, which was done in the beginning of
this last Convocation of the Council, that the Legates, with a few Italian
Prelates, who came from Rome only, should make a Decree, and practice it with
rigor, that nothing may be proposed, but by the Legates; so that the way is
barred, to all Princes, and Prelates, to be able to propose a good
reformation, which would be for the service of God; but in stead of that, the
doctrine controuersed with the Protestants is handled in their absence, without
any benefit of the Catholics, who do not doubt of it, and aliening the
Protestants, by condemning them before they are heard. And their complaynts
were renewed when they were informed from Monsieur de l'Isle, Ambassador of
their King in Rome, that, by the Kings order, he had made the same request to
the Pope, that the French Bishops might be expected all September, and that
his Holiness had referred it to the Legates. Lansac said, it was a thing
worthy of eternal memory; The Pope referred it to the Legates, the Legates
cannot do it without the Synod, and that cannot hear them; and so the King
and the world are deluded.

The eleventh of August the Bishops began to give their voices, concerning the
Decrees in matter of the Sacrifice; and almost all did lightly and uniformly
pass over all, but only that some did not approve the putting in of the
oblation of our Lord, in the Supper, and others did maintain it, andg for many
days, the number on both sides was almost equal. I must not omit, as a thing
worthy of memory, that the fourteenth of August Why the General of the
Jesuit is not in the Catalogue of those who assisted in Council.
James Lainez, General of the Jesuits did arrive; about whose place, because
that society had never been in Council, there was much ado. For he would
not content himself with the last place of the Generals of the Regulars, and
three of the same society labored to put him forward; for which cause he is
not named in the Catalogues of those who assisted in the Council.

The Spanish Prelates presented to the Legates a request subscribed by them all;
in which, having rehearsed many inconveniences, caused by the exorbitant
graces, and privileges, granted to those of the Conclaue, they demanded a The
Privileges of the Conclauists.
reuocation, or, at the least, a moderation of them. The Cardinals, entering
into the Conclaue, where they are locked up for the election of the future
Pope, use to have two servants apiece, one for a Chaplain, another to serve in
the Chamber; which are elected by them rather for negotiations, then to serve
their persons, and are ordinarily the best Courtiers of Rome. These oftentimes
have no less part in those affairs then their Masters; so that it has been
an old use, that, when they come out of the Conclaue, the new Pope receives
them all into his family, and gives them Privileges, fitting the degree of
every one, of one kind to Priests, of another to Seculars. Amongst those which
then were usually given to Priests, were these; that they might resign, to any
Ecclesiastical person, the Benefices they held, and cause them to be
conferred upon whomsoever they would name; that they might change their
Benefices with any beneficed man, themselves making choice of the persons to
confer both the one and the other. By this exorbitant Faculty, an open
merchandising was caused, and the Bishops perceived that where any Conclauist
was, Canonries, Parish Churches, and other Benefices were scandalously changed,
at pleasure. The Spaniards complained much because great inconveniences had
lately happened in Catalonia, by means hereof. But the Legates said, that the
moderation of such abuses belonged only to the Pope, because it concerned
persons of his family, and that it had been often concluded, to leave the
reformation of the Court to him, much more of his family; but they promised to
write to his Holiness, and to desire a provision: as they did. The Pope
considering that the Conclauists of account remain at Rome, and with the
Cardinals, and that the provision would touch only some few, and those of
small esteem, men retired to their houses, and that it was fit for his
affairs, to give some satisfaction to the Prelates of the Council, especially
to the Spaniards, resolved to yield unto them, and, in the next month, made a
reuocation of many privileges granted unto those, which notwithstanding was
not observed by his Successor.

Faber, the third French Ambassador, parted from Trent, to return to France,
which made the Papalins suspect that he went to give an account of the
Council, and to solicit the coming of the French Prelates: and they thought
he would do bad offices, because they saw his inclination by some of his
letters written to the Chancellor, which they had intercepted, for the ill
satisfaction he and his Colleagues had, because they could not obtain the
prorogation. Which being related to Lansac, by some creatures of Simoneta, to
discover the truth, he answered that he was gone for his own particular
occasions, and that it was no marvel, if, the defects of the Council being so
manifest, one did think they might be related.

But concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass, in the Congregation held until A
sharp contention about the oblation of Christ in the Supper.
the eighteenth, all contended resolutely about the oblation of CHRIST in the
Supper: and Father Salmeron was the principal man to persuade the affirmative.
He went to the houses of those who were of the other opinion, especially of
those who had not given their voices, persuading them to be silent, or, at the
least to speak remisly, and used the name of Cardinal Varmiense principally,
and sometime of Seripando, intimating the other Legates, without naming them.
And this he did with such importunity, that the BB. of Chiozza and of Veglia,
complained of it in the Congregation of the 18 of August. And this second spoke
for the negative with very forcible reasons. He told them they should consider
well of it, because one propitiatory sacrifice being offered, if it be
sufficient to expiate, no other is offered but only for thanksgiving; and he
that maintains a propitiatory (acrifice in the Supper, must needs confess
that, by it, we are redeemed, and not by his death; which is contrary to the
Scripture and Christian doctrine, which ascribe our redemption to this. And if
any say it is all one, begun in the Supper, and ended in the Cross, he
falls into another inconvenience as great, because it is a contradiction to
say that the beginning of a Sacrifice is a Sacrifice, and if one should cease
after the beginning, and go no further, no man would say he had sacrificed:
and it will never be believed that, if CHRIST had not been obedient unto his
Father, even unto the death of the Cross, but had only made an oblation in
the Supper, we had been redeemed; so that it cannot be said that such an
oblation may be called a Sacrifice, because it is a beginning of it. He said
he would not absolutely defend that those arguments were insoluble, but that
the Council ought not to tie the understanding of any, who had conceived an
opinion, upon so good reasons. He said, that, as he made no difficulty to
call the Mass a propitiatory sacrifice, so he could not by any means be
satisfied, that it should be said that CHRIST did offer, because it is enough
to say that he commanded the oblation. For (said he) if the Synod does
affirm that CHRIST did offer, the sacrifice was either propitiatory, and so it
will fall into the difficulties before mentioned, or not propitiatory, and so,
by that, it cannot be concluded that the Mass is propitiatory: yea, on the
contrary, it will be said that the oblation of CHRIST in the Supper was not
propitiatory, and therefore that of the Priest in the Mass ought not to be.
He concluded, that it was more secure to say only that Salmeron the Jesuit is
taxed for proceeding by faction in matter of faith.
CHRIST commanded the Apostles to offer a propitiatory sacrifice in the Mass.
Then he obliquely touched Salmeron, saying, that, if in points of reformation,
practices were used, it were tolerable, because they are humane, but to
proceed by faction, in matter of faith, is not a good example. The Bishop
persuaded so many, that it was almost the common opinion, not to make mention
of the propitiatory sacrifice offered by CHRIST in the Supper.

The same day the Archbishop of Prague, who came not long before from the
Emperor, presented his letters to the Legates, and letters came also from the
Nuncio Delphinus, resident with his Majesty: both which signified, that his
desire was that the sacrifice of the Mass should not be handled before the
Diet, and that the Article of the communion of the Cup might be dispatched in
the first Session. The Archbishop presented also, in the Emperors name, a
form of reformation. The Popes command, to finish the Council quickly, was so
peremptory, that the Emperors first demand could not be granted: but he was
partly satisfied in the expedition of the matter of the communion of the Cup.
For the Pope, unto whom the Emperor had made the same requests, wrote to Trent
that they should do so. Therefore, in the next Congregation, Mantua proposed
that, the doctrine of the Sacrifice being concluded, the communion of the Cup
should be handled. As the Prelates were giving their voices, it was remembered,
that the difficulty, whether CHRIST did offer himself in the Supper, was not
proposed to be disputed by the Divines, howsoever they have accidentally spoken
of it, and therefore that it would be good to propose it, that it might be
disputed on expressly, or omitted.

The general of the Jesuits was the last that spoke in this matter; who was
wholly for the oblation of CHRIST, and spent a Congregation himself alone,
whereas, in the other, between seven or ten Prelates did speak. Every one
having given his voice, howsoever the opinions were almost equally balanced,
yet the Legates at the earnest entreaty of Varmiense, resolved to put the
oblation into the Decree, but not using the word Propitiatory. In the end of
the Congregation, the Bishop of Five Churches seconding the proposition of the
Cardinal of Mantua, made an oration; in which having The Bishop of. Five
Churches makes an oration concerning the Communion of the Cup.:
first repeated the negotiations and pains, taken by the Emperor for the
service of the Christian Commonwealth, and to restore the Catholic purity,
not only after he was assumed to the Empire, but in the life time of Charles,
he added, that his Majesty had found by experience, that the most grievous
contentions and complaints of the people did arise from the prohibition of the
Chalice, and had therefore desired it should be treated on in Council.
Whereupon himself, and the other Ambassadors, by commission from him did, at
the first, put the Fathers in mind to consider that Christian charity did
require, that they should not suffer so many sacriledges, and slaughters in
most noble Provinces, and hinder the reducing of so many souls into the bosom
of the Catholic Church, by enjoying the observation of a Rite with too much
severity; that there is an infinite number of those, who having not abandoned
the Orthodox faith, are notwithstanding weak of conscience, who cannot be
cured but by this permission; that his Imperial Majesty is forced to make
continual war with the Turks, which he cannot do but by the common
contribution of Germany; whereof so soon as he makes mention, they begin to
speak of Religion, and principally demand the use of the Cup, which if it be
not granted, and so the controversies taken away, it is to be suspected that
not Hungary only, but Germany will be possessed by the Barbarians, with
danger of other bordering Provinces; that the Church has used always to
embrace those rites which are contrary to the new heresies: and therefore it is
good to take this resolution which does show the faith of the verity of the
most blessed Eucharist against the Sacramentaries; that there is no need, as
some require, to send a Proctor expressly in the name of those who do desire
it, as was done in the Council of Basil; for then all the Kingdom alone
demanding that favor, it might easily be done: but now not one people, or
Nation alone, but an infinite number dispersed in many Regions, does make the
demand; that it is no marvel if the Petition were first presented to the
Pope, and not obtained, because his Holiness did wisely refer all to the
Synod, to stop the mouths of the Heretics, who will not receive favors
from that Sea, and because he would not seem to derogate from the Council of
Constance, it being convenient, that the use of the Cup taken away by a
general Council should be permitted by the definition of another, as also to
give reputation to the Synod, to which it is fit to remit this determination
which may compose the discords of the Church; that he had letters from Rome,
that the Pope did think the demand honest, and necessary, and took it in good
part that it was desired of the Council. Then he presented the Article
concerning the Cup, as he desired it should be handled. And it contained, in
substance; that it might be granted to the States of the Emperor, as they
comprehend all Germany and Hungary This being read, the Prelates made a great
busselling, and gave manifest signs that they would contradict. But they were
quieted for that present, because it was told them, that they might deliver
their opinion, when the voices were collected.

The third of September, the French Ambassadors made a new request to the
Legates, that, to give more credit to the Council, and to make the Decrees
thereof to be more easily received in their Kingdom, they would prorogue the
Session a month, or five weeks, handling other matters in the mean while, to
publish afterward in the next Session as well that which has been discussed
and determined already, as that which shall be handled and determined in the
mean space; for so no time would be lost, the Council would not be prolongued,
and the King and the whole Kingdom would receive great satisfaction. Besides,
the Prelates of Polonia being expected to come shortly, it would be a thing of
much edification to the universality of Coristendome, to show that esteem is
held of two such considerable Kingdoms. This instance was made the day before
the Legates received letters from the Cardinal of Ferrara, that the Cardinal
of Loraine and the French Prelates would come by all means, and twenty
Parisian Doctors with them. Ne^es of the coming of the Cardinal of Loraine to
Trent, with many Prelates and Divines.
And other letters were showed also, written to diverse Prelates by their
friends, giving the same advice; adding, that their intention was to handle the
point of the superiority of the Pope and Council. Therefore they thought it so
much the more necessary to dispatch the things already discussed, that they
might not be crossed with new troubles, fearing also that, to the bad humors in
Trent worse being added, and more violent, so many difficulties would be
raised, that either the Council would be infinite, or some prejudicial thing
resolved. But the Legates concealing these reasons, answered the Ambassadors
with honorable terms, in the manner formerly used by them. That the Council
was called principally for France; that their Prelates had been long since
called; that to entertain so many Fathers a longer time, in the same
expectation, would be an indignity to the Council, and that, if the things
discussed were not published, the world would think that it was eithe by
reason of some dissension amongst themselves, or because the reasons of the
Protestants had some validity. But Lansac being satisfied with no answer, and
still pressing the dilation more, complained that the Council was The
complaint of Lansac.
opened for the Frenchmen, and yet they were not expected; that he could
never obtain any request of the Legates; that his remonstrances were
contemned; that stead of gratifying his King, they used greater precipitation
that he did not attribute this to the Legates, knowing they did nothing but
what was commanded from Rome; that they were in an error for suspecting the
coming of the Frenchmen; that having assayed so often to obtain that which
was just, and ought to be granted without demand, it was now fit to think of
other remedies; and spoke so, as that he made them doubt he would do some
extraordinary matter. This raised a rumor in the Council, that it would be
dissolved. Which pleased the greater part; some, to free themselves from the
incommodities they suffered; some because they thought that remaining there
they should do God little or no service; and the Papalins, for fear of some
attempt. It was publicly said, that Loraine, upon all occasions, had showed
an inclination to diminish the Popes authority, that he would open some way
for France to ascend to the Papacy, which he thought not fit should be wholly
in the disposition of the College of Cardinals, consisting of Italians; that
France has ever pretended to limit the Popes power, to subject it to the
Canons and Counsels; that this opinion would be favored by the Spaniards, who
already, howsoever they were much reserved in their speeches, had declared
their desire for the same and would be followed by many Italians, who, because
they cannot, or know not how to make use of the preferments of the Court, do
envy those that do, besides those who are desirous of nouity not knowing why;
of whom there seemed to be a considerable number.

In Trent a discourse was published, which passed through the hands of A
discourse published in Trent.
all, and was sent by the Legates to Rome; in which it was showed that it was
impossible to finish the Council in a short time, because all Princes were
inclined to prolong it. Of the French men and Imperialists it could not be
doubted, in regard of their demand made for the dilation. The King of Spain
showed the same mind, having destinated the Count di Luna for Ambassador to
the Synod, so soon as the Diet of Francfort should be ended, to which he
was first sent. The Prelates, by their redious discourses, would draw the
matters in length also. Then was showed the impossibility to continue long in
this sort, there being no provision of corn but for September only: and it
being not known where any may be gotten, in regard of the general dearth,
and the delay, made by the Emperor and Duke of Bauaria, to answer the demand
made unto them concerning victuals, it did seem they could not be relieved.
It was added that the Protestants would always be laying some snares to make
the Fathers fall into some dishonorable resolution; and raising nouities to
cause Princes to propose things prejudicial; that the Bishops seemed to aspire
to liberty, and would not in time be contained within such narrow bounds, and
that the Synod would not only be made free, but licentious also: and, by a
fine metaphor, the progress of the Council was compared to a man's body, which
does get, with delight, a small, and in the beginning not regarded French
infection, which afterward does increase, and possesses all the blood, and
all the powers of it. It exhorted the Pope to consider well on it, and not to
come to a translation, or suspension, for fear of being contradicted by all
Princes, but to learn how to use those remedies which God does send him.

Amidst these troubles the Legates hastened to conclude the Decrees for Three
opinions about the grant of the Chalice.
the Session. That of the sacrifice stood in good terms; but they talked still
of the grant of the Chalice: and there were three opinions. One extreme, and
negative, that, by no means, it should be granted; another affirmative, that
it should be granted, with the conditions, and cautions, which seemed good to
the Synod, which was maintained by fifty of the most intelligent persons; and,
amongst these, some would have Ambassadors sent into the Countries which did
desire it, to take information wheth(...) the grant were fit, and with what
conditions. The third, that it should be remitted to the Pope; which was
divided into many branches. Some would have had an absolute remission, without
declaring whether he should grant, or deny it; and others, with a declaration,
that he should grant it, according to his wisdom. Some would have restrained
him to particular Countries, and others left him to his liberty. The Spainyards
did absolutely deny it, because the Ambassador Vargas had written to them from
Rome, that it would be for the good of religion and service of the King, in
regard of the Low Countries and the State of Milan, who, when they should see
their neighbors enjoy that liberty, would require it themselves also, and
whether it were granted or denied, a great gate would be opened to heresy.
The Venetian Prelates, persuaded by their Ambassadors; were of the same mind
also for the same reason.

I will recite the principal Authors only of these opinions, and the things
remarkable spoken by them. The Cardinal Madruccio, who spoke first, approved
Of which the principal authors were.
the grant, without exception. The three Patriarchs did absolutely deny it.
Five Archbishops who followed, referred themselves to the Pope. Granata, who
had promised the Emperors Ambassadors to favor them, that they might adhere
to him in the matter of Residence, on which he insisted above all, said he did
neither affirm not deny, but that it could not be concluded in that Session,
and was necessarily to be deferred until another, but would not refer,
himself, saying it was a matter of great deliberation, because it could not be
regulated by the Scripture, or Traditions, but by wisdom only; wherein it is
necessary to proceed with circumspection, for fear of being deceived in the
circumstances of the fact, which cannot be known by speculation, or discourse;
that he made no difficulty, as others did, for the danger of effusion, showing
that the Wine is not spilt in the ablution which is now made; that, if it would
make an union in the Church, it should not be abhorred, it being but a Rite,
which may be changed for the good of the faithful: but yet he reserved
himself, because other extrauagant things might afterward be demanded; that,
to avoid error, it would be good first to have recourse unto God, by Prayers,
Processions, Masses, alms, and fastings: afterward, not to omit humane
diligence, in regard there are no Prelates of Germany in the Council, to
write to the Metropolitans to assemble them, and examine the matter well, and
to inform the Synod according to their conscience. He concluded, that, it
being impossible to do so many things in a short space, he thought fit to
desist now, and defer the determination until another time. John Baptista
Castagna, Archbishop of Rosano, dissuading the grant absolutely, spoke against
those that made, and those that favored the request, taxing them not to be
good Catholics, because, if they were, they would not desire a thing unfit,
with scandal of others. And he said plainly, that the request did aim to
bring in heresy, and used such words, that every one understood, that he
meant Maximilian King of the Bobemians.

The Archbishop of Braga, or Braganza, said, he was informed that in Germany
there were four sorts of men. True, Catholics: Obstinate heretics: Concea^d
heretics; and men weak in faith. That the first do not demand the grant,
yea oppose it; the second care not for it; the third desire it, that they may
cover their heresy, because they may counterfeit in all other things, but in
this; which therefore was not to be granted them, for that it would foster
their errors; but the weak in faith were not such, but only for the bad
opinion they have of the Ecclesiastical power, and of the Pope, and do not
demand the Cup for devotion, which is found only in persons of a goodlife,
whereas they are drowned in vanities and pleasures of the world, and do
unwillingly confess and communicate once a year, which does not demonstrate
such heat of zeal that they should desire to communicate with both kinds. He
concluded, that the diligence of the Fathers of Basil ought to be imitated,
that four or six Prelates of the body of the Council should be elected, who,
as their Legates accompanied with Divines fit to preach, should visit the
Provinces named by his Imperial Majesty, or where they found penitent men,
who desired the Cup for devotion, or because they were accustomed to that Rite,
and for all other matters would obey the Church, should reconcile them, and
grant it unto them.

The Titular of Philadelphia, though a Dutch man, said, that to deny it, being
demanded by the Emperor, was dangerous, and pernicious to grant it; but that
he was resolved rather to displease men then speak against his conscience,
that it was impossible to practice the use of the Chalice, without danger of
effusion, carrying it about, to places remote, and of bad passage, many times
by night, intime of snow, rain, and ice; that the Protestants would boast, and
inclucate to the people, that the Papists do begin to know the truth; and
that, without doubt, those who make the request do maintain that the precept
of CHRIST cannot be fulfilled, but by taking the Eucharist under both kinds.
And he took in his hand a Chatechisme written in Dutch, which he read and
expounded in Latin, and declared what their opinion was. He added, that the
Catholics would have the worse, and to gain a few, would loose very many;
that they would doubt on which side the true faith was seeing the Catholics
yield to the customs of the Protestants; that the grant made unto Germany
would move other Provinces, and especially France; that the Heretics will
make proof by this, to ouersway the constancy which they have found in the
doctrine of the Catholic Church. He concluded, that it ought to be deferred,
at the least, until the end of the Diet, that the Dutch Prelates might send to
the Council, approouing the opinion of Granata to defer, and the other of
Braga, that those who desire the Cup have all a root of heresy; and added,
that the Emperors Ambassadors had made such passionate instances, and such
effectual persuasions, that, being interested so much, it was not fit they
should be present in Congregation, that every one might speak freely. Friar
Thomas Casellus Bishop of Caua, having recounted that the Bishop of Five
Churches had persuaded many, saying, that if it were not granted, so many
mischiefs would follow, that it had been better never to have called a
Council, showed at large, that it ought not to be granted though the loss of
many souls should ensue, because a greater number would perish, if it were
granted.

The Bishop of Captemberg, in Stiria, desired also that the Emperors
Ambassadors should retire, and inueighed much against the words of five
Churches, related by Caua. Many of the Spanish Prelates made the same instance
to the Legates, that the Imperialists might not be present in the treaties of
the Fathers during this consultation, it being sufficient for them to know, in
the end, the resolution of the Synod. But others contradicted; saying, that
rather they then others should be present, and that to exclude those who have
interest, has never been the custom of Synods. The Legates, considering that
they had been present from the beginning, and that they could not be excluded
without danger of tumult, resolved to make no innovation.

The Bishop of Conimbria was of opinion, that it should be referred to the
Pope, to grant the Grace, with five conditions. That those that were to make
use of it should abjure all heresies, and, in particular, should swear that
they believe, that as much is contained under one kind, as under both, and as
much grace received; that they should banish the heretic Preachers; that in
their places they should not keep the Chalice, nor carry it to the sick; and
that his Holiness should not commit this to the Ordinaries, but send Legates,
and that the resolution should not be made in Council. For when it should be
published it would make the heretics proud, and scandalize very many
Catholics; and therefore, in case this dispensation were to be granted, it
ought not to be put in the eyes of all nations. The Bishop of Modena maintained
that it could not be denied, because, after the Council of Constance, the
Church having reserved to it self power to dispense, has always showed, that
sometimes it would be expedient to do it; that Paul the third had formerly
sent Nuncij, to release it, because he perceived that the prohibition had done
no good in so many years; that the Bohemians would never be reduced without
it; that the use of the Cup was conformable to the institution of CHRIST, and
anciently observed by the Church.

Friar Jasper of Cassall, Bishop of Liria, a man of an exemplary life, and
learned, defended the same opinion. He said in sum, that he did not wonder at
the diversity of opinions, because those who deny have the moderns to follow,
and those who grant do follow antiquity, the Council of Basil, and Paul the
third; that in this variety, he adhered to the affirmative, because the thing
was good in its own nature, and profitable, and expedient with the conditions
proposed, and being addressed as a thing necessary to reduce souls, he that
did desire the end, must needs use the means; that the necessity of the
means ought not to be doubted of, because the Emperor did affirm it, whom he
did believe that GOD would not suffer to be deceived in so important a
business, and the rather, because Charles was of the same opinion; and the
demand of the Duke of Bauaria and of the Frenchmen did prove the same. And if
any did doubt that the Secular Princes were not well informed in this cause,
being Ecclesiastical, he must needs believe the Bishop of Five Churches, and
the two other Bishops of Hungary, who were in the Council. And because it had
been said, that the Father was to be imitated, who received his prodigal
son, but not before he repented, he said they ought rather to imitate the
shepherd in the Gospel, who fought, with great diligence, in desert and
mountainous places, the lost sheep, and laying it on his neck, brought it to
the sheepefold. The discourse of this Prelate, for the fame of his honesty and
excellent learning, and because he was a Portugal, whom every one thought
would have been most rigorous in maintaining the Rites used, did not only
confirm those who were of his opinion, but made also very many of the
opposites to waver.

The Bishop of Osemo who spoke after him, said; I doubt we must drink this
Cup, by all means, and GOD grant it may be with good success. Johannes
Baptista Osius defended, that this use ought not to be granted, because the
Church has never wont to grant the least thing according to the positions of
the heretics, yea always to constitute the contrary. He showed by that which
happened amongst the Bohemians, who had always been the most rebellious, that
one ought not to promise himself any thing of the conversion of heretics,
but to make account he shall be deceived by them, and that it was necessary
to make the Emperor understand, that this demand was not profitable for his
State. He desired the Legates also, that they should not ground themselves upon
those who had from the beginning spoken of referring it to the Pope, because
they spoke confusedly, and that the suffrages ought to be collected, as upon
other occasions, by making every one answer Yea, or No, and to omit those
artificial ways which some had been forced to use to give satisfaction. He
was followed by Friar Johannes di Munnatones, Bishop of Sogorne, who said, that
first he was of opinion that the Grace ought not to be denied, but having
heard the Bishop of Riete, was, by his conscience, forced to change, and defend
the negative; that the Council, which was judge in this cause, ought to have
regard that, yielding unadvisedly to the Emperor, they do not prejudice other
Princes. Friar Marcus Laureus, Bishop of Campania, said, that the Emperor did
heartily desire this grant, but that it would be sufficient for his Majesty
for the gaining of his people, to make a show only, and therefore that it
would be fit to give him an account of the difficulties, that he might justify
himself with them.

Petrus Danesius, Bishop of Lauaur, did not define whether it were fit to grant
the Cup or not, but spoke only against the opinion of referring it to the
Pope. He said in sum, that perhaps the Pope would be offended, because having
been first requested himself, and having, either for that he knew not how,
or would not resolve, referred it to the Council, it is a manifest argument
that he would not be pleased, if it were remitted to him again with the same
ambiguities; and the Council which consists of many, may more easily bear
the burden of the importunities of those who complain for want of
satisfaction, and require a remedy, then the Pope alone, who, to maintain his
dignity, must hold an esteem of many respects. Besides, it will give occasion
of calumnies, that the Pope remitteth to the Council, and the Council to the
Pope, to delude the world. Afterward he came to Logical terms, saying, that
either it is referred to the Pope as superior, or as inferior; that either
the Council, not daring to resolve, in regard of the difficulties, does remit
it to a greater power, or, to free it self, does refer it to an inferior:
but neither the one nor the other is fit to be done, before it be decided
which power is superior; because every one will hence draw an argument for his
opinion, and much occasion will be given for disputations and division. He
said, with asseueration, that no wise Prelate ought to consent to the
reference, if he were not first assured in which of the two kinds it ought to
be done; yea, that it was impossible it should be done, but that the words
would show either the one or the other. The Papalins were impatient to hear
this Prelate.

The Bishop of Five Churches spoke in those Congregations, in his place, as a
Prelate; and following immediately after, with other new discourses, he made
them forget the former, and making a long digression, persuaded the grant of
the Cup. Then he answered point by point, to all the oppositions. He said
there was no need to answer those who would exclude him from the
Congregations, because their reasons were as strong against the Emperor
himself, if he had been present; that he would not answer the dangers of
effusion, because if they had been remediless, the Council of Constance,
would not have reserved power to dispense; that the discourses of those who
persuade the negative seem unto him weighty, and effectual, and able to draw
him to that side, if he had not practice and experience in that business,
which has more need of such knowledge, then of Science and speculatiue
reasons. To those that said, that the like grant did never any good in times
past, he answered, that it was quite contrary, because, after the treaty of
Basil, many Catholics were preserved in Bohemia, who still live in peace with
the Calistini, and have lately received the new Arch-B* of Prague, by whom they
cause their Priests to be ordained. To those that feared to put new
cogitations into other Nations, he answered, that those would not be moved by
such an example, because having in them no mixture of heresy, and being
desirous to preserve the purity of Religion, they would refuse the Cup, though
it were offered unto them; that the Germans the more it is denied them, the
more they desire it, but if it were granted them, they might be diuerted from
that use; the fear that when they had obtained this, they would pass to other
demands was too suspicious, and if they should, they might always be denied;
that it could not be called a nouitie, because it had been granted by the
Council of Basil, and by Paul the third; whose ministers, had they been more
courageous, and not retired from that dispensation for small terrors, because
some impertinent Friars preached against them, would have done more good; that
he was much offended with the reason alleged by some, that as no man could
be received with condition that fornication should be permitted unto him, no
more can these people, who would be reconciled, so that they may have the use
of the Cup. For the first condition is absolutely bad, and this only as it is
prohibited. He answered the Bishop of Sogorne, that the Emperor did not
contend with any Prince, nor sought preiudices against others, and desired the
Cup for his people by Grace, and not by way of Justice. But upon those who said
the care hereof ought not to be committed to the Ordinaries, but that
Delegates were to be sent from the Apostolic Sea, he iested somewhat
sharply; asking whether he that had the charge of their souls, and all the
Spiritual government might not be trusted with a thing indifferent, or
whether they thought that this thing did exceed the Episcopal government. He
said that to refer it to the Pope was to give him new and continual
molestations. To Philadelphia he answered, that the Catholics would not
only not be troubled, but consolated, because they might live united with
those, with whom they are now much troubled. To them who would have Proctors
sent expressly, he said, it was no marvel that none came to demand this Grace,
because the Emperor had undertaken to demand it for them, who could make an
infinite number of them to come if the Fathers would. But as the Council was
careful not to make the Safe conduct too large, that so many Protestants might
not come as to put them in fear, so they ought to have the same respect herein,
because more would come to obtain this grant. His conclusion was, that they
would have compassion on their Churches, and hold an esteem of the demand of
so great a Prince, who, out of his desire of the union of the Church, does
never speak of this business without tears. In the end, he showed grief
for the passion of many Prelates, who, for a vain fear of seeing a change in
their own Countries, were content with the loss of others. In particular he
complained of the Bishop of Rieti, who held the Emperor for a Prince ignorant
in government, not knowing what was good for his States, which he said his
most Reverend Lordship, accustomed to serve at the Cardinals tables in Rome,
could not teach him. Finally, he said, that many other things did remain to
be answered, which were spoken as to challenge him to a Duel; but he thought
it better to bear them, and pass them over with patience. He repeated that
which he had said before; that is, that if the Cup were not granted, it had
been better that the Council had never been called: which he expounded
thus, that much people remained in obedience to the Pope, hoping that this
Grace would in the Council be granted unto them, who would wholly aliene
themselves when they saw they were defrauded.

Andreas di Cuesta, Bishop of Lion in Spain, said, that the good intention of
the Emperor and Duke of Bauaria could not be doubted of, nor disputed whether
the Council might give such a permission, but that it was only to be
considered what was expedient. His opinion was that the ancient Fathers, and
continual use of the Church, never to yield to the petitions of the heretics,
was to be imitated. It appeared by the practice of the Nicen Council, that,
howsoever the world went topsie turuie, they would never grant any thing unto
them, and the Doctors abstained from words used by the heretics, though they
had a good sense; that they would never have been pleased with this grant; that
the Catholics would take it ill; that for an uncertain hope of reducing a few
heretics, many Catholics would be lost, that because the Bishops of Germany
did not make the demand, it was a great argument that it proceeded not from
devotion, coming from a people who give no sign of any spiritualitie; that he
could not understand how they were penitent, and would return to the Church,
believing it was governed by the holy Ghost, and yet be obstinate not to do it
without this favor; that this obstinacy shows, that they have not the
formal reason of faith; that if the Council of Basil did formerly grant this
to the Bohemians, it was because they did absolutely refer themselves to the
Church, which, afterward, in kindness, did grant it; that it ought not to be
called a true remedy which is not necessary, by the nature of the thing, but
by the malice of men, that the Synod ought not to nourish nor cherish them,
that the example of CHRIST, in seeking the wandering sheep, is sufficiently
imitated, when they are called, invited, and prayed; that if this favor must
be granted, it were better to be done by the Pope, who may revoke it if the
conditions be not performed; that the Council granting it, if the Pope would
afterward recall it, they will pretend he cannot do it, and that his
authority is not above the Council; that the heretics do ever proceed with
falsehoods and deceits.

Antonius Coronicius, Bishop of Almeria, said, that he was confirmed in the
negative by the reason used by the defenders of the affirmatine; that howsoever
God gives many helps to the impenitent, as preaching, miracles; and good
inspirations, yet he gives the Sacraments to the penitent only; that if they
would be moved with charity, they should be more careful to preserve the
Catholics then reduce the heretics; that the Council of Constance ought to
be imitated, which to maintain the good children of the Church, prohibited
the Communion of the Chalice, taught by John Husse; that now they ought so to
deal with the Lutherans; that this grant would open a gate to infinite
mischiefs; that they would demand marriage of Priests, abrogation of images,
of fasts, and of other godly constitutions, always proposing their demands as
the only and necessary remedies to unite them to the Church; that every little
change of the Law does breed great damage, especially if it be made in
favor of heretics; that he would not give counsel that the Pope should do
it, though he might do it better; that the people would be less offended
then if the grant were made by the Council, howsoever it ought to be
confessed that the supreme authority is in the Pope; that in case he should
grant it, it ought not to be committed to the Bishops though known to be
worthy for some time, because they may become bad, and of a perverse faith,
moved by their private interests.

Franciscus di Gado, Bishop of Lugo in Spain, made a long exhortation to the
Fathers, that, to avoid difficulties, or to give satisfaction to Prince or
people, they would not derogate from the reputation and dignity of general
Councels, whose authority having ever been esteemed in the Church, as every
one knows, and that having maintained the faith, was not to be contemned now,
for respects and interests. He alleged many places of Saint Austin, for
authority of general Councels, and much extolled the authority of them; and
howsoever he never descended to compare it with the Popes, yet every one
understood that he made it the superior. And Ierolamus Guerini, Bishop of
Imola, using the like conceits and words, extolled also the authority of
Provincial Councels, to confirm his opinion of not granting the Cup, and
said, that their authority ought to be esteemed obligatory, until the
contrary was determined by a general Council; alleging Saint Austin for it.
In heat of speaking, he came out with these words, that the general Council
had no superior; but perceiving afterward that the Papalins (of which number
himself was) were offended, sought to moderate it, by repeating the same
things, and adding an exception of the Popes authority. By which means he
satisfied neither party; but the greater number did excuse him, and attribute
it to inconsideration, because, in the former congregations, he had, upon
diverse occasions, confuted those who alleged the Council of Basil.
Notwithstanding Cardinal Simoneta, howsoever he employed him to make such
oppositions, did not forbear to expound it in a bad sense, and to charge him
that he was transported by affection, because the Bulls of his Bishoprike were
not dispatched upon free cost, as he would have had them.

The last congregation concerning this point was held the fifth of September:
and, amongst others, Richard of Verselli, a Preualentian Abbat, and a Regular
Canon in Geneua, maintaining the negative, said, that this matter was disputed
many days in the Council of Basil, which disputation remains still,
collected by Friar John, of Ragusi, Proctor of the Dominicans, and, in
conclusion, the Cup was absolutely denied to the Bohemians: so that no other
determination can now be made, without declaring to the world that the Church
did then err, in a general Council. He was reprehended by the Bishop of
Imola (to salve his own sore) for giving authority to that schismatic
Council, and noted of great boldness, that those who simply alleged the
Council of Basil having been often reproved, he should not only cite it,
but give it the authority of a general Council. The Father The authority of
the Council of Basil.
replied that he always marueiled, and then more then ever, how any one could
speak so of that Council, considering that the fourteen Articles decreed in
the matter of the Chalice the last Session were wholly taken out of it, and
that he knew not how a Decree could more be approved, then by renewing of it
not only in sense, but in words also. And waxing warm herewith, he said,
that, in regard of the Decree of that Council, the demand of the Cup sauoured
of heresy, and mortal sin. Whereupon a buzzing was raised among the
Prelates; and he desiring to proceed was silenced by the Cardinal of Mantua,
so that stopping himself he asked pardon, and speaking a few words, concluded.

Not to speak any more of this Father, I will add here, that he was noted
to have been at the French Ambassadors house, the sixteenth of August, early
in the morning, to demand whether their Bishops would come, and to exhort that
they might be solicited to come quickly. And in the Congregations, in which
the sacrifice was handled, he proposed the doubt whether the authority of the
Pope be above the Council; adding, that when it should be discussed, he
would speak freely. These things being put together, and duly weighed, the
Legates did not think fit that the Frenchmen should find at their coming
such a humor in Trent, and thought to make his General recall him, for
business of the Congregation, Richard of Versells dies with grief.
and so to remove him honestly. But there was no need; for the poor Father
fell sick a little after with grief of mind, and the twenty sixth of
November died. In that Congregation Friar John Baptista, General of the Serui,
maintaining the negative also, to overthrow the ground of the opposites, The
General of the Serui extolleth the Council of Constance.
spoke at large concerning the Council of Constance, which first decreed that
matter, and commended the authority thereof; exalting it above other general
Councels, and saying that it had deposed three Popes. This did not please; but
was passed over, because they would not thrust many matters together.

The giving of voices being ended, the Legates were desirous to give the The
Cup is denied, by plurality of voices.
Emperor satisfaction, but could not, because the party of the negative
prevailed: they resolved therefore to labor that it might be referred to the
Pope, hoping that, by persuasions, some of the negative might be drawn into
that middle opinion. And they gave commission to Iacobus Lomelinus, B. of
Mazzara, and to the Bishop of Ventimiglia, to employ themselves herein, with
dexterity and circumspection. The Legates themselves spoke with the three
Patriarchs, and persuaded them; by whose means all the Prelates and Fathers
of the Venetian State were pacified, which was a considerable number. Having
gained as many as seemed sufficient, they believed they had overcome the
difficulty. They brought the matter to this point, to write a letter to the
Pope in the ordinary form, and to send a note of all the voices. But the
Bishop of Five Churches did not approve it, except a Decree of the Session did
appear. For these two Articles having been reserved in the last Session, to be
handled in this, and they now being handled, and resolved, it is necessary
that the resolution of the Session should appear in the Acts. Varmiense
showed him how hard and dangerous it was to propose the Decree, and that he
ought to be content with the letter, if he desired to obtain. The Bishop not
being pacified herewith, they resolved to make a Decree, to be read in the
Session; in which he desired it should be said, That the Synod, knowing it
is expedient to grant the use of the Cup, did refer unto the Pope to grant
it, to whom, and upon what conditions he pleased. The Legates showed him that
many who were for the remission, did doubt whether it were expedient, and
therefore would oppose the Decree, so that it was impossible to cause any such
declaration to be made; and that, if he were firm in this opinion, it were
better to let a week pass, that this great heat might be cooled. The Bishop
of Five Churches was content; and so, this point being deferred, they purposed
to establish the Decree of the Sacrifice, that this being joined with it, they
might make the proposition for the Communion. Varmiense did oppose, who being
persuaded by the Jesuits, Laynez, Salmeron and Torre, did propose another
form of Decree for the Sacrifice in matter of the oblation of CHRIST in the
Supper, and they had much ado to make him desist. Finally, being almost out
of hope to be ready to hold the Session at the time appointed, the Decree of
the Sacrifice was established in the Congregation of the seventh day by consent
of the mayor part, howsoever Granata labored to interpose impediments and
delays.

After this, ten Articles for reformation of the abuses, occurring in the
Mass, were proposed, and eleven more in diverse other points of reformation;
which were purposely chosen of easy matters, not subject to contradiction, and
favorable to the authority of Bishops, that their proceeding might not be
hindered by the opposition of any; which was well known to the Ambassadors
and Prelates who complained of it. These began to be handled the ninth of
September, and the Prelates delivered their opinions briefly, forty in a
Congregation. There was no remarkable opposition, only Philadelphia said, that
Germany expected that matters of weight and importance should be handled in
Council. He named diverse, and, amongst others, the creation of Cardinals, and
plurality of Benefices. Ioannes Zuares, Bishop of Conimbria, said, that small
matters were not to be neglected, but thought that the dignity of the Synod
did require that some special order should be followed, that it may appear
why these particulars The Council is taxed by diverse Prelates, for omitting the
chief points of Reformation.
are proposed before others; that the reformation ought to begin from the Head,
and pass to the Cardinals; from the Cardinals to the Bishops; and from them to
other degrees; otherwise he feared that the Catholics would be offended, and
the protestants laugh. Paris said, that, for these hundred and fifty years,
the world has demanded a reformation in the Head, and the members, and
hitherto has been deceived; that now it was time they should labor in
earnest, and not by dissimulation; that he desired the French men should be
heard for the necessities of that Kingdom; that in France a far more
profitable reformation was made, then that which was proposed in Council. The
Bishop of Segouia said, they did imitate an unskillful Physician, who gave a
lenitiue, or anointed with oil, in mortal diseases. The Bishop of Oreate
said, that the Pope ought not to grant so great faculty to the Crusado, and the
Fabrique of Saint Peter, by virtue of which, every one in Spain will have
Masses in his house, which if it be not moderated, the provisions of the
Council will be in vain; that it was necessary to declare that the Decrees
of the general Council do bind the Head also. Whereat buzzing being
raised, he made a sign they should be silent, and added, that he meant in
respect of the direction, and not of coaction. He proceeded, and said that it
was necessary to find a means to take away contentions, and suits, or, at the
least, to make them fewer and shorter, in causes of Benefices; that this caused
great expenses, hindered the worship of GOD, and scandalized the people. The
Bishop of Five Churches spoke concerning the point of conferring Bishopriques,
expounding the words he had said, that base and unworthy persons were
promoted, and declaring that the abuse proceeded from Princes, who did
importunately recommend them to the Pope, saying they would be better bestowed
upon the horse-keepers of his Holiness. And he complained that his words had
been ill expounded.

The Spanish Agent complained in the Kings name, that in the eight Article too
much authority was given to Bishops over Hospitals, Mountains of piety, and
such places; and particularly in Sicilia, against the privilege which that
Kingdom aunciently has; for whose satisfaction the Legates caused a clause to
be added for reservation of the places which are immediately under the
protection of the King. These things being ended, the Legates were in a
strait, because there were but three days to the Session, and many things
unresolved, especially that which was of greatest importance, in which every
one was carried with a^ strong affection, that is the communion of the Cup. But
one accident made them to prolong the time. For the French Ambassador in Rome,
having earnestly desired the Pope in the Kings name, to cause a delay until
the coming of his Prelates, his Holiness, though nothing could more displease
him then the prolonging of the Council, as well in regard of his own
inclination, as of the Cardinals and Court, who were in hope, and much desired
to see it ended in December, notwithstanding, to conceal his fears, did
answer, that it was all one to him, and that it did depend on the Prelates,
who if they did abhor every delay, it was no marvel, in regard of their long
and incommodious abiding there, saying that they ought to be respected, and
that he neither could nor would compel them, or impose a law upon them,
contrary to the ancient use; that he would write to the Legates, concerning
this instance, and show he was contented with the dilation; that this is all
that can be required of him, and enough to satisfy the King. Thus he wrote,
adding that they should make use of this permission; as it should seem most
reasonable to the Fathers. This letter, and the backwardness in their
business, and that which was written by Delphinus, Nuncio with the Emperor,
and the instance of the Emperors Ambassadors, that the Decree of the Mass,
might not be published, made some of the Legates incline to defer the
Session. But Simoneta, who understood the Popes mind, rather as it was in his
head, then as it was expressed in the letter, opposed so strongly, that the
contrary was resolved. And he sent advice to Rome how dangerous a thing it was
to change the absolute commands formerly given, to come quickly to the
conclusion of the Council, only to give verbal satisfaction to others,
encouraging those who had bad intentions to cross good resolutions, and laying
burdens upon them to make them odious, to lose reputation, and to make them
unfit to do the service of his Holiness. Simoneta was favored by the event.
For, there being no opposition of moment, the Article of the abuses of the
Mass was established, together with the eleuonth of reformation, and the
Decree of the Communion had less difficulty then was believed. It did not
pass at the first proposing, because it said, that the Pope, by consent and
approbation of the Council, should do what he thought good. This was impugned
by those who held the negative, and the remissiue part; which made the Legates
resolve to omit this matter wholly, and excused themselves to the Imperialists,
because the fault did not proceed either from the Pope, or from them. The
Ambassadors desired that it should be proposed without the clause of consent
and approbation; which the Legates thinking would cause a delay of the Session,
did refuse. The Ambassadors protested, that seeing so small esteem was held
of the Emperor, they would assist no more either in Congregation or Session,
until his Majesty advised hereof, had given those orders that befitted the
Imperial dignity. Hereupon the Legates were content, not only to propose it
again without the clause, but to use persuasions themselves, also, and to
employ others. And the day following, which was the next day before the The
grant of the Cup is referred to the Pope.
Session, the Decree, corrected, did pass by the mayor part (though
contradicted by all of the negative) to the great joy of the Legates and
Papalins, as well because the Session was not prolonged, which they greatly
feared, as also because they thought it more honor for the Pope, that the
grace should totally depend on his authority. The Ambassadors were well
satisfied with this particular; but perceiving that the Session would be in
order, and that the publication of the sacrifice of the Mass could not be
hindered, as they had desired in the Emperors name, they joined with the
Frenchmen, who were mal-content, because the request which their King had made
in Rome was denied. Therefore the same day, in the afternoon, all the
Ambassadors A general consultation of the Ambassadors.
met in the house of the Imperialists, saying they would consult of a thing
common to all Princes. The Venetians and Florentiue, being called, excused
themselves, saying they could not come, without express commission from their
Masters. In that Assembly, the Bishop of Five Churches made a long discourse,
to show, that hitherto nothing of worth had been handled in the Council; that
they had vainly disputed of points of doctrine, which did the heretics no
good, who were resolved not to change their opinion, nor the Catholics, who
are sufficiently persuaded already that, for reformation, nothing has been
proposed but things of no moment, of Notaries, Receivers, and such like; that
it did plainly appear, that the Legates would make the next Session according
to the same style, and afterward spend the time in disputes, deciding of
Doctrines, making Canons, of Order, Marriage, or some other slight matter, to
avoid, as they have done the substantial points of reformation. And, by these
and other reasons, well amplified, he persuaded the Ambassadors to join
together, and to go to the Legates, and desire that for that Session they would
omit to speak of the sacraments, of doctrines, or canons, because it was now
time to think upon a good reformation, to take away so great abuses, to
correct bad manners, and to labor that the Council may not be unfruitful.
The Spanish Secretary would not assent. For his King, desiring that the
continuation should be declared in the end of the Council, feared he should
prejudice himself, if the manner of proceeding, which was to handle the
doctrine and reformation together, should be changed, because that alteration
might be used for an argument that it was a new Council. The Ambassador of
Portugal, having made a long vnconcluding speech, to show he desired a
reformation, but upon more pleasing terms, retired from the company. The
Susse, seeing the examples of those two, and that the Venetians were not
present, fearing to commit an error, said, it were good to consider of it
again, before they resolved. All the others were resolute to go.

Lansac (by consent) spoke for them all; saying, They were sent by their
Princes to assist and favor the Council, and to procure that the proceeding
should be pertinent, not by disputing of doctrine, whereof none of them; being
Catholics, do doubt, and is superfluous, in absence of those who do Who
choose Lansac to speak for them.
impugn it, but by making a good, holy, and absolute reformation of manners.
Now, because, notwithstanding all their remonstrances, they saw they would
determine principal points of controuersed doctrine, and touch the reformation
but slightly, he prayed them to change their purpose, and to employ the next
Session in reformation only, proposing more important and necessary Arguments
then those whereof hitherto they had spoken. The Legates answered in the usual
form; That the desire of the Pope and The answer of the Legates.
theirs was to do the service of God, procure the good of the Church, and
satisfy and gratify all Princes; but yet that it was not convenient to break
the order always observed in the Council to handle doctrine and reformation
together; that the things already done were but a beginning; that they had a
good intention to do better; that they would most readily receive the Articles
which the Ambassadors would propose; that they marvelled that the Articles
determined at Poisi in France were not sent to the Pope, who would have
approved them. Lansac replied, that the Pope having referred all matters
concerning Religion to the Council; the French Prelates, when they came, would
propose both those and many other things. The Legates answered they should be
welcome, and willingly heard; but that they ought not for that cause to defer
the Session, in regard that nothing should be handled in it in prejudice of
their propositions; that most of the Fathers were resolved the Session should
be held; that it was dangerous to give them distaste, and that if they
expected in Trent, with great discommoditie, those who lived at their ease, and
deferred their coming which they promised, it was not fit to discontent them
more, by making them remain idle. This cunning persuasion being not strongly
opposed by the Ambassadors, they held the Congregation, and framed the
Decrees; which being established, when they came to appoint the time and the
matter for the next Session, Granata counseled them to prolong the time, that
the Frenchmen, and Polonians might have space, not only to come, but to
inform themselves, and that they would not proceed to a precise declaration
of that which was to be handled, but stand upon the general, as formerly they
had done, and resolve according to occurrences. For so many persons being to
come, it could not be but that they would bring some new matters, which might
cause new determinations. This opinion was followed by the Spaniards, and many
others, and was like to have been generally approved. But it being noysed,
that the Popes absolute commandment was come, that the Session should not be
deferred above two months, and that the Sacraments of Order and Marriage
should be handled together, the Papalins were induced to persuade that the
time might not be prolonged, and that both those Sacraments might be
discussed. The Legates showed they were forced to make the Decree in
conformity hereof. But there were two other true causes of it; the one the
quick dispatch of the Council, because they hoped, by so doing, to finish all
in that Session alone, the other, that the Spaniards and other favorers of the
reformation, might not have time, being busied in matters of faith, to handle
any thing of importance; and particularly that they might be hindered to
promote, or insist upon Residence. After that this point was established, all
the Decrees being read together, new contradictions were raised, besides the
usual contentions, which the Legates could hardly stop with fair words. The
Congregation lasted until two hours within night, with small satisfaction of
the parties, and scandal of honest men. In the end all was resolved; but by
the greater part only, which did not much exceed in number those who
contradicted.

The seventeenth of September, the day appointed for the Session, being The
Session.
come, the Legates Ambassadors, and 180. Prelates went to the Church, with the
usual ceremonies; and after prayers made in time of the Mass, the Bishop of
Ventimiglia preached: who, with an Episcopal and Senatorious gravity, using
the comparison between civil bodies and natural, showed how monstrous a
Synod would be, if it had no head; he showed the office of it, in making an
influence of virtues into all the members, and the thankfulness and duty of
these, in having more care of it, then of themselves, exposing themselves also
to the defense of it, he said that the chief fault of an heretic, according
to Saint Paul, was, that he does not acknowledge an head, on which the
connection of the whole body does depend; he added, in few words, that CHRIST
was the invisible Head of the Church, but in many, that the Pope was the
visible. He commended the exact diligence of his Holiness, in making
provision for the Synod, and put every one in mind of his duty in presenting
the dignity of his Head: he praised the piety and modesty of the Fathers;
prayed GOD that that Council might proceed, and end as gloriously as it had
begun.

The Mass being ended, the letters of Cardinal Amulius were read, who, The
letters of Cardinal Amulius concerning the Oriental Christians.
as Protector of the Oriental Christian Nations, informed the Synod that
Abdisu, Patriarch of Muzale, in Assyria, beyond Euphrates, was come to Rome,
who had visited the Churches, rendered obedience to the Pope, and received the
confirmation and Cope from his Holiness. He related that the people subject
unto him had received the faith, from the Apostles, Thomas and Thaddeus, and
one of their Disciples called Marcus, wholly conformable to the Roman, with the
same Sacraments and Rites, whereof they had Books written ever since the time
of the Apostles. In the end, he told the largeness of the Country, subject
to that Prelat, which extends it self unto, the further India, with
innumerable people, subject, partly to the Turk, partly to the Sophi of
Persia, and to the King of Portugal. The letter being read, the Ambassador
of Portugal protested, that the Eastern Bishops subject to his King, did not
acknowledge any Patriarch for their Superior, and said that by acknowledging of
this Patriarch, they might not do themselves and the King a prejudice.
Afterward the Confession of his faith, made in Rome the Are confuted by the
Portugal Ambassadour^.
17 of March, was read, in which he swore to maintain the faith of the holy
Church of Rome, promising to approve and condemn that which it did approve
and condemn, and to teach the same to the Metropolitans and Bishops subject
unto him. Afterward his letters, directed to the Synod, were read, in which
he excused his not coming to the Council, by reason of the length of the
journey, and prayed them, that when it was ended, the Decrees thereof might be
sent unto him, which he promised he would cause to be fully observed. The same
things had been read in the first Congregation, but not regarded. The Portugals
protestation made men consider diverse absurdities in that narration, and there
was a whispering, and the Portugal Prelates began to speak. But the Speaker,
by order of the Legates, told them, that this should be spoken of in the
Congregation.

And proceeding in the acts of the Council, the Mass Bishop read the The
doctrine of the Mass.
doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, divided into nine heads; which
contained in sum: 1. That, for the imperfection of the Leuitical Priesthood,
another Priest, according to the order of Melchisedec, was necessary; which was
CHRIST our LORD: who, although he offered himself but once upon the Cross, to
leave in the Church a visible Sacrifice, representing that of the Cross, and
applying the virtue thereof, declaring himself to be a Priest after the order
of Melchizedec, offered to GOD the Father his body and blood, under the Bread
and Wine, and gave them to his Apostles, commanding them and their successors
to offer them. And this is that pure offering foretold by Malachie, which
Saint Paul calls the Table of the LORD, and was figured by diverse Sacrifices,
in the time of Nature, and of the Law. 2. Because the same CHRIST is sacrificed
in the Mass without blood, who was sacrificed on the Cross with blood, this
sacrifice is propitiatory, and GOD, appeased with this offering, bestows the
gift of repentance, and remitteth all sins, the offering, and (by the
Priests) the offerer being the same, who formerly offered himself upon the
Cross, only in a diverse manner; so that this of the Mass does not derogate
from that of the Cross, yea, by this, the fruits of that are received, which
is offered for the sins, punishments, and necessities of the faithful, and
also for the dead, not fully purged. 3. And though some Masses be celebrated
in memory of the Saints, the sacrifice is not offered to them, but to GOD
only. 4. And, to offer him with reverence, the Church has, for many ages,
instituted the Canon, free from all error, composed out of the words of the
LORD, tradition of the Apostles, and constitutions of Popes. 5. And, for the
edification of the faithful, the Church has instituted certain Rites to
pronounce in the Mass, some things with a low, and some with a loud voice,
adding benedictions, lights, odours, and vestments by Apostolical tradition.
6. And the Synod does not condemn as private and unlawful, but does
approve those Masses, in which the Priest does communicate alone (which use
is common) in regard the people does communicate spiritually, and that they
are celebrated by a public Minister, and for all the faithful. 7. And the
Church has commanded to put water into the wine, because CHRIST has done so,
and from his side did issue water and blood together, by which the union of the
people, signified by the water, with CHRIST their head is represented. 8. And
howsoever the people do not receive much instruction by the Mass, yet the
Fathers have not thought it fit that it should be celebrated in the vulgar.
Therefore retaining the use of the Roman Church, that the people may not be
deceived, the Priests ought to expound something which is read in it,
especially upon Holy days. 9. And to condemn the errors which are spread
against this doctrine, it does add nine Canons.

1. Anathematizing him that shall say, that a true and proper sacrifice is not
offered to GOD in the Mass. 2. Or that shall say that CHRIST, by these words,
Do this in remembrance of me, has not instituted Priests, and The Canons of
the Mass.
commanded them to offer. 3. Or shall say, that the Mass is a sacrifice only
of praise, or thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the sacrifice of the
Cross, and not propitiatory, and that it does help only him that does
receive it, and ought not to be offered for the huing and the dead, for
sins, punishments, satisfactions, and other necessities. 4. Or shall say,
that the sacrifice of the Mass does derogate from that of the Cross. 5. Or
that it is a deceit to celebrate Masses in honor of Saints. 6. Or that errors
are contained in the Canon of the Mass. 7. Or that the ceremonies, vestments,
or external signs used in the Mass, are rather incitements to ungodliness,
then offices of piety. 8. Or that the Masses, in which the Priest alone does
communicate, are unlawful. 9. Or shall condemn the Rite of the Church of
Rome, to speak part of the Canon and the words of consecration with a low
voice; or that the Mass ought to be celebrated in the vulgar, or that water
ought not to be mingled with the Wine.

The Fathers assented to the Decree, except only to that particular, that A
decree concerning the abuses of the Mass.
CHRIST did offer himself, which three and twenty Bishops did contradict: and
some others said, that, howsoever they held it to be true, yet they thought not
either the time or place fit to decree it. And there was some confusion in
delivering their voices, because many spoke at once. The Archbishop of Granata
began to dissent, who, having contradicted in the Congregations, that he might
not have occasion to do the same in Session, determined to be absent. But the
Legates seeing him not at Mass, sent to call him more then once, and
constrained him to come; which did more excite him to contradict. Immediately
after another Decree was read for instruction of Bishops, concerning abuses to
be corrected in celebration of the Masses: And contained in substance; That the
Bishops ought to forbid all things brought in by avarice, irreuerence, or
superstition. It named particularly, for faults of avarice, bargains for
reward, that which is given for new Masses, importunate exaction of alms: of
irreuerence, the admitting to say Mass of vagabond Priests, unknown, and
public and notorious sinners, Masses in private houses, and every where else
out of the Churches and Oratories, if the assistants be not in an honest habit,
the use of Music in Churches, mixed with lascivious songs, all secular
actions, profane speeches, noises, and screeches; of superstition, to celebrate
out of due hours, with other ceremonies and prayers then those which are
allowed by the Church, and received by use, a determinate number of some
Masses, and of candles. It ordained also, that the people should be admonished
to go to their Parish Churches, at the least on Sundays and great Holy Days,
declaring that the things aforesaid are proposed to the Prelates, that they may
prohibit and correct as Delegats of the Apostolic Sea, not only those, but
all that are alike unto them.

The decree of reformation contained 11. Heads. 1. That all the Decrees of
Popes and Councels, concerning the life and conversation of the Clergy, be
observed hereafter; under the same and greater punishments; at the pleasure of
the Ordinary, and those revived which are antiquated. 2. That none be promoted
to a Bishopric, but he, who, besides the qualities required by the holy
Canons, has been six months in holy Orders and if there be not notice of
all the necessary qualities in Court, information The Decree of reformation.
may be taken from the Nuncij, from his Ordinary or neighbor Ordinaries; who
ought to be a Doctor, Master, or Licentiate in Theology, or the Canon Law, or
declared to be able to teach, by public testimony of an University; and the
Regulars shall have the like testimonies from the Superiors of their religion;
and the processes and testifications shall be freely given. 3. That the Bishops
may convert the third part of the revenues of Cathedral or Collegiate Churches
into daily distributions, which notwithstanding those shall not lose, who, not
having jurisdiction or other office, do reside in their Parish Church or
Church united, being out of the City. 4. That none shall have voice in
Chapter, but he that is a Subdeacon; and he that shall hereafter obtain a
benefice to which any charge is annexed, shall be bound to receive Orders,
within one year, that he may execute it. 5. That commissions of dispensations
out of the Court of Rome shall be addressed to the Ordinaries, and those that
are for Grace, shall not take effect; until it be known by the Bishops, as
Delegates, that they have been justly gotten. 6 That commutations of wills be
not executed, until the Bishops as Delegats, do know that they have been
obtained by expression of the truth. 7. That superior Judges, in admitting
appeals, and granting inhibitions, shall observe the constitution of
Innocentius 4. in the Chapter Romana. 8 That the Bishops, as Delegats, shall be
executors of pious dispositions, as well testamentary, as of the living, shall
visit Hospitals, Colleges, and fraternities of Laiques, even those which are
called Schools, or by whatother name soever, except those which are under the
immediate protection of Kings; shall visit the alms of the Mountains of
piety, and all other places of piety; though under the charge of Laymen, and
shall have the knowledge and execution of whatsoever belongs to the service
of God, salvation of souls, and sustentation of the poor. 9 That the
administrators of the Fabrique of any Church whatsoever, Hospital,
Confraternity, alms of any Mountain of piety, or any other pious place,
shall be bound to give an account every year to the Bishops, and, in case
they be obliged to make an account to others, the Bishop shall be joined with
them, without whom they shall not have any discharge. 10 That the Bishops shall
examine the Notaries, and forbid them the use of their office in spiritual
matters. 11. That whosoever shall usurp the goods, rights, or emoluments of
Churches, Benefices, Mountains of piety, or other pious places, whether he
be Clerk, or Laique, King or Emperor, shall remain excommunicate, until a
full restitution or absolution of the Pope; and, if he be Patron, he shall
be deprived of the right of Patronage, and the clerk consenting shall be
subject to the same punishment, deprived of all benefices, and incapable of any
more.

Afterward the Decree for the grant of the Cup was read; of this tenor. That
the Synod having reserved to it self the examination and definition of two
Articles, concerning the communion of the Cup, in the former Session, has now
determined to defer the whole business to the Pope, who, in his singular
wisdom, may do what he thinks profitable for the Christian Common wealth,
and for the good of those who demand it. This Decree, as it was approved in
the Congregations by the mayor part only, so it The Decree concerning the Cup.
happened in the Session, where, beside those who contradicted, because they
thought the Cup could not be granted for any cause; there were some who
required that the matter should be deferred, and examined again. To whom the
Speaker answered, in the name of the Legates, that consideration should be had
of it. And finally the next Session was intimated for the twelfth of November,
to determine concerning the Sacraments of Order and Matrimony. The matter of
the next Session.
And the Synod was dismissed, after the usual manner, great discourses
between the Fathers about the Communion of the Cup continuing still.
Concerning which, some perhaps will be curious to know, for what cause the
Decree last recited, was not put after that of the Mass, as the matter seems
to require, but in a place where it has no connection or likeness with the
Articles preceding. He may know that there was a general maxim in A Maxim in
the Council about the Mayor part.
that Council, that to establish a decree of reformation a mayor part of
voices was sufficient, but that a Decree of faith could not be made, if a
considerable part did contradict. Therefore the Legates knowing that hardly more
then half would consent to this of the Chalice, did resolve to make it an
Article of reformation, and to place it the last amongst those, to show
plainly that they held it to be of that rank. There were also many discourses
at that time, and some days after, about the point decided, that CHRIST
offered himself in the Supper, some saying that, in regard of the three and
twenty contradictors, it was not lawfully decided, and others answering that an
eight part could not be called a considerable, or notable part. There were
some also who maintained that the maxim had place only in the Anathematismes,
and in the substance of the doctrine, and not in every clause which is put in
for better expression, as this, which is not mentioned in the Canons.

The Emperors Ambassadors were very glad for the Decree of the Cup, being
assured that his Majesty would more easily obtain it of the Pope, and upon
more favorable conditions, then it could have been obtained in the Council,
where, for the variety of opinions and interests, it is hard to make many to
be of one mind, though in a good and necessary matter. The greater part
overcomes the better, and he that opposes has always the advantage of him
that promoteth. And their hope was the greater, because the Pope seemed before
to have favored their Petition. But the Emperor had not the same opinion,
aiming not to obtain the communion of the Cup absolutely, but to pacify the
people of his own States, and of Germany, who being distasted with the Popes
authority for the things past, could not relish any thing well that proceeded
from him; whereas if they had obtained this grant immediately from the Council,
it would have given them good satisfaction, and bred an opinion in them, that
they might have obtained other requests which they esteemed; so that this
motion being stopped, and the infected Ministers casseered, he did hope he
might have held them in the Catholic Communion. He saw, by former
experience, that the grant of Paul was not well received, and did more hurt
then good; and, for this cause, he did prosecute the instance no further with
the Pope, and declared the cause of it. Therefore when he received news of
the Decree of the Council, turning to some Prelates who were with him, he
said, I have done all I can to save my people, now look you unto it, whom it
does more concern.

But those people which desired and expected the favor, or, as they said, The
censure of the decrees.
the restitution of that which was due unto them, were all distasted that their
just request having been treated on six months, presented by the
intercessions of so many, and so great Princes, and after, for better
examination; deferred and disputed, and discussed again with such contention,
should, in the end be referred to the Pope, which might have been as well done
at the very first, without loosing so much time, so many persuasions, and so
great pains. They said, the condition of Christians was according to the
Prophecy of Isayas, He sends, and countermandeth, expects, and
reexpecteth. For the Pope, who was moved first, referred that to the Council,
which now the Council remitteth to him; and both of them do mock both Prince
and people. Some discoursed more substantially; that the Synod had reserved the
definition of two Articles. Whether the causes which did formerly move to take
away the Cup, are such as that they ought to make them persevere in the same
prohibition; and if not, with what conditions it ought to be granted. The
former being undoubtedly a matter not of fact, but of faith, the Council did
confess, by a necessary consequence, that it knew the causes to be
insufficient; and would not, for worldly respects, make the declaration. For if
they had thought them sufficient, they must needs persevere in the
prohibition; if any doubt had remained they should have proceeded in the
examination, and ought not to remit it, but for the insufficiency of the
causes. But if they had made the declaration negative, that is, that the causes
were not such as that they ought to persevere, and referred to the Pope to do
upon information, what remained to be done defacto, they might have been
excused. Neither can it be said that this is presupposed by the reference. For
in the Decree of this Session, having repeated the two Articles, they resolved
to refer the whole business to the Pope; and therefore not presupposing any
thing.

I do not find, in the memorials which I have seen, that the Decree of the
sacrifice did raise any matter of discourse. And the cause perhaps was, for
that the words do not so easily declare the sense, as containing many strained
Metaphors, which draw the minds of the Readers unto diverse considerations,
who, when they are come to the end, know not what they have read. Only
concerning the prohibition of the vulgar tongue in the Mass, the Protestants
said something. For it seemed a contradiction, to say, that the Mass does
contain much instruction for the faithful people, and to, approve that part
should be uttered with a low voice, and wholly to forbid the vulgar tongue,
only commanding the Pastors to declare something to the people. Whereunto some
answered well, that, in the Mass were some secrets which ought to be concealed
from the people, which are incapable; for which cause they are spoken softly,
and in the Latin tongue, but other things which be of good edification are
commanded to be taught. But this was opposed two ways; one, that therefore
this second sort ought to be in the vulgar; the other, because they did not
distinguish the two sorts. For the Pastors being commanded to declare, often,
something of that which is read, and conceal the rest, these two kinds being
not distinguished, some of them may mistake for want of knowledge, and so abuse
the people. The Antiquaries did laugh at these discourses; because it is
certain that every tongue which is now brought into Art, was formerly vulgar,
in its own Country; and that the Latin, used in the Church, was many hundred
years, both in Italy, and in diverse Colonies of the Romans, in diverse
Provinces, the common language. And in the Roman Pontifical there remains
yet a form of the ordination of Readers in the Church, in which it is said,
that they must study to read distinctly and plainly, that the people may
understand. But he that would know what language is to be used in the Church,
needs only (without any more discourse) read the 14. Chapter of Saint Paul,
in the first to the Corinthians, which will sufficiently inform him, though
his mind be never so much prepossessed with a contrary opinion. And he that
would know what the meaning of the Church was, and when and why the Court made
this alteration, may observe, that Pope John the eighth, having severely
reprehended the Morauians, for celebrating of the Mass in the Slauonian
tongue, and commanded them to do so no more, yet being better informed
afterward, wrote i^ the year eight hundred eighty eight, to Sfento-Pulero,
their King or Count, a letter, in which, not by way of grant, but of
declaration; he affirms that it is not contrary to faith and sound doctrine
to say Mass, and other prayers in the Slauonian tongue, because he that has
made the Hebrew language, Grecke, and Latin, and has made others also for his
glory, alleging diverse passages of the Scripture, and, in particular, the
admonition of S. Paul to the Corinthians. Only he commanded that, for a
greater decorum in the Church, the Gospel should first be read in Latin, and
afterward in the Slauonian tongue, as the use already was in some places.
Notwithstanding he gave leave to the Count, and his Judges, to hear the Latin
Mass if it pleased them better. To these things we must add that which
Gregory the seventh wrote to Vratislaus, of Bobemia, just two hundred years
after, that he could not permit the celebration of divine Offices in the
Slauonian tongue, and that it was not a good excuse, to allege, that it was
not formerly prohibited. For the Primitive Church has dissembled many things,
which afterward, Christianity being established, upon exact examination,
have been corrected. And he commanded that Prince to oppose the people herein
with all his forces. Which things he that shall observe plainly, shall see
which were the ancient incorrupt institutions, and how corruptions began for
worldly respects and interests. For when men began to place heaven below the
earth, good institutions were published to be corruptions, only tolerated by
antiquity, and abuses, brought in afterward, were canonized for perfect
corrections.

But to return to the Decrees of the Council, that of the reformation
displeased many; considering, that in times past the Eccles^as^^call goods
belonged to the whole Church, that is, to all the Ch(...)ans of one
Congregation; the administration where of was commit^^d to the De^cons,
(...)cons, and other dispensers, with the superintendencie of the Bishops (...)
(...), to distribute them for the maintenance of Ministers, widows, sick, and
other poor persons, for education of children, in hospitality, (...)ing of
prisoners, and other workesofpi^ty. Notwithstanding, the Clergy, though
^^fitly, yet tolerably, began to desire to separate, and to know then part, and
to use it as they pleased (...) afterward the ab^^^s came to the ^^ight. For
the people was wholly excluded from all right in the goods, and the
Ecclesiasti^es being but administrators before, declared themselves to be (...)
of them, converting that to their own use, which was destinated for the poor,
for hospitality, schools, and other works of piety; whereof the world
having a long time complained, and demanded a remedy in va^ne, some Laiques
have, in some places, piously erected other hospitals, and Schools, etc. and
appointed Administrators of the Ea^ty. Now the world, in this age, demanding a
remedy more earnestly, that Hospitals, and Shooles etc. usurped by Pri^^sts,
may be restored, the Council, in stead of granting a demand s^ just, and
restoring Hospitals, Colleges, Schools, and other places of piety, as was
expected, has opened a way, in the eight^ and ninth Articles, to vs^^pe those
also which have been instituted since, by ordaining the superintendencie of
Bishops; which no man can doubt, but that as it has bin a means formerly to
divert goods destinated for good works, and to appropriate them to uses not
pious, so it will, in a very short time, produce the same effect again. The
Parliaments of France spoke much of this particular, and said plainly, the
Synod had exceeded their authority, meddling with the goods of Seculars, it
being clear, that the title of a pious work gives no right to a Priest,
that every Christian may apply his goods to what good work he pleases,
without giving the Clergy power to make laws therein, otherwise the Laity
would be in extreme seru(...), if they might do no good but what pleased the
Priests. Some con(...)d also the Article, by which power is obliquely given to
change w^^ls and (...)ments, by prescribing how and when they may be changed
it being plain, that Testaments have their strength from the Civil law, by
which only they may be changes And if any say that their strength is from
the law of nature the authority of Priests will be excluded the more, because
where that-law is dispensable, none can dispense but he that (...)eth the
higher place in the Common wea(...) or his ministers. But the Ministers of
CHRIST must remember that Saint Paul does allow them only the administration
of the Ministers of God. And (...) any Common wealth has given, at any time,
to their(...) any jurisdiction concerning Will^s, they are, (...) ^his not
spiritual Judges, and ought to receive laws herein, not from Councels, but
from that Majesty which governs the Republique, and d(...), not as ministers
of CHRIST, but as members of the Commonwealth; as they are called by diverse
names, and a (...) in public governments. But the fifth Article, in matter of
dispensations, was no less noted. For it is plain, that, in ancient times,
every dispensation was administered by the Pastors in their several Churches,
and that afterward in success the Popes reserved to themselves the most
principal things; which one might say was done, that the most important
matters might not be managed by insufficient persons, howsoever the reason
formerly alleged to the contrary by the Bishop of Five Churches seems very
strong. But now the Council decreeing that dispensations shall be committed
to the Ordinaries, to whom they should belong, if reseruations did cease, one
may demand to what end power is taken from any person, to be given to the
same again? It is plain that, by reserving dispensations, nothing was meant
in Rome, but only that their Bulls might be uttered; because this being
done, they think it better the work should be executed by him that should
have done it, if he had not been forbid, then by any other. Diverse other
oppositions were made, by those who more willingly censure the actions o^
others, when they proceed from eminent persons; which because they be of no
great moment, are not worthy of an history.

The Pope being advised of the holding of the Session, and of that which
happened in it, was very glad, as delivered from the fear he apprehended,
that, in the contention about the Cup, his authority would be drawn into
disputation; and because this way of composing differences, by referring them
unto him, was opened, he hoped the like might be done in the Article of
residence, or in any other that should be controuersed: by which means the
Council would be ended quickly. But he foresaw two causes which might cross
his desseigne; one, the coming of the Card. of Lorraine with the French
Bishops, which did much trouble him, especially in regard of the vast thoughts
of that Prelat, much contrary to the affairs of the The Pope plotteth to make
a mayor part in the Council.
Papacy, so incorporated in him, that he was not able to conceal them; for
which he saw no remedy, but by making the Italians so far exceed the
Vltramontans, that in their voices they should not pass for a considerable
number. Therefore he continually solicited all the Bishops, whether titular,
or others who had renounced, to go to Trent, offering to bear their charges,
and loading them with promises. He thought also to send a number of Abbats, as
had been done in some Councels. But being advised better, he thought it fit
not to show so much affection, nor to provoke others to do the like. He
feared another cross in regard of the purposes which he had discovered in all
Princes to hold the Council open with doing of nothing; in the Emperor, to
gratify the Dutchmen, and to gain their favor in the election of his son
to be King of the Romans; in the French King, to work his will with the same
men, and with the Hugonots. He considered much of the Congregation of the
Ambassadors, which seemed to be a Council of Seculars in the midst of that
of the Bishops; thinking that the Congregations of the Prelates would be
dangerous, without the presence and presidence of the Legates to keep them in
order, and therefore, that the Ambassadors much more, might handle things
prejudicial, and that there was danger if they continued, that they might
bring in some Prelate, in regard there were Ecclesiastiques amongst them, and
so use license, under the name of liberty. In this perplexity he conceived
hope, because he saw the greater part of the Ambassadors oppose the
propositions, and that none were combined but only the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and of the French King, who having no Prelates could prevail but
little. Notwithstanding he thought fit to solicit the conclusion of the
Council, and to cherish the division which he saw amongst the Ambassadors.
Therefore he wrote immediately that they should hold Congregations often, and
digest, and put in order the matters quickly. And because to give one thanks,
does oblige him to persevere, he commanded that the Ambassadors of Portugal,
and of the Suisses, and the Secretary of the Marquisse of Pescara, should be
commended, and heartily thanked, on his part, for refusing to consent with
others to an impertinent proposition. He caused thanks to be given to the
Venetians, and Florentine, for the good intention they showed in denying to
come to the Congregation, praying them not to refuse to come hereafter if they
were called, because he knew their presence would ever be serviceable to the
Apostolic Sea, and hinder the bad desseignes of others. Neither was his
Holiness deceived in his opinion. For it made them all say, that they had done
so, because in those times, the service of God did require that the Popes
authority should be defended, resolving to persevere in that resolution. And
they professed they were more obliged by the courteous thanks of his Holiness
for doing that, to which their duty did bind them.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
THe custom of those who write Histories is, The form of this History.
to propose, in the beginning, a model of what they mean to handle. Which I
have thought fit to defer until this place, making it an abstract of the
which is related already, and a desseigne of that which is to follow. Having
resolved to give to the memorials, which I had collected, some form, which
might not exceed my power, and yet best befit the matter, I considered, that,
of all the negotiations which have happened amongst Christians in this world, or
perhaps will happen hereafter, this is the most principal, and that most men
are desirous to know whatsoever does belong to that which they do esteem even
the least things of all. Therefore I thought first that the form of a Diarie
would best agree to this subject. But two oppositions did cross mine opinion:
One, that that form could not befit the occurrences of twenty nine years,
spent in making preparation for the birth of this Council, nor of the
fourteen years which passed while it slept, it not being known whether it
were alive or dead. Another, that all the matter which a continuate Diarie does
require, could not possibly be found. Therefore, fitting the form to the
matter, as nature does, not the matter to the form, as the Schools, I thought
it not absurd to write the preparatory and interconciliary times by way of
Annals, and in those of the celebration to make a Diarie of the occurrences of
those days, the knowledge whereof I was able to attain; hoping that whosoever
shall read this Treatise, will excuse the omission of those which could not be
known. For if of things, the entire memory of which those who have interest
do labor by all means to preserve, often times a great part is quickly lost,
how much more will it happen in this, which many men of great place, and exact
judgment, have used all diligence, amd spared no pains wholly to conceal. It
is true that matters of great weight ought to be held in a mystery, when it is
for the common good; but when it does damnifie one, and profit another, it is
no marvel if men who have contrary ends, do proceed in contrary courses. The
common and famous saying of the Lawyers is true, that his cause is more to be
favored who labors to avoid loss, then as who seeks gain. For these
causes this Treatise of mine is subject to some disequalitie of Narration; and
howbeit I might say, that as much might be found in some famous Writer, yet
this shall not be my defense; but this, that if others have avoided it, they
have not written the History of the Council of Trent, nor any other like unto
it.

The Ambassadors of France, so soon as the Session was ended, received The
petition, of the French Ambassadors.
letters from their King, that they should make instance for the deferring of
it. Wherefore though the time was past, they came to the Legates, and told them
they had a new commission from the King to make request, that they would labor
in the reformation, and, for points of doctrine, expect the coming of his
Prelates; adding that, if the matter of Order and Matrimony were disputed by
the Divines, and handled by the Prelates, no more points of doctrine would
remain, and the coming of the Frenchmen would be to no purpose. Wherefore
then request was, that they would be pleased to defer them until the end of
October, employing themselves, in the mean space, in the matter of
reformation, or one day in that, and another, in matter of doctrine, not
deferring as they had done, all the matter of reformation until the last days
immediately before the Session, so that there scarce remained time so much as to
see the Articles, much less to consult upon them. The Legates answered that
their propositions did desire to be weighed well, To which the Legates answered.
and that they would be careful to give them all possible satisfaction;
demanding a copy of their instructions, that they might resolve the better.
The Ambassadors gave them a writing, of this tenor: That the King having
seen the Decrees of the sixteenth of July, concerning the Communion Sub
vtraque, and deferring two Articles in the same matter, and those proposed in
the Congregations concerning the sacrifice of the Mass, howsoever he
commends that which is done, yet he cannot conceal that which is generally
spoken, that is, that the matter of discipline and manners is either quite
omitted, or slenderly handled, and the controuersed points in Religion, in
which all the Fathers do agree, hastily determined. Which although he
thinks to be false, yet he desires that the propositions of his
Ambassadors may be expounded, as necessary, to provide for the good of
Christendom, and the calamities of his Kingdom. And having found, by
experence, that neither severity nor moderation has been able to reduce those
who are separated from the Church, he thought fit to have recourse to the
General Council which he has obtained of the Pope; that he was sorry that
the tumults of France did hinder the coming of his Prelates; that he saw well
that the constancy and rigor, in continuing the form begun by the Legates
and Bishops, was not fit to reconcile peace, and make an unity in the Church;
that his desire was, that nothing might be done to aliene the minds of the
adversaries, now in the beginning of the Council, but that they may be
invited, and, in case they come, received as children with all humanity,
hoping that by this means, they will suffer themselves to be taught, and
brought back to the bosom of the Church. And because all that are in Trent
do profess the same Religion, and neither can nor will make doubt of any part
thereof, he thinks the disputation and censure in points of religion to be
not only superfluous, but impertinent for the Catholics, and a cause to
separate the adversaries the more. For he that thinks they will receive the
Decrees of the Council in which they have not assisted, does not know them
well; neither will any thing be done by this means, but arguments ministered
of writing more Books. Therefore the King thinks it better to omit the
matter of Religion, until the other of Reformation be well set in order: and
that this is the scope at which every one must aim, that the Council, which
now is great, and will be greater by the coming of the Frenchmen; may produce
fruit. Afterward the King demands, that in regard of the absence of his
Bishops, the next Session may be put off until the end of October, or the
publication of the Decrees deferred, or a new order expected from the Pope, to
whom he has written, laboring in the mean while in the matter of
Reformation. And because he understands that the ancient liberty of Councels
is not observed, that Kings and Princes, or their Ambassadors may declare the
necessities of their States, his Majesty demands that their authority may
be preserved, and all revoked which has been done to the contrary.

The same day the Emperors Ambassadors came to the Legates, requiring The
petition of the Emperors Ambassadors.
that the Articles sent by his Majesty, and presented by them, might be
proposed, and were very earnest that the points of doctrine might be deferred
until the coming of the Frenchmen; and, that the reformation may be
serviceable not only for the whole Church, but for the Church of every
particular Kingdom, their desire was that two of every Nation might be
deputed, to put them in mind of that which did deserve to be proposed, and
discussed in Council. The Legates made a common answer to them both, that they
could not alter, without great prejudice, the order set down, which was to
handle Doctrine and Reformation both together, and, if they should, that other
Princes would oppose; but, to content them, they would ordain that the Divines
and Prelates should examine the matter of Order only, and afterward handle
some points of Reformation, observing still the former use, that every one, of
what condition soever, may put them, the Legates, in mind, of what they think
necessary, profitable, or convenient; which is a greater liberty then to have
two deputed for every nation: and afterward they would treat of Matrimony.
The Ambassadors being not one jot contented, the Legates sent all their
demands to the Pope.

The Frenchmen complained to all men of this austeritie, and for that the Pope
had lately commanded other Prelates to go to the Council, that he might
exceed in number: which the Papalins themselves did not like should be done so
openly, and just when the news was spread of the coming of the Frenchmen;
desiring to be secured by a mayor part, yet so, as not to have it known for
what cause it was done. But the Pope did of set purpose proceed (...) openly,
that the Cardinal of Loraine might know that his attempts would be in vain,
and so resolve not to come, or that the Frenchmen might take some ^easion to
make the Council dissolve. Neither was the Pope o^^ly of (...)pinion, but all
the Court, fearing some great prejudice by the Cardinals desseignes; which
howsoever they might not succeed (a thing which they could scarce hope
hope(...)) yet his coming only would hinder, prolong, and disturb the
Council. Ferra^^ told Loraine, his kinseman, (...) his journey would be of no
moment; and of small reputation to himself, in regard he would arr^ue after
all was determined; and Biancheto, a familiar friend of the Cardinal of
Armignac, who also had credit with Loraine, (...) as much to them both; and the
Secretary of Seripando, who had (...)ritie (...) the President Ferrier, ^olde
him the same; all which was though too be do (...) by commission from the
Pope, or to please him, at the least.

But t^^ir care of the actions of the Council was not intermitted for all The
Articles of the Sacrament of Order.
this. For the Articles; concerning the Sacr^ment of Order, were presently
given forth, to be disputed by the Divines, the disputants elected, and
distinguished into four ranks, each of them being to di(...) two. For they
were eigh^. (...) Whether Order be truly and properly a Sacrament, instituted
by CHRIST, or an humane inventions or Rite, to elect Ministers of the word of
GOD, and of the Sao^^ments? (...) Whether Order be one Saorament only and all
others be means and degrees unto Priesthood? 3. Whether there be an
Hierarchy in the Catholic Church, consisting of Bishops, Priests, and other
Orders, or whether all Christians be Priests, or whether the vocation (...)
consent of the people or secular Magistrate be necessary, or whether a Priest
may become a Laicke? (...) Whether there be a visible and external Priesthood
in the new Testament, and a power to consecrate and offer the body and blood of
CHRIST, and to remit sins, or only the ba^e Ministry to preach the Gospel,
so that those who preach not are not Priests? (...) Whether the holy Ghost is
given and received in ordination, and a Character imprinted? 6. Whether
Unction, and other ceremonies, be necessary in consering Order; or superfluous,
or pernicious? (...) Whether Bishops be super(...) to Priests, and have
peculiar power to confirm and ordain, and whether those who are brought in by
any other means then Canonical ordination, are true Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments^ (...) W(...) the Bishops called and ordained by the Pope, be
lawful and (...) the those be true Bishops who come in by any other way then
Canonical institution? The (...) of the month the Congregations of the
Divines (...) ga^ and were held twice la day, and ended the second of October.
I will, according (...) use, ^^late those opinions only which are remarkable,
(...) there for singularity o^ (...) among themselves.

In the first Congregation four Dillines of the Pope spoke, who did all Are
disputed in the Congregations.
(...) in (...)ning that Order was a (...), by places of Scripture (...) ally
by that of S (...) The thing which (...) from God, are (...), then by the
^^adition of the Apo^^le, s^yings of the (...), v^^iso (...) (...) (...), and
above all, by the Council of Florence adding also this reason; that the Church
would be a confusion if there were not gouernnment and obedience. But Friar
Peter Soto was copious, in showing that there were seven Orders, and each
properly a Sacrament, and all instituted by CHRIST, saying, it was necessary to
make a declaration herein, because some Canonists; passing the limits of their
profession, have added two more, the first Tonsure, and the Bishopric; which
opinion may cause many other errors of greater importance. He likewise showed
at large, that CHRIST had, when he was on earth, exercised all these Orders,
one after another; all whose life as it was addressed to the last of these
Sacraments, so it is plain, that all the others serve only as a ladder, to
climb up to the highest, which is the Priesthood.

But Ierolamus Brauus, a Dominican Friar, having protested that he constantly
held that there were seven Orders, and each of them a Sacrament, and that the
use of the Church ought to be observed, to proceed from the inferior to the
superior, and so to the Priesthood, he added, that he was not of opinion that
so particular a declaration ought to be made, in regard of the difference
between the Divines, amongst which one can hardly find two of the same mind.
For which cause Caietan, in his old age, wrote, that he that collecteth the
things taught by the Doctors, and in the ancient and modern Pontificals,
will see a great confusion in all other Orders but Priesthood. The Master of
the Sentences maintained, that Sub-deaconship and inferior Orders, were
instituted by the Church, and the Scripture seemed to have instituted the
Deaconship, as a ministry of Tables, and not as one of the Altar. The
difference concerning inferior Orders in the old Pontificals, where that which
is in one is not in another, does show they are Sacramental, and not
Sacraments. And reason does lead us hereunto. For the actions which one
ordained does, may be done by one not ordained, and are of the same validity,
effect, and perfection. Saint Bonauenture also, though he thinks that all
seven are Sacraments, yet he holds two other opinions to be probable; one,
that only Priesthood is a Sacrament, and the inferiors, being employed about
corporal things, as to open doors, read Lessons, light Tapers, and the like,
do not seem to express any celestial matter, and are therefore only
dispositions to Priesthood. The second, that the three holy Orders are
Sacraments, and, concerning the common saying, that the inferior are degrees
to the superior, Saint Thomas affirms, that in the Primitive Church many
were ordained Priests immediately, without passing by the inferior Orders, and
that the Church did ordain that this passage should be made for humiliation
only. It appears plainly, in the Acts of the Apostles, that Saint Matthias
was immediately ordained an Apostle, and the seven Deacons did not pass by the
Subdeaconship, and the inferior Orders. Paulinus says of himself, that,
having a purpose to apply himself to the service of GOD in the Clergy, he
would, for humiliation, pass by all Ecclesiastical degrees, beginning from
the Ostiarie; but while he was thinking to begin, being yet a Laicke, the
multitude took him by force in Barcelona on Christmas day, carried him before
the Bishop, and caused him to be ordained Priest at the first; which would not
have been done if it had not been the use in those times. Therefore this
Brauus concluded, that the Synod ought not to pass beyond those things which
are agreed on by the Catholics, and that it was better to begin with the
Order of Priesthood, which would make a connection between this Session and the
last, which handled the Sacrifices, and to pass from Priesthood to Order in
general, not descending to any particularitie.

The Congregation being ended, and most of the Prelates departed, Five
Churches, with his Hungarians, and some Polonians, and Spaniards, tarried
behind; to whom he made a speech, and said, that the Emperor, being freed
from all suspicion of war; by the truce concluded with the Turk, took The
Bishop of Five Churches makes a speech concerning reformation.
nothing so much to the heart as the reformation of the Church; which would
surely be effected, if some of the Prelates in the Council would assist.
Therefore he exhorted and prayed them, for Gods sake, and for the charity
which every Christian owes to the Church, that they would not abandon so
honest, just, and profitable a cause, that every one would put down in writing
what he thought might be constituted for the service of God, without any
respect of man, not reforming one part, but the whole body of the Church, both
in the head and in the members. Granata did second him, showing the necessity
and opportunity thereof, thanking the Bishop of Five Churches for his
admonition, and said, they would consult amongst themselves. For this cause the
Spaniards, being assembled together, discoursed of And is seconded by the
Spaniards.
the necessity of reformation, and the hope thereof, in regard of the
Emperors inclination, from which their King also, who was most piously
addicted would not disseut, and the French Prelates, who would shortly be
there, would undoubtedly promote and assist the work, in earnest. They
repeated diverse abuses, and showed that the fountain of them all was the Court
of Rome, which is not only corrupt in it self, but the cause of deformation
in all Churches; and particularly the vsurpa^ion of the Episcopal authority,
by reseruations, which if it were not restored, and the Court deprived of that
which they have taken from Bishops, it would be impossible the abuses should
be redressed. Granata considered, that, it being necessary to lay a good
foundation for so noble a Fabrique, a way was open for them now that they were
to speak of the Sacrament of Order, if it be determined that the authority of
Bishops is instituted by CHRIST; because it will follow by consequence, that it
cannot be diminished; by which means that will be restored to the Bishops,
which having been given them by CHRIST, has by the ambition of others, and
their own negligence, been usurped from them. Braganza added, that it was so
much the more necessary, because the Episcopal authority was brought to
nothing, and the Order erected superior to Bishops, unknown to the Church in
former ages, that is, the Cardinals, who at the first, were esteemed in the
number of Priests, and Deacons, and, after the tenth age began to exalt
themselves above their degree. Notwithstanding they were still accounted
inferior to Bishops until the year 1200 since which time they have so far
advanced themselves, that they hold Bishops as servants in their houses, and it
will be impossible to reform the Church, until both of them be reduced to
their due places.

These propositions and discourses were heard with applause; so that they
resolved to elect six of them, to put in writing the things necessary and fit,
as well for the reformation in general, as particularly for this point of the
institution of Bishops, whence they purposed to begin, Oranata, Jasper
Cornante, Archbishop of Messina, the Bishop of Segouia, and Martin di Cardoua,
Bishop of Tortosa were named, the last of which was cause why the project did
not proceed. For, having secret intelligence with the Papalins, he excused
himself, alleging his own insufficiency; and the unfitness of the time,
adding that Five Churches was not moved with piety, and had no other end then
to make use of them, to constrain the Pope, by means of the reformation, to
grant the use of the Cup, wherein they had been auerse. And seeing they were
disposed to hear him, he prevailed so much with them that they passed no
further for the present, but interposed a delay. Notwithstanding it was not
long deferred. For Granata, Braganza, Messina, and Segouia, having obtained
audience of the Legates, desired that they might handle the Articles proposed
heretofore by Cardinal Crescentius in this same Council, and concluded,
though not published, that is, that the Bishops are instituted by CHRIST, and
are superior to Priests iure diuino. The Legates, after they had conferred
together, answered, that the Lutherans having affirmed that a Bishop and a
Priest is the samething, it was fit to declare that a Bishop is superior, but
that it was not necessary to say quo iure, nor by whom a Bishop is instituted,
because there is no controversy of it. Granata replied that there was a
controversy, and that if the Divines did dispute it, the necessity of deciding
this point would be known. The Legates would not consent by any means; and,
after some few sharp words on both sides, the Spaniards departed without
having obtained any thing; yet resolved still to persuade some of the Divines
to bring this particular into The Legates will not sulter the inst^tution of
Bishops to be discussed.
the discussions, and to make mention of it when they were to give voices in
congregation. But the Papalins, understanding hereof, did cause it to be voyced
amongst the Divines, that the Legates did forbid all speech of that question.

But to return to the congregation, when the second rank spoke, consisting of
Divines and Canonists, Thomas Passius, a Canon of Valentia, said, that all
doubt made of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, did proceed from gross
ignorance of antiquity, it being a thing most known that in the Church the
people has always been governed by the Clergy, and, in the Clergy, the
inferiors by the superiors, until all be reduced unto one universal Rector,
which is the Pope of Rome. And having declared the proposition at large, he
added that there was no need to do any thing herein, but to make this truth
appear, by remoouing the contrary errors, which have bin brought in by the
Schoolmen, who sometimes, by too much subtlety, do make plain things
obscure, opposing the Canonists, who place the first tonsure, and the
Bishopric in the number of Orders. Of the latter he said, it seemed strange
to him, how they could confess, that confirmation, ordination, and so many
other consecrations do so peculiarly belong unto it, that they cannot possibly
be done by any else, and yet deny it to be an Order, when as they give that
name to the keeping of the door, which may as well be done by a Layman. For
the first tonsure, he has ever heard the Divines say, that a Sacrament is an
external sign which signifies a spiritual grace, and that the tonsure is
the sign, and the thing signified is the deputation to the service of God; and
therefore he wondered why they would not have it to be a Sacrament, and the
rather, because one enters into the Clergy by it, and does participate of
Ecclesiastical exemptions; so that, if it were not instituted by CHRIST, it
could not be said, that either Clergiship, or the exemption thereof were de
iure Diuino; that it was plain that the Hierarchy consists in the
Ecclesiastical Orders, which is nothing but an holy order of superiors and
inferiors, which can never be well established without making, as the
Canonists Of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.
do, the Tonsure the lowest, and the Bishopric the highest; which being done
the Hierarchy is all established, because the first and last being given,
those of the middle will necessarily follow, which cannot subsist without the
former.

Concerning the other part of the Article, they said, it was very plain by the
Canons, that in the choice of Bishops and deputation of Priests, and Deacons,
the people of al sorts was present, and gave voice or approbation, but this was
by the Popes tacit or express consent; because no Laicke can have authority in
matters Ecclesiastical, but by privilege from him. And this was granted in
those times, because the common people, and Grandies also, were devout, and
did, by this means, entertain themselves in spiritual things, and showed more
obedience and reverence to the Clergy, being more ready to enrich it with
oblations and donations, which has made the holy Church to be in that state in
which it now is. But since devotion did cease, the seculars have armed only at
the usurpation of the Church goods, and to place their adherents in the
Clergy. And now the new Heretics have made a deuilish invention, saying, that
was due to the people which was granted by favor which is one of the most
pestiferous heresies which has ever bin set on foot, because it does destroy
the Church, without which faith cannot stand. He alleged many reasons and
congruities, to show that the ordination ought to be in the power only of the
Ordainer, which he confirmed by the Popes Decretals and concluded in the end,
that not only the Article was to be condemned as heretical, but that, the
voice and consent of the people in ordinations being taken away, for just and
necessary reasons, the Pontifical also ought to be corrected, and those places
removed which make mention thereof; because, so long as they continue there,
the heretics will make use of them, to prove that the assistance of the people
is necessary. He said the places were many; but to recite one, in the
ordination of Priests, the Bishop ordaining says, that it has been
constituted by the Fathers, not without cause, that the people should have
voice in the ordination of the Rectors of the altar, that they may be obedient
to him whom they have ordained, in regard of their consenting to his
ordination. If this, and other Rites shall remain, the heretics will always
detract from the Catholic Church, saying the ordinations now are but shadows
and shows, as Luther did wickedly say.

Francis Forrier, a Dominican of Portugal, said the Hierarchy of the Catholic
Church, could not be doubted of, it being proved by the Apostolical tradition,
by testimony of all antiquity, and by the continual use of the Church. And
howsoever the word be not used by all, yet the thing signified has ever been
in practice. Dionysius Areopagita has made a proper treatise of it, and the
Nicen Council has approved it, and called it an ancient custom: and that
which has been called ancient in the beginning of the fourth age, must needs
have its original from the time of the Apostles. Only he thought it not fit
to handle this point jointly with the Sacrament of Order, howsoever many of the
Schoolmen do handle it in that place, putting the Hierarchy in the
superior and inferior Orders; a thing which cannot subsist, it being certain
that the Pope is the highest Hierarch, and that the Cardinals do follow, and
then the Patriarchs, Primats, Archbishops, Bishops, Arch-Priests,
Archdeacons, and other inferior degrees under the Pope, as Head. And to omit
the disputation whether the Bishopric be an Order, it is certain that the
Arch-bishoprike, Patriarkship, and Papacy are not Orders, and do signify
only superiority and jurisdiction over Bishops. Therefore the Hierarchy
consists in jurisdiction, and the Council of Nice places it in that, when it
speaks of the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. Therefore the handling
of Hierarchy must not be joined with that of Order, for fear of giving way to
calumny.

There was much variety in the discussion of these Articles, those of the
second rank returning to the former, and some disputing that the degree of a
Bishop was an Order, and others, that above Priesthood, there was nothing but
Jurisdiction, some alleging Saint Thomas, and some Saint Bonauenture, and
some being of a middle opinion, that is, that it is an eminent dignity, or
office in the Order. The famous saying of Saint Hierom, and the authority of
Saint Austin were alleged, who say that the degree of a Bishop has been
most ancient, but yet an Ecclesiastical Constitution. Michael of Medina did
oppose, and say, that the Catholic Church, as Saint Epiphanius says, did
condemn Aerius of heresy, for saying that the Degree of a Bishop is no
greater then that of a Priest: into which heresy it is no wonder if Hierom,
Austin, and some other of the Fathers did fall, because the matter was not
clear in all points. This boldness, to say that Hierom and Austin did savor
of heresy, gave great scandal; but he insisted the more upon it, and
maintained his position. And the Doctors were equally divided into two opinions
in this point.

Others placed this Hierarchy in Orders only, alleging Dyonisius, who in
naming the Hierarchs, makes mention of none but of Deacons, Priests, and
Bishops. Some followed Forrier, that it did consist in Jurisdiction. At the
last a third opinion came forth, that it was a mixture of both, which
afterward was more generally approved. For placing it in Order, it did not
appear how Archbishops, Patriarchs, and, which is of more importance, the
Pope himself could enter, all being of accord that these Degrees are not
Orders above the Degree of a Bishop. Yet some did allege the common saying to
the contrary, that the Episcopal Order is divided into four parts, Bishops,
Archbishops, Patriarchs, and the Pope: and placing it in Jurisdiction, none of
the holy Orders did enter.

There was a great disputation amongst them about the form of the The form of
the Hierarchy
Hierarchy; some saying it was Charity, some Faith informed, and others,
according to Cardinal Turrecremata, Unity. To this last was opposed that
unity is a genericall quality in all that is one, and is an effect of the
form which does produce it. Those who were for charity brought very many
places of the Fathers, which do attribute the unity of the Church unto it.
But others said that it was the heresy of Wigles. For, if it were so, a
Prelate, loosing charity, would be out of the Hierarchy, and lose authority.
Notwithstanding they did not avoid the difficulty, by making faith informed to
be the form, because a Prelate might externally counterfeit, and be secretly
unfaithful, who not being of the Hierarchy, the Christian people could not
know whom to obey, because they might doubt of all, and sometimes had cause to
do it. And as the Divines, especially the Friars are free in exemplifications,
they alleged the Pope, saying, that, in case he should be incredulous, the
whole Hierarchy would perish by his default, whether one did make faith or
charity to be the form. And therefore they said, Baptism was. But the same
difficulties did arise in regard of the uncertainty thereof, because the
intention of the Minister, according to the determination of the Council, is
essentially required, which is more secret then the other two: for which cause
it cannot be certainly affirmed of any that he is baptized.

The Articles, whether there be a visible Priesthood? or whether all
Christians be Priests? or whether a Priest may become a Layman? or whether his
office be preaching? were not handled with any discussion, but with
declamations against the Lutherans, who deprive the Ghurch of commerce with
GOD, and of the means to appease him, making it a confusion without
government, and bereauing her of all her beauty and comeliness. Friar
Adamantius, of Florence, a Divine of this rank, belonging to Cardinal
Madruccio, said, that the greatest part of those who had spoken, had alleged
only probable reasons, and conueniencies, which when Articles of faith are
discussed, do not only not force the adversaries, but confirm them more in
their opinions; and, for proof hereof he brought a direct place of Saint
Austin. He added that discussions in Council should differ from disputations
in Schools. For in those how much the more things are minced, and curiously
handled, the better it is; but it does not become a Council to examine any
thing, but that which may be cleared and made plain. Notwithstanding many
questions were disputed, the knowledge whereof cannot in this life (in which
GOD does not suffer all to be discovered) possibly be attained. For this
Article, it is abundantly sufficient that the Church has an Hierarchy; that
the Hierarchy consists of Prelates and Ministers, that these are ordained by
Bishops, that Order is a Sacrament, and that Seculars have no part herein.
Petrus Romirius, a Franciscane Friar, following the doctrine of John Scot,
said, that Order ought not to be called a Sacrament, because it is invisible
and permanent, whereas all the Sacraments are necessarily visible, and (except
the Eucharist) consist in action. Therefore to avoid all difficulties, one
must not say that Order, but that Ordination is a Sacrament. But he was much
opposed, because all the Divines, and (which is of no less importance) the
Council of Florence also do call Order a Sacrament. And it would be a great
boldness to tax all the Doctors, a general Council, and the whole Church
for speaking improperly.

In the third rank, there was no less variety of opinions concerning the Of
the holy Ghost given in Ordination
fifth Article. For howsoever all agreed that the holy Ghost is given and
received in Ordination, yet some said, he was given in his proper person, and
others, in the gift of grace only. They disputed much on both sides, but those
especially who affirmed grace. Another question was, whether grace of
Justification be conferred, or only a gift to exercise the office. For the
former was alleged, that all the Sacraments give grace of Justification; for
the later, that a man cannot without repentance receive grace, and yet may
receive Order. For the Character, as they all agreed that it is imprinted in Of
the Character.
Priesthood, so they dissented in all the rest. For some said it was imprinted
in the holy Orders only, and others in all the seven; both which opinions
Saint Bonauenture does think to be probable. Some were better pleased with
the distinction of Durandus, that understanding, by Character, a power to work
a Spiritual effect, the Priesthood only has it, which only can consecrate,
and remit sins; and the others have it not, in regard their actions are
corporal, which a Layman, without any the least venial sin, may do as
well as they. But if by Character be understood a deputation to a special
office, so all the Orders have a proper Character. Others opposed that it was a
Lutherane opinion, contained in the first Article, and said, that therefore it
was necessary to affirm a proper and indeleble Character in all. And some said
it was in the first Tonsure also, because it was not reiterated in those who
are degraded, as would be necessary if a Character were not imprinted; and
because, by it, one is invested in the Clergy, and made partaker of
Eclesiastical exemptions, and immunities. Neither would it be possible to
maintain that Clerkeship, and the immunities thereof were de iure Diuino, but
by saying, that the first Tonsure is a Divine institution. Concerning the
degree of Bishops the controversy was greater, and the question was revived
whether it be one of the Orders. For having two properactions so famous, to
confirm, and ordain, a Spiritual power is necessary to it, which is a
Character, without which ordination and confirmation would be to no purpose.
The auditors were weary with hearing so many difficulties, and did willingly
give ear to those who said they ought to omit them, and speak only in
general terms. But the Friars grumbled, and were angry to see in them a
disposition to define Articles, and pronounce Anathemaes, not understanding the
points, and abhorring those who would inform them.

In the sixth Article they all condemned the Lutherans, for detracting from
unctions, and ceremonies used in conferring Orders. Some desired that those
which are necessary, and belong to the substance of the Sacrament (as was done
in the Council of Florence) might be distinguished from the rest, and him
declared to be an heretic, who should say that Order might be given or
received without them; and for the others, that he should be condemned in
general terms, who did call them pernicious. Hereupon a great contention
arose which were necessary, and which were added for ornament, or devotion.
Melchior Cornelius, a Portugal, seemed to speak What ceremonies be necessary
(...)ferring Orders
much to the purpose; who said, the Apostles did undoubtedly use imposition of
hands in Ordination, so that none is mentioned in the holy Scripture without
that ceremony; which, in succeeding ages, was thought to be so essential, that
Ordination was called by that name. Notwithstanding, Gregory the ninth says,
it was a rite brought in, and many Divines do not hold it to be necessary,
howsoever others be of the contrary opinion. It appears also by the
Decretall of Innocentius the third in this point, that unction was not used in
all Churches. And the famous Canonists, Hostiensis, Johannes Andreas, Abbas,
and others do affirm, that the Pope may ordain a Priest with these words
only, Be thou a Priest, and (which is of more importance) Innocentius, Father
of all the Canonists, says; that if the forms had not been invented, it had
been sufficient if the Ordainer had used these words only, Be thou a Priest,
or others equivalent, because they were instituted by the Church afterward to
be observed. For these reasons Cornelius gave counsel not to speak of
necessary Ceremonies, but only to condemn those who hold them to be
superfluous, or pernicious.

Although the Congregations of the Divines did take up almost all the time, yet
the Prelates did more intend, and discourse amongst themselves of reformation,
some promoting, and some declining it, then of the points of doctrine discussed
by the Theologues; so that the frequent and public speeches which were heard
throughout all Trent, cherished by the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and French
King, induced the Legates to think it necessary to make show they were not
auerse from it; especially because they had promised to propose it so soon as
the matter of Order was discussed, and understood, that a discourse of the
Ambassador Lansac was received with The Legates are much trobled with the
speeches that pasted concerning Reformation.
great applause made in an assembly of many Ambassadors and Prelates, in which
he concluded that if the reformation, proposed and demanded by the Emperor,
was so feared and abhorred, yet, at the least, a way ought to be found out
without making new constitutions, to cause those things which have been
established in ancient Councels to be observed, by remoouing the impediments
which do nourish the abuses. The Legates caused the propositions of the
Imperialists, and all the instances made unto them in matter of reformation
until that day, and their own answers to be put together, and an abstract to
be made of the Constitutions of the Assembly in France, and of the demands of
the Spanish Prelates: all which they sent to the Pope, and told him it was
impossible to entertain them any more with And send to (...) the Pope.
words, and that it was necessary to show the world by some effect, that they
have a purpose to handle this matter, and to give satisfaction in some sort to
the Ambassdours of Princes, especially in that which they desire for the
interest of their Countries; yet with such circumspection as that they may not
prejudice the Papal authority, or prerogatives of the Church of Rome.

The Pope seeing the instruction of the French King, which did import the
prolonging of the Council, was much displeased. For he had conceived hope,
that all which did remain to be discussed, might be defined in the next
Session of the 12. of November, or if not, yet that the Council would be
concluded, suspended or dissolved in the end of the year, at the latest. He
therefore answered the French Ambassador residing with him (who desired the
points of doctrine might be deferred until the coming of their Prelates, and
the matter of reformation handled in the mean time) that he was informed that
the Cardinal of Loraine meant to tarry until the surprise of Burges, and to
attend the King to Orlience, so that his departure out of France would be very
late, and perhaps never, and that it was not just to entertain so many
Prelates in Trent, upon disseignes so remote, that the demands for delay were
not made, because the Frenchmen desired to go to the Council, but to put
himself and the Prelates to more charges, protesting, that, if his money were
consumed by this means, he should not be able to continue in assisting the
King. He made it a greater matter, that their Prelates had been expected
eighteen months, and himself lead along with diverse frivolous excuses. He
complained of his condition, that if the Council uses any respect toward
him, which it does but seldom, the Ambassadors, there present, say it is not
free, and yet themselves to desire him to ordain a dilation, which is a thing
more unjust, and more abhorred by the Fathers then any other. His conclusion
was, that when he had assurance or likelihood of their coming, he would
endeavor that they should be expected, saying, he had given order to be
advertised, by an express Currier, of the Cardinals departure, that he might
presently employ himself in the business, and, in the mean while, he
thought it not just that the Fathers should be idle. He said the matter of
reformation was more fit to be deferred then this of doctrine which does not
concern him, as being a good Catholic, who will undoubtedly not dissent from
others. But in matter of reformation it is fit to hear him, because it does
concern him, as being a second Pope, having many Benefices, and a revenue of
three hundred thousand Crowns of Church livings, whereas himself has but one
Benefice, wherewith he is content; that notwithstanding he had reformed
himself, and all parts of the Court, to the hinderance and loss of many of
his officers, and would do more, but that he saw plainly, that, by diminishing
his revenues, and by weakening the forces and the sinews of his Stae; he
encourages the adversaries, and exposes all Catholics, who are under his
protection, to the injuries of his enemies. And, for the Countries which are
not subject to him in temporal matters, he said the overthrow of discipline
did arise from themselves, and from the Kings and Princes, who, with unfit and
importunate requests, do force him to make extraordinary provisions, and
grant unusual dispensations; that his condition was miserable, who if he did
deny unfit requests made unto him, every one complained of the injury, if he
granted them, all the inconvenience ensuing was ascribed unto him, and men
began to speak of reformation, as the Kings Ambassadors had done in Trent, in
such general terms, that it cannot be understood what they mean. He said,
let them come to particulars, and say what they would have reformed in the
Kingdom, and they shall have satisfaction in four days; that the Prelates in
Poisi, have made many constitutions, which he will confirm when he shall be
requested: but to stand upon universalities only, and to find fault with all
that is done, without proposing any thing, shows they bear no good affection.

The fourth rank of Theologues remained, who were to handle the superiority
The superiority of Bishops above Priests.
of Bishops above Priests. Those who spoke first followed the doctrine of Saint
Thomas and Bonauenture, who say a Priest has two powers, one to consecrate the
Body and Blood of CHRIST, and the other to remit sins, in the former whereof a
Priest is equal, in regard a Bishop has not greater authority then a simple
Priest, but inferior in the later, because not the power only of Order, but of
jurisdiction also is required. Others added that it was a more excellent action
to give authority to consecrate, then to consecrate, and therefore that the
Bishop was superior in this also, who cannot only do it himself, but ordain
Priests, and give them authority. But this being disputed sufficiently, they
returned to handle the Articles of the Hierarchy, as being the same with this
point of superiority; and the question being whether it does consist in Order,
jurisdiction, or in both, Antonius of Mont. Alcino, a Franciscan, said, it
ought not to be understood of an imaginary superiority, consisting in
preeminence, or perfection of action, but in superiority of government, so
that it may make laws, give commands, and judge causes, as well in the Court
of Conscience, as in the external; which superiority is to be discussed,
because it is denied by the Lutherans. He said there must be an authority in
the Church to govern it, the unity whereof could not otherwise be preserved.
He proved it by the example of Bees, and Cranes, saying, that in enery
particular Church a special authority was necessary to govern it, which was
in the Bishops, who have part of the charge, the totality whereof is in the
Pope as Head of the Church; which containing authority to judge, and to make
Processes and Laws, it must needs be a power of jurisdiction. Concerning
Order, he said a Bishop was of an higher degree then a Priest, having all the
power of him, and two powers more; yet notwithstanding cannot be called his
superior; as a Subdeacon is four degrees higher then a doore-keeper, yet not
superior unto him. He proved this his opinion by the general use of the
whole Church, and all Christian Nations, and alleged diverse authorities out
of the Fathers. Finally, he came to the holy Scripture, citing many places of
the Prophets, to show that this authority is called the authority of a Pastor,
saying, that the universality of it was given to S. Peter, when CHRIST said,
Feed my Lambs, and some of it imparted by Peter to the Bishops, when he bad
them, Feed the flock which they have in their custody. And this opinion had
great applause.

But before those of this fourth rank made an end of speaking, the Spanish
Prelates resolving the point should be handled whether Bishops are instituted
by CHRIST, after they had consulted together, did conclude that it was better
the first motion should begin in the Congregations of the Divines, that
themselves might with more show of reason, resuming the things spoken before,
discourse upon them, and compel others to do the like. Therefore, in the
Congregation of the first of October, Michael Oroncuspe, a Divine of the Bishop
of Pampelona, said to the seventh, that being to qualify or condemn a
proposition which has many significations, it was necessary to distinguish
them, and afterward to examine them one by one: and he thought the
proposition whether Bishops be superior to Priests to be such. For one must
distinguish whether they be superiors de facto, or de iure. That they are
superiors de facto it cannot be doubted, because present experience, and the
Histories of many ages do show, that Bishops have exercised superiority and
Priests obedience. Therefore this Article being without question, the other, de
iure, remains to be discussed. Wherein there is another ambiguitie also,
whether Iure Pontificio, or Divine. In the first sense the case is clear, that
they are superiors, there being so many Decretals which say it expressly:
which howsoever it be true and certain, yet the Lutherans are not in this
regard to be condemned for heretics, because that cannot be an article of
faith which is grounded only upon the law of man, and deserve to be condemned
for denying the superiority of Bishops, only in case it be d^iure Diuino. He
added that he thought this point very clear, and that he could evidently
prove it, and resolve anything alleged to the contrary, saying he must not
proceed further, being prohibited to speak of it. And here he showed that the
Ministry of Confirmation and Ordination is proper to Bishops. And having
spoken upon the eighth Article, in conformity of the others, he ended his
discourse.

Johannes Fonseca, a Divine of the Archbishop of Granata, followed; who The
institution of Bishops is discussed.
entered bravely upon the matter, saying, it neither was, nor could be forbidden
to speak of it. For the Article being proposed to be discussed, whether it be
heretical or no, it is necessary to understand whether it be against faith,
against which it cannot be, if it do not repugne to the Law of GOD. He said
he knew not whence the report came, that one might not speak of it, because,
by the very proposition of the Article, it was commanded to be discussed. And
here he proceeded to handle, not the superiority alone, but the institution
also affirming that Bishops are instituted by CHRIST, and by his divine
ordination, superiors to Priests. He said, that if the Pope be instituted by
CHRIST, because he has said to Peter, I will give thee the keys of the
Kingdom, and, Feed my Lambs; Bishops are likewise instituted by him, because
he has said to all the Apostles, That which you bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven, and whose sins you remit they are remitted, saying to them
afterward, Go into the whole world, and preach the Gospel. And (which is
more) he said unto them, As my father has sent me, so I send you. And if the
Pope be successor of S. Peter, the Bishops are successors of the Apostles;
alleging many authorities out of the Fathers, that the Bishops are
successors of the Apostles. And, in particular, he recited a long discourse of
S. Bernard in this point to Eugenius the Pope; and a place of the Acts of the
Apostles, where S. Paul says to the Ephesians, that they were made Bishops by
the holy Ghost to govern the Church of GOD. He added, that to be confirmed
or created by the Pope, did not conclude that they were not instituted by
CHRIST, or had not authority from him. For the Pope himself is created by the
Cardinals, and yet has his authority from CHRIST: and Priests are created by
the Bishop, who does ordain them; but receive their authority from GOD: So
the Bishops receive the Diocese from the Pope, and authority from CHRIST.
Their superiority over Priests he proved to be iure diuino, by authority of
many Fathers, who say that Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and Priests the
seventy two disciples. Concerning other particles of this point, he said the
same things which others had spoken before, Cardinal Simoneta was impatient,
and turned often to his Colleagues, and was about Which vexes Cardinal
Simoneta.
to interrupt the discourse: but being entered into upon so good reason, and
heard by the Prelates with such attention, he knew not how to resolve.

After him followed Antonius Grossetus, a Dominican Friar, who, having briefly
passed over the other articles, insisted upon this. He stood much upon the
words of Saint Paul spoken to the Ephesians in Miletum, exhorting them to have
a care of the flock; over which the holy Ghost had made them overseers: upon
which place he made many observations. He said it was first necessary to
declare that Bishops have not commission for their office from men, for so they
would be hirelings, to whom the Lambs do not belong, because the man, who had
committed the care unto them, being satisfied, they had no more to think on.
But Saint Paul shows that the commission to govern the people of GOD is
divine, given by the holy Ghost, to conclude that they could not be excused by
any dispensation of man. He alleged the famous passage of Saint Cyprian, that
every Bishop is bound to give an account of CHRIST only. Then he added that
the Bishops of Ephesus were not of those who were instituted by CHRIST our
LORD, while he was in the flesh, but by Saint Paul or some other Apostle, or
disciple; yet no mention is made of the ordainer, but all is attributed to the
holy Ghost, who has not given authority to govern, but divided a part of the
flock, and consigned it to be fed. And here he made an inuectiue against
those, who a few days before, said, that the Pope does disturb the flock,
inculcating that it was not well spoken, and that it would bring again into
use that which Saint Paul did detest; I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo. He said
the Pope was the ministerial Head of the Church, by whom CHRIST, the
principal Head does work, unto whom also the work ought to be ascribed,
saying according to Saint Paul, that the holy Ghost does give the flock to be
governed. For the work is never ascribed to the instrument or minister, but to
the principal Agent; that this form of speech has always been used by the
Ancients, that GOD and CHRIST do provide the Church of governors; that Saint
Paul wrote to the Ephesians, that CHRIST, ascending to heaven, has furnished
the Church with Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Masters, showing plainly
that he did provide Pastors after he was ascended into heaven, and that the
institution of Pastors and Masters, in which number Bishops are, ought as much
to be ascribed unto CHRIST, as unto the Apostles and Evangelists themselves.
The Theologue perceived that he displeased the Legates, and some more besides;
and fearing some bad Antonius Grossetus excuses himself.
encounter, as had happened upon other occasions, he added that he had spoken
without premeditation, being carried along by consequence of words; and heat
of discourse, not remembering that that point was forbidden to be spoken of. And
entering again to examine the proper offices of Bishops, and contradicting the
Lutherans, who hold them for superfluous, showing they have been very ancient
in the Church, and come from Apostolical tradition, he concluded. The Legates
did perceive that this was the art of Granata, and the other Spaniards, to
give the Prelates a field to enlarge themselves in this matter. Therefore they
took order that the contrary opinion should be defended by some of the four
Prelates, who only remained to speak the next day; and the Popes Prelates,
used to this art, were prepared to contradict the Spanish Bishops, if they had
begun to speak of this matter in the Congregations.

The next day, the second of October, two Divines went about to prove, that as
the superiority of Bishops was certain, so it was hard to be decided quo
iure, and in case it were, would be of no fruit; and therefore was to be
omitted. Two others maintained, that it was de iure Pontificio. And Friar
Simon, a Florentine, and a Divine of Seripando, discoursed, according to the
opinion of Caietanus and Catharinus, in this form, that Bishops are instituted
by CHRIST, to govern the Church; that his Majesty did create Bishops all the
Apostles, when he said, I send you, as I have been sent by the Father; that
this institution was personal, and ended with them; that one of them was
constituted, to remain perpetually in the Church, which was Peter, when he
said, not to him alone, but to all his succession, Feed my lambs; that Saint
Austin did mean so when he said, that Peter did represent the whole Church,
which was never spoken of any of the other Apostles; that Saint Cyprian said
that Saint Peter is not only a Type and figure of the unity, but that the
unity does begin from him. In this power, given only to Peter and his
successors, the care of governing the Church is contained, and of ordaining
other Rectors and Pastors, not as Delegates, but as Ordinaries, dividing
particular Provinces, Cities, and Churches. Therefore when it is demanded,
whether any Bishop be de iure diuino, one must answer affirmatively, One
only, the successor of Peter. Besides, the degree of a Bishop is de iure
diuino, so that the Pope cannot take order that there may be no Bishops in the
Church, but every particular Bishop is De iure Pontificio. Whence it comes
that he may create and translate them, diminish or enlarge their Dioces, give
them more or less authority, suspend them also and deprive them; which he
cannot do in that which is de iure diuino. For from a Priest, he cannot take
away authority to consecrate, because he has it from CHRIST, but may take
jurisdiction from a Bishop, because he has it from himself. And thus the
famous saying of Cyprian must be expounded; there is but one Bishopric, and
every Bishop holds a part thereof in solidum; otherwise, it cannot be
defended that the government of the Church, is the most perfect of all, that
is Monarchical, and must necessarily fall into an Holigarchie, which is the
most imperfect, and condemned by all those who write of government. He
concluded, that quo iure Bishops are instituted, by the same they are superior
to Priests, and that, when this matter is to be discussed, the declaration is
to be made thus. He alleged Saint Thomas, who says, in many places, that
every spiritual power depends on that of the Pope, and that every Bishop
ought to say, I have received part of that fullness. He said that the old
schoolmen were not to be regarded, because none of them had handled this
matter; but the Modernes, having after that the heresy of the Waldenses arose,
studied the Scripture and the Fathers, have established this truth. The last
Divine labored to contradict him, in that he said the Apostles were ordained
Bishops, saying, when he sent them, as himself was sent by the Father, that he
sent them to preach, and to baptize, which belongs not to a Bishop, but to a
Priest, and that only Peter was ordained a Bishop by CHRIST, who after the
ascension, ordained the other Apostles Bishops. Concerning the other parts of
this Article, and the next, they all agreed to comdemne them. And so the
Congregations of the Theologues were concluded.

After which the Legates, being obliged to propose the reformation,
considering with themselves what particulars might be proposed not
prejudicial, and yet might give satisfaction, were much troubled. For that
which would be grateful to the Ambassadors, would damnifie the Court, and
distaste the Bishops, neither could they meddle with any thing that would please
the Bishops, which would not be prejudicial to Rome, or the The Legates
demand of the Pope by letters what they shall do concerning the reformation.
Princes. Their resolution was to dispatch a Currier to the Pope, and expect an
answer, and in the mean time, to draw the business in length, by making the
Prelates speak in the matter of Order. In particular, they gave his Holiness
an account of the contention which they did foresee, concerning the Article of
the superiority of Bishops, in regard of the petition made by the ^panish
Prelates, and the entrance made by their Divines. And howsoever they knew not
their end, yet, observing how earnest their request was, and knowing how the
Spaniards do usually aim at things far off, they could not choose but
suspect. They put him in mind that this was the time in which they promised to
speak of residence; whereof some motion was made already. For the Archbishop
of Mesina demanded of those of Cyprus, and Zara, what their opinion would be,
in case it were proposed, and many practices were discovered, though they were
not able to penetrate the ground of them. That they gave order to Otranto and
Ventimiglia, to learn cunningly of what opinion the Prelates would be in case
they proposed to refer it to his Holiness; who, having sounded them exactly,
found that 60 would be rigidly opposite, of whom there was but small hope that
they could possibly be persuaded. For howsoever the Secretary of the Marquisse
had, at their instance, dealt effectually with the Spaniards, yet he brought
from them no more then this, that they would not oppose with bitterness but
deliver their opinions quietly, and without clamor. That they knew the mayor
part were of the contrary opinion, because they depend on Rome; but they ought
to disburden their conscience. That they were assured that this was not
contrary to his Holiness, of whose religious and godly disposition they could
not doubt, but unto the Bishops only who are about him. They added, that the
Spaniards, having discovered that there was a purpose to remit the business to
his Holiness, said the same was done in the matter of the Chalice, and that it
was in vain to hold a Council to handle that which was of no importance, and
to refer that which deserves provision. They advised him of the promise made
to the Ambassadors, to propose the reformation, and of the impossibility to
defer it any longer, and being advertised of the coming of Loraine, and the
Frenchmen, and understanding that they were full of conceits, and designs of
nouitie, they concluded that they would undoubtedly join with the mal-contents
of Trent. Therefore not knowing, in these ambiguities, what course to take,
they told him they had resolved to expect the commandments of his Holiness.

The Pope being advised, at the same time, from other places of the proiects
With whose aduertiseme^ts and others his Holiness is much troubled.
of Loraine, and particularly, that he would reform the election of the
Popedom, that the Vltramontans might also be partakers of it, it pierced
deeply into his mind. Therefore resolving not to expect the blow, but to
prevent, he informed all the Italian Princes hereof, showing them what a
dishonor it would be to the Nation, if it should succeed; that he spoke not
for himself, whom it did not concern, but for public respects, and for the
love of his Country. And knowing that a Spanish Pope could not be acceptable
to the King of Spain, in regard of the natural propension that Clergy has,
to free themselves from the exactions of the King, and that a French man would
have pleased him less because of the enmity between the Nations, and that the
greatest part of his trusty friends were in Italy, he wrote unto his Nuncio,
to communicate unto him the design of the French men, to make a Pope of their
Nation, that, by his means, they may possess Naples and Milan, to which they
pretend right. And, not to be wanting on his part, that he might remove some
of the foundations, on which the Cardinal might build, which were the abuses of
the times past, lately revived, he made a Bull in this matter; which howsoever
it contained only the provisions formerly made by diverse Popes, which were
antiquated; yet it might be said there was no need of more reformation in
that behalf, because the Bull did remedy all the inconveniences which
happened, or, at the least, took all strength from them, so that it could not
be pretended they were in force. And to him that would prognosticate that it
would not be observed, as others made before, it might be answered, that he
who does evil does think ill, and that it is the duty of Christian charity to
expect good from every on. The Bull was dated the ninth of October 1562.
Afterward news came, that many Congregations were held in Spain, to make a
general reformation, and to give commission to the Ambassador, who was to go
to Trent, to make the Spanish Prelates join, and aim all at one mark. The
news that the King would send another Ambassador did please neither the Pope
nor the Legates. For the Marquis of Pescara did much conform himself to the
Popes will, and the Ministers he used were of Milan, much addicted to the
person of his Holiness and his kindred, and to Card. Simoneta, who employed them
in the Popes service upon all occasions. But the Count of Luna, who was
designed to be sent, had remained with the Emperor, and with the King of the
Romans, and was very dear unto them, and had their proiects imprinted in him.
And they feared him the more because there was a fame (and it was indeed so
resolved, though not effected) that he should bear the name of the Emperors
Ambassador, to avoid the difference of precedencie with France, but really
should be Ambassador of the K. And the Pope did suspect for many causes, the
conjunction of those Princes; especially in regard of the K. of Bohemia, who,
in diverse things, had showed he was auerse from him. And the nomination of the
Count of Luna was more displeasing to him, because he could not come before the
Diet of Francfort was ended, which being likely to last until the end of the
year, he coniectured the King had a purpose to prolong the Council. But having
received the last advice from the Legates, he was perplexed most of all, seeing
the Prelates, even his own also, were conspired to make it longer, by means of
unseasonable persuasions, howsoever their interests did require a quick
dispatch. He caused the letters to be read in Congregation of the Cardinals,
and gave order that every one should think of the best means rather to oppose
an infinity of imminent difficulties, then to take away the present grieuance,
in regard the Council the longer it continued the harder it was to be
managed. Neither could any order be given from Rome, but, because of the great
distance, it was unseasonable before it came to Trent, a thing which in
continuance of time would produce some great inconvenience. He complained that
the Vltramontans did consent to prolong it, for their proper interests; the
Emperor to gratify the Duch-men, and to make his son King of the Romans;
France, to make use of it, in case of composition with the Hugonots; and
Spain, to keep the Low Countries in hope. He repeated all the difficulties
which arose from the diverse interests of the Prelates in Council, the arms
which were discovered in the Spaniards, and what was suspected of the designs
of the Frenchmen, whose coming was expected.

At this time, the French King sent the Abbat of Mante, expressly, to Rome, to
give the Pope an account of his resolution, to accept the Decrees of the
Council, and of the Cardinal of Loraine his going to Trent, accompanied with
many Bishops to propose the means to reunite Religion in his Kingdom; because
both himself and his Counsel were of opinion, that none was more sufficient
for that charge, as well for learning as for experience. The Pope did seem to
be pleased with the resolution, both in sending the Cardinal, and in
accepting the Decrees of the Council. He promised the Legates and Fathers
should receive the French Prelates honorably and courteously, expecting their
assistance in matters of Religion in which they were so much interested,
especially the Cardinal, who is the second Ecclesiastical person in the
world, not much inferior to a Pope. He said the Bishops had discreetely
handled the points of reformation, in the assembly of Poisi, offering to cause
the greater part of them to be confirmed by the Council. He added, that he
was forced to hasten the end of the Synod in regard of his great charge,
which if it did continue long, he could not be able to continue in assisting
the King in his war; so that he hoped he would join with him to conclude
it. The conclusion of his discourse was, that he had no authority in
Council, but to approve, or reject the determinations of it, without which
they would be of no force, and that his purpose was to go to Bolonia when the
Council was ended, and to assemble all the Fathers there, that he might know
them, and thank them, and make the approbation. This French messenger gave the
Pope also the letters of the Cardinal of Loraine, of the same tenor, with an
addition of profers, to preserve by all means, the authority of the holy Sea.
The Pope asked him in particular what the Cardinal meant to propose; but
receiving only a general answer, that is, necessary remedies for the
Kingdom of France, he answered, to make the Cardinal be think himself what
to do, that all should be maturely advised on, every thing being decided in
Council by plurality of voices.

It was resolved, in the Congregation of the Cardinals, to answer the Legates
that they should labor to conclude the Article of residence, before the The
answer made to the Legates.
coming of the Frenchmen, and to refer it to the Pope, without any Decree,
if it were possible; but if not, yet, at the least, with a Decree. If neither
could be obtained, then to make the declaration with rewards and punishments,
not touching the point, whether it were de iure Diuino. That the Article of the
institution of Bishops seemed difficult, and of great consequence, and
therefore that they should procure that it should be remitted likewise; which
in case they could not do, yet they should inuiolably observe not to suffer a
determination to pass, that it was de iure Diuino: Concerning reformation,
that his Holiness was resolute that none should meddle with the Papacy, and
Court, who already had made so many reformations, (which all the world did
know) as that every disorder was redressed; and, if any thing remained, was
willing to add it; that, for all other matters, they should tell all men
plainly that the Pope did remit the reformation freely to the Council; and of
those things which were proposed by the Imperialists, and decreed by the
Frenchmen in Poisi, they should propose in Council what they thought
expedient, but not resolve, before they sent advise again.

The proposition, to finish the Council, was esteemed by the congregation to
be of greater moment; not because the necessity to do it was not manifest,
but because they saw not the means, in regard so many things did remain to
be handled, and that the Prelates could not be induced to speak briefly, nor
to agree in their discourses; which things were necessary for a sudden
dispatch, and, without them, it was impossible to conclude, but in a long time.
To suspend it without consent of the Princes, seemed dangerous and scandalous,
in regard of the advice, sent by the Legates, that the Ambassadors de Ferriers
and Five Churches had said, that if the Council were suspended they would not
depart from Trent, nor suffer the Prelates, their adherents, to go, before
they had commission from their Princes, To have commission from them did
require much time, because they would undoubtedly know one another mind,
before they would answer. Therefore they knew not what to resolve in this
matter, but to solicit the Legates, to dispatch the points, which remained to
be handled. The coming of Loraine did trouble them more, being advised, from
diverse places, that, besides the business of the election of the Pope, he
meant to propose many nouities, about the collation of Bishoprics, plurality
of Benefices, and, which was of no less importance, the Communion of the Cup,
marriage of Priests, and Mass in the vulgar tongue. And, presupposing he
would not begin his journey before he had answer from the Abbat of Mante,
sent by the King and himself, they gave counsel to recall the Cardinal of
Ferrara, and to offer the legation of that Kingdom to Loraine, which they The
Cardinal of Loraine had a desire to be Patriarch in France.
did think might stop him, because he so much desired to command that
Clergy, that he had formerly plotted to make himself Patriarch in France;
but if he came, that more Prelates ought to be sent to the Council, and some
Cardinals also, to counterpoise him. And the Cardinals of Bordisiera, and
Nauagero were named. But this resolution was not then taken, because they
feared that Loraine would disdain, and take occasion to do worse, and because
it was not so well known whether these were able to make so great an
opposition, as also because they were willing to know the opinion first of
those who were in Trent, for fear of giving them distaste. They considered the
charge which would increase, which was not fit to be endured, without great
utility. Therefore they resolved to write to the Legates, not to suffer any
the least discourse concerning the election of the Pope; which if they could
not resist, yet they should not give any permission, but rather return to
Rome, lest they should prejudice the College of Cardinals, and Italy.

But, in Trent, the Deputies for composing the Anathematismes and doctrine,
having considered the opinions of the Divines, made a draught; and put into it,
that Bishops are superiors iure Diuino. For the Archbishop of Zara, and the
Bishop of Conimbria, chief of the Deputies, were of that opinion. But the
Legates did not permit it, saying, that nothing ought to be put into it which
was not contained in the Articles; notwithstanding that it should be thought
on, if the Fathers did desire it in the Congregations. The Spaniards therefore
did immediately resolve to desire it; and the Legates, understanding so much,
gave order to their Prelates, who were wont to contradict, that, if this matter
were proposed, they should be silent, and not dispute, that they might not
give the Spaniards occasion to reply, by which means the Congregations might
be drawn in length, and inconveniences arise, which happened in the matter of
residence, but if the instance were prosecuted by Granata, or others, the
Cardinal Varmiense should interrupt them, answering that it was not a point to
be handled in Council, because it was not controuersed with the Protestants.

The thirteenth of October 1562. when the first Congregation of the The Arch-b.
of Granata discourses concerning the institution of Bishops.
Prelates was held, the Patriarchs, and some Archbishops, having approved, in
few words, the Anathematismes, as they were composed, the Archbishop of
Granata, did so likewise concerning the six first Canons; in the seventh he
desired it should be said, that Bishops, instituted iure Diuino, are superiors
to Priests; saying, that he might with reason desire it, because it was
proposed in this form in the Council, by Cardinal Crescentius, under Julius
the third, and approved by the Synod. For witnesses he brought the Bishop of
Segouia, who assisted, as a Prelat, in that Council, and Friar Octauianus
Preconius, of Messina, Archbishop of Palermo, who being not then a Prelate,
was there as a Theologue. He said they must needs declare both of these two
points, that is, that Bishops are instituted iure Diuino, and are iure Diuino
superior to Priests, because it is denied by the heretics: and he confirmed
his opinion at large, with many reasons, arguments and authorities. He
alleged Dionysius, who says, that the Order of Deacons is included in that
of Priests, that of Priests in that of Bishops, and that of Bishops in that of
CHRIST, who is Bishop of Bishops. He added Pope Eleutherius, who, in an Epistle
to the Bishops of France, wrote, that CHRIST had committed the Church
Universal to them. That Ambrose, upon the Epistle to the Corinthians, says,
that the Bishop holds the place of CHRIST, and is Vicar of the LORD. He added
also the Epistle of Cyprian to Rogatianus, where he often repeateth that the
Deacons are made by the Bishops, and the Bishops by GOD: and that famous place
of the same Saint, that there is but one Bishopric, and every Bishop holds
a part of it. He said the Pope was a Bishop, others are, because they are all
brothers, sons of one father, which is GOD, and of one mother, which is the
Church. Therefore the Pope does also call them brethren; so that if the Pope
be instituted by CHRIST, so are the Bishops also. Neither can it be said that
the Pope calls them brethren in civility, or humility only, because the
Bishops also, in the incorrupt ages have called him brother. There are extant
Epistles of Cyprian to Fabianus, Coruelius, Lucius, and Stephanus, Popes, where
he gives them the title of brothers; and of Austine, written in his own name,
and of the other Bishops of Africa, in which the Popes, Innocentias, and
Bonifacius, are likewise called brothers. But which is most plain, not only
in the Epistles of those two Saints, but of many others also, the Pope is
called Colleague. And it is against the nature of a College to consist of
persons of diverse kinds: and if there were such difference, that the Pope
should be instituted by CHRIST, and Bishops by the Pope, they could not be in
one College. In a College there may be an Head; as in this College of
Bishops the Pope is Head, but for edification only, and, as it is said in
Latin, in beneficientem causam. St. Gregory says, in his Epistle to Johannes
Syracusanus, that when a Bishop is in a fault, he is subject to the
Apostolic Sea, but otherwise, all are equal, by reason of humility; which
Christian humility is never separated from the truth. He alleged St. Jerome
to Euagrius, that wheresoever a Bishop shall be, whether in Rome, or in
Augubium, or in Constantinople, or in Rheggio, all are of the same merit, and
of the same Priesthood, and all successors of the Apostles. He inueighed
against those Theologues, who said that St. Peter had ordained the other
Apostles Bishops. He admonished them to study the Scriptures, and to observe,
that power to teach throughout all the world, to administer the Sacraments, to
remit sins, to bind and loose, and to govern the Church, is equally given
to all: and finally, they are sent into the world, as the Father has sent the
Son, And therefore as the Apostles had authority, not from Peter, but from
CHRIST, so the successors of the Apostles have not power from the successor
of Peter, but from CHRIST himself. He brought to this purpose the example of
the tree, in which there are many branches, but one body only. Then he iested
at these Divines, who had said, that all the Apostles were instituted by
CHRIST, and made equal in authority, but that it was personal in them, and
ought not to pass to their successors, except that of, St. Peter, asking
them, as if they had been present, with what ground, authority, or reason,
they were induced to make such a bold affirmation, invented within these fifty
years only, expressly contrary to the Scripture, in which Christ said to all
the Apostles, I will be with you, until the end of the world; which words
because they cannot be expounded of their particular persons only, must be
necessarily understood of the succession of all, and so they have been
understood by all the Fathers and Schoolmen, to whom this new opinion is
directly contrary. He argued, that, if the Sacraments be instituted by Christ,
by consequence the Ministers of them are instituted also and he that will say
that the Hierarchy is de iure divine, and the chief Hierarche instituted by
his Majesty, must say that the other Hierarche* also have the same
institution. That it is a perpetual doctrine of the: Catholic Church, that
Orders are given by the hand of Ministers, but the power is conferred by GOD.
He concluded that all these things being true and certain, and denied by the
heretics, in many places, which the Bishop of Segouia had collected, it was
necessary they should be declared, and defined by the Synod, and the contrary
heresies condemned.

Cardinal Varmiense took occasion hence to interrupt him, saying, as they had
agreed, that there was no controversy of this, yea, that the Confessionists
did maintain the same. Therefore that it was superfluous, and unprofitable to
put it in question, and that the Fathers ought not to dispute of any thing in
which the Catholics and heretics do agree. Granata, rising up, replied,
that the Augustane Confession did not confirm this, but contradicted it,
putting no difference between a Bishop and a Priest, but by humane
constitution, and affirming, that the superiority of Bishops was first by
custom, and afterward by Ecclesiastical constitution. And he demanded
again, that this definition might be made in the Council, or the reasons and
authority, alleged by him, answered. The Cardinal replied, that the
heretics did not deny these things, but only did multiply injuries,
maledictions, and inuectiues, against the present uses. And some other replies
passing between them, Granata, full of disdain and hear, said, he referred
himself to the Nations.

After this, there being some tumult raised and appeased, they spoke of the
other points, receiving the things as they were proposed, some grounding
themselves upon the saying of Varmiense, and some holding that the Pope only
is instituted iure diuino, until it came to the Archbishop of Zara, who said,
it was necessary to add the words (de iure Diuino) to condemn that which the
heretics say to the contrary, in the Augustane Confession. Varmiense said
again, that in that Confession the heretics did not dissent in this; and Zara
alleging the place, and the words, the contention was so long, that the
Congregation did end with it.

In the Congregations following, the opinions were diverse also. In particular,
the Archbishop of Braga demanded the same adiunct, saying, it could not be
omitted. He proved at large the institution of Bishops De iure Diuino,
bringing reasons and arguments, like to those of Granata, and said, that the
Pope could not take from Bishops the authority given them in their
consecration, which does contain in it the power not only of Order, but of
jurisdiction also, because, in it, the people is assigned to him to be fed and
governed, without which the Ordination is not of force; whereof this is a
manifest argument, that to titular and por^atiue Bishops a City is allotted,
which would not be necessary if the Episcopal Order could subsist without
jurisdiction. Besides, in giving the Pasto^all this form is used, that it is a
sign of the power which is given him to correctvices. And, which is of more
importance, when the Ring is given him it is said, that with it he does marry
the Church; and, in giving the book of the Gospel, by which the Episcopal
Character is imprinted, it is said; that he must go to the people, committed
to him: and in the end of the consecration, that prayer is said, Deus omnium
fidelium Pastor and Rector which since has been in the Missals appropriated
to the Pope, by turning himself to GOD, and saying, that his will is, that the
Bishop should govern the Church. Moreover, Innocentius the third said; that
the spiritual marriage of the Bishop with the Church is a bond, instituted by
GOD, not to be loosed by the power of man, and that the Pope cannot translate
a Bishop, but because he has special authority to do it; all which things
would be very absurd, if the institution of Bishops were De iure Diuino. The
Arch bishop of Cyprus said, that it ought to be declared that Bishops are
superiors to Priests Iure Diuino, but reserving the authority in the Pope. The
bishop of Segouia, adhearing wholly to the conclusions and reasons of Granata
made a long repetition of the places of the heretics; where they deny the
superiority of Bishops, and their institution to be De iure diuino. He said,
that as the Pope is successor of Peter, so the Bishops are of the Apostles:
and that it was plain by the Ecclesiastical History, and by the Epistles of
the Fathers, that all Bishops gave an account one to another, of all that
happened in their Churches, and received approbation thereof from others. The
Pope did the same for the occurrences of Rome. He added, that the Patriarchs,
when they were created, sent a circular Epistle to the others, to give them an
account of their Ordination, and faith, which was as much performed by the
Popes to others as by others to them; that if the power of the Bishops be
weakened, that of the Pope is weakened also; that the power of Order, and
jurisdiction, is given to the Bishops by GOD, and that the division of
Diocesses, and the application of them to the person proceeds from the Pope.
He alleged an authority of Anacletus, that Episcopal authority is given in
the Ordination, with the unction of the holy Chrisme; that the degree of a
Bishop is as well an Order instituted by CHRIST, as the Priesthood; that all
Popes, until Siluester, have either professedly, or incidently said it is an
Order, which comes immediately from God, that the words spoken to the
Apostles, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc. give power of jurisdiction,
which is necessarily conferred upon the Successors; that CHRIST did institute
the Apostles with jurisdiction, and since that time the Church has ever
instituted Bishops in the same sort. Therefore this is an Apostolical
tradition, and, it being defined that points of faith are taken out of the
Scripture, and Traditions, it cannot be denied that this of the Episcopal
institution is an Article of faith; and the rather, because S. Epiphanius, and
S. Austine, do put Aerius in the number of heretics, for saying that Priests
are equal to Bishops, which they would not have done if Bishops had not been
De iure diuino.

Fifty nine Fathers were of this opinion, and perhaps the number had been
Simoneta uses practices in the point of institution of Bishops.
greater if many had not been ill at case at that time, of a defluction of
rheum, which then did generally reign, and some others had not fained the
same impediment, that they might be out of the crowde and offend none, in a
matter, handled with such passion; especially those, who, for speaking what
they thought in the matter of Residence, found they had incurred the
displeasure of their Patrons; as also if Cardinal Simoneta, when he saw
matters proceed so far, had not used diverse persuasions, employing herein
Johannes Antonius Fa^binet^us, Bishop of Nicastr^, and Sebastianus Vantiue,
Bishop of Oruieto; who persuaded, with much cunning, that the enterprise of the
Spaniards was to shake off their obedience to the Pope, and that it would be
an apostasy from the Apostolic Sea, to the great shame and damage of Italy,
which has no other honor above the Nations beyond the Mountains, but that
which it receives from the Papacy. Five Churches said, it was fit that it
should be declared quoiure all the Orders and degrees of the Church are
instituted, and from whom they receive authority. Some others adhered to him,
and, in particular, Pompeius Picholhomini, Bishop of Tropeia; who, making the
same instance, added, that when all the degrees of the Church were handled,
from the greatest to the least, and declared quo iure they were, he would
deliver his opinion also concerning the degree of Bishops, if the Legates would
give leave. In this number some briefly adhered to the opinion of others who
had spoken in this matter, and some amplified the same reasons, and turned them
into diverse forms, so that it would be too long to make a narration of all the
suffrages which are come into my hands.

That of George Sincout, a Franciscan Friar, Bishop of Segna, does well deserve
to be repeated, who, adhering to Granata, said, that he would never have
believed that any could have doubted whether Bishops are instituted, and have
authority from Christ. For it they have it not from his divine Majesty,
neither can the Council have any from him, which consists of BB. that it is
necessary that a Congregation, though very populous, have their authority
from whom the particular persons have it, that if Bishops are not instituted by
CHRIST, but by men, the authority of them altogether is humane, and he who
hears it spoken, that Bishops are not instituted by CHRIST, must needs think
that this Synod is a Congregation of profane men, in which CHRIST does not
preside, but a power received precarily from men, and so many Fathers would in
vain reside in Trent, to their great charge and trouble, because he who has
given the power to Bishops; and the Council, may, with more authority, handle
the same things; and it would be a great illusion generally of all
Christendom to propose it, not only as the best, but as the only and
necessary means, to decide the present controversies. He added, that he had
been five months in Trent, with this persuasion, that never any would have
doubted whether the Council has authority from GOD, and whether it may say
as the first Council of Jerusalem did, It seemed to the holy Ghost and to us;
that he would never have come to the Council, if he had believed that CHRIST
had not been in the midst of it. Neither can any one say, that, where CHRIST
assisteth, the authority comes not from him; that if any Bishop should
believe and think his authority to be humane, it had been great boldness
in him to denounce, in the former difficulties, anathematismes, and not rather
refer all to him who has greater authority. And if the authority of the
Council be not certain, it was fit in the year 1545. when this was first
assembled, that this matter should have been sifted, and decided what the
authority of Councels is, as is usually done in places of justice, where, in
the beginning of the cause, it is disputed, and decreed whether the Judge be
competent, least in the end, there be a nullitie in the sentence, for want of
authority. The Protestants, who do take all occasions to detract from, and
wrong this holy Synod, cannot have any more fit, then that it is not certain
of its own authority. He concluded, that the Fathers should take heed what
they did resolve, in a point, which being resolved truly, does establish all
the actions of the Council, and if otherwise, overthrows all.

The nineteenth of October, all the Fathers made an end of speaking in this
matter, except Father Laynez, General of the Jesuits; who, being to speak
last, did purposely absent himself that day, that he might have a whole
Congregation for himself alone. And to make the cause hereof understood,
Laynez spends a whole congregation himself. The importance of this point of
the institution.
we must return a little back, and remember, that when the question was set
on foot in the beginning, the Legates thought that the aim was only to make
great the authority of Bishops, and to give them more reputation. But before
the second Congregation was ended, they perceived, very late, by the voices
given, and reasons used, of what importance and consequence it was. For it did
infer, that the keys were not given to Peter only; that the Council was
above the Pope, and the Bishops equal unto him, who had nothing left but a
preeminence above others. They saw that the dignity of Cardinals, superior to
Bishops, was quite taken away, and that they remained mere Priests, or
Deacons; that, by that determination, residence was inferred by a necessary
consequence, and the Court brought to nothing; that the preuentions and
reseruations were removed, and the collation of Benefices was drawn to the
Bishops. It was noted that the Bishop of Segouia had, a few days before,
refused to admit one to a Benefice in his Diocese, to whom it was given in
Rome. And these things did still appear more plainly, as new suffrages were
daily given, and new reasons alleged. For these causes the Legates did use
the solicitations aforesaid, for fear that more Italians might join with the
Spaniards. Yet they were not able to prevail so much, but that almost the
half were of that opinion. And the other Papalins reprehended the Legates,
because they foresaw not what might happen, but suffered such great preiudices
to come upon them, saying, they proceeded by chance, and admitted not counsels
and aduertisements of wise men; that, so soon as Granata delivered his
suffrage, they were put in mind to use effectual solicitations, which
afterward they were forced to use, when it was too late; that by their want of
care (if not malice in some) matters have been handled of the greatest
importance that can possibly happen in Council. They added, that the
Ambassador Lausac had, by many solicitations, used to diverse of the Prelates,
discovered himself to be not only a favorer, but a promoter of that opinion;
and considered what an addition would be made unto it, when the Frenchmen
came, who were expected. And they spoke so openly, that some words came to the
ears of the Legates themselves; who, seeing now the danger not foreseen,
thought (in regard the matter had proceeded so far, and so many had put
themselves on that side) that it was not fit to think of diuerting the
question, but of finding a temper, to give the Spaniards some satisfaction.
And, after long consultation, they determined to compose the Canon, with these
words; That Bishops have the power of Order from GOD, and, in that, are
superior to Priests; not naming jurisdiction, for fear of making them
suspect. For, by such a form of words, it might be inferred, that the
jurisdiction remained wholly in the Pope, without saying it.

They sent Father Soto, to treat with the Spanish Prelates, concerning this
form, not so much with hope to remove any of them, as to penetrate to what
they might be brought. Granata gave him audience, but no answer. He labored
with others also, and gained the reputation of a good Courtier of Rome, in
stead of the other, of a good Friar, as he was before. And, to win some that
wauered, and some who unadvisedly fell into that opinion, being otherwise
devoted to the Pope, they resolved to use solicitations unto them, that,
understanding the difficulty, they might be content to refer it to his
Holiness, or, at the least, to speak more sparingly. To perform this, with
the two aforenamed, they joined the Archbishop of Rosano, and the Bishop of
Ventimiglia. And, that those who would acknowledge their error might have
color to retire, they gave order that Laynez should make an exact full Lecture
on this matter; and, that it might be heard attentively, and make an
impression, they would not have him, as has been said, speak after the
others, in the end of the Congregation, but allowed him one wholly for
himself. The four Jesuits consulted together concerning the opinion, and
Caueglione, labored more then the rest. And, not to omit any good means of
diuersion, they busied the Prelates in another matter. For, to return to the
occurrences of that Congregation, after that the General of the Serui (who was
the last) had given his voice in conformity of the Spaniards, the Cardinal of
Mantua admonished the Fathers deputed for the Index, and showed how important a
business they had in hand, in regard all subuersions do arise, and all
heresies are spread by means of books, he exhorted them to be diligent, and
to let the Synod see the end of the work quickly, he said he knew it required
much pains and time, but considered withal that all the Fathers would
contribute their labors to the assistance of the deputies, saying, that the
Congregations were spent in handling questions of no profit, and a work so
necessary deferred. He exhorted in the end, that this particular of the Index
might be concluded in the next Session.

The morning being come, Laynez spoke more then two hours, very fitly, The
discourse of Laynez.
with great vehemence, and master-like. The argument of his discourse had two
parts; the first he spent in proouing, that the power of jurisdiction was given
wholly to the Bishop of Rome, and that none in the Church besides has any
spark of it, but from him; and the second, in resolving all the contrary
arguments, used in the former Congregations. The substance was, that there is
great difference, yea, contrariety between the Church of CHRIST and civil
societies. For these have first their being, and then they frame their
government, and therefore are free, and all jurisdiction is originally in them
which they do communicate to Magistrates, without depriving themselves of it.
But the Church did not make it self, nor its government, but CHRIST, who is
Prince and Monarch, did first constitute Laws, by which it should be governed,
and then did assemble it, and, as the Scripture says, did build it; so that it
is was borne a servant, without any kind of liberty, power, or jurisdiction,
and absolutely subject. For proof hereof, he alleged places of the
Scripture, in which the Congregation of the Church is compared to a sowing, to
the draught of a net, and to a building: and where it is said that CHRIST came
into the world to assemble his faithful people, to gather together his sheep,
to instruct them, by doctrine and example. Then he added that the first and
principal ground, upon which CHRIST built the Church, was Peter and his
succession, according to the words which he spoke to him; Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock, I will build my Church. Which rock howsoever some of the
Fathers have understood to be CHRIST himself, and others the faith of Peter,
or the confession of his faith, yet the more Catholic exposition is, that
Peter himself is understood, who, in the Hebrew and Syriacke, is called a
stone. And, continuing his discourse, he said, that while CHRIST lived in the
mortal flesh, he governed the Church with an absolute Monarchical
government, and, being to depart out of this world left the same form,
appointing, for his Vicar Saint Peter and his Successors, to administer it as
he had done, giving him full and total power and jurisdiction, and subiecting
the Church to him, as it was to himself. This he proved of Peter, because the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven were given to him only, and, by consequence,
power to bring in, and shut out, which is jurisdiction. And to him alone it was
said; Feed, that is, govern my sheep, animals, which have no part or
judgment in governing themselves. These things, that is, to be a Key-keeper,
and a Pastor, being perpetual offices, must be conferred upon a perpetual
person, that is, not upon the first only, but upon all his succession. So the
Bishop of Rome, from S. Peter to the end of the world, is true and absolute
Monarch, with full and total power and jurisdiction, and the Church is subject
unto him, as it was to CHRIST. And as when his divine Majesty did govern it,
it could not be said, that any of the faithful had any the least power or
jurisdiction, but mere, pure, and total subjection, so it must be said, in
all perpetuity of time, and so understood, that the Church is a sheepefold,
and a kingdom; and that which Saint Cyprian says, that there is but one
Bishopric, and a part of it held by every Bishop, is to be expounded, that
the whole power is placed in one Pastor, without division, who does impart and
communicate it to his fellow ministers, as cause does require. And in this
sense Saint Cyprian makes the Apostolic Sea like unto a root, an head, a
fountain, and the Sun; showing, by these comparisons, that jurisdiction is
essential in that alone, and in others by deriuation or participation. And
this is the meaning of the words, so much used by antiquity, that Peter and
the Pope have fullness of power, and the others are of their charge. And that
he is the only Pastor, is plainly proved by the words of CHRIST, when he
said, he has other sheep which he will gather together, and so one
sheepefold should be made, and one Shepherd. The Shepherd, meant in that
place, cannot be CHRIST, because he would not speak in the future, that
there shall be one Shepherd, himself then being a Shepherd, and therefore
it must be understood of another Shepherd, which was to be constituted after
him, which can be no other but Peter, and his Successors. And here he noted
that the precept, Feed the flock, is found but twice in the Scripture: once
given by CHRIST to Peter only, Feed my sheep: again by Peter to others,
Feed the flock allotted to you. And if the Bishops had received any
jurisdiction from CHRIST, it would be equal in all, and no difference
between Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops; neither could the Pope meddle
with that authority, to diminish or take it all away, as he cannot in the
power of Order, which is from GOD. Therefore he advised them to beware, lest,
by making the institution of Bishops, de iure Diuino, they do not take away
the Hierarchy, and bring in an Oligarchie, or rather an Anarchie, He added
also, that, to the end Peter might govern the Church well, so that the gates
of hell might not prevail against it, CHRIST, being near unto his death,
prayed effectually that his faith might not fail, and gave him order to
confirm the brethren, that is, he gave him a privilege of infallibility in
judgment of faith, manners and religion, binding all the Church to hear him,
and to stand firmly in that which should be determined by him. He concluded,
that this was the ground of Christian doctrine, and the rock upon which the
Church was built. Then he censured those who held there is any power in
Bishops received from CHRIST, because it would take away the privilege of the
Roman Church, that the Pope is the Head of the Church and Vicar of CHRIST. And
it is very well known what is constituted by the old Canon, Omnes five
Patriarchae, etc. that is, that he who takes away the rights of other
Churches commits injustice, and he that takes away the privileges of the
Church of Rome is an heretic. He said it was a mere contradiction to say the
Pope is Head of the Church and the government Monarchical, and then say that
there is a power or jurisdiction not derived from him, but received from others.

In resolving the contrary arguments, he discoursed that, according to the
order instituted by CHRIST, the Apostles were ordained Bishops, not by CHRIST,
but by Saint Peter, receiving jurisdiction from him only; and many Catholic
Doctors do hold that this was observed: which opinion is very probable. But
the others who say the Apostles were ordained Bishops by CHRIST, do add, that
his Divine Majesty in so doing, did prevent the office of Peter, by doing, for
that one time, that which belonged to him, giving to the Apostles that power
which they ought to receive from Peter, even as God took some of the spirit of
Moses, and divided it amongst the seventy Judges. So that it is as much as if
they had been ordained by, and received authority from Peter; who therefore
did remain subject unto him, in respect of the places where, and the manner
how to exercise the same. And howsoever it is not read that Peter did correct
them, yet this was not for want of power, but because they did exercise their
charge aright. And he that shall read the renowned and famous Canon, Ita
Dominus, will assure himself, that every good Catholic ought to defend, that
the Bishops, successors of the Apostles do receive all from Peter. He
observed also, that the Bishops are not successors of the Apostles, but only
because they are in their place, as one Bishop succeeds another, not because
they have been ordained by them. To those who inferred, that therefore the
Pope might refuse to make Bishops, and so himself remain the only man, he
answered, it was Gods ordination there should be many Bishops in the Church,
to assist him, and therefore that he was bound to preserve them: but there is
a great difference, to say a thing is de iure Diuino, or that it is ordained by
God. Those de iure Diuino are perpetual, and depend on God alone, both in
general, and in particular at all times. So Baptism, and all the Sacraments
are de iure Diuino, in every one of which GOD has his particular work, and so
the Pope is from GOD. For when one Pope does die, the keys do not remain to
the Church, because they are not given to it, but a new Pope being created,
GOD does immediately give them unto him. Now it is not so in things of divine
ordination, in which the general only proceeds from GOD, and the
particulars are executed by men. So Saint Paul says, that Princes and
temporal powers are ordained by God, that is, that the general precept, that
there should be Princes, comes only from him, but yet the particulars are
made by the civil Laws. After the same manner, Bishops are by divine
ordination, and Saint Paul says they are placed by the holy Ghost, to govern
the Church, but not de iure Diuino. Therefore the Pope cannot take away the
general order of making Bishops in the Church, because it is from God, but
every particular Bishop, being de iure Canonico; may be removed by the Popes
authority. To the opposition that then the Bishops would be Delegati, and not
Ordinarij, he answered, that there was one jurisdiction fundamental, and
another derived; and the derived is either delegate, or ordinary. In civil
Commonwealths the fundamental is in the Prince, and the derived in all the
Magistrates: neither are the Ordinaries different from the Delegates because
they receive authority from diverse persons, yea, all do equally derive from
the Souereignty; but the difference stands, because the Ordinaries are by a
perpetual law, and succession, and the others have a particular authority,
either in regard of the person, or the case. Therefore the Bishops are
Ordinaries, because they are made by the Popes law a dignity of perpetual
succession in the Church. He added, that those places where authority seems
to be given to the Church by CHRIST (as these, that it is a pillar and
foundation of truth, that he who will not hear it, shall be esteemed an
Heathen and a Publicane) are all understood in regard of its Head, which is
the Pope, and therefore the Church cannot err, because he cannot, and so he
that is separated from him who is Head of the Church, is separated also from
the Church. To those who said the Council could not have authority, if none
of the Bishops had it, he answered, that this was not inconvenient, but a very
plain and necessary consequence, yea if every particular Bishop in Council
may err, it cannot be denied that they may err altogether; and if the
authority of the Council proceeded from the authority of Bishops, it could
never be called general, because the number of the assistants is always
incomparably less then that of the absent. He He proves that the Pope is
above the Council.
told them, that in this Council, under Paul the third, principal Articles
were defined, concerning the Canonical Books, interpretations, paritie of
Traditions with the Scriptures, by a number of flue, or a less; all which
would fall to the ground if the multitude gave authority. But as a number of
Prelates, assembled by the Pope to make a general Council, be it how small
soever, has the name and efficacy to be general from the Pope only, so
also it has its authority; so that if it does make Precepts or
Anathematismes, neither of them are of force but by virtue of the Popes future
confirmation. And when the Synod says, that it is assembled in the holy
Ghost, it means that the Fathers are congregated, according to the Popes
intimation, to handle that, which, being approved by him, will be decreed by
the holy Ghost. Otherwise how could it be said that a Decree was made by the
holy Ghost, and could be made to be of no force by the Popes authority, or had
need of greater confirmation. And therefore in the Councels, be they never so
frequent, if the Pope be present, he only does decree, neither does the
Council any thing but approve, that is receive the Decrees; and therefore it
has always been said, Sacro approbante concilio, yea, even in resolutions of
the greatest weight (as was the disposition of the Emperor Frederic the
second, in the general Council of Lions) Innocentius the fourth, a most wise
Pope, refused the approbation of the Synod, that none might think it to be
necessary, and thought it sufficient to say, Sacro praesente concilio. And for
all this the Council cannot be said to be superfluous, because it is
assembled for better inquisition, for more easy persuasion, and to give
satisfaction to men. And when it gives sentence, it does it by virtue of the
Popes authority, derived from God. And for these reasons, the good Doctors
have subjected the Councels authority to the Popes, as wholly depending on it,
without which it has not the assistance of the holy Ghost, nor infallibility,
nor power to bind the Church, but as it is granted by him alone to whom CHRIST
has said, Feed my sheep.

There was not any discourse in this Council more praised and dispraysed, The
censure of this discourse.
according to the affections, of the hearers. The Papalins said it was most
learned, resolute, and substantial, others did condemn it of flattery, and
some of heresy: and many made it known they were offended by his sharp
censure, and that they purposed in the Congregations following, to confute him
upon all occasions, and to note him of ignorance, and temeritie. The Bishop of
Paris, who was sick at home when he should have given his voice, told every
one that, when a Congregation was held, he would deliver his opinion against
that doctrine, without respect, which not being heard in former ages, was,
within these fifty years, invented by Caietan, to gain a Cap; that in those
times it was censured by the Sorbone; that, in stead of a celestial Kingdom
(for so the Church is called) it makes it not a Kingdom, but a temporal
tyranny; that it takes from the Church the title of the Spouse of CHRIST, and
makes it a servant, prostituted to a man. He will have but one Bishop
instituted by CHRIST, and the others not to have any authority but dependant
from him, which is as much as to say, that there is but one Bishop, and the
others are his Vicars, to be removed at his pleasure. He said this should
excite all the Council, to think how the Episcopal authority, so much
debased, might be kept alive, and that it may not come to nothing; because
every new Cogregation of Regulars which does arise, does give it a great shake.
The Bishops have held their authority entire until the year 1050. when it
received a great blow by the Cluniacensian and Cisterciensian Congregations,
and others which arose in that age, because many functions, proper and
essential to Bishops, were, by their means reduced to Rome. But when the
Mendicants began after the year one thousand two hundred, almost all the
exercise of Episcopal authority was quite taken away, and given to them, by
privilege. Now this new Congregation, borne but the other day, which is
neither secular nor regular (as the University of Paris did well observe eight
years since, knowing it was dangerous for matter of faith, a perturber of the
Churches peace, and fit to destroy Monastical life) to go beyond their
predecessors, does labor to take away all jurisdiction of Bishops, by saying
it is not given them by GOD, and that they ought to acknowledge that they have
received it precarily from men. The Bishop having repeated these things to
diverse men, moved many to think of the matter, who before did not regard it.
But those that were seen in Histories did speak no less of that observation,
Sacro praesente Concilio: which being in all the Canonical Textes, seemed new
unto them all, because they had not marked it. And some approved the Jesuits
interpretation, and some, on the contrary, said that the Council had refused
to approve that sentence. Some proceeding another way, said, that the question
being of a temporal matter, and wordly contentions, the business might pass
either one way or other; but that no consequence could be drawn from hence,
that the same might be done in matter of faith, or Ecclesiastical Rites,
especially it being observed, that, in the Council of the Apostles, which
ought to be a rule and pattern, the Decree was not made by Peter, in presence
of the Council, nor by him with approbation, but the Epistle was entitled with
the names of the three degrees, assisting in that Congregation, Apostles,
Elders, and Brothers, and Peter was included in the first, without prerogative.
An example, which in regard of antiquity, and divine authority, is of more
credit then all those of the times following, yea then altogether. And, for
that day, in respect of these other points, the discourse of the Jesuit gave
matter of talk throughout all Trent, and nothing else was spoken of.

The Legates were not pleased that this remedy, applied for a medicine, did
work a contrary effect, perceiving that, in the Congregations, the voices
would be longer in giving; neither did they know how to hinder it. For that
Father having spoken more then two hours, it did not appear how he that
would contradict him could be interrupted, especially it being in his own
defense. And understanding that Laynez enlarged his discourse, with purpose to
publish it, they forbade him to impart it to any, that others might not take
occasion to write against it, observing what mischief succeeded, because
Catharinus published his opinion concerning Residence, whence all the evil did
spring, which still continues stronger then ever. But he could not forbear
to give copies to some, as well to honor himself, and oblige the Papalins to
his society, then rising, as also to moderate in writing some particulars,
delivered with too much petulancy. Many did make preparation to write against
him; and this motion continued until the Frenchmen came, who caused this
difference to be forgotten, by bringing in others more considerable, and
important. Yet the Papalins The coming of the French men did hinder the
answering of it.
continued their counsels against the Spaniards, and their practices with the
Prelates, whom they thought they might win. And a Spanish Doctor, called
Zanel, did fitly offer himself to the Legates, and proposed means to put the
Prelates of that nation upon their defense, and give them something else to
think on. And he proposed to them thirteen points of reformation which did
touch them at the quick. But they could not hence gather the fruit they
expected, because those reformations required others also belonging to the
Court, which made them desist, lest, according to the proverb, by taking one
eye from their adversaries, they might loose both their own, The practices
were so manifest, that, in a banquet of many prelates in the house of the
French, Ambassadors, discoursing of the custom of ancient Councels, not
observed in this, that the presidents of the Synod, and the Ambassadors of
Princes delivered their voices, Lansac said The Legates give auricular voices.
aloud, that the Legates gave auricular voices; and was well understood by all
that he meant their practices.

When these Congregations were held, Five Churches presented the Emperors
letters to the Legates; who wrote unto them, that, having satisfied The Emperor
desires that the doctrine may be deferred, and only the reformation handled.
themselves in publishing the Canons of the sacrifice of the Mass, they would
forbear to proceed in the Sacraments of Order, and Matrimony, and handle the
matter of reformation in the mean while, referring to their wisdom to handle
what part pleased them best, of those things which were proposed to them, in
his name. Five Churches spoke in conformity of the letter, and made the same
request, that, the matter of Order being so far proceeded in, they would, at
the least, forbear to handle that of Marriage, that, in the mean space, the
Emperor might induce the Germans in the Diet to go and submit themselves to
the Council. For so long as the Dutch and Frenchmen continue in their
resolution, not to go to it, nor acknowledge it, the Fathers do in vain
abide there, to their great cost and incommoditie; and when his Majesty shall
see they cannot be persuaded, he will procure a suspension of the Council,
thinking it will be a greater service to God, and benefit to the Church, to
leave matters undecided, and in the state they are, expecting a more fit time
for the conversion of those who are separated, then by precipitating, (as has
been done until that time) the decision of controversies, in absence of those
who have put them in disputation, to make the Protestants irreconciliable,
without any benefit of the Catholics; saying, that, in the mean while, they
might treat of the Reformation, that the Ecclesiastical goods may be
distributed to persons of desert, and all have part of them, and the revenues
may be well dispensed, and the part belonging to the poor not usurped by any;
and such other things. In the end, he demanded of them, whether, the Count of
Luna coming with the title of the Emperors Ambassador, the difference
between Spain and France for precedence will cease. The Legates answered to
this last, that they did not see what pretense the Frenchmen could have to
contend; and, for the rest, they said they could not forbear to handle the
points of doctrine, but that, with them, they would handle the Reformation
effectually, according to the order set down by the Synod. They commended the
Emperors intention to desire the Protestants to submit, but added, that, for
this hope, the Council ought not to be prolonged. For the Emperor Charles,
in the Papacy of Julius the 3. made means for the same, and obtained it also;
but the Dutchmen proceeded with dissimulation, to the damage of the Church,
and of the Emperor himself. Therefore it was not fit the Council should
change its pace, before the Emperor was assured of the intentions of the
Princes and people, as well Catholic as Protestant, and what kind of
obedience they will yield to the Decrees made already, and to be made in this
Council and in the former, requiring the observation of the Synod, with
authentical Mandats of the Provinces and Princes, and obligation from them for
the execution of the Decrees, that their cost and labor may not be in vain,
and laughed at. And in conformity hereof they answered the Emperor.

A Congregation was held the 25. of October, to rece^ue Valentinus Erbu^us The
Ambassador of Polonia is received.
Bishop of Premisa, Ambassador of Polonia, who made a short spe(...)
concerning the Kings devotion, the tumults of the Kingdom about religion, the
necessity of a good reformation, the using of some remission in yielding to the
desires of the people, in matters which are de iure positiuo. The Speaker
answered in the Synods name, thanking the King and the Ambassador, and
offering to give assistance in all the occasions of that Kingdom. The Legates
did not permit that any thing else should be handled in that Congregation, for
the cause which shall be related.

The Court in Rome, and the Popes Ministers in Trent, were no less troubled
with the Spaniards, and their adherents in Council, then with the expectation
of the coming of Loraine; and of the frenchmen; with which they were not so
much moved, so long as there was hope that some rub might stop them, as
after that certain news came that they would The coming of the French
Prelates does much trouble the Pope and Court.
keep the day of All Saints with the Duke of Sauoy. The Cardinal, either
vainly or of purpose, made it known at the french Court, before he parted, and
in many places in the journey, that he would handle diverse things in diminution
of the popes authority and commodities of the Court, which being reported
diverse ways, both in Rome and Trent, made an impression in both places, that
the general intention of the Frenchmen was, to prolong the Council, and,
according to occasions, to discover, and put in practice their particular
desseignes: and they had conjectures to make them believe, that it was not
without the knowledge of the Emperor, and of other Princes and Lords of
Germany. And howsoever they were assured, that the Catholic King held not
full intelligence with them, yet they had strong arguments to make them
believe, that his desseigne was to prolong the Council, or, at the least, not
to suffer it to end. To cross this purpose, they How the reformation of
Princes began.
determined to propose the abuses of the Kingdom of France, and to let the
Ambassadors understand that they would make provision for them; because all
Princes, who desire a reformation in the Church, would not willingly endure any
at all of themselves, so that they thought, that if any matter of importance
were handled to their prejudice, they would forbear, and make their Prelates
forbear also to speak of things prejudicial to the Apostolic Sea.
Therefore after some packets had passed between Rome and Trent, it being
judged a good course, the abuses were collected, which were said to be
principally in France, and partly in other Dominions. And hence the reformation
of Princes began, which, in the relation of the things that follow; will
afford us much matter.

Besides, in Rome it was thought to be a good remedy, that the Legates should
bridle the transcendent boldness of the Prelates, using their authority and
superiority, more then they had done. And, in Trent, it was thought to be a
good course, to keep the Prelates, their adherents, united, well edified, and
satisfied. For howsoever the voices of the contrary part might increase, yet
they should ever exceed in number, and be Lords of the resolutions. And they
thought fit also proceed to finish the Council, or suspend, or translate it.
They wrote also, and made many of the popish Prelates to write to their friends
and Patrons in Rome, that there could be no better resolution or provision,
then to give occasion, (which might easily be done) that some Prince might
desire the suspension, not suffering any to slip: and, for this end, they
demanded diverse Briefes to be sent from Rome, in matter of translation,
suspension, etc. that they might make use of them, as occasion was offered.
They counseled the Pope also to go to Bolonia in person. For besides the
receiving of more frequent and fresh aduices, and the sudden making of
incident, and necessary provisions, he might have a colorable reason to
translate the Council to that City, upon every small occasion, or to suspend
it; desiring him that, as they had imparted nothing to the Cardinal Madruccio,
so nothing might come to the ears of the Cardinal of Trent, his uncle, who,
for many respects, and particular interests would certainly use all means
that it might not be transferred from Trent.

To quench the boiling heat in the controversy about the institution of
Bishops, that it might not increase, by means of so many who were prepared to
contradict Laynez, they would not hold any Congregation for many days. But
this leisure did strengthen their opinions, and they spoke of no matter but of
this, in every corner, and almost every day three or four of them joined
together, and went to some of the Legates, to renew the instance. And, one day,
the Bishop of Gadici with four more, having, after the proposition made,
added, that as they confessed that the jurisdiction belonged to the Pope, so
they were content it should be expressed in the Canon. The Legates believed
that the Spaniards, acknowledging their error, would confess that all
jurisdiction was in the Pope, and derived from him: but, desiring a further
declaration, that Bishop said, that as a Prince does institute in a City a
Judge of the first instance, and a Judge of appeal, who though he be superior,
yet cannot take authority from the other; nor usurp the causes belonging to
him, so CHRIST, in the Church, has instituted all Bishops, and the Pope
superior, in whom the supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was, yet so, that
others had theirs, depending on CHRIST alone. Five Churches complained to every
one, that so much time was lost without holding any Congregation, which might
be profitably spent, but that the Legates did, according to their use,
purposely suffer it to be spent in vain, that they might give forth the
Articles of reformation the last day, that there might not be time to consider,
much less to speak of them. But the Legates were not idle, still thinking how
they might find a form for this Canon, which might be received, and changed
it more then once a day: which forms going about, and showing the hesitation
of the Legates, the Spaniards were not only encouraged in their opinion, but
spoke also with more liberty; so that, in a meeting of many Prelates, Segouia
was not afraid to say, that one word would be cause of the ruin of the Church.

Seven days being past without any Congregation, the thirtieth of October, the
Legates being in consultation, as in the days before, all the Spaniards, with
some others, required audience, and made a new instance, that the institution
and superiority of Bishops De iure Diuino, might be defined, saying, that if
it were not done, they should fail to do that which is just and necessary in
these times, for clearing of the Catholic truth, and protesting they would
assist no more in Congregation or Session. This being diuulged, many Italian
Prelates agreed together in the house of Cardinal Simoneta, in the Chamber of
Julius Simoneta, Bishop of Pescara, and came to the Legates the next morning
three Patriarchs, six Arch bishops, and eleven Bishops with a request, that
it might not be put into the Canon, that the superiority is De iure Diuino, in
regard it sauoured of ambition, and was unseemly that themselves should give
sentence in their own cause, and because the greater part would not have it
put in, the occasion might not be given to speak of the Popes authority,
which they would, and ought to confirm. When this was known in Trent, many
did believe that this instance was procured by the Legates themselves: whereupon
after Euensong, a greater number assembled themselves in the vestry, in favor
of the Spanish opinion, and others in the house of the B. of Modena, for the
same end: and there were four other assemblies in the houses of the
Archbishops of Otranto, Taranto, Rosano, and of the Bishop of Parma. The
tumult proceeded so far, that the Legates were afraid of some scandal, and
thought they could by no means hold the Session at the time appointed, and
that there was a necessity to discuss some points of doctrine, and propose
some matter of reformation, before they came to the resolution of the Article
which was the cause of so great a motion. And Simoneta complained often that
he had little assistance from Mantua and Seripando, who howsoever they did some
thing, yet could not hide their thoughts, which did incline to the adversaries.

Letters of credence came from the Marquis of Pescara, to the principal The
letters of the Marquis of Pescara.
Spanish Prelates, with commission to his Secretary, to use the strongest
persuasions with them, and to advise them not to touch any thing in prejudice
of the holy Sea, assuring them that the King would be displeased, and that
great inconveniences in his kingdoms would ensue; saying, it could not be
expected from their wisdom that they would resolve in any particular, before
they understood his Majesty's pleasure. And he gave him order to advise whether
any of the Prelates made small account of this admonition, or were refractary
in obeying, because it was the Kings pleasure that they should stand united in
the devotion of his Holiness, and should dispatch The answer of the
Archbishop of Granata.
express Curriers: if there were occasion. Granata answered, that he never
meant to say any thing against the Pope, and thought that whatsoever was spoken
for the authority of Bishops, was for the benefit of his Holiness, being
assured, that if their authority were diminished, the obedience to the holy Sea
would decrease also, though by reason of his oldage, he knew that it would not
happen in his time; that his opinion was Catholic, for which he would be
content to die; that, seeing such contrariety, he was not willing to remain
in Trent, because he expected but small fruit, and therefore had demanded
leave to depart of his Holiness and his Majesty, much desiring to return;
that at his departure out of Spain, he received no commandment from the King
and his Ministers, but to aim at the service of God, and the quiet and
reformation of the church, which he had truly performed; that he thought he had
not crossed the Kings will, though he made not protession to diue into it but
he knew that Princes when they are requested, especially by their Ministers,
do easily content them with general terms. Segouia answered, that his
meaning never was to do the Pope any The answer of Segouia.
ill office, but that he could not gainsay his opinion, because it was for
the Catholic truth, nor could speak more then he had spoken already, having
never since seen or studied any thing concerning this matter. Afterward they
retired all together, and sent to the King a Doctor, of the family of Segouia,
with instruction, to inform his Majesty that neither they, nor any other
Prelates could be reprehended, if they knew not how to promote the proiects of
Rome, because they could not propose any thing, but only deliver their opinion
concerning that which was proposed by the Legates, as his Majesty did well
know; that it would be hard so interrogate them, and bind them to answer
against their conscience; that they were assured they should offend GOD and his
Majesty, if they should do otherwise; that they could not be blamed for
speaking out of season, because they did not propose, but answer; that when
they did commit any error, they were ready to correct it, according to the
commandment of his Majesty; that they had spoken according to the Catholic
doctrine, in such plain terms, that they were ^^re he would approve all,
beseeching him to vouchsafe to hear them, before he did conceive any finister
opinion of them.

Those Prelates were not deceived in belcouing it did proceed rather from The
Legues use mean, to curb the Spanish Prelates.
the Ministers, then the King. Simoneta used persuasions, at the same time, to
another Spanish Secretary of the Count of Luna, that the Count being to
assist at the Council, it was necessary he should come prepared, to keep
those Prelates within their bounds, otherwise there would ensue, not only
prejudice to the Church of GOD, but to the dominions of his Majesty also,
because their principal intent was to assume all authority to themselves, and
to have free administration in their Churches. And he persuaded the Secretary
of Pescara to meet Luna on the way and to inform him of the dissignes, and
boldness of those Prelates, and to persuade that it would be good service for
the King to repress them. In conformity whereof Varmiense wrote a long letter
to Petrus Canisius to the Emperors Court, that he would use the same
persuasion to the Count.

The doctrine collected out of the voices, delivered in the former
Congregations, being given forth, they began again to speak their opinions
concerning it the third of November. But Cardinal Simoneta forewarned his
adherents to speak reseruedly, and not to run out into words of provocation,
because that time did require that men's minds should rather be pacified. Having
spoken hereof three days, and returning often to the controversy, by reason
of the connection of the matter, the Legates thought it necessary to propose
some matter of reformation, especially because, the Frenchmen approaching the
Bishop of Paris said publicly, that it was time to begin to give satisfaction
to the French, and other Nations, deputing some Prelates of each, to consider
of the necessitles of those Countries, because the Italians, neither in Trent;
nor in Rome, could know them; that until then no reformation had been made,
because that which was decreed was to no purpose. But the Legates being to
propose some thing of reformation, thought it necessary, that they might not
give occasion of many inconveniences, to begin with residence.

It has been related already what the Pope wrote in this business.
Afterward, the Legates and their adherents were in continual cogitation how
to compose a Decree, that might satisfy his Holiness, without prejudice of
the promise which Mantua made to the Prelates. For to propose at the first, the
reference of it to the Pope, seemed contrary to that promise; and there was
great difficulty what Decree to propose, which not being accepted, might give
them occasion to return to the business of reference. They made a calculation
of those who might be drawn to their side, and of those who were totally
opposite, and found that the Council was divided into three parts, almost
equal, that is, into these two, and a third, who desired a definition to be
made in Council, without offense of his Holiness: of which there was hope to
gain the mayor part, and so to overcome the adversaries. Therefore they
divided themselves, and persuaded so effectually, Some Prelates are overcome by
practices.
that, besides others they gained seven Spaniards, amongst whom were Astorga,
Salamanca, Tortosa, Patti, and Elma, the Bishop of Macera laboring strongly
herein.

Four courses were proposed to come to the execution; one, to make a For
courses proposed concerning Residence.
Decree, only with rewards and punishments; another, that many Prelates should
desire the Legates, that the business might be remitted to the Pope, which
request should be read in Congregation, hoping that, by persuasions, so many
would come unto them, that their number would exceed the other, by one half;
the third that the Legates should propose the remission in Congregation; the
fourth, that the Pope should presently make an effectual provision, which
should be printed immediately, and published every where before the Session,
that the opposites, being prevented, might be The objections against them.
forced to yield. To the first was objected, that all those who demanded the
declaration de iure Diuino, would be contrary, and think that rewards and
punishments cannot be so effectual as the declaration, especially there being
already Decrees of Councels and Popes, which have never been esteemed: and
there would be difference also concerning the rewards and punishments. That
the Prelates will make impertinent demands; that, at the least they will desire
the collation of Benefices with Cure. That they will demand the abolition of
the Privileges of the Regulars, and other exorbitant things; and that they
shall ever be in danger of mutation after the proposition made, until it be
passed in Session, especially when the Frenchmen come, who may demand a
retractation. It was opposed to the second, that the Prelates could not be
brought to make request, without clamor; that those who were not called, would
disdain and go to the adverse part; that the adversaries also would make
unions, and clamours, and complain of the practices. To the third was objected
that the opposites would say, that the consent was not voluntary, but for fear
of seeming to distrust his Holiness, and because there was not liberty to
speak, and if it were refused, it were as much as to call the Popes authority
into question: besides it would be said that this reference was desired by his
Holiness. Against the fourth was said, that the Popes Bull being not read in
Council, occasion was given to the Fathers to demand the definition, and if it
were, it might be feared that some would demand a greater provision, and so
all would succeed with small reputation. Seeing so many difficulties they
prolonged the business, which did not give satisfaction, because it had been
published, that the Fathers should speak of it. Finally, being forced to
resolve, the sixth of November, embracing that course to propose a Decree with
rewards and punishments, after that some of the Fathers had spoken concerning
the business of that Congregation, the Cardinal of Mantua proposed it in good
terms, saying in substance; that it was a thing necessary, desired by all
Princes, and that the Emperor had often made request for it, and complained
that this point was not immediately dispatched; and that, by troubling
themselves with vain questions, which be of no importance, the principal
conclusion has been deferred; that this is not a matter which needs
disputation, but a means only remains to be found, to execute that which
every one thinks to be necessary; that the Catholic and most Christian
Kings had made instance for the same, and that all Christendom did desire to
see the provision; that this matter was spoken of in the time of Paul the
third, and passed over by some, very impertinently, with superfluous questions,
which then were wisely buried in silence; that it appears, by the same
reasons, that there is no need to handle any thing now but that which was
proposed in the Decree. And, amongst other things, he said, that they were
confirmed by the speech of the Ambassador Lansac, who had often showed by good
reasons, that nothing was to be required, but that residence should be
executed, and that it was to no purpose to show whence the obligation came.
Amongst other particles, there was in the Decree, that the Bishops residing
should not be bound to pay Tenths, Subsides, or any other Tax, imposed by what
authority soever, though at the instance of Kings and Princes. This moved all
the Ambassadors very much; but Lansac, dissembling, complained that the
Cardinal of Mantua had named him, without telling him of it before, granting
he had spoken so much unto him, but as a particular friend, not as an
Ambassador. And to make his complaint the more grievous, he found fault also,
that the Catholic King was named before the most Christian. Of the Tenths he
said nothing, hoping that, by that which he had said, and by some opposition,
which the favorers of ius diuinum would make, that form of Decree would be
hindered. Five Churches said only, that he did not believe that the Emperors
mind was as the Cardinal had proposed. But the Secretary of the Marquis of
Pescara demanded openly, that the words might be amended, so that they might
not prejudice the grace granted by the Pope to his Catholic Majesty, for the
Subsidy of the Galleys. The Legates did believe they had by this means gained
the Prelates: but after they understood the exception for Spain, they began to
say amongst themselves, that they were favored in that which could not be
granted. For in Spain and France, and vnden every other Prince they should be
forced to pay; and in the state of the Church also, with a Non obstantibus, the
grace would be made of no force.

The next day they passed from residence, to Episcopal Order. And Segouia
replied, that the institution of Bishops de iure Diuino, was handled, and A
difference between the Cardinal of Mantua and the Bishop of Segonia.
resolved, in the same Council under Julius the third, with a general consent
and that himself had delivered his opinion therein, and specified the day and
hour^ when it was. The Cardinal of Mantua caused the acts of that time to be
searched, and that to be read by the Secretary which was then defined to be
published, expounding them so, as that he concluded that it was neither
decided, nor examined, nor proposed in that manner, as it was said by Segouia.
The Bishop answering, though reverently in appearance, there passed so many
replies, that they were forced to break up the Congregation. And because some
will perhaps desire to know which of them spoke with most reason, it will be
fit to recite here that which was then decided in the Congregations, though
not published in Session, by reason of the sudden dissolution of that Council,
before related. Three heads of doctrine were then composed, the third where of
was inscribed, of the Hierarchy, and of the difference of Bishops and Priests:
and having spoken much of the Hierarchy, it says thus afterward, as it is
translated verbatim out of the Latin. Besides, the holy Synod does teach, that
those are not to be bearkened unto, who say that Bishops are not instituted
Iure diuino, it appearing manifestly, by the words of the Gospel, that CHRIST
our Lord has himself called the Apostles, and promoted them to the degree of
the Apostleship, into whose place the Bishops are subrogated; neither ought we
to think that this, so eminent and necessary a degree, has been brought into
the Church by humane institution; for so we should detract from, and
disesteeme the divine providence, for failing in the most noble things. These
were the words used in that point of doctrine. There were noted also eight
Canons; the last whereof said thus: He that shall say that Bishops are not
instituted iure Diuino, or are not superior to Priests, or have not authority
to ordain, or that this does belong to Priests, let him be anathema. Every
one being prepossessed with an opinion, does find it in all this that is read;
and it is not wonder, if each of those two Prelates did find his own in the
same words, which the Papalins did interpret only of the power of Order, and
the Spaniards of all, which contains order and jurisdiction. Yet some of the
Popish Prelates did believe that Mantua, studiously faining to think as they
did, caused the old determination to be read, not to confirm his own
opinion, but the Spanish, which secretly he defended.

The Cardinal of Loraine being entered into Italy, the Pope could not deny
the Frenchmen, to cause that he should be expected. And he wrote to Trent,
that they should prolong the Session, yet not so as to pass November. The
Legates receiving advice that the Cardinal was upon the Lago di Garda, in the
Congregation of the ninth of November, Mantua proposed the deferring of the
Session until the 26. of the same month, which Loraine not knowing, sent
Carlo de Grassi, Bishop of Monte Finscoue, and wrote letters also to the
Legates, that, if it would please them to tarry for him, he would be in Trent
within a few days. And they resolved to make no more Congregations until his
coming, to give him the more satisfaction. The Bishop related, that the
Cardinal did show a good intention in all his discourses, and that he would
send his opinions to his Holiness, that he might see them; that the Prelates
in his company came for the service of God, and with a good mind toward the
Apostolic Sea, and did hope that their coming would make a concord in the
Council, and cause them to be diligent in making a fruitful reformation,
without any respect of their own interest; and many such things he said:
which though they were testified by Grassi, and confirmed by the Ambassador de
Ferriores, yet the Popish Prelates did believe them only in complement, and
purposed to use all the remedies, desseigned both in Trent and Rome.

Loraine entered Trent, and was met a mile on the way by Card. Madruccio The
entry of the Cardinal of Loraine into Trent.
and many Prelates, and by all the Legates at the gate of the City; from which
place he was accompanied to the house where he was lodged. He rode between
the Cardinals Mantua and Seripando, which honor they thought necessary to do
unto him, because the same was done unto him by Monte, and Sancta Croce,
Legates in Bolonia, when the Council was held in that City, at the time when
he went to Rome for the Cap. In the evening he went to visit the Cardinal of
Mantua, and had audience the next day before the Legates, He visits the Card.
of Mantua, had audience the next day, and makes a speech.
with the Ambassadors, Lansac and de Ferrieres. He presented the Kings letters
directed to the Council, and then made a long discourse, to show his
inclination to serve the Apostolic Sea, promising to communicate all his
designs to the Pope, and to them the Legates, and not to desire any thing, but
to the good satisfaction of his Holiness. He said, he would not be curious
in unprofitable questions, adding, that the two controversies, of the
institution of Bishops, and of residence, which were spoken of every where, had
diminished the authority of the Council, and taken away the good opinion the
world held of it. For his own part he professed he was more inclined to the
opinion which does affirm them de iure diuino, yet though it were certainly
true, he saw no necessity, or opportunity to proceed to the declaration
thereof; that the end of the Council ought to be to reunite those to the
Church who were separated; that himself had been at a parley with the
Protestants, and had not found them so different, but that they may be
reduced, if the abuses were taken away; and that no time is more fit to win
them then this, because it is certain they were never so united to the
Emperor, as now; that many of them, and in particular, the Duke of Wittemberg,
was willing to assist in Council: but it was necessary to give him
satisfaction, by a beginning of reformation, in which the service of GOD did
require that their Excellencies should employ their labor; he showed the
desire of the King, that fit remedies might be applied to the necessities of
his people, seeing that, as he had war now with the Hugonotes, so if the
abuses were not provided against, he should have more to do with the
Catholics, whose obedience will be quite lost; that these were the causes
why his Majesty had sent him to the Council. He complained that, of all the
money which the Pope promised to lend the King, he could receive but five and
twenty thousand crowns, disbursed by the Cardinal of Ferrara, in regard of
the limitations, put in the Mandats, because they could not be exacted but upon
certain conditions, to take away the Pragmatikes of all the Parliaments of the
kingdom, a thing of so great difficulty, that there was no hope ever to
receive one penny. In the end he said he had brought new instructions to the
Ambassadors; and therefore when he had spoken to the Synod, in the Kings
name, in the first congregation, he would afterward only deliver his suffrage
as an Archbishop, not meddling with the affairs of the kingdom, but leaving
the care thereof to them.

The Legates answered, without consultation, as every one thought good, The
answer of the Legates.
commending his piety and devotion toward the Apostolic Sea, and offering to
impart all their affairs unto him. They showed what patience they used in
suffering the liberty, or rather the license of Prelates, in their speeches,
who went up and down, and moved new questions: but now, his excellency being
joined with them, they doubted not but by his advice and assistance they might
be able to repress this great boldness, and compose the differences risen,
and proceed hereafter in so comely a manner, that the world might receive
edification, which before had conceived a bad opinion, that the evil will of
the Protestants was too much known, who when they show themselves not auerse
from concord, then it is to be doubted that they invent new occasions of
greater difference; that it is certain that they have demanded a Council,
because they thought it would be denied them, and at the same time when they
required it, they indeauoured by all means to hinder it, as now those, who are
assembled in Francfort, labor that it may not proceed, and use means to the
Emperor to interpose some impediment; that they hate the very name of the
Council, as much as of the Pope, neither have they formerly made any other use
of it, then to cover and excuse their apostacy from the Apostolic Sea, that
there was no hope of their conversion, and therefore means only was to be
used to preserve the good Catholics in the true faith. They commended the
piety and good intention of the king, and showed the desire of the Pope for
reformation and what he had done to reform the court, not regarding the
diminution of his own revenues, and that he had always written to the
Council, that they would labor in the same business, whereunto themselves
the Legates were much inclined and disposed, but were hindered by the
contentions of the Prelates, which consumed almost all the time; that if in
France there be danger to loose the obedience of the Catholics, it is a
matter to be treated of with his Holiness. Concerning the loan of money,
they said the paternall charity of the Pope toward the King and Kingdom was
so great, that they might be assured that the conditions were put in for pure
necessity. And after diverse complements, they concluded that on Monday he
should be received in the general congregation, to declare to the Fathers the
occasion of his coming, and to read unto them the Kings letters.

The Legates were troubled with these words of the Cardinal, that he would
not meddle with the affairs of the Kingdom, but leave them to the
Ambassadors, which were not conformeable to those which Lansac and de
Ferrieres had uttered a little before; saying, they were glad of the Cardinals
coming, because they should be eased of all pains, all being (as they said)
to depend upon his Honorable Lordship. They concluded that they were to take
heed of those dissimulations, and the rather, because Cardinal Simoneta had
received certain advice from Milan, that the French Abbots, lodged in Saint
Ambrose, said they would join with the Spaniards, Dutchmen, and
Vltramontanes, and treat of matters which would not please the Court. Besides,
the Frenchmen were heard to say in all their discourses, that time was not to
be lost in questions, but the reformation to be spoken of; that they ought to
begin with taking away plurality of Benefices, and that the Cardinal would
be the first to leave them, to give example; that dispensations are to be
given gratis; that the Annates, preuentions and small dates ought to be
removed, and only one provision made for a Benefice: amplifying also the
matter, that the Pope had a most excellent occasion to gain immortal glory,
by making the foresaid provision, to satisfy Christian people, and to unite,
and appease them by providing against these abuses and inconveniences; and that
in recompense they would pay unto his Holiness an half Tenth; that they were
come thither, resolute not to depart, before they had attempted to make all
these provisions, how long soever they tarried there; that in case they saw they
could not prevail, they would make no clamor, but return quietly into
France, and make the same provisions at home. The Legates also had notice, that
the Cardinal held great intelligence with the Emperor, and (which was of more
importance) with the King of Bohemia, who were manifestly inclined to give
satisfaction to the Princes of Germany, who did undoubtedly hate the Council,
and would be glad it might not proceed, but dissolve in some aduantagious
manner for them, and dishonorable for the Apostolic Sea and the Synod. They
suspected also the Catholic King in regard of an advice which came to the
Secretary of the Count of Luna, that the instruction being already made in
Spain for that Count, it was resolved to send Martin Gazdellone, who had been
Secretary to Charles the fifth, to bring him, instruction by word of mouth,
which they would not commit to writing, by reason of diverse aduices which
lately had come unto them. And confronting this with another advice received
out of France, that the Cardinal of Loraine had, before he departed,
communicated to his Catholic Majesty the petitions, he purposed to handle
in Council, and knowing assuredly that he had been solicited by Germany, to
make instance for the reformation, they doubted that the coming of that
Cardinal might hatch some great nouitie, and were not pleased one jot with his
speech in the audience, concerning the coming of the Dutchmen to the
Council, considering the conference he had with the Duke of Wittenberg. In
sum, presupposing that a person of so great authority and wisdom would
not have come, without a sure ground to build his designs upon, they resolved
to send presently all these considerations to the Pope. And having observed
that whenever any extraordinaries came to Trent, or departed, the Prelates
took occasion to talk, to seek out the cause, to whisper, to make a noise,
and to lay plots also, which, now that the Cardinal was come, might produce
more dangerous effects, they dispatched secretly, and wrote that order might
be given to the Curriers to leave their guide and baggage at the next Post to
Trent, and enter slowly into the City, with the dispatch only.

The Cardinal went not into the congregation at the day appointed, by reason
of a small fever, which had seized on him; and therefore he desired they would
proceed slowly, that he might be present before the resolution. The Legates
desired the order should be given to the Curriers to enter secretly into Trent.
The Legates resolved to give him satisfaction, and therefore they began the
Congregation later then they were wont. In which the French Bishops and Abbats
being present, a general muster was made (the number of the Prelates being
found to be two hundred and eighteen) and a place assigned to every one. The
next day, there being some difficulty about precedence, they made a new
assignation of places, making all the Prelates to enter into the Congregation
one by one, and conducting every one to his seat. In those Congregations none
of the Frenchmen spoke, either because they expected the Cardinal to begin,
or because they were willing to see the manner first. The nineteenth of
November the Archbishop of Otranto appointed a banquet at night for many
Prelates, and he that had A factious banquet.
the charge to inuit them, saying, that they ought not to fail, in regard of
the service they might do the Apostolic Sea, by coming thither, it was
immediately published in Trent, that the Popish prelates, were assembled, to
make a combination against the Frenchmen. This distasted them much, and the
more, because after the banquet, they were assured that such discourses had
been used at the table, and observing that since their coming, some new
Prelate did arrive every day, they thought they were mistrusted, and held to
be opposites. Therefore the Legates, to make show of all confidence, and
respect of honor to the Cardinal, in the Visitations which each of them made
while he was sick, they persuaded him to take so good an occasion to compose
the controversies which the questions have made; a thing which would be easy
for him, and of great reputation, because no man has been able to effect it.
The Cardinal seemed to be willing, and offered his endeauours.

The Pope, who in those days had been in some danger, by reason of A plot of
the French Ambassador when the Pope was sick.
a great unexpected accident, having recovered his health, received aduices
from the Legates, and from diverse other places, by which the Frenchmen had
passed, all uniformly full of their desseignes. Besides, when he was sick,
Monsieur de l' Isle used practices, and laid plottes, that, if he had died,
the Pope might be created in Trent by Nations, and the Sea held vacant until
the reformation were made. For so the Council would be free, and the new Pope
would accept the reformation, which was established before his creation. This
moved him most of all, as well because every man, and Princes especially, are
displeased when any thing is desseigned to be Troubles his Holiness.
done after their death, as also because he was by this most assured, that the
Frenchmen were resolved to reform the Court, and the Popedom. These things,
and the differences in Trent about the institution of Bishops and residence,
caused him to hold a Congregation every day, and he could not forbear to tell
every one, that he had no business more important, and dangerous to him then
the Conncell. And relating in Consistory the differences in Trent about the
institution, and the new proposition of residence, he break out into this
exclamation, that all the Bishops beneficed by him were his opposites, and that
he maintained an army of enemies in Trent. There was an opinion that he
secretly wished some good success to the Hugonots in France, and some
advantage to the Protestants in the Diet of Germany, that the Council might
be dissolved, and not by his means. But, And makes him exclaim.
being wholly bent to provide remedies, he gave order to the Bishops who He
sends some Bishops to Trent, and withholdeth others.
were not parted from Rome as yet, to depart immediately, and caused Marcus
Antonius Boba, Bishop of Asti, Ambassador for the Duke of Sauoy, residing with
him, to go thither also. On the other side, he forbade the Archbishop of
Turris, and the Bishop of Cesena to go thither; the former, because he had
defended residence to be de iure diuino; with more constancy then the times
did comport, in the Council under Paul; the other because he was a familiar
friend of the Cardinal of Naples, of whom he doubted much, by reason of the
slaughter of his two uncles, and of the executions made against his person: and
he feared, because it was said, that the Count of Montebello; father of the
Cardinal, had, in his custody, an obligation under Fearing to be accused of
S^monie.
his hand, by which, being Cardinal in the Conclaue, he promised a sum of
money to the Cardinal of Naples for his voice to be Pope. But howsoever his
greatest diffidence was in the Frenchmen, yet he thought fit to dissemble it.
He sent into France forty thousand Crowns, the residue of the hundred
thousand which he promised. And he caused Sebastianus Gualterus, Bishop of
Viterbo and Ludouicus Antinori to go to Trent, who, having bin in France, had
some acquaintance with some of those Prelates, and had made themselves known to
the Cardinal, under color to honor him. And he wrote to this Cardinal and
to Lansac letters full of complement, and confidence. Yet they thought that
these men were sent to discover the Cardinals intention, and to observe his
proceedings; and the rather because they had received advice from Rome, that
the Bishop had exhorted the Pope not to be so much afraid, in regard the
Cardinal also would find difficulties and impediments, more then he believed
he should, and said that himself would make more to arise.

The 22. of November, the Cardinal resolved to enter into the Congregation the
day following; and it was agreed that the Kings letters should be read, and
himself make a speech. But Loraine proposed also, that the Ambassador de
Ferrieres should make another. To this the Legates did not consent, because if
this had been once permitted, both he and all other Ambassadors, would still
be desirous to speak, and propose, with danger of making greater confusion;
but, concealing this cause, they said, that neither in this Council, nor under
Paul or Julius, it was ever permitted to Ambassadors to speak in
Congregation, but only when they were first received; and that without the
Popes consent they could not yield to such a nouitie. But Loraine answered,
that the Kings letter, and the instruction being new, it might be called a
new Embassage, and that, the first entrance. After many answers and replies,
Loraine having given his word, that they should not desire to speak any more,
the Legates, to give him satisfaction, and that he might not have cause of
open distaste, were contented.

Therefore the next day, the Congregation being assembled, the Kings letter
was read, with this inscription. To the most holy and most reverend Fathers,
assembled in Trent to celebrate the sacred Council. In which he said, that,
it having pleased God to call him to the Kingdom, it has pleased him also to
afflict him with many wars; but has so opened his eyes, that, howsoever he
be young, he knows that the principal cause of the evils is The French Kings
leters.
the diversity of religion. By means of which divine illumination in the
beginning of his Kingdom, he made instance for the celebration, of the
Council, in which they were then assembled, knowing that in them the ancient
Fathers have found the most proper remedies to the like infirmities, and, that
he was grieved, that being the first to procure so good a work, he had not
been able to send his Prelates with the first; the causes whereof being
notorious, he thought he was sufficiently excused; and the rather, because
the Cardinal of Loraine was now arrived; accompanied with other Prelates. That
two principal causes has moved him to send that Cardinal; the first, his
own great and frequent instance, to have leave to satisfy his duty, in regard
of the place he holds in the Church; the second, because, being of his Privy
Council, and exercised from his youth, in the most important affairs of the
Kingdom, he knows the necessity thereof, better then any other, and whence
the occasions do arise: so that he will be able to make a relation unto them,
conformable to the charge which is given him, and demand in his name the
remedies which are expected from their wisdom, and fatherly affection, as well
for the tranquillity of the Kingdom, as for the general good of all
Christendom. He beseeched them to proceed herein with their wonted
sincerity, that they may come to an holy reformation, and that the ancient
luster of the Catholic Church may appear, in the union of all Christendom
in one religion; which will be a work worthy of them, desired by the whole
world, recompensed by God, and commended by all Princes. In conclusion, for the
particulars; he referred himself to the Cardinal, praying them to believe
him in whatsoever he^ should say unto them on his part.

After this the Cardinal spoke. In the beginning, he showed the miseries The
speech of the Cardinal of ^oraine.
of the Kingdom, deplored the wars, the demolitions of Churches, occisions
of religious persons, conculcation of the Sacrament, burning of the libraries,
images and relics of Saints, overthrowing of the monuments of Kings, Princes,
and Bishops, and expulsion of the true Pastors. And, passing to civil
matters, he showed the contempt of the Kings Majesty, usurpation of his
rents; violation of the laws, and seditions raised amongst the people. He
attributed the cause of all this to the corruption of manners, to the ruin of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and negligence in repressing heresy, and in using
remedies instituted by God. Turning to the Ambass. of Princes, he told them
that that which they do now behold at leisure in France, they shall find at
home, when it will be too late to repent, if France, tumbling down with its
own weight, shall fall upon places near unto it. He spoke of the virtue and
good disposition of the King, the counsels of the Queen, and King of Navarre,
and of the other Princes, but said, the principal matter was expected from the
Synod, whence the peace of God, which passes all understanding, ought to
come. That the most Christian King being assured hereof, in regard of his
observance toward that Synod, and of his sorrow for the differences of
religion, did demand two things of them. The first, that they would avoid new
discords, new and unprofitable questions and cause a suspension of Arms
amongst all Princes and States, that scandal may not be given to the
Protestants, and occasion to believe, that the Synod does more labor to
incite Princes to war, and to make confederations and leagues, then to keep
the unity of peace. That King Henry has first established it, and then Francis
continued it, and that the present King, under age, and his mother, have
always desired it; which how soever it has unhappily succeeded, yet they
might fear that the accidents of the war would be more unfortunate. For all
the states of the Kingdom being in danger of shipwreck, one cannot help
another. He therefore desires that some account may be held of those who are
gone astray from the Church, pardoning them as much as may be done without
offending God, and holding them for friends, as much as is possible, even as
far as unto the Altars. The second request, common to the King with the
Emperor and other Kings and Princes, was, that a reformation of manners, and of
Ecclesiastical discipline, should be handled seriously; wherein the King did
admonish and conjure them by CHRIST our LORD, who will come to judgment, that,
if they meant to restore the authority of the Church, and retain the Kingdom
of France, they would not balance the incommodities of the French men with
their own. He said he was glad, that Italy was all in peace, and that Spain
did govern the Helm; but that France was fallen, and scarce held it with one
finger. He added, that, if they will demand, who has caused this tempest and
fortune, he can say nothing but this, that this fortune is come by our own
means, cast us into the Sea. Therefore that there was need of boldness, and
courage, to look unto themselves, and the whole flock. In the end, he said,
he had ended his Legation, and, that the Ambassadors would say the rest; but
himself and the Prelates who came with him, did protest that, after God, they
would be subject to the most blessed Pope Pius, acknowledging his Primacie on
earth, above all Churches, whose commands they will never refuse; that they do
reverence the Decrees of the Catholic Church, and of the general Synod, that
they did honor the Legates, offer concord and union to the Bishops, and were
glad that the Ambassadors were witnesses of what they said, all for the honor
of the divine Majesty.

Having made an end of speaking, the Cardinal of Mantua, in few words,
commending him for the pains he had taken for the service of God, said, that
The answer.
all the Synod was glad of his coming, made honorable mention of his
brothers, who in their profession showed no less readiness in the service of
God and the kingdom, and referred himself to the answer which the Arch
bishop of Zara, deputed hereunto, should make, in the name of the Council. Who
said that the Synod was sorry to hear of the seditions and differences of
religion in France, whose quiet and tranquillity was always dear unto them,
and the more then, because by the narration of his Excellency, they were so
lively set before their eyes, but hoped that shortly the King, imitating the
virtue of his predecessors, would be able to repress them, that the Synod
will labor, by all means, to make the true worship of God known, to reform
manners, and restore tranquillity to the Church, which end they might more
easily attain, if they were assisted by his Excellency, and the Prelates who
came with him. He spoke largely in commendation of the Cardinal, and
concluded that the Synod thanked God for his coming, and gave him joy of it,
and offered to give care to whatsoever should be delivered by the Ambassadors,
in fit time and place, not doubting, but that it would be for the glory of
God, benefit of the Church, and great dignity of the Apostolic Sea.

Afterward the Ambassador de Ferrieres spoke. He began with the commendation
The speech of de Ferrieres the French Ambassador.
of the Kings disposition, inclined to Religion, which appeared more by the
coming and discourse of the Cardinal; by whom it might be known, how great
care France did take of the good of the Catholic Church, because every on
might see that most potent reasons had induced the King to send him, in regard
he had ever employed him in his counsel, in the greatest affairs of the
Kingdom, that the King could appease all the seditions in three days, and
keep all his Subjects in their natural obedience, if he aimed only at his
own good, and did not desire to maintain the Catholic Church, and retain
the dignity and authority of the Pope in France; for which he exposes to
danger the Kingdom, his life, and the goods of all the Grandees and Nobles.
And, descending to the requests, he added, that they would not be troublesome,
nor obstinate in them, that they did demand nothing but that which all the
Christian world demands that the most Christian King does request that which
Constantine the great requested of the Fathers in the Council of Nice, that
all his demands are contained in the holy Scripture, in the old Councels of
the Catholic Church, and in the ancient Constitutions, Decrees, and Canons of
the Popes and Fathers; that the most Christian King does demand the restitution
of the Catholic Church to its integrity, by means of them the Fathers,
constituted by CHRIST as the chief judges, not by a Decree with a general
clause, but according to the form of the express words of that perpetual and
divine Edict, against which, neither usurpation nor Prescription can take
place, so that those good orders which the devil has taken away by force and
concealed a long time, may be restored, as it were, out of captivity to the
holy city of God, and to the sight of men. He exemplified in Darius, who
composed the tumults of Judea, not by arms, but by executing the ancient Edict
of Cyrus; in Josias, who reformed Religion, by causing the book of the Law to
be read and observed, which had been concealed by the malice of men. Then he
spoke acutely, and said, if they shall demand why France is not in peace, he
could answer nothing, but that which Iehu say to Ioram; How can there be
peace, there remaining? and concealed the words following, but added, you know
the text. Then he said, that if they do not seriously labor in the
reformation, the assistance of the King of Spain, of the Pope and of other
Princes, will be in vain, and the blood of those who perish, though justly,
for their own sins, will be required at the hands of them the Fathers. He
concluded, that, before they would descend to the particulars which they meant
to demand, they desired that the things which they had begun to handle, might
be dispatched quickly, that they might, as soon as was possible, apply
themselves to other matters of more weight, and of greater necessity in that
time. The biting liberty of this Ambassador did no less displease, then that
of his Colleague Pibrac, at their first coming to Trent; but the fear they
had of the Frenchmen made them forget all.

The next day the Congregations were continued, and the first was all spent by
Friar Iaspar of Casal, Bishop of Liria: who, to inform the Cardinal of
Loraine of all the reasons of the Spaniards, did recapitulate, with great
eloquence, whatsoever they had said in this matter. He added besides, that
nothing was more in favor of the Lutherans, then to say that Bishops are
instituted by the Law of man; that by this means, their nouitie is approved,
in making Preachers, or Predicants, or Ministers to govern the Church, in
stead of Bishops instituted by CHRIST. He said that to him that reads the
Epistles of Saint Gregory, to John of Constantinople, and to others against
him, for calling himself Universal Bishop, it does plainly appear, that it
cannot be said, that the institution of the Pope is from Christ, if it be not
said that the institution of Bishops is from him also.

The Cardinal of Loraine made a congregation of Prelates and French Divines in
his own house, to understand their opinion concerning the Jurisdiction of
Bishops; in which it was uniformly resolved amongst them, that they did
receive it from GOD, and that it did belong unto them iure diuino. The Papalins
are distasted with the French Congregations.
And this singularity of congregation was used afterward by the Cardinal in
all occurrences to the great distaste of the Papalins, who said he held a
Council apart, and feared that the Spaniards would imitate the example, which
might in time make a manifest schism, as it happens in the first Council of
Ephesus, by the Congregations which Egyptians and Syrians held apart. But the
Papalins had, amongst the Spaniards Barthomeus Sebastianus Bishop of Patti, who
a Spaniard by nation, because he had a Bishopric in Sicilie, had great
intelligence in Rome, and had discovered all the Spanish practices and
counsels. Amongst the Frenchmen, about the time Iacobus Hugonius betrayeth ye
French Prelates.
when the Cardinal of Loraine put himself in order for the journey, the
Nuncio in France did gain Iacobus Hugonius, a Franciscan Friar, a Divine of
the Sorbone, elected by the Cardinal for his company; with whom he had some
cause of acquaintance because he was constituted Proctour for the Council, by
Johannes (...), Bishop of Triguier, where of he sent news to Rome, and
addressed him for correspondence in Trent, with his letters to Lactantius
Rouereda Bishop of Ascoli. But Simoneta was not willing to put such confidence
in that Bishop, nor would suffer him to know the intelligence which was to be
held with that Divine. Therefore when Loraine was near unto Trent, he caused
the Bishop of Ventimiglia to send another Friar of S. Francis, called Pergola,
to meet Hugonius, to tell him from him, that he was informed by the Nuncio of
France, of a letter which he brought to the Lord Bishop of Ascoli, who had
written also unto him that he should speak with him before he did deliver it.
Pergola did this business cunningly, so that the Divine promised to do so,
and accordingly went to Ventimiglia a few days after he came to Trent; and
after that they knew one another, and the tokens that they were to treat
together; the Friar made him a relation of the state of all things, and said,
that one ruin of the kingdom did especially proceed from the Queen, who
favored the heretics, as himself saw plainly, in the dispurations which
he often had with them in her presence. Concerning the Ambassadors in Trent,
he said they were corrupted also. The Cardinal he held to be a good
Catholic, but inclined to impertinent reformations of Ecclesiastical Rites,
of the use of the Cup, of taking away images, of bringing in the vulgar tongue,
and such other things, whereunto he was persuaded by the Duke of Guise his
brother, and others of his kindred, and that the Queen at his departure, had
effectually persuaded him to it, and given him twenty thousand crowns. He
said, that amongst the Bishops there were three of the same faction; but, above
all, that the Bishop of Valence held intelligence with the Queen, and was
sent expressly by her, as the prime man to whom the Cardinal was to bear
respect. In the end, they set down an order how to meet, and treat together,
Ventimiglia gave him fifty crowns in gold, as the Legates had appointed, which
at the first he refused to accept; but Ventimiglia persuaded him with good
terms to be content. Notwithstanding himself did not take them, but called
his servant, who was with him, and gave him order to keep them in the name of
his Religion.

I have often rehearsed, and continue still, many particulars, which I am sure
many will think not worthy of mention, as I have thought my self; but finding
them preserved and noted in the memorials of those who were present in the
actions, I persuade my self, that for some respect, unknown to me, they have
deemed them worthy of commemoration, and therefore, according to their
judgment rather then mine own, I have thought fit to relate them. Perhaps
some sharp wit may discover in them some thing which is not penetrated by
me, and those who do not esteem them will lose but a little labor in
reading them.

The six and twentieth of November, destinated for the Session, Cardinal
Seripando proposed in Congregation, that it might be deferred, in regard the
Decrees which they were to publish were not established. And he admonished the
Prelates of their long discourses, by means whereof they could not determine
any certain day for the Session, which therefore was necessarily to be
deferred during pleasure. He told them that many of them spoke of abuses, not
remembering that to spend so much time, in vain disputations without any fruit,
was the greatest abuse of all, which was necessarily to be taken away, if they
desired to see the end of the Council, with edification. Loraine confirmed the
same, and exhorted the Fathers to leave those questions, which were nothing to
the purpose in that time, and to be brief and diligent in dispatching the
things already proposed, that they may come to things of more importance and
necessity. Many of the Prelates did not consent that the Session should be
deferred during pleasure, and required a determinate time. To whom it being
replied, that it was not possible, because they knew not when they should end
the matter now in hand, which was so much controuersed amongst them, it was
concluded that the determinate time should be set down within eight days.

The same day the Senator Molines arrived, sent by the Marquis of Peseara, to
renew and give strength to the persuasions, used to the Spanish Prelates, in
favor of the Pope, which having been made by the Secretary resident, had done
no good. He brought new letters of credence to them all from the Marquis, and
labored with great diligence* Which wrought a contrary effect. For the
Prelates did interpret it to be a practice of the Cardinal of Arragon,
brother of the Marquis, without any express commission from the King. It
appearing now, that the further they proceeded about this point of the
institution, the more difficulty did arise, the Ambassadors of France used
means, that a temper might befound, that they might rid themselves of those
superfluities and come to the business of the Reformation, that they might
know what they might hope for from the Council. And the Bishop of Nismes told
them, when he gave his voice, that if the Fathers were delighted to decide a
curiosity, which in conclusion will be nothing but words, yet they ought not
to entertain others with it, but deferring it until another time, to handle
that now which is more necessary. Diego Couarruuias, Bishop of Citta di
Rodrigo, who spoke after him, excusing the Fathers for spending time in that
question, said, that, it having been proposed by the Lords the Legates, the
Prelates could not choose but deliver their opinions. Wherewith Cardinal
Simoneta being moved, did deny that the proposition was made by them; and
Seripando did second him more fiercely, and said, that themselves assuming too
much license, did not think it sufficient to discourse of the superiority of
Bishops which was proposed, but had set on foot also the other of the
institution, and added Ius diuinum unto them both; and not contented with the
patience used in suffering them to say what they will, they began also to lay
the blame upon the Legates. He sharply reprehended their too much liberty in
entering into these questions, and their boldness in treating of the Popes
power, vainly and superfluously repeating the same things, more then ten
times, some also using frivolous reasons, and foolish, unworthy of that
assembly. And, in the progress of his speech, perceiving he had been too
bitter, he began to set them down a form how every Prelate should give his
voice in Council. Speaking of the questions proposed, he showed that both the
opposite opinions were probable, and that in case that de iure Diuino had more
probability, yet it was not a thing to be decided in Council. He could not
by this means pacify the minds of many that were moved; neither did he
absolutely please the Cardinal of Loraine, who made all possible demonstration
to gain a good opinion. For he made means to know the men, and to inform
himself what was possible to be done, that he might not undertake the
business before he knew it would succeed; and he affected also to be the man
who should compose the differences, and be judge of the question. For dispatch
of the matter, a proposition was made to depute some Prelates of every nation,
as it were to compromise the resolution by them. But it could not be done,
because the French and Spaniards desired an even number of every nation, and
the Italians, as they were more in number then the others, so they would have a
greater number in this deputation. Simoneta was the first to oppose this
proposition, for fear of reviving the custom of the Council of Basil.

At this time a new matter of contention was prepared. For the Count of Luna
gave the Legates to understand, that he was to come to Trent Ambassador of
the King of Spain, and not of the Emperor, but would first know what place
would be allowed him. The Legates called the French Ambassadors, and told
them of it, desiring them to find some means to compose the difference for
precedence. They answered that they were not A question about precedence
between France and Spain.
sent to compose differences, but to hold the place due, and always granted
to their King; that they meant not to prejudice the King of Spain in any thing
belonging to him, but to do him all honor and service, as being a cousin,
and a friend to their King, and that they had charge, if their place was not
given unto them, to make protestation of the nullity of the acts of the
Council, and to depart with all the French Prelates. The Cardinal of Mantua
proposed this course, to make the Spanish Ambassador set apart from the others
over against the Legates, or under the Ecclesiastical Ambassadors, or under
the Secular Ambassadors. But the Frenchmen were contented with none of these
courses, saying that by all means he should have his place after them, and no
where else.

In the Congregation of the first of December Melchior Auosmediano, Bishop The
Bishop of Guadice causes a great stir in the Council.
of Guadice, speaking of that part of the last Canon, where it was determined
that Bishops, called by the Pope, are true and lawful, said, that the manner
of expressing it did not please him, because there were also Bishops not called
by the Pope, nor confirmed by him, who notwithstanding were true and lawful.
For example he brought four suffragans, elected and ordained by the
Arch-biship of Salzburg, who take no confirmation from the Pope. Cardinal
Simoneta did not suffer him to proceed, saying, that whatsoever the Bishop of
Slazburg, or other Primats did, was all by the Popes authority. Friar Thomas
Castello, Bishop of Caua, and the Patriarch of Venice stood up both at once,
and said that he ought to be put out of the Council, as a Schismatike. And
Egidius Falceta, Bishop of Caurle, cried aloud, Out with the Schismatike. And
there followed a great noise amongst the Prelates, as well of whispering, as of
feet, partly in offense of the Prelate that gave his voice, and partly in
defense: which gave but small satisfaction to the Prelates beyond the
mountains. The Cardinal of Loraine was dipleased, The Card, of Loraine says
the Council was not free.
but made no demonstration of it; and the Legates did hardly appease the stir,
by making others proceed who were to speak in that Congregation; which being
ended, the Cardinal of Loraine said, in presence of many of the Popish
Prelates, that the insolency had been great, that the Bishop of Guadice had
not spoken ill, and that, if he had been a Frenchman, he would have appealed
to another Council more free, and that in case provision were not made that
all might speak freely, the Frenchmen would return, to make a National
Council in France. And indeed it was found that the Bishop had not spoken
ill, and the Canon was corrected; for whereas it said, The Bishops called by
the Pope of Rome, it was altered thus, The Bishops assumed by authority of the
Pope of Rome.

The next day, in which they were to determine the just time for the Session,
the Cardinal of Mantua proposed, that it might be prorogued until the
seventeenth; and if, in the mean while, the Decrees of reformation, beloging
to the matter which was handled, could not be put in order, it should be
deferred until the next Session. The Cardinal of Loraine consented for that
day, but with condition, that the whole matter might be handled, and nothing
deferred until the next Session, in which it was necessary to begin the
general reformation. The Arch bishop of Prague, Five Churches, and the Orator
of Polonia, agreed in the same opinion. and, after much contention, between
those, who (as the Bishop of Nismes had said) would have those questions
deferred until another time, and others, who would have them decided, it was
resolved to appoint the Session for the day aforesaid, with order, that, to
dispatch all the matter, they should hold two Congregations every day, and if
they would not decide all, yet they should publish those Decrees which could
be made by that time, deferring the undecided points until another, handling
the reformation in the next Session, before they entered into matter of
doctrine. Mantua did also reprehend the noise made with feet, and words, the
day before, concluding that, if hereafter they would not speak with that
respect and reverence which might beseem their own dignity, the presence of
them the Legates, who represent his Holiness, and of the Cardinals and
Ambassadors, who represent the Princes, they would go out of the
Congregation, that they might not endure so great disorders. The Cardinal of
Loraine commended the admonition, and said, that as the Legates ought not to
go out of the Congregation for any occasion whatsoever, so it was most just
that the perturbers of it should be punished. The Bishop of Caua would neither
excuse himself for that which he had said, nor receive the admonition with
silence, though it was in general, but said, that the causes ought to be
removed that the effects might cease; that if the words of the Bishop of
Guadice had offended his own person, he would have endured it, for Christian
charity, which as it requires patience in wrongs committed against ones
self, so it makes men sensible of the injuries done unto CHRIST, whose divine
Majesty is offended, when the authority of his Vicar is touched, that he had
spoken well, yea, as well as might be, and confirmed the same with other words
of the same sense, which were generally condemned of petulancy.

Iacobus Gilbertus, of Nogueras, Bishop of Aliffe, in delivering his voice, The
suffrage of the Bishop of Aliffe concerning the institution of Bishops.
said, that, concerning the institution of Bishops, one could not speak with
better ground, then considering well and understanding the words of Saint Paul
to the Ephesians. For as it is most true that CHRIST did rule the Church with
an absolute government, while he lived in mortal flesh, as others had
iudiciously said, so it was a great untruth which was added, that is, that,
being in heaven, he has abandoned the same government, yea, he does exercise
it rather more then before. And this is it which he spoke to his Apostles, at
his departure; I am with you until the end of the world; adding also the
assistance of the holy Ghost; so that now also not only the inward influence
of graces comes from CHRIST, as from the Head, but an external assistance
also, though invisible to us, which does minister occasions of salvation to
the faithful and drives away the temptations of the world. Notwithstanding,
besides all these things, he has instituted also some members of the Church
for Apostles, Pastors, etc. to defend the faithful from errors, and to
direct them to the unity of faith, and knowledge of GOD. And upon these he
has best owed a gift, necessary for the exercising of this holy office, which
is the power of jurisdiction, which is not equal in all, but so much as every
one has, is given him immediately by CHRIST. Nothing is lord contrary to Saint
Paul, then to say, that it was given to one only, to impart it to whom he
listed. It is true that it is not equal in all, but according to the divine
distribution, which, as Saint Cyprian says, that the unity of the Church
might be preserved, did ordain, that the supreme should be in Peter and his
successors; not that it should be absolute, and, according to the Proverb,
that the will may be a law, but, as Saint Paul says, for edification of the
Church only, not for destruction so that it cannot be extended to abrogate
laws, and Canons, made by the Church, for a foundation of government. And
here he began to allege the Canons cited by Gratian, in which the ancient
Popes do confess themselves to be subject to the Decrees of the Fathers, and
to the constitutions of their predecessors.

The Cardinal Varminese interrupted him, and said, that the subject to speak
on was the superiority of Bishops; so that this discourse was beside the
matter. The Bishop answered, that the authority of Bishops being handled, it
was necessary to speak of that of the Pope. And Granata stood up, and said,
that others had spoken of it superfluously, not to say perniciously, meaning
Laynez, and therefore that Aliffe might speak of it likewise. The Bishop of
Caua stood up, and said, that others had spoken of it, but not in that manner;
and whisperings beginning to arise amongst the Prelates, Simoneta made a sign
to Caua to hold his peace, and admonishing Aliffe to speak to the point, he
quieted the noise. But he continuing to allege the Canons, as he had begun,
Varmiense interrupted him again, not speaking unto him but making a formal
discourse to the Fathers, concerning that matter. He said the heretics pretend
to prove, that Bishops, elected by the Pope, are not true and lawful, and that
this is the opinion which ought to be condemned, but whether true Bishops are
instituted iure Diuino, or not, there is no difference between the heretics
and the Catholics, and therefore the question does not belong to the Synod,
which is congregated only to condemn the heresies. He advised the Fathers to
abstain from speaking things which might give occasion of scaudall, and exhort
them to leave these questions. Aliffe desired to reply; but Simoneta with the
assistance of some other Prelates, did pacify him, though with some
difficulty. And after him spoke Autonius Maria Saluia^^, Bishop of Saint
Papulo; who said, that all were assembled for the service of GOD, and proceeded
with a good intention, though some one way, and some another. And, having said
many things which served partly to accord the opinions, but principally to
reconcile their minds, was a cause that the Congregation did quietly end; and
that words of humanity and reverence did pass between the Cardinal and the
Bishop.

The fourth of December, the Cardinal of Loraine delivered his opinion The
suffrage of the Card, of Loraine.
concerning the same matter, and spoke at large, saying, that jurisdiction was
given by God immediately to the Church. He alleged the place of Saint Austin,
that the keys are given to Peter, not unto one person, but unto the unity,
and, that Peter, when CHRIST promised him the keys, did represent all the
Church, who if he had not been a Sacrament; that is, representing the Church,
CHRIST would not have given them unto him. And he showed a great memory in
reciling the places word by word. Then he said, that that part of jurisdiction
which is joined with Episcopal order, the Bishops do receive immediately from
God; and declaring in what it does consist, amongst other things, he
specified, that power of excommunication is contained in it, enlarging himself
much in the exposition of that place of Saint Matthew, in which CHRIST does
prescribe the manner of brotherly correction, and judicial of the Church, with
authority to separate the disobedient from the body thereof. Then he disputed
against that opinion, alleging diverse reasons taken out of the words of
CHRIST, spoken to Saint Peter, and from the exposition which S. Leo the Pope
does give unto them in many places. He exemplified in many Bishops who had
acknowledged all their jurisdiction to come from the Apostolic Sea, and spoke
with so much eloquence, and in such sort, that it could not clearly be
discovered, what his opinion was. Afterward he said, that Councels had
authority immediately from God; alleging the words of CHRIST, Where two or
three shall be assembled in my name, I will be in the midst of them, and the
Council of the Apostles, which ascribes the resolution to the holy Ghost; and
the style of all Councels, in saying they are congregated in the holy Ghost
and, in particular of that of Constance, which says plainly, that it has
authority immediately from CHRIST. But he added, that speaking of Councels, his
meaning was that the head should be joined with it, and that nothing was of
more service for the union of the Church, then to confirm well the Popes
authority; that himself would never consent to determine any thing in
diminution thereof, and that all the Prelates and Clergy of France were of the
same opinion. And returning to the institution of Bishops, and speaking still
with the same ambiguitie, he concluded in the end, that the question was
boundless. Afterward exhorted the Fathers to leave it, and himself gave a
form to the Canon, in which the words, iure diuino, were omitted; and,
instead of them, it was said, Instituted by CHRIST.

The French Prelates, who spoke then after Loraine, and the days following,
used not the same ambiguity, nor the same respect toward the Apostolic Sea,
but maintained openly, that the authority of Bishops was, de iure diuino,
alleging the reasons, delivered by the Cardinal, and expounding them; who
howsoever, while they spoke, leaned his head upon his hand, as if he had been
displeased, yet they noted him for ambition, as if he had purposely procured a
Comment to be made upon his opinion. But the Spaniards were not satisfied with
the French men; though they did openly defend their opinion, as well because
the Cardinal had spoken ambiguously, as for that he and the other Prelates
did not hold the institution and superiorritie of Bishops de iure diuino to be
necessary to be determined in Council, but rather that it ought to be omitted.
And they were more displeased with the form of the Canon, proposed by the
Cardinal, in which the words de iure diuino, were left out, howsoever, more
for their satisfaction, then for any other respect, these words were put in,
That they are instituted by CHRIST.

The Frenchmen and Spaniards had the same end, to provide against the ambition
and avarice of the Court, which did domineere at their pleasure, with precepts,
unprofitable, and of no fruit, and drew a great quantity of money from
Christian nations, by collation of Benefices, and dispensations. But the
Spaniards judged, in regard of the devotion which the people of their Country
bear to the Pope, and of the inclination of the King, and of his counsel,
abhorring nouities, if this had been done directly, and openly, it would have
raised a scandal, and could not have been effected, and that the Pope would
easily have interposed so many difficulties with the Princes, that they should
never have been able to come to the declaration thereof; but that according to
the custom of that nation, they ought to take their aim afar off, and, by
declaring that jurisdiction and residence are from CHRIST, and de inre diuino,
to put that order in reputation with the people, to withstand the violent
courses which the Court of Rome might take against their persons, that so in
progress of time, they meght have means to reform the Churches, for the
service of GOD, and tranquillity of the people, restoring the liberty usurped
by the Romans.

But the Frenchmen, who by nature do proceed openly, and with passion,
esteem these arts vain. They said, there would not want means at Rome to
make them unprofitable, and that they required so much time before they could
be brought to effect, that no good hope could be conceived of them; that the
true means was, without art, directly and plainly to rush down the abuses,
which are too clear and manifest, and that there was no greater difficulty to
obtain this which was the principal end, then there was to obtain the
pretense, which, being obtained, would be as much as nothing. And their
councels were no less different in another particular also. They all agreed;
in judging it necessary that the execution of the Decrees of the Council should
be so firm and stable, that it might not be altered. But there was some
difference between the Frenchmen and Spaniards, about the manner how to order
that the Decrees of that Council might neither be derogated from, nor altered
by the Pope, by dispensations; non obstanties, and such other clauses of Rome.
And therefore the Frenchmen disseigned that the superiority of the Council
above the Pope should be decided, or a constitution made, that the Decrees
thereof could nither be derogated from, nor dispensed with, which would be an
absolute remedy. The Spaniards thought it a hard point, and therefore not to
be attempted, because the Pope would always be favored by Princes, when he
should complain that his authoritiy was diminished, and would be assisted by
the greater part of the Italian Prelates, in regard of the dignity of their
Country, and for many private interests. And, for themselves, they thought it
sufficient that the Council should make the Decrees, purposing afterward to
obtain a pragmatique from the King upon them, by which means they would so
be established, that the Popes dispensations to the contrary could not enter
into Spain.

The Legates dispatched an express Currier, with a copy of the proposition of
the Cardinal of Loraine, and of the animaduersion of some Canonists made upon
it; showing that the Papal authority was in question, demanding that order
should be sent them what to do. Whereof the Cardinal, when he knew it, was
very sensible, and complained that having given the copy before he spoke in
the Congregation, and the Legates seeming to be pleased, they had afterward
showed so much distrust of him. He The Legates send the proposition of the
Card, of Loreine to Rome
said he thought it strange, that fear was apprehended by every thing that
either himself, or any of the French Prelates said, or did. He complained
that his Nation was wronged by the Italians, affirming, that, with his
Wherewith he is displeased.
own ears, he had hard some Italian Prelates scornefully use that scurrile
proverb, which was already made common throughout all Trent, that is; That
from the Spanish scabbe, we are fallen into the French pox: of which the other
Frenchmen did complain upon every occasion, and the Spaniards also. Whose
complaints, as the custom is did more incite the curious; and A disgrace full
proverb in Trent.
the suspicions and diffidences btweene the Nations did, with very great
danger, increase: neither were the Legates and wiser sort of Prelates able to
stop the motion, though they opposed both with authority and with persuasions.

The, Frenchmen, being provoked, did resolve to make proof of their liberty,
and agreed that, in the Congregation of the seventh day, the Cardinal of
Loraine should not be present, and that their Prelates who were to speak
should use freedom, and that, if they were reprehended, their Ambassadors
should protest; and Lansac, that they might know it and beware, in presence of
many of them, said to Antonius Lecius, Bishop of Orange, one of the speakers,
that he ought to speak freely, and without fear, and that the Kings
protection was sufficient to maintain him. This being reported to the
Legates, was a cause that they were heard with much patience, though they said
that the institution and jurisdiction of Bishops The French opinion concerning
the Popes authority.
was de iure diuino, as well as that of the Pope, and that there was no
difference, but in degree of superiority, and that the Popes authority is
confined within the limits of the Canons, relating, and commending the style of
the Parliaments of France; that, when any Popes Bull is presented which
contains any thing contrary to the Canons received in France, they pronounce
it to be abusiue, and forbid the execution. This liberty made the Papalins
use more respect in their speeches, though the proverb pleased them so well,
that sometimes some of the merry Prelates could not forbear to use it.

The pretense for the absence of the Cardinal of Loraine, was the advice of
the death of the King of Navarre, which came to Trent that day. This The death
of the King of Nauar made a great change in Trent, and in France
Prince, wounded with a bullet at the siege of Roan, in September, was never
well cured, and at the last, died. Near unto his death, he received the
Communion after the Catholic manner, at the persuasion of his Physician
Visentius Laurus, and afterward wauered toward the doctrine of the
Protestants, and so died the tenth of November. This accident made a great
mutation in the Council; and Loraine did suddenly change all his desseignes.
For that King had a principal hand in the Commissions given to the Cardinal
at his departure, so that he was uncertain whether, after his death, the
Queen, and others, would continue in the same heat. Besides, he saw a manifest
change in the whole government, and therefore desired to be in France, that
himself might bear part of it also. For the Prince of Conde being in open
dissension, distrusting the Queen and those who had power with her, the
Cardinal of Bourbon incapable, Montpensier in small credit, the Constable old,
of whom many also were emulous, he had a great conceit that his brother might
be the Chief for Arms, and himself for counsel. And he ruminated these
things in his mind, thinking but little of the Council, and of Trent, where
he was. The other Frenchmen said openly, they ought to thank God for the
death of the King, because he began to waver, and to join his own interests
with those of his brother, and of the other Hugonots.

The next day, being the eighth of December, was all spent in ceremonies, for
the election of Maximilian King of the Romans. The Arch bishop of Prague sang
the Mass of the holy Ghost, with the assistance of the whole Council: the
Bishop of Tininia made a sermon, in commendation of the Prince, and the
Cardinals and Ambassadors were invited by Prague.

So soon as the Diet was assembled in Francfort, the Prince of Conde sent, not
only to demand assistance from the Protestant Princes, but also to treat an
union of the Hugonots, with those of the Confession of Ausburg; and in
particular, to make a joint demand for a free new Council, in which the
resolutions of Trent might be examined, the Frenchmen of the old Catholic
Religion giving hope also that they would agree unto it, because it had been
promised to the Ambassador of France, (who afterward was created Cardinal
della Bordissiera) that it should be done. But the Dutch Protestants were most
auerse from the Council, so long as Germany might be in peace without it. And
therefore a book was printed in Francfort, full of excuses, and reasons, why
they neither would, nor could come to Trent, with protestation of the nullitie
of all that was, and would be done in that place.

The King was first anointed, and crowned King of Bohemia, in Prague, The
coronation of the King of Bohemia.
in presence of his father, the Emperor, by that Archbishop who went from
Trent into Bohemia, to perform that ceremony, that the King might have a
voice in the Imperial Diet. Being come to Francfort, they were forced to
expect until the Canons of Colon had elected their Archbishop, because that
Sea was then void; so that the Princes had much time to handle many matters,
expecting still in that place, that the number of seven might be full, by the
Coronation in Bohemia, and the election in Colen. They were troubled in Rome
with these thimgs, and afraid, that the Diet would send to Trent, to protest,
and that some new form would be used in the coronation, and the old
abolished, which would show an inclination to depart from the ancient Rites; or
that some promise would be made, by the new King, prejudicial to the Popes
authority. But the Emperor, and the King used much art to divert the
handling of points of Religion before the Election, which was made the 24 of
November, and the coronation the last The election of the King of the Romans.
of that month. In which the Electors, and other Protestant Princes stood at
the Mass until the Gospel was read, and then they went forth. This only
was new. But the Popes Nuncio took place above the Electours and Ambassadors.
The coronation being past, the Emperor began to practice with some of the
Protestants, that they would adhere to the Council of Trent; who, not to be
prevented, assembling themselves together, presented to the Emperor the
answer, promised 20. months before to his Ambassadors, in the assembly at
Namburg, which was deferred until then. Conditions required by the Protestants
of Germany, before they would assist the, Council.
In which having declared the causes why they had, inmany Imperial Diets,
appealed and did appeal again unto a free Council, they added the
conditions, which they held to be necessary, with which they offeredto assist
in a future general Council. 1. That it should be celebrated in Germany. 2.
That it should not be intimated by the Pope. 3. That he should not preside,
but be part of the Council, subject to the determinations thereof. 4. That the
Bishops and other Prelates should be freed from their oath given to the Pope,
that they may freely, and without impediment, deliver their opinions. 5. That
the holy Scripture might be judge in the Council, and all human authority
excluded. 6. That the Divines of the States of the Augustan Confession, sent to
the Council, might not only have a consulting, but deciding voice also, and
might have a Safe Conduct, both for their persons, and for the exercise of
their religion. 7. That the decisions in Council, should not be made, as in
Secular matters, by plurality of voices, but the more sound opinions
preferred, that is, those which were regulated by the word of God. 8. That the
acts of the Council of Trent should be made void, because it is partial,
celebrated by one part only, and not governed according to promise. 9. That if
a concord in religion cannot be concluded in the Council, the conditions of
Passau may remain inviolable, as also the peace of religion, made in Ausburg,
in the year 1555. may continue in strength and force, and every one bound
toobserue it. 10. That, concerning the foresaid conditions, a fit and
sufficient caution be given. The Emperor, having received the writing,
promised to labor for concord, and to use means that the Council may be
celebrated, where they cannot refuse, with reason, to assist, so that on their
part they would lay aside hatred and passion, which are contrary to Christian
peace. And, to this end, he offered to go in person to Trent, and resolved to
pass to Ispruc, so soon as the Diet was ended, where being distant from
Trent but four small days journey, he might in a short time effect whatsoever
was necessary.

But in Council the Prelates having made an end of giving voices concerning the
Institution, so much discussed: no resolution was made, because the Legates did
expect it from Rome: But they gave forth the Canon of Residence, having first
imparted it to the Cardinal of Loraine, which was, as was said before, without
the declaration whether it was de iure diuino, or no, but with rewards and
penalties. And Loraine, giving his voice first, said it was necessary to grant
power to the Bishops to absolve from cases reserved In caena Domini: which he
protested he spoke, not to diminish the authority of his Holiness, but
because, having seen in France that no transgressour thereof did care to go
or send to Rome for absolution, he thought it worse, both for the souls of the
people, and for the dignity of the Apostolic Sea, to leave them in those
censures. He added also that he thought it not fit so to tie Bishops to
residence, that they might not be absent for just causes, which were to be
referred to the judgment of his Holiness. He said moreover, that the public
emploiments in the affairs of Kingdoms, and republikes, were to be accepted,
because they seem not to be aliene from the Episcopal charge, especially in
Kingdoms, where the Ecclesiastical order is a member of the State, as in
France, and the Kingdoms, of Spain also. The Cardinal was very prolixe; and
howsoever he repeted often that Residence was necessary, and that it was fit to
make provision for it, yet he interposed so many exceptions, and excuses,
that, in the end, no man could judge whether he would have any constitution to
be made for it or no.

The Legates imparted the Articles of reformation for the future Session to the
Ambassadors also, according to promise, before they were proposed in
Congregation; which were all for remedies of the abuses in the Sacrament of
Order. And therefore the French Ambassadors and Bishops met in the house of
Loraine, to consider of them, and deputed four Bishops to examine whether any
thing was contained in them prejudicial to the privileges of the French
Church, or whether any thing might be added for the service of their Country,
and withal they gave order to the Ambassador de Ferrieres, to collect, in
Congregation of the same Bishops, all the reformations, formerly proposed in
Trent, under Paulus, and Julius, and in the present Council also, and in the
Congregation of Poisi, to make an abstract of them, and, adding unto them those
which were contained in the Kings instructions, and whatsoever seemed good unto
them besides, should compose Articles for all Christendom, and France
especially.

But the Imperialists, seeing that none of the Reformations mentioned by them
were proposed, called together all the Ambassadors. Prague spoke unto them, and
told them, that much time was consumed in Council with doing of nothing; that
the Legates had often promised to handle Reformation, and yet they were
entertained with speculations, or with provisions against small abuses; that it
was time to make an effectual instance that they would begin to handle
important and urgent matters, and that if all would join in requesting the
execution of so many promises, made by the Pope and the Legates, there might be
hope to obtain. All consented; but when they came to particulars, they were so
different, that they could not agree but in the general, only to demand a
Reformation. Whereupon it was resolved, that Prague, in delivering his voice,
should desire it, in the name of all; and so he did.

And, in the matter of residence, he said in few words, that the entertainments
being taken from the Prelates, which they enjoy in the Courts of Rome and other
Princes, any Decree would suffice. The opinion of the Archbishop of Otranto
was, that the Decree of the said Council under Paul the third was sufficient,
adding only the Popes Bull, dated the fourth of Sept. 1560. Others demanded
that the causes of absence, which the Synod deemeth to be lawful, should be
expressed, because the greatest difficulty is like to arise upon this point.
The Bull, named by Otranto, did contain a command of personal residence,
under the penalties, declared by the Council, and four graces to those which
reside. That is, that they may not be cited to the Court, but with Commission
signed by the Pope. That they shall be free from all impositions, ordinary and
extraordinary, though imposed at the petition of Princes. That they may
exercise jurisdiction against every Secular Clerk, or Regular, dwelling out of
his Cloister. That no appeal may lie from their sentences, but only from the
definitive. Others were content with the Decree; as it was porposed by the
Legates, but with some alteration, all fit for their own respects, which were
as many as there were persons. Some required that the declaration de iure
diuino, might be made. And there was a fourth opinion, that although it be de
iure diuino, yet it was not fit to make declaration thereof.

The Cardinal of Loraine assembled the French Prelates to dispute upon this
point; who concluded uniformly, that it was de iure diuino. The Bishop of
Angiu, was the first that gave his opinion so, and all the rest did follow him.
But in the general Congregation of the Synod, the Prelates were unspeakably
tedious; whereof the Cardinal of Loraine complained to the Legates, desiring
to have those matters dispatched, that they might come to the reformation,
repeating the words so often used, that if satisfaction be not given them in
Trent they will take it at home.

Friar Albertus Duimius Bishop of Veglia, alleging that the point of Residence
The suffrage of the Bishop of Veglia concerning residence
was discussed in the Council under Paul the third, and the decision deferred
until another time, said, that therefore it was necessary to see the reasons
then alleged by the Prelates; that now they had given their voices without
alleging reasons, which himself would not do, esteeming reasons more then
authority and multitude of opinions. And then he began to recite all the
reasons for proof that it is de iure diuino, and to resolve the contrary. He
insisteth much upon the saying of CHRIST, A good shepherd goes before the
flock, calls every sheep by name, runs through the desert to seek that
which is lost, and lays down his life for them. He shows that this was
understood of all those whom CHRIST has instituted Pastors; which are all
those who have cure of souls, especially the Bishops, as Saint Paul, said and
wrote to the Ephesians; that whosoever did hold himself not to be bound by the
Decree of CHRIST to perform these offices, or was more fit for the affairs of
Kingdoms, or Commonwealths, ought to leave the charge of a Pastor, and apply
himself to those matters only; that it is very much to perform one charge
well, but to perform two, which be contrary, is impossible. His prolixitie did
not please the Cardinals, because he was the first that disputed that matter
with reason. He spoke with great vehemency, using many phrases and words,
taken out of Saint Hierome. Simoneta would willingly have interrupted him, but
forbear, in regard of the occurrence of the Bishop of Guadice. But he called
him, in the presence of many Prelates, and reprehended him sharply for speaking
against the Pope. The Bishop defended himself humbly, and with reasons: and a
few days after, alleging indisposition, asked leave to depart, and had it,
and departed the one Who quieteth Trent for fear.
and twentieth of the month.

After this time the controversy about residence changed state, and those The
Prelates are terrified with ye Popes authority.
who did abhor it, did labor no more to demonstrate by reasons or
authority, as until then they had done, that it was of the law of man, but
began to terrify those of the contrary opinion, by saying, that to maintain
that it was de iure diuino, was to diminish the Popes authority; because it
would follow that he could not enlarge or diminish, divide or unite, change or
transfer Episcopal Seas, nor leave them vacant, or gave them an
administration, or commenda; that he could not restrain, much less take away
the authority to absolve; that, by this determination, all dispensations
granted by Popes, were condemned at once, and power taken away to grant them
hereafter. The other part, who saw the necessity of those consequences, which
they thought were not unfit, but that it was the truth, and the lawful use of
the ancient Church, and that the declaration was proposed for no other end
then to remove those inconveniences, themselves also omitting to use reasons
and authority, to prove it to be de iure diuino, began to show, that
residence being restored by that declaration, it would turn to the
enlargement of the Popes power, and increase the reverence toward the Clergy,
and especially toward the Pope, who has lost authority in so many Provinces,
because Bishops, not residing, but governing by unable Vicars, have left a way
open for the sowing of new doctrines, which, with so much detriment of the
Popes authority, have taken root. If Bishops do reside, his authority will
be preached every where, and confirmed where it is acknowledged as yet, and
restored where it has been shaken. Neither of the parties could speak with
such terms, but that their dissimulation was perceived on both sides, and
their inward thoughts, which they would have concealed, were but too manifest.
They were all masked, and yet all known. Being assembled again the sixteenth
of December, one half of the Prelates having not as yet given their voices,
Cardinal Seripando proposed the prorogation of the Session; and being not
able then to foresee when they could dispatch, they resolved to prefixe a
certain time, within fifteen days. And the Cardinal admonished the Prelates
of their great prolixitie, in giving their voices, which did aim only at
ostentation, took away the reputation of the Council, and did prolong it, to
the great in commodity of them all.

The Pope was much afflicted with the death of Frederick Boromeo his nephew,
which happened in the end of the last month; upon whom thinking to confer
all the greatness of his house, he had married him to a daughter of the Duke
of Vrbin, made him general governor of the Church, and purposed also to give
him the Dukedom of Camerino, and because he was old, and oppressed with
grief, he fell into a dangerous sickness; out of which being recovered, he
applied his mind to the affairs of the Council. He held diverse
Congregations, to find a temper concerning the two Canons, of the Institution,
and of Residence, which were thought by all the Court to be very dangerous for
the Popes authority; as also to make some provision against the prolixitie of
the Prelates, in delivering their opinions, because it did prolong the Council,
and left a gate open for all those to enter, who would attempt any thing
against his dignity. Above all, that which was desseigned by the Frenchmen did
trouble him, especially, because he did never receive Letters from Trent; in
which it was not said, that either the Cardinal of Loraine, or some of the
Ambassadors did make request for reformation, with this addition, that if they
could not obtain those provisions they demanded, they would make them at home,
making mention often of providing against the annats, preuentions, and other
things properly belonging to the Pope of Rome. He resolved to deal plainly
with the Frenchmen; and to those which were in Rome he said, that, having so
often offered to treat with the King concerning his own rights, and to come to
a friendly composition, and seeing that his ministers in the Council do
always make show that they will speak of them in the Synod, he was resolute
to see whether he would break out into an open dissension with him. He gave
order, by an express currier, to his Nuncio in France to speak hereof; and
wrote to the Cardinal of Loraine, that those matters could not be proposed in
Council, without breach of the Kings promises, expressly made unto him, by
Monsieur d' Auxerres. He complained in Consistory of the impertinencie of the
Bishops in Trent, in making every thing long, to no purpose. He exhorted the
Cardinals to write to their friends, and himself wrote to the Legates, to use
threats and authority, seeing that persuasions did no good. Concerning the
Articles of the Institution he wrote, that to make the institution of Bishops
absolutely de iure diuino, was a false opinion, and erroneous; because the
power of Order was from CHRIST, but of jurisdiction from the Pope, which, in
this respect, may be said to be from CHRIST, because the Papal authority
comes from his Divine Majesty, so that whatsoever the Pope does, CHRIST
does by him. And, for a resolution, he wrote, that either the words de iure
diuino, should be quite omitted, or they should be used in that form which
he sent, in which it was said that CHRIST did institute Bishops to be created
by the Pope, who may distribute to them what and how much authority it pleased
him to give them, for the benefit of the Church, having absolute power to
restrain and amplify that which is given, as seems good unto him. Then he
wrote, that, in the particular of Residence, it being a clear case that the
Pope has power to dispense, they should, by all good caution of words, reserve
his authority in the Decree, in which the words de iure Diuino, could by no
means be put; as Catharinus had well proved, from whose opinion, being
Catholic, they ought not to depart. For holding the Session, he wrote
confusedly, that it should not be deferred above fifteen days, nor
celebrated before the matter were in order, that the envious might not take
occasion to calumniate.

A solemn Embassage from the Duke of Bauaria passed by Trent to go The Duke
of Bauaria sondeth Ambassadors to Rome.
to Rome, to obtain of the Pope the communion of the Cup. They had audience
with the Legate, and secret conference with the Cardinal of Loraine. This
wakened the controversy in that matter, which was asleep; and the Spaniards,
and many Italians, (howsoever the matter was referred to the Pope by the mayor
part) said it would be a prejudice to the Council, if, while that lasted,
that use should be permitted. And all the Fathers were in a hurly burly,
because letters came from Rome to diverse Prelates, that the Council should be
suspended, which report was confirmed by Don John Manriques who passed by
Trent, from Germany to Rome. But the Legates, having received the Popes letters,
thought it impossible to execute the orders he had sent, and that it was
necessary to give him a more particular account of the occurrences, then could
be done by writing, and make him understand that the Council cannot be
governed as at Rome they think it can, that they might receive a more plain
instruction from his Holiness what they should do. And it being necessary to
send a man of judgment, well informed, and of credit with the Pope; they
found none better then the Bishop of Ventimiglia, whom they resolved to
dispatch with speed. The Holy Days The Legates send the B. of Ventimiglia to
the Pope.
of Christmasse approaching gave them fit occasion first to proceed slowly, and
afterward to intermit the congregations and so to have leisure to make that
dispatch; which was done the six and twentieth of December.

The eight and twentieth, news came to Trent, of the battle in France, which
happened the seventeenth of the month, in which the Prince of Conde The battle
and other troubles in France.
was taken prisoner. That Kingdom was very turbulent all that year, for the
differences of religion, which gave a beginning first unto a gentle, and
afterward unto a furious war. For the Hugonots increasing in Paris, to the
great discontent of the Catholics, who are many in the City, and adhering to
the Prince of Conde, the Constable, with his sons, and the house of Guise,
with some others, to hinder the greatness unto which that Prince did aspire,
made a league, and desseigned to make themselves leaders of the people of
Paris, and to chase, by their means, from that City and the Court, the Prince
and his followers. Each of them departing from his house, to go toward Paris,
and in the journey slaying and dispersing the Hugonots, whom they found
assembled in diverse places, they entered into Paris; and, having drawn the King
of Navarre to their side, and caused the city to arm in their favor, the
Queen was constrained to join with them. Hereupon the Prince going out of
Paris, and retiring, with his adherents, to Orlience, manifests and writings
passed on both sides, each protesting they did nothing but for the liberty and
service of the King. But the Constable and Guise waxing every day stronger, in
April the Prince wrote to all the reformed Churches of France, demanding
soldiers, and money, and declaring war against the defenders of the
Catholic party, calling them perturbers of the public quiet, and violaters
of the Kings Edict, published in favor of the Reformatists. The Princes
letters were accompanied with others of the ministers of Orleans, and of some
other cities, which caused those of that Religion to arm. And there fell out
an accident which did incite them more* For at the same time the Edict of
January (whereof we have already made mention) was published again in Paris,
with an addition, that neither in the suburbs of the City, nor within the
space of a league any assembly of Religion should be held, or Sacraments
administered but after the old Rite. And in the end of May the King of Nauar
made all the Reformatists go out of Paris; but proceeded with such moderation,
that none of them were offended.

War brake forth in all the Provinces of France, between these parties; and
that summer there were at the least, ^^urteene formal Armies, all at one time,
in diverse parts of the Kingdom. The sons fought against their fathers,
brothers against brothers, and even women took Arms on both sides, for
defense of their religion. There was almost no part in Dolphinie, Languedoc,
and Gascoigne, which was not vexed oftentimes, the Catholics, remaining
conquerours in some places, and the Reformatists in others, with such variety
of accidents, that it would be redious to repeat them, and besides our
purpose, which requires that nothing should be related by us but concerning
Trent, except those which have a connection with the Council, as the things
following have. Where the Hugonots overcame, the images were beaten down, the
altars destroyed the Churches spoiled, and the ornaments of gold and silver
melted, to make money for soldiers pay where the Catholics were conquerors,
they burned the Bibles in the vulger tongue, rebaptized children, and remaried
those who had been married according to the new ceremonies. And the condition
of the Clergy on both sides was most miserable, who, whenever they were
taken, were cruelly murdered, without all humanity. In Iulie the Parliament of
Paris made a Decree, that it should be lawful to slay all the Hugonots,
which, by public order, was read every Sunday in every Parish. Afterward they
added another, declaring them rebels, public enemies, themselves infamous, and
all their posterity, and the goods of those who took Arms in Orliens
confiscated, A bloody decree made by the Parliament of Paris.
except Conde, upon pretense that they held him by force. And howsoever there
were many treaties between the parties, and a verbal conference also between
the Queen Mother, and the Prince, yet such was the ambition of the Grandies,
that it was impossible to find out any means of composition.

But the King of Nauar being dead, who perhaps would not have suffered them to
proceed to an open war, the Queen resolving to regaine obedience The Low
Countries do ^^itate France.
with arms, demanded aid of all the Princes. And because the people of the
Low Countries did learn, by this example, to be more contumacious, and
obstinate, the Kings authority diminished every day, and could not be repaired
by the Governors. And the King refused to go thither to oppose his person
against the ill disposition of the people, and the dessignes of the Grandies,
as Granuel, the chief in that Government, had given him counsel* For that
wise King knew how dangerous it was to be contemned to his face, and doubted
that, in stead of gaining Flanders he should make it more contumacious, and,
in the mean while, loose Spain. But he thought The Queen mother resuseth the
Spanish army.
that by subduing the Frenchmen, who rebelled against their King, he might
make an absolute provision against the contumacie of his own. Subjects. And
therefore he offered the Queen great assistance of men and money, sufficient
to subject the whole Kingdom unto her. But the Queen refused the men and
demanded the money, knowing that if she had received a Spanish army, she
should have been forced to govern France, not according to her own intrests,
but of the King of Spain. Yet taking a middle course, she received six
thousand men, with which, and with her own forces, conducted by the Constable,
and the Duke of Guise, the battle was made the seventeenth day aforesaid, in
which three thousand Hugonots; and five thousand Catholics were slain, and
the Generals on both sides Conde, and the Constable taken prisoners. Neither of
the armies was discomsited, by venue of the Lieutenants on both sides, Guise
for the Catholics, and Colignie for the Hugonots. The Queen did make Guise
the General, which did not deter Collignie from maintaining his army,
preserving the places he possessed, and making some progress also.

For this victory (for so it was called, though it deserved not the name)
thanks were given to God in Trent, by all the Fathers assembled together
making a procession and singing a Mass, Franciscus Belcarrus Bishop of Metz,
made an Oration also, in which, relating all the story of the confusions of
France, since the death of Francis the second, and the success of the last
war^e, Solemnities are used in Trent for the victory in France.
he gave the praise of all that was well done to the Duke of Guise only. He
said Martin Luther was cause of all those troubles, who, though but a little
spark, had raised a great fire, first in Germany, and afterward in all the
Provinces of Christendom, except Italy and Spain. He exhorted the Fathers
to assist the Christian commonwealth, because they only were able to
extinguish that flame. He told them that this was the six and twentieth year
since Paul the third began to heal this disease, by intimating the Council
there; which was first deferred, then dissembled, and finally celebrated with
diverse factions, until it was transferred to Bolonia, where there were many
dilations, and greater contentions, and more bitter factions then before.
Afterward it was recalled to Trent, and, by reason of the wars dissolved.
Now that they were come to the last, there was no more place for dissimulation,
because the Council would either reconcile the whole world, or cast it
headlong into an infallible ruin. Therefore it was fit that the Fathers should
not regard their private interests, nor have particular designs, nor speak in
favor of others, in regard the cause of religion was in question, which will
be utterly overthrown, if they cast their eye upon any thing besides. This
liberty of speech he tempered with flattery, first toward the Pope, then
toward the Emperor, kings of the Romans, and of Polonia. He passed to the
commendations of the Queen Mother of France, and of the King of Portugal, and,
in the end, exhorted them to reform the Ecclesiastical discipline.

The Cardinal of Loraine, having received news of the imprisonment of the
Prince; was very glad, particularly for the honor of his brother, and desired
the more to return quickly into France, to assist him in the Court and in the
Kings Council, and to raise himself also one degree higher, in regard Nauar
and the Constable, to whom he was neccessarily to yield, were both taken away.

The Pope was full of suspicion for the journey to Ispruc, which the Emperor
The Pope is troubled that the Emperor will go to Ispruc.
had published, thinking he would not go thither without great designs, and
without assurance to effect them. He believed he had secret intelligence with
France and Spain, but knew not to what end, but only in general, that it
was a plot against him. Therefore he resolved to go in person to Bolonia, to
send eight or ten Cardinals to Trent, to make greater alliance with the
Italian Princes, and to confirm the Prelates his adherents in Council, until
be could find some occasion to dissolve or suspend it. And ^o hinder all
treaties in Trent of reforming the Court, he labored much himself in that
business. He reformed the Rota, publishing a Brief, dated the seven and
twentieth of December, in which he ordained, that no Audit^r should proceed to
a definitive, howsoever the case might be plain, before he made the
proposition to the whole College, without 1563 PIUS 4. FE^^INAND. --
ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. PHILIP 2.
consent of the parties; that the sentences propounded in writing, should be
produced within fifteen days; that the causes of the Auditors themselves, or
of their kinsfolk unto the second degree, or of any of their family, shall
not be heard in the Rota, that the parties shall not be forced to receue an
Advocate; that no decision shall be made against those which be printed,
except two thirds of the voices do consent: that they shall be bound to remit
every cause which seems to be criminal. In the same Bull he made also a
tax for moderation of fees. He reformed likewise by other Bulls, published
the first of the next January, the signature of justice, the tribunals of
Rome, the office of the Friscall Advocate, ordaining what fees they should
have. But the usual extorsions were so far from being redressed by those
provisions, that by transgressing the new orders, they learned to violate the
old which were in some use.

The Courtiers in Rome thinking the Catholics in France had gotten an absolute
victory, and that the Hugonots were reduced to nothing, were exceeding glad.
For believing that France had obtained that by Arms which it expected from the
Synod, and there being no further regard to be had of Germany, which
protested against it, they thought that all causes of holding the Council were
ceased, so that it might be suspended or deferred, and them selves delivered
from fear, which had increased every week, by reason of the nouities which
happened in Trent. But the Pope made no great matter of it. For being informed
that the Catholic forces were not augmented, nor the Hugonots diminished, and
that this battle would give occasion to treat a peace, which could not be
without his prejudice, nor without giving matter of more nouities in Trent, he
was more afraid and troubled then before. And the year 1562. ended thus; a
congregation in Trent having been held the thirtieth of the month, in which
it was resolved to prolong the Session, and appoint a day for it within
fifteen days.

The year 1563. began in Council with the presentation of the articles, of
reformation made by the French Ambassadors, which seemed very hard to the
Legates and all the Papalins; especially in those particulars in which 1563 The
Articles of reformation.
they would have the Rites of the Roman Church altered, and in which the
emoluments and profits, which the Apostolic Sea received from other Churches,
were touched. The Ambassadors added the usual Appendix, not to call it a
protestation, that if their propositions were not embraced, they would provide
for their necessities in France. The Legates were sure the Pope would be vexed
heerewith, in regard of the promise made unto him, that they would not treat in
Council of the Annats, and other pecumarie Rites; but friendly compose the
matter with him. Therefore they thought it necessary to send them to him by a
Prelate, and to inform The Bishop of Viterbois sent to the Pope.
his Holiness. And they elected the Bishop of Viterbo, as being well
instructed in the affairs of France, where he had been Nuncio many yeeresand
in the designs of the Cardinal and French Prelates of the Council, with whom
he had conuersed since their arrival. The Cardinal of Loraine, informed
hereof, persuaded them to do so, and himself gave him instructions, to
speak with the Pope. The Bishop was so nimble, that howsoever the Cardinal
held that he was sent unto him for a spy, and an obseruer, yet he carried
himself so well, that he gained the confidence of him and the Ambassadors,
without losing that which the Pope and Legates had in him. The Prelate went
with instruction to represent to the Pope all the difficulties which the Legates
found, and to bring back a resolution how they should govern themselves in
every particular. He had instructions from Loraine to desire his Holiness to
take in good part that which was desired by the King for the necessity of his
Kingdom, and by them to execute the commands of his Majesty, and to offer his
endeavors to accommodate the differences of the institution of Bishops, and of
residence, which held the Council employed in small matters.

The Emperors ministers, seeing the Reformation of the Frenchmen, and
considering the Proheme, thought they were noted to have but small authority.
They complained to the Legates that the Articles of reformation, mentioned by
the Emperor and by them, had not been proposed, though they had given copies
of them, sent them to Rome, and spread them throughout Trent; desiring they may
be put together with those of the Frenchmen. The Legates excused themselves, in
regard of the liberty which the Emperor by letters, and themselves by word of
mouth had given them, to propose and omit what seemed them good, adding, that
they did expect a fit time, and that indeed the Frenchmen had not found a good
conjecture, while the differences of the two Canons does continue, which gives
much trouble to his Holiness. The Amdassadours were not so satisfied, saying,
there was a great difference between omitting all, and a part; and between
deferring, whiles in the mean space things are concealed with due respect, and
diuulging them, and putting them in derision. And Simoneta replied, that it was
hard to discern which were fit to be proposed, but easy to know which were
to be omitted, in the end they were content to expect what the Pope would say
to the French propositions, so that afterward theirs might be proposed. The
French Prelates had consented, in general terms, to the Articles belonging to
Rites, and to the grieuances of Bishops, which in their secret thoughts they
did not approve, because they believed that, in the discussion of them, they
should have the Spaniards, and many of the Italians their opposites; but seeing
they were sent to Rome, they were afraid that the Pope opposing those which
touched his revenues; would yield to the others, and by composition be content
to give way to those which were prejudicial to them, to avoid others which
concerned his own interest. For this cause they made secret practices with the
other Prelates, persuading a moderation; which being done after the French
fashion, without much caution, was known to the Ambassadors. Therefore Lansac
assembled them all, and reprehended them sharply, for daring to oppose the
will of the King, Queen, of the whole council, and of the Kingdom. He
exhorted them, not only not to labor against, but to promote the Kings
determination. And the admonition was very rigorous.

But before we relate the negotiation in Rome, it will not be amiss to
declare the substance of the French proposition, which presently was printed in
Ripa and Padua, and contained: That the Ambassadors had determined long since,
in performance of the Kings command, to propose to the Council the things
contained in that writing; but the Emperor having proposed almost the same
things, not to importune the Fathers, they had expected to see what the Pope
would resolve concerning the propositions of his Imperial Majesty. Now having
received a new commandment from the King, and seeing the instance of the
Emperor deserred longer then they thought, they resolved not to make any more
delay, not desiring any thing singular, or separate from the residue of
Christendom; and that the King, expecting that esteem should be held of his
propositions, does notwithstanding refer the judgment and knowledge of them
all to the fathers. The points were four and thirty. 1. That Priests The
French propsitions.
should not be ordained before they were old, and had a good testimony of the
people, that they had lived well, and that their carnalities and transgressions
should be punished according to the Canons. 2. That holy Orders should not be
conferred at the same time when the inferior were, but that every one should
be approved in these, before he ascended to those. 3. That a Priest should
not be ordained, before he had a Benefice, or ministry, according to the
Council of Chalcedon, at which time a presbyterall title without an Office was
not heard of. 4. That the due function should be restored to Deacons, and
other holy Orders, that they may not seem to be bare names, and for ceremony
only. 5. That the Priests and other Ecclesiastical Ministers should attend to
their vocation, not meddling in any office, but in the divine ministry. 6. That
a Bishop should not be made but of a lawful age, manners, and doctrine, that
he may teach, and give example to the people. 7. That no Parish Priest should
be made but of approved honesty, able to instruct the people, celebrate the
sacrifice, administer the Sacrament, and teach the use and effect of them to
the receivers. 8. That no Abbat or Conuentual Prior should be created, who
has not studied divinity in some famous University, and obtained the degree of
Master, or some other. 9. That the Bishop, by himself, or by other preachers,
as many as are sufficient, according to the proportion of the Diocese, should
preach every Sunday and Holyday, and in Lent, on fasting days, and in Aduent,
and as often as it shall be fit. 10. That the parish Priest should do the
same as often as he has auditors. 11. That the Abbat and Conuentuall Prior
shall read the holy Scripture, and institute an Hospital, so that the ancient
Schools and hospitality may be restored to the Monasteries. 12. That Bishops,
Parish Priests, Abbats, and other Ecclesiastiques, unable to perform their
charge, shall receive Coadiutors, or leave their Benefices. 13. That concerning
the Catechism, and summarie instruction of Christian doctrine, that should be
ordained which the Emperor has proposed to the Council. 14. That no man
should have more then one benefice, taking away the differences of the quality
of persons, and of Benefices compatible and incompatible, a new division not
heard of in the ancient Decrees, and a cause of many troubles in the Catholic
Church; and that the regular Benefices should be give into regulars, and
secular to seculars. (...) That he who now has two or more, shall retain that
only which he shall choose within a short time, or shall incur the penalty of
the ancient Canons. 16. That to take away all note of avarice from the Clergy,
nothing be taken, upon any pretense whatsoever, for the administration of holy
things; but that provision be made that the Curates, with two Clerks or more
may have whereon to live and mainetaine hospitality, which may be done by the
Bishops by uniting benefices or assigning tenths unto them, or, where that
cannot be done, the Prince may provide for them by (...) or collections,
imposed upon the Parishes. 17. That in parish Masses, the Gospel be expounded
clearly, according to the capacity of the people, and that the prayers which
the Parish Priest makes together with the people be in the vulgar tongue, and
that, the sacrifice being ended in Latin, public prayers be made in the
vulgar tongue likewise, and that at the same time, or in other hours;
spiritual hymns or Psalms of David, approved by the Bishop, may be sung in
the same language. 18. That the ancient Decree of Leo and Gelasius, for the
Communion under both kinds, be renewed. 19. That before the administration of
every Sacrament, an exposition be made in the vulgar, so that the ignorant may
understand their use and efficacy. 20. That according to the ancient Canons,
benefices may not be conferred by the Vicars, but by the Bishops themselves,
within the term of six months, otherwise that the collation may be deuolued
to the next Superior, and, by degrees to the Pope. 21. That the Mandats of
Provision, expectatiues, regresses, resignations in confidence, and commendaes
be revoked, and banished out of the Church, as contrary to the Decrees. 22.
That the resignations in favor be wholly exterminated from the Court of Rome,
it being as it were an election of ones self, or a demanding of a successor,
a thing prohibited by the Canons. 23. That simple Priories, from which the cure
of souls is taken away, contrary to the foundation, and assigned to a
perpetual Vicar, with a small portion of tithes, or of other renenue, be
restored to their former state at the first vacancie. 24. That benefices, unto
which no office of preaching, administering the Sacraments, nor any other
Ecclesiastical charge is annexed, may have some spiritual cure imposed upon
them, by the Bishop, with the council of the chapter, or be united to the
next parishes, because no Benefice ought or can be without an office. 25. That
pensions be not imposed upon benefices, and those abolished which are imposed
already, that the Ecclesiastical revenues may be spent in maintaining the
Pastors, and poor, and in other works of piety. 26. That Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction throughout the whole Diocese be restored to the Bishops, all
exemptions being taken away, but of the chief governors of the Orders and
Monasteries subject unto them, and those who make general Chapters, to whom
exemptions are granted by a lawful title, but yet with provision that they be
not exempted from correction. 27. That the Bishop may not use jurisdiction, and
handle matters of great weight concerning the Diocese, without the counsel of
the Chapter; and that the Canons may reside continually in the Churches, be of
good conversation, learned, and at the least 25. years of age, in regard the
laws, not giving them the free disposition of their goods before that time,
they ought not to be made counselors to Bishops. 28* That the degrees of
affinity, consanguinity, and spiritual kindred be observed, or reformed, and
that it may not be lawful to dispense therein, but with Kings and Princes,
for the public good. 29. That, in regard many troubles have risen by means
of images; the Synod would make provision, that the people may be taught what
they ought to believe concerning them; and that the abuses and superstitions,
if any be used in the worship of them may be taken away: and that the same be
done concerning indulgences, pilgrimages, relics of Saints, and of companies
or confraternities. 30. That the public and ancient penance in the Catholic
Church forgrieuous and public offenses, be restored and brought into use as
also fastings and other exercises of sorrow, and public prayers to appease
the wrath of God. 31. That excommunication be not decreed for every sort of
offense, or contumacie, but only for the greatest, and in which the offender
does persevere after admonition. 32. That, to abbreuiate or quite take away
suits of law for benefices, by which the whole Clergy is blemished, the
distinction of petitorie and possessorie, newly invented in those causes, may
be taken away, nominations of Universities abolished, and a commandment given
to Bishops, to give benefices not to those that seek them, but to those that
avoid them, and are worthy of them: and their merit will be known, if, after
their degree received in the University, they shall have spent some time in
preaching, with the consent of the Bishop, and approbation of the people. 33.
That there being a suit for a benefice, an Economique may be created, and
arbitrators elected by the litigants; which in case they refuse to do, that
the Bishop may nominate, and that these may determine the controversy within
six months, and that no appeal may lie from them. 34, That the Episcopal
Synods may be held once a year at the least and the Provincial once in every
three years, and the General, if th ere be none impediment, every tenth
year.

The first of January Vintimiglia arrived in Rome, having made the journey The
negotiation of the Bishop of Vintimiglia in Rome
in seven days. He presented the letters to the Pope, and declared his
credence, relating the cogitations and diverse ends and humors which were in
the Council, and in what sort the Legates and other good servants of his
Holiness thought the difficulties ought to be managed. The Pope held a
congregation the third day, and gave account of the relation of Vintimiglia,
showed he was satisfied with the diligence and wisdom of the Legates, and
commended the good will of Loraine, and gave order that they should consult
upon the point of the institution of Bishops, which did then especially press
them. The sixth day being the anniuersarie of his coronation, he held another
Congregation, in whch he published Cardinals Ferdinando de Medici, and
Frederico Gonzaga; the former to consolate his father for the miserable death
of another son, who was Cardinal also, and the other to gratify the Legate
Mantue, and others of the family nearly allied to him by a marriage of the
Legates nephew to a sister of Cardinal Borromeo. Yet the Pope did not omit to
assist at the Consultation concerning the affairs of the Council, and
resolved to write to the Legates, that the Canon of the institution of Bishops
should be thus composed: That the Bishops do hold the principal place in the
Church, depending of the Pope of Rome, and that they are by him assumed, in
partem solicitudinis. And in the Canon concerning the Popes power, that it
should be said; that he has authority to feed and govern the Universal
Church, in place of Christ, from whom all authority has been communicated to
him, as General Vicar: but in the Decree of doctrine they should enlarge the
words of the Council of Florence; which are, that the holy Apostolic Sea, and
Pope of Rome has the Primacie in all The Popes (...)tter to the Legates.
the world, and is Successor of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, the true
Vicar of CHRIST, the Head of all Churches, Father and Master of all Christians,
to whom, in Saint Peter, by CHRIST our LORD, has been given full power to
feed, rule, and govern the Universal Church: adding, that by no means they
should depart from that form, which he was certain would be received. For
the substance of it being taken out of a general Council, he that should
oppose, would show himself to be a Schismatike, and fall into the censures,
which, by the providence of God, having always been inflicted upon the
contumacious, with the greater exaltation of the Apostolic Sea, he was
confident that the cause of the Church would not be abandoned by the Divine
Majesty, nor by the good Catholics; and he hoped that in the mean space
Vintimiglia would be returned, whom he meant to dispatch shortly, with more
ample instructions. He resolved to go to Bolonia, that he might be near,
and so the better embrace all occasions of finishing or translating the
Council, which, before they could be advised to Rome, did vanish. He caused
a Bull to be made, and in case he should die before his return, the Election
should be made in Rome by the College of Cardinals.

The Currier was not so soon dispatched for Trent with these Letters, The
negotiation of the Bishop of Viterbo.
but Viterbo arrived with the French Reformation, and revived his trouble. The
Pope, when he heard it first read, was extremely impatient, and brake out
into these words, that the end of it was to take away the Datarie, the Rota,
the Signatures, and finally all the Apostolic authority. But afterward he
was much pacified (...) the Bishop, who told that his Holiness might be able
to divert some things, and moderate others, granting some few of them. He
delivered to him the instruction of Loraine; which was, that Princes demand
many things, to obtain those of which they have most need; which do not much
concern the Apostolic Sea; as the use of the Cup, use of the vulgar tongue,
and marriage of Priests, in which, if his Holiness would give satisfaction, it
would be easy for him to receive honor from the Council, and to obtain his
wished end. He showed that many of those Articles did not please the French
Bishops themselves, who endeavored to cross them. The Pope understanding these
things, gave order that the Articles should be discussed in Congregation, and
that Viterbo and Vintimiglia should be present, to inform the occurrences at
large; in which it was resolved, that the Divines and Canonists should write
concerning those propositions, and every one deliver his opinion in paper; And
to make some diuersion in France, he gave order to Ferrara to release those
forty thousand Crowns to the King, without any condition, and to tell him
that the Proposition of his Ambassadors in Trent, were fit in many parts for
the Reformation of the Church, which he desired not only to have Decreed, but
to be put in execution also, yet so, as that he did not approve them all,
because some were to the diminution of the Kings authority, who will be
deprived of the collation of Abbeys, which is a great help to his Majesty to
reward his good servants; that the ancient Kings, having their Bishops too
potent, in regard of their great authority, and con(...)acious against the
Regal power, did desire the Popes to moderateiy; but now the Ambassadors by
their propositions, would restore that license, which the Predecessors of his
Majesty did wisely procure to be cur^ed. Concerning the Popes authority, that
it could not be taken away, because it was given by CHRIST, by whom Saint Peter
and his successors were made Pastor^ of the universal Church, and
Administrators of all Eclesiasticall goods, that, by taking away the pensions,
he shall not have power to give alms, which is one of the most principal
charges which the Pope has throughout all the world; that faculty to confer
some Benefices has been by favor granted to Bishops, as Ordinaries, which
is not fit to be extended to the prejudice of the Universal Ordinary, which
is the Pope, that as Tithes are due to the Church de iure divine, so the tenth
of the Tithes of all Churches is due to the Pope, that, for more commodity,
this has been changed into Annats; that in case they were incommodious for the
Kingdom of France, he did not refuse to find a temper, so that the right of
the Apostolic Sea were in some convenient manner, preserved; but that, as he
had often given him to understand, this could not be handled in Council, nor
by any but himself. In the end he gave the Cardinal charge, that having put
all these things to the Kings consideration, he should exhort him to give new
Commissions to his Ambassadors.

The Pope sent also to Trent the censures concerning those Articles, made by
diverse Cardinals, Prelates, Divines, and Canonists of Rome, with order The Pope
writes again to the Prelates.
that they should defer to speak of them as long as was possible; that the
Article of Residence, and the abuses concerning the Sacrament of Order, might
entertain them many days; that when there was necessity to propose them,
they should begin with those which were least prejudicial, as those which
appertain to manners, and doctrine, deferring to treat of those which concern
Rites, and Benefices; that, in case they were forced to propose them, imparting
their objections to the Prelates their adherents, they should put them in
discussion and controversy, and that, in the mean while, he would give order
for that which he had resolved besides. And this he wrote to the Legates.

In the end of the month, he delivered in Consistory, that the greatest
Princes of Christendom did demand reformation, which could not be denied them,
neither by true reasons, nor by pretenses: and therefore that he was resolved
to give a good example, and, not to fail of his duty, to begin with
himself, providing against the abuses of the Datary, taking away the
coadiutories, regresses, resignations in favor, and that the Cardinals ought
not only to consent unto it, but to publish it to all. The good intention of
his Holiness was generally commended. But some considered that those uses were
brought in to take away greater abuses of manifest Simonie, and unlawful
bargains, and that they were to take care, that, remoouing those tolerable
inconveniences, which indeed are but against the law of man, a gatebee not
opened for the return of those which are against the Law of GOD. The Cardinal
of Trent said, that it would be a great prejudice to take away the
Coadiutories in Germany, because those Bishoprics being annexed to
principalities, if Coadiutories could not be had for both together, they must
be had for the principality alone, and so the temporal would be divided from
the spiritual, which would be the utter overthrow of the Church. The
Cardinal Nauaggiero opposed the making of Germany different, saying that the
Dutchmen being the first that demanded reformation, they ought to be
comprehended at the last. Afterward the Pope related how many enterprises were
used in Council against the privileges of the Roman Church, and spoke of
Annats, Reseruations, and preuentions. He said they were necessary Subsidies,
to maintain the Pope, and College of Cardinals, whereof as themselves were
partakers, so it was fit they should labor to defend them, and that he would
send a number of them to Trent, for this service.

In which place, the next day after the arrival of the currier, who brought
The Canons sent from Rome.
from Rome the canons of the institution, which was the fifteenth of January,
a day appointed to resolve on the certain time of celebrating the Session, a
Congregation was held, and a resolution made to defer the determination
until the fourteenth of February. And a copy was given of the decrees of the
Institution, with order that the Congregations should begin, in which they
should be discussed. And the care of reforming the decree of Residence was
committed to Loraine, and Madruccio, together with those Fathers whom they
pleased to take unto them. In the congregations following the forms which came
from Rome were, with facility, approved by the Patriarchs, and the most
ancient Archbishops, but many difficulties were alleged against them by the
Spaniards, and more by the Frenchmen. This passage (That Bishops do hold the
principal place depending of the Pope) was questioned, Do not absolutely
please the Fathers.
because the form of speech was ambiguous, which ought to have been plain.
After long discussion, they were content to admit that it should be said,
Chief under the Pope, but not dependent. Some also oppugned those words, that
Bishops were assumed by the Pope into part of the charge, but would have it
said. That they were appointed by CHRIST, to take part of the cure: alleging
the place of Saint Cyprian: There is but one Bishopric, of Which every one
holds a part in solidum. And for the point of the authority to feed, and to
govern the Church universal, they said that the Church was the first,
tribunal under CHRIST, to which every one ought to be subject, and that Peter
was addressed to it as unto a Judge, by the words of CHRIST Go, tell it to the
Church, and he that will not hear the Church, let him be accounted an
Heathen, and a Publican. And they were content it should be said that the Pope
has authority to feed, and govern all the Churches, but not the Church
universal: wherein there was small difference in the Latin between
Vniuersa^em Ecclesiam, and Ecclesias vniuersas. And Granata said, I am Bishop
of Granata, and the Pope Archbishop of the same City; inferring that the Pope
has the superintendencie of the particular Churches, as the Archbishop has of
the Churches of his Suffragans. And it being alleged, that this word, Church
Universal, was used in the Council of Florence, it was replied, that the
Council of Constance, and Martin the fifth, in condemning the Articles of John
Wiglef, does condemn the Article against the supremacy of the Apostolic Sea,
only for saying, that it is not set over all particular Churches. And here a
disputation began between the Frenchmen and the Italians, these saying that
the Council of Florence was general, that of Constance partly approved, and
partly not, and that other of Basil schismatic; A difference between the
Italians and the Frenchmen about the Councels of Constance, Basil, and
Florence.
and the others maintaining that those of Constance and Basil were general
Councels, and that this name could not agree to that of Florence, celebrated
only by some few Italians, and four Grecians. Neither did they grant that the
Pope had all the authority from CHRIST, no not with the restrictions and
limitations, as he was a man, and in the time of his mortality; but they were
content it should be said that he had authority equal to that of Saint
Peter. This manner of speech was suspected by the Papalins, who saw they would
make the life and actions of Saint Peter a pattern for the Pope, which would,
as they said, reduce the Apostolic Sea to nothing; which they defended to
have an unlimited power, to be able to give a rule for all emergents as the
times do require, though contrary to the actions of all his predecessors, and
of Saint Peter himself. And the contentions were like to proceed further. But
the Legates, to give some intermission, to have time to send the Pope the
corrections of the Vltramontans, and receive his command how to govern
themselves in the business, that they might set another matter on foot which
might make this to be forgotten, returned to the point of Residence, concerning
which, Loraine and Madruccio had composed a form, and presented it some days
before to the Legates, who without considering of it, did approve it, upon the
first sight. Afterward, having consulted with the Canonists, they disliked one
part, in which it was said, that Bishops are bound by the commandment of God,
to attend and watch over the flock, personally; and doubting that those words
would not please in Rome, they changed them, and so proposed the form in
congregation. Loraine The Cardinals of Loraine and Trent are offended with the
Legates.
and Madruccio were much offended with this mutation, and thought they were
disparaged: and Loraine said, that hereafter he would take no more care in
those things, nor treat with the Prelates, but only give his voice with
modesty, and serve the Legates out of his love, in any honest work, as far
as he was able. And Madruccio did not forbear to say, that there was a secret
Council within the Council, which did arrogate more authority. A Council
within the Council
The Legates perceiving that every thing turned against them, caused the
Congregations to be omitted, Neither was this sufficient. For the Prelates
Practices to dissolve the Council.
made private congregations amongst themselves, and the Legates continual
consultations. The Archbishop of Otranto, and others, who aimed at the
Cardinalitie, of which they thought themselves assured if the Council were
separated, agreed together to oppose every thing to make some tumult arise, and
went passionately about, even in the night also, making practices, and causing
men to set their hand to papers. Which, though in effect, it pleased the
Legates, yet, for the manner, it displeased the most of them, as being of bad
example, which might give scandal. And, on the contrary side, there wanted not
those who desired a dissolution. But each party expected an occasion that the
cause of it might be attributed to the other: so that the suspicions did
increase on both sides.

The Cardinal of Loraine complained to all, that plots were laid to dissolve
the Synod, and especially to the Ambassadors of Princes, desiring them to
write to their Masters, to persuade the Pope that the Council may be
continued, that the practices might be moderated, and the Fathers left to
their liberty; saying, that otherwise a composition would be made in France,
that Of which the Card of Loraine complains.
every one might live as he would until a free Council, as this was not, in
which nothing could be resolved but as pleased the Legates, nor by the Legates,
but as the Pope listed; that he would be patient until the next Session, And
of the want of liberty in Council.
and then, if he saw not things go better, he would make his protestations,
and, together with the Ambassadors and Prelates, return into France, to make
a National Council, in which perhaps Germany would concur with them; a
thing which would be displeasing unto himself, in regerd of the danger that
the Apostolic Sea would not be acknowledged any more. In those days many
Curriers passed between Rome and Trent. For the Legates As did also the
Frenchmen in Rome
advised the frequent contradictions, and the Pope solicited the proposing of
the Canons which he sent. And the Frenchmen in Rome made the same complaint to
the Pope, which Loraine had done in Trent, and used the same threats of a
National Council, and the assistance of Germany. But The Pope answers
resolutely.
the Pope, who had been used to these things, said he was not daunted with
words, was not afraid of National Synods, did know that the French Bishops
were Catholics, and that Germany would not subject it self to their
Councels. He said that the Council was not only free, but might be called
licentious; that the practices of the Italians in Trent were not with his
knowledge, but did arise because the Vltramontans would tread the Popes
authority under their feet; that he has had three good occasions to
dissolve the Council, but was willing it should continue, hoping that GOD
would not abandon his Church, and that every attempt against it would come upon
the head of the Innouators. Five Churches departed, and went to the Emperors
Court, in the time of these confusions, to give his Majesty an account of the
state of the Council, and of the combination of the Italian Prelates; and it
was discovered that Granata, and his adherents, had desired him to persuade the
Emperor to write to the Catholic King concerning the Reformation and
Residence, that both in those, and in other occasions they might speak freely,
according to their conscience; all which the Legates did believe to proceed
from Loraine. And therefore, for a counterpoise, themselves also, a few days
after, sent the Bishop Commendone to the Emperor, upon pretense to excuse, and
render the causes why the demands of his Majesty could not as yet be proposed.
And they gave him commission to exhort the Emperor to be content not to demand
of the Council, bot of the Pope himself, those points of his petition which
concern his authority; as also other instructions, such as seemed them good.

But Martinus Crame(...), Bishop of Vormis, Ambassador of the King of Polonia
to the Emperor, being come to Trent, upon pretense to visit the Cardinal of
Varmia, his ancient and in ward friend, there was a great suspicion that he was
sent by the Emperor, to be an eye-witnes of the proceedings in Council, and to
relate them to him. All these things made the Legates doubt that the Council
would be dissolved, in some manner dishonorable to the Pope, and themselves,
observing that it was desired by many, even by some of the Papalins themselves,
and that disorders were purposely procured by others, to justify themselves,
in case it should happen. They sent unto all the Ambassadors a writing, which
contained the present difficulties, and desired their counsel. But the French
Ambassadors answered, upon this occasion, that which they desired to say many
days before; that as the Council was assembled to remedy abuses, so some
were willing to make use A free speech used by the French Ambassadors.
of it to increase them; that before any thing else were done, it was fit to
withstand such manifest practices; that they were intolerable; that if they
were removed, and every man had liberty to speak freely what he thought a
good accord would easily be made; that the Pope was Head of the Church, but
not above it; that he was to govern and direct the other members, but not to
domineere over the body; that to remedy the differences, it was necessary to
follow the Council of Constance, which having found the Church most disorderly
by means of these opinions, did reduce it into tolerable terms. They said
that one cause of discord was, because the Secretary Seconded by the
Imperialists.
did not set down their voices faithfully, so that the greater part seemed in
the acts to be the lesser, and that could not be taken for a resolution which
was concluded by the common opinion; and therefore that it was fit to join
another with him. The Imperialists said almost the same things, and were more
earnest for another Secretary. The other Ambassadors stood upon general
terms, desiring a continuation of the Council, and an union of minds.

Things standing thus, Ventimiglia, redispatched by the Pope, returned The B of
Ventimiglia returns to Trent.
to Trent the nine and twentieth of January, who made a relation of his
credence to the Legates, and by their advice, sought to remove two opinions
spread in the Council: one, that the Pope could not live long; the other that
he desired a dissolution of the Council. He testified the desire of his
Holiness, that laying aside all contentions, they would labor for the service
of God, and to end the Council quickly. He spoke of Bulls, of offices, and
Benefices, conferred upon some of the kinsmen of some Prelates, and a
Referendariship to the Secretary of the Portugal Ambassador, and a very great
pension to the son of the Spanish Secretary, and diverse promises to others,
according to their pretensions. But to the Cardinal of Loraine he made great
complements, in the Popes name, showing that he had confidence in him only,
for a sudden and a good end of the Council.

The coming of the Bishop of Asti, the Ambassador of the Duke of The Legates
use persuasions to the-Card. of Loraine by the B. of Sinigaglia.
Sauoy, gave a fit occasion to reassume the Congregations: in which the Legates
designing, after they had received him, to renew the proposition of the Canons,
they sent the Bishop of Sinigaglia to the Cardinal of Loraine, to pray him to
find a means that the frenchmen might be satisfied. The Bishop showed him,
that those words (to govern the Church Universal) were used in many Councels;
that the other (that they were assumed into part of the care) Who answers.
were used by S. Bernard, a writer much commended by his exce(...). The
Cardinal answered, that the whole world was a spectator of the actions of the
Council; that the opinions and voices of every one were known; that one ought
to beware what he says; that writings had been sent out of France, against
the opinions maintained in Trent in the questions that were handled; that many
complained of him that he proceeded with ^do much respect, especially in that
matter, and in that other of residence; that he (...) not been so earnest as
he ought for the declaration that they are de (...) diuino; that by a word used
by an Author one cannot presently conclude what his meaning was, because the
antecedents and consequents must be considered, which may infer a contrary
sense; that the words do not trouble him, but the sense, which they would
cano(...); that to say the Pope has authority to govern the Church
universal, could not be admitted by the French men by any means; that if it
were proposed again, the Ambassadors would protest in the name of the King,
and of the twenty French Prelates, from whom they should always have
authority to do it; that this would be a prejudice to the opinion which is
generally held in France, that the Council is above the Pope. Sinigaglia
relating these things to the The French opinion is that ye Council is above
the Pope.
Legates, in presence of many Italian Prelates, assembled to consult upon this
matter, made them fear that it was impossible to reduce the Frenchmen.

The coming of Martin Guzdellun of whom we spoke before, which Martin
Guzdellun co^plaineth that the Council is not free.
happened at the same time, gave great courage to the Spaniards; who, having
seen the passages of one day, said he understood plainly that the Council
was not free. He praised Granata, and said the King had a very good opinion of
him, and that if the Bishop like of Toledo were void, he would bestow it upon
him. Things being thus managed, sunday, the last of January came, when the
general congregation was intimated, to receive the Ambassador of Sauoy, who
made a short speech, to show the dangers in which The Ambassador of Sauoy is
received in Congregation.
the state of his Prince was by the vicinitie of the heretics; and what charge
he was put unto; he exhorted them to finish the Council quickly, and to
think of some means to make the contumacious receive the Decrees thereof, and
offered all the forces of his master. In the answer made, the piety and
wisdom of that Duke was commended, and joy giued the Ambassador of his
coming. As the congregations continued, so the dissentions increased, and many
demanded that the Decree of residence, composed by the two Cardinals, should
be proposed. But the Legates, seeing such variety of opinions, after long
consultation amongst themselves, and with the Prelates their friends, resolved
it was not a time to make any decision, but necessary to interpose so great a
delay, that the humors might cool of themselves, or some means might be
found to compose the differences, by prolonging the time of the Session. And to
make Loraine agree to it, they went all to his house, to impart their purpose
unto him, and to demand his counsel and assistance. He complained of the
conuenticles, and that they sought by unlawful means, to give the Pope that
which belongs not unto him, and to take from Bishops that which is given them
by CHRIST: he said he did not like the deferring of the Session so long though
he was co^(...) to yield unto then; but prayed them, that in regard this was
done to moderate (...)ens minds, they would indeauor effectually to curb those
who were unquiet and ambitious,

In the congregation of the third of February Mantua proposed, that, in regard
Lent was near, and that the holy days and feasts of Easter would follow
quickly, they would defer the Session, until after that time, and, in the
mean while, in the congregations, handle the reformation belonging to holy
Order, and the matter of the Sacrament of marriage. But the proposition had much
contradiction. The French and Spaniards, almost all, were earnest that a short
prorogation should be determined, and the matter of Order, together with its
reformation, defined, before they treated of Matrimony; to which opinion also
some Italians did adhere. Others desired that the Session should be held with
the things decided already, and in particular, that the Decree of recidence,
composed by the Cardinals, should be established: and some added that it was a
great indignity to the Council, to have the Session so often deferred,
showing there was a desire to violence the Fathers by weariness, to consent to
those opinions, which they did not believe in their conscience; and therefore
that it ought to be held, and matters to be resolved by the mayor part. Some
did not forbear to say, that the distinction of Session and general
congregation was not real, and that, in regard No real difference between a
Session and a general congregation.
the persons, and the same number were in both, that ought to be held for
decided in the one which was determined in the other. After great contention,
the dilation until the two and twentieth of April was concluded by the mayor
part, the others still contradicting. The Cardinal of Loraine, howsoever he
seemed to consent only to content the Legates, yet he was willing, in regard
of his own interest; and that for four causes. To know whether the Pope would
recover his health. To have commodity to treat with the Emperor. To
understand the Catholic Kings mind. And to see the success of the affairs of
France, that he might resolve what to do, upon better ground.

The next day the French Ambassadors made a great and long instance to the
Legates, to handle the reformation, and to propose their petitions, before they
began to treat of Matrimony. They answered, that the Synod was not to
receive laws from others; that if things convenient be proposed by Princes,
consideration is to be had of them, at such times as the President shall
think fit; that if, in their petitions, any thing be found belonging to
Order, they will propose it together, and afterward the other things in their
time. This answer not contenting the Ambassadors, they desired, that if they
would not make the proposition, they would be content that themselves might
do it, or else give them a plain negative; adding, as it were in form of a
protestation, that, if they continued to give these ambiguous answers, they
would hold them to be equivalent to a scornful negative. The Legates took
three days time to give a more precise answer, and, in the mean while,
desired Loraine to pacify them, and to make them contented to expect until
they had received an answer from Rome concerning the Articles which they had
sent thither.

The next day the Articles of Matrimony were given forth, to be discussed
The Articles to be disputed
by the Divines, the week following; in which a dispute presently arose
between the French and Spaniards, about precedence, which could not be
composed to the satisfaction of both parties, but by changing the order
observed until then, and by giving precedence according to promotion unto the
doctorship. The Popes Divines, opposed saying, that, the difficulty being
between the French and Spaniards, the provision should be made for them
alone, and their place not altered, which was undoubtedly the first. The
Legates, saying they had reason, concluded that the first rank, in which the
Papalins were, should speak as formerly they had done, and the other A
question of precedence between the French and Spanish Prelates.
three according to the order of promotion: wherewith the Frenchmen were not
content, except one of them were put into the first rank. The Spanish
Secretary desired that a public instrument might be made of the decree, that
it might appear, that if any Frenchman speak before the Spaniards, it was not
by reason of precedence of the Kingdom. In conclusion, to give satisfaction to
all, an instrument was made, and a grant to the Frenchmen, that, after
Salmeron, the first of the Popish Divines, the Deane of Paris would speak, and
the others of the first rank should proceed according to promotion.

The Articles were eight, upon which they were to dispute whether they were
heretical, and ought to be condemned. 1. That Matrimony is not a Sacrament
instituted by God, but an humane introduction in the Church, and that it has
no promise of grace. 2. That the Parents may make void secret marriages, and
that those which are so contracted are not true marriages, yea, that it is
expedient that hereafter they should be made void in the Church. 3. That it
is lawful, in case the wife be divorced for cause of fornication, to marry
another, in the life time of the former, and that it is an error to make a
divorce for any cause but fornication. 4. That it is lawful for Christians to
have many wives, and that the prohibition for marriage in certain times of the
year, is a tyranny, which proceeded from the superstition of the Gentiles. 5.
That Matrimony ought to be preferred before chastity, and that God gives
more grace to those that are married then to others. 6. That the Priests of the
West may lawfully contract Matrimony, notwithstanding the vow of
Ecclesiastical law, and that to say the contrary is to condemn Matrimony,
and that all those who have not the gift of chastity, may marry. 7. That the
degrees of consanguinitie, and affinity, mentioned in the eighteenth of
Leuiticus, ought to be kept, and neither more nor less, 8. That inabilitie to
carnal copulation, and ignorance in the contract of marriage are only causes
to dissolve Matrimony contracted, and that the causes of Matrimony do belong
to Secular Princes. Of which Articles that they might briefly speak, they were
divided into four parts, according to the four ranks of Divines, and two
appointed for each.

The Bishop of Renes, Ambassador of France to the Emperor, arrived in Trent,
who, having treated with Loraine, that Cardinal went to the Legates, and told
them, that, ever since his departure out of France, he has had commission
from the King to go to the Emperor, which he would do within a few days,
because he would be in Ispruc, and because Renes was come to fetch him. He
gave an account also of the journey to the Pope by letters, in which he
touched the manner of the proceeding of the Italians in Council; adding, that
if they so continued, he would pray God that he might do some thing for his
holy service. They had talked of this journey a month before, and therefore
when it was published, the suspicions were not so great as if it had not been
foreseen. All men assured themselves, that it was to make a combination
concerning the Council, and, particularly, to bring in the use of the Cup; and
the rather, because the Cardinal had said to many Prelates, upon diverse
occasions, that the Emperor, Discourses about the Cardinal of Loraine his
going to Ispruc.
Kings of the Romans, and of France, would never leave to make petitions for
Reformation, until they had obtained the use of the Chalice, though they were
to remain two years in Council; but that favor being granted, they would
easily be quieted, and that to give satisfaction to those Princes, was the
best means to retain those Kingdoms in obedience; that it was impossible to
obtain it of the Pope, in regard of the opposition of the Cardinals, who
abhorred the grant; that it was not hitherto obtained in Council, because the
business was not well managed, and that there was hope, that using good
means, it might be gained. But those who did more attentively mark the
Cardinals proceedings, observed a great variety in his speeches, For sometimes
he said, that, in case matters were not resolved, he should be forced to
depart at Easter or at Whitsuntide; sometimes, that he would remain in Trent
two years; sometimes proposing means to dispatch the Council, and sometimes
taking courses to make it everlasting; manifest arguments, that as yet he knew
not his own intention. And they suspected his cautelous proceeding, which did
argue a desire to justify his reasons by Art, and make his cause honest. And
considering that in Ispruc would be the King of the Romans, the Duke of
Bauaria, the Archbishop of Salzburg and the Archduke Ferdinand, it was
thought that this conference must needs produce some nouities; especially in
regard of the small satisfaction which the Council had hitherto given the
Emperor, and of the union, in all matters between France and him. And it
might be thought also that the King of Spain, so near unto him in blood,
would adhere to that party; and the rather, because it was diuulged, that, by
his letters of the eight of June, he had given commission to the Count of Luna
to hold intelligence with the Emperor, and the King of France, in matters of
reformation and liberty of the Council. In these days Friar Felicianus
Ninguarda, Proctor of the Archbishop of Salzburg, presented the letters of that
Prince, and made instance, that the Proctors of the Bishops of Germany might
give voice in Congregations; affirming, that, if it were granted, other Bishops
of Germany would send Proctors, if otherwise, both himself and others would
depart, because they would not be idle. It was answered, that consideration
should be had of it, and a resolution taken according to right. And they gave
an acount hereof to Rome, and would not resolve so much as this small
particular without advice from thence. But in regard of greater businesses in
both places, there was no more speech of it.

The ninth of February the first Congregation of Divines was held, to dispute
of Matrimony. Salmeron spoke in a very lofty style; and concerning the first
Article, delivered the usual sayings of the Schoolmen. For the second, he
alleged the determination of the Council of Florence, that Matrimony
receives perfection only by the consent of the contractors, neither has the
Father; or any other, any authority over it. He defended; that they ought to
be condemned for heretics, who attribute power to the father to make it
void; that the authority of the Church was very great concerning the matter
of Sacraments, that it can alter whatsoever is not of the essence; that the
condition of public and secret being accidental, the Church had power
therein. He showed the great inconveniences of secret marriages, and
innumerable adulteries which follow, and concluded that it was expedient to use
a remedy, by making them void. He insisted much upon this inextricable case;
if, after matrimony contracted and consummated in secret, one does contract in
public with another, from which being desirous to depart, and return to the
first lawful wife, is forced by censures to remain in the public contract;
the poor man is entangled on both sides, either in perpetual adultery, or in
censures, with scandal of his neighbor.

The next day the Deane of Paris followed; who spoke copiously out of school
doctrine, of the institution of marriage, of the grace which is received in it,
and of condemning him that does affirm it to be an humane invention. But upon
the article of clandestine matrimony, having disputed, that they were true
marriages and sacraments, he put a doubt whether the Church has power to make
them void. He contradicted the opinion, that there is authority in the Church
over the matter of Sacraments; he discoursed that the Church cannot make any
Sacrament which is now lawful, to be of no force for hereafter, he
exemplified in the consecration of the Eucharist, and went through all the
Sacraments. He said the Ecclesiastical power was not such, as to be able to
hinder all sins; that the Christian Church has been 1500. years subject to
that which is now described to be intolerable, and, (which is of no less
importance) secret marriages have been accounted good even from the beginning
of the world, and no man has ever thought to make a nullity in them, howsoever
a public contract has often followed them; that it seems to be insoluble,
though it has inconveniences on both sides; that the marriage of Adam, and Eve,
a pattern for all other, was without witnesses. The opinion of the Doctor was
not disesteemed; but the Italian Prelates were well pleased, that having once
named the Pope, he gave him this Epithet, with the exposition following,
Governor and moderator of the Roman Church, that is, of the Universal. And
this did minister much discourse. For the Papalins concluded, that it might
likewise be said in the Canon of the institution, that the Pope has power to
govern the Universal Church. But the French men answered, that there was
great difference between saying absolutely the Church Universal, by which is
understood the Universality of the faithful, and saying the Roman Church, that
is the Universal, where the word Roman does declare the word Universal,
inferring that he is Head of the Universal, and that all places, in which
authority is given to the Pope over all the Church, are understood
disiunctiuely, not coniunctiuely, that is, over every part of the Church, not
over all together.

The eleventh of February, the Frenchmen presented, in Congregation, a letter
from their King, of the eighteenth of January; in which he said, that
howsoever he was assured that the Cardinal of Loraine had imparted to the
Synod, the happy victory against the enemies of religion, whose boldness he
has and does daily oppose without respect of difficulty, or danger, even
exposing his own life, as becomes the eldest and most Christian son of the
Church, yet himself was willing to make them partakers of the same joy also,
knowing that the wholesome remedies, for the evils Letters from the French K.
are presented in Congregation.
which do afflict Christian Provinces, have always been expected from
Councels. He desired of them, in the name of CHRIST, an emendation and
reformation, answerable to the expectation the world has conceived of them;
and that as himself, and so many besides, have consecrated life and blood to
God in those wars, so they, in respect of their charge, would, And de
Ferrieres makes a speech.
with sincerity of conscience, be careful of the business for which they are
assembled. The letters being read, the Ambassador de Ferrieres spoke to the
Fathers in this substance. That they having understood by the Kings letters,
and before by the orations of the Cardinal of Loraine, and Bishop of Mentz the
desolation of France, and some victories of the King, he would not relate them
again, but only say, that the last, in regard of the forces of the enemy,
was miraculous; whereof this is an argument, that being overcome, yet he does
live, and commits spoils, running through the very bowels of France. But
he said, he would turn his speech to them only, who are the only refuge of
the miseries, without whom France will not be able to preserve the tables of
shipwreck. He exemplified in the army of Israel, which had not been able to
overcome Amalec, if the hands of Moses, lifted up to God, underpropped by
Aaron and Vr, had not assisted the combartants; that the King of France does
not want forces, a valiant Captain the Duke of Guise, the Queen Mother, to
manage the affairs of war and peace; that there is no other Aaron and Vr
but themselves, to hold up the hands of the most Christian King, with Decrees
of the Synod, without which the enemies will never be reconciled, nor the
Catholics preserved in the faith; that the humor of Christians now, is not
the same as it was fifty years since; that all Catholics are now like to
the Samaritanes, who did not believe the woman's relation of CHRIST, until they
had inquired, and informed themselves; that a great part of Christendom does
study the Scriptures, and that the most Christian King, had given no
instructions to his Ambassadors, but conformable to them, which they have
presented, to the Legates, who presently will propose them, as they have
promised, to them the Fathers, to whom the most Christian King does principally
send them, expecting their judgment upon them; that France does not demand any
singular thing, but common to all the Catholic Church; that if any marvel
that the most necessary things are omitted in the propositions, he may assure
himself that they begin with the smaller matters, that they may propose the
other of more weight, in their fit time, as also to give an easy execution to
those; which if they the Fathers will not begin before they depart from
Trent, the Catholics will cry out, the adversaries will laugh, and will both
say, that the fathers of Trent do not want knowledge, but a will to do good,
and that they have constituted good laws, without touching them so much as
with one of their fingers, but leaving the observation of them to their
posterity. And if, in the demands exhibited, any do think that some thing is
contained conformable to the books of the adversaries, he holds them
unworthy of answer: to those who hold them immoderate, he will say nothing
but that of Cicero, that it is an absurdity to desire temperance of mediocrity
in the best things, which are so much the better, by how much the bigger they
are. He said the holy Ghost did say to lukewarm moderators, that he would
cast them out of the body; that they should consider the small good the Church
had, by the moderate reformation of the Council of Constance, and of the next,
which he would not nominate, for fear of offending the ears of some, and
likewise of the Councels of Ferrara, Florence, the Laterane, and the first of
Trent, and how many sorts of men, how many Provinces, Kingdoms, and Nations,
have since departed from the Church. He turned his speech to the Italian and
Spanish Fathers, that a serious emendation of Ecclesiastical discipline was
more for the good of them, then of the Bishop of Rome, the chief Vicar of
CHRIST, and successor of Peter, who has the highest authority in the Church
of God, that their life and honor was in question, and therefore that he would
say no more.

In the answer to the letters and the Ambassadors Oration, the King The
answer.
was commended for his pious and noble acts, and exhorted, as if he had been
present, to imitate his predecessors, turning all his cogitations to the
defense of the Apostolic Sea, and preservation of the ancient faith and to
give ear to those who preach unto him the Kingdom of God, and not to those
who preach a present vtility, and an imaginary tranquillity, which will never
be a true peace; adding, that the King would surely do so by the help of GOD,
and in regard of the goodness of his disposition, of the Counsel of the
Queen Mother, and of the Nobility of France; that the Synod will labor to
define things necessary for the reformation of the Church universal, and for
the good and interests of the particular of the Kingdom of France. In the end
of the Congregation, the Cardinal of Mantua proposed, that, to make a more
quick dispatch, the Congregations of the Divines might be held twice a day,
and Prelates deputed to propose the correction of the abuses, in the matter of
Order; and so it was decreed.

The biting speech of the Ambassador did pierce the minds of the Papalins; and
particularly, when he said, that the Articles were addressed principally to
the Synod: Which words they thought were contrary to the Decree, that the
Legates only should propose, a principal secret to preserve the Popes
authority. But they were moved more, that he said that he had deferred the
proposition of more important matters, until another time, whence they drew
great consequences, especially having always feared, that they had not as yet
discovered their desseignes, and that they did plot greater matters. As also to
speak unto the Italian and Spanish Fathers, as if they had other interests
then the Pope, seemed a seditious manner of treating. The Ambassador gave a
copy of his Oration; and by those words which he spoke of the Pope, That he
has supreme authority in the Church of God, some Popish Prelates noted,
that, in reciting them, he had said, Who has full power in the Church
universal; drawing them to the favor of their opinion, and disputing that it
was as much to have full power in the Church-vniuersall, as to govern the
Church-vniuersall, which the Frenchmen did so much abhor, in the Decree of
the institution. But himself and the other Frenchmen affirmed, that he had
pronounced them as they were written.

The next day Loraine went to Ispruc, to visit the Emperor and King of The
Card of Loraine goes to Ispruc.
the Romans, accompanied with nine Prelates, and four Divines of the most
learned amongst them. He had first a promise from the Legates, that while he
was absent, the Article of the marriage of Priests should not be handled, which
he did instantly desire, that nothing might be determined or preconceiued
contrary to the commission which he had from the Kings, to obtain of the
Council a dispensation for the Cardinal of Bourbon to marry. Cardinal
Altemps also went to Rome, recalled by the Pope, to be General of the A
dispensatio^ to marry for the Card of Bourbon. Card. Altemps is to be ene^^ll
of the Popes army.
soldiers, which he purposed to raise for his own security. For
understanding that leuies were made in Germany, by the Dukes of Saxony and
Wittenberg: and by the Landgraue of Hassia, howsoever it was generally
believed, that all was done to assist the Hugonots of France, yet considering
that the Count of Luna had written, that the Dutchmen had a great desire to
invade Rome, and did remember the Sack six and thirty years since, he
thought it was wisdom not to be unprovided, and, for the same cause, revived
the treaty of making a combination with all the Italian Princes, for the
defense of Religion.

In the congregations, the Divines of the first rank did uniformly agree in
condemning the first article, and every part thereof, as heretical; as also
the second saying that secret marriages were true marriages. But there was the
difference before metioned between Salmeron and the Deane of Paris, whether
the Church has power to make them void. Those who held the negative, stood
upon that ground, that the matter, form, minister, and receiver are essential
in every Sacrament, in which, as being instituted by God no Ecclesiastical
power has any thing to do. They said that the Council of Florence having
declared, that the consent of the parties only is necessary to Matrimony, he
that would infer the word, Public, for a necessary condition, does
infer, that the consent only is not sufficient, and that the Council of
Florence has failed in a necessary declaration. That CHRIST said in general
of Matrimony, that man cannot separate that which GOD has joined, meaning
both the public and the secret conjunction. That in the Sacraments nothing
ought to be affirmed without authority of the Scriptures, or tradition,
neither of which do allow this authority to the Church; yea, by tradition we
find the contrary, because all Churches in all nations throughout the world
are uniform; in not pretending any power herein. On the contrary, it was said
to be a clear case, that the Church has power to make any man incapable of
marriage, because many degrees of consanguinitie and affinity are made
hindrances by the Ecclesiastical law only; and likewise the impediment of a
solemn vow was made by the Popes law; and therefore secrecy may be likewise
made an impediment, by the same authority. The other part answered, that the
prohibition by reason of kindred, is de iure diuino, as Saint Gregory the Pope,
and many of his successors have determined; that matrimony cannot be
contracted between two, until it be known in what degree of kindred they are
joined, and if other Popes have restrained this universality to the seventh
degree, and afterward to the fourth, this was a general dispensation, as
Divorce was to the Jews, and that a solemn vow does hinder de iure diuino,
not by the Popes authority.

But Camillus Campeggius, a Dominican Friar, agreeing with the others, that no
humane power is extended to the Sacraments, added, that whosoever can destroy
the essence of the matter, can also make it incapable of the Sacrament; that no
man can make water not to be the matter of Baptism, or some bread of wheat not
to be the matter of the Eucharist; but he that shall destroy the water,
turning it into air, or shall burn the bread, turning it into ashes, shall
make those matters not to be capable of the form of the Sacraments: So in
Matrimony, the civil nuptial contract is the matter of the matrimonial
Sacrament, by Divine institution; which being destroyed, and made of no force,
can no more be the matter of it. Therefore it cannot be said that the Church
can make a nullity in the secret marriage, for so it would have authority over
the Sacraments, but it is true that the Church can nullify a secret nuptial
contract, which, as being void, cannot receive the form of a Sacrament. This
doctrine did much please the generality of the Fathers, because it was plain,
easy, and resolved all the difficulties. But Antonius Solisius, who spoke
after him, did contradict, saying, the speculation was true, but could not be
applied to this purpose. For the reason, as it is meant of Baptism and the
Eucharist, that whosoever does destroy the water and the bread, does make
them incapable of the forms of those Sacraments, does not argue an
Ecclesiastical power, but a natural, so that whosoever has virtue to destroy
the water, may, by this means, hinder the Sacrament; whereby it would follow,
that he that can nullify a civil nuptial contract, may hinder Matrimony,
but the annullation of such contracts belongs to the civil Laws, and to
secular Magistrates; therefore they must take heed, lest while they would give
authority to the Church to make void secret marriages, it be not rather given
to the secular power.

Amongst those who attributed this power to the Church, it was disputed whether
it were fit that the Church should use it. And there were two opinions. One, to
make void all the secret, in regard of the inconveniences which ensue. The
other, that the public, made without consent of parents, in whose power they
are, should be made void also. And these alleged two reasons; one, that as
great inconveniences did follow by these, in respect of the ruins which happen
to families, by marriages unadvisedly, contracted by young men, the other that
the Law of GOD, commanding obedience to parents, does include this case as
principal. That the Law of GOD does give this particular authority to the
Father, to give his daughter in marriage, as it plainly appears in Saint
Paul and Exodus. That there are examples of the Patriarchs in the old
Testament, all married by their fathers. That the humane civil Laws have
esteemed the marriages void, which have been contracted without the father.
That as then it was judged expedient to nullify secret marriages, so now,
seeing that the Popes prohibition is not sufficient, which has forbidden them
without addition of nullitie, there is more reason, in regard the malice of man
will not obey the Law of GOD, which forbids to marry without consent of
parents, that the Synod should add unto it a nullity also; not because the
Fathers have authority to make void the marriages of children, which is
heresy to affirm, but because the Church has authority to nullify both
these and other contracts, prohibited by divine or humane Laws. This opinion,
as honest, pious, and as well grounded as the other, pleased many of the
Fathers. And so was the Decree framed, howsoever the publication was omitted,
for causes which shall be related hereafter.

But the Prelates did not for bear to discuss the controversies about the
Popes authority, and institution of Bishops. And the Frenchmen did persevere
in their resolution, not to admit the words, Church-Vniuersall, lest they
should prejudice the opinion held in France, of the superiority of the
Council; and if it had been proposed, would have made protestation of the
nullitie, and departed. The Pope wrote it should be proposed, whatsoever did
The Legates dare not propose the Article of the institution of Bishops.
follow. But the Legates fearing that every little stir would be much out of
season now the Emperor was so near, wrote back, that it was better to
defer it until the Article of Matrimony was finished.

The seventeenth of February Father Soto was the first that spoke in the second
rank; who, upon the Article of Divorce, did first distinguish the matrimonial
conjunction into three parts: the bond, the cohabitation, and the carnal
copulation; inferring that there were as many separations also. He showed at
large that the Ecclesiastical Prelate had authority to separate the married,
or to give them a divorce, in respect of cohabitation, and carnal copulation,
for all causes which they shall judge expedient and reasonable, the
matrimonial bond still standing sure, so that neither can marry again;
saying, that this was it which was bound by GOD, and could not be loosed by
any. He was much troubled with the words of Saint Paul, who grants to the
faithful husband, if the unbelieving wife will not dwell with him, to remain
separated. He was not contented with the common exposition, that the
Matrimony of the unbelievers is not insoluble, alleging, that the
insolubilitie is by the law of Nature, as also the words of Adam, expounded by
our SAVIOVR, and the use of the Church, that married unbelievers, after they
have been Baptized, are not married again; and that their matrimony is not
different from that of the faithful. And he refolued to approve the exposition
of Caietan, that the separation, mentioned by Saint Paul, of the faithful from
the unbeliever, is not understood of the matrimonial bond, and that it was a
thing worthy to be considered by the holy Synod. For Fornication he said, that
it ought not to be a cause of separation from the bond, but from copulation,
and cohabitation only. But he found himself much entangled, because he had
said first that divorce might be granted in many respects, and for many
causes, whereas the Gospel does admit but one, which is Fornication, which must
needs be understood in respect of the bond, because Divorce in the other two
respects may have many causes. He gave many expositions of that place of the
Gospel, without approcuing or disproouing any of them; and concluded that the
Article ought to be condemned, because the contrary is made an Article of
faith, by Apostolical tradition, howbeit the words of the Gospel are not so
plain as that they are sufficient to convince the Lutherans.

Concerning the fourth Article of Polygamic, he said it was against the law of
Nature, nor could be permitted so much as to infidels, who are subject to
Christians. He said the ancient Fathers had many wives by dispensation, and
the others, who were not dispensed with by GOD, did live in perpetual sin.
For the prohibition of marriages at certain times, he briefly alleged the
authority of the Church, and the disconuenience of marriage with some times:
and took this occasion to say, that no man had reason to be grieved, because
the Bishop might dispense. He returned to the causes of Divorce, and concluded
that the world would not complain of any of these things, if the Prelates did
use their authority with wisdom and charity. But the cause of all the evils
is, because they do not reside, but give the government to a Vicar, and
oftentimes, without convenient maintenance, so that Justice is ill administered,
and graces not well bestowed. And here he spoke at large of Residence, saying,
that if it were not declared to be de iure diuino, it was impossible to
remove those and other abuses, and to stop the mouths of heretics, who
not observing that the evil comes from the bad execution, lay the blame upon
the Popes constitutions; and therefore the Popes authority will never be
defended well, but by Residence well established; nor that well executed
without the declaration, de iure diuino; and that they did notoriously err,
who thought it prejudicial to the authority of the Pope, whereas it is the
only foundation to uphold and preserve it. He concluded, that the Council
was bound to determine the truth, and spoke with such efficacy, that he was
willingly heard by the Vltramontans, but did displease the Papalins, who
thought the time impertinent to touch that matter. And it gave occasion to both
parties to renew their practices.

In the Congregation of the twentieth of February, John Ramirez, a Franciscan
Friar, after he had spoken upon the same Articles, according to the common
opinion of Divines, of the insolubilitie of marriage, said, that the same
reasons which are between man and wife, are also between the Bishop and the
Church, and that as the man ought not to depart from his wife, so ought not the
Bishop to depart from his Church, and that this Spiritual bond was of no less
force then the other which was corporal. He alleged Innocence the third,
who decreed that a Bishop could not be transferred but by the divine
authority because the matrimonial bond, which is less (said the Pope) cannot
be dissolved by any power of man. And he was copious in showing that the Popes
authority was rather increased then diminished hereby, who, as a general
Vicar, might make use of Bishops in an other place, where there was more need:
as the Prince may employ married men for public occasions, sending them to
other places, without dissoluing the matrimonial bond. And he labored to
resolve the contrary reasons with much prolixity.

In the Congregation of that afternoon, Doctor Cornisius said, that both these
Aricles, the third and fourth, were heretical, because they were condemned by
many Decretals of Popes, and oxalted the authority of the Apostolic Sea in
many words, saying, that all ancient Councels, in the determinations of faith,
did perpetually follow the authority and will of the Pope: He exemplified in
the Council of Constantinople in Trullus, which followed the instruction sent
by Pope Agathone, the Council of Chalcedon, which did not only follow, but
worship the sentence of St. Leo the Pope; calling him also Ecumenicall, and
Pastor of the Universal Church. And after he had alleged many authorities
and reasons, to show that the words of CHRIST, spoken to Saint Poter (Feed my
sheep) do signify as much as if he had said, rule and govern the Church
Universal, he amplified very much the Popes authority in dispensations, and
other things also. He brought the authority of the Canonists, that the Pope
may dispense against the Canons, against the Apostles, and in all the law of
GOD, except the Articles of faith. In the end, he alleged the Chapter, Si
Papa, that every one ought to acknowledge that his salvation does depend, after
GOD, upon the holiness of the Pope; amplifying these words, because they
proceed from a Saint, and a Martyr, of whom no man can say that he did respect
any thing but the truth.

At this time Commendone returned from the Emperor, whose negotiation had not
that success as the Legates desired. For the Emperor, hearing his
propositions, answered, that he must have time to think on them because of
their importance, and that he would consider of them, and answer The relation
of Commendone returned from the Emperor.
the Council by his Ambassador. He presently gave an account here of by
letters, adding, that he found the Emperor was grieved, and had an ill
conceit of the actions of the Council. Being now returned, he said further,
that by the words of his Majesty, and by that which he had understood by his
counselors, and observed by their proceedings, he thought he knew that he
was so firm in that bad opinion, that he feared some disorder would ensue.
That as far as he could comprehend, the cogitations of his Majesty were
wholly bent to obtain a great reformation, with such provisions as that it
might be observed; and that he could certainly affirm, that he would not
be content that the Council should be finished. That he had understood, that
Delphinus, the Nuncio resident, having named suspension or translation, the
Emperor was offended. Then he related that there was an opinion in that Court
that the Catholic King held intelligence with the Emperor concerning the
affairs of the Council, which he did believe, because he was assured that
the Spanish Prelates had sent letters to him, in which were complaints against
the proceedings of the Italians, and many Articles of Reformation, which it is
like they would not dart to do, except they knew their Kings mind. He said
also, that the Count of Luna, when the Popes ministers had spoken of the too
much license of the Spanish Prelates in their speeches, answered thus, what
could be done if those Prelates should say that they spoke as they thought in
their conscience; He laid moreover, that in the conference he will have with
the Cardinal of Loraine, he was of opinion that they would conclude to make
their petitions to be proposed by the Ambassadors; and that his Majesty had
caused his Divines to consult upon them, and upon other conciliarie affairs;
and that howsoever himself and the Nuncio Delphinus had used much diligence
yet they were not able to learn the particulars.

But within a short time they came to light. For the Jesuit Canisius do rote
to the General Laynez, that the Emperor was ill affected toward the Council
and made many points to be consulted on, that he might resolde how to
proceed, in case the Pope did prefeuere in refusing to propose the reformation
or in giving words contrary to his deeds. One point was, what Points consulted
on in the Emperors cour.
the Emperors authority might be in Council; and that Fredericus Staphilus,
Confessor to the Queen of Bahemia, was the chief man in the consultation.
Canisius desired that one of the Society might be sent unto him, whom he might
bring into the consultation, and by him discover all. Whereupon Laynez having
conferred with Cardinal Simoneta, they resolved to send Father Natalis, by
whom all was discovered. And the Articles consulted on were seventeen. 1.
Whether a general Council, lawfully In number 17
assembled by the favor of Princes, may change the order determined by the
Pope to be observed in handling the matters, and bring in a new manner. 2.
Whether it be profitable for the Church that the Council should handlematters,
and determine them as it is directed by the Pope or Court of Rome, so that it
may not do otherwise. 3. Whether, if the Pope die in time of the council, the
Fathers thereof ought to choose another. 4. What the Emperors power is, the
Sea of Rome being void, and the Council open 5. Whether, when matters are
handled concerning the peace and tranquillity of the Christian common wealth,
the Ambassadors of Princes ought to have a deciding voice, howsoever they have
it not concerning matters of faith. 6. Whether Princes may recall their Orators
and Prelates from the council, without imparting it to the Legates. 7. Whether
the Pope may dissolve or suspend the Counsel without the participation of
Princes, and especially of the Emperor. 8. Whether it be fit that Princes
should interpose, to cause more necessary and expedient matters to be handled
in Counsel. 9. Whether the Orators of Princes may expound to the Fathers in
person, those things which the Princes commit unto them, to be expounded. 10.
Whether a means may be found, that the Fathers, sent by the Pope and Princes,
may be free in giving their voices in Council. 11. What course may be taken,
that the Pope and Court of Rome may not interpose in ordayning that which is to
be handled in Council, that the liberty of the Fathers may not be hindered.
12. Whether a means may be found that no fraud, violence, or extortion be
used in delivering the opinions of the Fathers. 13. Whether any thing may be
handled, be it point of doctrine, or reformation of the Church, before it be
discussed by the learnell. 14. what remedy may be found, if the Italian
Prelates doecont inue their obstinacy in not suffering matters to be resolved.
15. What remedy may be used to him (...) the con(...) of the Italian Prelates,
when the Popes authority is in question. 16. Now the practices may be removed
which hinder the determination of the point of residencie. 17. Whether it be
seemly that the Emperor should personally assist in Council.

But a long and serious consultation was held in Rome, whether the petitions A
consultation in Rome.
of the Frenchmen ought to be proposed? and they consideredred not so much the
weight of the things themselves, as the consequences thereof. For observing
what de Ferrieres had said in his Oration, that the petitions exhibited were of
the lighter sort, and that others remained of more weight, they coniectured
that the Frenchmen, having not made those demands because they desired to
obtain them, they aimed to make entrance by that way, to propose others which
they had in their mind, and that, by these which they call light, the gate
being opened, passage might not be denied them what attempt soever they would
make besides. For these and other respects it was resolved to write to the
Legates, that, absolutely, they should not be proposed, nor a negative given,
but only a delay interposed; and the means they were to use, were written
also. At the same time, a writing of an uncertain Author came from Rome, in
answer of those petitions, A writing published in Rome against the French
petitions.
which immediately was spread in Trent, and in the Emperors Court. And it was
believed in Rome, that, by these means, they had given a good counterpoise to
the instances of the Frenchmen. But the Pope was more troubled with the
nouitie at the Emperors Court to consult of matters so prejudicial to him,
knowing well that the Papal dignity is preserved by the reverence, and
certain persuasion of Christians that it cannot be called into question, that
when the world does begin to examine matters, apparent reasons will not be
wanting to disturb the best things. He observed that his predecessors had used
potent remedies in like occasions, and that when the foundation of faith is
questioned, that precept, to resist the beginnings, takes place. For as, in
the breaches of rivers, if the smallest ruptures be not stopped, the channel
cannot be kept full, so when there is but a small ouerture against the supreme
authority, and not stopped, it is easily carried to an absolute downfall. He
was counseled to write a Brief to the Emperor, concerning this his distaste,
as Paul the third did to the Emperor Charles, about the Colloquies of Spira,
and reprehend him for questioning those Articles, as things that are most
clear, and in another Brief to reprove the Counselors, for persuading him to
it, and to admonish the Divines who have assisted in the business, to seek an
absolution from the censures. But having thought well on it, he considered
that the state of things was not then as it was under Paul. First, because that
disputation was public, whereas this was private, and concealed of purpose
that it might not be known, so that he might dissemble all notice of it,
whereas if it should continue after his public reprehension of it, he should
put himself into greater danger; that it was convenient for Charles to stand
united with the Pope that he might not subject himself to the Dutch Princes,
whereas this Emperor is, as it were, subject unto them already; finally that
this remedy might be deferred, because it would always be in season, but by
dissembling a while, he might obliquely make trial to hinder the resolution
of the consultations which were made, by sending the Cardinal of Mantua to his
Majesty.

The writing which went about against the petitions of the Frenchmen, did not
one displease them, who took it for an affront, but the Emperor Displeases
the Frenchmen, and the Emperor.
also very much. And the Legates having received commission from Rome
concerning them, were but ill satisfied, and thought that this was not to give
commission to Presidents of Council, but aduertisments rather to ministers to
make use of entreaties by way of negotiation. They wrote back only to demand
what they should do, in case the Imperialists should make instance to have
their petitions proposed: and they caused Gabriel Paleotto, Auditor of the
Rota, to write a full information of the difficulties, which they sent. But the
Cardinal of Mantua, in regard the Emperor had told Commendone, that he
would give answer to the Council by his Ambassador, thought it not
convenient to go unto him before they received that resolution: besides, the
Cardinal of Loraine being at the Emperors Court, and the effect of his
negotiation not known, he should be doubtful in what manner to proceed.
Upon these reasons he excused himself to The Card. of mantua writes freely
to the Pope.
the Pope, and besides wrote to him with his own hand, that he had not a face
to appear any more in Congregation, to give words only, as he had done two
years together; that all the Ministers of Princes do say, that howsoever his
Holiness does promise much for reformation, yet seeing nothing to be
executed, they do not think he has any inclination to it; who if he had
performed his promises, the Legates could not have been Wanting to give
satisfaction to the instances of so many Princes. Neither ought any to marvel
that this Cardinal, a Prince conversant so many long years in many great
affairs, and of a most complete conversation, should use this passage with
his Holiness, it being a thing natural to men that are near their grave,
for some intrinficall cause, unknown even unto themselves, to be distasted
with humane matters, and to neglect pure ceremonies; to which jail he was
then very near, there remaining but six days of his life from the date
hereof.

But in the Congregation, the last that spoke in the second rank was Adrian, a
Dominican Friar; who, touching but lightly the matter in question, discoursed
at large of dispensations, and, with Theological terms and forms defended
the things mentioned by Doctor Cornisius, and speak of them, not without
scandal. He said that authority to dispense in humane laws, was absolute,
and unlimited in the Pope, because he was superior to them all; and therefore
when he did dispense, though without any cause, the dispensation was
notwithstanding to be held for good: that in divine laws he had power to
dispense, but not without a cause. He alleged Saint Paul, who says, that
the Ministers of CHRIST are the dispencers of the mysteries of God; and that to
him the Apostle, dispensation of the Gospel had been committed. He added,
that howsoever the Popes dispensation concerning the Divine Law be not of
^orce, yet every one ought to captiuate his understanding, and believe that he
has granted it for a lawful cause, and that it is temeritie to call it into
question. Then he discoursed of the cause of dispensations; which he reduced
to public utility, and charity toward private men. This discourse gave
occasion to the French men to speak of the matter, with the ill satisfaction
of the Papalins.

The secondranke having made an end of speaking, for observation of the promise
made to Loraine, not to handle the marriage of Priests in his absence, they
changed the order, and made the fourth rank speak next. John Verdun, handling
the seventh Article of the degrees of affinity and consanguinitie, passed
immediately from it, and came to the matter of dispensations, and seemed to have
none other aim, then to contradict Friar Adrian, laboring to weaken the Popes
power. First he expounded the places of Saint Paul, That the Ministers of
CHRIST are the dispensers of the mysteries of God, and of the Gospel, and said
the gloss was contrary to the text. For the place does not prove a
dispensation, that is, a disobligation from the Law, but a publishing and
declaring the divine mysteries, and the word of God, which is perpetual, and
remains inviolable for ever. He granted, that in humane laws a dispensation
might lie, in regard of the lawmakers imperfection, who could not foresee all
cases, and, making general laws, must needs reserve power to him that
governs the Commonwealth, because of Sundry occurrences, which may bring
acceptions in particular matters. But where God is the Lawgiver, from whom
nothing is concealed, and by whom no accident is not foreseen, the law can
have no exception. Therefore the law of God and Nature ought not to be called a
written Law, which in some cases ought to be expounded, and made more gentle,
but all that Law is even equity it self. In humane laws, in which some cases
by reason of particular accidents, if they had been foreseen, would not have
been comprehended, a dispensation may well be granted. But the dispencer
cannot, in any case, free him that is bound, and if he deny a dispensation to
him that deserves it, the party refused shall notwithstanding remain without
all obligation. That the world has conceived a wrong opinion, that to
dispense, is to bestow a favor, and that the dispensation is requisite to be
given, as any other part of distributive justice to be exercised; that the
Prelate does offend if he give it not to whom it is due. And, in sum, he
said, that when a dispensation is desired, either the case is such, as, if it
had been foreseen, it would have been excepted, and here there is an
obligation to dispense, or would have been comprehended, though it had been
thought on by the Lawmakers, and to this the power of dispensing is not
extended. He added that flattery, ambition, and avarice have persuaded, that
to dispense is to bestow a favor, as the master would do to his servants, or
one that gives of his own. The Pope is not Lord, and the Church a servant,
but he is servant of him who is spouse of the Church, and by him set over the
Christian family, to give, as the Gospel says, to every one his own measure,
that is, that which is due unto him. And, in conclusion, he said, that a
dispensation was nothing but a declaration or interpretation of the Law, and
that the Pope could not, by dispencing, unbind any that was bound, but declare
only to him that is not bound, that he is exempted from the Law.

The last day but one of February, the Cardinal of Loraine returned to Trent,
having remained five days in Ispruc, which he sent in continual The Card. of
Loraine returns.
negotiation With the Emperor, King of the Romans, and their Ministers. At his
return he found the Popes letters to him; in which he said, that he did
desire a reformation should be made and not deferred any longer, and that they
might have time to labor therein, the words of the decree of Order, which were
in difficulty, should be taken away. The Cardinal did publish these letters
purposely in Trent, where it was generally known that the Legates had a
contrary Commission. But the Papalins used all diligence to find what business
the Cardinal had by means of those who were in his company and in particular,
what resolution was taken concerning the seventeen Articles; and the rather
because Count Frederick Massei, who came from Ispruc but the day before
related that the Cardinal was every day in private conferrence, more then two
hours, with the Emperor and King of the Romans. The Frenchmen made show to
understand nothing of the Articles, and said that none of the Dutch divines had
treated with the Cardinal but Staphilus only who presented him with a book
which he had made in matter of residence, and Canisius when he went to see
the College of the Jesuits, that the Divines had not spoken to the Emperor,
but only when going to see the Library, they ouertooke him and the King his
son, who demanding what they thought concerning the grant of the Cup the
Abbat of Claneual, who was first of them, answered, that he thought it could
not be granted; then the Emperor, turning to the King of the Romans, spoke
this verse of the Psalm in Latin; Forty years have I endured this
generation, and have always found them to err in their will.

But Loraine, in visiting the Legates, said nothing, but that the Emperor was
very well and zealously affected toward the Counsel desiring it might produce
some fruit, and that if occasion were, he would assist in person, and go to
Rome also, to pray the Pope to have compassion of Christendom, and to suffer a
reformation to be made, which might not diminish his authority, to which he
bare exceeding great reverence nor would have any thing spoken of touching his
Holiness and the Court of Rome. But to others in private he said, that if the
Council had been governed with that wisdom as was convenient, it would have
had a sudden and prosperous end; that the Emperor was resolved, that a good
and a strong reformation should be made, which if the Pope would continue to
cross, as hitherto he had done, some great scandal would ensue, that his
Majesty purposed to go to Bolonia, in case the Pope came thither, with
desseigne to receive the crown of the Empire; and such other things.

It is not to be doubted, that the Cardinal spoke of the affairs of the The
points on which the Cardinal of Loraine treated with the Emperor.
Council, and informed the Emperor of the disorders, and delivered his opinion
what remedies might be used, to oppose the Court of Rome, and the Italian
Prelates of Trent, to obtain in Council the communion of the Cup, the marriage
of Priests, the use of the vulgar tongue in holy matters, the relaxation of
other precepts of positive law, a reformation in the Head and the members, and
a means to make the Decrees of the Council indispensable, and how in case they
were not able to obtain, they might have a colorable occasion to justify
their actions, if, of themselves, they should make provision for the
necessities of their people, by making a National Council, assaying also to
unite the Germans with the Frenchmen, in matters of religion. But this was not
his negotiation only. For he treated a marriage also, between the Queen of
Scotland and the Arch duke Ferdinand, the Emperors son, and another between
a daughter of his Majesty and the Duke of Ferrara, and to find a means to
compose the differences of precedence between France and Spain, which things,
as domestical, do touch Princes more nearly then the public.

After the return of Loraine the Congregations continuing, James Alan, a
French Divine, entered likewise into the matter of dispensations, and said, that
authority to dispense was immediately given to the Church by Christ, and by it,
distributed to the Prelates, as need required, according to times, places, and
occasions. He extrolled the authority of General Councels, which represent
the Church, and diminished the Popes, adding that it belongs to the General
council to enlarge or restrain it.

The second of March, the Cardinal of Mantua, having been sick a few, The
Cardinal of Mantua dies.
days, passed to another life; which was cause of many mutations in Council.
The Legates did presently send advice hereof to the Pope; and Seripando, who
remained prime Legate, beside the common letter, wrote in particular, that he
would be glad his Holiness would send another Legate, his superior, to
govern the Council, or remove him: but in case he would The three Legates
remaining write to the Pope.
leave him prime Legate, he told him he would proceed as God should inspire
him; and that otherwise it were better to remove him absolutely. The Cardinal
of Varmia wrote a part also, that his Church had great need of the presence of
a Pastor, and that the communion of the Cup was brought in, and other notable
abuses, desiring leave to go thither, to make provision herein, and that
generally in all Polonia, there was need of a person, who might keep the
residue of the people in obedience, saying, he should do the Apostolic Sea
more service in those quarters, then he could by remaining in the Council. But
Simoneta, desirous that the weight of the whole business should lie upon his
shoulders; hoping to guide it with satisfaction of the Pope and his own
honor, considering that Seripando was satiated with it, and not inclined to
govern it, and that Varmiense was a simple man, fit to beled, he wrote to the
Pope, that, the affairs of the Council being not in a good state, every nouity
would shake it much, and therefore did think fit to continue without sending
other Legates, and promised a good issue.

In those days advice came from Rome, that a cause of the Bishop of Segouia,
which was to be proposed in the Rota, was refused, and that one of the Auditors
told his Proctor, that the Bishop was suspected of heresy. This made a great
stir, not only amongst the Spaniards, but all the Oltramontanes also,
complaining that, in Rome, calumnies and infamies were raised against those who
did not absolutely adhere to their wills.

The fourth of March the third rank began to speak: and, for the fifth
Article all agreed that it was heretical, and to be condemned; and so they did
of the sixth. Yet there was a difference, because some said, that howsoever the
Oriental Church and the Occidentall did differ, in regard this did admit to
Priesthood and holy Orders continent persons only, and that did admit married
men, yet no Church did ever grant that Priests might marie and that this is so
by Apostolical tradition, not by reason of vow, or of any Ecclesiastical
constitution; and therefore that, absolutely, they were to be condemned for
heretics, who say it is lawful for Priests to marie, though they restrain
not themselves to the West, nor make mention of vow or law of the Church. And
others said, that no disp(...) could be granted for Priests to marry for any
cause whatsoever. Some said that matrimony was forbid to two sorts of
persons, for two causes. To secular Clerks, in regard of holy Orders, by
Ecclesiastical law; to regulars, in regard of their solemn vow. That the
prohibition of marriage by constitution of the Church, may be taken away by the
Pope, or, in case that remain in force still, the Pope may dispense with it.
They alleged the examples of those who have been dispensed with, and the use
of antiquity, that, if a Priest did marry the marriage was good, but the man
was separated from the Ministry; which has continually been observed until
the time of Innocenntius the 2. who, first of all the Popes, ordained that
there should be a nullity in the marriage. But with those who are bound to
continency by solemn vow, this being de iure diuino, they said the Pope
could not dispense. They alleged Innocentius the third, who affirmed that the
observation of chastity, and the abdication of the propriety of goods, does so
cleave to the bones of Munkes, that the Pope cannot dispense therein. Then they
added the opinion of Saint Thomas, and of other Doctors, who affirm, that the
solemn vow is a consecration of the man to God, and that, because no man can
make a thing consecrated to return to humane uses, no man likewise can make a
Munke to return to the power of marrying, and that all Catholic Writers do
condemn Luther, and his sectaries of heresy, for saying that Munkship is an
humane invention; and do affirm that it is by Apostolical tradition:
whereunto the opinion that the Pope may dispense, is directly contrary.

Others did maintain that the Pope might dispense, even with these also, and
marueiled at those, who, granting the dispensation of simple vows, did deny
that of solemn, as if it were not most clear, by the determination of
Boniface the eigth, that every solemnity is de iure positiuo, making use also
of the examples of things consecrated to prove their opinion. For as a thing
consecrated, remaining so; cannot be employed in humane uses, but yet the
consecration may be removed, and the thing made profane, whereby it may
lawfully return to a promiscuons use, so a man consecrated to Munkship,
remaining so, cannot marry, but, the Munkship and consecration, arising from
the solemnity of the vow, which is de iure positiuo, being removed, he may,
without any hinderance, live as others do. They brought places of Saint
Austin, by which it does manifestly appear, that in his time, some Munkes did
marry. And howsoever it was thought they offended in it, yet the marriage was
lawful, and Saint Austin reprehendeth those who did separate them.

They said moreover it was necessary to dispense with Priests, or to take away
the precept of continency. And the Duke of Bauaria having sent to Rome, to
demand of his Holiness the Communion of the Cup, requested also that married
men might have leave to preach, under which name all the Ecclesiastical
ministry was understood, exercised by Parish Priests, in the cure of souls.
Many reasons were alleged to persuade the grant, which were resolved into
two; scandal given by incontinens Priests, and want of continent persons, sit
to exercise the ministry. And the famous saying of Pope Pins the second, was
in the mouth of many that Priests were by the Occidentall Church forbid to
marry for good reason, but there was stronger reason to restore marriage to them
again. Those of the contrary opinion said, that it is not the part of a wise
Physician to cure one disease; by causing a greater, that if Priests are in
continent and ignorant, yet the Priesthood is not to be prostituted to (...)d
(...) And here many Popes were alleged, who did not permit it; because they
said it was impossible to attend to the flesh and to the spirit, and that (...)
(...) was a carnal estate; that the true remedy was to make provision of
continent and learned persons, by education, by diligence, by rewards and
punishments, and, in the mean time, not to ordain any but m^n of an approved
life; and, for doctrine to cause Homilies and Catechismes to be printed in the
Dutch and French tongues, composed by learned and religios men, to be read to
the people out of the book by the(...) learned Priests, by which means the
Parish Priests, though insufficient, might satisfy the people.

The Legates were blamed for suffering this Article to be disputed; as being
dangerous; because it is plain that married Priests will turn their
affections The principal reason why Priests are forbid to marry.
and love to their wives and children, and by consequence to their house and
Country, so that the strict dependence which the Clergy has on the
Apostolic Sea, would cease, and to grant marriage to Priests, would destroy the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make the Pope to be Bishop of Rome only. But
the Legates excused themselves, that, to please the Bishop of Five Churches, who
had made this request in the name of the Duke of Bauaria, and of the Emperor
also, and to make the Imperialists not to be so earnest in the matter of
reformation, which was of more importance, they were forced to yield to this
disputation.

The Frenchmen, perceiving it was the more common opinion that the marriage of
Priests might be dispensed with, consulted together whether it were fit to
demand a dispensation for the Cardinal of Borbon, as Loraine and the
Ambassadors had commission. Loraine was of opinion, that it was not fit;
saying, that, without doubt, the Council would hardly be persuaded that the
cause was reasonable, and urgent, in regard it was not necessary he should have
posterity, the King being young, there being two Brothers, and other Princes of
the blood, Catholics: and for governing, during the minority of the King; he
might do it, remaining in the Clergy, that, in regard of the differences
between the French and Italians, about reformation, and the authority of the
Pope and Bishops, their opposities would diligently oppose this demand; that
it was better to go to the Pope, or expect a better occasion, and that it was
sufficient for that time, to provide that no doctrine should be established in
prejudice of it. Some thought that Loraine did not like, in his private
opinion, that Borbon should marry, in regard it might cause an emulation, or
diminution of his house; but others did not think it probable. First, because
by this means all hope was taken from ^onde, whom he ^^ist^^sted much more;
yea that he did much desire that Borbon should return to the secular state,
that himself might be the prime (...) France, and that, if a Patriarch were
made, as he much desired, he might undoubtedly be the man, which could not
be, if Borbon did still remain in the Clergy.

The Pope having received advice of the death of Mantua, and consulted with his
inward friends, thought it necessary to send other Legates, who being new, not
entangled with promises and treaties, might follow his instructions with more
ease. And therefore the seventh of March, the second Sunday in Lent, not
intimating a Congregation, as he was wont, but the Two new Legates are created.
Cardinals being assembled in the Chamber where they put on their robes to go
to the Chapel, according to the use, he stayed, and, excluding the
Courtiers, caused the doors to be shut, and created Legates, the Cardinals,
John Morone, and Bernardus Nauaggerus, that, by the persuasions of Princes or
Cardinals, he might not be forced to name others that pleased him not. The
Pope thought to do it secretly; but it came to the ears of the Frenchmen,
and the Cardinal of Bordissiera spoke to the Pope before he went out of the
Chamber, and told him many reasons, that, in case he would create new Legates,
he could not commit the charge to a more worthy person then the Cardinal of
Loraine. But the Pope being resolute, and displeased that the matter was not so
secretly carried, answered freely, that the Cardinal of Loraine came to the
Council as Head of one of the pretendent parties, and that he would depute
those who were Neutrals, and without interests. The Cardinal being about to
reply, the Pope made haste away, and went down out of the Chamber so fast,
that there was not time to make answer. The Congregation being ended, the Pope
let the Cardinals go to the Chapel, and himself returned to the Chamber,
because he would not be in ceremony, when he was so much vexed with the
words of that Cardinal.

The ninth of March news came to Trent, that the Duke of Guise, brother The
Duke of Guise is slains under Orlience.
to the Cardinal of Loraine, as he returned from the trenches under Orlience,
was shot, by John Poltrot, a private Gentleman of the reformed religion, and
six days after died, to the great discontent of all the Court, and that,
after he was wounded, he exhorted the Queen to make peace, and said openly,
that he was an enemy to the kingdom who was against it. The Homicide being
interrogated of his accomplices, named Coligni, the Admiral, and Theodore Beza,
and afterward excused Beza, but perseuered in accusing the other. Yet he
wauered so, that one could not tell what to believe. The Cardinal advertised
hereof, provided a greater guard then formerly he had: and, being exceedingly
grieved for the death of his brother, who was so dear unto him, first of all
he wrote a consolatorie Letter to Antoniette de The Card. of Loraine writes
to his mother.
Borbon, their common mother, full of exquisite conceits, to be compared, or
rather as his friends said, to be preferred to those of Seneca, in the end
whereof he said, he was resolved to go to his Church of Reims, and to spend
the residue of his life in preaching the word of GOD, instructing the people,
bringing up his brothers children in Christian piety, and never to cease
performing of these offices, but when the Kingdom, for some public affairs,
had need of his pains. The Letter was no sooner parted from Trent, but the
City was full of copies of it, rather importunely offered by his friends, then
requested; so hard it is for the affection of self love to be quiet, though
in the occasion of greatest sorrow. After this, the Cardinal, thinking of the
change of things by this variation, altered all his desseignes. And this caused
a change also in the affairs of the Council. For he being the man which the
Emperor and Queen of France had, until then, wholly employed, they were
forced, for want of so fit a minister, to be more remiss in their purposes,
and to proceed more slowly. But it happens in humane affairs, as it does in
fortunes at Sea, where, the winds being ceased, the waves do tumultuate, for
some hours after. So the great weight of the affairs of the Council could
not easily be appeased, in regard of their former impetuous motion. But it is
certain, that the death of that Duke The death of the Duke caused a great
alteration in the Council.
was a great beginning of the quiet which succeeded some months after,
especially after the death of the other brother, great Prior of France, and the
peace made with the Hugonots, and the instances of the Queen to the Cardinal
to make his peace with the Pope, and return into France: of which things we
will speak in due place. Hereby the Cardinal saw, that the affairs as they
stood, would not be profitable, neither for himself, nor his friends.

The death of Guise was lamented both in Trent and Rome, because every one
thought he was the only maintainer of the Catholic party in the kingdom
of France; neither did it appear what other person could succeed, in
supporting that weight; the rather, because every one was daunted by the
example of his death. The French Prelates in the Council were troubled in
mind, because they understood that an accord was treated with the Hugonots,
who pretended, amongst other things, that the third part of the Ecclesiastical
revenues should be employed for maintenance of the reformed Ministers.

In this variety of businesses, and perplexity of minds, Fiue-Churches
returned to Trent, and, with the other Ambassadors of the Emperor, had
audience with the Legates, and presented to them the Emperors letter which The
Emperors letters to the Legates and the Pope.
he brought, and the copy of another written by his Majesty to the Pope. They
all made request for the reformation, but in general terms only, and very
remissely. The Emperors letter to the Legates, did signify his desire to see
some fruitful proceeding of the Council, for which it was necessary to
remove some impediments, whereof having written to the Pope, he prayed them to
labor in Council, and to use persuasions to his Holiness, that the future
progress might be for the service of GOD, and benefit of Christendom. In his
letter to the Pope he said, that, having dispatched great businesses with the
Electors, and other Princes and States of Germany, nothing was more precious
unto him, being Advocate of the Church, then to promote the affairs of the
Council; that he was come to Ispruc for that cause, where, to his grief, he
understood that matters did not proceed as he hoped, and as the public
tranquillity did require; that he feared, if better order were not taken, the
Council would end with scandal of the world, and laughter of those who had
forsaken the obedience of the Church of Rome, who would be incited to retain
their opinions with greater obstinacy, there had been no Session held of a
long time; that while Princes did labor to unite the adversaries differing in
opinions, the Fathers came to contentions, unworthy of them; that there was a
fame that his Holiness meant to dissolve or suspend the Council, perhaps
moved thereunto by the present state thereof: but that his opinion was to the
contrary. For it had been better it had never been begun, then left imperfect
with the scandal of the world, contempt of his Holiness, and of the whole
Clergy, prejudice of this and other future general Councels, loss of that
small remainder of Catholics, and opinion of the world, that the end of the
dissolution or suspension was only to hinder the reformation; that, in the
intimation of it, his Holiness did desire his consent, and of other Kings and
Princes, which he did, in imitation of his predecessors, who always have
thought it necessary, for many respects; that the same reason does conclude,
that it cannot be dissolved or suspended without the same consent. And he
exborted him, not to hearken to those who would have him to dissolve it, a
thing shameful and unprofitable, which undoubtedly would be a cause of
National Councels, so much abhorred by his Hol. as contrary to the unity of
the Church, which as they have been hindered by Princes to preserve the Popes
authority, so they cannot be denied, or deferred any more. He persuaded him
to maintain the liberty of the Council, which was impeached principally by
three causes. One because every thing was first consulted of at Rome, another,
because the Legates had assumed to themselves only the liberty of proposing,
which ought to be common to all; the third, because of the practices which some
Prelates, interested in the greatness of the Court of Rome, did make. He said,
that a reformation of the Church being necessary, and the common opinion being,
that the abuses have their beginning and growth in Rome, it was fit, for common
satisfaction, that the reformation should be made in Council, and not in that
City. And therefore desired his Holiness to be content that the demands
exhibited by his Ambassadors, and by other Princes, might be proposed. In the
conclusion, he told him, he purposed to assist in Council personally, and
exhorted his Holiness to do the like.

This letter was dispatched the third of March, and it gave much offense With
which his Holiness is offended.
to the Pope. For he thought that the Emperor did embrace much more then his
authority did reach unto, and passed the terms of his Predecessors, men more
potent then himself. But he was displeased more when he was advised by his
Nuncio, that he had sent copies of the same Letter to other Princes, and to
the Cardinal of Loraine also; which could be done to no other end, but to
incite them against him, and to justify his own actions. Besides, Doctor
Scheld, great Chancellor to the Emperor, persuaded Delphinus, the Popes Nuncio
in that Court, that he would be a means that the words, Vniuersalem Ecclesiam,
might be taken away, which did infer the superiority of the Pope above the
Council, saying, that these times did not comport they should be used, and
that the Emperor and himself also did know, that Charles the fifth, of happy
memory, did hold the contrary opinion in this article, and that they should
take heed of giving occasion to his Majesty and other Princes to declare what
they think (...). The Pope considered that Loraine also had written, that it
was not (...) to (...) the difficulty of the words, Vniuersalem Ecclesiam,
etc, and the advice which came from Trent, that the Cardinal said, that
neither himself, nor the French Prelates could endure them, that they might not
^an^nize an opinion, contrary to all (...)ance, which, when men came to speak
plainly in the discussion of this point, would have more favorers then was
believed, and that they were deceived who thought she contrary; which showed
clearly, that he had treated hereof at the Emperors Court. These things
considered, the Pope thought fit to make a good answer, and to send about
also, to justify himself.

Therefore he wrote, to the Emperor, that he had called the Council with
the participation of him, and of other Kings and Princes, not because And
answers the letter thus.
the Apostolic Sea had need, in governing the Church, to expect the consent of
any authority whatsoever, because he had pleni^ude of power from CHRIST; that
all the ancient Councels have been assembled by authority of the Bishop of
Rome, nor any Prince ever interposed, but as a mere executor of his will, he
had never had any purpose either to dissolve or to suspend the Council, but
has always purposed to give a complete end; for the service of GOD; that, by
consulting Rome of the same matters which were disputed in Trent, the liberty
of the Council was not only not hindered, but promoted rather, that no Council
was ever celebrated in absence of the Pope, but that he has sent
instructions, which the Fathers have also followed; that the instructions do
still remain, which Pope Celestinus sent the Eph^sine Council, Pope Leo to
that of Chalcedon, Pope Agatho to than of Trullus, Pope Adrian the first to the
second of Nice, Pope Adrian the second to the eighth general Council of
Constantinople, that, for proposing in the Council, it has always belonged
to the Pope whenever he has bin present, yea, he alone has resolved, and
the Council done nothing but approve; that in absence of the Pope, the Legates
have ever proposed, or others, deputed by them; in conformity whereof, the
Council of Trent has determined, that the Legates should propose; that this
is necessary for the keeping of order, in regard there would be a great
confusion, if the Prelates, (...)iltuously and one against another, might set on
foot matters seditious, and in convenient; that the Legaes have never refused
to propose any thing that is profitable, that the practices, made by dide^s
against the authority of the Apostolic Sea, has much displeased him; that
all the books of the Fathers and Councels are full, that the Pope, successor,
of Peter, and Vicar of CHRIST, is Rastor of the universal Church, that many
conuenticles and (...) have been made in Trent, against this truth, how
soever the Church has always used this form of speech, as his Majesty might
feel (...) the place which he sent him cited in a paper enclosed, (...) present
A paper full of quotations.
(...) have (...) because his Legates, using (...) bad (...) (...)g take
occasion to speak against the libert of the Council, had (...) to be
contemned, so that the Council might be^ (...) that; for reformation, he
de(...) it should (...) and absolute, and has continually solli^^ted his
Legates to resolve upon (...), concerning the Court, the world knew how any
pro(...) with the diminution of his rents, and that, if any thing (...) Would
no(...) it, that (...) could not be done in (...), being no^ informed well,
instead of reforming, would (...) more, that, in the mean while, he desi^ed
to second it (...) formation in other Courts also, which had no less need of
it, in the affairs of the Church only, and that perhaps from the abuses
therein the evil does principally arise; that, concerning the petitions
proposed by his Majesty's Ambassadors, and others, he has always written
they should be examined and discussed, each of them in its fit time, and that
an oder being instituted, and continued to handle in Council matters of faith,
and reformation of the abuses concerning them, both together, it could not be
altered, without confusion and indignity; that his Majesty having touched
diverse disorders of the Council, had omitted the principal, and fountain of
the others, which is, that those who ought to receive law from Councels, would
give it unto them; that if the piety of Constantine, and the two Theodosi^j
were imitated, and their examples followed, the Council would have had no
division between the Fathers, and been in great reputation with the world;
that he desired to assist personally in Council, to remedy the disorders
thereof, but in regard of his age, and of his important affairs, it was
inpossible for him to go to Trent, and would not speak of translating it to a
place whither he might go for fear of giving suspicion.

The Pope thought that the interests of the Emperor and of France could not be
united with his, and therefore could promise himself but little, and hope
less of them. For they did not think of the Synod but for the interests of
their estates, and therefore did desire nothing from it but what might give
satisfaction and contentment to their people, and in case they cannot obtain
it, to hinder the ending of the Council, and so to keep their subjects still
in hope. But these interests could not move the King of Spain, whose people
are Catholics, and therefore he might conform himself to his will, without
prejudice to his states, yea that it was good for him to stand united with him,
that he might obtain graces; and therefore he thought it necessary to
solicit him, with continual persuasions, and to give him hope of all
satisfaction. And Lewis d' Auola did opportunely arrive in Rome, sent expressly
by his Catholic Majesty. The Pope honored him above measure, lodged him in
the palace, in the rooms formerly inhabited by Count Frederic A Spanish
Ambassador comes to Rome.
Boremeo, his nephew, and used him with all effectual courtesy. The causes of
his coming were, to obtain of the Pope a prorogation for five years more of
the Subsidy of the Clergy, granted unto him, and power to sell five and
twenty thousand crowns of the Fees of the Churches. He had commission also
to procure a dispensation of marriage between the Princess, Sister of the
King and his Son Charles, which, in Spain, was thought easy, because many,
even private men, were dispensed with to marry the daughter of their brother
or sister, which is as much as to take the sister of the father, Besides,
Moses and Aaron were borne of such a matrimony. For the marriage, the Pope
said he would do as much as his authority would stretch unto, and would cause
the matter to be consulted on. But the Treaty did not proceed, in regard of
the infirmity of the Princess which succeeded, and made her unfit for
marriage. Concerning the Subsidy, and alienation, the Pope showed a willing
mind, but made difficulty to do it while the Prelates were at charges in the
Council, promising to gratify the King if he would assist him to finish it,
and to free him from it. For matters of the Council, Don Lewis did not proceed
far in the first audiences, only he offered to procure the preservation of
the Popes authority, and exhorted his Holiness not to treat a league between
the Catholics, least the heretics should do the like, and France run
headlong to any accord with the Hugonots.

In the mean while diverse assemblies were held in Trent: the Emperors
Ambassadors called together the Spanish Prelates, in the house of the
Archbishop of Granata, to persuade them to consent that the use of the Cup
might be granted in Council, purposing to propose it again: but they found
them so auerse, that they were forced to bury it in silence. The Cardinal of
Loraine held many congregations with his Prelates and Divines to examine the
places, sent by the Pope to the Emperor, in the paper before mentioned, and by
the Emperor to him, concerning the words, Vniuersalem Ecclesiam, to see
whether they were justly cited, and whether the true sense was given them, that
they might, as they did, make another writing, in confutation of it. The
Emperor gave order that these places might be imparted to the Spanish
Prelates, that he might know their opinion; which Five Churches having done,
when they were all assembled to this end, Granata answered that his Majesty
needed not to have taken such pains with them who do receive the Council of
Florence, but should ask the Frenchmen, who receive that of Basil. Upon this
occasion some of them, when Five Churches was gone from them, did persuade,
that a letter should be written to the Pope, to take from him the bad opinion
he had conceived of them. But Granata refused, and said, it was sufficient
that he knew by their voices that they were not opposite herein; yet so, as
it was not fit they should imitate the flattery of the Italians. And he used
these very words. Let him restore unto us our own, that we may leave unto him
more then is his; and it is not just, that of Bishops we should be made his
Vicars. Another day the Ambassadors of the Emperor and French King met
together, to set down an order that the Decree of residence, composed by the
Cardinal of Loraine, might be proposed: which neither they, nor Loraine could
obtain of the Cardinal of Varmia, and Simoneta, Seripando being sick, and
absent.

In the congregation of the seventeenth of March, one of the Divines, finding
opportunity to digress from the continency of Priests to residence, spent
his whole large discourse therein. He brought authority and examples to
persuade that it was de iure diuino, and to answer that objection, that many
Canons and Decrees do command it, which needed not, if it were commanded by
God. He used this conceit, that Ius diuinum is the foundation, or pillar of
residence, and Ius Canonicum the Edifice or roof, and that as the building is
overthrown when the foundation is removed, and as the roof falls when the
pillar is taken away, so it is impossible to preserve residence with Ius
Canonicum only, and those who ascribe it only unto that, have no other aim
then to destroy it. He brought the examples of ancient times, noting that
residence was exquisitely observed by all, before any Canons or humane Decrees
were made, because every one held that he was bound by God. But since that
some have persuaded themselves, that there was no obligation but that which is
derived from humane Laws, howsoever these have often been renewed, and
fortified with penalties; yet all has still grown worse and worse.

The same day Cardinal Seripando dyed, to the great grief of all the
Prelates, and of all Trent, having in the morning received the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which he took out of his bed upon his knees. After that he
returned into his bed, and in the presence of five Prelates, and of the
Secretaries of Venice and Florence, and of all his family, he made a long
Oration The death of Seripando.
in Latin, until his spirits did fail him; he confessed his faith, wholly
confortable to the Catholic of the Roman Church; spoke of the works of a
Christian, of the Resurrection of the dead, of the affairs of the Council,
recommending the progress of it to the Legates, and the Cardinal of Loraine;
but striving to set down the means, his spirit did fail him, and he said,
that GOD had forbid him to proceed further, but that his Divine Majesty would
speak himself in time and place: and so passed, without saying any more.

The Count of Luna wrote from the Emperors Court, to Martin Gusdelun, the
Secretary, and sent a copy of a letter, written to him from the King, in which
his Majesty did advise, that the Pope had complained to him of the Spanish
Prelates; and howsoever he believed that his Holiness was not well informed,
thinking that the Prelates would show devotion toward the Apostolic Sea, yet
he gave order to the Count, that, at his coming to Trent, he should cause
them to favor the Pope, as far as their conscience could permit, and so to
carry themselves, that his Holiness might not have cause to complain of him.
And to this purpose the Count wrote also to Granata, Segouia, and Leon.

The eighteenth of March, in which no Congregation was held, by reason of the
obsequies of Seripando, the French Ambassadors appeared solemnly before the
two Legates, and complained that, these eleven months, since the first day of
their arrival in Trent, until then, they had made known the desolations of
France, and the dangers of Christendom, for the differences of Religion, and
declared that the most vnecessary and principal remedy was a good entire
reformation of manners; and s(...) moderation of positive Laws, and had
always received good hope, and gracious words, but could never see any effect
of them; that the reformation is avoided, as much as is possible; that the
greater part of the Fathers and Theologues are now more hard and severe
th(...), i^ (...) yielding to the necessity of the time; they prayed them to
consider how many good men dyed, before they were able to do any good work
for the public service; whereof the Cardinals of M(...) and Seripando were
examples; desiring them to do something for the discharge of their conscience,
while they had ti(...) The (...) answered that they were displeased with this
long deferring of matters (...) (...) and Seripando were cause; that themselves
(...) so great a weight, praying them to expect (...) and N(...) (...) would
presently arrive. They were (...) with the (...) the (...) there, because the
Imp(...) made instance (...) would (...) ly, expecting the negotiation of the
Emperors Ambassadors in Rome, who together with Lewis (...), made request to
the Pope, that a general reformation of the whole Church in the Head, and in
the members, might be made not in Rome, but in the Council, and also that the
Decree, that the Legates only might propose in Council should be revoked, as
contrary to the liberty of the Ambassadors and Prelates, in propounding what
they thought profitable, these for their Churches, and those for their States.
The negotiation of the Ambassadors of the Emperor and King of Spain in Rome.
This instance the Emperor the tight fit should be first made to the Pope and
afterward to the Council.

Notwithstanding, these Princes were not absolutely of one mind. For howsoever
Don Lewis made the same demands apart, yet afterward, he desired the Pope to
persuade the Emperor not to seek the communion of the Cup, and marriage of
Priests, saying, that the King had given commission to his Ambassador to go
to Trent, and persuade that it should not be spoken of, or, if it were, that
the Spanish Prelates should oppose it. He exhorted the Pope to endeavor to
win the heretics by gentleness, not sending Nuncij, but using the means
of the Emperor, and of other Princes of authority, to accept the demands of
the Frenchmen, and to leave the Council free, that all may propose, and no
practices be used in making the resolutions. The Popes answer to the
Ambassadors was, that the decree, The Popes answer.
Proponentibus Legatis, should be so expounded; that every one might propose
what he would, and that to the Legates, which parted lately, he had given
liberty to resolve all things, which might o^^urre in Council, without
writing at all; that the reformation was desired by him, and that he had often
made instance for it, and that, if the world would have had it from Rome, it
should have been done by this time, and put in execution also; but seeing they
would have it from Trent, if it were not effected, the cause ought to be
as(...)ed only to the difficulties which were amongst the Fathers, that he
desired to see an end of the Council, and did procure and solicit it, nor
had ever any thought to suspend it; that, in conformity hereof, he would
write to the Legates, and did write, that the Decree, proponentibus Legatis,
was made to take away confusion; but that his will was, that (...) of the
Prelates should be hindered to propose what he thought fit and that they
should dispatch the (...), according to the voices of the Fathers, without
expecting any order from Rome. But this letter was to give satisfaction, and
not to work any effect. For Morone, the prime Legate, Secret instructions
given to Cardinal Morone.
had instructions apart, to give a (...) to the orders also which should come
from Rome.

The Pope answered Don Lewis in particular, that he had opened the Council
upon promise of his Majesty that he would protect it, and pre^^rue the
authority of the Apostoli(...) Sea, but that he found he was decerted, in
regard he had (...) his Prelates, then from ^ he was not pleased it should have
license, nor be in servitude to those Princes, who preach liberty, and are
desirous to command, that every one made request to him for the liberty of the
Council, but he did not know whether they had all well considered of what
importance it would be, if the Prelates had the raines laid on the neck; that
howsoever there were amongst them, some men excellent for integrity and
wisdom, yet there were of those also, who wanted either one of them or both;
all which would be dangerous if they were not kept in order, that perhaps it
did least of all concern him to think of it, because, his authority being
grounded upon the promises of God, he did trust in those; that Princes had
more need to beware, in regard of the preiudices which may ensue, and that, if
the Prelates had such superfluous liberty, perhaps his Catholic Majesty
would have cause to be sorry for it, that, for reformation, the impediments
did not proceed from him; that he would continue to defer the demands of
Princes concerning the communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priests, desiring
his Majesty to consider, that as he dissented from others in these
particulars, so in every thing else there are some who make requests for it,
and others who oppose. He concluded, that it was in the power of his Majesty
to see a fruitful, and a sudden end of the Council, from which so soon as
he was free, he might promise himself all favor from him.

The twentieth of March, the Divines made an end of the Articles of Matrimony;
and the Legates consulted privately, whether it were good to propose the
doctrine, and canons thereof in the congregations of the Fathers. But,
considering that the Frenchmen and Spaniards would oppose, and that greater
controversies might be raised then ever were, and that if they should propose
the abuses only, they should give the Emperors and French Ambassadors fit
occasion to enter again into the matter of reformation, they were much
perplexed what to do. Varmiense thought good to make trial, to accommodate
some of the difficulties: but Simoneta* feared that some great prejudice might
ensue, in regard of the instability of his colleague; and attributing the blame
of all the disorders, which have happened in Council, to the two Legates dead,
who proceeding in the matter of residence rather according to their own
opinion, then the necessities of the Church, have, by too much integrity,
caused all the mischief, and said it was not fit to put themselves in danger
of raising greater, and therefore did not consent that any of them should be
spoken of. Finally, they concluded to intermit all discussions, until the
coming of the new Legates. In the mean time, The Cardinal of Loraine
resolves to go to Venice.
Loraine resolved to go to Venice, to recreate his mind possessed with grief,
for the death of his brother, the great Prior, which also had revived his
former sorrow, for the death of the Duke, his other brother.

The difficulties which were spoken of, were six. One concerning the The 6.
difficulties which trouble the Council.
Decree, made long before, that the Legates only should propose. (...).
Whether residence were de iure diuino. 3. Whether Bishops are instituted by
CHRIST. 4. Concerning the authority of the Pope. 5. To ^ncrease the number of
the Secretaries, and to hold an exact account of the Suffrages. 6. (Which was
of most importance) concerning the general reformation: which I was willing to
repeat (...), as a recapitulation of that wherein the Council has been
troubled until this time, and a pro(...) of the troubles which shall be
related hereafter.

The news was now stale in Trent, of the instance made in Rome to the Pope.
For the Emperors Ambassadors and the French, had published it should be done,
and that afterward they would make the same requests to the Council. The
Cardinal of Loraine, who was wont to speak variously, said, that if those
Princes did receive satisfaction, by proposing their petitions of reformation,
and the reformation made, without diminution of the Popes authority, those
instances would immediately cease. And he added afterward, that the Pope might
have a good proceeding in the reformation, and a quick dispatch of the
Council, if he would declare himself plainly what points he would not have
to be discussed, that they might labor in discussing the others; by which
means the contentions would be taken away, which have caused all the delays.
For some, who desire to show their affection to his Holiness, supposing that a
part of those petitions may be prejudicial to the Apostolic Sea, do oppose
them all: and others, denying that any of them do prejudice, do cause the
business to be drawn in length. But if his Holiness would declare himself,
the difficulties would cease. The Emperors Ambassadors gave a copy to many
in Trent, of his Majesty's letter to the Pope; which made the Legates resolve
to spread also the copy of the letter which themselves had written in answer
to the Emperor, when he sent them that which he had written to the Pope;
which letter being composed according to the instructions sent from Rome, did
contain the same conceits, as the letters of his Holiness did.

The Pope, comparing the propositions of all the Ambassadors with the speech
of Loraine, whereof advice was sent him, was so much the more resolute, not to
consent to the propositions of reformation, made by the Frenchmen. And indeed,
not only a person of a great spirit, and experienced in the world, as the Pope
was, but every mean capacity might discover the cunning used, to draw him
into the net, in case he had not been wary. He considered, that to say he
should declare which of the petitions did not please him, did signify nothing
but that, by suffering the others to be discussed, he should leave a way wide
open to bring in the others afterward, which were to his prejudice. And who
could doubt that to obtain the first would not be an end, but a degree to
pass to that at which they aimed; and that to release the Ecclesiastical
precepts, belonging to thrites, as the communion of the Cup, marriage of
Priests, use of the Latin tongue, which seem, at the first view, not to
derogate from the Popes authority, would notwithstanding cause immediately a
total destruction of the foundations of the Church of Rome. Some things make a
fair show, and seem that they may be admitted without loss; but a wise man
must consider the conclusion of things, rather then their beginning. Being
therefore resolved to stop these first passages, and considering what other
remedies there might be, he returned to his first cogitations, that the King
of Spain had neither interest; nor any affection to prosecute the instances
made, that the Emperor and French men did (...)bour in them, hoping by this
meane^ to satisfy their people, and to appease the discords; not knowing that
the heretics do inculcate the reformation that they may have a pretense for
their separation from the Church, and would not be reduced though it should be
made. He thought therefore, that if the Princes were made to understand this,
they would abandon their instance, and suffer the Council to end quietly.
Wherefore he wholely bent his endeavors to overcome the difficulties, by this
means. And considering well all respects, he thought it more easy to persuade
the Emperor, who could determine of him self, and was of a more gentle and
sweet disposition, far from any cunning, and not entangled with war,
whereas in France, the King being a child, many that were partakers in the
government, using many artifices, and having diverse interests, it would be very
hard to do any good. Whereupon he resolved that Cardinal Morone before he
entered into the affairs of the Council, should go to the Emperor for this
end. And remembering what Loraine The Pope resolves to send Cardinal Morone to
the Emperor.
said in Trent, that the Emperor would go to Bolonia to receive the Crown,
he resolved to try whether he could induce that Cardinal to be a mediator
herein, and so to translate the Council to that City. He gave order to the
Bishop of Vintimiglia to insinuate with him, and to persuade And has a plot
upon the Cardinal of Loraine.
him to it; and, to give him a means of entrance, he caused Boromeo to give
him commission, to condole with him, for the death of his brother the great
Prior.

But before this order came, the Cardinal was gone for Padua. The Bishop
therefore conferring with Simoneta, concluded that the importance of the matter
did not admit any loss of time, nor could be negotiated but in presence.
Wherefore he resolved to follow him, pretending to see a Nephew of his, who was
very sick in Padua. Being come thither, he visited the Cardinal, presented
the letters of Boromeo, and condoled with him making no show of any other
business. Talking together, the Cardinal demanded what news there was in
Trent, since his departure, and whether Cardinal Morone would go to the
Emperor, as was reported. After many discourses on both sides, the Bishop
began to put him in mind that his Excellency had formerly told him in Trent,
that, in case the Pope would go to Bolonia, the Emperor would go thither
also, and would make it an occasion to receive the Crown, which would turn to
the great advantage of his Holiness to maintain the possession of coronation,
which Germany did oppugn. The Cardinal affirming this again, the B. added,
that he had then sent advise thereof to Rome, and now had received an answer by
which he did conclude that a very fair occasion was presented to his
Excellency of doing much good to the Church of GOD, by laboring to bring so
profitable a disseigne to effect. For in case he could persuade his Majesty to
go to Bolonia, calling also the Council thither, he might assure himself that
his Holiness would resolve to be there likewise, and that, by the assistance
of them both, the affairs of the Synod would have a quick dispatch, and a
happy success. The Cardinal desired to see what was written to him; and the
Bishop, making demonstration to proceed freely with him, showed him the
letters of Cardinal Boromeo, and a writing of Ptolemeus Gallus; the Popes
Secretary.

The Cardinal having read all, answered, that at his return to Trent, bot
should better understand the Emperors mind, and what answer the Pope had sent
to his Majesty, whereby he might resolve better, and would not fail to
bestow his pains, if there were occasion. The Bishop replying, that he might
plainly understand the Popes mind, by the letters which he showed him, and
that there was no cause to expect better information, the Cardinal entered into
other discourses, neither could the Bishop, though he often returned to the
same matter, draw any other answer from him. He said indeed, that the
Emperor had spoken of his going to Bolonia, because the Pope had told him of
his purpose to make the reformation; but seeing that it is now plain, by long
experience, that howsoever his Holiness promises many things, yet nothing is
executed in Council, his Majesty and other Princes do believe, that he has
no true meaning of performance, and that, otherwise, the Legates would not have
failed to have executed his will. He said the Emperor was not satisfied, for
that the Pope having, in January, showed a purpose to go to Bolonia, was cooled
on the sudden, and that when his Majesty told him of of his desire to assist
personally in Council, his Holiness labored much to diswade him, using his
wonted variety of speeches. He said also that the Emperor would not resolve
to go into Bolonia, lest he should displease the Princes, who might doubt;
that when he was there his Holiness would govern all after his own manner,
and conclude the Synod as he listed, without making any reformation. He said
he had received advise of the instance, made by Don Lewis d' Auila in the name
of the Catholic King, and was glad to hear it. And speaking at large of the
particulars, he added, that it was necessary it should be performed, even
from Alpha to Omega, and that it was fit to remove from the Council fifty
Bishops at the least, who do always oppose all good resolutions. He said
that formerly he thought there were more abuses in France, then else where, but
now he knew that there were enough in Italy also. For the Churches are in the
hands of Cardinals, who, aiming at profit only, do wholly abandon them, and
leave the cure to a poor Priest; by which means the Churches are ruined, and
Simonies, and an infinity of other disorders committed. For remedy whereof,
the Princes and their ministers did proceed moderately, hoping that, at the
last, the desired reformation would be made. That himself also had proceeded
with respect; but now, seeing that it was time to labor in earnest for the
service of GOD, he would burden his conscience no more; but, in the first
voice he should give, was resolved to speak hereof. That his family had
suffered, as every one knows, the loss of two brothers; that himself would
spend his blood in the same cause, though not in Arms, as they did; that his
Holiness ought not to hearken to those who would divert him from so pious an
intention, but to resolve to obtain a reward at the hands of GOD, by the merit
of removing the abuses of the Church. He said also, that, when the new Legates
came, who no doubt would be well informed of the Popes mind; it would he
known what his purpose was concerning the reformation, in regard they could
have no cause to delay it, if they meant to make it at all. And howsoever the
Bishop did often assay to bring him back to speak of the journey to Bolonia,
yet he always turned the discourse another way. Vintimiglia sent advice of
all to Rome, and gave his censure, I that, howso ever the Car(...) had here to
fore made mention of this journey, his mind was contrary, and spoke it only in
cunning, to discover the intention of his holiness and of the County and that
he was glad he had found his purpose. For if he had promised to labor herein,
he might have prolonged the business, and caused diverse prejudicial
inconveniences to arise.

Advise came to Rome that, the French King had made peace with the News out of
France.
Hugonots, the particular conditions being not known as yet. And the Pope
thinking it proceeded from some Prelates, who, though they did not openly
declare themselves to be Protestants, yet did follow that party, he resolved
to discover them, and was wont to say, that he was wronged more by the masked
heretics, then by the barefaced. Whereupon, the last of March, having caused
first the Emperors letter written to him to be read, as also his own answer,
he passed from that business, and related the confusions of France, adding,
that the Cardinal Chastillion, having changed his name of Bishop of Beauuois,
into Count of Beauuois, had also pronounced himself deprived of the Cardinals
Hat, all the disorders to him, to the Archbishop of Aix, the Bishop of V(...)
and some others. Which things, how soever they were notorius, and needed no
further proof to come to the declaration thereof, yet he gave order that the
Cardinals, who governed the Inquisition, should proceed against them. The
Cardinal of Pisa answering, that there was need of proper and special
authority, the Pope ordained, that a new Bull should be made, which was dated
the seventh of April, and contained in substance; That the Pope of Rome being
Vicar of CHRIST, to whom he has recommended the feeding of his sheep, to
reduce those that wander to bridle with temporal penalties those who can not
be gained by admonitions, he has not, find the beginning of his assumption,
omitted to execute this charge. Notwithstanding some Bishops are not only
fallen into heretical errors, but do also favor (...) heretics, opposing
the faith. For provision wherein, he commands the general Inquisitors of
Rome, to whom he has formerly (...) ended this business, (...) proceed
against such, though Bishops and Cardinals, inhabiting on places where the
Luther(...) sect is potent, with power to one them (...) Rome, (...) Edict, or
to the consines of the Church, to appear personally, or, if (...) (...)
appear,, to proceed to sentence, which he will pronounce (...)onsistorio. The
Cardinals, in conformity of the Popes or inaud, cited, by Edict, to appear
personally in Rome, to purge themselves from imputation of heresy, and of
being (...) of heretics, (...) Cologui, Cardinal de Chastilion, Saint Maine,
Archbishop of (...) John (...)luc, Bishop of Valence, Johannes Antonius (...),
Bisop of Tr^jes, John Blankan son, Bishop of Apo(...) (...), Bishop of (...).

But the absence of Loraine in Trent, and (...) (...) of the (...) of the new
Legates, with opinion that the form of pro(...) council should be changed,
and the days of the Passion and Easter approaching, gave some (...) (...)
negotiations. (...) (...) Cardinal (...) (...) to hon(...) the Lagate, M(...),
who was th(...) expected, The entry of Card. (...) into Trent.
and arrived the next day late at night. He made his entry pontifically under
a canopy, was met by the Legates, Ambassadors, and Fathers of the Council, and
Clergy of the City, and conducted to the Cathedral Church, where the
ceremonies used in receiving Legates, were performed. The morrow, which was
Easter day, he sung the solemn Mass in the Chapel. The Count of Luna came
to Trent also this day and was met by the Prelates, and Ambassadors. He entered
into the City between the Ambassadors of the Emperor and of France, with
many demonstrations of friendship. He was also visited by the French, who told
him, they had commission from the King and Queen to communicate all their
affairs unto him, and offered to join with him in all the services of the
Catholic King his Master. Luna answered, that he had the same order, to
communicate with them and that he would hold good correspondencie. He visited
the Legates, using many loving words, and general offers.

The thirteenth of April there was a congregation, to receive Cardinal Card.
Morone is received in congregation
Morone, where, after the Brief of his Legation was read, he made a speech,
fit for the occasion, and said, that the wars, seditions, and other
calamities, present, and imminent, for our sins, would cease, if a means
were found to appease GOD, and to restore the ancient purity, for which and
the Pope had, with great judgment, assembled the Council, in which are two
Cardinals, Princes, famous for nobility and virtue, Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and of so many great Kings, Princes, free Cities and Nations, and
Prelates of excellent learning and integretie, and most skillful Divines. But,
Mantus and Seripando being dead, the Pope had substituted him, and joined
Nauaggero with him, which he had refused, knowing the weight of the burden,
and the weakness of his strength. But the necessity of obedience has over
come fear, that he was commanded to go to the Emperor; and would return
shortly, to treat with the Fathers, in company of the other Legates, that which
does concern the salvation of the people, the honor of the Church, and the
glory of CHRIST; that he brought with him two things one, a good meaning of
the Pope to secure the doctrine of faith, to correct bad manners, to provide
for the necessities of Provinces, and to establish peace and union, even with
the adversaries, as much as piety and the dignity of the Apostolic Sea can
permit the other, his own readiness, to do what his Holiness has commanded
him. He prayed the Fathers, that contentious and discord; and unprofitable
questions being laid a side, which do grieously offend Christendom, they would
handle seriously the things that are necessary.

The Count of Luna used persuasions to all the Prelates, vessals of his
Persuasions of the Count of Luna.
King, Spaniards or Italians, or beneficed in his states, exhorting them in the
name of his Majesty, to stand united in The service, of God and reverence
toward the Apostolic Sea, and not to do themselves wrong, saying he had
commission to advise particularly of the proceedings of every one, and that his
Majesty will keep a particular (...) come of those who will carry themselves
according to his desire, and that he would not have them say any thing against
their conscience. And he spoke to, that every one understood, that these last
words were spoken seriously, and the other in Ceremony.

Morone was willing to see Loraine, before he went to the Emperor, who because
he would not speak with him, deferred his return. For having spoken in
Venice with Nauaggero, and understood a good part of the Popes instructions,
he was willing to avoid occasion, that Morone, communicating unto him all, or
part of that which he was to treat with the Emperor, should put him into
some obligation. Whereupon Morone parted the sixteenth of April. He said, he
was sent only to justify the Popes good intention, The negotiation of Morone
with the Emperor.
that the Council might proceed, and an absolute reformation of the Church
be made without any exception. Notwithstanding his other commissions were
known, which were to dissuade his Majesty from coming to Trent, because many
impediments of the reformation would be caused thereby; to excuse the Pope,
that he could not personally assist in Council, and to pray him to hasten the
end of it, proposing the translation to Bolonia, where his Majesty and the
Pope might meet, which would be a good means for him to receive the Crown
of the Empire in so famous an assembly; a favor which never had been done to
other Emperors. He had charge also to pray him to maintain the authority of
the Apostolic Sea, against all the plots, made to diminish it, or rather to
bring it to nothing; and that the reformation of the Court of Rome might not be
made in Trent, but by the Pope himself; that no mention might be made of
renewing the things determined under Paul and Julius, in the same Council,
that his Majesty would be content, that the Decrees should be made in
Council, by the proposition of the Legates only, first imparting them, and
having the consent of the Ambassadors of his Majesty and of other Princes. He
had commission also to give the Emperor hope of a particular grant of
whatsoever he would demand, for his people, and to dissuade him from holding
intelligence with the French King, in this matter of the Council, showing him
that as the State of France and Germany was not the same, so the ends of his
Majesty and of that King must needs be diverse, and their counsels different.
The Legates, remaining in Trent, did willingly give the Prelates leave to
depart, and especially those who held the institution of Bishops and residence
to be de iure diuino.

The 20. of April Loraine returned, and was met by the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, of Polonia, and of Sauoy; and the same day news came of the peace
concluded by the French King with the Hugonots, which was more for the
advantage of the Catholic party. For after the battle before mentioned, the
factions were equally balanced, until the death of Guise. Afterward Colignie
took, by assault, the fort of Cadome, with so much reputation to himself, and
diminution of the Catholics, that it was resolved in the Kings Council to
conclude the treaty of peace, which was continually managed ever since the
battle. To this end, the seventh of March an assembly was made, to which the
prisoners, Conde and the Constable, were brought. And; after some speech, they
being released upon promise, to conclude the (...) conditions, the Hugonote
Ministers assembled, and resolved not to consent to any agreement, except the
Edict of January might be observed, without any exception, or condition;
adding also, that hereafter their religion should not be called new; that
children baptized by them should not be rebaptized; that their marriages
should be esteemed lawful, and their children legitimate. From which
conditions because they would by no means depart, Conde and the Nobility,
weary of war, without calling the Ministers any more, did make the agreement.
And the capitulations, concerning religion, were these. That where the Noblemen
of the Hugonots have high justice, they may live in their houses, in liberty of
conscience, and exercise of the reformed religion, with their families, and
subjects. The conditious of the accord in Frace.
That other Gentlemen, who hold in fee, not dwelling under other Catholic
Lords of high justice, but immediately under the King, may exercise the same in
their houses, for themselves, and their families only. That, in every
Bayliweeke, an house shall be appointed, in the Suburbs, in which the reformed
religion may be exercised, by all of that jurisdiction. That every one may live
in his own house without being enquired into, or molested for his conscience.
That in all Cities, where that religion has been exercised until the seventh
of March, it shall be continued in one or two places of that city, so that
the Catholic Churches be not taken for that use, which also shall be restored
to the Ecclesiastiques, in case they have been surprised by them, yet so as
that they shall not pretend any thing for demolitions made. That, in the City
and Precincts of Paris, there shall be no exercise of that religion, but those
who have houses or revenues there, may return and enjoy them, without being
molested for matters either past or to come, concerning their consciences. That
all shall repossesse their goods, honors, and offices, notwithstanding the
sentences to the contrary, and executions of them, since the death of Henry
the second until now. That the Prince of Conde, and all his followers shall be
said to have a good end and intention, for the service of the King. That all
prisoners of war, or justice, for matter of religion, shall freely be set at
liberty. That an oblivion of things past shall be published, and iniuring and
provoking one another, as also disputing and contending about religion shall be
forbid, and that they shall live as brothers, friends, and fellow Citizens.
This accord was established the twelfth of March, to the coffeehouse of
Colignie, who said, their affairs were not in state to make such aduantagious
conditions. That it was proposed unto him in the beginning of the war, to
make peace with the Edict of January, and now that they might require more
advantage, the conditions were worse. To say that in every Bayliweeke there
shall be one place for the exercise of religion, is to take away all from GOD,
and to give him a portion. But the common inclination of all the Nobility did
force him to be content. Concerning these conditions the Kings letters were
dispatched, the nineteenth of the same moneth^ in which it was said; That it
having pleased God to permit, for some years, the kingdom to be afflicted
with seditions and tumults, raised for matter of religion, for which cause
arms were taken, with infinite slaughters, sacking of cities, ruins of
Churches, and now, by continuance of the evil, having experience that war is
not the proper remedy for this malady, the King has thought fit to reunite
his Subjects in good peace, trusting that time, and the fruit of an holy, free,
general, or National Council will establish the same. And here the
Articles, concerning religion, were added, besides the others in matters of
State: which letters were published, and registered in Court of Parliament, and
publicly proclaimed in Paris, the seven and twentieth of the same month.

This was blamed by the greater part of the Fathers in Council, who said it
was to prefer the things of the world, before the things of GOD, yea to ruin
both the one and the other. For the foundation of a state, which is religion,
being removed, it is necessary that the temporal should come to desolation;
whereof the Edict made before was an example, which did not cause peace and
tranquillity, as was hoped, but a greater war then before. And some of the
Prelates did dare to say, that the King and the whole Counsel had incurred the
excommunications of many Decretals, and Bulls, for having given peace to the
heretics; and that there was no hope that the affairs of that Kingdom would
prosper, where there is a manifest disobedience unto the Apostolic Sea, until
the King and the Council did cause themselves to be absolved from the
censures, and did persecute the heretics with all their forces. In defense
whereof the Frenchmen said, that the tribulations, continually supported by
all France, and the manifest danger of the ruin of the Kingdom did
sufficiently justify this action against the opposition of those, who,
regarding only their own interests, do not consider the necessity in which
the King was, which is more potent then any law^ alleging that of Romulus,
that the good of the people is the most principal law of all. But these
reasons were not esteemed, and the King was blamed above all, because he said
in the proheme, that the time, and the fruit of an holy, free, general or
National Council would cause the establishment of tranquillity; which they
said was an injury to the general Council, to be put in alternation with a
National, and that the Cardinals of Borbon, and of Guise should be named
amongst the Authors of the Council to make peace, saying it was a great
injury to the Apostolic Sea.

The Synod began also to be troubled amongst themselves, for a small cause,
which did give much matter of discourse. Friar Peter Sota about The letter of
Soto to the Pope.
this time, and three days before his death, did dictate and subcribe a letter
to be sent to the Pope, in which, by way of confession, he declared his
opinion concerning the points controuerted in Council, and did particulary
exhort his Holiness to consent, that residence, and the institution of Bishops
might be declared to be de iure diuino. The letter was sent to the Pope, and
Friar Ludouicus Sotus, his companion, kept a copy of it; who thinking to
honor the memory of his friend, begann to spread it. This caused much speech.
Some were moved with the action of a doctor of an honest life, and at the
time of his death. Others said he did it not by his own motion, but at the
instigation of the Archbishop of Braganza. Simoneta labored to get in all the
copies; which did increase curiosity, and made them published the more, so
that they were in the hands of all. And it is certain that the maintainers of
these opinions were encouraged by this accident. The Spaniards did often meet
in the house of the Count of Luna, where Granata informed him of the present
and past occurrences of the Council; and, the Bishops of Leria, and Patti
being departed, he said, these are forlorn men, who, like to animals, suffer
the burden to be laid upon them, and themselves to be governed by the will
and opinion of another, who are good for nothing but to make a number: adding,
that if in their resolutions they proceeded by number of voices, as hitherto
they had done, little good could be hoped for; and that it was necessary that
matters should be handled by way of Nations. The Count said, it was necessary
to provide for that and many other things, beginning from the reuocation of the
Decree that the Legates onelymay propose, and from establishing the liberty of
the Council; for which things he had special commission from the King; which
being well settled, the residue would be provided for with ease. The Legates and
other Papalins were displeased to see that the Spaniards, their opposits, did
never go from the Count: and as it happens when oneentreth new in a place
where are contrary factions, every one hops to gain him, the Legates also
did strive to put him on the side of the Prelates the Kings Subjects, whom they
called their well-willers, because they had intelligence with them, that they
might do a good office, and, as they said, vndeceiue him, and make him to
know the truth. They employed also herein the Ambassador of Portugal, who,
having much opportunity to speak often with him, because those Kings had
almost the same interest in respect of matters Ecclesiastical, did cunningly
(because he was much obliged to the Pope) lay before him the things which the
Popes ministers had suggested to him, for the service of the Court of Rome.

The 22. of April, appointed for the Session, drawing near, a congregation
was held the day before, to consult about the prorogation of it. The Legates
did propose the deferring of it until the third of June. But Loraine said it
was a great scandal to all Christendom to prorogue the Session so often, and
never to hold it? which would be increased also if it were put off to another
day, and afterward deferred again? therefore, seeing that none of the things
proposed and handled concerning Residence, and the Sacraments of Order and
Matrimony were resolved, it was better not to prefixe a certain day, but to
expect until the twentieth of May, and then to resolve upon the time, because
the progress of all things would then more plainly appear; and, in the mean
while, not to loose time, voices may be given concerning the Articles of the
abuses of the Sacrament of Order, before the end whereof Cardinal Morone
would be returned from the Emperor, with ample resolution, whereby the matters
in controversy may be composed, and diligence used to finish the Council
within two or three months. Cardinal Madruccio and so many of the Fathers
followed that opinion, that it prevailed, and it was decreed that the day to
celebrate the next Session should be prefixed the twentieth of May.

The Congregation being ended Antonius Chierelia, Bishop of Budua, who, in
delivering his voice, was wont to entertain the Father, with some witty
conceit, and oftentimes to add some merry Prophecies, which were spread
abroad in diverse parts, did then also deliver one concerning the city of
Trent. He said in substance; that Trent had been favored, and elected for the
city; in which the general concord of Christendom was to be established,
but being made unworthy of that honor, by reason of the inhospitalitie
thereof, would shortly incur a general hatred, as the seminary, of greater
discords. The sense was covered with diverse enigmaes, in a Poetical
Prophetical form, yet not so but that it was easily understood.

Loraine having obtained the general consent, with so much reputation, the
Papalins grew jealous; who, considering the honor which was done to him the
day before by those who met him, and now by the receiving of his opinion,
thought it not only an indignity to the Legates, but an entrance also to
break the Decree, that only the Legates should propose. And they speak
Publicly, that the Pope said well, that the Cardinal was Head of a party,
and that he prolonged the quick dispatch of the Council, and hindered the
journey to Bolonia. But Loraine, not caring what was said in Trent, and
intending his negotiation with the Emperor, dispatched a Gentleman to him,
with the opinion of the Doctors, concerning the Articles put into consultation
by his Majesty, Loraine sends a gentleman to the Emperor.
whom he caused to tell him, that, for the good proceeding of the Council, it
was necessary he should speak earnestly to Morone, and show his great desire
to see good resolutions, for the glory of God; as also of the desire of all the
good Fathers that he would not remove further from the Council, in regard of
the fruit which they hoped for, by means of his vicinitie, which will keep
every one in his duty, and hinder the attempts of those who would translate it
into another place, as he was advised that some did lay plots to do, and that
before he parted from Ispruce, his Majesty would be assured that the liberty
of the Council, whereof he is protector, might be preserved. He sent him a
copy of the Edict of Pacification in France, and of a letter of the Queen of
Scotland, in which she gave account of her delivery from a great conspiracy,
and of her resolution to live and die in the Catholic Religion. In the end,
the Cardinal prayed his Majesty to use some means that there might be no
dispute in Council for the precedence, between France and Spain, that the
good proceeding thereof might not be hindered.

The two Legates, that they might not do nothing in the absence of Morone, did,
the 24. of April, impart to the Ambassadors the Decrees composed concerning
the abuses of Order, that they might consider on them: and the 29. day they
gave them to the Prelates. The first, of the election of Bishops, in which were
expressed their qualities conformable to the ancient Canons, the Ambassadors
did not approve, because it seemed to restrain too much the authority of
their Princes in the presentation or nomination of them. And they all labored
very much, especially the Count of Luna, that it might be amended, or rather
quite omitted; a thing which did likewise much please the Legates. And the
Emperors ministers made difficulty also in regard of their desseigne to make
an occasion arise of handling the election of Cardinals, and by consequence, of
the Pope.

The same day at night Cardinal Nauaggero (having given out, to avoid The
Legate Nauaggero comes to Trent.
meetings and ceremonies, that he would enter the next day) arrived in Trent;
who said, that, at their departure from Rome, the Pope had told them, that they
should make a good and a rigorous reformation, preserving the authority, of the
Apostolic Sea, which is absolutely necessary, to keep the Church in good
form and order.

But not with standing all this, his Holiness in his speeches to the
Ambassadors residing with him, desired them to tell him what reformation their
Princes would have. And his end was, that, their demands being given to him,
they might forbear to present them to the Council, and so have means, by
showing the invincible difficulty in every particular, to pacify the raging
humor of reformation. And he said often to the Ambassadors, that their
Princes were deceived if they thought a reformation would reduce the The Popes
discourse to the Ambassadors.
heretics, who first of all made themselves Apostates, and then alleged the
abuses and deformations, for a pretense; that the true causes which have moved
the heretics to follow their false teachers are not the abuses of the Clergy,
but of civil gouernements; that if all defects of the Ecclesiastiques were
wholly corrected, yet they would not return, but would invent other colors, to
persevere in their obstinacy; that these abuses were not in the primitive
Church, nor in the time of the Apostles, and yet as many heretics, in
proportion of the faithful, were then as now; that himself did desire, in
sincerity of conscience, that the Church might be amended, and the abuses
removed, but saw plainly that those, who do procure it, do not aim at this
good mark, but at their particular profit, which in case they should obtain,
greater abuses would arise, and the present not be taken away, that the
reformation is not hindered by him, but by the Princes, and by the Prelates in
Council; that himself would make one, and that very rigorous also, but in
case he should come to the conclusion, the contentions between Princes, some
desiring it after one manner, some after another, and those of the Prelates,
who are no less opposite, would hinder all; that he knows very well that it
is unseemly to attempt that which would only discover the common defects and
wants, and that those who desire reformation, moved with zeal, do, as Saint
Paul says, use it without Christian wisdom, and nothing would be effected,
but as now it is known that the Church has defects, so it would appear that
they are incurable, and which is worse, men would begin to defend and to
justify them, as lawful use.

He did expect, with impatience, the end of the negotiation of Morone; from
whom he had advice that the Emperor took time to answer, and still
continued in consulting upon the Articles. He thought that all the orders and
resolutions which came out of France to Rome, and to the Council, did proceed
from the opinion and counsel of Loraine; and therefore, The Popes plot to
gain the Cardinal of Loraine.
not to omit any means of gaining him, the Cardinal of Ferrara being to
return into Italy very shortly, with whom Loraine was to speak, for many
causes concerning their common nephews, he wrote unto him to use persuasions
that he would be content with the translation of the Council to Bolonia; and,
that he might be well informed of the affairs of Trent, he gave order that
Vintimiglia should meet Ferrara, before his parley with Loraine, and carry
with him the instructions of the Legates, besides that which himself did know.

The month of May did begin with new discourses of the peace of France, For
the Kings letters came to Loraine and the French Ambassadors, to inform them
thereof, with commission to impart all to the Fathers of the Council either in
general or in particular, as seemed them best. The letters were dated the
fifteenth of the last month, and did show principally, that by the peace he
had no intention to favor the introduction or establishment of a new religion
in the kingdom, but that, with less contradiction and difficulty he might
reduce all his people into one holy Catholic religion, by laying down of
arms, and remoouing, the civil dissentions and calamities. But he added, that
a pious and serious reformation (alwaie expected from a general and free
Council) would assist him most of all, in this good work; for solicitation of
which, he was resolved to send the President Birague to Trent. But, in the
mean while, he gave (...) to the Ambassadoures already in that City, to let
the Fathers know, upon (...) good occasion, that he was sensible still of the
ruins and afflictions which the diversity of opinions in religion have caused
in his kingdom, with the apparent decay, and greater danger of the State; that
rather then he would return to that extremity, he was resolved, in case the
general Council would not perform its duty, and that which is expected from
it, by so holy and necessary a reformation, to call a National having first
given satisfaction to GOD and men, by continual persuasions used to the
Fathers and the Pope to obtain of them a remedy against the common evil;
that, to effect this with greater ease, he had dispatched the Lord of Oysel to
the Catholic King, and the Lord d' Allegres to the Pope, and commanded
Birague, that after he had performed his charge with the Fathers of the
Council, he should pass to the Emperor, to try, if, by means of these
Princes, be might gain so great a benefit.

It is certain that the Pope was much distasted with the peace, as well for
the prejudice of his authority, as because it was concluded without his
knowledge, having made so great contributions to the war. But the King of
Spain was displeased more. For being, by his soldiers, a party in the
wars, and the victory, and having spent so much, he thought all was lost,
and that it was not just to conclude a peace without him, to the prejudice of
religion, which he undertook to defend and maintain; especially having so
great interests therein; in respect of the damage he did receive in the
government of the Low Countries: it being plain, that every prosperity of the
Hugonots in France; would encourage the people of Flanders, and strong then
them more in their contumacie. For these reasons, the Catholic Ambassador in
France, made great complaints; which was the principal cause, why these
extraordinary Ambassages were sent to Rome, and into Spain, to make known
that the King and his Council were not induced to make this accord by their
own will, but by mere necessity, and for fear that gross Armies would be
sent out of Germany to the Hugonots, which, as was reported; were prepared
about Strasburg, and in other places. For those Dutch men, who had made war
in France, being returned home, laden with spoils they invited others to go
thither and make themselves rich. Neither were they without fear that the
Princes, of the Empire would, upon that occasion assay to (...) Monte (...),
(...); and other Cities of the Empire, and that the Queen of England would
assist (...) Hugonots more potently then she had done; to possess some other
places, (...) already she had possessed Haure de Grace. But, besides this
principal end of both the Ambassages, d'Oysel was afterward to make a
proposition for translating the Council from Trent to Constance, Worms,
Ausburg, or some other place in Germany, and to represent to the King, that, in
regard it ought to be celebrated for the Dutch, English, Scottish, and part of
the Frenchmen, and other Nations, who were resolute not to adhere to, nor ever
to accept that of Trent, it was in vain to continue in that place. Conde was
author of this negotiation; who hoped by this means, if it did succeed, to
strengthen his party, by uniting it to the interests of so many Kingdoms and
Princes, and to weaken the Oatholiques, by promoting difficulties against the
Council of Trent. But it did not take effect. For the King of Spain having
heard the proposition (which I say by way of anticipation that I may not
return to this matter) did perceive what the aim was; and made a full answer
that the Council was assembled in Trent with all the solemnities, with consent
of all Kings, Princes, and at the instance of Francis the French King; that the
Emperor had superiority in that City, as in the others that were named, and
might give full security to all, in case the former Safe conduct were not
sufficient, that he could not choose but favor it in the place where it was,
and accept the determinations thereof. And he advised the Pope of all,
assuring him he would never change that resolution.

The French men in Trent thought it superfluous to make instance to the
Fathers, as the King had commanded, before the return of Morone, it being
generally resolved that all Conciliary actions should be deferred until then.
But the Emperor had not dispatched that Cardinal, and informed Loraine at the
same time, that, for diverse accidents, and because the propositions were of the
weight and importance, as that they did deserve mature deliberation and
consultation, he had not been able as yet, to give a resolute answer but he
hoped it should be such, as to make all men know, that his actions were
answerable to his desire, to see the affairs of the Council set straight, for
the common benefit. Therefore, notwithstanding the occasions and urgent
necessities of his other Provinces, he resolved to continue his residence in
Isprue, to favor the liberty of the Council, by his presence, until he had
hope to see some good fruit. This delay did not please Morone, not that the
Emperor should refer, as he did, all the negotiations to the Divines, and
Counselors: and both he and the Pope did doubt that the answer would be
deferred until he had heard Birague, who as they were informed, was to propose
the translation of the Council into Germany, to give satisfaction to the
Hugonots; whereunto the Pope was resolute not to consent, as well by his own
inclination, as in regard of the instance made unto him by the College of
Cardinals and all the Court. And he marvelled at the humor of the Frenchmen,
who demanded reformation and a translation at the same time, and desired to
have a supply from the Clergy, for payment of the Kings de^ts, and yet would
make show to be favorers of the Church.

But the truth was that the Frenchmen, being assured they could obtain
nothing fit for their (...)ce, so long as the Italians did make the mayor part,
began to despair, and to hold no esteem of the Council while it remained in
Trent. Therefore they took from the Divines, sent by the King, their public
allowance, and gave them all leave either to depart, or (...)ine there; so that
almost all went away, one after another. The two Benedictines remained until
the end, who were ^haintained by chest Monasteries, as also Hugonius, whom the
Papalins caused to be lodged, and defrayed, in the Monastery, and gave him
fifty crowns every three months.

Loraine, having (...)ed the all^gations sent by the Pope to the Emperor, and
made a con^ure upon them, sent it to his Majesty: (...) thought The con^ure of
(...) upon the (...) allegations.
he had done all secretly, but Hagonots had not only discoured it, but given a
copy to the Legates, who, expecting Morone shortly, wrote, by order from the
Pope, to the Bishops departed from Trent, that they should return, to resume
the actions of the Council. In the mean while a congregation was made the
tenth of May, to read the letters of the Queen of Scotland, presented by the
Cardinal of Loraine, in which she declared, that she did submit herself to
the Council, made mention of her succession to the Kingdom of England,
promising that in case it did happen, she would subject both those Kingdoms to
the obedience of the Apostolic Sea. The letters being read, the Cardinal
made an cloqnent Oration to (...)use the Queen, for sending neither Prelates
nor Ambassadouts to the Council, because they were all heretics, and
promised that she would never vary from the true Religion. For answer, thanks
were given, in the name of the Synod. Some laughed, because the negotiation
was as if it had been of a private person, not of a Prince, and marvelled that
she had not so much as one Catholic subject to send. But the wiser sort did
believe this was begged, and extot^ed from her, because she was able to do
like a Prince, in regard she had ever many Catholics about her.

The Secretary of Loraine was returned whom he sent to Rome, to clear him of
the imputation that he was a Head of a faction; whom the Pope received with
demonstration of love, and seemed to believe his exposition, and wrote to the
Cardinal that he was content that the contentious matter^ should be omitted,
the doctrines of Order and Residence not spoken of, but the reformation only
treated on. Loraine, imparting this letter to (...), that order might be taken
to begin, was deferred until the return of Morone; where with he was
distasted, as if he had been mocked by the Pope. And, joining this with the
advice which came unto him, that Morone, speaking with the Emperor of the
liberty of the Council, said that himself and the French Ambassadors did
hinder it more then others, he complained upon every occasion to all with whom
he spoke; that the Council had no liberty, and that not only the resolution
of every little particular was made a^ Rome, but that the Fathers, and
especially the Gardinall M(...), and himself were not thought worthy to know
what was commanded by the Pope, that they might conform themselves to the
will of his Ho(...), and that it was (...) that so many (...) should be
disparched from Trent to Rome by the Lega^s, for every shall (...), and
sometimes (...) concerning the same matter, and yet it could heuer be kno(...)
what resolution or answer came from the(...) The (...) hereat, because the
things went so apparent, and public, that they could neither be denied, no^
(...) Loraine, full of these ^ll satisfactions, being called the (...)
consultation, to treat of beginning the Congregations, because Morone had w(...)
would be in Trent within eight days, (...)t parties steel a good, while
without speaking one word, and afterward entering into complements, they (...)
from another, without talking of the bus(...)sse.

The Proctor(...) the French Prelates, who remained in the Kingdom, being (...)
in Trent, they dessired the Ambassadors that they might be admitted in
Congregation, which (...) refusing, Lansae replied, that they La(...) spor(...)
^
had does anded it in reverence, not because they did acknowledge the Legates
for Judges, and that he was resoliue that the difficulty should be proposed in
Council. This made the Legates a^ per their perpose to expect Morone, and
appointed a Congregation for the fourteen the of May, to handle the abuses
(...) Where Loraine, giving his voice (...) the first point (which The Cardinal
of Lorain, in delivering his sus^rage.
afterward was taken away for the causes which shall be related hereafter)
spoke at large of the abuses (...)ring in that matter. And, that he right more
(...)gh against the disorders of Rome, he begain with France, not sp^ring the
King, he could (...) the Concordate, said that the distribution of the
Benefits of the Kingdom, which ought (...) belong to the Chapters, was
divided between Pope (...), and King F(...), scareely forbearing to say, as
the prey is divided amongst Hunters. He disliked that the King and Princes^ all
the nomination of Prelatures, and that Cardinals did possess Bishop(...) also
the vaccord lately made by the King with the Hugonots, But, leaving France, he
said that Rome was the fountain whence all di(...) that no Cardinal was
without a Bishopric, yea, without (...) how (...) charges were incompatible;
that the invention of Commendaes, Unions for life, administrations, by which,
against all law, many Benefic(...) with appearance that he had but (...), was
(...) king of the Majesty of GOD. He often allead(...) that place of Saine
P(...) Take heed of errors, for God is not mocked, and one shall reap only
that which he has so^ed. He spoke much against dispen(...) by which the
strength of all laws, is taken away; as also against many other abuses, and
with such cloquened, that he spent the whole Congregation. His discourse was
not (...) taken by the Papalins. Simoneta, did openly treats with (...) Preiats
(...) said he spoke like the Lu(...), and God grant that he were not of their
opinion, wherewith Lo(...), was (...) to the Pope. In the Congregations
following one thing (...) ordinary, (...) of memory, was spoken, except (...)
obliquely used, by those who had un(...) by Loraine.

In this inter i^ Cardinal Morone had his dispatch, in writing from the
Emperor, very general terme^; that be would defend the authority of Is
thought to speak like a Lutheran.
and Hope against heretics (...) would remain at (...) and pass further,
that the (...) no^ to be made without (...), of the King(...) for (...) (...)
because being done on the sudden, (...) much matter of discourse (...) many
that be would ^est satisfied with the proceeding in (...) upon the (...)
conditions, that the reformation (...) Trent, and that every one might propose:
desiring they would presently begin to handle the Articles exhibited by him and
France. Concerning this negotiation of the Cardinal, and of the answer made,
I have related what I have found registered in public monuments; but I ought
not to omit the fame, then diuulged in Trent, and believed by men of the
greatest understanding, that the Cardinal had treated with the Emperor, and
with his son, King of the Romans, more secret matters, and showed them, that
in respect of the diverse The secret negotiation of the Cardinal Morone with
the Emperor.
ends of Princes and Prelates, and of their diverse and important interests,
which were contrary, it was impossible the Council should have such an end as
some of them did desire. He told them, that, in the matter of the Chalice,
marriage of Priests, and of the vulgar tongue, things desired by his Majesty
and the French King, neither the King of Spain, nor any Prince of Italy would
ever consent; that, in matter of reformation, every sort of persons would
remain in their present state, and reform others; whence it comes that
every one demands reformation, and yet, when any Article thereof is proposed,
more do oppose then favor it; that every one thinks of himself only, and
does not consider the respects of another, that every one would have the Pope a
minister of his designs, not thinking whether others will remain offended for
it; for whom it is neither honest, nor profitable, to favor one with the
disseruice of another; that every one would have the glory, to procure the
reformation, and yet persevere in the abuses, laying the burden upon the Pope
only. The Cardinal discoursed also, that, for the reformation of the Pope
himself, he would not say what the mind of his holiness was; but for that
which neither does nor can touch him, how can any one persuade himself that
he would not condescend, but that he knows that which is unknown to
others, because the respects of all are referred unto him alone. He said
moreover, that the experience of these fifteen months since the opening of
the Council, has showed, that the pretensions are multiplied, and the
diversity of opinions increased, and do still proceed forward to the height;
that, in case it should continue long, some notable scandal must necessarily
happen. He told him of the jealousy which did possess the Princes of
Germany, and the Hugonots of France, and concluded that seeing it was plain
that the Council could do no good, it was expedient to finish it in the best
manner it was possible. It was said that those Princes were persuaded that they
could never obtain any thing that was good by means of the Council, and
therefore thought it better to bury it with honor, and that they gave their
word to that Cardinal to use conniuencie hereafter, and not to take it ill if
the Council were ended. And he that shall observe what end the Who gives
his word to conniue hereafter.
Council had, and that those Princes had no satisfaction in any of their
demands, will easily believe that the fame was true; but considering, on the
other side, that the instances of the Emperors ministers did not cease after
this negotiation, he will think it a vain rumor. But to avoid both the
absurdities, one may believe that those Princes did then lay hope aside, and
resolve not to oppose the ending of the Council; yet so, as that they held it
not honorable to make a sudden retreat, but to remit their instances by
degrees, that they might not publish their want of judgment, for conceiving
hope of good by that means, and for not believing the observation of Saint
Gregory Nazianzen, who testifies, that contentions have always been increased
by the Episcopal assemblies. The truth of this particular I put in the number
of those things, the knowledge whereof I cannot attain unto. But it is
certain that the catastrophe of the Council, which it was thought could not
possibly have a quiet conclusion, had beginning in this time.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
THe seventeenth of May, Cardinal Morone returned to Trent from his Legation
in Ispruc; and the Legates presently began to treat amongst themselves about
the certain day of the Session, because the twentieth was near when it was to
be determined. And, because they knew not when the matters would be in order,
in the Congregation of the nineteenth day, a prorogation was made until the
tenth of June, to determine then the prefixed time. In that Congregation two
notable things did happen. One was the contention; whether it did belong to the
Legates, or to the Council, to determine A question about the authority of the
Legates.
whether the Proctors of the Bishops ought to be admitted in Congregation,
begun (as we have said) by Lansac. The French Prelates did maintain, that
the Legates had no other prerogative but to be the first, and had no authority,
as they were separated from the Fathers of the Council; alleging the
Council of Basil, and other monuments of antiquity. On the other side, it was
said, that the Council could not be lawful, except it were called by the
Pope, and that it belongs to him only to determine who may assist and have
voice in it; and that to give this power to the Council, would be to give it
authority to generate it self. After some contention, the matter did remain
undecided. In giving of voices concerning the abuses of Order another question
succeeded. For the Bishop of Philodelphia made a great and a long exclamation,
that Cardinals have Bishopriques without maintaining so much as a Suffragan;
which was much derided by many, as if the Bishop, being but titular, had spoken
for the interest of himself, and of such as he was.

In the Congregation of the 21. of May the Count of Luna was received, The
Count of Luna is received in Congregation.
forty days after his arrival, in regard of the difficulties for precedence
with the French Ambassadors. In the mean while, many consultations were held
to compose them; but the French would by no means yield that he should have
any place but below, and after them. Whereupon he thought to stand on his feet
in the midst of the place amongst the Emperors Ambassadors (who had order from
their Master to accompany him,) and to stand by them until he had finished
his oration, and then to return presently to his house. But this seemed
dishonorable for the King. Therefore he labored to persuade the French not
to enter in Congregation that day; whereunto they not consenting, He thought to
force them to it, by making some Spanish Prelat demand, that Secular
Ambassadors might not assist in the Congregations, because they were never
admitted in the ancient Councels. But thinking that this would offend all
Princes, he purposed to use means that some Prelates should propose the
handling of some things, at which it would not be reasonable that the French
Ambassadors should be present; as might be, the preiudices which might come
to Christendom by the capitulations made with the Hugonots; or some such
thing. This, coming to the ears of the Cardinal of Loraine, put another
course in his head; and, consulting with the other French men, they resolved
not to contest any more, if a place were given him a part out of the order of
the Ambassadors. Therefore the Count, entering into the Congregation the day
before mentioned, and coming to the place assigned for him, which was in the
midst of His protestation about place.
the assembly over against the Legates, he presented the Mandat of his King;
which being read by the Secretary, he immediately protested, that, howsoever,
in that and all other places, he ought to be next after the Emperors
Ambassadors, yet because that place, the cause which was handled, and the time
did not comport that the course of divine matters, and of the public welfare
should be hindered by humane contentions, he did receive the place given him,
but protesting that his modesty, and the respect he had not to hinder the
progress of the Council ought not to be prejudicial to the dignity and right
of his Prince, Philip, the Catholic King, nor of his posterity, but that they
remain entire, so that they may always make use of them, as if his due place
had now been given unto him; requiring that his protestation might be written
in the Acts, and that they may not be published without it, and a copy thereof
given unto him. After this the French Ambassadors did protest also, that if
they should set in any other place then next to the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and before the Ambassadors of other Kings, which their Predecessors
have always held, and namely in the Council of Constance, and the Lateran,
they should be wronged; and if the new place in which the Ambassador of his
Catholic Majesty did set, should bring any prejudice to them, or to the
Orators, the Fathers of the Council, representing the Church universal,
should reduce them to the ancient order, or give them the Evangelical
admonition. But the Fathers holding their peace, and the Emperors Ambassadors
saying nothing, whose interest is common with those of France, because they sit
next unto them, and so preserve the ancient possession of their King, the
French Ambassadors in regard of the amity and alliance between the Catholic
and most Christian Kings, demanded nothing but that the Fathers of the Council
would declare that the Count his fact could not prejudice the ancient
prerogative and perpetual possession of his most Christian Majesty, and
register this in the Acts.

The Oration was made, in the name of the Count, by Petrus Fontidonius, a
Divine; who said in substance. That, the end of the Council drawing near, his
Catholic Majesty had sent that Ambassador, to show himself ready to do
for it that which Martianus the Emperor did in the Council The Oration made
in his name.
of Chalcedon, that is, to maintain and defend the truth, declared by the
Synod, to pacify the tumults, and to conduct to an happy end that Council
which his Father, Charles the fifth, Emperor has protected in its birth and
growth, for the cause whereof he has made most difficult and dangerous
wars, and which his Uncle, the Emperor Ferdinand does maintain, that his
King has omitted no office of a Catholic Prince, that it might be called and
celebrated; that he has sent the Prelates of Spain, and most learned Doctors
besides; that he has preserved religion in Spain; that he has hindered the
entrance of heresy at all the passages of the Pirenies, nor suffered it to
pass to the Indies, whither it has labored to penetrate, to infect the
roots of Christianity, springing in that new world; that, by means of that
King, faith and purity of doctrine does flourish in that kingdom, so that
the holy mother the Church, when she sees other Provinces infected with
errors, takes great consolation, that Spain is the holy anchor for refuge of
all her calamities. He added, would to GOD that other Catholic Princes and
Christian commonwealths would imitate the severity of that King, in bridling
the Heretics, that the Church might be delivered from so many miseries, and
the Fathers of Trent from the care of celebrating the Council; that his King
married with Mary, Queen of England, for no other end then to reduce that
Island to the true religion. He repeated the late assistance sent to the King
of France, adding, that, by the virtue of his Soldiers, though but few, sent
for defense of religion, the victory inclined to the Catholic party. He
said the King desired the establishment of the doctrine of religion and the
reformation of manners. He commended the Fathers, because in the handling of
these two, they would not separate the one from the other, howsoever great
instance was made unto them to cause them to omit the doctrine, and proceed in
the reformation only. He said the Kings desire was they should examine well the
petition, more pious then circumspect, of those, who say that some thing ought
to be granted to the protestants, that, being overcome with kindness, they
may return to the bosom of the Church; saying, that they have to do with
persons, who cannot be bowed neither with benefits nor with pity. He
exhorted the Fathers, in the Kings name, to proceed in such sort, as to show
they have a greater care of the Majesty of the Church, then of the desires of
those that wander, and that the Church has always used this gravity and
constancy in repressing the boldness of her enemies, not to grant them so
much as that which it honestly might. He said, the King desired that
superfluous questions might be omitted; and concluded, that the Fathers being
assembled to do so good a work, as to cure the diseases which afflict
Christendom, if this were not effected, posterity would blame none but them,
and wonder, that, being able, they would not also be willing to apply the
remedy. He praised the virtues of the Ambassador, and the glory of his
house; and so ended. Answer was made, in the name of the Synod, that, in
their grief for the common miseries, they received consolation, hearing the
piety of the Catholic K. related, and, above all, that his promise to defend
the Decrees of the Council was most acceptable; which the Emperor, and other
Christian Kings and Princes being willing to do also, the Synod was stirred up
to take care that The answer.
her actions may be answerable to their desires, as it has done already, both
by their own inclination and by the exhortation of the Pope, always employing
themselves in the emendation of manners, and in the explication of the Catholic
doctrine; that it gave the King many thanks, as for his singular affection
toward religion, and good will toward the Synod, so for sending such an
Orato, from whom they did hope for honor and assistance.

The Oration displeased all the Ambassadors, because it was a manifest
reprehension of all Princes, for not imitating the Catholic King; and they
complained thereof to the Count, who answered, that those words did as much
displease him, yea that he gave order to the Doctor to leave them out, and not
to speak them by any means, and that he would be sensible of his
disobedience. The Frenchmen in Rome blamed much those in Trent, for The
Frenchmen in Rome complain of the Cardinal of Loraine.
consenting to the place given to the Spanish Ambassador. They said that
Loraine, for his own interests, and to gratify the Catholic King had done
this great prejudice to the Crown of France, as also because he had
counseled the Pope not to grant the King the alienation of 100000. crowns of
Ecclesiastical goods, as he demanded. They added that in all things he aimed
only at his own interests, and therefore because neither he, nor his brother,
did manage the money, he did not care though the King should receive none at
all. But the difference for precedence was not as yet well ended. For howsoever
there was a place found for the Spanish Ambassador in the congregations, the
same could not be given him in the Sessions. Whereupon the Legates wrote to
the Pope, to have order how to govern themselves.

After the Spanish Ambassador was received, Loraine parted to meet with the
Card. of Ferrara; who, being arrived in Piemont, found the affairs of that The
state of religion in Piemont.
Country in no better state then those in France. For in diverse places of the
Marquisate of Saluzzo all the Priests were hunted away; and in Cherie, and
Cuni, places belonging to the Duke of Sauoy, and in many other Cities near
unto them, many were of the same opinions with the Hugonots, and many even in
the Dukes Court also did profess them, and more were discovered every day. And
howsoever the Duke had set forth a Proclamation, a month before, that all that
followed those opinions should within eight days part out of the Country, and
some also were departed, yet afterward he commanded that there should be no
proceeding against them, yea pardoned many condemned by the Inquisition, and
made their processes void, as also of those who were in the Inquisition, and
not condemned, and gave leave to some that were departed, to return. But the
Cardinal, understanding the reasons of the Duke, was forced to believe that
which he was used to say of the affairs of France, that to do so, would
turn to the service of the Church.

This Cardinal received institution in the same place, from the Bishop of
Vintimiglia, who went expressly to inform him (as has been said before) of
the affairs of the Council, and how to treat with Loraine. Both the
Cardinals met in Asti the four and twentieth of May. Ferrara having related
the estate of France, and of their family, since the death of the Duke of
Guise, and of the Prior, exhorted him to a Sudden return, showing what
necessity the family had of his presence. He told him, that, since the peace
The Cardinals of Loraine and Ferrara meet in Ostia.
was made with the Hugonots, there formation would not produce those good
effects in France as was believed. But he found (which he could not have
believed before) that he had a great impression, that his honor did require
that he should abandon the negotiation. Loraine complained that Morone, turned
from the Emperor, had acquainted him with no part of his business, saying
that he had been advised of all by his Majesty. He said that the Catholic
King was well united with the Emperor, and that there was good intelligence
between the Count of Luna,, and him. In the matter of residence, he said it
was necessary it should be declared, and that this was the opinion of the
Emperor, and of almost all the prelates, except some few Italians, and that
the declaration was demanded, that the Pope might not dispeuce; so that the
labor of the Cardinal of Ferrara did little good. And the Cardinal of
Loraine returning to Trent; did diuulge, that the Cardinal of Ferrara had
persuaded him, in the name of the Pope and Legates, that the residence might
be determined with a penal. Decree, without declaring that it is de iure
diuino; whereunto he said he would never assent.

But Cardinal Morone; to pacify Loraine before he entered seriously into the
affairs of the Council, knowing it was necessary to make show of referring
And their conference was to no purpose
all matters unto him, went to visit him, pontifically; with the Cross
before; accompanied with many Prelates; and after complements told him that his
desire was he should give counsel, and command, and proceed^ as if he were
one of the Legates; that the Pope did desire reformation and had famous.
Articles, very severe; and written, that those which were mentioned by the
Emperors and French Ambassadors, should be proposed also, leaving those which
belong to the Court of Rome, which his Holiness will (...) himself, for the
upholding of the authority of the Apostolic Sea. But Loraine suspecting that
Morone had a purpose to lay some bad matter upon him, and to make the Spaniards
mistrust him, answered, that the weight of a Legate was too heavy for his
strength, who was not able to (...) then to give his voice a^ an Archbishop,
that he commended the deal of his Holiness to reform other Churches, and
desired he would be content that the Bishops should give as many Articles also
for the Cardinals and the residue of the Court, that the Apostolic Sea was
worthy of all (...); and respect, but the abuses ought not to be covered with
that (...). The answer of this Cardinal made the Legates resolve (...) in
order. And, in the meaned while, (...) the (...) Prelates were secretly and
seriously persuaded hot (...) that the Decree of residende etc. (...) (...),
might be (...).

There fell out an accident which was sufficient to confound and divide the
Popish Prelates amongst themselves. For advice came to Trent that Cardinals
should be created the next Ember week, and a list of those who were in Rome
was sent. The pretendants, who were many, were ill satisfied, and, as
passionate men use to do, did not contain themselves within such bounds, but
that their words did show their affections, and that they were very sensible of
it. In particular, Marcus Antonius Columna, Archbishop of Taranto, and
Alexander Sforza Bishop of Parma, (who, in regard of the great power of their
families in Court, had more hope then others) were noted to have said, that
they would hold intelligence with Loraine; which Simoneta believing, did advise
it to Rome: wherewith they were both much offended, and spoke very feelingly of
it. The distastes did continue certain days: but no promotion of Cardinals
being made, and satisfaction being given to these bishops, all things were
finally well accommodated.

After this time Loraine began to remit his rigor. For France, being now, by
observation of things past, assured, that nothing fit for the service Loraine
does remit his rigor.
of that kingdom could possibly be obtained in Trent, and seeing also that
the peace was accommodated with great facility, so that there was hope to
restore absolute obedience to the King, without meddling with Religion, and
perhaps being informed by the Emperor of the treaty with Morone, as also in
regard of the persuasions which the Pope used to the Queen mother by his
Nuncio, did resolve not to labor anymore, with such affection, in matters of
the Council, but rather to gain the good will of his Holiness; and if any
good came from Trent, to receive it, and only to take care that nothing should
be done to their prejudice. Therefore the Queen The Queen mother writes to
the Pope and the Cardinal of Loraine.
wrote to Rome, and offered the Pope to join with him to finish the Council
quickly, to curb Loraine, and the French Prelates, that they may not impugn
his authority, and to cause all the Hugonot Soldiers to depart from Auignion,
and the territory thereof. She wrote likewise to the Cardinal of Loraine,
that the affairs of France did proceed exceedingly well, and that to give
them perfection, nothing wanted but his presence, where being able to do more
good then in Trent, in which place he had found by experience that no
profitable thing can be done he should use means to quitte himself of those
affairs, and return as soon as was possible, seeking to give the Pope all
satisfaction, and to make him his friend and, for matters of the council, not
to think on them, more then his conscience and honor did compel him. She
added, that he should have the same authority in the kingdom as he had
before; and therefore should hasten his return.

The Queens letters came to Rome and Trent in the end of May; which, as they
were very grateful to the Pope; and made him believe he should see a good end
of the Council, so an other accident did much displease him. For, in France,
consultation being had how to pay the debts of the Crown, the Ecclesiastical
goods are aliened in France without the Popes leave.
Decree, for aliening the value of one hundred thousand crowns of
Ecclesiastical immooueable goods, was confirmed by the Kings Edict; and
sentence of the Parliament. This raised a great tumult of the Priests, who said,
their privileges and immunities were violated, and that sacred things could
not be aliened for any cause whatsoever, without the authority and decree of
the Pope. To pacify which noise, the Ambassador desired his Holiness to give
his consent, alleging, that the King was exhausted by the last wars,
deseigning to put his affairs in order, that he may begin, as his purpose
ever was since the making of the peace, to reunite all the Kingdom in the
Catholic religion; and, that he might be able to force whosoever should
oppose, he meant to impose a subsidy, and to cause the Clergy to contribute
their part also; whereunto the Church was so much more bound then others, by
how much her interests were more in question; that, all being considered,
nothing was found to be more easy then to supply that necessity with the
alienation of some few Ecclesiastical revenues; wherein he desired the consent
of his Holiness.

The Pope answered, that the demand was painted forth with a fair pretense
Which makes the Pope angry.
of defending the Church, but was the only way to ruin it, for the avoiding
whereof, his securest course was not to consent to it. And howsoever some might
think that the French would proceed to execution without him; yet he was of
opinion that leave would not have been demanded, in case they could have found
buyers without it, thinking that none would dare to adventure their money,
fearing (as the affairs of the world are uncertain) a time might come in
which the Ecclesiastiques would resume their rents, and not restore the price.
Therefore, having proposed the business in Consistory, by the deliberation of
the Cardinals, he resolved not to consent, but, by diverse excuses, to show it
was impossible to obtain that demand at his hands. Loraine, bearing an
irreconciliable hate to the Hugonots, not so much for religion, as for faction,
which himself and his house had always with them, being assured it was
impossible to reconcile friendship, was much displeased that the matters of the
peace did proceed. For his return into France, he thought fit to consider
very well when and in what manner it ought to be; and, for his particular
affairs, he thought it necessary to hold good intelligence with the Pope, and
Court of Rome, and with the Ministers of Spain also, more then formerly he had
done. Therefore he began from that day not to be so severe in procuring the
reformation, and to show greater reverence to the Pope, and to have good
correspondence with the Legates.

But besides the trouble for the demand of the alienation, the Pope had
another, of no loss weight. For, having often promised the French Ambassador
Agreat difference in Rome about precedence between the French and Spanish
Ambassadors
to give him his due place at Whitsontide, and desiring to perform it, he
assembled some Cardinals to find a means to give the Spanish Ambassador
satisfaction. The courses were proposed, one to give him place under the Deacon
on the left hand; another, upon a stool at the top of the Deacons bench. But
these did not take away the difficulty. For there remained still matter of our
currencie in bearing the train of his Holiness and giving water for his
hands, when he did celebrate the Mass, and in receiving incense and the pax.
The difficulty of the train and the water did not press the(...) because the
Pope was not to celebrate, and the Emperors Ambassador was to be there. For
the incense and the pax, a temper was found, that they should be given to all
on the right side, even to the Ambassador of Florence also, who was the last,
and then to those on the left. The French was not content with this, and said,
that the Pope had promised him his place, and that the Spaniard either should
not come, or should stand under him; and would depart from Rome, if this were
not performed. And it pleased the Spanish Ambassador as little: whereupon the
Pope sent him word that he was resolute to give the French Ambassador his
place. The Spaniard answered, that, if the Pope were resolute to do him that
grieuance, he would read a writing to him. The Cardinals, who treated with him
in the Popes name, showed him it was not good to do so, before his Holiness
had seen it, lest, not being known before some inconvenience might arise. The
Ambassador was unwilling to give it, but, in the end, was content. Which the
Pope having read, was very angry at the form of words, which The Protestation
of the Spanish Ambassador.
he said were impertinent. Finally, he was brought into the Popes Chamber with
four witnesses, where he read his protestation, on his knees; which did
contain. That the King of Spain ought to precede the French King, in regard
of the antiquity, power and greatness of Spain, and of the multitude of his
other Kingdoms, by which he is the greatest and most potent King of the world;
because the Catholic faith, and Church of Rome, have ever been defended, and
preserved in his states; that, if his Holiness will declare, or has declared,
in words or writing, in favor of France, the grieuance and injustice was
notorious. Therefore he, in the name of his King, does contradict all
declaration of precedence, or equality, in favor of France, as frustrate and
void, against the notorious right of his Catholic Majesty: and, if it has
been made, there is a nullity in it, being done without knowledge of the
cause, and citation of the party, and that his Holiness doing this, will
because of great inconveniences in all Christendom. The Pope answered
admitting the Protestation, Si, and in quantum, excusing himself for the
citation omitted, because he gave nothing to the French men, but preserved the
place in which he had ever seen^ them, next the Emperors Ambassadors; but
offered notwithstanding to commit the cause to the College of Cardinals, or to
the whole Rota, adding, that he loved the King and would do him all the good
offices he could. The Ambassador replied, that his Holiness had deprived
himself of doing the King any good office, by giving him so great a grieuance.
The Pope answered again, not for out cause, but your own and for the benefi^s
(...) by us to the King, these words were not worthy to be put into the
protestation made unto (...).

The President Birague arrived in Trent at the same time, whom (as we said
before) the French King had sent to the Council and the Emperor, who (...)
(...) (...) Trent.
was received in Congregation the second of (...); where no Ambassadors
inferior to the French were present that he might (...) them place, because Is
received in congregation.
he had not the title of Ambassador in the Kings (...) He presented the
letters of the King, dated the fifteenth of April which saiel in substance.
That the troubles and (...), raised in the kingdom, for cause of religion,
were very well knowe^^ also his (...) with the (...) and assistance of Princes
and (...) his friends (...) (...) by arms; that it pleased God, in his
incomprehensible Judgments, not to suffer those remedies of arms to produce
any thing but (...), slaughters, sackings of cities, ruins of Churches, loss
of Princes, Lords, Knights, and other calamities and desolations, so that it is
easy to know that they were not fit to heal the infirmity of Spirits, which
are overcome only by reason, and persuasion; that this has caused him to make
a Pacification, according to the contents of his letters, dispatched upon that
occasion; not to permit the establishing of a new faith in the kingdom, but
that, arms being laid aside, he might, with less contradiction, make an union
of all his Subjects in the same holy and Catholic religion; a benefit which he
did expect from the mercy of God, and from a good and serious reformation,
which he did promise himself from the Synod. And because he had many things
to represent to them, and to desire of them, he resolved to send Monsieur
Renaut Birague, who would inform them of all by word of mouth, praying them to
receive and hear him with courtesy.

The letters being read, the President spoke, relating very particularly the
And makes an oration.
discords, wars, and calamities of France, the State and necessity into
which the King and kingdom were reduced, the imprisonment of the Constable,
and death of the Duke of Guise, which made them to be as it were without
arms. He justified the accord at large, as being made for pure and mere
necessity, and with more advantage to the Catholic party, then to the
contrary. That the intention of the King and Council was not to suffer an
introduction, or an establishment of a new religion, but, on the contrary,
arms and disobedience being removed, to reduce, with less contradiction, and
by the ways observed by his ancestors, to the obedience of the Church those
that were out of their way, and to reunite all in an holy Catholic
profession, knowing very well that the exercise of two religions cannot long
subsist and continue in one kingdom. Then he said that the King did hope to
reunite quickly all his people in one opinion by the singular grace of GOD, and
by means of the Council, a remedy used always by the ancients against such
evils as those were, which did then afflict Christendom. Heprayed the Fathers
to further the Kings good intention, by a serious reformation, by reducing
manners to the (...) and purity of the ancient Church, and by composing the
differences in religion, promising that the King would always be Catholic,
and devoted to the Church of Rome, according to the example of his ancestors.
He said, in conclusion, that the King did trust in the goodness and wisdom
of the Fathers, that they would compassionate the miseries of France, and
labor to cure them. The President had commission to demand, that the Council
might be translated to a place where the Protestants might have free access.
For, notwithstanding all the security given by the Pope and the Council, they
held Trent suspected, and desired a place where the Emperor might secure
their. But he touched not this point, by the aduie^ of Lordiu^ and the French
Ambassadors, who ^^ought it not fit to make (...), and held it (...) of which
(...) ker should answer Birague in the name of the Synod, condoling the
misfortunes and calamities of the kingdom of France, and exhorting the King,
that having been forced to make peace, and to grant something to the Hugonots,
to restore religion entirely, he would, for the service of GOD, when the
kingdom was in peace, labor without any delay, that this good end might be
obtained. And they showed this answer to Loraine after the Mass, before they
entered into the Congregation. Who said, he did not like they should approve
the Kings fact, whereof they should rather complain, as prejudicial to the
faith; and therefore that it was better to take time to answer, as the use is
in matters of importance. Whereupon they gave order that Birague should be
answered thus insubstance. That in regard the things related and proposed by
him were of great weight, and had need of much consideration, the Synod would
take a fit time to answer him. The French Ambassadors were much displeased
with this fact of Loraine, thinking that, if the Legates had not been disposed
to commend the Kings actions, he ought to have incited them, yea to force them
as much as he could, whereas on the contrary, they judging a commendation of
the fact to be just and reasonable, as indeed it was, he had dissuaded them.
But consulting amongst themselves, they resolved not to write thereof into
France, for many respects; and Lansac, being to return shortly, might make
that relation which should be thought necessary.

The month before there happened a great tumult and popular commotion in
Bauaria, because the Cup was not allowed, nor married men suffered A tumult in
Bauaria for the Cup, and marriage of Priests.
to preach; which disorder proceeded so far, that, to appease them, the Duke
promised in the Diet, that, if in all June a resolution were not made in Trent,
or by the Pope, to give them satisfaction, himself would grant both the one
and the other. This news coming to the Council, made the Legates dispatch in
diligence Nicolaus Ormonetus, to persuade that Prince not to make such a grant,
promising that the Council would not be wanting to his necessities. To whom
the Duke answered, that, to show his obedience and devotion to the Apostolic
Sea, he would use all means to entertain his people as long as he could,
expecting and hoping that the Council would resolve that which they saw to be
necessary, notwithstanding the determination made before.

But the Congregations proceeding in handling the Conciliarie matters, The
Bishopof Nimes speaks against Annates.
in one of them the Bishop of Nimes, speaking of the abuses of Order,
discoursed of Annates. He said, that howsoever it could not be denied that all
Churches ought to contribute to the Pope for maintenance of his Court, yet he
could not commend that payment, as well for the manner, as the quantity;
because it would be enough if the twentieth part were paid, whereas this is
perhaps more then the tenth; and for the manner, that no man ought to be
forced to pay them but after the year was ended. And seeing that the Court of
Rome must be maintained by the contributions of all Churches, it is just that
they should receive some profit thence, whereas many, and almost all the abuses
of Christendom do arise, by means of the Officers thereof; of which the
Synod ought to advertise his Holiness, that (...) might make pro^uision
therein. He descented to speak in particular of the ordina^^ of Priests made
at Rome; saying, that the Canons and decrees are not observed in them, and that
it would be necessary to decree, that in case the Priests ordained in Rome were
not sufficient, the Bishops (notwithstanding the ordination) might suspend
them, and that the suspended might not, by way of appellation or other
recourse, hinder the determination of the Prelate. The last that spoke in that
Congregation, was the Bishop of Osmo; who said, that as the abuses of Order are
collected, so it were good to handle penances, and Indulgences also, because
all those three matters are of affinity, and go hand in hand.

In another Congregation the Bishop of Guadice spoke very long; and, amongst
other things, made, as it were, an inuectiue against the ordination The Bishop
of Guadice speaks against titular Bishops.
of titular Bishops, upon occasion of speaking on the fourth Article of the
abuses, in which he said, that to redress the great scandals which do arise
by means of such Bishops, there should be no more created without urgent
necessity, and in that case, before they were ordained, the Pope should make
provision that they might live according to the dignity of a Bishop. He said,
that to the dignity of a Bishop is annexed the having of a place and a
Diocese, and the Bishop and Church are relatiues, as man and wife, of which
one cannot be without the other; and therefore it did imply a contradiction, to
say, that titular Bishops were lawful. He said their ordination was an
invention of the Court, and used these words, Figmenta humana; that there is no
mention of them in antiquity; that if any Bishop were deprived, or did
renounce, he was not held to be a Bishop, as he is not an husband who wants a
wife, that the old Canonists do write, that there is a nullity in the
ordinations made by him who has renounced his Bishopric; that the Simonies
and indecences which do arise by means of these Bishops, and the other
corruptions of discipline, are nothing in comparison of this abuse of giving
the name of Bishops to those who are not, and to alter the institution of
CHRIST, and the Apostles.

Simon de Negri, Bishop of Sarzaua, entering into the same matter, said, Who are
defended by the Bishop of Sarzana.
that in a Bishop are to be considered Order, and Jurisdiction; in respect of
Order he has nothing, but that he is minister of the Sacraments of Order and
Confirmation, and, by Ecclesiastical constitution, has authority of many
consecrations and benedictions, which are forbid to simple Priests. But in
respect of jurisdiction, he has authority of government in the Church,
whereas titular Bishops have the power of Order only, without in risdiction;
and therefore it is not necessary they should have a Church. And if a Bishop
was not consecrated in former times, except he had a Church given him, this
was because no Deacons or Priests were consecrmed without a ^itle. Afterward,
it appearing that more service was done to God, and to the greatness of the
Church having Priests without title, the same ought to be concluded of
Bishops; yet so, as that, to avoid abuses, it was convenient not to ordain
any, without giving them where on to live, that they may not be forced to
indignities; but otherwise it is necessary they should be created to supply
the places of unable Bishops, or of those who have a lawful cause to be
absent from their Churches, or of great P^elates,, employed in greater
affairs, and therefore he did approve the Article as it was unfolded.

The Bishop of Lugo discoursed of Dispensations, saying, that there were many
matters, concerning which if the Synod would make decrees, declaring them to be
indispensable, it would be a great service to God, and benefit to the Church.
Which he did not say, because the Synod might give a Law to his Holiness, but
because they are things in which dispensations of Popes cannot be admitted; and
if in a rare case, in a whole age, a reasonable cause to dispense, might happen
once, yet the dispensation would not be just Of Dispensations.
in that case neither. For it is convenient that a private person should
support some grieuance, when there is a great public benefit, as also, where
many cases deserving dispensations may occur, to take away occasions of
obtaining surreptions, supplications, and graces, it is better to be
auaritious then liberal.

One of the difficulties of the Council; which was about Bishop Tilefius, the
Secretary, in regard of whom frequent instance was made, that the Acts of the
Council might be written by two, did cease of itself. For he, not able to
support the pain of the stone any longer, resolved to be cut. After he was
retired, that charge was given to the Bishop of Campania, whose first action
was in the Congregation of the seventh of ^une, to read the answer The answer
to Birague.
which the Legates had made, to give to the President Birague, which, being long
and proposed on the sudden, not assisted in voice by any of the Legates, and
very ambiguous, with words which might be drawn to the commendation or the
dispraise of the accord made by the King, was not understood by all in the same
sense; whereupon there were diverse opinions amongst the Prelates. The Cardinal
of Loraine first spoke at large of it, and was not understood whether he did
approve it or not. The Cardinal of Varmia, urged to it by Morone, desired
him, after he had made an end, to declare, plainly what he thought; and he
answered that it did not please him: to the great distaste of Morone, who had
showed it to him before, and he seemed to be content. Madruccio, who followed,
referred himself to the Fathers; of the others some did approve it, and some
not. The French Prelates complained, that, against the orders observed in the
Synod in like occasions, the answer was deferred and disputed. The Bishop,
Ambassador of the Duke of Sauoy, when it was his turn to speak, said, that
the matter ought to be referred absolutely to the Legates, and the two
Cardinals. When all the voices were delivered, the Archbishop of Lanciano stood
up, and said, that howsoever he had concluded otherwise in his suffrage, yet
having heard the Ambassador, he was of his opinion, and the same was approved
almost by the voice of all together.

The eleventh of June a consultation was held by the Legates; Cardinals, and
(...)tie (...)s, to find a means to establish the doctrine of the Institution
of Bishops, Loraine, in delivering his mind, touched the opinion of the
Frenchmen, that the Council is above the Pope, alleging also, that it was so
defiued in the Councels of Constance and Basille He concluded that he did not
do sure another declaration from that Council, but said, that if they would be
o^ accord with the Frenchmen, it was necessary that no words should be put in
the Decrees, which were to be composed, which might prejudice that their
opinion. The Archbishop of Otranto, coming to speak, enlarged himself with
many words to convince that Cardinal, resuming and refuting whatsoever he had
said in favor of the superiority of the Council. He added, that some held
opinion of the superiority of the Council to be as true as Verbum caro factum
est, saying he knew not how they could secure themselves in their conscience;
wherein he meant Loraine, who was said to have used this comparison. And,
descending afterward to discourse of the Institution of Bishops, he said
there had been no controversy A contestation between the Arcbishop of
Otranto, and the Cardinal of Loraine.
in this matter, if the form proposed by the Cardinal of Loraine had not
given occasion. The Cardinal answered, that, at his coming to Trent, he found
the difficulties already moved; that he had composed that form, being
requested, with intention to make peace and concord, and to remedy the
differences; that this not succeeding, he would be glad that the Archbishop
might obtain that honor which himself could not do; thanking him besides,
that, as his master, he had put him in mind of that wherein he had failed.
And, for the question of the superiority of the Council, he said, that being
borne in France, where this opinion is common, neither he nor the other
Frenchmen could leave it, and did not believe, that, for holding it, they
should be forced to make a Canonical abiuration. The Archbishop replied,
that he disliked the form, because it was imperfect, whence the difficulties
did arise; but, for the rest, it was not a place to answer him, and that he
did little esteem the injuries he did him. But he complained of some who did
profess to accuse the actions of the Legates, wherein they did not show a good
mind. The Cardinal was silent, and made no show he was offended. The Count
of Luna, whether of his own accord, or at the instance of the Frenchmen,
reprehended the Archbishop, saying, that if it came to the ears of his
Catholic Majesty, it would certainly displease him. And a French Prelate,
either by order from Loraine, or of himself, did advertise Morone, that the
Archbishop did much pass his bounds; that he used bad speeches, in handling
the matter of Residence; and that the Cardinal was advised, that he was
continually abused in his house, and that the most honorable title he gave
him, was, a man full of poison; so that, in regard of these things, and of this
last accident also, it would not be good to call them both together to
consultation, because the Cardinal would not rest satisfied. Morone answered
precisely, that he had order from Rome to call that Archbishop to all
consultations, and that it was convenient to hold esteem of him, because he
had at the least forty voices which did The Archbishop of Otranto had 40
voices at his command.
follow him. This, being related to Loraine, did make him exceeding angry
against Cardinal Morone; and the rather, because a few days before the Legates
and Cardinals consulting together about the answer to be given to Birague,
referred to them by the Congregation, Morone did vpbraid him, that he was
content with the answer first made, afterward said the contrary in the
general Congregation. And Loraine considered very much with himself, in what
manner he might show himself sensible of the small account was made of him,
especially being advised from Rome, that the Pope did accuse him for a man
scandalous, and desirous to unite the Catholics and Protestants. But weighing
his own interests, which did move him not to separate himself from Rome, but
rather to seek means to be reunited, his profit overcame his passion, and so
he resolved to continue in promoting the conclusion of the Council, and
giving the Pope satisfaction.

But the President Birague, having expected an answer as long as he thought
his honor would permit, the thirteenth day parted from Trent, to go to
Ispruc, to negotiate the other part of his instructions with the Emperor;
which was to give him joy of the election of the King of the Romans, and an
account for what causes the Peace was concluded with the Hugonots, Birague
parts from Trent without his answer.
and to answer him concerning the restitution of Metz, and of other Imperial
Cities. He had instruction also, that, jointly with the King of Spain, they
should use persuasions for the translation of the Council into Germany. His
negotiation with the Emperor.
This particular being imparted to Loraine, to receive advice from him in what
manner to proceed in it, or whether he should omit it, as he had done in
Trent, the Cardinal resolved for the same reasons, that he should make
mention of it, as of a thing rather to be desired, then hoped for, or
attempted.

The Count of Luna had express order in his instructions, to demand a The
Spanish Ambassador makes instance that the Decree, Proponentibus Legatis, may
be abrogated.
retraction of the Decree, Proponentibus Legatis; and after his arrival in
Trent, he received a letter from the King, which told him, that he was desired
by the French Queen, that the Council might be translated into Germany, that
it might be in a free place, and that he had answered, that he did not think
it necessary, in regard there was means to procure the liberty of it in the
place where it was; therefore he gave him commission to labor, that it might
have full liberty, beginning from the reuocation of that Decree; because, that
continuing, the Council could by no means be called free. The Ambassador,
thinking he could not defer any longer, imparted this commission to the
Legates, and, in conformity thereof, made effectual instance in the Kings
name, that the Decree might be abrogated, or expounded, saying, it was
convenient so to do, because the Germans did forbear to come to the Council
for this cause amongst others, and because the Emperor did think it
necessary, that he might be able to induce them to receive the Council. They
answered, that the Decree was made by common consent of all the Fathers,
notwithstanding, they would consider on it, and resolve that which should seem
just, after he had presented the instance in writing. The Ambassador gave it,
and the Legates sent it to the Pope: howsoever Morone said, it was superfluous,
and that nothing was to be done but to delay the answer, without troubling his
Holiness. In the negotiation of Princes, especially those which do not touch
the substance of their State, it happens, that howsoever they do change
opinion by the change of occurrences, yet by the persuasions made before the
change, things contrary to their new will do fall out. And so it was that the
persuasions made by the Queen mother to the King of Spain, before she
resolved to give total satisfaction to the Pope concerning the Council, did
produce the effect of that Letter of the King. Therefore Morone, who did
penetrate the bottom, did not hold that esteem of it as some thought.

The fifteenth of ^une Morone proposed in Congregation, that the fifteenth of
July might be appointed for the determinate day of the Session. Segouia, and
some few others said, they saw not how the difficulties which were upon their
hands could be resolved in so short a time, of Hierarchy, of Order, of the
institution of Bishops, of the pre-eminence of the Pope, and of Residence; and
that it was better to decide the difficulties first, and afterward to appoint
a short term for the day of the Session, then to appoint it now, and
afterward to prolong it with indignity. But the contradictors being but few,
the proposition was established, as it were without difficulty. The next day
Laynez, General of the Jesuits, in giving his suffrage, bent all his forces
The suffrage of Laynez.
to answer whatsoever had been said by others, not conformable to the
dectrine of the Court, with so great affection, as if his salvation had been
in question. In the matter of dispensations he was exceeding copious; saying;
it was spoken without reason that there is no other power of dispensing but
interpretatiue and declaratiue, for so the authority of a good Doctor would
be greater then of a great Prelate; and that to lay the Pope cannot by
dispensation, disoblige him who is obliged before God, is nothing but to teach
men to prefer their own conscience before the authority of the Church; which
conscience, because it may be erroneous, as it is for the most part, to
refer men to that, is nothing but to cast every Christian into a bottom less
pit of dangers; that as it cannot be denied, that CHRIST had power to dispense
in every law, nor that the Pope is his Vicar, nor that there is the same
tribunal and consistory of the Principal and the Vicegerent, so it must be
confessed that the Pope has the same authority, that this is the privilege of
the Church of Rome, and that every one ought to take heed, in regard it is
heresy to take away the privileges of the Church, because it is nothing but
to deny the authority which CHRIST has given it. Then he spoke of reforming
the Court; and said, that it is superior to all particular Churches, yea to
many joined together; and if it does belong to the Court of Rome to reform
each Church, which does appertain to every Bishop in Council, and none of
them can reform the Roman, because the scholar is not above his master, nor
the servant above his Lord, it follows, by necessary consequence, that the
Council has none authority to meddle in that business; that many did call
those things abuses, which, if they were examined and sounded to the bottom,
would be found to be either necessary, or profitable; that some would make the
Sea of Rome, as it was in the time of the Apostles, and of the Primitive
Church, without distingushing the times; not knowing what does belong to those,
and what to these, that it is a plain case, that, by the providence and
goodness of GOD, the Church is made rich, and that nothing is more impertinent
then to say that God has given riches, and not the use. For Annates he said,
that it is de iure diuino that Tithes and first Fruits should be paid to the
Clergy, as the Jews did to the Leu^^es: and as the Levites paid the Tenthes
to the high Priest, so ought the Ecclesiastical order to the Pope, the rents
of Benefices being the Tithes, and the Annates the Tithes of the Tithes. This
discourse displeased many, and particularly the Frenchmen; and there were
Prelates who noted some things which they meant to answer, if occasion served,
when their turn was to speak.

The Spaniards and Frenchmen thought, that that Father spoke thus, by Favors
done unto him.
order, or by consent of the Legates, alleging for an Argument the many
favors which were done unto him, upon all occasions, and especially, because,
whereas other Generals were wont to stand on their feet, and in their place
when they gave their voice. Laynez was called into the middle, and made to sit
down, and many times a congregation was made for him only, to give him
commodity to speak what he would; and howsoever none was ever half so
prolike as he, yet he was praised, and those against whom he spoke could
never be so brief, but they were reprehended for being too long. But Laynez,
knowing what offense the Frenchmen did pretend His excuse.
to have received, sent his companions, Torre and Cauillone, to make an excuse
to Loraine, saying, that his redargutions were not meant of his Excellency, or
any of the French Prelates, but of the Divines of the Sarbone, whose opinions
are not conformeable to the Doctrine of the Church. This being related to the
Cardinal, in a Congregation of Gives distaste to the Frenchmen.
Frenchmen, held in his house, the excuse did much distaste the Prelates, some
saying it was petulant, and others scornful, and those few Divines which
remained were sensible of it; so that Hugonias himself, whom they had bought,
did think it insufferable. Verdun thought he was touched in particular, and
obliged to reply, and prayed the Cardinal to give him leave, and occasion. He
promised to speak modestly, and to show that the doctrine of the Sorbone was
orthodoxe, and that of the Jesuit new, and never heard of in the Church
before, that is, that the key of authority is given by CHRIST, without the key
of knowledge; that the holy Ghost, given for the government of the Church, is
called, by the holy Scripture the spirit of truth, and the operation thereof
in the governors of the Church, and Ministers of CHRIST, is to lead them into
all truth, that, for this cause, CHRIST has made his Ministers partakers of
his authority, because he has withal imparted to them the light of doctrine;
that Saint Paul to Timothy, writing that he is constituted an Apostle, does
expound it thus, that is, a Doctor of the Gentiles, who, in two places,
prescribing the conditions of a Bishop, says, he must be a Doctor; that,
observing the use of the primitive Church, it will appear, that the faithful
did go to Bishops for dispensations, and declarations, because those only
were assumed to that charge who were most of all instructed in Christian
doctrine; that, to omit antiquity, the Schoolmen and greater part of the
Canonists have constantly said, that the dispensations of Prelates are good,
Claue non errante, and not otherwise. Hugonius also did offer to prove that
assertion, that there is the same tribunal of CHRIST and of the Pope, to be
impious and scandalous making mortality equal to immortality, and
corruptible judgment of man, to the incorruptible judgment of GOD, and that
it did proceed from ignorance, that the Pope is that servant, which is set
over the family of CHRIST, not to perform the office of the Master of the
family, but only to distribute to every one, not arbitrarily, but that which
is ordained by the Master; that he was amazed that Christian cares could endure
to hear that the whole power of CHRIST is imparted to any. They all spoke,
some censuring one, some another of the Jesuits assertion. But the Cardinal
told them, that it would be no small matter if they could obtain that, in the
public Decrees of the Council, way might not be given to that doctrine; at
which it was convenient that all should aim; to which end they should more
easily come, if the matter were passed over in silence, and suffered to dye in
oblivion, which, by contradiction, might do some prejudice to the truth. They
were pacified; yet not so, but that, in their private meetings, they spoke of
it very much.

But the Legates did so accommodate the two Articles of the Institution of
Bishops, and of Residence, with general terms, that they The Decrees of the
Institution, and of Residence.
gave satisfaction to both parties, and to Loraine also. But having consulted
on them with the Popish Divines, and some Canonists, Prelates, these said, that
they did admit an interpretation, prejudicial to the authority of the
Apostolic Sea, and the uses of the Court. The Bishop of Nicastro, who had
often contended in this matter in favor of Rome, said plainly, that, by that
form of speech, it was inferred that all jurisdiction of Bishops did not
proceed from the Pope, but a part of it immediately from CHRIST; which was by
no means to be endured. Other Papalins maintained the same, and made a bad
interpretation of all, if it were not plainly said, that Bishops have all
jurisdiction from the Pope. Therefore the Legates sent the Articles thus
reformed to the Pope, not so much that they might be examined in Rome, as
because, in a matter of so great importance, they would propose nothing without
the Popes knowledge. The Cardinals deputed for these affairs, having seen and
examined them, did judge that the form was sufficient to make all Bishops in
their Diocesses equal to the Popes. And the Pope reprehended the Legates for
sending them, because he knew that the mayor part in the Council were good
Catholics, and devoted to the Church of Rome, and in confidence hereof, was
content that the propositions and resolutions should be determined in Trent
without his knowledge. Notwithstanding he thought he ought not to consent to
any prejudicial thing, for fear of giving bad example to them, and being a
cause that they also should assent unto it against their conscience.

At this time they had another very hard negotiation also. For the King A
difficulty whether the King of the Romans ought to promise obedience to the
Pope.
of the Romans being to send Ambassadors, to give him an account of his
election, would not do as other Emperors and Kings had done, who, having no
cause to make difficulty, did promise and swear whatsoever the Popes would
have them. But he having respect not to offend the Princes and Protestants of
Germany, would first know what words must be used. The consultation hereof
being committed in the Cardinals, they resolved, that he must demand
confirmation of the election, and swear obedience, according to the example of
all other Emperors. Whereunto he answered that they were deceived, and that
he would consent to nothing which might prejudice his successors, as the
actions of his predecessors were alleged against himself, and that it was to
confess he was Vassal. And he proposed that his Ambassador should use these
words, that his Majesty will perform all reverence, devotion and duty to his
Holiness and the Apostolic Sea, with promise not only to preserve, but to
enlarge as much as he can the holy Catholic faith. This negotiation
continued this whole year without agreement; and, finally, in Rome they
thought they had found a temper for it, proposing that he should swear
obedience not as Emperor, but as King of Hungary and Bohemia, because it
could not be denied, they said, that King Steven did give the kingdom to the
Apostolic Sea, in the year of our LORD 1000, acknowledging to receive it
from the said Sea, and making himself vassal; and that Vlad^slaus, Duke of
Bohemia, did receive from Alexander the second power to wear a miter, binding
himself to pay an hundred marks of silver every year. These things being
considered of in Germany, because there was no proof of them but the bare
affirmation of Gregory the seventh, were derided, and answer was made, that
they desired more fresh examples, and more certain, and more lawful titles.
Messengers went to and fro, with diverse propositions, answers, and replies, of
which we will now relate the issue, that we may return no more to them: Which
was; that, twenty months after Count Elfestain, Ambassador of that King,
arrived in Rome, with whom the same treaties were renewed, to demand
confirmation, and swear obedience. He answered that the Oration, which he was
to recite punctually, was in writing and that he had commission not to alter
one jot. The Pope therefore proposed the business to the Cardinals, in a
general Congregation; who after long consultation, concluded, that, howsoever
the confirmation were not demanded, nor obedience promised, yet, in the
answer to the Ambassador, it should be said, that his Holiness did confirm
the election, supplying all defects thereof de facto and de iure, and did
receive the Kings obedience, without saying it was demanded, or not demanded,
promised or not promised. This ceremony gave but small content to the Pope, and
less to the College of Cardinals.

But to return to the time whereof I write, the Pope was to answer the
frequent instances, made unto him by the Ambassadors, resident in Rome, and by
the Count of Luna in Trent, for abrogation of the Decree of Propouentibus
Legatis. And, being satiated with this trouble, he wrote to the Legates, that
the suspension of it should be proposed in Congregation. But Morone answered
the Ambassadors, who urged the Popes order, that rather then he would
condescend unto it, he desired that his Holiness would remove him. This
answer being given without participation of the other Legates, and many other
things resolved by him alone, Morone is thought to take too much upon (...) by
the other Legates.
put them in a jealousy, that he took too much upon him; saying, that
howsoever he might have instructions apart, yet he ought not to execute them
without aduising them first, and communicating all unto them, at least in the
execution.

In the Congregation of the one and twentieth of June, the answer to be made
to the President Birague, composed by the Legates and Cardinal of Loraine, was
read; which passed without difficulty. And because he was not present, that it
might not be given him by word of mouth, they sent it after him in writing.
And Adamus Fumanis was deputed Secretary, joined with Tilesius, who continued
in his indisposition. But the differences about the Articles of the institution
of Bishops, and of the authority of the Pope remaining still, or rather
increasing, and it being plain, that to speak of them in Congregation, would
augment them more, the Prelates, as it were, with a common consent, began to
handle them particularly, and to propose courses to find a temper for them.
Some, desirous to bury these controversies, and to proceed, seeing no means
of concord, gave counsel to omit both the matters absolutely: which opinion,
howsoever in conclusion it was received, in the beginning had much
contradiction. The Spaniards did oppose; who, by all means would have the
Episcopal jurisdiction to proceed from CHRIST; and the Cardinal of Loraine
went further, and, would have it defined, that their vocation and place were
immediately from God. And the Frenchmen did desire, that the Popes authority
might be so declared as that it might neither contradict, nor dispense with the
Decrees of the General Council. Others said that this course served only to
defer, without assurance that the delay would do any good. For when they came
to the conclusion of the Council, it would be necessary to define all matters
which have been examined; so that the difficulty would return; and, in case
the Frenchmen should depart first, as they resolved to do, there would be
danger of schism, if afterward any controuersed point should be handled.
Besides, in regard of the intelligence of Loraine with the Emperor, those who
knew not their new thoughts, did believe, that the Frenchmen being gone, his
Majesty would recall his Ambassadors also: in which case it would be small
reputation to continue the Council, and, to determine any thing, would be
thought to be a thing done without authority.

Another difficulty as great as this was in the election of Bishops. For many
of the Fathers would have it said, that there is an obligation to elect the
most worthy, and, for confirmation, alleged many Canons, and holy Doctors.
The Papalins said, on the contrary, that this was to bind the authority of the
Pope, that he could not gratify any, and that the use of the Court time out
of mind, has been, to think it sufficient if a man worthy were elected. The
French and Spanish Ambassadors also did not agree, because it did too much
restrain the power of Kings in nominations, if they were bound to go about
and seek the most worthy. Many Prelates went up and down, using persuasions,
that the Article might not be received, though it were without the addition of
electing the most worthy, and especially the Bishop of Bertinoro, and the
General Laynez, distributing some annotations, and aduertisements, made by
them, showing that great inconveniences would ensue by that Decree. For in it
was contained, that a Cathedral being vacant, the Metropolitan should write
unto the Chapter, the name of him who was to be promoted; who should afterward
be published in pulpit in all the Parish Churches of the City on Sunday, and
hanged on the door of the Church, and afterward the Metropolitan should go
to the City vacant, and examine witnesses concerning the qualities of the
person; and all his letters patents and testifications being read in the
Chapter, every one should be heard who would oppose any thing against his
person; of all which an instrument should be made, and sent to the Pope, to
be read in Consistory. This constitution they said would be a cause of
calumnies and seditions, and that hereby some authority was given to the
people, with which they would usurp the election of Bishops, which formerly
they were wont to have. Others being stirred up herewith; made the same
oppositions against the Article, concerning those who are to be promoted to
the greater orders, in which it was said, that their names ought to be
published to the people three Sundays, and affixed to the doors of the
Church, and that their letters testimonial ought to be subscribed by four
Priests, and four Laiques of the Parish; alleging, that no authority ought
to be given to the Laity in these affairs, which are purely Ecclesiastical.
In these perplexities the Legates knew not what to do, but to enjoy the
benefit of time, and to expect some ouerture, to come to the end of the
Council, to which they saw not how they should be able to arrive.

Another trouble began about the reformation of Cardinals. And the Pope
understanding that this was spoken of in all Courts, and that in Trent, The
reformation of Cardinals.
the Ambassadors of France, Spain, and Portugal, were combined to demand it
of the Council, he wrote to the Legates for advice, to know whether it were
better to handle it at Rome, or in Trent. He proposed the same in Consistory,
ordayning also a Congregation to consult on it, and, particularly, to find a
means that Princes might not intermeddle in the Conclaue, in the election of
the Pope. And, to proceed with all circumspection in a business of so great
weight, he sent many Articles of reformation to Trent, drawn out of the
Councels, with order that the Legates should impart them to the principal
Prelates, and signify their opinions. The Cardinals of Loraine, and Madruccio,
answered, they would not deliver their own opinions, before they understood
the Popes mind, and afterward it would be necessary to think very much on
it. And Loraine said, that there are many things which are thought worthy of
correction, which himself did think could not justly be reprehended, and
others which might in part, but not absolutely. He descended to the
particular of having Bishopriques, saying, there was no inconvenience that a
Cardinal Priest should have a Bishoprique, but did not like that a Cardinal
Deacon should be a Bishop; and that, for this cause, he had counseled his
brother, the Cardinal, to leave the Arch-bishoprique of Sans. But this matter
of reformation of the Cardinals was quickly put to silence. For those who were
in Trent, inclining rather to have it Did quickly vanish.
handled by the Pope and College, and those who pretended for the red Cap,
doubting their desires might be crossed, they did, with great facility, leave
to speak of it. The Pope also thought to make a constitution, that no Bishops
should have any temporal offices, either in Rome, or in the Ecclesiastical
Dominion. But he was advertised by Simoneta, and other Prelates, that it would
be a great prejudice to the Ecclesiastiques of France, Polonia, and other
Kingdoms, where they are Counselors of Kings, and have the principal
offices, of which they might easily be deprived, if Princes should take
example by his Holiness, and the Secular Nobility incite them to it, for their
own interests. Therefore if he would execute this his determination, he
should do it in effects, and not in writing, lest he should damnifie the
Clergy in other Kingdoms very much.

The Emperor found by experience, either at this time, or two months before,
when Morone was with him, that his vicinity to the Council did not only no
good, as he thought it would, but the contrary rather. For the popish
Prelates, suspecting his deseignes were against the authority of the Court,
were afraid of every thing, so that the difficulties and suspicions did turn
into bitterness, and increase in number. Therefore having other business
wherein to employ himself with more profit, he departed, and wrote to the
Cardinal of Loraine, that the impossiblity of doing good in the Council being
palpable, he thought it was the duty of a Christian and wife Prince, rather to
support the present evil with patience, then by curing it, to cause a greater.
And to the Count of Luna, who went unto him by Post, three days before, he
gave order to write to the Catholic King, concerning The Emperor parts from
Isorut.
the Decree Proponentibus Legatis exhorting his Majesty in his name to be
content not to desire the reuocation, or declaration, and if he did think
that the not declaring of it might prejudice other Councels, the declaration
might, if need were, be made in the end of this. And notice being given, that
they consulted at Rome and in Trent, to proceed against the Queen of And
dehorteth the Council from proceeding against the Q. of England.
England, he wrote to the Pope and the Legates, that if the Council would not
yield that fruit, as was desired, that they might see an union of all
Catholics to reform the Church, at the least they should not give occasion
to the heretics to unite themselves more, which they would do, in case they
proceeded against the Queen of England. For undoubtedly they would by that
means make a general league against the Catholics, which would bring forth
great inconveniences. And his admonition was so effectual, that the Pope
desisted in Rome, and revoked the Commission given to the Legates in Trent.
After that the Pope had given distaste to the Spaniards, in not giving place to
the Ambassadors, to appease them again, he gave care to the instance of
Vargas, who had troubled him many days together desiring that as means was
found that the Count of Luna, the Ambassador of his King, might come into
congregations, so, the time of celebrating the Session drawing near, his
Holiness would find a way that he might be there also; Whereof having considered
well, and consulted with the Cardinals, he resolved finally that a place,
separated from the other Ambassadors, should be given the Count in the Session
also, and to remedy the comperency which would be in giving the Incense and the
pax, he gave order that 2. Censers should be used, and Incense given to the
Frenchmen, and the Spaniard both at once; as also two Paxes to be kissed at
the same instant. And he wrote to the Legates to do so, commanding that they
should conceal all until the time of the execution, for fear some
inconveniences might be prepared if it were known.

Morone, according to the Popes command, concealed the order, neither A
difference about precedence.
did the Frenchmen know of it at all. On Saint Peter's day, the 29. of June;
the Cardinals, Ambassadors, and Fathers being assembled in the Chapel of the
Cathedral Church, and the Mass being begun, which the Bishop of Asti, the
Duke of Sauoy his Ambassador, did celebrate, on the sudden a murrey velvet
chair came out of the Vestry, and was placed between the last Cardinal, and
the first Patriarch: and by and by the Count of Luna, the Spanish Ambassador,
came in, and sat upon it; whereat the Prelates kept a great murmuring, Loraine
complained to the Legates of this sudden act, concealed from him. The French
Ambassadors sent the Master of the Ceremonies to make the same complaint,
telling the of them ceremonies of the Incense and the Pax. The Legates answered
there would be two Censers and two Paxes; wherewith the French were not
satisfied, and said plainly, that they would be maintained, not in paritie,
but in precedence, and would protest against every innovation, and depart from
the Council. These goings and commings continued until the end of the Gospel,
so that the Epistle and Gospel were not heard, by reason of the great
whisperings. The Theologue being gone into the Pulpit to preach, the Legates,
with the Cardinals, Ambassadors of the Emperor, and de Ferrieres, one of the
French, retired into the Vestry, where this matter was handled, and the Sermon
was ended before any thing was concluded. In the midst of the Credo a silence
was made, and Madruccio, with Five Churches, and the Ambassador of Polonia,
came out to speak with the Count of Luna, and to pray him in the name of the
Legates, that, for that time, he would be content, that neither Incense nor
the Paxe should be given to any, to hinder this sudden tumult, which might
cause some great evil, promising that, at any other time when he requested,
they would execute the order of his holiness of two Censors and two Paxes at
once, which being considered on before hand, both he and they, and all might
be able to resolve how to govern themselves with wisdom. After long
discourse, they returned with this resolution that the Count was content. So
they all came out of the Vestry, and went to their places, and the Mass
proceeded without Incense or Paxe. And as scone as these words were said; Ite,
missaest, the Count of Luna, who, in the Congregations, was wont to go out
last, did go then before the Cross, followed with a great part of the Spanish
Prelates, and Italians, subject to his King. Afterward the Legate, Ambassadors,
and residue of the Prelates departed also, after the usual manner.

The Legates, to be freed from the imputation laid upon them for this secret,
and almost fraudulent proceeding, n a matter of so great weight, were feign to
publish the express orders, received from Rome, to do so in that time, in
that manner, and without participation of any. De Ferrieres said publicly,
that but for the respect he bare to the worship of God, he would have
protested, as he had in commission from his King, which he would do hereafter,
in case the usual ceremonies of Incense and paxe were not restored, and given
them in their due place. The Cardinal of Loraine also wrote a sharp letter to
the Pope, declaring the wrong that should have been done them, and said
modestly, that his Holiness had made him be told that he trusted so much in
him, that he would that all the affairs of the Council should be
communicated unto him; whereof, though he saw no effect, yet he did not
complain; but he was troubled that he had commanded the Legates not to impart
unto him their own proper affairs, and especially, that, in which he might
have done more good then another, adding, that more mischief had insued, but
for his mediation. He said moreover, that the blame of all was imputed to his
Holiness, and prayed him that he would not be the author and cause of so
great an evil. He sent Musottus unto him also, by post, to inform him more
particularly of the resolution of the French Ambassadors, and of the imminent
danger. The Count of Luna complained of the stiffenesse of the French
Ambassadors, and magnified his own great patience, and modesty, and desired
the Legates, that the next Sunday he might be admitted to equal place, and
ceremonies, according to the Popes order. Some thought it was a stratagem of
the Pope to dissolve the Council; and the Papalins, called Amoreuoli, said,
that, if they must come to a dissolution, they desired it should rather happen
for the controversy about the words of the Council of Florence, That the Pope
is Rector of the Church universal; thinking it would be more easy to justify
his Holiness in that, and to lay all the blame upon the Frenchmen.

The next morning, the last of June, the Count having assembled the Spanish
Prelates, and many Italians, told them, that the day before he went into the
Chapel, not to give occasion of any disturbance, but to keep the right of his
King, and make use of the Popes order; that since he had understood, that, in
case he should return to the Chapel again, the Frenchmen would protest:
which if they should do, he must not fail to answer them, in the same manner
and terms that they should use, as in regard of his Holiness, so also in the
behalf of the Majesty of his King. The Prelates answered, that if it came to
this, they would be ready to do his Holiness service, and not fail to hold
esteem of his Catholic Majesty as far as did concern them. The Count
prayed them again to consider well of all which might happen in such a case;
saying, that himself would come prepared also. And knowing that the Frenchmen
could take but three courses, either against the Legates, or against the King,
or against him the Ambassador, he meant to be provided for an answer for
all. All the Ambassadors of other Princes persuaded the Legates to find a
temper; that so great disorder might not happen: who answering, that they must
needs execute the Popes command, which was precise, and without any
reservation, and the rather because they had promised the Count to do it
whenever he would request it, the Cardinal of Loraine protested to them,
that, in case they did so, he would go into the pulpit, and show of what
importance the matter was, and what a ruin it would bring to all Christendom,
and with the crucifixe in hand, would cry, Misericordia, persuading the Fathers
and people to go out of the Church, that they might not see so fearful a
schism, and crying, He that desires the welfare of Christendom, let him
follow me, would depart out of the Church hoping he should be followed by every
one. The Legates moved heerewith, persuaded the Count to be content that no
Chapel should be held the next Sunday, nor any procession made, according to
the use, and sent the Pope advise of all.

Continual congregations were held in the house of the French and Spanish
Ambassadors. The Spaniard sometimes gave hope he would be content, and
sometimes made instance to go to Church, to execute the Popes order for the
Incense and Pax. And the French Ambassadors were resolved to protest, and
depart, and said openly, that they would not protest against the Legates, being
but mere nor against the King of Spanic, or the Count his Ambassador, in
regard they did prosecute their cause, nor against the Apostolic Sea, which
they would always honor, following the steps of their predecessors, but
against the person of the Pope, from whom the prejudice and innovation came, as
making himself a party, and giving cause of schism, and for another cause
also, appealing unto the future Pope, lawfully elected, and to a true and
lawful council, threatening to depart, and to celebrate a National. The
Prelates, and other Frenchmen apart, did commonly say to every one, that the
Ambassadors had protestations against the person of the Bishop, who carried
himself for Pope, being not lawful because there was a nullitie in the
election for Simonie, intimating particularly the obligation which Cardinal
Caraffa had from the Duke of Florence, The Prenchmen make a question whether
the Pope were lawfully elected.
with promise of a certain sum of money, which that Cardinal sent
afterward to the Catholic King, pretending it could not be made, but by
consent of the Pope before his assumption, as also another obligation made by
the Popes own hand, then Cardinal in the Conclaue, to the Cardinal of
Naples, whereof mention has bin made before. And the President de Ferrieres
prepared a very sharp Oration in Latin, and a protestation: which howsoever
it was not made, yet it was printed, and was showed by the Frenchmen, and is
still to be seen in print, as if it had been recited; to relate the substance
whereof, is not besides our present purpose, that it may be seen, not what the
French said only, but what opinion they brought to the Council.

He said in substance; That that Council having bin called by means of Francis
The protestation.
and Charles, brothers, French Kings, they, the French Kings Ambassadors, were
sorry they should be forced to depart, or consent to the diminution of the Kings
dignity; that the prerogative of the French King was known to whosoever has
read the Popes Law, and the Histories of the Roman Church; as also those who
have read the volumes of the Councels must needs know what place themselves
ought to hold, that the Ambassadors of the Catholic King, in former
general Councels, have followed the Ambassadors of the most Christian, that
now the mutation was made, not by the Fathers, who, if they had been in
liberty, would not have deprived any Prince of his possession, nor by the
Catholic King, so nearly allied in amity and kindred with their King, but by
the Father of all Christians, who, in stead of bread, has given his eldest
son a stone, and for fish, a serpent, to wound, with one sting, the King and
the French Church together, that Pius 4. does sow seeds of discord, to
disturb the peace of Kings who are in amity, changing by force and injustice,
the order of sitting, always used by the Ambassadors, and lastly in the
Councels of Constance and Lateran, to show that he is above Councels; that he
can neither disturb the amity of the Kings, nor alter the doctrine of the
Councels of Constance and Basil; that the Council is ab oue the Pope; that
Saint Peter had learned to abstain from wordly matters, whereas this his
successor, and no imitator, did pretend to give and to take honors from Kings,
that by the divine, National, and civil Law, account was held of the Eldest
son, both in the life time and after the death of the father; but Pius does
refuse to prefer the eldest King before those who were borne long after him;
that GOD, in respect of David would not diminish the dignity of Solomon; and
Pius the fourth, with out respect of the merits of Pipin, Charles, Lewis, and
of other Kings of France, does pretend with his decree, to take away the
prerogatives of the successors of those Kings; that, against the Laws of GOD
and man, without any knowledge of the cause, he has condemned the King, taken
his most ancient possession from him, and pronounced against the cause of a
pupil; and widow; that the ancient Popes, when a general Synod was celebrated;
have never done any thing, without approbation thereof, and Pius has, without
that Council, which represents the Church universal, taken away the
possession of the Orators of a King, a pupil, not cited, sent not to him, but
to the Synod, that, to the end provision might not be made against it, he has
used diligence to conceal his decree, commancing the Legates, upon pain of
excommunication; to keep it secret; that the Fathers should consider whether
these be the facts of Peter, and other Popes, and whether they the Ambassadors
are not forced to depart, from the place where Pius has left no place for
Laws, nor so much as any print of liberty of the Council, in regard nothing
is proposed to the Fathers, or published, if it be not first sent from Rome;
that they did protest only against that Pius the fourth, adoring the
Apostolic Sea, and the Pope, and the Church of Rome, refusing only to obey
this man, and to esteem him the Vicar of CHRIST, that they will always have
in great veneration the Fathers; but, seeing that whatsoever is done, is not
done in Trent, but in Rome, and that the Decrees published, are rather of Pius
the fourth, then of the Council of Trent, they will not receive them for the
Decrees of a general Synod. In conclusion, he commanded the Prelates and
Divines, in the Kings name, to depart, and to return when GOD should restore
the due form and liberty to general Councels, and the King receive his due
place.

But there was no occasion to protest. For the Count considered finally, that,
howsoever the Spanish party was greater, in number of Prelates, then the French,
yet, because the dependants of the Pope, who at the first were on this side,
when they understood the will of his Holiness, would now, knowing that a
dispatch was made to Rome for this cause, think fit he should desist until
the answer and the new order came, and therefore join with the French, his
side would prove to be the weaker. Therefore inclining to a composition, and
all the other Ambassadors, and the Cardinal Madruccio interposing, after many
difficulties, they agreed that neither Incense nor the Pax should be given in
the public ceremonies, until the answer of the King of Spain did come.
This accord displeased the Popes dependants, who would have been glad of that
occasion to interrupt the progress of the Council, as also those, who being
weary of Trent, and nor seeing how the Council could either proceed or be
ended, desired the interruption, as the lesser evil, that the discords might
not increase. It is certain that the Pope himself, receiving advice of this
composition, did take it ill, in regard of the same fear, that the discords
may not be made greater, and some evil en^de. And the Spanish ministers in
Italy did all blame the Count, for letting slip so favorable an occasion for
the service, of the King.

This controversy being composed, the Legates, intent upon the celebration How
the difficulties in the points for the next Session were removed.
of the Session, because the time approached, consulted what might (...) done to
remove the differences. Loraine proposed the omission of the two articles,
that is, of the Institution of Bishops, and of the authority of the Pope, as
things wherein the parties were to passionate, and, concerning Bishos to say
nothing, but what concerns the power of Order. To some of the Papalins this
seemed a good remedy, but to others not; who said, that this would be
attributed to the Pope, as if the form last composed did not please him, and
the Princes would wonder, why his Holiness should not rest content, having the
same power given him, which Saint. Peter had; which would have given matter of
discourse to the heretics. Besides, the Spaniards would take occasion to have
little hope hereafter to agree together in any thing; whence infinite
difficulties would arise in other matters also. Moreover there might be a
doubt whether it could be effected, because it was probable that many of the
Fathers. Would require, that those Articles should be declared. The Cardinal
of Loraine offered that the Frenchmen should not require it, and so to labor
with the Spaniards that they also should be content; adding, that, in case the
Legates would do the like with the Italians, who do with too much passion
oppose the others, all would be composed.

And very fitly order camefrom the Emperor to his Ambassadors, to use all
means that the authority of the Pope should not be discussed in Council;
which his Majesty did, because he saw the mayor part was inclined to enlarge
it, and feared that something might be determined, which might make his
concord with the Protestants more difficult. The Ambassadors, having treated
with the Legates in conformity hereof, as also with Loraine, and other
principal Prelates, did cause this Article to be omitted, as also that other
of the Institution of Bishops. But first they made many consultations about it,
admitting unto them the Prelates which were of greatest note, and had most
followers, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, that they might so dispose of
matters; as that all might rest contented, and the Decrees of the provisions
made against the abuses were given sorth Concerning the first point, which was
of the election of Bishops; the Ambassadors of Spain and Portugal did sharply
oppose this particular, that the Metropolitans should examine the persons
promoted to Bishoprikes (whereof much has been said before) saying, that this
was to subject the Kings to the Prelates their subjects, because authority was
indirectly given them, to reject the Kings nominations. The French Ambassadors
being demanded what their opinion was, made show they did not c^re whether it
were decreed or not. Whereupon the Popish Prelates, who thought it as diminution
to the Popes authority, said, that all that point might be omitted:
especially, because, in the fifth Session, sufficient provision was made in that
matter. But others opposing hotely, a conclusion was made by common consent,
that it should be deforred until the next Session, that they might have time
so to dispose it, as that it might please all, least the publication of the
things agreed on should be crossed, in regard of this.

There was the same difficulty about the last of the Articles proposed, in
which a form of confession of faith was prescribed, to be (...), by those who
were designed to Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Benefices with cure, before
the examination; which did so other with that of the election, as that they
could not be separated. It was resolved to (...) this Article also. But because
it was deferred, and then resolved not to (...), and afterward, in a
tumultuous manner, referred to the Pope, as shall be said in due place, it is
not alieue from our present purpose to recite here the substance of it. Which
was, that not only it should be required of them who were designed to
Bishoprikes, and other cures of souls, but also an admonition and precept, in
virtue of obedience, made to all Princes of what Majesty or excellency
soever, not to admit to any dignity, magistracy, or office, any person,
before they have made inquisition of his Faith and religion, and before he
has voluntarily confessed and sworn the Articles, contained in that form
which, to that end, it did command to be translated into the vulgar tongue,
and publicly read every Sunday, in all the Churches, that it might be
understood by all. The Articles were. To receive the Scriptures of both
Testaments, which the Church does hold to be canonical, as inspired by God.
To acknowledge the holy Catholic Apostolic Church, under one Bishop of Rome,
Vicar of CHRIST, holding constantly the faith and doctrine thereof, in regard,
being directed by the holy Ghost, it cannot err. To have in veneration the
authority of Councels, as certain and undoubted, and not to doubt of the
things once determned by them. To believe, with a constant faith, the
Ecclesiastical traditions, received from one to another. To follow the opinion
and consent of the Orthodoxe Fathers. To render absolute obedience to the
constitutions and precepts of the holy mother the Church. To believe, and
confess the seven Sacraments, and their use, virtue, and fruit, as the Church
has taught until this time, but above all, that in the Sacrament of the Altar
there is the true body and blood of CHRIST, really and substantially, under the
Bread and Wine, by the virtue and power of the word of God, uttered by the
Priest, the only minister ordained to this purpose, by the institution of
CHRIST; confessing also that he is offered in the Mass to God, for the living
and the dead, for the remission of sins. And finally to receive and retain
most firmly all things which have been until this time piously and
religiously observed by their ancestors, nor to be removed from them by any
means, but to avoid all nouity of doctrine, as a most pernicious poison,
flying all ^^^isme, detesting all heresy, and promising to assist the Church
readily and faithfully, against all heretics.

It being (as has been said) resolved to omit this matter, they labored to
rectify the matter of Residence, by taking away whatsoever might displease
those who held it to be, de iure Diuino, or those who thought it to be, de
iure Positino. Loraine used all effect all diligehee to make the parties agree,
resolving, that, by all means, the Session should be held at the time
appointed. For having received lately very loving letters from the Pope,
co(...) him to come to Rome, and to speak with him, and determining to give
his Holiness all satisfaction, his resolution was to give him this, as an
earnest, that is, to end the discord, and com^ose the differences between
the, Prelates; a thing much desired by him. For his going to Rome, he spoke
ambiguously, meaning to expectan answer from France(...) Another matter,
though of no great importance, did prolong the progress, that is, the handling
of the (...) one of Orders, of which a great, long (...) was proposed, wherein
all were expounded, from the office of a Decon, to the office of a
doore-keeper. This was composed in the beginning by the Deputies, when the
Decrees were made, as necessary to oppose against the Protestants, who say
those Orders were not instituted by CHRIST, but by Ecclesiastical
introduction, because there is use of them, as being offices of good and
orderly government, but not Sacraments. This Article of the Deeree was taken
out of the Pontifical, which would be too long and superfluous to repeat, in
regard it may be read in the book it self. And the Decree did The functions
of the inferior Orders.
declare besides, that those functions cannot be excercised but by him, who,
being promoted by the Bishop has received grace from God, and a Character
imprinted, to make him able to do it. But when it came to be established,
they were troubled to resolve an old common objection, what need there could
be of a Character, and spiritual grace, to exercise corporal Acts, as to
read, light candles, ring bells, which may be as well or better done by those
who are not ordained; especially since it has been disused, that men ordained
should exercise those functions. It was considered, that the Church was
condemned hereby for omitting this use, so many years. And there was a
difficulty how to restore the practice of them. For they must ordain, not
children, but men of age to shut the Church doors, to ring the bells, to
dispossess the possessed with devils: which if they did, they did cross
another Decree, that the inferior orders should be a necessary degree to the
greater. Neither did they see how they could restore the three offices to the
Deaconship, to minister at the Altar, to Baptize, and to preach, nor how the
office of the Exorcists could be exercised, in regard of the use brought in,
that the Priests only did dispossess the possessed. Antonius Augustinus,
Bishop of Lerida, would have had that whole matter omitted, saying that,
howsoever it was certain that these were Orders, and Sacraments, yet it would
be hard to persuade that they were brought in in the Primitive Church, when
there were but few Christians; that it was not for the Synods dignity, to
descend to so many particulars; that it was sufficient to say, there are four
inferior Orders, without descending to any further speciali^ie of doctrine, or
making any innovation in the practice. Opposition was made, that so the
doctrine of the Protestants, who call them idle Ceremonies, would not be
condemned. But Loraine was Author of a middle course, that the Article should
be omitted, and in few words the execution referred to the Bishop, who should
cause them to be observed, as much as was possible.

These things being settled, they resolved to read all in the consultation of
those principal Prelates, that all things might pass in the general
Congregation with absolute quiet. Both parties were agreed, but only in the
s(...)h Anathematisme, that is, that the Hi^^archie is instituted by Divine
ordination. The Archbishop of Otranto, and other Popish Prelates suspected,
that, by such general words, signifying that all holy Orders, without making
difference, are by ordination of CHRIST, (...) (...)ght be in^^redthat Bishops
are equal to the Pope. But the Popish Divines and Canon(...) did persuade them
not to make difficulty, because it was manifest, by the Canons precedent, and
subsequent, that nothing was spoken of (...) Order, in which the Pope does not
exceed the Bishops, and (...) mention made of (...) (...) The same men
suspected also the Proheme of the Article of residence; where it was said, that
those who have cure of souls are bound, by Gods command, to know their
sheep, etc inferring, that it was, in some sort, declared that Residence was
by the commandment of God. But the greater part of the Papalines were of the
contrary opinion, saying, that all those particulars which are said to be
commanded by God, to him who has charge of souls, may be observed in absence,
though not so well as in presence, and that the words following do provide
against all preludice to his Beatitude. They said moreover, that it having bin
composed by the Cardinal of Ma^tu^, and often consulted on, this doubt was
never made, and that at Rome likewise they did not think it prejudicial. But
Otranto and his followers could not possibly be removed from their opinion.

Some of the Spaniards were very earnest for the declaration, that the
Institution of Bishops, and Residence are de iure diuino, but were forced to
desist, because the mayor part of their Colleagues were disswad^d by Loraine,
who used terms of conscience; saying it was not good, nor acceptable to GOD,
when the good desired could not be effected, to cause evil by a superfluous
and vain instance; that it was sufficient to hinder the prejudice which some
thought to have done the truth, by establishing contrary opinions, and that if
all could not be now obtained which was desired, some thing might be hoped
for hereafter, by the assistance of GOD. But Granuta Segouia, and some others
could not be removed by any means; and on the other side, it was not
possible to make quiet the Patr^arke of Jerusalem, or the Archbishop of
Otranto, and their adherents, who resolved to cross all that was proposed, as
not serving to remove the differences, but only to cover them; being assured,
that, in the progress, they would return with greater force, and thinking it
better, in case they must needs break, to do it before the Session then
after. Neither were the Legates able to persuade them.

Notwithstanding these two contradictions, matters were established with the
other principal Prelates; and the ninth of July the general Congregations
began; in which all that belongs to the doctrine and Canones of Order being
first read, the Cardinal of Loraine gave an example of speaking briefly, and
making no difficulty: and was imitated by others, until it came to Granata to
speak; who said, it was an indignity, that the Fathers The Spanish Prelates
are constant in their opinion concerning the Institution of Bishops.
should be thus derided, handling the foundation of the Institution of Bishops
so long, and now omitting it; requiring the declaration, de iure diuino, and
wondering why a point so true and infallible, should not be declared. He added
that all books which say the contrary ought to be condemned as heretical.
Segouia adhered to him, and said it was an express truth, which could not be
denied, and that it ought to be declared, to condemn the heretics who
defend the contrary. Guadi^e, Aliffe, Morte Mara^^o, and some other Spanish
Prelates followed: some of which said, that their opinion was as true as the
precepts of the decalogue. The Bishop of Conimbri(...) did complain
publicly, that the truth was circumuonted by craft; that is by ordaining
titular Bishops. For this did show that (...)diction was not essential to a
Bishopric, nor received immediately from CHRIST. And he required a
declaration to the contrary, repeating the conceit often used, that a Church
and faithful subjects were as essential to a Bishop, as a wife to an husband.
The Decree of Residence being proposed afterward, Loraine did approve it with
the same brevity; only he advised, that where the causes of absence are
expressed, amongst which is vtility of the Church, vtility of the Commonwealth
should be added also, to remove all impediment which that Decree might bring
to the admission of Prelates to offices and public Councels; wherein he had a
general applause, Madruccio, who followed, spoke in the same manner. The
Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the Archbishops Verallo, and Otranto refused to
deliver their opinions concerning that Decree: whereof the Archbishop Braga,
when his turn was to speak, complained, and turning to the Legates, told
them, after a reprehending manner, that they ought to use their authority, and
to force the Prelates to speak their opinions, and that it was a bad example
in Council, as if they were compelled to be silent, or had an ambition not to
speak but when they had followers. Whereupon others, who resolved to imitate
them, changed their purpose, and consented to the Decree. The other Decrees
were approved as they were read, but only that Granata made instance that
Residence might be declared to be de iure diuino in plain words, because
(he said) the ambiguous words of the Proheme were unworthy of the Council,
which was assembled to take away, and not to increase the difficulties; that
books maintaining the contrary should be prohibited and that Cardinals should
expressly and namely be comprehended in the Decree. This last concerning
Cardinals, did seem to please many. Whereupon Morone answered, that
consideration should be had of it, and that it should be spoken of another
time. They proceeded in the residue, and, in the end, the Patriarch and the two
Archbishops consented also to the Decree; which was the first thing to make
them hope that the Session could be celebrated at the time appointed, a thing
thought impossible, but effected, by the dexterity of the Cardinal of Loraine,

The days following the Fathers gave their voices concerning the other
Articles of reformation. In which there was no difference of moment, but only,
that, at the great instance of Pompeius Zambeccari, Bishop of Sulmona, one
particle was removed out of the Articles of the first Tonsure; in which it was
said, that, if the promoted shall commit any delict within six months after
the ordination, the ordination shall be presumed to be fraudulent, and the
ordained shall not enjoy the privilege of the Court; and whereas it is decreed
that none should be ordained before he was appropriated to some Church, the
innovation of the Decrees made by the Later an Council was added, that those
also who were ordained to the title of the Patrimony should be applied to the
service of some Church, in which they should actually exercise themselves, or
otherwise should not be partakers of the privileges. This last was taken away
also: and for the residue, with a small variation of words, and those not
belonging to the substance, satisfaction was given to all the Fathers.

The Spaniards, who could not obtain in Congregation the declaration for the
institution of Bishops as they desired, did the thirteenth day at night,
assemble in the house of the Count of Luna; where Granata and his adherents,
perswa^ed him to protest to the Legates, in case the determination of that
point should be omitted; but others dissuaded it, as a thing which might raise
a great commotion. The whole Congregation was spent in disputes, and ended in
contention, deferring the resolution until the next morning. When the Count,
hearing again the diversity of opinions, and considering that it would much
displease the Pope, all the Italian Bishops, and all the French men, who had
reformed their opinions, prayed Granata to think as others did, in regard it
was not a matter of conscience, because the question was not in what manner it
should be refined, but whether it should be refined, or omitted. Granata not
changing, but saying that he thought in his conscience the determination was
necessary, he desired him that he would speak his opinion quietly, and
freely, and content himself if it were not embraced by others, and abstain
from contentions; which both he and the others promised to do.

The next day, which was the next before the Session, a general congregation
was held, in which Morone did propose; whether the Fathers were pleased that in
the Articles of Residence, and of the age of those who are to be ordained,
mention should be made of Cardinals; and particularly of the age. Few did
consent, and most of them did discourse that there is no cause to make any
Cardinals under age, except Princes, in whom age is not considerable, because
they do honor the Clergy, of what age soever they be; and that it was to no
purpose to make a Decree where there was no abuse. But in the particular of the
residence, the greater part was of opinion they should be named. But some
contradicted, because it would be an approbation that Cardinals might have
Bishopriques, and, by consequence, Commendaes; which was not fit to do, but to
leave them to their conscience, which must needs tell them that they are not
exempt from the general precept, rather then by naming them, to approve two
abuses at once, plurality of Benefices, and Commendaes. Afterward some other
particulars of small weight being handled and concluded, all which was to be
published in Session was read again, the Prelates giving their opinions only
with the word, placet. Some Spaniards and Italians, in number twenty eight,
answered negatiuely, and the others, being 192. did consent; and in the end
Morone concluded, that the Session should be held. He thanked the Fathers for
accepting the Decrees, and exhorted the others to join with them, and prayed
the Count of Luna to persuade his Prelates, that, seeing the universal
concourse of all the Council in one opinion* they would not dissent. Whereof
speaking with him more particularly, after the congregation, he promised, that,
whenever the Popes authority should be declared, according to the form of
the Council of Florence, the institution of Bishops should be declared also
to be de iure diuino. The Spanish Prelates being assembled that day at night,
in the house of the Count, after many discourses, grounding themselves upon the
Cardinals promise, were content to accept all things.

The fifteenth of July being come, they went all to Church early in the The
Session.
morning with the usual order; where the accustomed ceremonies were used. The
Bishop of Paris sang Mass, and the Bishop of Aliffe preached, and did offend
the Frenchmen, by naming the King of Spain before their King; as also the
Polonians, by naming Portugal before Polonia; and the Venetians, by mentioning
the Duke of Sauoy before their Republique. He seemed to say also, that the
celebration of the Council, was a continuation with the precedent of Paul and
Julius; wherein the Imperialists and Frenchmen had ill satisfaction. He spoke
also of the faith and manners of the heretics and catholics; and said, that
as the faith of the Catholics was better, so the heretics did exceed them
in good life; which did give much distaste, especially The preacher ostendeth
many Ambassadors.
to those who remembered the saying of our Savior, and of Saint James, that
faith is not showed but by works. At that instant nothing was said, for fear
of troubling the ceremonies. But the next day, the French Ambassadors, the
Polonian and the Venetians, desired the Legates that the Sermon might not be
printed, nor put amongst the acts of the Council. The Mass, and the other
prayers being ended, the Briefes of the Legation of the Cardinals Morone and
Nauaggero were read, as also the Mandats of the King of Polonia, of the Duke of
Sauoy, the letter of the Queen of Scotland, and the Mandate of the Catholic
King. Afterward the Decrees of the doctrine of faith were read; in which there
was no contradiction, but only that the mayor part of the Spaniards said, they
did consent upon condition, that the Lords the Legates, should perform the
promise made to the Ambassador of their King.

The Decree of faith did contain in substance. 1. The Sacrifice and the
Priesthood, are united in each law; therefore there being a visible sacrifice
The Decree of faith.
in the New Testament, that is the Eucharist, it must be confessed necessarily,
that there is a visible and external Priesthood, in which power is given, by
divine institution, to consecrate, offer, and minister the Eucharist, and to
remit and retain sins. 2. Which Priesthood being divine, must have many
Orders of Ministers to serve in it, which must ascend from lower to higher
ministeries, because the Scripture makes mention of the name of Deacons; and
from the beginning of the Church the ministeries of Subdeacons, Accolythites,
Exorcists, Readers, and Ostiaries were used, placing the subdeaconship amongst
the greater Orders. 3. And because grace is conferred in the holy ordination,
Order is truly and properly one of the seven Sacraments of the Church. 4 In
which a Character being imprinted, which cannot be blotted out, the Synod
does condemn those who say that Priests have sacerdotal power for a time, so
that they may return to the world, and not exercise the ministry of the word
of God. And does condemn those who say all Christians are Priests, or have
equal spiritual power; which is nothing but to confound the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which is in an order, as an army of soldiers. To which
Hierarchicall order do belong especially Bishops, who are superior to
Priests, to whom it appertains to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation,
to ordain Ministers, and to perform other functions. The Synod does teach
also, that, in the ordination of Bishops, Priests, and other degrees, the
consent, vocation, or authority of the Magistrate, or of any other secular
power is not necessary; and that those, who, called only, or instituted by the
people, secular power or Magistrate, or by their own temeritie, do ascend to
Ecclesiastical Ministeries, are not Ministers, but thieves.

This doctrine was attended with eight Anathematismes. 1. Against him that
shall say, that there is no visible Priesthood in the new Testament, nor any
power to consecrate and offer, and remit sins, but only an Office, or naked
Ministry to preach the Gospel, and that those who do not preach are not
Priests. 2. Or that, besides Priesthood, there are not greater Orders, The
Anathematismes.
and less, which are degrees to ascend to Priesthood. 3. Or that holy
ordination is not a Sacrament, but an humane invention, or only a certain
Rite, to elect Ministers of the word of God, and of the Sacraments. 4. Or that
the holy Ghost is not given by the holy Ordination, nor any Character
imprinted, or that a Priest may return to be a Laique. 5. Or that the holy
Unction, or other Ceremonies which the Church uses, are not requisite, but may
be omitted, or are pernicious. 6. Or that there is not an Hierarchy instituted
in the Catholic Church; by divine Ordination, consisting of Bishops, Priests,
and Ministers. 7. Or that Bishops are not Superior, to Priests, or have not
power to confirm and ordain, or that Priests also have the same power, or
that Orders conferred without the consent or vocation of the people, or Secular
power, are void, or that they may be lawful Ministers of the word of God and
Sacraments, who are not lawfully ordained by the Ecclesiastical power. 8. Or
that Bishops assumed by authority of the Pope, are not lawful and true, but
that it is an humane invention.

Afterward the decree of reformation was read, which contained eighteen The
Decree of Reformation.
heads. The first concerning the matter of Residence, so much disputed on, in
which it was said, that every one that has cure of fowls, is bound, by the
Commandment of God, to know his sheep, to offer Sacrifices for them, to feed
them with preaching, Sacraments, and good examples, and to attend other
Pastoral charges; which things because they cannot be performed by him who
does not assist and watch over the flock, the Synod does admonish them to
feed and govern, with judgment and truth. But that none by a badde
interpretation of the Constitutions, made under Paul the third in this matter,
may think the absence of five Months lawful, it does declare, that
whosoever has Bishoprics, in what title soever, though Cardinals, are bound
to reside personally, nor may be absent, but when Christian charity, urgent
necessity, due obedience, or vtility of Church or Commonwealth does require;
as also that such causes of absence must be approved for lawful, by the
Pope, or Metropolitan, except they be notorious or sudden, in which case the
Provincial Councels must take knowledge, and judge of the licenses granted,
that there may be no abuse therein, the Prelates providing that the people may
not be damnified in their absence. And because a short absence deserves not
this name, though without any the causes aforesaid, it does declare that this
shall not exceed the space of two months, or three at the most, whether it be
continuate or at diverse times, so that there be equity of reason in it, and
without the damage of the flock; which must be referred to the consciences of
the Prelates; admonishing every one not to be absent on Sundays in Aduent,
Lent, Feast of the Nativity, Resurrection, Pentecost, or Corpus Christi. Which
Decree, he that shall violate, besides the penalties imposed upon Non-residents
under Paul the third, and mortal sin, may not, with a good conscience, enjoy
the Fruits for that proportion of time, decreeing the same concerning all those
that have charge of souls, who, being absent with leave of the Bishop, must
substitute a sufficient Vicar, approved by the Bishop, allowing a convenient
stipend; and does ordain that this Deceee, together with the other under Paul
the third, shall be published in the Provincial and Diocesan Councels.

The second Article of the Decree concerning Order, was; That whosoever does
hold a Bishopric, in what title soever, though a Cardinal, not receiving
consecration within three months, shall lose the Fruits, and deferring three
months more, shall lose the Benefice, and that the consecration, if it be not
in the Court of Rome, shall be celebrated in the proper Church, or in the
Province at the least, if there be opportunity. The third, That Bishops shall
celebrate the ordinations in their own person, and, in case they be sick,
shall not send their subjects to be ordained by other Bishops, before they be
examined and approved by themselves. The fourth, That the first Tonsure shall
not be given but to him that is confirmed, and has learned the principles of
Faith, to read and write, and has chosen a Clericall life to serve GOD, not
to avoid the Secular judgment. The fifth, He that is to be promoted to the
inferior Orders shall have testimony from the Parish Priest, and
Schoolmaster, and charge shall be given by the Bishop, that his name may be
proposed publicly in Church, and inquisition made of his birth, age, manners
and life. The sixth, That none shall have an Ecclesiastical Benefice before
the age of fourteen years, nor enjoy the exemption of the tribunal, if he
have not an Ecclesiastical Benefice, or, wearing the habit and Tonsure, does
not serve in some Church, by commission from the Bishop, or dwell in a
Seminary, or School, or University, with license of the Bishop. And, for
married Clerks, the constitution of Boniface the eighth shall be observed, with
condition likewise that they shall serve in the Church, in habit and Tonsure, by
deputation of the Bishop. The seventh, That when an ordination is to be made,
all shall be called to the City, the Wednesday before, and diligent inquisition
and examination of them made by the Bishop, with the assistance of who he
pleases. The eighth, Ordinations shall not be celebrated but in times
appointed by the law, in the cathedral Church, in presence of the Canons: and
if occasion be to make it in an other place of the Diocese, it shall be in
the most worthy Church, in presence of the Clergy. Every one shall be ordained
by his own Bishop, or, if any be ordained by another, he shall have letters
testimonial of his own. The ninth, A Bishop shall not ordain one of his
family that is not his subject, if he have not dwelt with him three years,
and, in that case, shall presently confer a Benefice upon him. The tenth, No
Abbat, or other Prelate, shall confer the first Tonsure, or the minor Orders,
but unto Regulars, their subjects; nor these or other Prelates, Colleges, or
Chapters, shall grant dimissorie letters to Secular Clerks to receive Orders.
The eleventh, That the minor Orders shall be conferred upon him that
understands the Latin tongue, and with interposition of time between one
Order and another; and these being degrees unto others, none shall be ordained
if there be not hope that he may be worthy of holy orders; and from the last
of the minor Orders until the Subdeaconship, there shall be the interposition
of a year, if the Bishop shall not judge otherwise for the good of the Church.
The twelfth, None shall be ordained Subdeacon before the age of two and twenty
years, Deacon before three and twenty, Priest before six and twenty. Neither
shall the Regulars have any exemption herein. The thirteenth, Subdeacons, and
Deacons shall be first proved in the minor Orders, shall have hope to live
continently; shall serve the Church to which they are ascribed, and shall
think it very convenient to receive the Communion on Sundays, and solemn
Feasts, when they serve at the Altar. Subdeacons shall not pass to a higher
degree, until they be exercised one year in their own; but two holy degrees
shall not be given in one day, by virtue of any privilege whatsoever. The
fourteenth, None shall be ordained a Priest but a Deacon, which has been
exercised in that ministry, a whole year at the least, and found sufficient
to teach the people, and administer the Sacraments: and the Bishop shall take
care that they celebrate the Mass every Sunday, and holy day, (...), in case
they have cure of souls, they shall satisfy their charge; and if any be
ordained to the superior Orders, before the inferior, the Bishop may dispense,
if there be a lawful cause. The fifteenth, Howsoever Priests receive power, in
their ordination to absolve from sins, yet none shall hear confessions, who
have not a Parochial Benefice, or is not approved by the Bishop. The
sixteenth, None shall be ordained before he be ascribed to some particular
Church, or pious place, to exercise the ministry of that Order; and, if hoc
abandon the place without consent of the Bishop, the ministry shall be
prohibited unto him; and no strange Clerk shall be admitted to the exercise
of the Ministry without the letters of his Ordinary. The seventeenth, To bring
again into use the functions of the Orders from a Deacon to an Ostiarie,
which, being used from the time of the Apostles, have been intermitted in many
places, that they may not be derided by the heretics, as idle, these
Ministeries shall not be exercised, but by those who have received the Orders
appertaining, and the Prelates shall restore those functions, and in case they
have not continent Clerks for exercise of the minor Orders, they may take
married men, so that they have not been twice married, and be in other respects
apt for that exercise.

The last article was for the institution of Seminaries, in which it was
constituted, that every Episcopal Church should have a certain number of
boys, brought up in a College, near the Church, or in another convenient
place, the boys shall be twelve years old at the least, legitimate, and
distributed into forms, by the Bishop according to their number, age, and
progress in Ecclesiastical discipline. They shall wear the habit, and
tonsure, learn Grammar, Music, Ecclesiastical computation, the holy
Scripture, to read the Homilies of the Fathers, know the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Sacrament, and especially that which belongs to hearing confessions.
And to defray the charge thereof, where there is any revenue deputed for
education of children, it shall be applied to this Seminary, and, to supply
that which remains, the Bishop, with four of the Clergy, shall detract a
portion from all the Benefices of the Diocese, and apply simple Benefices also
to this use, and compel those who have Schoole-houses, or other charge to
read or teach in the Schools of the Seminary, by themselves, or by
sufficient substitutes; and Schoolemasters places shall not be given
hereafter, but unto Doctors or Masters in Divinity, or in the Canon law. And
if, in any Province, the Churches be so poor, that a Seminary cannot be
erected in them, one, or more, shall be appointed in the Province, and in the
Churches of the great Diocese the Bishop shall erect one, or more if he
think fit, besides that of the City, which notwithstanding shall depend on
that of the City.

In the end, the Decree, intimating the next Session for the sixteenth of
September, was read, expressing that then the Sacrament of Matrimony was to be
handled, and other things pertaining to the doctrine of Faith, as also the
provisions of Bishoprics, Dignities, and other Benefices, and diverse other
articles of reformation. The Session continued from nine until sixteen a
clock, with great content of the Legates and Popish Prelates, that matters did
pass so quietly, and with such a general consent; And they commended the
Cardinal of Loraine above all, confessing that he had been the most
principal cause of this benefit.

No act of this Council was seen with more desire then this of this Session,
The censure of the acts of this Session.
every one being curious to know what that was which held in contention so many
Prelates in Trent, and all the Courts of Christian Princes in business ten
months together. But it proved to be according to the proverb, The travail
of mountains, and the nativity of a mouse. No man could find how it could
deserve not only so great and long pains of so many great persons, but even
the least employment at all. And those who understood Theology, did desire
that it should be once declared, what the Council did understand by the power
of retaining sins, which was made one part of the Sacerdotall power; because
they had declared the sense of the other, which was to remit sins And others
wondered at the declaration, that the inferior Orders are only degrees unto
the superior, and all unto Priesthood, in regard it does appear, in the
ancient Ecclesiastical Story, that those who were ordained to any ministry
or charge, were, for the most part, perpetually entertained in the same, and
the ascending to an higher degree happened very seldom, and was used only in
case of necessity, or great utility. None of the seven Deacons instituted by
the Apostles, ascended any higher; and in the ancient Church of Rome it self
it does not appear, that the Deacons, whose office was to hear the
confessions of Martyrs, did pass to the title of Priesthood. The ordination of
Saint Ambrose to be a Bishop, of Saint Hierome, Saint Austin, and Saint
Paulinus to be Priests, and of Saint Gregory the Great to be a Deacon is
described, without mention of any passage by other degrees. They did not blame
the use begun in later times, but they marueiled that they did allege it as a
thing always used, whereas the contrary was manifest.

The Decree, that the ministeries of the Orders from a Deacon to an Ostiary
should not be exercised, but by persons promoted to those proper Orders, made
a fair show; but it seemed a thing hard to be observed, that, in no Church
none might ring the bells, or open and shut the doors, but the ordinary
Ostiaries, nor light the lamps, and candles, but the Accolites, who were to
exercise those manual functions, that they might ascend to Priesthood. And it
seemed some contradiction, to have determined absolutely, that those
ministeries should not be exercised but by persons ordained, and afterward
commanded the Prelates to restore them, as much as conveniently they could. For
observing the absolute Decree, it is very necessary; that, where persons
ordained cannot be had for exercise of those functions, they must not be
exercised at all: and if they may be exercised without Orders, in places where
persons ordained cannot be found, the absolute definition might have better
been omitted. In the Decree of the ordination of Priests, it was thought very
convenient to prescribe that condition, that they should he able to teach the
people; but this did not seem very coherent with that other doctrine and use,
that cure of souls is not essential to Priesthood, so that to be able to
teach the people is not necessary to those Priests who mean never to take that
cure upon them. And to make to a necessary condition in the minor orders, to
understand the Latin tongue; was to show that this was not a General Council
of all Christian Nations, in regard this Decree could not be universal, and
bind the Nations of Africa, Asia, and of a great part of Europe, where the
Latin tongue never had place.

The sixth Anathematisme was much noted in Germany; in which an Article of
faith was made of Hierarchy, which word and signification thereof is aliene,
not to say contrary to the holy Scriptures; and though it was somewhat
anciently invented, yet the author is not known; and in case he were, yet he
is an Hyperbolicall writer, not imitated in the use of that word, nor of others
of his invention, by any of the ancients: and following the style of CHRIST our
LORD, and of the holy Apostles, and Primitive Church, it ought to be named not
Hierarchy, but Hierodiaconia, or Hierodoulia. And Peter Paul Vergerius in
Valtelina did make this and other objections against the Vergerius makes
objections against the Council.
doctrine of the Council the subject of his Sermons, relating the contentions
between the Bishops, and detracting as much as he could, not only by words,
but by letters also to the other Protestant and Evangelical Ministers; which
they read in their Churches to the people. And howsoever the Bishop of Como, by
order from the Pope, and the Cardinal Morone, used all means, and in a very
extraordinary manner also, to cause him to depart out of that Country yet they
were not able to effect it.

Concerning the Decree of Residence, of which every one discoursed, and
expected some good resolution, because there was so much spoken and written of
it, tha nothing seemed to be more in voice then that, (...) marueiled that in
the end that was pronounced for a decision of (...) (...) which was plain to
every one, that is, that not to reside was (...), except there were a lawful
cause: as if it were not (...) (...) all by the law of (...) ture, that
whosoever does absent himself from his charge, of what (...) soever it be,
without a lawful cause, does s(...)

The success of this Session to(...) away the indelligence^ held until then^
The Spanish Prelates complain of the Cardinal of Loraine.
between Loraine and the Spaniards. For these complained, that they w(...)
abandoned in the matter of the Institution of Bishops, and of the (...) (...)
which he had very often told them that he was of their opinion, and promised
to labor effectually to cause that doctrine to be decreed without making any
condition. They added that there was no hope he would be constant in any other
promise, and that the Pope by making him believe he should be Legate of
France, had won him. And other things they said, which were little for his
honor. On the other side he justified himself, saying, that the offer was
made unto him to make his friends mistrust him, and that his answer was, that
he would not hearken unto it, before areformation were made in Council.
Notwithstanding it was not believed that he would persevere in the same
opinion, no not so much as in this matter.

The Legates, desirous to finish the Council, did, so soon as the Session was
done, use means to facilitate the residue; which, for matter of faith, was
Indulgences, invocation of Saints, and Purgatory. And to this end they elected
ten Divines, two Generals of Friars, and two for every Prince, that is for
the Pope, France, (of which there were but a few remaining) Spain and
Portugal; charging them to consider how the Protestants opinion in this matter
might briefly be confuted. And themselves being resolved, meant to propose
their own opinions in general Congregation, by which the Canons might be
composed, at the same time when Matrimony should be handled, that they might
quickly dispatch those matters, without hearing the disputes of the Divines, as
formerly they had done.

In matter of reformation they treated with the Cardinal of Loraine, the
Emperors and Spanish Ambassadors, to be content that the reformation The
reformation of Princes.
of Princes might be proposed also: who saying it was fit that abuses should
be removed, wheresoever they were, the Articles were collected, and hope
conceived that all that remained might be decided in one Session only. But
the Spanish Ambassador, for many respects of his King did not like that haste,
and therefore did cross it, with many difficulties. First he proposed, that
it was necessary, before the Council ended, to use means to bring the
Protestants thither, alleging that it would be labor in vain, if the
Decrees were not accepted by them, and that there was no hope they would accept
them, if they were not present in Council. The Legates answered that the Pope
had done for his part whatsoever was fit, wrote letters, and sent express
Nuncij to them all, so that nothing could be done to make their contumacie
more manifest. The Count answered, that he did not desire it should be done in
the name of his Holiness, because that would not only not cause them to come,
but make them more auerse, but in the name of the Council, with convenient
promises, and intercession of the Emperor. Whereunto the Legates replying, that
they would consider on it, they gave an account thereof to the Pope, that he
might use means in Spain to divert such discourses, and to persuade the
ending of the Council. The Count desired also that the Divines might speak
publicly, according to the use, concerning the particulars of Indulgences, and
of the other matters, persuading the Prelates, that the order might not be
changed, nor the reputation of the Council diminished, by omitting the
examination of those things, which had more need of it then any other.

The Pope was much troubled with these aduises, and the rather, because Don
Lewis d' Auila, and Vargas, the Ambassador resident with him, had given their
words, that the King would be content that the Council should end. And calling
them unto him, he made a great complaint of the Counts proposition. For the
Protestants, he said that none did more desire to reduce them to the Church
then he; that the actions of his predecessors for forty years, and his
own, by sending Nuncij expressly to them all, not regarding the indignity to
which he did subject himself and the Apostolic Sea, was a manifest argument
thereof; that he had used the Emperors mediation, and the persuasion of all
Catholic Princes; that he is assured that the hardness of their heart is
voluntary, resolute, and obstinate; and therefore that the reducing of them
was no more to be thought of, it being impossible, but the preservation of the
obedient; that so long as there was any hope to regaine them, the time did
require that all means should be used to please them, but that being lost, it
was necessary to keep the good, to make the division strong, and the parties
irreconciliable, that the affairs of their King did require the same, as he
would perceive too late, in case he should temporize in Flanders, and use
terms of mediocritie, that the King should remember what good effects his
severe executions, at his entrance into Spain, had produced whereas if he had
proceeded remisly, and desired to gain the favor of the Protestants, he
would have felt those accidents which are seen in France. He complained also
that the Count would prescribe a manner of handling matters of Theology, and
determine when they should be well digested. And last of all he told them of
their promise, that the King was content that the Council should end, which
the Count did labor to hinder. The Ambassadors having excused the Count, and
confessed what they had said concerning the Kings pleasure for the end of the
Council, the Pope was satisfied, so that they would be content he should say
so much, where he thought it necessary. Whereunto they consenting, he gave
order to his Nuncio in Spain to complain to the King, and to tell him, that
he could not penetrate the cause, why the Ambassadors of his Majesty in Rome
and Trent should speak diversely, and, which imported more, himself doing what
he could to gratify him, for what cause he should be crossed by his Ministers,
in regard, the Council continuing, he was hindered from doing his Majesty many
favors and graces, that if for his affairs in Flanders, or for the interests
of the Emperor in Germany, he did desire any thing of the Council, he might
know by experience how hard it was to effect it in Trent; that they might
promise themselves any thing from him, and that he was resolute, so soon as
the Council was ended, to send into all Provinces to provide for the particular
necessity of every one, whereas in Trent general provisions only can be
made, which have infinite difficulties, to be fitted to every place.

But the persuasions of the Count in Trent made a division of the Prelates,
some desiring that those matters might be exactly disputed; and the rather,
because very little or nothing was spoken of them by the Schoolmen, and
whereas for other things handled in the Synod there were decisions either of
other Councels, or of Popes, or an uniform consent of Doctors, these were
wholly obscure, and, in case they were not cleared, it would be said that the
Council had failed in the most necessary things. Others said, that if there
were so many difficulties, and contentions in the thing decided already, how
much more might they be feared that (...) these which are full of obscurity,
where there is no sufficient light showed by the Doctors, they might go in
infinitum, because they had a large field, in regard of many abuses which were
crept into them for matter of gain, and of the difficulty which would arise
about the interpretation of the Bulls, especially of the words used in some, of
penalty, and guilt, as also of the manner of taking Indulgences for the dead.
Therefore in these, and the adoration of Saints the use only might be handled,
and the residue omitted, and, for Purgatory, the opinion of the heretics
condemned only; otherwise there would be no end of the Council, nor any
resolution of this difficulty. While these opinions went about, concerning
these matters reserved for the last, the Legates resolved to dispatch that of
Matrimony, and to abbreuiate the time of the Session, and to hold it the 19
of August at the latest. This pleased the Card of Loraine very much: The Card.
of Loraine resolves to go to Rome.
who having received answer out of France, that he should give the Pope
satisfaction in going to Rome, did resolve so to do in the end of that month,
so that the Session were celebrated. And he was forced to join with the Pope
and his adherents; not only in regard of the order received out of France, but
because the Imperialists and Spaniards did mistrust him for the success of the
last Session.

The 22. of July the Anathematismes were given forth, not much differing from
the manner, in which they were established afterward. The greatest variety
was, that until then they had not sufficiently considered of the fifth,
condemning divorces, allowed in the Code of Justinian: which Anathematisme was
aded at the instance of the Cardinal of Loraine, to oppose the opinion of the
Caluinists. And it was easily received, because it was conformeable to the
School doctrine, and the Popes Decrees. But in that of divorce for adultery,
the composers of the Canons did forbear to use the word Anathema, fearing to
condemn that opinion which was of Saint Ambrose, and of many Fathers of the
Greek Church, Notwithstanding the others thinking that it was an Article of
faith, and almost all the Fathers consenting thereunto, the Canon was reformed,
and the Anathema added, condemning those that say, that the bond is dissolved
by adultery, and that either of the parties may contract another Matrimony
whilst the other lives; which Canon received afterward another mutation, as
shall be said in due place. In the Congregations following, the things
proposed were easily dispatched, but almost all the Prelates left those, and
spoke of ^land^stine marriages, though neither the time, nor the place did
comport it, and the difference of opinions therein began to be discovered. In
the Congregation of the four and twentieth day in the morning, the Bishop of
Cortona, Ambassador of the Duke of Florence, was received; who made a short
speech of the devotion of his Prince toward the Apostolic Sea, and favor to
the Synbd: and thanks were given him, In the congregation that night, the
French Ambassadors caused a request to be read in the name of their King, that
children which are in The Ambassador of Florence is received in congregation.
the power of their Parents, might not, without their consent, either many or
betroth themselves, or, if they did, that it should be in the power of the
parents to make void, or ratify the contract, as they pleased. And the same
day the Fathers were admonished to put up in writing to the deputies the abuses
observed by them, in the matter of Matrimony.

The voices being all given concerning the Anathematismes, two Articles were
proposed; the promotion of married persons to holy Orders, and the making void
of clandestine marriages. For the former, the Fathers Two new Articles
concerning married Priests and secret marriages.
did uniformly, and without difficulty, agree on the negative; and the
Archbishop of Prague, and the Bishop of Five Churches, who persuaded them to
think better on it, were scarcely heard. But the other of clandestine
marriage; did not pass so. For one hundred thirty and six did approve the
making it void, fifty seven did contradict, and ten would not declare
themselves. The Decree was composed according to the opinion of the Mayor part,
that howsoever clandestine marriages were good, so long as the Church did not
make them void (and therefore the Synod does anathematise him that thinks
the contrary) yet the Church has always detested them. And now, seeing the
inconveniences, the Synod does determine, that all persons which hereafter
shall either marry or betroth themselves, without the presence of three
witnesses at the least, shall be unable to contract, and whatsoever they do
therein shall be void. And another Decree followed, commanding the Banes, but
concluding, that if there were a necessity to omit them, the marriage might be
made, so that it were in presence of the Parish Priest, and of five witnesses
at the least, publishing the Banes afterward, upon pain of excommunication,
to him that should contract otherwise. But that great number which would make
void the secret marriages, was divided into two parts, some following the
opinion of those Divines who grant power to the Church to make the persons
incapable, and some, those who say it may make the contract void. And the
Legates themselves did differ. Morone was content with any resolution, so that
they might dispatch. Varmiense thought that the Church had no power herein, and
that all marriages, celebrated in what manner soever, with consent of the
persons contracting, are good. Simoneta said, that the distinction of the
contract of Matrimony from matrimony it self, and the giving of power to the
Church over the one, and not over the other, seemed to him sophistical, and
chimericall, and was much inclined not to make any innovation.

Concerning the abuses of Matrimony, many Prelates considered that the causes
to hinder marriages, and to make them void though they were contracted, were so
many, and happened so often, that there were but few not subject to some of
those defects; and (which was more) persons did contract ignorantly; either not
knowing the prohibition, or the fact, or by forgetfulness, in whom, after they
knew the truth, many perturbations and scruples did arise, as also suits and
contentions about the legitimation of the issue, and the dowries. The
impediment of kindred, contracted in baptism, was particularly alleged for a
very great abuse, because in some places twenty or thirty men were invited for
Godfathers, and as many women for Godmothers, between all which, by
Ecclesiastical constitution, a spiritual kindred does arise, who oftentimes,
not knowing one another, do join in marriage, Many thought fit to take away
this impediment; not because it was not well instituted at the first, but for
that, the cause of the institution being ceased, the effect ought to cease
also. They considered that the gossips were then sureties to the Church, for
the faith of the children baptized, and therefore were bound to instruct and
chatechize them, according to their capacity, by which means they conuersed
often, and familiarly with them and their parents as also the gossips amongst
themselves, by which means a certain relation did arise between them, which
was a cause to be reverenced and sufficient to prohibit marriage, as all other
causes to which reverence ought to be borne. But afterward, when use bad
abolished whatsoever was real herein, and the Godfather did seldom see his
God-childe and had no care at all of his education, the cause of reverence
ceasing, the relation ought not to have place.

Likewise the impediment of Affinity by fornication, nullifying marriages
until the fourth degree, it being a matter of secrecy, did ensnare many,
who, understanding the truth after the marriage, were filled with
perturbations. For kindred of Consanguinity, and Affinity, it was said, that the
same account being now not made of it, as formerly was, and, amongst great
personages, scarce memory kept of the fourth degree, that might be omitted
also. Wherein there was much disputation. Some thought, that as seven degrees
of kindred did hinder marriage for many hundred years, and Innocentius the
third took away three of them at once, restrayning the impediment unto the
fourth, alleging very common reasons, that there are four Elements, four
humors of man's body, so, it appearing now that four cannot be observed
without many inconveniences, the impediments may be more justly restrained to
the third. Others contradicted, and said, that so they might hereafter proceed
further, and at the last come to that of Leuiticus; which would cherish the
opinion of the Lutherans; and therefore did conclude that it was dangerous to
innonate. Which opinion, after much examination, did prevail. Some thought
that the impediment of fornication, being secret, ought wholly to beetaken
away: But they prevailed not, because there appeared an inconvenience, in
regard that many things which first are secret are published afterward.

Many were of opinion that no nouitie should be made in these prohibitions,
but power granted to Bishops to dispense, and maintained that it was better to
give it to them then to the court, because they knowing, better the merits of
the fact, and the causes, may exercise distributive justice more exactly
herein. They said, the court of Rome does often give dispensations to persons
not known, who obtain them by deceit, and that diligence cannot be used in
regard of the distance of the Countries. besides the world being scandalized,
thinking they are not given but for money, that imfamie ought to be taken away.
The Spaniards, and Frenchmen labored effectually herein; but the Italians
said they did it to make themselves all Popes, and not to acknowledge the
Apostolic Sea, and that the difficulty of sending to Rome, and negotiating
the expedition with pains and cost was profitable, because by that means, few
marriages were contracted in degrees prohibited; whereas, if by granting power
to Bishops there were a^facility herein, the prohibitions would, in a short
time, come to nothing, and so the Lutheranes would gain their opinion. Here
upon a common incl^natio^ grew, that none should be dispensed with, in these
prohibitions, but for a very urgent cause; into which opinion those who could
not prevail for the Bishops did enter also, thinking it was more for their
credit, if that which was forbid to them, were not granted to others. After
many discourses in the Congregations, it was resolved to restrain spiritual
kindred; and affinity by marriage and fornication, and to confine the
dispensutions also with in the limits which shall be spoken of in reciting the
Decrees.

There was some contention also about the ninth point, in which Superiors
Whether one may be forbid or forced to marry.
are forbid to force their subjects to marry, with threats and punishments
naming the Emperor, and Kings. Gulielmus Cassodorus, Bishop of Bacellona,
opposed, and said, that it could not be presupposed, that great Princes would
meddle in marriages but for great causes, and for the public good; that
threats and punishments are then bad, when they are used contrary to order of
law, but penal precepts, conformable to the law, are just, and can not be
reprehended. If there be any case (he said) in which the Superior may justly
command a marriage, he may force the celebration of it, by penal commands,
alleading also that it is a thing decided by the Divines, that just fear does
not cause an inuoluntary action. He desired that lawful causes might be
excepted, and those Superiors only comprehended in the Decree, who do compel
against justice, and order of the law, saying, that many cases may occur, in
which the necessity of the public good does require the celebration of a
marriage, which he that would say, that a prince could not command, and cause,
by compulsion, to be celebrated, should offend against the law of God, and
man. To this reason he added an example, that, in the year 1556. the second of
January, Paul the 4. sent a monitorie to Dame Joan of Arragon wife of Ascanius
Columna, that she should not marry any of her daughters without his leave, or,
if she did, the matrimony, though consummated, should be void; which that most
wise and sincere Pope would not have done, if Princes had not power to marry
their subjects, in case of the public good.

In the point of not mentioning Princes he was followed by many, and the name
of the Emperor, Kings, and Princes, was taken away. But for the residue he
was much opposed, with this reason only, that Matrimony is an holy thing, in
which the Secular power has no authority, and if there be any lawful cause to
compel any to marry, it must be done by the Ecclesiastical power only. The
relation of the monitory of Paul, raised a great wispering in the Congregation,
and afterward gave matter of diverse discourses. Some said he did it, not as
Prince, but as Pope, and that he had reason to do it, in regard Ascanius
Columna being a traitor unto him, he would not have him get new adherences, by
marriage of his daughters, by which he might be confirmed in his contumacie.
Others said, that the Pope, as Vicar of CHRIST, has no traitors intemporall
matters, and that the opinion of those who think that marriages may be made
void by Apostolic authority is not well grounded, except it be by course of
law, or general canons, but not for particular persons, and that, for this,
neither reason can be brought, nor example found. Some denied, that one might
ground himself upon such actions of popes, which show rather how far the
abuse of their power can stretch, then how far the lawful use thereof is
extended.

And there was no less difficulty, because the Decree did comprehend fathers,
mothers, and other domestical Superiors, who might compel their children,
especially daughters, to marry: and it was considered, that to come to
excommunication, in cases of this kind, was very hard. Yet those who before had
defended, that children were bound to obey their Fathers in this particular,
did maintain it. A temper was proposed, that having first commanded politic
Superiors upon pain of excommunication, domestical Superiors should be
admonished not to compel their children against their will. But the same men
still opposed, and said, it was not just to take from fathers that power which
God has given them. And, in the end, it was resolved to take this part quite
away. But the bishop of Barcellona, and some few besides, were not of the same
opinion, as to say, that as the authority of fathers and other domestical
Superiors over marriages was manifest, or, at the least, not to be doubted,
and therefore not to be spoken of, so the same consideration ought to be had
of the authority of Politic Superiors.

The Congregations, assembled to discuss this point, being ended, the last
whereof was the last of Iulie, they began to speak privately of secret
marriage. And both parties continuing in their own opinions, some said that the
difficulty does presuppose a doctrine of faith, and therefore cannot be
determined, being contradicted by a notable number. This troubled them much
who desired they should be made void, and thought that they were wholly
barred from all possibility to obtain it.

At this time a difficulty arose, though private, yet very contentious. A
difficulty about censuring the Archbishop of Toledo.
For the Deputies concerning the Index, having given the work of Bartholomeus
Caranza, Archbishop of Toledo, to some Divines, to be perused, and they
having related that nothing worthy of censure was found in it, the Congregation
did approve it, and made public faith thereof at the petition of his Agent.
But because the book, and the author were under the censure of the
Inquisition of Spain, the Secretary Castellunne complained to the Count of
Luna, and the Count to the Fathers of that Congregation, desiring a
retractation. The fathers not inclining to revoke the Decree, because they
thought it just, the bishop of Lerida, either moved by the Count, or for some
other cause, began to speak against it, and to tax it, alleging places of
the book, which, by a bad interpretation, did seem to deserve censure, and,
which was more, touched the judgment and conscience of those Bishops. The Arch
bishop of Prague, the chief of that Congregation, in defense of himself and
his colleagues, complained to the Legates, desiring they would show themselves
in the business, and protesting not to assist in any public act, until the
Congregation had due satisfaction. The Cardinal Morone interposed, and made
peace, with these conditions, that no other copy of the faith made should be
given, and that Lerida should give satisfaction of words to the Congregation,
and to Prague in particular, and that all should be forgotten on both sides.
And the Count of Luna, with irresistable entreaties, got the testimony out of
the hands of the Agent of Toledo: and so this stir was appeased.

The Legates gave the Articles of reformation to the Ambassadors, in number
thirty eight, that they might commend to their consideration what pleased them,
before they were given to the Fathers to be discussed; which 38. Articles of
Reformation.
Articles were divided, and one half allotted for the next Session, and the
other for the Session following, for the reasons which shall be related
hereafter. The Count of Luna persuaded the other Ambassadors, to demand, that
deputies might be elected for every Nation, to consider what was fit to be
reformed, because the model given by the Legates, made for the interests of
Rome, could not be fitted to other countries. But the Cardinal of Loraine, and
the French and Portugal Ambassadors contradicted, alleging that every one
might speak his opinion concerning the Articles proposed, and propose others,
if there were cause, so that there was no need to give this distaste to the
Pope, and the Legates, who could not endure to hear speech of Nations in
Council. And the Imperialists coming to this opinion also, the Count retired,
but said that diverse considerations ought to be had concerning those which
were proposed.

The Cardinal of Loraine counseled the Legates to facilitate the business,
and to take away those points which might seem to cause contradiction, adding,
that the fewer matters were handled, the better it would be; whereat Varmiense
seeming to wonder, Loraine asked him, whether he marueiled The Card of Loraine
excuses the change of his mind.
because he saw not in him that heat and desire of reformation, as he had
made demonstration of at other times: and he added, that his desire was the
same, and had the same disposition of mind to employ all his force therein,
but that experience has taught him, that not only nothing perfect or
ordinary can be done in Council, but that every enterprise in that business
turns to the worst. He persuaded also the Count of Luna not to seek to
hinder the reformation totally, but if there were any thing which did not fully
satisfy him, he should make the partcular known, and he would labor that
contentment should be given him.

The Emperors Ambassadors first of all gave their answer in writing, the one
and thirtieth of July; in which they said, that, desiring a general
reformation in the head and members, and having read the Articles exhibited,
they had added some things, and noted others, desiring they might be corrected
accordingly, and discussed by the Fathers. And because the Emperor, with the
Ambassadors of many Princes, did hold a Diet in Vienna, to handle many things
concerning the Council, they hoped they would take it in good part, if, having
received a new commandment from his Majesty, they should present other
considerations also; and that, for the present, they added eight Articles to
those proposed by them. 1 That a serious, and The Imperialists add 8. Articles
more.
durable reformation of the Conclaue might be made in Council. 2. That
alienation of Ecclesiastical goods, without the free and firm consent of the
Chapter, might be prohibited, and especially in the Roman Church. 3. That
Commendaes, and Coadiutories, with future succession, might be taken away. 4.
That Schools and Universities might be reformed. 5. That the Provincial
Councels may be enjoined to correct the Statutes of all the Chapters; as also
that authority may be given to reform Missals, Breuidries, Agends, and
Graduals, not in Rome only, but in all Churches. 6. That Laymen may not be
cited to Rome in the first instance. 7. That causes may not be removed from
the Secular Court to the Ecclesiastical, upon pretense of justice denied,
before the truth of the supplication be known. 8. That Conseruators may not
be given in profane matters.

And, concerning the Articles exhibited by the Legates, they noted many things,
part whereof, as being but of small weight, it will not be amiss to omit.
Those of importance were. That Cardinals might be chosen out of all Nations,
that the Universal Bishop might be created by Electors of all Countries. That
the provisions against Pensions, Reseruations and Regresses, should be
extended, not only to the future, but to those also that are past. That the
kissing of the Gospel should not be taken from the Emperor and Kings, who
ought to defend it. That it may be declared what secular affairs are
prohibited to Ecclesiastiques, that that which is determined in the decree of
Residence may not be crossed. That, in the Article of not laying taxes upon the
Ecclesiastiques, the cause of Subsidy against the Turks and other Infidels
may be excepted, The proposition, though it were of hard digestion, did not so
much trouble the Legates, as the doubt moved, that some extraordinary demand
for change of Rites, received by the Church of Rome, and relaxation of Precepts
de iure Positiuo, might come from the Diet in Vienna.

The third of August the Frenchmen gave their observations, the essential
whereof were. That the number of Cardinals might not exceed four and The
articles exhibited by the Frenchmen.
twenty, and that no more might be created, until they were reduced to that
paucitie. That they may be elected out of all Kingdoms and Provinces. That
there may not be two of one Diocese, nor more then eight of one Nation. That
they may not be less then thirty years of age. That the nephew or brother
of the Pope, or of any Cardinal living, may not be chosen. That Bishoprics
may not be given them, that they may the better assist the Pope, and, that
their dignity being equal, their reuenew may be equal also. That none may
have more then one Benefice, and that the difference, unknown to the good ages
of the world, of Benefices simple, and with cure, compatible, and incompatible,
may be taken away, and that he that has two at this present, may choose and
keep one only, and that within a short time. That resignations in favor may
be quite taken away. That it may not be prohibited to confer Benefices only
upon those who have not the language of the Country, because the Laws of
France forbid all strangers, without exception, to have Offices, or Benefices
in the Kingdom. That the criminal causes of Bishops may not be judged out of
the kingdom, in regard of the ancient privilege of France, that none may be
judged out of the Kingdom, neither voluntarily, nor by compulsion. That power
may be restored to Bishops to absolve from all cases, without exception. That,
to take away suits for Benefices, preuentions, resignations in favor, mandats,
expectatiues, and other unlawful ways to obtain them, may be removed. That
the prohibition, that the Clergy may not meddle in secular matters, may be
expounded, so that they may abstain from all functions, which are not holy,
Ecclesiastical, and proper to their order. That the Pensions, already
imposed, may be taken away and abrogated. That, in causes of Patronage, the
ancient institution in France may not be changed, to give sentence in the
possessorie, for him who is in the last possession, and in the petitorie, for
him who has a lawful title, or a long possession. That the laws of France
concerning Ecclesiastical causes may not be prejudiced, that the possessorie
may beiudged by the Kings Judges, and the petitorie by the Ecclesiastiques, but
not out of the Kingdom. That none may be assumed to be Canon in a Cathedral
Church, before he be five and thirty years old. That, for the Article
containing the reformation of Princes, the Clergy may be first entirely
reformed in this Session, and that which belongs to the dignity and
authority of Kings and Princes, may be deferred until the next, and that
nothing may be decreed therein, before they the Ambassadors be heard, who
have given account to the King of those and other things, which they had to
propose. But howsoever they proposed these difficult matters, yet they said
indifferently to all, and with affectation, that it might be published, that
they would not be earnest in any thing, but that which concerns the rights
and Secular affairs of their Kingdom. The Venetian Ambassadors proposed,
that the Article of Patronage might be so accommodated, that it might not give
occasion of nouitie, concerning those who belong to their Republique, and
Prince. The Ambassadors also of Sauoy and Tuscane made the same instances.

At this time the Imperialists received commission from their Prince, to
mediate, as they did, with the Legates, that, in the reuiew of the Index of the
books, mention might not be made of the Recesses, of the Diets in Germany,
formerly prohibited by Paul 4: and the Emperors order was somewhat sharp,
that, in stead of handling of Ecclesiastical matters, they would not give a
form to the policy of Germany, and occasion to the people who are governed
by such Laws, to aliene themselves from the Church of Rome against their
wills. Answer was made, that the Bishop of Prague, one of them, who was chief
of the Congregation, might know whether any speech were made of it, and if
there was not, his Majesty might trust to his Ambassador, who, in all causes
concerning him, should be favored both by them, and by the Pope.

The seventh day the Spanish Ambassador presented his writing; in which he
said he was well satisfied with all the Articles, and would not demand any
thing, but only the change of some words, which seemed unto him to be
superfluous, or that they may be expounded better. And he touched almost all
things which did enlarge the authority of Bishops, so moderating the words,
that the alteration did not seem to be substantial, but that indeed he did
rather restrain then augment it. He made request also that they would treat
of the Conclaue, saying, that the King did much desire it; as also that the
part concerning fecular Princes might be deferred until another Session. After
he had exhibited his writing, he desired the Legates, that, so soon as voices
were given concerning the things proposed, they would depute Fathers of every
Nation, to collect what they should think necessary for reformation of their
Countries, that all might be determined with a general satisfaction. Morone
answered in the name of all, that they could not consent to proceed otherwise
then they had done hitherto in other matters. Wherein many things being said by
both parties, by the Count to intimate the Council was in servitude, and by
the Cardinal to show the liberty, Morone added, that no man could complain
that he was hindered in his liberty of speaking. The other replied, that he
could not believe that any thing of worth had been done by them, and did not
forbear to tell him, that there was a great murmuring in the Council for the
particular congregations assembled a few days since, and that it was supposed
that they were made to get voices. The Legates said, it was their duty, in the
diversity of opinions, to understand the truth, and to accommodate the
differences, that matters may be determined with union. The Count replied,
that it was well if it were so, but that Italians only were called, except two
or three Spaniards, and as many Frenchmen, who differed from others of their
Nations. The Legates defended themselves, that they were not called in
proportion, because there were an hundred and fifty Italians in Council, and
not above threescore of all other Nations. The Count seemed to be satisfied,
and, being parted, said to his Prelates, that the Legates having begun a
discourse to show that esteem ought not to be held of Nations, had concluded
it, showing that they had ever held esteem of them.

The next day, the Legates and two Cardinals consulted about the aduertisments
of the Ambassadors, and how to amend the Articles of reformation, to be given
to the Fathers and of the manner to be held in speaking on them. In which
Loraine having received new letters from France, and order, that both himself,
and all the other French Prelates should favor the Popes affairs, wholly bent
to satisfy the Legates, persuaded them not to suffer so many points to be
handled at once, but to divide them into parts, according to the subjects, and
when one part was ended, to propose another, and to hasten the Session,
omitting all the things which had any difficulty, and concluding those only,
in which all, or the greatest part would agree, and particularly not to
propose, in the beginning, those in which the Ambassadors did not consent.

The eleventh day the Congregations began to be celebrated, to establish the
Anathematismes, and decrees of Matrimony. The proposition of the Frenchmen
was handled, to make marriages void, contracted by children, without consent of
parents, in whose power they are. And the first that gave voice, did differ in
opinion. The Cardinal of Loraine did approve it, alleging places of the
Scripture which give to the Fathers power to marry their children, examples of
marriages of the Patriarchs Isaac and Jacob, adding the Imperial laws of the
Institutions and the Code, made by Christian Princes of famous memory; as also
the Canon under the name of Euaristus, and another of the Council of Carthage,
produced by Gratian. And he related the inconveniences arising herein. The
Arcbishop of Otranto was of the contrary opinion; saying, that this was to give
authority to Laymen over the Sacraments, and make them believe that the
authority in making them void, does depend on the paternall, not on the
Ecclesiastical* Besides, it would be a decree directly contrary to the holy
Scripture, which expressly faith that a man shall leave father and mother, and
cleave to his wife. And, for inconveniences, it will cause more, referring the
sons to their fathers in matters of conscience. And if a father would not
consent to the marriage of a son, who has not the gift of continency, he
would be infinitely perplexed. Nine and twenty spoke in that Congregation, and
twenty were of opinion to omit that matter. Of the others, some approved the
decree so generally, and some restrained it in sons to the age of twenty
years, and of eighteen in daughters.

In the end of the Congregation, the Venetian Ambassadors caused a The
Venetian Ambassadors do exhibit a petition concerning divorces in the Greek
Church.
demand of theirs to be read, concerning the Anathematismes of divorces;
which did continue in substance. That their Republique having the kingdoms of
Cyprus, Candie, Corfue, Zante, and Cephalonia, inhabited by Grecians, who have
from all antiquity used to put away their wives for fornication, and take
another, for which Rite, well known to the whole Church, they were never
condemned, nor reprehended by any Council, it was not just to condemn them in
absence, having not been called to this Council. Therefore that the Fathers
would be pleased so to accommodate the Canons concerning this matter, that
they may not do them any prejudice. The Legates having received this demand,
did cause it to be proposed, without making any particular examination of it;
which caused a whispering amongst the Fathers. And in the next Congregation,
some of them touched that string, repeating the same, that it was not just to
condemn the Grecians, not heard, nor cited, The Archbishop of Prague opposed,
and said, that, by the general citation of all Christians, they also were
understood to be cited by the Pope, To which the Cardinal of Varmia added,
that his Holiness had sent particularly to inuit the Duke of Muscouia: and
howsoever he knew not well that he had invited other of the Greek Church in
special, yet it ought to be presupposed that the whole nation was called,
even by special inuitation, besides, the general intimation was sufficient,
as the Archbishop had said. Whereupon the Legates gave order to the Secretary,
to take that particular out of the petition of those Ambassadors, that is,
that the Grecians have not been called. But as well in regard of their
proposition, as of the opinion of Saint Ambrose, they would not use the word
Anathema, but found a temper, that is, not to condemn those that say that
Matrimony may be dissolved for adultery, and another contracted, as Saint
Ambrose and some Greek Fathers did say, and as the Eastern Church does
practice, but to anathematize those who say, the Church may err, teaching that
the Matrimonial bond is not broken by adultery, and that it is not lawful to
contract another, as the Lutherans do maintain. This form was generally
approved, and many did praise it, and say, that the Council was assembled only
to condemn the opinions of the Protestants, and not those of other Nations.
Yet some doubted how one could be condemned for saying the Church did err in
teaching an article, the contrary whereof was not condemned. But seeing that it
was favored by so many, they contented themselves.

And because the proposition about the marriage of children did bring in a
general question, whether the Church could make marriages void, all began to
speak of it, howsoever it had been spoken of before, the voices collected and
the Decree composed accordingly, as has been said. Cardinal Madruccio
maintained the negative, and alleged many reasons and arguments, saying, that
he would oppose in Session also. And Varmiense, and Simoneta, spoke as much.
But Laynez, General of the Jesuits, having dispersed a writing against the
irritation, made a greater confusion, and gave occasion to many to be more
constant and courageous in the other opinion. And in the Congregations they
began to answer one another reasons, with such prolixity, that the Legates
were almost of opinion to omit that matter, for fear it would hinder the
Session, and the rather, because the Bishop of Sulmona did first make a
question in public Congregation, whether that matter of irritation did belong
to doctrine, or reformation. The Bishop of Segouia, who spoke after him, made a
long discourse, to show, that it could not be reduced to doctrine, and
therefore the mayor part having approved the irritation, the Decree was as
good as established. The Bishop of Modena followed the same opinion, adding,
that to handle that matter by way of doctrine, would take away all means of
making any reformation whatsoever. For in all Articles the same difficulty
might be moved, whether the Church has authority in that particular which is
handled: which would be as much as to put Arms into the hands of heretics,
and to take all authority from the Church, because it would not be fit to
meddle with that, to which it might be doubted whether their authority did
extend. He complianed, that that question was moved by him, who ought to hold
it, as clear and decided. This opinion pleased many, who said that it never
ought to be disputed whether the Church can do any thing or not, but to take
it for granted, that as all power in heaven and earth is given to CHRIST, so
the Bishop of Rome, his Vicar, has as much, which being communicated by him to
the general Council, it must be defended that it wants no power to do
whatsoever is profitable, without disputing whether it concern doctrine or
not. It pleased those also who desired the dispatch of the Council, perceiving
that the difficulty promoted might hinder the ending thereof, and cause a
scandal. And the Legates and principal Italians used persuasions that it
might not be spoken of, in regard there was no cause to treat of it with the
French men or the Spaniards, who did all agree in opinion, that secret marriages
ought to be made void. And many assemblies of Prelates were made both amongst
themselves, and with the Legates, to this end: and it was resolved that the
decree should not only not be placed with the doctrine, that it might not
seem to be a part of it, but also that it should not be so much as in a
Chapter apart, lest it might be doubted whether it was held to be such, or
not, but that it should be inferted amongst the articles of Reformation. And
to remove all difficulty the more, it was resolved also so to compose the
decree, that they might not seem to handle that matter purposely, but to
mingle it with the first article of the abuses, which was a provision to
restore the Banes, ordained by Innocentius the third, which had been
intermitted, and in decreeing as well this, as all the other conditions
appropriated for the public form of Matrimony, it should be added, in two
words only, as it were incidently, that all contracts made otherwise were
void, and so pass it over, and say no more. And the Decree was composed
according to this sense, and reformed often, always very intricately, and the
later had ever more difficulty then the former. And amongst other alterations,
this point, established before, as has been said, was changed, that the
presence of three witnesses was sufficient for absolute validity, and, in stead
of one witness, it was substituted, that every Matrimony should be void,
contracted without the presence of the Priest; a thing which did much exalt the
Clergy, seeing that so principal an action, in Political and Economicall
administration, which until then had been only in the hands of those to whom
it belonged, came to be in the power of the Ecclesiastical order, there
remaining no means to contract Matrimony, if two Priests, that is the Parish
Priest, and the Bishop interested for some respects, shall refuse to afford
their presence. I have not found in the memorials who was Author of this great
advantage; as many other particulars of importance are hid from me also,
whereof I would willingly make mention. I ought not to defraud Francis
Beaupere, Bishop of Metz, of his due honor, who, thinking it impossible to
reduce this Decree into such a form as might give satisfaction to various
opinions, and to represent them with reseruations and nice distinctions, gave
this form to it, in which it now is; which as it is subject to diverse
interpretations, so it may be fitted to diverse opinions: and being proposed in
Congregation, it had one hundred thirty and three voices in favor of it, and
nine and fifty did expressly contradict.

The Legates informed the Pope of all, and demanded order what they should do,
and whether the contradiction of such a number, it being impossible to
persuade them, should hinder the Decree, or not. There was a A vain fear of
the plague in Trent.
report, which caused some fear amongst the Fathers, that the plague was in
Ispruc, and many would have been gone, if the Cardinal Morone, who thought that
matters were in good term to finish the Council, had not used means to know
the certainty; which was, that in Sborri, a place twenty miles distant from
Ispruc, many of those poor men who labored in the mines, died of a contagious
sickness, by an infection taken under the ground, and that those of Ispruc had
provided so well, as that there was no danger the disease would come thither,
which also did decrease in Sborri.

A great stir happened likewise amongst the Italian Prelates, especially
those of the kingdom of Naples, and Dukedom of Milan. For the Catholic A
stir about the Inquisition in Milan.
King moved the Pope, the month before, to place the Inquisition in the state
of Milan, as it is in Spain, and to make a Spanish Prelate the Head of it,
alleging, that in regard of the vicinity of places infected, it was necessary
to use exquisite diligence for the service of God, and defense of religion: and
notice came that the Pope had proposed it in consistory and did show (howsoever
it was contradicted by some Cardinals) some inclination to it, at the
persuasion of Cardinal Carpi, who told him, that it was good for the keeping
of the city of Milan in devotion toward the Apostolic Sea, which office he
performed, for a secret hope, cherished by the Spanish Ambassador, that, by
this means, he should gain the favor of the King of Spain to make him
Pope. The cities of that state sent Sforza Morone to his Holiness, and Cesare
Tauerna, and Princisuale Bisosto to the Catholic King, and Sforza Briuio to
the Council. This last to pray the Prelates, and Cardinals of that state, to
have compassion on their Country, which being brought into misery, by
excessive impositions, would be wholly dissolved by this, which goes beyond
all, many citizens preparing themselves to abandon the Country, knowing well
that that office had never proceeded in Spain to heal the conscience, but
very often to empty the purse, and for many other mundane respects also. And
if the Inquisitors, under the Kings own eyes do domineere so rigidly over
their own Country men, how much more will they do it in Milan, where remedy
will hardly be found against them, toward persons whom they care less for.
Briuio declared how the Cities were generally perplexed with this ill news,
desiring the favor of the Prelates. This did more displease the Prelates, then
the Seculars, and those of the Kingdom did doubt, that, the yoke being put
upon the state of Milan, themselves should not be able to keep it from their
own necks, as they had done before. The Prelates of Lombardie did assemble,
and resolve to write letters to the Pope, and to Cardinal Borromeo, subscribed
by them all. They told the Cardinal it would be a prejudice to him, to whom
it belonged, as Archbishop, to be the chief in that office. And they said to
the Pope, that there were not such causes and respects as are in Spain, to put
so rigorous an Inquisition amongst them; which, besides the evident ruin which
it will bring to that state, will be a great prejudice to the holy Sea. For he
could not refuse to place it in Naples also; which would give occasion to other
Princes of Italy to desire the like. And that Inquisition having authority*
over the Prelates, the holy Sea would have but little obedience from them,
because they would be forced to seek the favor of secular Princes, to whom by
this means they would be subject; so that, in occasion of a new Council, he
should have but few Prelates whom he might trust, and command freely. Neither
ought he to believe that which the Spaniards might say, that the Inquisition
of Milan should be subject to that of Rome; as does appear by their
proceeding in the cause of the Archbishop of Toledo, ever refusing to send the
Processes which have been demanded from Rome: as also do the Inquisitors of
the Kingdom of Sicilie, who depend on Spain. The Prelates, not content with
this and other reasons alleged unto the Cardinals, and others of Rome, by
every one to those with whom he had any power, did persuade also that some
word might be inserted in the Decrees of the Council, in favor of the
Bishops, to exempt or secure them, and that the manner of making processes in
that matter might be decreed, which if it could not be done in the first
Session, it might in the next. Morone gave them hope of satisfaction. And this
accident did trouble the Council very much, because many were interested in
it. But news came, a few days after, that the Duke of Sessa had found the
general distaste it gave, and, for some reports which came unto him, doubting
that the Duchy of Milan would follow the example of the Flemings, who became
Gueux (for so the reformists are called in those Countries) by the attempt of
putting the Inquisition upon them, knowing it was not a fit time to handle that
business, stopped their Ambassadors, promising to use means that the State
should have satisfaction. And, but for this, some ma^er of great moment had
ensued.

The Pope seeing the answers of the Ambassadors, made to the Articles proposed
by the Legates, was more confirmed in opinion, that it was necessary to finish
the Council; otherwise he thought some great scandal would follow: and the
inco^ugniences foreseen^ he esteemed but light, and feared some greater not
thought on. But seeing the difficulty to make an end, The Pope labo^^eth to
finish the Council.
without determining the things for which the Council was called, if the
Princes were not content, he resolved to treat with all of them herein.
Therefore he wrote concerning this to his Nuncij in Germany, France, and
Spain, and spoke of it to all the Ambassadors residing with him, and to the
Ministers of the Princes of Italy also, using this concept, that to him that
assisted to finish the Council, he should be more obliged, then if he had
assisted him with arms, in some great necessity. To the Legates he answered
that they should principally aim at the conclusion of the Council, and should
grant whatsoever was necessary to obtain it, admitting as few prejudicial
things as was possible: all which he did refer to their wisdom who were in
the business, so that the Council might end with speed.

But the Legates, having together with some of the Prelates, considered the
propositions of the Ambassadors concerning the reformation, and, And so do
the Legates.
at their instance, omitted six of the Articles proposed, and reduced them to
the number of two and thirty, the one and twentieth of August gave them to the
Prelates to be discussed. Loraine made particular congregations of the
Frenchmen to examine them: which did please the Legates, not only because
they were assured he had the same intention as they had, but because they were
desirous to accommodate them to the common satisfaction, before they were
spoken of in general Congregation. And they gave order to the Archbishop of
Otranto, and Taranto, and to the Bishop of Parma, to assemble their adherents
in their private houses, to examine them, and search what would give a general
contentment. This continuing some days, the Spaniards, and some Italians, who
were not called, murmured very much, resolving to make a mutiny, and to oppose.

The Archbishop of Otranto went to the Catholic Ambassador; who The Spanish
Ambassador is displeased with the priu^te congregations.
admonished him, and said, he was not willing to write to the King those
things that would not please him; and told him that those particular
congregations were so well understood by all Prelates, that he could not choose
but give his Majesty an account of it. He excused himself, and said all was
for a good end, to facilitate the matter, and to provide against the
difficulties before the general Congregation. And the Bishop of Ischia coming
just then to speak with the Count, from the Cardinal Morone, he told him the
same, that those private Congregations did displease him, and that his opinion
was they could not be for any other end then to cause difficulties, and to
omit part of the Articles, that the Session might sooner be celebrated*
Notwithstanding the Legates, aiming more to satisfy the Prelates, then the
Ambassador, having considered on the things observed in those particular
congregations, held them for good aduertisements, and did alter and compose the
Decrees, according to them.

But as they were about to give them forth, so corrected, the Archbishop of
Prague, upon an instruction newly brought unto him by a Currier from the
Emperor, did instantly desire the Legates, not to propose the Reformation of
Secular Princes, until they had answer from his Imperial Majesty, and
afterward was seconded by the Count of Luna. The Legates were much perplexed
herewith, considering that France first, and now the Emperor, and King of
Spain were not satisfied. And, on the other side, the common desire of all the
Fathers was, that the reformation should be made all together. Whereupon being
assembled in the house of Nauaggero, who was sick, they proposed, whether all
the reformation should be put off, The Reformation of Princes, and some
Articles of the other Reformation are differed.
or only that part which concerns Princes. Loraine was of opinion that only
this should be deferred, and the residue proposed, which would have pleased,
but that they doubted they should make the Prelates afraid, that the secular
reformation should be wholly omitted, whereby they might take occasion to
exclaim both privately, and in the public Congregations. Whereupon they
resolved to satisfy the Ambassadors, deferring the reformation of Princes;
and, that the Prelates might not take it ill, to defer half at the least of
the other Articles, and those the most important, giving forth the rest, as
they had corrected them, that the voices might be given, and the Session
celebrated, though the difficulty about the Decree of clandestine marriages
did make them doubt. The sixth of September one and twenty Articles of
reformation were given forth, with order to begin the congregations on the
morrow. In the composition of these, Cardinal Simoneta, and his adherents,
used all their Art and ingenie, to proceed with such a temper, that the Court
of Rome might not be prejudiced, and the world which desired reformation, and
the Ambassadors who did solicit it, satisfied, and, which was of most
importance, the Bishops contented. For being desirous to finish the Council,
it was necessary that they should willingly concur.

The BB. had all one aim, to have the government more free: which they thought
they should obtain, if three provisions were made. One, that Parish Priests
should depend on them; which would happen, if the collation of Benefices with
cure were given unto them, which point, besides other difficulties, did touch
Reseruations, and the rules of the Chancerie, which was to discover a great
part of the secrets of the Court of Rome. For it did plainly appear, that a
gate would be opened to take all collations from them, which was as much as to
take from them all power, and life it self. Therefore they came to a temper,
to hold the Reseruations firm, but to make the Bishops. Patrons to give the
Cure to whom they please, upon pretense of examination. And, to this end the
18. Article was framed, with exquisite artifice, as every one may see; which,
with a fair show, gives power to the Bishop to bestow the Benefice on whom he
pleases, and yet takes no profit from the Court. Another point was of
exemptions, wherein they had formerly received many satisfactions, and now the
11. Article was added for a total complement. The exemptions of the regular
Orders remained; and the Bishops were in hope, either to take them quite away,
or, at the least, so to moderate them, that they should be subject unto them,
in a great part.

Ever since the beginning of the year, there was a congregation erected about
the reformation of the regulars, which, by the assistance of the Generals, and
advice of other religious persons in Council, had made a great progress, and
established good decrees, without contradiction; for outwardly, and in show the
Regulars did not only not abhor, but desire them; but secretly they made
account to interpret and practice them as they listed: yea they thought it good
to have a strict reformation in writing; as indeed all The Reformation of the
Regulars.
their rules are one thing as they are written, and another as they are
observed. But when they began to speak of moderating their exemptions, and
subiecting them, at least in part, to the Bishops, the Generals, and the
Divines of the Orders did mutiny all together; and treating with the
Ambassadors of Princes, they showed them what service they did to people,
Cities, and public Gouernements, offering, that if any abuse whatsoever were
amongst them, it should be amended; that they would be contented, with any
reformation, and returning to their gouernements, would execute it with more
severity then it was ordained; but to subject the Monasteries to the
Ordinaries, was absolutely to put them out of order. For they, not
understanding a regular life, nor the severity of discipline wherewith it is
maintained, would disorder every thing. The Bishops said, that a privilege is
ever with detriment and derogation of the Law, and the reuocation favorable,
reducing things to their own nature; and therefore to take them away was not
to innouate, but to restore things to their ancient state. On the other side it
was answered, that the exemption of the Regulars was so well prescribed by
antiquity, that it could no more be called a privilege, but common law; that
when the Monasteries were subject to Bishops, the Ecclesiastical discipline
both in them and their Canons, was so well governed, and so severe, that it
merited to superintend over all; that if they will restore antiquity, they must
do it in all parts, that if Bishops would return to be as they were in those
times, Monasteries might be subjected to them now, as then they were, but it
was not just that they should demand the superintendency over Monasteries,
before they made themselves to be such as was necessary the Rectors of a
regular life should be. The Regulars were favored by the Ambassadors, and by
the Legates, for the interests of the Court, which would have lost a great
instrument, if they had not depended wholly on it. And they wanted not the
favor of some Prelates, who confessed their reasons were good. This contention
continued certain days, but did abate by little and little, because the
Bishops who had moved it, did discover every day more difficulty in it.

The third Article was concerning the impediments which Bishops receive from
secular Magistrates, who, to preserve the temporal power, do not suffer them
to exercise that absolute dominion which they would, not only over the Clergy,
but over the people. To this effect, the reformation of Princes was made,
whereof we have spoken already, and will hereafter, more at large. This part,
and others which cohere with it, were deferred until another Session, because
it was thought a difficult matter, and that it would have much prolonged the
business. But the Bishops did expound this delay as if they had meant to have
done nothing in it. And they complained, that, purposing to reform the whole
Church, the Clergy only should be reformed. The Legates used all means to
appease them; showing; that not this only was deferred, but other matters also,
which were necessary to be handled, promising that the delay was only to
proceed with more maturitie, and that they should certainly be discussed;
that it was necessary to facilitate the dispatch of that Session, which should
be a preparatorie for the other, in which all that remains should be handled.
The Legates were all bent to hold the Session at the time appointed, thinking it
necessary for the quick dispatch of the Council: for which the Pope, by every
ordinary Currier, and sometimes by an extraordinary, did solicit them, that
he might be set at liberty from it. In the Congregation of the seventh of
September Friar Martinus Roias, Ambassador for the Hospitalaries of S. John of
Jerusalem, now called Knights of Malta, was received; which was deferred by
reason of the great opposition of some principal Bishops, that he might not
have The Ambassador of the Knights of Malta is received.
place above them, saying it was not just that a religion of Friars should
precede the whole body of so many Prelates. But, finally, the matter was
accorded, and published in Congregation, that place was given him amongst the
Ambassadors, without prejudice of the Prelates, who pretend precedence. The
Ambassador made an Oration, and excused their grand Master, who did not send to
Trent sooner, by reason of the rumors of the Turkish Armada, and His Oration.
of the incommodities they received by Dragut, the Pyrate. He exhorted the
Fathers to remedy the present evils, which also did not a little touch the
Friars of their religion, who are not idle members of the Christian
Commonwealth. He persuaded the extirpation of heresies, offering that their
grand Master, and Society, would take upon them the patronage and defense of
the cause, spending not their goods only, but their life and blood. He
related the beginning of their religion, which was forty years before
Godfrey did go to the conquest of the holy land; the heroical works done by
their ancesters, the like whereof they could not perform now, because they
were spoiled of a great part of their lands, and possessions; that they are a
Barracado of Sicilie and Italy aginst the Barbarians. Therefore he prayed the
Fathers to take notice of the antiquity, nobility, merits, and dangers of
that Society, and to cause their possessions, and Commendaes, usurped from
them, to be restored, and that it might be decreed by the Council, that they
should be conferred upon none but of their order, ratifying the immunities and
privileges thereof. The Speaker received the excuse in the name of the Synod,
and promised that they would have that consideration, as his demand, for the
preservation of the Commendaes and privileges of that religion, did deserve.
But howsoever he made the same instance afterward to the Legates, and the
relation to the Pope, his Holiness would never answer any thing, but that it
belonged to him only to make provision herein, and that he would do it, in
time convenient.

In that Congregation and those that followed, voices were given concerning the
21 Articles of reformation, proposed; in which though there was nothing of
great moment, yet for the order of the story, and declaration of many things
which happened afterward, it is not amiss to make mention of the principal.
In the first, which was of the election of Bishops, it being said that there
was an obligation to provide the most worthy, the difficulty formerly moved
did return, that it would bind very straightly the hands, as of the Pope in
collations, so of kings and Princes in the nominations, if they were tied to
nominate one person only. And the greater part was of opinion to remove the
comparatiue, and to say only, that they were bound to provide a worthy person.
But on the other side, some considered that the Fathers have always used this
manner of speech, that In the p(...) mo(...) Pr(...) there (...) (...) worthy
(...) to be preferred.
the most worthy should be preferred, and alleged the reason, that he cannot
be without blame who prefers the least worthy, though fit, before an other
of more desert. There was much disputation herein; but, a means was found to
compose all, leaving, in show, the word, more worthy, and speaking first in
positive terms, and passing afterward to comparatiues, that the provision
might be understood to be free; and so that form was used which is now in
Print: that is, that there is an obligation to provide good and fit Pastors,
and that he does mortally sin who does not prefer the more worthy, and more
profitable to the Church; leaving a natural exposition to these words, that
many are more worthy and more profitable, in respect of others, who are less;
in which compass the will of him that is to provide has a large field.

In the third Article there was some difficulty about the visitation of
Archbishops. These alleged the Canons, and ancient customs, that the
Suffragans did swear obedience to the Metropolitans, and were wholly subject
to their visitation, correction, and government, and would not consent that
their authority should be prejudiced, and, amongst these, the Patriarch of
Venice was exceeding warm. On the contrary, the Bishops, especially those of
the Kingdom of Naples, labored to mainetaine the custom, by which they
differ not in authority, but in name only. But the number of the Bishops being
great, and of the Archbishops small, and the Legates and Papalins favoring
those, that these might not, by granting authority and reputation by their
subjection, exempt themselves more from subjection to the Court, they would
obtain nothing, but one word only of satisfaction; that is, that they were
not forbid to visit, when there was cause, approved by the Provincial
Council. Whereof the Archbishops did complain, and say, it was just nothing.
For there being one Archbishop in the Provincial Council, and many Bishops,
it is certain that the cause would never be approved.

The sixth Article was concerning the exemption of Chapters of Cathedrals, from
Episcopal authority; in which the Spanish Bishops, and, in contemplation of
them, the Count of Luna having great interest, many restrictions and
ampliations were made, but not such as did content the Prelates howsoever they
were often changed, and in the end deferred until another Session, as shall be
said,

The thirteenth Article, concerning Pensions, spoke generally that no Benefice
should be burdened with greater Pensions then of the third part of the fruits,
or of their value, conformeable to that which was used when the Pensions began.
This seem (...) convenient to the Cardinal of Loraine, because there are some
very rich benefices which could not be said to be burdened, if they should pay
two thirds, and others so poor, that they cannot bear any pension at all. And
therefore he said, that this was not a just distribution, and that it was
better to prohibit, that Bishopriques of a thousand crowns and benefices of
an hundred, should be burdened, and concerning the others, to say nothing.
This opinion prevailed to the great content of the Legates, and Papalins, for
the absolute power which was left to the Pope in good Benefices, Those who
demanded a moderation of the pensions of reseruations of fruits formerly
imposed of accesses and regresses, made many and long discourses. But the
difficulty compelled every one to bury all in silence, for the confusion and
disorders which were foreseen would ensue For all would have excused
themselnes that they would not resign their Benefices without those
conditions, and those especially who had paid composition to the Chamber for
the obtaining of such graces, would have complained that the graces should be
taken from them, and the money not restored; the restitution wereof was a thing
impossible. Finally every one thought it enough to provide for the future,
without thinking of that which is past.

The fourteenth Article, which did detest and forbid all payment of part of the
fruits for the collation, provision or possession, did much please the French
men. They said the payment of Annats was taken away by those words. And indeed
he that does consider, and examine them, cannot give them any other sense,
howsoever the event has showed, that they have not been so understood in Rome.
In the seventeenth, in which plurality of Benefices is forbid, and dualtie
granted when one is not sufficient, some desired an addition, that they should
not be distant above a days journey, that the incumbent might make part of his
residence in each of them. But they could not obtain it, neither did they much
labor, foreseeing that that addition, as also the whole Article, would not be
executed but against those of the poorer sort only. The eighteenth, howsoever
it did please in that it did restore in effect the provision of Benefices with
cure to Bishops; yet the Frenchmen did oppose against the form of the
examination, because it did seem to bind the Bishops hands to strait. Their
reason was, that, by that concourse, too open and to public a way was given to
ambition; that antiquity made profession to give benefices to him that refused
them, whereas, by this new manner they would not only procure them but profess
themselves to be worthy of them.

In the nineteenth, the Bishop of Conimbria spoke at large against the
Expectatiues or Aduowsons, because they did make the incumbents death to be
desired, and sometimes procured. And for mental Reseruations, he said they
were frauds, and near thefts, and that it was better to leave to the Pope the
whole collation of all Benefices, then to use such unworthy Artifices, as was
to give virtue to a secret thought, not published, and to leave a suspicion
that it was not a reservation in the mind, but an invention after the fact.
But Simoneta crossed his discourse, saying, that it was good to reprehend
abuses for which no provision was determined, that it might be procured, but
seeing a common disposition to the remedy, and the Decree composed already,
it was sufficient to establish it, by consenting, without multiplying words of
reprehension, ambitiously, when there was no need.

The eleventh of September, the French Ambassadors received letters from the
King, of the eight and twentieth of August; in which he signified, that he
had received the Articles, imparted to them by the Legates, and did see that
matters were far from the hope he conceived, because to establish these was
to pare the Kings nails, and to make those of the Ecclesiastiques The French
King writes to Trent, concerning the Reformation of Princes.
longer. Which because he would not endure, he commanded to represent to the
Fathers with wisdom, dexterity, and courage, that as every Prince, so long
as the Council does proceed aright, is bound to favor it with all heat of
zeal, so to cover the sore, which causes the present evils, and to make a
greater, with the prejudice of Kings, is far from that which was expected.
That he saw how lightly they passed over the reformation of the Clergy, who
only have given the scandals to those that have separated themselves from the
Romish Church, and how they assume authority to take away the rights and
prerogatives of Kings, to break their Constitutions and Customs, prescribed
by time out of mind, to anathematize and excommunicate Kings and Princes, all
tending to sow disobedience, sedition, and rebellion of subjects against their
Sovereigns; whereas it is manifest to the whole world, that the power of the
Fathers, and of the Council, extends only to the reformation of the Clergy,
without touching matters of State, or of Secular power and jurisdiction, which
is wholly distinct from the Ecclesiastical, and that always, when the Fathers
and Councels have presumed to handle such things, Kings and Princes have made
resistance; whence many seditions and wars, to the great damage of
Christendom, have proceeded. That they should exhort them to be careful in
that which belonged to their charge, and was necessary for the present
occasions, and to leave those attempts, which, having never done good
heretofore, would produce a worse effect in those times. The King added, that,
if the Fathers would not retire upon these persuasions, they, the Ambassadors,
should make a strong opposition; which being done, without expecting their
judgment, or referring themselves to their discretion, they should depart, and
go to Venice, letting the French Prelates know that they ought to continue in
Council, and endeavor to do God service, being assured, that, in case any
thing shall be treated against the rights, prerogatives and privileges of the
King and French Church, they will not fail to absent themselves, as his
Majesty would have them do. He wrote also to the Cardinal of Loraine in the
same manner, as he gave order should be told the other Prelates; that is, that
he should not approve any thing with his presence, that should be handled in
Council against the Kings rights, but should absent himself, if he shall see
that the Fathers do sally without the limits of their charge, referring him,
for the residue, to the instructions sent to the Ambassadors.

The Ambassadors having received these letters, and consulted of all with the
Cardinal of Loraine, by his advice, did impart them to the Legates, and caused
a voice thereof to pass in the Council, that the Bishops, hearing of it, might
desist from demanding the reformation of Princes, and themselves might not have
occasion to oppose, and protest. But this brought forth a contrary effect.
For the Bishops who were quiet, in regard of the expectation that, when the
Session was ended, the reformation of Princes should be proposed, understanding
this news, and perceiving that the aim was to pass it over in silence, began
to treat among themselves, not to proceed any further in the acts of the
council, if that also which concerns Princes were not given forth; and put
in consultation, together with the other articles. And they proceeded so far
herein, that a hundred of them gave A combination of an hundred Prelates
concerning the Reformation of Princes.
their word one to another to be constant in this resolution; and having
drawn a writing to this purpose, which was subscribed by all, they went to the
Legates, requiring that the articles of the Reformation of Princes might be
proposed and given to the Fathers, declaring, as it were by way of
protestation, that they would not proceed, nor conclude any thing in the
others, but together with these. The Legates gave good words, purposing, and
hoping to divert the humor. And, in this trouble, the Count of Luna appeared
again, and demanded, as he had done before, a reuocation of the Decree,
propenentibus Legatis, that every Prelate might propose what he thought worthy
of reformation: and demanded also that the sixth Article might be amended, to
please the Spanish Prelates, taking quite away the exemptions of the Chapters
of the Canons of Cathedral Churches, and subiecting them to the Bishop. And
there being in Trenta Proctor of those Chapters, who labored to the contrary,
he commanded him to speak no more in it.

Things standing in these terms, the Legates thought to hold the Session with
the matter of matrimony only. But it was opposed, that the difficulties of
Clandestine marriage were not well digested as yet, and that the Ambassadors
would suspect, that if the Session were held, and the reformation not spoken
of, all hope was lost that it would ever be handled. And it being evident that
no part of the reformation could be in order, at the time determined for the
Session, they proposed, in the general Congregation of the fifteenth of the
month, to prolong it until the eleventh of November; and so it was resolved.
The cause of this long delay was, that the Pope, seeing the difficulties to
finish the Council, arising partly by the controversies of the Prelates, and
partly by the oppositions of the Spanish Ambassador, put all hope of
ouercomming them in the Cardinal of Loraine. Whereupon The Popes confidence is
only in the Cardinal of Loraine.
he wrote to the Legates, that, in case the Session could not be held at the
time appointed, it should be deferred for two months. And this he did that
the Cardinal might have time to come unto him, that he might treat with him,
of that which was impossible to do by letters or messengers, and that, by this
means, every preuious disposition for the conclusion of the Council might be
prepared. Until that time the Pope had no other determination then to finish
the Synod, but he firmly resolved then, that, if that The Pope is resolved
by all means to be freed from the Council.
could not be done, there being a necessity to rid himself of it, he would
by all means dissolve it. He sent the Legates faculty to make a suspension,
or a translation, as they thought best, by advice of the Fathers, and wrote
unto them that he would, by all means, be freed from it, by an end of it, if
it were possible, which he did much desire, but, if it could not be, they
should use one of those two remedies: and therefore that they should endeavor
to make some occasion arise, that they might be requested to do it, that he
might not seem to be the author; as also that they should solicit the
journey of Loraine; who parted the next day after the resolution was made to
prolong the Session.

All the distastes of France for matter of the Council were ceased in the Pope,
though he received continual troubles from that kingdom. He was much vexed
with the daily instance, made unto him, that he would not consent to the
alienation of 100000. crowns of Ecclesiastical goods, and by the The Cardinal
of Loraine goes to Rome.
continual detraction which he understood the Hugonots used against him, and
the Apostolic Sea. And particularly, he was grieved at the Cardinal
Chastillion, who, as has been said, laid aside the clericall habit, and
called himself Count of Beauvois, and, understanding that the Pope in
Consistory had deprived him of the Cap; the last of May, he resumed the habit
of a The Cardinal Chastillion mocketh the Pope.
Cardinal, and was married in it: and in a great solemnity in Roan, the
thirteenth of August, when the King was declared in Parliament to be of age,
he appeared in the solemnity, in the same habit, in presence of all the
French Nobility; which was generally thought to be a great contempt of the
Papal dignity. Wherewith the Pope being moved, he made his deprivation And
is deprived by him.
to be printed at this time, and many copies to be dispersed in France.

The Popes Nuncio resident in France, came to Rome, a few days before the
arrival of the Cardinal of Loraine; who was dispatched by the Queen, to
propose to the Pope a conference between his Holiness, the Emperor, and the
King of Spain; and the King her son, in whose train her self would be. The
proposition did not displease the Pope, because it might serve him to finish
the Council, but he thought the execution was impossible. And he promised to
send Nuncij to the Emperor and King of Spain, to this end; and appointed the
Bishop of Vintimiglia for Spain, whom he therefore recalled from Trent, and
the Bishop of Ischia for the Emperor.

To the Cardinal of Loraine he made excessive demonstrations of honor, lodged
him in the palace, (a thing unusual) went publicly to visit How the
cardinal of Loraine was treated in Rome
him in his lodging. Their discourses were partly about the Conference, though
the Cardinal did not think it feasible. They treated about the sale of a
100000. crowns which whether the Cardinal did promote or draw back, was not
discovered. But the Pope having, upon a new instance made by the French
Ambassador, answered, that he did refer it to the Council, many thought it
to be an excuse invented by Loraine. But the principal business was about
finishing the Synod, which the Pope thought to be of greatest importance, and
knew to be most difficult. Wherein there was great confidence between them.
For the Cardinal discovered to him that his interests were turned the same
way, and that, since the death of his brothers, he saw plainly, that there was
no means to maintain Religion in France, and his house, but his conjunction
with the Apostolic Sea. The Pope promised to make Cardinals at his instance,
and gave him such words as showed an intention to make him his Successor in
the Popedom: and that they might have more credit, he made show, that the
greatness of that Cardinal was profitable for the ends he had, in aiming at
some matter of great moment. And the conclusion of his discourses to every one
was; We must shut up the Council, provide money, and afterward that will
happen which shall please GOD.

The Pope told the Cardinal, that as often as he heard of the discords, and
delays, which some did plot, he thought to suspend the Council; but changed
his opinion, for fear of the scandal which the world would take, which knew
not the truth: and that sometimes he thought this the greatest evil that
could occur, and sometimes judged it less then the danger in which his
authority was, which was the mark at which the Princes, Bishops, and all
sorts of persons did shoot: but finally, that it was necessary to lay aside all
respects, and come to this resolution. The Cardinal dissuaded him, showing
that this was not a medicine to cure the evil, but to defer it only, with
greater danger, because he would, in a short time, have new demands to restore
it, and plots would be laid by those who were not satisfied with him; and that
to suspend was as difficult as to finish it, For there was no need to allege
causes for this, it being sufficient to bring things to the conclusion, and so
to end, whereas the suspension did require an allegation of the cause, whereof
every one would speak his opinion; that it was more honorable to finish, then
to suspend it; and he used other reasons, which made the Pope know that his
counsel was good and faithful. And afterward he advised him to deal
plainly with the King of Spain.

Therefore calling the Ambassadors of that King, he complained, in grievous
terms, saying, that he had called the Council, upon hope and promise, that
the affairs of the Papacy would have been favored by his Majesty, to whom
he had given all imaginable satisfaction, and would give him more, according to
his demands, if the impediments, caused by the Council, were taken away; that
he had not demanded any favor of his Majesty and his Ministers, but the
ending of the Council, for the service of GOD, and the public good, and
therein was ill used, though it was rather a loss to the King, then a benefit.
Therefore he was forced to hold esteem of him by whom he was esteemed, and to
cast himself into the arms of those that would assist him. And he dispatched
also a Currier to the King, with a letter of his own hand, complaining of the
offices, done by his Ambassador and Prelates in Trent, contrary to his
Ministers in Rome, each party saying, he does the commission of his Majesty.
He showed that it was convenient for the service of GOD, of the Apostolic
Sea, and of his Majesty, that the Council should end; and in conclusion, he
desired him to declare himself plainly whether he would assist him herein,
or not. The Cardinal did counsel him also not to be auerse from granting to
the Emperor the Cup, and marriage of Priests, by which means he should gain
both him and the king of the Romans, not to consent only to the ending of the
Council, but to be favorable, and to promote it. He told him likewise, that
it was necessary to omit the reformation of Princes, because it would prolong
the business more then any thing besides.

After the departure of Loraine, nine French Bishops parted from Trent, and
returned home, so that there remained but eight, besides six who went with the
Cardinal to Rome. This departure caused an opinion, that they were recalled,
and that there was a purpose, at the persuasion of the Hugonots to recall the
others, that, the end of the Council approaching, no French men might be
present when they should be anathematized. The Legates, to facilitate the
difficulties of secret marriage, caused the Divines who were maintainers and
opposers of it, to make a public disputation. This was never done before in
any occurrence, and then did so little good, that every one was more confirmed
in his own opinion. After this, to reassume the Congregations, and to handle
the reformation, they gave forth the residue of the Articles, the last of
which was the reformation of Princes, being forced thereunto by the mutiny of
the Prelates.

Of which matter concerning Princes having often made mention, and now being
come to a place, in which it is necessary to recite it, for the understanding
of the things that follow, it must be known that it did contain a propheme,
with thirteen Articles, and a very pregnant Epilogue; the substance whereof
was. That the Synod, besides the things constituted concerning Ecclesiastical
persons, has thought fit to correct the abuses of the Seculars, brought in
against the immunitie of the Church, hoping that the Princes will be content,
and cause due obedience to be rendered to the Clergy. And therefore it does
admonish them to cause their magistrates, officers, and temporal Lords, to
yield that obedience to the Pope and constitutions of the Council, which
themselves are bound to perform. And, for facilitation hereof, it does renew
some things decreed by the holy Canons, and Imperial The Articles of the
Reformation of Princes.
laws, in favor of Ecclesiastical immunitie, which ought to be observed
upon pain of Anathema. 1. That Ecclesiastical persons may not be judged in a
secular Court, howsoever there may be doubt of the title of the Clerkeship, or
themselves consent, or have renounced the things obtained, or for any cause
whatsoever, though under pretense of public utility, or service of the King,
nor shall be proceeded against there, in cause of murder, if it be not truly
and properly a murder, and notoriously known, nor in other cases permitted by
the law, without the declaration of the law going before. 2. That in causes
spiritual, of matrimony, heresy, patronage, beneficial, civil, criminal,
and mixed, belonging, in what manner soever, to the Ecclesiastical Court, as
well over persons, as over goods, tithes, fourths, and other portions
appertaining to the Church, or over beneficial Patrimonies, Ecclesiastical
Fees, temporal jurisdiction of Churches, the temporal Judges shall not
meddle, neither in the Petitorie nor in the Possessorie, taking away all
appeal upon pretense of justice denied, or as from an abuse, or because the
things obtained are renounced: and those who shall have recourse to the Secular
magistrate, in the causes aforesaid, shall be excommunicated, and deprived of
their rights, belonging unto them in these things. And this shall be observed
also in causes depending in what instance soever. 3. That the Seculars shall
not appoint Judges in causes Ecclesiastical, though they have Apostolic
authority, or a custom time out of mind: and the Clerks who shall receive
such offices from the Lakes, though by virtue of any privilege whatsoever,
shall be suspended from their orders deprived of their Benefices, and offices,
and made incapable of them. 4. That the Secular shall not command the
Ecclesiastical Judge, not to excommunicate without license, or to revoke or
suspend the Excommunication denounced, nor forbid him to examine, cite and
condemn, or to have Sergeants, or Ministers for execution. 5. That neither the
Emperor, Kings, nor any Prince whatsoever, shall make Edicts or Constitutions,
in what manner soever, concerning Ecclesiastical causes, or persons, nor
meddle with their persons, causes, jurisdictions, or tribunals, no not in the
Inquisition, but shall be bound to afford the seculat Arm to Ecclesiastical
Judges. 6. That the temporal jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastikes, though with
mere and mixed power, shall not be disturbed, nor their subjects drawn to the
Secular tribunals, in causes temporal. 7. That no prince or magistrate shall
promise by Brief, or other writing, or give hope to any to have a Benefice
within their dominions, nor procure it from the Prelates, or Chapters of
Regulars, and he that shall obtain it by that means, shall be deprived, and
yncapeable. 8. That they shall not meddle with the fruits of Benefices Vacant,
under pretense of custody or patronage, or protection, or of withstanding
discords, nor shall place there either Bayliefes, or Vicars: and the Seculars
who shall accept such offices, and custodies, shall be excommunicated, and the
Clerks suspended from their Orders, and deprived of their Benefices. 9. That
the Ecclesiastikes shall not be forced to pay taxes, gabels, eithes, passages,
subsidies, though in the name of gift or loan, either in respect of the Church
goods, and of their Patrimonial, except in Provinces, where by ancient custom,
the Ecclesiastikes themselves do assist in public Parliaments, to impose
Subsidies both upon the Laity and the Clergy, to make war against the
infidels, or for other urgent necessities. 10. That they shall not meddle with
Ecclesiastical goods, mooueable or immooueable, vassallages, tenths or other
rights, nor in the goods of communities or private men, over which the Church
has any right: nor shall rent out the depasturing or herbage which grows in
the lands and possessions of the Church. 11, That the letters, sentences and
citations of Judges Ecclesiastical, especially of the Court of Rome, so soon
as they be exhibited, shall be intimated, without exception, published, and
executed, neither shall it be necessary to require consent or license, which
is called Exequatur, or Placet, or by any other name either for this, or for
taking possession of Benefices, though upon pretense of withstanding falsehoods,
and violences, except in fortresses and those Benefices in which Princes are
acknowledged by reason of the temporalitie, and in case there shall be doubt
of falsitie, or of some great scandal or tumult, the Bishop, as the Popes
delegate shall constitute what he thinks needful. 12. That Princes and
Magistrates shall not lodge their officers, servants, soldiers, horses or
dogs, in the houses or Monasteries of the Ecclesiastikes, nor take any thing
from them for their food or passage. 13. And if any Kingdom, Province, or
place shall pretend not to be bound to any of the things aforesaid, by virtue
of privileges from the Apostolic Sea which are in actual use, the
privileges shall be exhibited to the Pope, within a year after the end of
the Council, which shall be confirmed by him, according to the merits of the
Kingdoms or Provinces, and, in case they be not exhibited before the end of
the year, they shall be understood to be of no force. And, for the Epilogue
there was an ad(...)tion to all Prindes to have in veneration the things which
concern the Clergy, as peculiar to God, and not to suffer them to be
offended by others, renewing all the constitutions of Popes and holy Canons, in
favor of Ecclesiastical immunitie, commanding under pain of Anathema, that
neither directly nor indirectly; under any pre^ence whatsoever, any thing be
constituted, or executed against the persons or goods of the Clergy, or
against their liberty, any privileges or exemptions, though immemoriall
notwithstanding.

And this is it which was first imparted to the Ambassadors, and by each of
them, sent to their Princes, whereupon the French King gave the order to his
Ambassadors before mentioned, And the Emperor having seen them wrote to the
Cardinal Morone, that he could not possibly assent, either as Emperor, Are
distasteful to the Emperor.
or as Archduke, that they should speak in Council of reforming the
jurisdiction of Princes, nor to take from them authority to receive assistance
and contributions from the Clergy, putting him in mind, that all the former
evils did arise from the oppressions attempted by the Ecclesiastikes against
people and Princes. That they should beware not to provoke them more, and cause
greater inconveniences to arise.

After Loraine was departed, the French Ambassadors put their protestation in
order, to make use of it if need were. In the Congregation of the two and
twentieth of September one of the Fathers made a long speech to show. that the
cause of all deformation proceeded from Princes; that they had more need of
reformation; that the Articles were already in order, and was now time to
propose them, that they might not vanish to nothing by delays. After he had
spoken, the Ambassador de Ferrieres made a long querulous The speech of de
Ferrieres.
Oration, or, as the Frenchmen say, a complaint. The contents whereof, in the
principal points, were. That they might say to the Fathers as the Ambassadors
of the Jews did to the Priests. Ought we also to continue fasting and
lamenting: That there are more then 150. years part since the most Christian
Kings have demanded of the Popes a reformation of the Ecclesiastical
discipline; that for this end only they have sent Ambassadors to the Synods, of
Constance, Basil, and the Lateran, to the first of Trent, and finally to this
second. What their demands were, John Gerson, Ambassador in that of Constance,
the Orations of Petrus Danesius, Ambassador in the first of Trent, of Guido
Faber, and of the Cardinal of Loraine in this second, do testify: in which
nothing was demanded but the reformation of the manners of the ministers of the
Church; and notwithstanding this they must still fast and lament, not seventy
years, but two hundred, and GOD grant they be not three hundred, and many
more. And if any should say, that satisfaction has been gives them, by
Decrees and Anathematismes, they did not think that this was to satisfy, to
give one thing in payment for another. If it shall be said that they ought to
be satisfied with a great bundle of reformations proposed the month before,
they had spoken their opinion concerning that, and sent it to the King, who had
answered, that he saw few things in it befitting the ancient discipline, but
many things contrary. That that is not the plaster of Isaias, to heal the
wound, but of Ezekiel, to make it raw, though healed before. That these
additions of excommunicating and anathematizing Princes, was without example in
the ancient Church, and did make a way to rebellion; and all the Articles
concerning the reformation of Kings and Princes, have no aim but to take away
the liberty of the French Church, and offend the Majesty of the most
Christian Kings, who, by the example of Constantine, Justinian, and other.
Emperors have made many Ecclesiastical laws, which have not only not
displeased the Popes, but they have inserted some of them in their Decrees, and
judged Charles the Great, and Lewis the ninth, principal authors of them,
worthy of the name of Saints. He added, taht the Bishops had, with them,
governed the Church of France, not only since the times of the Pragmatique, or
Concordate, but four hundred years and more before the book of the
Decretals; and that these laws have been defended and renewed by the later
Kings, since that the Decretals, substituted in place of them, have derogated
from them in the times following. That the King, being now of age, would
reduce those laws, and the liberty of the French Church into observation,
because there is nothing in them contrary to the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, to the ancient Decrees of Popes, nor to the Councels of the Church
universal. He said moreover that those laws do not prohibit Bishops to
reside all the year, and to preach every day, not only nine months, and in
the feasts, as was decreed in the last Session; nor forbid them to live in
sobriety and piety, and having the use only, and not the benefit of the
revenues, to distribute them, or rather to render them to the poor, who are
owners of them. And he proceeded in naming other things of the Council, with
the like ironicall manner, that he seemed to jest at them. He added, that the
power given by GOD to the King, the laws of France, and the liberty of the
French Church, have always forbid Pensions, Resignations in favor or with
Regresse, plurality of Benefices, Annats, Preuentions, and to litigate for the
Possessorie before any but the Kings Judges, or for the propriety, or other
cause, civil or criminal, out of France, and forbid also the hindering of
appeals, as from abuse, or to hinder that the King, Founder and Patron of
almost all the Churches of France, may not make use of the goods and revenues,
though Ecclesiastical, of his Subjects, for instant and urgent necessity of
the Commonwealth. He said afterward, that the King marueiled at two things.
One, that they, the Fathers, adorned with so great Ecclesiastical power in the
ministry of GOD, assembled only to restore Ecclesiastical discipline, not
regarding this, should bind themselves to reform those whom they ought to
obey, though they were stiffenecked. Another, that they should think they can
and ought, without any admonition, excommunicate and anathematise Kings and
Princes, which are given by GOD to men, which ought not to be done to any
ordinary man, though perseuering in a most grievous offense. He said, that
Michael, the Archangel, durst not curse the Devil, or Micheas, or Daniel, the
most wicked Kings, and yet they, the Fathers, were wholly conversant in
maledictions against Kings and Princes, and against the most Christian, if he
will defend the laws of his ancestors, and the liberty of the Gallicane
Church. His conclusion was, that the King did desire them not to decree any
thing against those (...), or if they should, that he commanded his
Ambassadors to oppose the Decrees, as (...) they did oppose them. But if,
(...)ting the Princes they would attend seriously to that which all the world
expectch, it would be most (...) (...)ble to the King, who did command them,
the Ambassador(...) to (...) that (...) he spoke in the Kings name. Afterward
he did (...) the heaven, earth; and the Fathers, to consider whether the King^
demand were just, whether it were honest for them to make orders for themselves
throughout the whole world; whether this were a ^^me to take compassion, not
upon the Church, nor upon France, but upon themselves, the Fathers, their
dignity, reputation, and (...)s, which cannot do preserved but by the Arts by
which they were gained in the beginning; that in so great confusions they must
be wary, and not cry when CHRIST comes, s^nd Us into the heard of (...)*
that if they would restore the Church to the ancient reputation, comp(...) the
adversaries to repentance, and reform Princes, they should follow the example
of Ezekias, who did not imitate his father, nor his first, second, third, and
fourth grandfather, who were imperfect, but went higher to the imitation of
his perfect ancestors; so it was not fit at that time to respect the next
predecessors, though very learned, but to ascend as far as Ambrose,
Augustine, and Chrysostom, who overcame the heretics, not by arming Princes
to the war, themselves in the mean while picking their nails at home, but
with prayers, good life, and sincere preaching. For they, having framed
themselves first like Ambrose, Austine, and Chrysostom, will make the Princes
also to become Theodosii, Honorij, Arcadij, Valentiniani, and Gratiani; which
he said they hoped for, and prayed God it might be so; and here he ended. The
Oration, when it was pronounced, did anger very much, not only the Papalins,
but the other Prelates more, and Frenchmen also: Is censured.
and, when it was ended, there was such a whispering, that it was necessary to
finish the Congregation. Some did tax it of heresy; and others said, it was
much to be suspected, at the least; and others, that it was offensive to godly
ears. They said, he had taken occasion to do it, in absence of the Cardinal
of Loraine, who would never have endured those terms, and that his end was to
dissolve the Council, that he did attribute to Kings more then belongs to
them; that he inferred that the Popes authority is not necessary for the using
of Church goods; that he made the French King like to the Queen of England.
But nothing did so much offend, as that he said that the authority of the
French Kings over persons and goods Ecclesiastical, was not founded upon the
Pragmatique, Concordates, and privileges given by Popes, but upon the law of
Nature, holy Scripture, ancient Councels, and laws of the Christian Emperors.

The French Ambassadors were reprehended also, because they did not follow the
steps of the Emperors and Spanish Ambassadors, who, though they had the same
interests, made not such a commotion, because they knew there was no reason for
it. De Ferrieres defended himself, and said, that the Legates had promised the
Cardinal of Loraine, that this matter should not be spoken of, but with such
moderation, as that it should not touch the affairs of France, which was not
performed; that the Kings instruction had been, imparted to the Cardinal,
who, if he had been present, would not only have consented to, but counseled
Protestation; that those were great Ignorantes, who having seen nothing but
the Decretals, Laws of four hundred years, did think that there were (...)
Ecclesiastical laws before them; that if any would reform the King by the
Decretals, he would reform them by the Decrees, and lead them also to more
ancient times, not only of Saint Austine, but of the Apostles also; that he
did not make the French King as the Queen of England, but did oppose them, who
have begun long since to enlarge their own authority, by di(...)ing the
Kings; that if those Articles did so much damnifie the Emperor, and Catholic
King; as they do France; they would never have been proposed, and therefore
he was not to take example by those, who have not equal interests. The
Archbishop of Sant, and the Abbat of Claraual were distasted most of all, who
went up and down, saying, that the Ambassadors had done ill to protest, and
that their end was to make a confusion, and give occasion for a National
Council in France; that they were men not well affected, creatures of the King
of Navarre, sent by him to the Council, for his own deseignes, had protested
without the Kings commission and that it was fit to make them show their
instructions and to frame an Inquisition against them, as not having a good
opinion in matter of faith. Where in great differences did arise between the
Ambassadors and them. The next day the Ambassadors gave the King an account of
the causes why they had deferred the protestation until then, and how they
were forced, at that time, to come unto it, adding, that they would defer the
registring of it in the acts of the Council, until his Majesty had seen it,
and commanded them what they should do.

The Legates not having a copy of the Oration made a collection of it by the
memory of those who had beeene most attentive, to send it to the Pope; of which
de Ferrieres, having gotten a copy, complained, that many things were
expressed against his intention, and in particular, where he named
Ecclesiastical laws, it was repeated, spiritual laws, and that Kings might
take Church goods at their pleasure, whereas he had said only for necessary
cause. By this he was forced to give forth his Oration, and sent a copy of it
to Rome, to the Cardinal of Loraine, excusing himself for not having used
words of such acrimony as he was commanded in the last instructions, and in the
first, which are reconfirmed in those; adding also that he thought it necessary
to obey the King, and was not willing to undergo the reprehensions of the
Counselors of Parliament, who would have taxed him, if in a General Council,
matters of so great importance had been determined against that which has
been by them so exactly maintained; besides, the Kings authority, which he
defended, having been vpheld four hundred years by the Kingdom of France,
against the war, in opposition of it, made by the Court of Rome, it was not
just that the Fathers of the Council, the greater part of whom are Courtiers,
should be Judges of the ancient differences, which the kingdom has with that
Court. He gave a copy of the oration to the Ambassadors also, and to as many
as did desire it, and some said, that he had pronounced it otherwise then it
was written. Whereunto he replied, that that could not be said by any that
had any mean understanding of the Latin, and that, howsoever it was the same
pronounced, and written, yet if they thought otherwise, they must remember that
the style of the Synod was never to judge of things as they were delivered in
voice, but as they were exhibited in writing, and therefore they should move no
controversy herein, or, if they would, himself was to be believed before any
other.

The oration being published, it was answered in the name of the Synod, And
answered.
by a namelesse man. He said, that the French Ambassadors had reason to
compare themselves to the Ambassadors of the Jews, because they had both made
an unjust complaint against GOD; and that the same answer might be given them,
which the Prophet gave to that people, in the name of GOD, that if they had
fasted and lamented so many years, or ate and drunk, all was for their own
interests; that the Kings of France were cause of all the abuses of that
Kingdom, by naming to Bishoprics unlearned persons, ignorant in
Ecclesiastical discipline, and more inclined to a lascivious then to a
religious life; that the Frenchmen would not have a resolution in the
controversies of faith, that Christian doctrine might always be uncertain,
and place might be given to new masters, who might rub the itching ears of
that unquiet Nation, that they spared not to say in those turbulent times, that
it belonged to the King, though very young as yet, to dispose of all the
government of the Church; that they had said, with asseueration, that beneficed
men had only the use of the revenues, whereas in France time out of mind they
have carried themselves for Vsufructuaries, making Testaments, and receiving
inheritances from their kinsfolk, who die intestate; that to say the poor are
owners of the revenues, was much contrary to another saying in the same
oration, that the King is Patron of all Ecclesiastical goods, and might dispose
of them at his pleasure; that it was a great absurdity, to say, that the King
might not be reprehended by a general Council, seeing that David was
reprehended by the Prophet Nathan, and took it in good part; that it did a
little savor of heresy to tax Bishops of these later times, as if they were
not true Bishops. In the end, he spoke at large against the saying of the
Ambassador, that Kings are given by GOD, confuting it as heretical, condemned
by the extrauagant of Boniface the eight, Vnam sanctam, if he did not
distinguish, that they are from GOD, but by mediation of his Vicar.

The Ambassador published an Apology in answer of this writing, as if Which
causes him to make an Apology.
it had been made to the Synod, saying, that the Fathers could not answer
them as the Prophet did the Jews; for they demanded a reformation of the
Clergy, principally in France, knowing the defects of it, and not as the
Jews, to whom the cause of their fasting and lamentation was imputed because
they were ignorant of their own defects; that the Fathers, ascribing the cause
of the Ecclesiastical deformation to their Kings, should take heed they did
not like Adam, who laid the blame upon the woman which God had given him for
company; saying, it was a great fault in the Kings to present unworthy Bishops,
but a greater in the Popes to admit them; that they had desired the reformation
before the doctrine, not to leave it uncertain, but because, all Catholics
consenting therein, they thought it necessary to begin with corrupted manners,
the fountain and source of all heresies, that he was not sorry he had said,
that, in the Articles proposed, there are many things repugnant to the ancient
decrees, yea, he would add that they did derogate also from the constitutions
of the Popes of later times; that he had said that Charles the great, and
Lewis the ninth, had constituted Ecclesiastical Laws, by which France had
been governed, not that the present King did mean to make new, and if he had,
he had spoken conformably to the holy Scripture, the civil laws of the
Romans, and to that which the Ecclesiastical authors, Greek and Latin, do
write, before the book of the Decrees; for saying that beneficed men had only
the use of the revenues, he asked pardon, because he should have said that
they were only Administrators, and that those who take his saying in ill part,
must complain of Ierom, Austin, and the other Fathers, who did not say only,
that the Ecclesiastical goods did belong to the poor, but that Clergy men,
like servants, did gain all for the Church; that he never said that the King
had free power over Ecclesiastical goods, but that all did belong to the
Prince, in time of instant and urgent public necessity, and he that knew the
force of those words, did understand well, that, in such a time, neither
request, nor authority of the Pope could take place; that he had reprehended
the Anathema against Kings in that manner as it was set down in the Articles,
and did grant that Princes and Magistrates might be reprehended in that sort
as Nathan did, but that they should not be provoked with injuries and
maledictions; that having incited them, by the example of Ezekias, to make a
reformation, according to the pattern of the ancient times, it could not be
inferred that he did not think the Bishops of the last times to be lawful,
knowing very well that the Pharisees and Popes sit in Moses chair: that in
saying the power of Kings comes from God he has said absolutely and simply,
as the Prophet Daniel, and Paul the Apostle have written, not remembering the
distinction of mediate and immediate, nor the Constitution of Boniface, of
which if he (being a Frenchman) had thought, he would have repeated what the
Stories say of the cause and beginning of that extrauagant.

This Apology did not diminish the bad opinion conceived against the
Ambassadors, but increased it rather, it being (as they said) not an excuse
The government of France is taxed by the Fathers.
of the error committed, but a pertinacie in maintaining it. And many
discoursed not so much against the Ambassadors, as against the Kingdom. They
said, it did plainly appear of what mind they were who managed the affairs of
France. They noted the Queen Mother, that she gave credit to the Chastilons,
especially to him that had quitted the Cardinals Cap; that the Chancellor, and
the Bishop of Valence had too much power with her, at whose instance that
unlucky check had been given to the Parliament of Paris, with the detriment
of Religion; that she had inward familiarity with Cursor, and with his wife,
whom, in respect of their Religion, she should not have endured to look upon;
That the Kings Court was full of Hugonots, exceedingly favored; that
solicitation was still used to sell Ecclesiastical goods, to the great
prejudice of the Church; and other things they said of this nature.

But while the Council was in this motion, by means of these differences, the
Count of Luna, according to his use, to add difficulties to those which were
proposed by others, made instance for the abrogation of Proponentibus Legatis.
A thing which did much trouble them, because they knew not how to content him,
without prejudice of the formed Sessions. For not only the reuocation, but
every modification or suspension, did seem to be a declaration, that they had
not lawfully proceeded in the things past. But the Ambassador, seeing nothing
done concerning his demand, so often The abrogation of proponentibus Legatis is
promoted again.
made, said, that hitherto he had negotiated modestly, but should be forced to
alter his course; and spoke more boldly, because the Pope, upon his former
instances, had written that they should do that which was convenient, and did
wholly refer himself unto them. The Legates, to be quit of his importunity,
answered, that they would leave it in the liberty of the Council to make the
declaration, if he thought good; and so the name of liberty of the Council did
serve to cover that, which did proceed from others. For the Legates did at the
same time use strong persuasions with the Prelates their friends, that a delay
might be interposed, to refer this particular to the end of the Council, and
to enjoy the benefit of time, that some ouerture might be made to some course
less prejudicial. But the Count, having discovered the practices, prepared a
protestation, desiring the Emperors, French, and Portugal Ambassadors to
subscribe it; who persuaded him not to be so earnest, at that time. For
Morone, having promised the Emperor, that provision should be made herein
before the end of the Council, until it were understood whether that would be
performed or not, they knew not how he could protest concerning the other. And
Cardinal Morone, to pacify the Count, sent Paleotto often to negotiate with
him, in what manner his request might be granted: which himself did not well
understand; because his meaning was not to prejudice the decrees past, and,
with this condition, it was hard to find a temper. In conclusion, the Legates
gave the Count theirword that the declaration should be made in the next
Session, so that a means were found to satisfy the Fathers.

News being come to Rome of the French protestation, the Pope, and the whole
Court were wonderfully moved, thinking it was purposely done to dissolve the
Council, and imputed it unto them. But the Pope complained above all, that
while the King did demand a favor, and a grant of a hundred thousand crowns
of the revenues of the Clergy of France, his Ambassadors should say, in the
face of the whole Council, that he might take them without him. And the
Cardinal of Loraine was troubled more, because he thought it would be a great
cross to his negotiation with his Holiness. He labored to make it appear,
that this did happen against his will, and that he would have diuerted it, if
he had been in Trent, that that instruction was a remnant of the Councels taken
in the life time of the King of Nauar, and the execution procured by the
dependants of that faction, of which de Ferrieres was one; that that faction,
though it professed the Catholic religion outwardly, did hold strict
intelligence with the Hugonots, who desired a dissolution of the Council
without a quiet end, that they might not be anathematised. But he said, that
those who govern the affairs in Trent, were not without blame, in regard,
that before his departure from that City, the things concerning that matter,
stood in good terms, the Legates having promised morethings, with which the
Ambassadors were contented. One, that they would not speak of Kings, and
Sovereign Princes, but only of certain little Lords, who grant to Bishops no
exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the other, that all things depending
on graces done by the Pope, should be excepted, as indulgences, privileges,
and graunts of the holy Sea, and notwithstanding, since his departure, they had
given to the Fathers the first form, with the same things in it, which they
had promised to take away. But he assured his Holiness, that, notwithstanding
this, the Council should have a quiet end, and promised to write to the King,
and complain of that which was done, and to use means that the Ambassadors
should return to Trent, which he hoped to obtain.

According to this promise, he wrote into France, and to the Ambassadors.
These, he told that their action had this excuse, that it was done, but that
hereafter they should continue in doing their duty, without making any more
innouations. He wrote to the King, that the opposition made by the Ambassadors
seemed unto him very strange; and the rather, because they had done it without
his priuitie, and that there was neither reason, nor occasion for it; that his
absence from Trent was the cause why the Ambassadors had applied, out of
season, a sharp plaster, to a small sore; that, at his return, he would make
provision therein with great case. But because things done already could not
bevndone he prayed his Majesty to write to the Ambassadors, to continue in
doing their duty, and to abstain from violent courses. He added, that he
found the Pope well inclined, and disposed to an holy and serious reformation
of the Church; that Christendom was happy in having so worthy a Pastor, that
he sent him back to Trent, so well instructed of all his holy intentions, for
the ending and conclusion of the Council, that he might hope for an happy
success. And because, in the end of the Council, the decrees must be
subscribed by the Fathers, and Ambassadors, who have assisted in the name of
their Princes, he desired the King to cause his Ambassadors to return, that
they may be present, and accomplish that which is the complement of the
protection, and of all the favors done to the Council by his Majesty, by his
Brother, Father, and Grandfather.

The Cardinal had much ado to defend himself, not only with the Pope, but
with the College of Cardinals also in Consistory; who said, that Princes
desired the liberty of the Council, yet not in the least and iustest thing
that concern them, but only for the destruction of the Ecclesiastiques. The
Pope gave order that better consideration should be had of that which was to
be written to Trent about that reformation, saying, he did it, not to meddle
in the affairs of the Council, because he meant to let the Fathers alone, but
only to instruct the Legates, by way of counsel. But, in the mean while, he
wrote to the Legates, that if the Frenchmen would depart, they should do it,
but that they should not give them occasion, but should be very careful to
hold the Session at the time appointed, when Loraine should be returned, and to
finish the Counsel with one Session more, holding it within two or three weeks
at the most; and that they should conceal this order, imparting it to none but
to Loraine. And if the Emperors Ambassadors should move them, they should
answer, that, at the arrival of that Cardinal, they would resolve what to
do. And he enco^uraged them; saying, that he had brought Germany and France
to his purpose, and that nothing remained but Spain, which answered, that it
was not good to finish the Council, because many things, and the most
principal did remain to be handled. Notwithstanding he had hope, he said, to
reduce it, and to conclude the Synod, with a general satisfaction. And indeed
he was secure of France and Germany. For besides his treaty with Loraine,
who did abundantly secure him of France, he received at the same time a
resolution from the Emperor, that he was content with the end, and would
promote it. And howsoever his Nuncio advised that his Majesty was doubtful in
resolving, and that there was danger he would change, yet, understanding that
the King of the Romans was author of the resolution, saying, that it was good
to finish it, because it did no good, nor gave any hope that it would do, he
was assured that that King, moved by himself, and by good reason, would
persevere in his purpose, and, by consequence, keep his father in that opinion.

But the French Ambassadors, after the Oration, did no more appear publicly
in Trent. They let those few Prelates remaining know, that the Kings pleasure
was that they should oppose the fifth Article and the second, because the
persons, and causes of France might by virtue of those two, be drawn to
letigate out of the Kingdom; and the ninteenth, because by it, the preuentions
were canonized, and the Parlaments deprived of their prerogatives, in matter of
benefices.

The Legates, so soon as the Fathers had made an end of speaking of the 21.
Article proposed unto them the others also; wherein all the Ambassadors
opposed, in regard of the matter concerning Princes. The Fathers complained,
that, being to reform, as always has been said, all the Church, in the Head
and in the members, in the end, the Princes would have no reformation but for
the Clergy only; which could not be reformed neither, if the Prelates were
hindered in performing their charges, and the Ecclesiastical liberty not
preserved. Notwithstanding, the Princes, who seemed to desire reformation, did
oppose that decree which did restore unto them their liberty and jurisdiction,
necessary for it. The Legates excused themselves, and said, they must needs
give some satisfaction to the Prelates; that the Ambassadors had had time to
allege their grieuances, and to handle the cause with reason, and that it was
too much violence to oppose only de facto, and to show that the Council is
only for reformation of the Clergy, and not of the whole Church.

News came at the same time, that the Emperor was very sick, and his The
Emperors sickness troubles the Fathers.
Ambassadors said, that, in case he should die, the Council would not be
secure, because the safeduct would be ended. The Legates sent presently to the
Pope, for order what to do, and the Prelates began to think more of pa^ting
from Trent, then reforming Princes. Therefore a Congregation was hold the
seventh of October, to resolve what should be done with the other Articles of
Reformation, besides the one and twenty, and especially with that which
concerns Princes. In which after long discussion, it was concluded that the
Session should be celebrated with the matter of Matrimony, and the 21.
Articles of reformation, and that of the Princes should be deferred. The next
day the French Ambassadors parted from Trent to Venice, according to the Kings
order.

The Pope, though well satisfied of Loraine, and of the Frenchmen, his
dependants, yet provoked against that faction from which he thought the The
French Ambassadors go to Venice.
motive of the protestation, made in Council, came, he resumed his
determination, made at the time of the Edict of pacification with the Hugonots,
to proceed in Trent against the Queen of Navarre: which he had put off,
foreseeing that the Emperors Ambassadors would oppose as they did when mention
was made of proceeding against the Queen of England, and resolved to (...) it
in execution in Rome. And the thirteenth of the month he caused The
proceeding against five Bishops of France, and of the Queen of Navarre.
a sentence to be published against the five French Bishops formerly cited, as
has been said, and a Citation to be affixed to the gates of Saint Peter's
Church, and in other public places, against Johan Queen of Navarre, the
widow of Antonie, that, within the term of six months, she should appear
to defend her self, and to show reasons why she should not be deprived of all
her Dignities, States, and Dominions, and the marriage between Antonie of
Vandome, and her, made void, and the issue illegitimate, and that she had not
incurred other penalties, declared by the Canons, against heretiqdes. The
Cardinal of Loraine, before the Pope came to those sentences, and process,
used persuasions to him, and put him in mind, that the maxims held in France
did much differ from those of Rome. For it would be ill taken in that
kingdom, that the causes of BB. in the first instance should be judged in
Rome, and that the Citation against the Queen, as well for the same cause, as
in regard it was with temporal punishments, would give matter of talk, and
bad satisfaction to many. But those persuasions being understood by the Pope,
as they were made, brought forth no other fruit, but that which the Cardinal
did secretly desire. For the conference, which the Queen Mother so much
desired, by every Currier that came from her, new instance was made to the
Pope. But news came from the Emperors Court, that he would not hearken unto
it; and out of Spain, though complementall words of the Kings desire to have
it effected, yet a resolution that the times and coniunctures did not comport
it. The Cardinal of Loraine was of opinion, that howsoever there was no hope,
yet the Pope should not forbear to send express Nuncij for this purpose, as
being an office whereon many other negotiations, for the service of the
Apostolic Sea, might depend, and, in particular, to remove impediments of
the conclusion of the Council, in case any should arise. Whereupon Visconte
was dispatched into Spain, and Santa Croce into Germany, in show, to treat of
this conference, but indeed, with other particular instructions.

In Trent, the Legates, being not willing to give occasion of any difficulty
while the Session was expected, did propose Indulgences, Purgatory, worshipping
of Saints and images, not to publish the Decrees in the next Session, but in
the other following, adding the manner how the Divines ought to handle those
matters, that is, to give their opinion in writing only concerning the use of
them, and not to speak of the other Articles, and giving order to the fathers
to deliver their voices in short terms, protesting that whosoever would delate
besides the point, should be interrupted. Notwithstanding the Divines made long
writings, and so diverse, that the Fathers knew not what to resolve in that
doctrine.

For the reformation, howsoever twenty Articles were concluded, and the one
and twentieth treated on with the Count of Luna, the Spanish Prelates
complained that the Article of the exemption of Chapters, and the last, of the
first instances, and appeals, were altered from that which was noted by the
Prelates. Whereat the Legates, and Deputies for making the Decrees, disdaining,
answered, that either they should justify what they said, or hold their
peace. And some words of distaste passing, the Count of Luna appeared in their
favor, demanding that the oppositions made by his Prelates against those two
Articles might be considered on. Afterward, he desired that in the first
Article, in which the criminal causes of Bishops were reserved to the Pope, a
declaration should be made, that no prejudice should be done to the
inquisition of Spain; which request the Ambassador of Portugal had first made
for his kingdom. And the Legates answering, that those matters were already
decided, the Count replied, that if they should be proposed so, he would not go
into the Sessio^, nor suffer any of his Prelates to enter. Whereupon Cardinal
Morone said, that if they would not go into the Session, it should be done
without them. The Count ascribing this rigiditie of the Legates to the Proctor
of the Chapters of Spain, he commanded him to depart immediately from Trent;
which displeased the Legates. But that nothing might hinder the Session, the
time whereof did draw nigh, to please the Ambassador in the Article of the
causes of Bishops, they caused kingdoms, where the Inquisition was, to be
excepted. For that of the first instances, because they would wholly take from
the Pope all authority to make commissions in Rome, the Legates thought it too
hard. The sixth also did import very much. For the Chapters of Spain are a very
principal member, and do more depend on the Apostolic Sea them Bishops do;
because these are all by the nomination of Kings, whereas more then half of
the Canonries are of the Popes pure collation. Therefore they resolved to
defer this matter until the next Session, rather then to prejudice the
Canons. And they employed the Emperors Ambassadors to persuade the Count to
be content with it, by which means that difficulty also was overcome.

The declaration of Propenentibus Legatis did remain. For which not being able
to find a temper, they told the Count, that he should propose a form how he
would have it done. Wherein he excusing himself, they deputed three Canonists
to treat with him, and to find a means that might please him, so that it were
not to alter the way prescribed by the Pope. But The Card of Loraine returns
to Trent and hasteneth, the end of the Council.
the Cardinal of Loraine came fitly for that occasion, who being parted from
Rome with instruction and conclusion of all things, and having took Venice in
his way, to persuade the Ambassadors to return before the end of the
Council, and now arrived in Trent, caused, with his desteritie, the Count to
approve that manner, by which that difficulty, so much agitated, received an
end, with satisfaction of all and it was made the one and twentieth Article of
reformation, proposed in the Congregation of the ninth of November held for
this purpose, and approved with small resistance. After this, the second
Article was taken away, which being done, all the Articles were read over
again, and the suffrages briefly delivered. In which Loraine, to salve his
honor, said, that howsoever he desired a greater reformation, yet, knowing
that in the beginning one could not come to the last remedies, he assented to
the Decrees, not judging them sufficient, but hoping that the Pope, either by
bringing the old Canons into use, or by celebrating other general Councels,
would add a perfection.

It is worthy of memory that, in this Congregation, he made a long
digression, He makes an Oration in (...) of the Pope
in form of an encomiasticall Oration, of the Popes good will, of his desire
to see the Church reformed, the Episcopal degree restored to its ancient
dignity, and the Council ended, with the fruit of all Christendom. The
Archbishop of Granata, when it was his turn to speak, brake out into the
Popes commendation also, attributing as much unto him as the other, but added,
that either the Pope did judge that he could not do as he would, or had not
authority to make his ministers and dependants to execute his will Here I must
make a great mutation of style. For whereas in the former narration I have used
that which is proper to describe variety of minds, and opinions, The state of
the Council is quite altered.
one crossing the designs of another, and delays of resolutions interposed,
framing my self to declare the counsels of diverse, sometimes contrary amongst
themselves, hereafter I must make relation of one aim only, and uniform
operations, which seem rather to fly then run to one only end, whereof I can
give but one cause, not to repeat it in all places, that is; the joint
resolution to precipitate the Council.

Therefore to speak simply, I must say, that Letters came from the Pope, with
resolution that the Council should be ended, though with distaste of the King
of Spain, because he had means to make an agreement with him that they
should establish the Decree of secret marriage, with as much union as was
possible, but yet to do it, though the same opposition should continue; that,
for the reformation of Princes, and restitution of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
and liberty, they should not descend to any particular but renew the ancient
Canons, and without Anathemaes; that if any difficulty did arise, concerning
the other Articles, they should reserve it for him, who would make provision
therein; referring them, for the residue, to the Cardinal of Loraine, who was
fully informed of his whole will, whom they ought to believe. Afterward, he
sent a form in what sort they should finish the Council; which did contain,
that all things done under Paul and Julius should be confirmed, and declared
that they were all done in this one Council, and that, in all things, the
authority of the Apostolic Sea should be preserved; that of the things
decreed the Popes confirmation should be demanded, that all the Fathers should
subscribe, and, after them according to the example of the ancient Emperors,
there should be a subscription of the Ambassadors, that the Princes might be
bound to the observance of the Decrees, and to persecute with Arms those of
the contrary religion, leaving it in the power of them, the Legates, together
with Loraine to add, diminish, or alter, according to opportunite. All which
things were kept most secret until after the Council that they might (...) the
better as shall be said.

The eleventh of November came in which the Session was held with the usual
ceremonies. Voices being to be given in the matter of clandestine marriage*
Cardinal Varmiense, who held it a matter of (...) and thought the Church had
no authority over it, would not be (...) sing himself that in a matter of
positi^^ law, be thought (...) The Session.
(...) deliver his mind freely, though the contrary were (...) he should be
forced to say, for satisfaction of his (...) Synod could not make that decree,
which might have ^used, same distates, such as he was not willing to give.
Francis Richar^^ made the Sermon^ in which he admonished the Fathers that this
most holy Synod having been in travail these two years, and every one being
in expectation of what it will be delivered, it was not fit it should produce
(...) (...) child because the world does expect a sound and perfect issue.
For effecting hereof, it was convenient to imitate the Apostles, ^^yrs, and
Primitive Church, making them a pattern whence to take the (...) of the infant
which is to come into the world. These were he said, doctrine religion and
discipline, all which, being degenerated in these times, must be restored to
their ancient integrity. And that this is it which has been expected so long,
and is expected still. The ceremonies being ended the letters of Madam, Regent
of Flanders, concerning the sending of (...) Prelates to the Council, were
read, as also the Mandates of the Duke of Florence, and of the grand Master of
Malta. Afterward the doctrine and the anathematismes of matrimony were read
by the Mass Bishop to which all consented. The Articles of reformation of
Matrimony being read to the first, of the annullation of the clandestine,
Cardinal Morone said, that it Variety of opinions about clandestine marriages.
pleased him, if it pleased the Pope. Simoneta said it did not please him but
referred himself to the Pope. Of the others six and fifty did absolutely
deny, and all the rest did approve it.

Afterward the Decrees of reformation were read. And being come to The
Decrees of reformation.
the fifth, of the criminal causes of Bishops, perceiving the Kingdoms, where
the inquisition is, were excepted, a great commotion was raised amongst the
Fathers, the Lombards and Neapolitans saying confusedly, that that exception
was never proposed in Congregation, and that it ought to be removed; which
they were forced presently to do. Afterward the Cardinal of Loraine said,
concerning the same point, that he did approve the Decree, upon condition
that it did not prejudice any of the privileges, rights, and constitutions of
the Kings of Frange, as had been concluded in the Congregation the day before,
declaring that they did not prejudice the authority of any Prince. And, in the
end of the Decrees, he made a protestation, in his own name, and of the other
French Prelates, wholly conformable to that other, made two days before, in
the Congregation; that is, that their nation did receive those decrees, not as
a perfect perfect reformation, but as a preparation to one entire, hoping the
Pope would supply the defects in time, and occasion, by bringing into use the
old, Canons; or by celebrating other general Councels, to give a perfection to
the things begun. And he desired, in the name of all the French Bishops, that
this might be inserted in the Acts of the Council, and a public instrument
made of it. Diverse other things were added by others, and some oppositions, of
no great moment, made against some of the Articles, where in some differences
arising, it was said, they should be accommodated in a general Congregation
because it was then late 2 hours within night. And for the conclusion of the
Session, the Decree of the intimation of the next for the ninth of December,
was read, with power to anticipate, declaring that the sixth Article now
deferred, and other Articles of reformation exhibited, and other things
belonging thereunto, should then be handled, adding that in case it shall
(...) fit, and the time comport, some doctrines may be handled, as they shall
be in their times proposed in the Congregations.

The doctrine of the Sacrament of Matrimony did contain. That Adam did
pronounce the bond of Matrimony to be perpetual, and that only two persons
may be joined therein, a thing more plainly declared by CHRIST who also by
his passion, has merited grace to confirm it, and to sanctify those who are
joined. Which is intimated by Saint Paul, when he said that this was the great
Sacrament in CHRIST and the Church. Whereupon Matrimony in the Evangelical
Law, exceeding the ancient marriages, by addition of grace, it is justly numbered
amongst the Sacraments of the new law. Therefore the Synod, condemning the
heresies in this matter, does constitute the Anathematismes 1. Against him that
shall say, that Matrimony is not one of the seven Sacraments, instituted by
CHRIST, and does not confer grace. 2. Or that it is lawful for Christians to
have many wives at once, and that this is not forbidden by any Law of God. 3.
Or that only the degrees of affinity, and consanguinity, expressed in
Leuiticus may nullify the marriage, and that the Church may not add others, or
dispense with some of them. 4. That the Church cannot constitute impediments,
or has erred in constituting them. 5. That one of those who are married may
dissolve the Matrimony, for heresy, troublesome conversation, or voluntary
absence of the other. 6. Or that lawful matrimony, not consummated, is not
dissolved by a solemn religious vow. 7. Or that the Church has erred in
teaching, that the matrimonial bond is not dissolved by adultery. 8. Or that
the Church does err, in separating those who are married for a determinate or
indeterminate time, in respect of carnal conjunction, or cohabitation. 9. Or
that the Ecclesiastiques of holy Order, or professed Regulars may marry, as
also all those who find they have not the gift of chastity, in regard that
GOD does not deny the gift to him that does demand it. 10. Or that shall
prefer the state of marriage to virginity, and chastity. 11. Or that the
prohibition of marriage, in certain times of the year, is superstition, or
shall condemn the benedictions and other ceremonies. 12 Or that matrimonial
causes do not belong to Ecclesiastical Judges.

The Decrees of the reformation of Matrimony did contain. 1. That howsoever it
be true, that clandestine marriages have been true and lawful, so long as the
Church has not disallowed them, and that the Synod does anathematize him who
does not hold them for such, as also those who affirm, that marriages,
contracted without consent of parents, in whose power the married parties are,
is void, and that the Fathers may either approve or disprooue it, yet the
Church has ever forbid, and detested them. And because prohibitions do no
good, the Synod does command, that the matrimony shall be denounced in the
Church three Festival days, before it be contracted, and no impediment being
found, shall be celebrated in the face of the Church, where the Parish Priest
having interrogated the man and the woman, and heard their consent, shall say,
I join you in matrimony in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and
shall use other words, accustomed in the Province. Notwithstanding the Synod
does refer it to the will of the Bishop, to omit the Banes but does declare
those to be incapable of marriage, who attempt to contract it without the
presence of the Parish Priest, or another Priest of equal authority, and of
two or three witnesses, making void and nullifying such contracts, and
punishing the transgressors. Afterward, it does exhort the parties married,
not to dwell together, before the benediction, and command the Parish Priest to
have a book, in which marriages, so contracted shall be written. It does exhort
the parties that are to be married, to confess, and communicate before the
contract, or consummation of the marriage, reserueth the customs and ceremonies
of every Province; and will have this Decree to be of force within thirty
days after it shall be published in every Parish.

Secondly, concerning the impediments of marriage, the Synod does affirm, that
the multitude of prohibitions did cause great sins and scandals. Therefore it
does restrain that of spiritual cognation, to that which the baptized and
their parents have with the godfathers and godmothers, and the number of
these to one man and one woman only Ordaining the same about the kindred which
does arise by the sacrament of Confirmation. 3. It does restrain the
impediment of honesty, which has its beginning from contracts, to the first
degree only. 4. That of affinity by fornication, to the first and second. 5.
It does take away all hope of dispensations for matrimony, wittingly contracted
in degrees prohibited, and to those who have ignorantly contracted, without the
solemnities, in case of probable ignorance, a dispensation may be given gratis.
But to contract in degrees prohibited, a dispensation shall never be granted,
or seldom only, for a just cause, without cost; nor in the second degree
amongst Princes, except for a public cause. 6. Matrimony shall not be
contracted with a woman stolen away, so long as she is in the power of him
that did steal her; and does declare those Raptors, and those that do assist
them with counsel, aid, or favor, excommunicated, infamous, incapable of all
dignity; and the Raptor, whether he many the woman or not, shall be bound to
give her a dowry, at the pleasure of the Judge. 7. It does ordain, that
vagabonds shall not marry without a diligent inquisition first made, and
license of the Ordinary, exhorting the secular Magistrates to punish them
severely. 8. It does ordain against Concubinaries, that being admonished
thrice by the Ordinary, in case they separate not themselves, they shall be
excommunicated, and perseuering one year after the censure, the Ordinary
shall proceed severely against them, and the Concubines after three
admonitions, shall be punished, and, if the Bishop shall think fit, chased
also out of the Territory, by assistance of the secular power. 9. It
commands every temporal Lord and Magistrate, upon pain of excommunication,
not to compel their subjects, or any others, to marry, directly or indirectly.
10. It does restrain the ancient prohibitions of nuptial solemnities, from
Aduent, to the Epiphany, and from Ash wednesday, to the Octaues of Easter.

The Decrees of reformation, not as they were read in Session, but as they were
corrected the next day in Congregation (which was appointed The Decrees of
Reformation.
to be don) did contain. 1. That public prayers shall be made, though the
Church be vacant, that whosoever have right in the promotion, shall be
admonished that it is a mortal sin, if they shall not use all diligence to
promote the most worthy, and profitable for the Church, borne of lawful
matrimony, worthy in regard of their life, age, doctrine, and of other
qualities required by the holy Canons, and Decrees of this Council. That in
every provincial Synod, a form of examination shall be prescribed, by
approbation of the Pope, fit for every place, and the examination made
according to that prescript shall be sent to the Pope, to be discussed by the
Cardinals, and proposed in Consistory; and all other things required by the
Synod for age, life, doctrine, and other qualities in the promotion of BB. shall
be required in the creation of Cardinals, though but Deacons, which the Pope,
if he can conveniently, shall take out of all Nations, and those that are fit.
And it was added; that the Synod being grieved to see such great incommodities
of the Church, cannot choose but call to mind, how necessary it is, that the
Pope, in regard of his duty, should endeavor to assume Cardinals of excellent
worth, and to provide the Church of fit Pastors, because if the flock should
perish by their negligence, CHRIST will demand an acount of his Holiness. 2.
That the provincial Council shall be called by the Metropolitan, or, the most
ancient Suffragane, within one year at the most after the end of this Synod,
and afterward every two years at the least. That Bishops shall not be forced
hereafter to go to the Metropolitan Church. That those who have not an
Archbishop shall elect one in the provincial Synod, in which he ought to
assist, and receive the constitutions thereof, their exemptions and privileges
otherwise remaining firm. And the Diocesan Synods shall be celebrated every
year, in which the exempted, except those who are subject to general Chapters,
shall assist. Which general Chapters having secular Churches annexed, in
regard of them, shall assist also. 3. Bishops shall be bound to visit the
Diocese every year, either in person, or by visitors, and all of it, if they
can, or, if it be large, in two years at the least. Metropolitans shall not
visit the Diocese of the Suffragans, but for a cause, approved in the
provincial Council. The Arch deacons, and other inferiors, shall visit in
person, and shall take a Notary, by consent of the Bishop. The Visitor shall
go with a modest train of men, and horses, dispatching the visitation as
soon as may be; and shall not receive any thing but frugall and moderate
diet, which may be given either in kind or money; yet so as that if there be a
custom in any place not to receive so much as these, it shall be observed
also. That Patrons shall not meddle with that which concerns the
administration of Sacraments, or the visitation of the ornaments of the Church,
immovable goods, or rents of houses, except it do belong unto them by right of
the foundation. 4. That Bishops shall be bound to preach in person, or, having
a lawful impediment, by others. And in case the Parish Priest be hindered that
he cannot preach in his own Church, he shall, at his charge, maintain
another to do it, deputed by the Bishops. And he shall preach every Sunday and
solemn feast, and in Aduent and Lent, every day, or thrice a week at the
least. That the Bishop shall admonish every one to go to his own Parish, to
hear the sermon. That none shall preach against the Bishops will, whose cure
shall be, that Christian doctrine be taught in every Parish. 5. That criminal
causes against Bishops that be of great weight, shall be judged by the Pope,
and if there shall be occasion to commit them to any out of the Court, they
shall be committed only to the Metropolitan, or to Bishops elected by the
Pope, and to take information only, reserving the definitive to the Pope: but
small matters shall be judged in the Provincial Council, or by Judges
deputed by them. 6. That the Bishops shall dispense in the Court of Conscience,
with all their subjects, in all their irregularities, and suspensions for
secret offenses, except voluntary murder, and absolve from all cases reserved
to the Apostolic Sea, either by himself or his Vicar, as also from the
excess of heresy, by himself, but not by a Vicar. 7. That the Bishop shall
have care that the force and use of the Sacraments shall be expounded to the
people in the vulgar tongue before they be administered, according to the form
of a Catecechisme, which the Synod will compose, which the Bishop shall cause
to be faithfully translated into the vulgar, and to be expounded to the people
by the Parish Priests. 8. That to public offenders public Penance shall be
given, but the Bishop shall have power to change it into a secret. In every
Cathedral Church a Penitentiarie, Master, Doctor, or Licentiate in Theology,
or Canon, of the age of forty years, shall be appointed by the Bishop. 9.
That the Decrees of the Council, under Paul the third, and Pius the fourth,
concerning visitation of benefices exempted, shall be observed in the Churches
which are not of any Diocese, which shall be visited by the next Bishop, as
Delegate of the Apostolic Sea. 10. That where visitation or correction of
manners is in question, no exemption or appeal, though to the Apostolic Sea,
shall hinder or suspend the execution of that which is decreed or adjudged. 11.
That for titles of honor which are given to Protonotaries, Count Palatines,
Kings Chaplains, or servants in war, Monasteries, Hospitals, those persons
shall not be exempt from the authority of Bishops, except they shall reside in
the houses, or under their obedience, and Kings Chaplains, according to the
constitutions of Innocentius the 3. And exemptions granted to the servants of
Cardinals, shall not be extended to that which concerns benefices. 12. That
no person under the age of twenty five years, shall be promoted to dignities
with cure; and the Archdeacons, if it may be, shall be Masters in Theology,
or Doctors, or Licentiate in the Canon Law. And none, under the age of two and
twenty years, shall be promoted to any dignity without cure. Those that are
promoted to Benefices with Cure, shall be bound to make profession of their
faith with in two months; and Canons shall do the same. And none shall be
received to any dignity, Canonry, or portion, except he shall have that order,
which it does require, and that age which is necessary for the receiving of it.
That in Cathedral Churches, all the Canons and Portionaries shall be Priests,
Deacons, or Subdeacons, and the Bishop, with the Chapter, shall distribute how
many shall be of every order, but so, as that one half at the least shall be
Priests. The Synod does exhort also, that all the dignities, and half the
Canonries in the Cathedral and famous Collegiat Churches may be conferred
upon Doctors in Divinity, or in the Canon Law, and that none may be absent
more then three months in the year. That the daily distributions may not be
given upon any pretense whatsoever, to any that has not been present in the
offices, and that every one shall perform his office in his own person, not
by substitutes. 13. There being many poor Cathedral Churches, a remedy shall
be consulted on in the Provincial Council, and the Pope desired to make
provision according to his wisdom. The Bishop also shall have care to provide
for poor Parish Churches, either by union of some Benefice not regular, or by
assignation of first fruits, or tithes, or by contributions and collections of
the Parishioners. Parish Churches shall not be united to Monasteries,
Canonries, simple benefices, and religious orders of Soldiers, and those that
are united shall be reviewed by the Ordinaries, and the Cathedral Churches,
not exceeding a thousand crowns, and the Parish Churches, not exceeding an
hundred crowns, shall not be hereafter burdened with pensions, or
reseruations of fruits. Where the Parishes have no certain confines, but the
Sacraments are administered indifferently to those that do demand them, the
Bishop shall confine them, and they shall have their proper Parish (...)est.
And in Cities which have no Parishes, they shall be erected as fast as may
be. 14. The Synod does detest, and forbid all institutions or customs of
paying any thing for the obtaining of titles, or possessions, except it be
converted into pious uses, declaring them to be simoniacall who shall usurp
herein. 15. In Cathedral and Collegiate Churches where the Prebends and
distributions are too small, the Bishop shall have power to unite simple
Benefices, or to reduce them to a smaller number. 16. The Episcopal Sea being
void, the Chapter shall elect one or two Economickes, or a Vicar, within eight
days, or, if not, this authority shall be deuolued to the Metropolitan. And
the Bishop when he shall be created, shall take of them an account of the
administration; and punish them, if they have offended. 17. That no
Ecclesiastical person, though a Cardinal shall have more then one Benefice,
which not being able to maintain him honestly, another simple Benefice may be
added, so that they do not both require personal residence, which shall be
understood of all Benefices, as well secular as regular, of what title or
quality soever, though commended. And he that has now more Benefices then
one shall be bound to leave all but one, within six months, or if not, they
shall be all void. Notwithstanding, the Synod does desire that some provision
should be made for those that resign, in some convenient manner, as shall
seem best to the Pope. 18. In case of vacancie of any Church in any manner
whatsoever, all shall be written down that are proposed or do propose
themselves, and shall be all examined by the Bishop with three examiners, at
the least, and amongst all those which shall be judged fit, the Bishop shall
elect the most sufficient, upon whom the collation of the Church shall be made;
and in Ecclesiastical patronages, the Patron shall present to the Bishop him
that is most worthy. But in Lack patronages he that is presented by the
Patrons shall be examined by the examiners, and not admitted, except he be
found to be fit. And (...) Examiners shall be proposed every year in the
Diocesan Synod, of which the Bishop shall elect three, who shall be Masters,
or Doctors, Secularor Regular, shall swear to perform their duty, and shall
not receive anything, either before or after the examination. That expectatiue
graces for Benefices shall not be granted hereafter, nor any other, extending
to Benefices that shall be vacant; and withal, the mental reseruations shall
be prohibited. 19. That causes Ecclesiastical, even beneficial also, shall
be judged by the Ordinary in the first instance, and ended within two years
at the most. That there shall be no appeal but from the definitive sentence,
or from that which shall have the force thereof, except in those which the Pope
shall think fit to call to himself, for an urgent and reasonable occasio(...)
That matrimonial and criminal causes shall be reserved to the Bishop only.
That in matrimonial, those that are proved to be poor, shall not be forced
to litigate out of the Province, neither in the second or third instance,
except the adverse part will allow food and charges of the suit. That the
Legates, Nuncij, and Ecclesiastical governors, shall not hinder Bishops in
their causes, nor proceed against Ecclesiastical persons, but in case of the
Bishops negligence. That the Appellant shall be bound to bring at his charge,
the acts made before the Bishop, to the Judge of the appeal, which the
Notarie, being conveniently paid, shall be bound to give within one month at
the farthest. 20. That in the words of the decree, made in the first Session
under the present Pope Pius the fourth, that is, Proponentibus Legatis, the
meaning of the Synod was not to change in any part the usual manner of
handling matters in general Councels, nor to add or detract any thing,
besides that which has been constituted heretofore by the sacred Canons, and
by the general Synods. In the end, the next Session was intimated for the
ninth of December, with power of anticipation to handle the sixth Article, and
the other which were proposed, and deferred, and other points also, as
opportunity should serve, and as they should be proposed in Congregation.

There was not such expectation of the issue of this Session, as of the last,
as well because the general curiosity was then satisfied, as because it did
seem that the matter of Matrimony could not afford any thing of any great
observation. The world was more attentive to see what issue the protestation
made by the French Ambassadors would have: which was read with variety of
affections. Those who were ill affected to the Court of Rome, did commend it,
as true, and necessary. But the Popes adherents thought it as abominable, as
the Protestations formerly made by Luther.

In the sixth Anathematisme of Matrimony, many did wonder, that the dissolution
The censure of the Decrees.
of marriage not consummated, for a solemn vow, should be made an Article of
faith, because the matrimonial conjunction, though not consummated by carnal
copulation, is a bond instituted by the Law of GOD. For the Scripture does
affirm, that there was a true marriage (...) Mary and Joseph, and the
solemnity of the profession being or (...)re^ po(...), as Boniface the eighth
has decreed, it seemed strange not so (...) humane bond should dissolve a
divine, as that he should be condemned for an heretic, who will not believe,
that an invention of man, borneth any hundred years since the Apostles, should
prevail against a divine instituted on, made at the first creation of the
world.

In the seventh it was thought to be a captious speech, to condemn for an
heretic him that shall say that the Church has erred, in reaching that,
Matrimony is not dissolved by adultery. For if one should say absolutely,
that Matrimony ought to be dissolved for that cause, without saying or thinking
that one has erred, or not erred in teaching the contrary, it seems that
this man should not be comprehended: and yet it does not appear how one can
think so, except the hold the contrary to be an error. It was judged, that
they should have spoken plainly and said absolutely, that (...) no^ dissolved
by adultery, or that both opinions are probable, and not to make an Article of
faith concerning a word only. But these men would not have made the
difficulty, if they had known the causes before mentioned, why they did
speak in that manner.

The ninth Canon did afford matter of speech also, by that affirmative, that
God does not deny the gift of chastity to him that does demand it a right,
because it did seem to be contrary to the Gospel, which affirms that it is
not given to all; and to Saint Paul, who does not exhort to demand it, which
was more easy then to marry.

The Politicians knew not what to think of the twelfth Anathematismem; that it
should be heresy to hold that matrimonial causes do not belong to
Ecclesiastical Judges, it being certain, that the Laws of marriage were all
made by the Emperors, and the judicature of them administered by the secular
Magistrates, so long as the Roman Laws were in force, which the reading only
of the Theodosian and Justinian Codes, and of the Nouels, does evidently
demonstrate. And in the forms of Cassiodore there is mention of terms used by
the Gothish Kings in the dispensations of degrees prohibited, which then were
thought to belong to civil government, and not to be matters of religion, and
to him that has any skill in story, it is most known, that the
Ecclesiastiques began to judge causes of this nature partly by commission, and
partly by negligence of Princes and Magistrates.

But in the beginning of the Decree of reformation of Matrimony, many wondered,
how it could be defined as an Article of faith, that clandestine marriages are
true Sacraments, and that the Church has always detested them, because it
does implie a contradiction to detest Sacraments, And to command that the
Parish Priest should (...)gate those that are joined, and understanding their
consent, should say, I join you in Matrimony in the Name of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, was derided by the critics; saying, that either they are
joined by those words, or not if not, then that is not true which the Council
of Florence has determined, that matrimony receives perfection from consent
if so, what conjunction is that which the Priest makes of persons joined
before. And if the word, I join, should be expounded, I declare them joined a
way would be laid open to conclude, that the words of the absolution are
declaratory also. But howsoever it was, they said the decree was made to no
other end, but that within a short time it might be made an Article of faith
that those words pronounced by the Parish Priest were the form of the
Sacrament.

For making void clandestine marriages, they spoke as much as was spoken of it
in the Council it self. For some did extol the decree to the heavens; and
others said, that if those matrimonies were Sacraments, and consequently
instituted by CHRIST, and the Church has always detested them, and finally
made them void, it did not appear how those who had not made provision for it
in the beginning, could be excused from the blame of ignorance, or negligence.
And when the distinction, on which they founded the decree, was published, that
the contract was nullified, which is the matter of the Sacrament, it was hard
to understand a long time, because the matrimonial contract has no
distinction from the matrimony, nor the matrimony from the Sacrament: and the
rather, because the matrimony was indissoluble before it was a Sacrament, in
regard CHRIST does not pronounce it insoluble, as instituted by him, but as by
GOD, in the earthly Paradise. But, it being admitted, that the Matrimonial
contract is an humane and civil thing, separate from the Sacrament, which is
nullified, some said this annullation would not belong to the Ecclesiastical
Judge, but to the Secular, to whom the discussion, and cognition of all civil
contracts does appertain.

The cause alleged to moderate the impediments of marriage, was much
commended, as reasonable; but it was observed withal, that it did necessarily
conclude many more restrictions then those that were decreed, in regard there
are no less inconveniences by the impediments confirmed, then by those that
were abolished. The end of the Article of matrimonial dispensations moved a
vain question in the curious, whether the Pope, by reserving them to himself
alone, did more good or hurt to his authority. For the good, was alleged the
great quantity of gold which did flow into the Court, through this channel,
and the obligations of so many Princes, gained by this means, as to be
satisfied in their appetites, or interests, so to defend the Papal authority,
on which only the legitimation of their children was grounded: For the hurt,
the loss of the revenues of England, and of the obedience of that crown was
produced, which did weigh down all gain or friendship, which the dipensations
might procure.

The Frenchmen did not like the decree, that he that steals a woman shall
be bound to endow her, at the pleasure of the Judge, saying, that the Law
concerning dowries, cannot be made by Ecclesti^all authority, and that it was
an artifice to take the judicature of that delict from the secular Magistrate.
For if the Ecclesiastique may make the Law, he may judge the cause. And
howsoever they said absolutely, at the pleasure of the judge, yet there is no
doubt, but that in the declaration, they would say they meant the
Ecclesiastical only. And they thought it an usurpation of temporal
authority, to punish Seculars with infamy, and incapacitie of dignities.
Neither did they approve the constitution against conculinaries, any a year
in excommunication, that they should be punished by the Ecclesiastique, because
excommunication is the extreme, last and greatest of Ecclesiastical
punishments, according to the doctrine of all the Fathers; so that to pass
that, was to enter upon the Temporal power, and the rather, because they give
themselves power to course concubines out of their countries, deriding the
secular Magistrates, by imploring their arm, if there shall be need; which is
as much as to affirm, that, ordinarily, the execution of this banishment may
be made by the Ecclesiastique himself.

The Decree of reformation in the first Article was noted either of defect, or
of presumption. For if the Synod had authority to give Law to the Pope,
especially in things so just, it was not fit to do it by way of narration, or
by obloquitie of words. But if it ought to receive Law from the Pope, it cannot
be excused for having passed its bounds, because it does sharply reprehend
the former actions of this and other Popes, though it does it obliquely: Those
that were seen in the Ecclesiastical stories, said, that to draw all the
causes of Bishops to Rome, was a new policy to make the Court great, whereas
all the examples of antiquity, and Canons of the Counsels of those times do
show, that the causes of Bishops, though of depositions, were handled in the
countries of each of them. Those who expected a provision against the abuse of
pensions, seeing what was decreed in the 13. Article, did judge that the matter
would pass to a greater corruption as the event also has showed. The
fourteenth Article was commended by every one, because it did seem to take
away the Annates, and paying for Bulls, dispatched at Rome, for collation of
Benefices. But in progress of time, it appearing that those remained still,
and that there was not so much as any cogitation either to remove or moderate
them, they remembered, that, only the small abuses of other Churches being
provided against, the saying was verified, that only moates were taken out of
the eyes, and beams never. Every wise man thought that this age was not worthy
of that Decree for the unity, or, at the most, dualtie of Benefices, and that
it would not be observed but in the poorer sort only. Likewise for the
examination in concurrence, in the collation of Benefices, every one did
prognosticate that it would be deluded by some sinister interpretation. And
the prophecy was quickly verified. For in Rome, within a short time, they
began to declare, that concurrence was not to be observed in case of
resignation, but that he only was to be examined, to whom the resignation
was made; which was as much as to abolish the Decree for the most part, because
the better sort were excluded by resignation, and he only preferred who
pleased the resignant: and Benefices are not vacant for any other cause but
casually. The Decree of the cognition of causes in the first instance was quite
destroyed, by the exception added, that is, except those which the Pope will
commit, and call to himself. For causes were never taken from the lawful
tribunals, but by commissions, and auocations of Popes; and now the cause of
the disease was preserved, and the symptom only cured. And howsoever the
adiunct (for urgent and reasonable causes) did seem to moderate the matter
well, yet men of understanding knew that it was as much as to say, for any
arbitrary cause.

But in the last point, which was in expectation so many months, touching the
essential liberty of the Council, seeing it was declared, that the meaning of
the Synod was, not to change the manner of proceeding, nor to make any
addition, or diminution of the old constitutions, wise men said, that
concerning this Council it was a declaration contrary to the fact, and
published when it did no good: neither was there any more use of it, then of a
medicine applied to a dead body. And some mocked, and said, that it was as much
as the consolation of an honest man, whose wife had brought him children by
other men, and said she did it not to do him wrong. But, by an example given
to posterity, it did teach how all violence, and exorbitancie might be used
in Council, from the beginning to the end, and all inconvenience done excused
by such a declaration, yea justified, and maintained for lawful.

At this time, besides the advice of the Session held, three other sorts of
distasteful news came into France. The first was the Popes answer about the
hundred thousand crowns. The second, the protestation made in Council, and
the displeasure taken at it, in Trent, and Rome. The last, was the sentence
against the French Bishops, and the citation of the Queen of Navarre: The
Frenchmen, having much considered on these things, resolved The Alienation of
Ecclesiastical revenues in France.
not to treat any more with the Pope for his favor in the alienation, but to
execute the Kings Edict, approved in Parliament, without any consent of his
Holiness. This being suddenly performed, few buyers could be found, as well
because men do not easily resolve to lay down their money, as because they
were dissuaded by the Ecclesiastiques, who told them, that the sale, wanting
the Popes confirmation, would not hereafter be esteemed to be good. This was a
hinderance to the King, and no favor to the Clergy. For the sale was made,
but it was done at a low rate; neither was there raised more then two millions
and half of Francks, small, in regard of the things aliened, seeing that it
was made at twelve for an hundred, whereas it had been a small price if they
had given an hundred for four. And it is worthy to be repeated here, that,
amongst the things sold, one was, the jurisdiction which the Archbishop of
Lions had held until that time, over that city, which was sold at the outcry
for thirty thousand Francks. But the Bishop complained so much that, in
supplement of the price, he had given unto him 400. crowns yearly.

Concerning the protestation made in Council, the King wrote to his
Ambassadors the ninth of November, that, having seen what the Cardinal of
Loraine had written against their protestation, and heard the relation made by
the Bishop of Orlience of all things done in Trent, he was pleased with it, as
also with their retire to Venice, and commanded, that de Ferrieres should not
depart thence until he had new order, which should be when he was advised
that the Articles were so reformed that the rights of the King, and of the
Gallican Church were not put in question. And he wrote to the Cardinal of
Loraine, that himself and his Counsel knew that his Ambassadors had protested
upon great and just occasion. For as he would continue in the union and
obedience of the Church, so he would preserve inviolable the rights of his
crown, without suffering them to be questioned, or disputed, or himself
forced to show them. That they should not think to satisfy him, with saying
in the end, Saving and reserving the rights, etc. because, under this color,
they would bind him to show a reason in every opposition. That if he had
seen the Articles as they were proposed, he would have judged, that the
Ambassador could not have done otherwise then make the opposition: which his
desire was they should first have showed to him, but said they were to be
excused, in regard of the occasion suddenly arising, and of the circumstances
which did produce it, and of the suspicions, which made them doubt of some
Artifice to precipitate the decision. And if the Pope had no intention, as he,
the Cardinal, gives him to understand, that the rights of the Emperor, and
Kings should be touched, and disputed, his Holiness must turn his anger upon
the Legates, who proposed the Articles, and named Kings, Emperor and
Republikes, and not upon the Ambassadors. That he thinks the protestation
may be justified before all Christendom, when the Articles shall be seen.
That, the Legates having proposed those Articles against the intention of his
Holiness, he ought not to refer himself to their discretion hereafter, nor
to cause his Ambassadors to return, until he had full assurance that those
Articles should not be spoken of any more, which being done, he will command
them to go again to the Council.

Concerning the citation and sentence, the King gave order to Henry Clutia, The
French King takes part with the Queen of Navarre.
Lord d'Oysel, to tell the Pope, that his Majesty had understood, to his great
displeasure, that which he did not believe by the fame which was spread, until
he had seen a copy of the monitories affixed in Rome, that the Queen was so
proceeded against, as that he was bound to defend her. First in regard the
cause and danger was common to all Kings, who therefore were obliged to protect
her; and the rather, because she was a widow, and his obligation was the
greater, in respect of the near kindred he has with her, by both lines, and
by agnation with her husband, who died but a little before in the war against
the Protestants, leaving his sons Pupils. Therefore he could not abandon her
cause, following the examples of his ancesters; and the rather, because he
ought not to endure that any should make war against his neighbors under
color of religon; adding, that it was not pious, to put the Kingdoms of
Spain and France, lately joined in friendship, in danger of a bloody war,
for this cause. He said moreover, that the Queen, having many Fees in France,
she could not, by the rights and privileges of that Kingdom, be compelled to
appear, either in person, or by Proctor, adding many examples of Princes and
Popes, who have proceeded with due and lawful moderation. He touched the
form of the citation by Edict, a thing not heard of in former times, invented
by Boniface the eighth, and, as too hard and unjust, moderated by Clement the
fifth, in the Council of Vienna. He said that such citations could, by no
means, take place, but against the inhabitants to whom the access is not
secure, and that, the Queen remaining in France, a great injury was done to
him and the Kingdom, by using that form; as also was done by exposing to
prey, and granting to the Usurpers, the Fees she holds in France, the right
whereof belongs to him. And every one marueiled (he said) that his Holiness
who did favor so affectionately the cause of King Antonie while he lived, in
being his mediator with the King of Spain, would now oppress his children,
and widow. But he complained most of all, that so many Kings, Princes, and
cities having departed from the Church of Rome, with in forty years, he had
not so proceeded with any other, which showed well that he did it not for the
good of her soul, but for other ends. He wished his Hol. to consider, that
power was given to Popes for salvation of souls, not to deprive Princes of
their States, nor to order any thing in earthly possessions, which having been
formerly attempted by them in Germany, did much trouble the public quiet. He
entreated the Pope, to revoke all his Acts against the Queen, protesting,
that, in case he would not, he would proceed to those remedies which his
predecessors have used. He complained also of the cause of the Bishops, and
commanded his Ambassador, And with the Bishops.
that, declaring unto him the ancient examples, the liberties and immunities of
the French Church, and the authority of the Kings in causes Ecclesiastical,
he should pray the Pope not to make any innovation. Monsieur d' Oisel performed
this office with great vehemency, and, after many treaties with the Pope,
obtained of him to speak no more either of the Queen, or of the Bishops.

But in Trent, the Session being ended, and matters well agreed on between the
Legates and Loraine, and the business imparted to the principal Papalins,
Otranto, Taranto, and Parma^, as also to the Emperors Ambassadors, The Card,
of Loraine publishes ye desseigne to finish ye Council.
Loraine began to publish their deseigne, that the Council might be finished
with one Session more. He said he could not be in Trent at Christmas; that
himself, and all the French Bishops must depart before that time; that he
desired to see the Council ended, and was loath to leave so honorable an
assembly; but that he could not otherwise do, being commanded by the King.
The Imperialists also did publish in the Council, that the Emperor did desire
the dispatch, and that the King of the Romans did write, that his desire was
it should be finished by Saint Andrews day, or, at the longest, in the
beginning of the next month by all means. And indeed that King, not to
please the Pope, but because it was his opinion, did solicit the conclusion.
For being to hold a Diet, he was not willing his Father should have
Ambassadors in the Council; and said, that if that were shut up, the affairs
of Religion in Germany would be in far better case.

The greater part of the Fathers were glad to hear this; and Morone making a
Congregation in his house, the fifteenth of November, of the Legates, two
Cardinals, and five and twenty Bishops, the principal of every Nation, he
proposed,, that the Council, having been assembled for the necessities of
Germany and France, and now the Emperor, King of the Romans, Cardinal of
Loraine, and all Princes desiring that it should be finished, they would
speak their opinion concerning the concluding of it, and the manner. Loraine
said, it was necessary to finish it, not to hold Christendom in suspense any
longer, to show the Catholics what they ought to believe, and to take away the
Interim of Germany, which could not be done by any other means, because it
was to continue until the end of the Council; and to continue it longer,
could not be without great damage of the Catholic Church. And that it was
needful to finish the general Council in Trent, to hinder a National in
France. For the manner he said it might be ended with one Session, handling
in it the residue of the reformation, and dispatching the Catechism, and the
Index of the books prohibited, which were in order already, referring other
matters to the Pope, not disputing the Articles of Indulgences and Images, nor
anathematizing particular heretics, but proceeding with general terms only.
They all agreed, in some sort, to finish the Council, except the Archbishop of
Granata, who referred himself to the Ambassador of his King. Some said it
could not absolutely be ended, because so many matters did remain to be
handled: but that it might be done by intimating another ten years after,
which also would serve to hinder the calling of National Councels, and to
defer the determination of the things remaining, and the Anathematismes. The
Bishop of Brescia proposed a middle course between an absolute end and a
suspension; because the former would make the heretics desperate, and the
latter not satisfy the Catholics. But these opinions had no followers, all
the others adhering to that which the Cardinal had said.

For the manner, Otranto thought it necessary to anathematize the Heretics,
because it has been used in all Councels, and is the principal thing which is
required of Synods. For many are not capable to understand the truth or
falsehood of opinions, by their own judgment, but do follow or abhor them
according to the credit or discredit of the authors. He said that the Council
of Chalcedon, full of learned men, to clear themselves whether Theodoret,
Bishop of Ciros, were a Catholic or not, would not hear an account of his
faith, which he desired to render, but only wished him to denounce a plain
anathema against Nestorius; that if Luther and Zuinglius, dead, and their
followers alive, were not anathematized, it might be said, that the Council
had labored in vain. The Cardinal replied, that diverse times did require
diverse counsels; that the differences in Religion were then between the
Bishops and the Priests; that the people were but as an accessory; that the
Grandees either did not meddle, or if they did adhere to any heresy, they did
not make themselves Heads, and leaders. But now all was quite contrary; because
the heretic Ministers, and Preachers could not be said to be heads of the
Sects, but the Princes rather, to whose interests their Ministers and
Preachers do accomodate themselves. He that would name the true Heads of
heretics, must name the Queen of England, the Queen of Navarre, the Prince
of Conde, the Elector Palatine of the Rhene, the Elector of Saxony, and many
other Dukes and Princes of Germany. He said, that this would make them unite,
and show they were sensible of it; and that the condemnation of Luther and
Zuinglius only would so provoke them, that some great confusion would
certainly arise. Therefore to do, not what they would, but what they could,
he thought that the more universal resolution was the better.

Morone sent to call the Ecclesiastical Ambassadors: to whom having imparted
the proposition and opinion of that assembly, they consented to the end and the
manner, according to the opinion of Loraine. Which resolution being also
communicated to the secular Ambassadors, they did all assent, except the
Spaniard, who said, he knew not the express will of his King, and desired
time that he might understand it. Notwithstanding this, the Legates, resolute
to execute this determination, gave the matter concerning Princes, omitting the
Anathematismes, and all the particular Articles, only renewing the old Canons
of the Ecclesiastical liberty and jurisdiction, speaking of Princes with much
reverence, only exhorting them to cause their ministers not to violate them.
The same day at night a Congregation was made, to begin to speak of the
reformation, and an order was set down, that there should be two
Congregations a day, until all the voices were given.

Which were delivered with great shortness and resolution except by some A
difficulty about subiecting the Chapters in Spain to the Bishops.
few Spaniards, who desired to hinder, whereas all the others did endeavor to
promote the expedition, with breuity. The greatest difficulty was concerning
the sixth Article, of the subjection of Chapters to Bishops, in regard of the
great interest, which not only the Bishops, but the King also had in
diminishing the Capitular authority, that they might not oppose the subsidies
which are often imposed in Spain, and, on the other side, for the favors the
Legates did the Chapters, by whose means, and for the reasons alleged, many
Italians, who first seemed to favor the Bishops, turned on the Chapters side.
The Count of Luna sent a Currier to Rome, in diligence, by whose advice Vargas,
the Ambassador, entreated the Pope for his favor to the Bishops. Who,
according to his custom, referring himself to the Council, the Ambassador
complained that the Italian Prelates had been persuaded to change their
opinion in that matter. Whereunto the Pope readily answered, that they changed,
because they were free, but that the departure of the Agent for the Chapters
from the Council was not free, having been driven from thence, and, upon that
occasion, complained, that the Count of Luna, in Trent, did dissuade the
finishing of the Council. Notwithstanding he wrote, according to the
Ambassadors request, but in such terms, as did not disfavor the pretensions
of the Chapters. And finally the Decree was made, with some enlargement of the
Episcopal authority in Spain, but not so much as they desired.

The Venetian Ambassadors made instance, that, in the Article of Patronages,
those of the Emperor and Kings being excepted, those of their Republique might
be excepted also. The Legates were willing to please them, but could hardly
tell how. For to except all Republiques was too much, and to name them
particularly would breed matter of jealousy. They found a temper, to
comprehend that in the number of Kings, declaring that amongst those are
contained the possessors of Kingdoms, though they have not the name.

In the Congregation of the twentieth day, a proposition was made, to The Popes
confirmation is demanded.
demand the Popes confirmation of all the Decrees of the Council, as well
under Paul and Julius, as under his Holiness. The Archbishop of Granata
opposed; saying, that in the sixteenth and last Session under Julius, when the
Council was suspended, it was ordained that all the Decrees made by the Synod
until then should be observed, without saying that there was any need of
confirmation, so that to demand it now would be to condemn those Fathers,
who then thought that the Decrees might be executed, without any confirmation
at all. He professed he did not say this because he disliked the demand of a
confirmation, but that means might be found to use words not prejudicial.
Otranto answered, that the Decree, named by Granata, did not only not favor
the opposition which he drew from it, but did resolve it rather, showing
plainly, that the Council did not think the ordinations obligatory, because
it did not command, but simply exhort that they should be received and
observed, whereof no other cause could be alleged, but the want of
confirmation. Granata was quiet, and resolved to demand the confirmation, as it
was proposed by the common consent. But in the manner there was some
difference. Some were of opinion that the Council should demand confirmation,
and dissolve without expecting answer; saying it could not otherwise be done
with dignity, either of the Apostolic Sea, or of the Council, and that it
would seem to be an accord made between them; and if any thing should not
be confirmed, the provision must be made by the same Council. To satisfy
these, who were many, Morone was willing, that, in the Session of the ninth,
which, in regard of the multiplicity of the matters, was thought would continue
three days, the first day a Currier should be dispatched to demand the
confirmation, at whose return another Session should be held without any
action, but to dissolve the Synod. But this opinion had much contradiction. For
if the Pope would confirm the Decrees without examining them, the same
difficulty did return; if with examination, the time of some months was
necessary. Finally, the Cardinal of Loraine told the Fathers, that these
difficulties were to prolong the Council; that himself and the other French
men must needs depart, being so commanded by the King, and that after their
departure the Council could not be called General, there wanting a Nation,
whereby the dignity and honor of it would be diminished, and National
Synods and other difficulties might be raised. This half protestation, with
the persuasions of the Imperialists for the expedition, was cause (after many
consultations) of a resolution, to demand the confirmation, and dissolve the
Synod in the same Session.

The Cardinal of Loraine wrote presently to de Ferrieres, who was at Venice,
that the matter concerning Princes being accommodated, he might return to
Trent. Who answered he could not, without particular commission De Ferrieres
refuses to return to Trent.
out of France, because the King in his letters of the ninth, had written to
him, as also to him the Cardinal, that when the Decree was made, and himself
advised thereof, he would send him back; so that it was necessary to expect
the order of his Majesty. But he wrote to the King, that he thought it not
fit for his service to return, in regard that the rights of the Crown, and
the liberty of the Gallican Church were violated in other Decrees also,
published in that Session.

The reformation standing in good terms, the care of composing the Decree of
Purgatory, invocation, worship, relics, and images of Saints was committed to
the Cardinal of Varmia, and eight Prelates; who, thought they all resolved not
to move any difficulties, yet they did not agree. Some were willing to make
mention of the place of Purgatory, and of the fire, as was done in the Council
of Florence. Others said, that this being hard to do, and impossible to find
words to express it, which might give satisfaction to all, it was better to
say only that the good works of the faithful did help the dead for the
remission of their sins. The Archbishop of Lanciano said, that, in handling
the Mass, mention was made, that that sacrifice is The manner of the Decree
concerning Purgatory.
offered for those that are deceased in CHRIST, not entirely purged; by which
words the doctrine of Purgatory was sufficiently defined: so that nothing
remained to be done, but to enjoin the Bishops to cause it to be preached,
and to take way the abuses, taking care also that there be no want of due
prayers for the dead. And so the Decree was made.

In matter of the Saints they easily agreed to condemn, particularly, all
Opinions about the adoration of Images.
the opinions, contrary to the uses of the Roman Church. Only about Images
there was some difference. The Archbishop said, no honor was due unto them,
but by relation to the thing signified. But Lainez, the General, who also was
one of the composers, added, that, when they were dedicated, and put in place
of adoration, a worship did belong unto them, besides the adoration due unto
the Saint worshipped in them, calling this adoration Relative, and the other
Obiectiue. He proved his opinion, because the vessels and vestments
consecrated deserve a reverence belonging unto them, by virtue of the
consecration, though they do not represent any Saint; and so an adoration is
due unto the Image dedicated by virtue of the dedication, besides the reason of
the representation. The Cardinal of Varmia, for satisfaction of both,
concluded, that the opinion of the Archbishop ought to be expressed, as more
facile, and plain, but without words which might prejudice the other.

Deputies were appointed also to reuiew the reformation of Friars and Nuns,
besides those Prelates who had composed it, and the Generals of the Orders were
added unto them. These changed nothing, but that it being generally granted, in
the third Article, to all Monasteries of Regular Mendicants to possess
immooueable goods, though it be contrary to their institution, Friar Francis
Zamotra, General of the Minor Obseruants, desired that his Order might be
excepted; saying, he meant to live according to the rule of Saint Francis,
from which in was not fit to exempt those who did not demaundit. And
satisfaction was given him by excepting his Order: as also the Capuchins, at
the instance of Friar Thomasodi Castello, their General. General Lainez
desired also the exception of the company of Jesus; saying, that, howsoever the
Colleges deputed to entertain scholars, who were not yet religious, might
enjoy mooueable goods, yet the house^ professed, in which the society does
essentially consist, might not live but by begging, without possessing any
immovable thing whatsoever. This was easily granted. But he returned the next
day, desiring the exception might be removed, and said, that his society
would always preserve themselves in pure (...)city, in the houses professed,
but did not care to have this honor with the world, The Jesuits proteste to
line with begging, but will not be bound unto it.
thinking their desert in the sight of God to be sufficient; which would be
the greater, if, being able to make use of the power given them by the
Council, they should forbear to do it. This resolution was made by consent
of all the four Jesuits in the Council, proposed by Father Torres, who said,
they should, by this means, have liberty to use or not to use the grant of
the Council, according to opportunity.

In the fifteenth Article it was constituted, that none should profess, before
the age of eighteen complete, and that every one should be a Nouice two
years at the least, at what age soever he entered. The Generals opposed;
saying, it was not just to hinder any from entering into Religion, who was
capable to know what the Regular vows did import; which capacity was judged
by the Church to be at the age of sixteen years, in a time when the world
was not so well awake, and therefore that it was fit rather to make the age
less then greater: which reason they used also against the two years of the
Nouiceship. In the end, because they were willing to please all, they resolved
to satisfy the Generals also, and to make no innovation herein.

Besides the twenty two Articles, there was another, in which power was given
to the Prouincials, Generals, and Heads of the Orders to expel the
incorrigible out of the Order, and to deprive them of the habit. Which
Johannes Antonius Fachinnettus, Bishop of Nicastro, opposed sharply; saying,
that the profession and Act of admission to it are a mutual contract, and, as
it were, a marriage, by which the professed is bound to the Monastery, and the
Monastery to him, and as the one could not depart, so the other could not put
him away, and that, by means of this Decree, all Cities would be filled with
expelled Friars, to the great scandal of the world. The Archbishop of Rosano
said to the contrary, that the relation was not as between man and wife, but
as between father and son, and that the son could never lawfully refuse
the father, but the father might emancipate his son, especially if he were
disobedient, and that it was a less evil to see expelled Friars in the
Cities, then incorrigible in the Monasteries. The Generals were not all of one
opinion. The perpetual did approve the expulsion, but the temporary did not.
The mayor part inclined, (according to the custom of a multitude, when it
consulteth) to leave things in the state they were, and not to decree either
for the one side or the other. But, in this consultation, it was often
repeated, and by many, that the people did receive great scandal to see some
wear a religious habit many years, and afterward become seculars. This
brought the secret profession into question, and made a consultation to begin,
whether they ought to declare it to be of force, as it had been until that
time, or that no profession does bind, but that which is express. But this had
difficulties also; for temper whereof, this resolution was taken, that the
religious Prelat, the year of probation being ended, should be bound either to
give the Nouice leave to depart, or admit him to the profession. And this was
inserted in the sixteenth Article, as in a place convenient.

General Laynez commended the Decree very much, as necessary; but desired that
his society might be excepted, alleging, that the condition of it was
different from that of other regular Orders, that in those tacit profession
has place, by ancient custom, and approbation of the Apostolic Sea, which
in their society is prohibited; that the cause of scandal which the people
receives in seeing some in a secular habit, who have long worn the
religious, does cease in them, in regard the habit of the Jesuits does not
differ from the secular; that their society has also a confirmation from the
Apostolic Sea, that the Superior may admit to the profession after a long
time; which has never been made to any Regular. All inclined to favor him
with this exception; for extention whereof he contended, that the Rules of
speaking Latin did require that the expression should be in the plural,
saying, that by these things the Synod does not intend to alter the institution
of the Jesuits, etc. And it was not considered that this manner of speech might
be referred both to the admitting or dismissing of Nouices in the end of the
Laymez makes use of the negligence of the Fathers in Trent.
year of Probation, and to the whole Contents of the sixteenth Article; as
also that it might be referred to all the things contained in the sixteen
heads. But the Father knew how to make use of the negligence of others, laying
a foundation, on which the succeeding Jesuits might build that singularity
which now appears in their Society.

The Congregation of the two and twentieth treated of Indulgences; the
difficulty and length of which matter made the mayor part to be of opinion to
speak of it no more, in regard all were resolved before to avoid impediments.
But some desired to handle them, saying, that otherwise the Heretics would
say, that they were omitted, because there was no ground to maintain them.
Others thought it sufficient to speak of their use only, and to take away the
abuses which the corruption of times has brought in. The Ambassador of
Portugal said, he was sorry that provision was not made for the Crusadoes,
but would be silent, lest occasion might be taken to prolong the Council.
The Emperors Ambassadors, though they did jointly solicit the Expedition,
by commission from their Master, were not of accord in this. Prague would not
have them speak of the points of doctrine. Fiue-Churches said, that if they
were omitted, and the abuses of relics, Images, and Purgatory not taken
away, the Synod was quite shamed.

The Bishop of Modena told the Fathers, that, in case they would handle
Indulgences, as they had done Justification, considering all the causes, and
resolving all the questions, they would find it difficult, and to require a
long time, it being impossible to make that matter plain, but by determining
first whether they be absolutions, or compensations only, and suffrages; or
whether they do remit the penalties imposed by the Confessor only, The
Council dares not handle the matter of Indulgences exactly.
or all that are due: likewise whether the Treasure, which is put for their
foundation, does only consist of the merits of CHRIST, or whether those of
Saints be required also; whether they may be given, though the receiver
perform nothing; whether they extend to the dead also; and other things of no
less difficulty. But to determine that the Church may grant them, and has
done so in all times, and that they are profitable for the faithful, who do
worthily receive them, needs no great disputation. The authority to grant
them is proved by the Scripture; their continual use by Apostolical
tradition, and authority of Councels, and the perspicuitie of the whole matter
by the uniform doctrine of the Schoolmen. Upon this a Decree may be composed
without difficulty. The opinion had many followers; and he, with other Friar
Bishops, was deputed to make a Decree in this sense, adding a provision against
abuses.

In the Congregations following they handled the Index of books, Catechism,
Breuiarie, Missals, and Agends. And all things, determined in the particular
congregations of the Prelates, deputed for these matters since the beginning of
the Synod, were read. Wherein they did not all agree. Some thought that
certain Authors and Books were censured without reason; The Index,
Catechism, etc.
and some, that others were omitted which did more deserve censure. And there
was no less difficulty about the Catechism, some thinking that that which
was made, was not fit to be made the common for the whole Church, in which the
greater part are simple, and some desiring that more matter might be put into
it. And they differed as much about the Rituall books, some desiring an
uniformity in the whole Church, and some maintaining their own. But it
appearing that these matters could not be decided in a whole year, the
Legates propoled that all should be referred to the Pope. Whereunto some few
Prelates did not consent, and namely the Bishop of Lerida made a long oration
to show, that if any thing were proper to the Council it was the Catechism,
it being a book, which, after the Symbol, ought to hold the first place in the
Church; that the Rituall books ought to hold the second, in correcting of
which there was need of an exquisite knowledge of antiquity, and of the
customs of all countries, which will not be found in the Court of Rome;
where, though there be men of excellent wit, and of great learning, yet they
want skill in this kind which is necessary to do any thing commendably herein,
and that this is more proper to the Council. But the resolution to finish, and
the desire to depart from Trent, caused him to have but small audience.

The five and twentieth of this month, the Count of Luna came to the Legates,
with an instance in writing. He complained that the most principal matters
for which the Council was assembled were omitted, and the others precipitated;
that they went about to finish the Synod without the priuitie of his King;
concluding, that they ought to hear the opinions of the Divines concerning the
points of doctrine, and expect an answer out of Spain for the end of the
Council. The Legates answered; that things were in such forwardness, that
there was no time to expect, nor was possible to withholde so many Bishops, who
were already in order to depart. The Count replied, that if the Council were
ended without the knowledge of his King, besides the instance, he would do
something else, as he thought convenient. Hereupon the Legates sent presently
to the Pope, and the Count to the Ambassador Vargas, to treat with his
Holiness. But Vargas thought it superfluous to speak any more herein, both
because, at the coming of the currier, the Pope fell extreme sick, and
because having made the same instance a few days before, the Popes final
answer was, that he referred it The Popes sickness.
to the Council, the liberty whereof, so much desired by his King also, he
would not impeach. And the Ambassador saying, that the Council ought to be
held open, because all the world did desire it, the Pope demanded what that
world was which would have it open; the Ambassador answered, Spain would; the
Pope replied, Write into Spain, that if they buy and study Ptolomie, they
shall find that Spain is not the whole world. The Legates used many
persuasions to the Count of Luna; and so did Loraine also, and the Emperors
Ambassadors. But, not being able to prevail, they labored against him, the
Ambassadors in the name of the Emperor, King of the Romans, and of all
Germany, and Loraine in the name of his King, and of the Kingdom of France.
The Legates, resolving to finish the Council, according to the Popes order,
howsoever the Spanish Ambassador might oppose, were diligent in dispatch of
the matters.

While these things were in doing, the first of December, a currier came from
Rome late at night, with advise, that the Pope was suddenly fallen into a
dangerous infirmity. He brought letters from Cardinal Borromeo to the Legates,
Causes the end of the Council to be hastened.
and Cardinal of Loraine, that they should hasten the Council as much as
might be, and finish it without respect of any, to withstand the inconveniences
which might occur about the election of the Pope, in case the Council should
be open in time of vacancie. In the letters there were some few words written
with the Popes own hand, who did commit the same absolutely, and told Loraine
he should remember his promise. It is certain (to speak this particular here,
though out of place) that the Pope was resolved, in case he did not recover
quickly, to create eight Cardinals, and to take order that no confusion might
arise in the election of his successor. The Legates and Loraine purposed to
anticipate the time of the Session, and either with the propositions, or
without to finish the Council within two days, that the news of the Popes
death might not first come. Therefore they sent to communicate the advice
received, and their resolution, to the Ambassadors, and did negotiate with the
principal Prelates. They all agreed except the Spanish Ambassador, who said
he had order from his King, that if the Sea were vacant, he should not suffer
the Pope to be elected in Council, but that the election should be by
Cardinals, so that there was no need to precipitate. But Morone answered, he
knew for certain, that the Ambassador of France, who was as yet in Venice,
had order from his King, to protest that the Kingdom would not obey any Pope,
but him that should Notwithstanding the opposition made by the Count o^ Luna.
be elected in Council; so that it was necessary by all means to finish it,
for avoiding of danger. The Count of Luna made a Congregation of Spanish
Prelates in his house, and spread a fame, that he was resolved to protest and
oppose.

Notwithstanding, the Legates held a Congregation the next morning, in which
the Decrees of Purgatory and of the Saints were read, as they were composed by
the Cardinal of Varmia, and the other deputies. Afterward the reformation of
Friars was read, and all appooued with very great brevity, and a little
contradiction. Then the Articles of reformation were read. In the first of the
manners of Bishops, at the passage, where it is said, that they shall not
enrich their kindred and family by the revenues of the Church, it was said of
the revenues of the Church, of which they are faithful dispencers for the
Pope. The Bishop of Sal^nona did oppose this point, saying, that the portions
of the poor being divided by ancient Canon, as also of the fabrique and of the
Episcopal table, it cannot be said that bishops, and other beneficed persons
are dispencers, but were Lords of their own part; which if they did spend ill,
they did sin and incur the wrath of God, as every other man did, who
spends his goods amiss; but if they were dispencers for the poor, they
should be bound to restitution, which cannot be said. There were many
discourses, the mayor part defending that beneficed men were Lords of the
fruits, or vsufructuaries, and others saying, as the French Ambassador had
done in his Oration, that they have but the use only. Some defended the words
of the Decree that they were dispencers, alleging the place in the Gospel of
the faithful servant, and the Doctrine of all the holy Fathers. But the
precipitation to finish the Council, caused those words, that is, of which
they are appointed faithful dispencers for the poor, to be omitted, as also
other difficulties to be passed over in silence.

In the Article of Patronages, the Ambassadors of Sauoy and Florence made
request that those of the Princes might be accepted also, or that all might be
comprehended but those of the Emperor and Kings. Satisfaction was given them,
by accepting, besides the Emperor, Kings, or Possessors of Kingdoms, other
great and supreme Princes, who have soueraignety in A dispute whether the
Decrees made under Paul and Julius should be read.
their dominions. Afterward a proposition was made for the reading in Session
of all the Decrees made under Paul and Julius, to be approved; which Modena
opposed, saying that it would be a derogation to the authority of the
Council of those times, if it should seem that the things then done had need
of a new confirmation of the Fathers, and would show that this and that was not
all one, because none can confirm his own things. Others said, it was
necessary to do it, for that cause that authority might not be taken from
them, saying, that they were not of the same Council. And the same Frenchmen,
who before did so earnestly desire that it might be declared that the Council
was new, and not continuated with that under Paul and Julius, did now labor
more then others, that all cause of doubting might be taken away, that all the
acts from the year 1545. until the end; were not of the same Synod. Thus it
happens, as in humane affairs, so in religion also, that one credulity is
changed with his interests. Therefore now, all aiming at one mark, it was
determined, simply to read them, and say no more. For so the unity of the
Council was most plainly declared, and all difficulty removed which the word
confirmation might bring, leaving every one to think what he listed, whether
the reading of them, did cousequently import a confirmation, or a declaration
of their validity, or an inference that it was one Synod which made them with
that which read them.

Finally a proposition was made to anticipate the Session, and to celebrate The
Session is anticipated.
it the next day; and, if all the actions could not then be dispatched, to
continue it the day following, and to dismiss the Fathers, and subscribe all
the acts of the Council on Sunday. The Spanish Bishops opposed this, saying,
that there was no necessity to abbreuiate the time. Notwithstanding Card.
Morone said, that the Session should be held. And Loraine and the Emperors
Ambassadors renewed their persuasions to the Count of Luna, that he would yield
to that which is so uniformly resolved. Who in the end, after many things
spoken and replied, was content upon two conditions; one, that a decree might
be made that the Pope should make provision for all things that remain;
another that in the handling of Indulgences it should not be said that they
ought to be given gra^ts, nor any other thing that might prejudice the
Crusadoes of pain.

That day therefore being come, which was Friday, the third of December, they
wentto the Church with the usual Ceremonies, and the Mass was said, in which
Ierolamus Ragazzone, Bishop of Nazianzo, made the Sermon. And held the 3.
December.
He summoned all the world to admire that most happy day, in which the The
Sermon.
temple of God was restored, and the ship brought into the haven, after so many
tempests, and storms; and that the joy had been greater, if the Protestants
would have had their part in it, which was not the Fathers fault. He said, they
had chosen that city for the council, situated in the mouth of Germany,
even at the threshold of their houses, without any guard, not to give suspicion
of want of liberty; that the Protestants had been invited, by a Safe Conduct,
expected and prayed; that, for the safety of their souls, the Catholic faith
was expounded, and the Ecclesiastical discipline restored. He showed the
abuses taken away in holy Rites. He said that if there had been no other cause
to call a Council, it had been necessary to do it for the prohibition of
Clandestine marriages. And, passing to the things constituted for reformation,
he showed, from step to step, the public service the Church would receive by
those decrees. He added, that the explication of faith, with the reformation
of manners, had been handled in former Councels, but not more diligently in
any, that the arguments and reasons of the heretics had been often handled and
discussed, and many times with great contention, not because there was any
discord amongst the Fathers, which cannot be amongst those who are of the same
opinion, but to proceed with sincerity, and so to clear the truth as that
more could not have been done if the heretics had been present. He exhorted
all, that, being returned to their Diocesses, they would put the Decrees in
execution; as also to thank God first, and then the Pope, showing what he
has done to favor the Council, sending Nuncij into the Protestant Countries,
Legates to Trent, exciting Princes to send Ambassadors, sparing no cost to
maintain the Council in liberty. He commended the Legates, as being good
guides, and moderators, and, in particular, Cardinal Morone, and concluded
with the commendation of the Fathers.

After the ceremonies were ended the Decrees were read. In the doctrine The
Decrees.
of Purgatory it was said that the Catholic Church has taught, out Of
Purgatory.
of the Scripture, traditions, and in this same Synod, that there is
Purgatory, and that the souls detained in it, are assisted by the suffrages
of the faithful, and the sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore it does command
Bishops to teach sound doctrine in this matter, and cause it to be preached,
without handling subtle questions before the ignorant people, not suffering
uncertain and unlikely things to be published; prohibiting curiosities,
superstition, and dishonest gain, procuring that those suffrages be fully
executed which are usually made for the dead by the living, as also that the
things ordained in last wills, or in any other manner be fully performed.

In matter of the Saints, it does command Bishops and all others who have Of
Saints.
the charge of teaching that they instruct the people, concerning the
intercession and invocation of them, honor of relikes, lawful use of Images
according to the ancient doctrine of the Church, consent of Fathers, and
Decrees of Councels, teaching that the Saints do pray for men, that it is
profitable to invoke them, and to have recourse to their prayers and
assistance. Afterward, all in one periode, it does condemn seven asse^tions
in this matter. That the Saints of Heaven ought not to be inuocated. That they
do not pray for men. That it is idolatry to invoke them to pray for us,
though singularly. That it is repugnant to the word of God, contrary to the
honor of CHRIST, and a foolishness to pray unto them, either with heart or
voice. That the bodies of Saints, for whose sake God does give us many
benefits, ought not to be worshipped. That their relics and sepultures ought
not to be honored. And that it is in vain to make mention of them, to
obtain assistance.

Concerning images, that those of CHRIST, of the Virgin, and of Saints Of
Images.
ought to be kept in the Churches, and to have due honor given them; not that
there is any divinity, or virtue in them, but because the honor redoundeth to
the thing represented, CHRIST and the Saints being worshipped by the images,
whose simisitude they bear; as has been defined by the Councels, especially
in the second of Nice. That for histories, the mysteries of religion, expressed
in pictures, are taught to the people, and the Articles of faith called to
their mind; and not only the Benefits of CHRIST are suggested to them, but
the miracles and examples of Saints are even put before their eyes, that they
may thank God for them, and imitate them; anathematizing those that teach or
believe the contrary.

Afterward it adds; that, desiring to take away the abuses, and occasions of
pernicious errors, it does ordain, that, if there because to make an image of
the Divinity, to declare the Historical pictures of the holy Scripture, the
people be taught that it is not done because it can be seen with bodily eyes,
that all superstition in invocation of Saints, worship of relikes; and use of
images be taken away, that all dishonest gain be abolished, all excess
avoided, images not pictured, nor adorned lasciuiously, nor banquets made in
the Feasts of Saints, or visitation of relics, that no unusual image be put
in any Church or other place, but approved by the Bishop, that no new miracles
be admitted, or new relics received, and in case of any doubt or abuse hard
to be removed, or great difficulty, the Bishop shall expect the opinion of
the Provincial Council neither shall any thing new, or unusual in the Church
be decreed without the consent of his Holiness.

The Decree of the reformation of the Regulars did contain two and The Decrees
of Reformation of Regulars.
twenty heads, with these particular precepts, in sum, 1. That all shall
observe the rule of the profession, especially in regard of the perfection,
which consists in vows and essential Precepts, as also in regard of their
common food and apparel. 2. None shall possess goods mooueable or
immooueable, as their own neither shall their Superiors grant immooueables,
so much as for use, government, or Commenda, and in the use of mooueables,
there shall be neither superfluity nor want. 3. The Synod grants to all
Monasteries, though Mendicant, except the Capuchins, and the minor Obseruants,
to possess immovable goods, with command, that the number of religious in the
Monasteries may be established to contain as many as can be maintained by the
rents or usual alms, neither shall such places be built hereafter without
license of the Bishops. 4. No religious person shall go to the service of any
place or person, without leave of his Superior, nor depart from his Convent,
without his command. 5. Bishops shall have care to restore, and preserve the
enclosure of the Nuns, exhorting Princes, and commanding Magistrates, upon
pain of excommunication, to assist them. Nuns shall not go out of the
Monasteries, and none shall enter, upon pain of excommunication, without
exception of sex, condition, or age, except it be with license. The Cloisters
of Nuns which are without the walls of the Cities and Castles shall be
brought within. 6. That elections be made by secret scrutinie, and titulars,
shall not be created to this effect, or the voice of the absent supplied,
otherwise the election shall be void. 7. In the Cloisters of Nuns the
Superior shall be forty years of age, and eight years professed or, where
this cannot be of thirty years of age at the least, and five years
professed. No woman shall have superiority in two Nunries, and he that is to
ouersee the Election, shall stand without the gates. 8. The Monasteries,
immediately under the Apostolic Sea, shall be reduced into a Congregation, and
shall give order for their government, and their superiors shall have the same
authority as others have, which have been formerly reduced into a
Congregation. 9. The Monasteries of Nuns, subject immediately to the
Apostolic Sea, shall be governed by the Bishops, as Delegates. 10. The
Nuns shall confess and communicate, once a month, at the least, and,
besides the ordinary Confessor, one extraordinary shall be given twice or
thrice a year, and they shall not keep the Sacrament within the Monastery.
11. That in Monasteries, which have cure of the souls of Secular men, those
who do exercise it, shall be subject to the Bishop as far as concerns the
ministry of the Sacraments, except the Monastery of Clugni, or where the
Abbats, Generals, or Heads of the Orders do reside, or where the Abbats have
Episcopal or temporal jurisdiction. 12. The Regulars shall publish, and
observe the Papal and Episcopal censures, and interdicts, as also the feasts
which the Bishop shall command. 13. The Bishop shall be judge of all
controversies for precedence, between Ecclesiastical persons, whether Secular
or Regular, and no appeal from him shall lie; and all shall be bound to go
to public processions, except those who live in strict enclosures. 14. The
Regular, who resideth in the Cloister, and commits an excess abroad shall
be punished by his Superior, when the Bishop shall appoint, who also shall be
certified of the punishment, or otherwise the delinquent may be punished by
him. 15. Profession made before the age of sixeteene years complete, and a
year of probation, shall be void. 16. No ronunciation or obligation shall be
of force, except it be made within two months before the profession, and with
license of the Ordinary; and the time of probation being ended, the
Superiors, shall admit the N(...) to the profession, or send them out of the
Monasteries; but not meaning to comprehend the Jesuits. The Monastery shall
not receive any thing of a Nouice before the profession, except food and
apparel, and, at his departure, all shall be restored that belongs to him.
17. No virgin shall receive the habit, or make profession, except she be
examined by the bishop, and her will well understood, and that she has the
conditions required by the rule of that Monastery. 18. That all such be
anathematized, of what condition soever, who shall (except in lawful cases)
force any woman to enter into a Monastery, receive the habit, or make
profession, as also those who shall, without just cause, hinder those who would
enter willingly, The Penetenti or Conuertite are Nuns who have been
Courtis^us.
except the Penitenti, or conuertite. 19. He that shall pretend a nullitie in
the profession shall not be heard after five years from the first day
thereof, and shall allege the cause before the Superior and Ordinary,
before he depose the habit, and none shall go to a more large religion, nor
have leave to wear the habit secretly. 20. The Abbats and Heads of the Orders
shall visit the Monasteries, subject unto them, though but by Commenda, and the
Commendataries shall be bound to execute the Ordinations; and, in those, Priors
and Superiors, who have spiritual government shall be created by the
Chapters, or visiters of the Orders. 21. That the Synod does desire to
restore discipline in all Monasteries, but sees it is impossible, in regard of
the stiffenecked and difficult age, yet they will not omit to use means, that
hereafter provision may be made therein, and do hope that his Holiness, as
far as he shall see the times will comport, will provide that a Regular
professed person shall be made governor of Monasteries commended, and those
that shall be vacant hereafter shall not be conferred but upon Regulars; and
those who have Monasteries in Commenda, and are Heads of Orders, if provision
be not made within six months of a Regular successor, they shall make
provision, or quit the place, otherwise the Commendaes shall be vacant. And,
in the provision of Monasteries, the quality of every one shall be expressed
by name, otherwise the provision shall be accounted surreptitious. 22. That it
shall be understood that all Regulars are subject to these Decrees,
notwithstanding any privilege, though by foundation; commanding Bishops and
Abbats to execute them immediately, and praying, and commanding Princes and
Magistrates, to assist them, as often as they shall be required.

The reading of the general reformation did presently follow; which, The
general reformation.
after an exhortation to Bishops for exemplary life, modesty in apparel and
food, and frugality, does forbid. 1. That they shall give to their kindred, or
any of their family, any part of the revenues of the Church, except they be
poor; extending the same to all beneficed persons, secular, or regular, and
also unto Cardinals. 2. That the Bishops shall, in the first Provincial
Council, receive the Decrees of this Synod of Trent, promise obedience to the
Pope, Anathematize the heresies condemned, and every Bishop promoted hereafter
shall do the same, in the first Synod; and all beneficed men, who are to
assist in the Diocesan Synod, shall do the same therein. Those who have the
care of Universities, and studies generab, shall endeavor to make the Decrees
to be received in them, and the Doctors to teach the Catholic faith in
conformity of them, and shall take a solemn oath herein every year. And for
those which are immediately subject to the Pope, his Holiness will have care
that they be reformed in the same manner by his Delegats, or as he shall
think fit. 3. That, howsoever the sword of excommunication is the sinew of
Ecclesiastical discipline, profitable to keep men in obedience, it is to be
used with sobriety and circumspection, having found by experience, that it is
more contemned then feared, when it is denounced rashly, for a small cause.
Therefore it shall not be denounced by any, but by the Bishop for things lost
or stolen; who shall not grant it at the persuasion of any secular authority
whatsoever, though a Magistrate. And in judicial causes, in which a real or
personal execution may be made, they shall abstain from censures; and in
civil, belonging in what manner soever, to the Ecclesiastical Court, they may
use pecuniary punishments, or proceed by distraining of goods, or imprisonment
of the parties themselves, with their executors or others; and in case they be
not able to execute really or personally, they may proceed to excommunication.
And the same shall be observed in criminal causes. The secular Magistrate
shall not prohibit the Ecclesiastical to excommunicate, or revoke
excommunication, upon pretense that the Decree has not been observed. The
person excommunicated shall not only not be received to participate with the
faithful, but, if he persevere in the censures, he may be proceeded against,
as suspected of heresy. 4. It does give power to the Bishops, in the Diocesan
Synods, and to the Heads of the Orders, in the general Chapters, to ordain
for their Churches that which shall be for the honor of God, and benefit of
them, when there shall be an obligation to celebrate so many Masses by
testamentarie legacies, that they cannot be performed, or that the alms is so
small that none can be found to perform the charge, but with condition, that
memory be always made of those parties deceased who have left the legacies. 5.
That, in the collation, or any other disposition of Benefices, no derogation
be made to the qualities, conditions, and charges required, or imposed in the
erection or foundation, or by any other constitution, otherwise the provision
shall be accounted surreptitious. 6. When the Bishop, not in time of
visitation, does proceed against the Canons, the Chapter shall elect two in the
beginning of every year, by whose council and consent, the Bishop shall
proceed in all the acts, and the voices of both shall be as one; and in case
they both dissent from the Bishop, a third shall be elected by them, who shall
determine the controversy; and if they cannot agree, the third man shall be
elected by the next Bishop, But, in causes of concubinaries, or other more
heinous, the Bishop may receive information alone, and proceed to retention;
and for the residue, shall observe what is ordained. The Bishop shall have the
first seat in the quire, Chapter, or other public places, and shall choose
his place. The Bishop shall preside in the Chapter, except in cases belonging
to him or his which authority shall not be communicated to his vicar; and
those who are not of the Chapter shall, in causes Ecclesiastical, be all
subject to the Bishop, and where Bishops have more jurisdiction then the
aforesaid, the Decree shall not have place. 7. Hereafter no regresse or
access to any Ecclesiastical benefice shall be granted, and those which be
granted already, shall neither be extended nor transferred: and herein the
Cardinals shall be comprehended also. Coadiutors, with future succession, shall
not be made in any Ecclesiastical benefices whatsoever; and if, in Cathedral
Churches or Monasteries, it shall be necessary to do it, the cause shall first
be known by the Pope, and the due qualities shall concur. 8. All beneficed
men shall use as much hospitality as their revenue will give them leave: and it
does command those who have the government of Hospitals, under what title
soever, to exercise it, as they are bound by the revenues deputed hereunto; and
if persons of that sort as the institution does require be not found in the
place, the revenues shall be converted to a pious use as near as can be to
that, as shall seem good to the Bishop with two of the Chapter. And those who
will not give satisfaction in this charge of hospitality may be compelled
(though they be Laikes) by censures, and other remedies, to perform their
duty, and shall be bound to the restitution of fruits in court of conscience,
and such gouernements shall not begiuen hereafter to any; for longer time then
three years. 9. The title of Patronage shall be showed to be authentical by
foundation, or donation, or by presentations multiplied time out of mind, or by
some other lawful manner. But in persons and communities, in whom usurpation
is usually presumed, the proof shall be more exact, and time immemoriall shall
not suffice, except presentations of fifty years at the lest be
authentically showed, and that they have all taken effect. Other sorts of
Patronages shall be understood to be abrogated, except those of the Emperor,
Kings, possessours of Kingdoms, and supreme Princes, and of general studies.
The Bishop may refuse to admit those that are presented by the Patrons, if they
be not fit; and the Patrons shall not meddle with the fruits, neither shall the
right of Patronage be transferred against the canonical ordinations: and the
unions of simple benefices to those which have right of patronage, if they have
not really taken effect, shall wholly cease, and the benefices shall be reduced
to liberty, and those that have been made within forty years, though they
have been executed, shall be reuiewed by the Bishops, and if any defect be
found, shall be made void, and likewise all Patronages shall be reuiewed, made
within forty years, for augmentation of dowry of the Church, or for building
it anew; and if they shall not be found to be for the evident vtility of the
benefice, they shall be revoked, and that shall be restored to the Patrons
which is due unto them. 10. That in Provincial Councels or Diocesan, four
persons at the least, shall be elected, endowed with fit qualities, to whom
Ecclesiastical causes shall be committed which are to be delegated by the
Legates, Nuncij, or Apostolic Sea, and all other delegations shall be
thought to be surreptitious. 11. Money shall not be received before hand for
Ecclesiastical goods, in prejudice of the successors, nor Ecclesiastical
jurisdictions rented out, neither shall the Farmours of them have power to
exercise them: and the farming of Ecclesiastical things, though confirmed by
the Pope, done within thirty years, for a long time, that is, for twenty nine
or more years, ought to be judged by the Provincial Synod to have bin done
with damage of the Church. 12. Those who are bound to pay tenthes, shall pay
them hereafter, to whom they are entirely obliged, and he that with holds
them ought to be communicated, and not to be absolved before restitution. And
it exhorts all, to whom God has given wealth, to impart some of it to
Bishops and Priests, who have poor Churches. 13. Whereas the fourth of the
funerals was usually paid, until within these forty years, unto the
Episcopal or Parish Church, and was afterward granted to pious places, it
shall be restored to them again. 14 It does forbid all Clearkes to keep
Concubines, or any suspected women, at home, or abroad, which if they forbear
not to do after admonition, they shall be deprived of the third part of their
Ecclesiastical rents, and of all, after the second admonition, and suspended
also from administration of the Sacraments; and, in case they persevere, they
shall be deprived of all Benefices, and made incapable of any other, until
they shall be dispensed with: and if, after they have forsaken them, they
shall return, they shall be excommunicated also, and the cognition of these
causes shall belong only to Bishops, summarily. But Clearkes, not beneficed,
shall be punished with imprisonment, suspension, or inhabilitie. And if the
Bishops themselves shall fall into the like error, and not amend, after
admonition, given by the Provincial Synod, they shall be susspended, and, if
they persevere, they shall be delated to the Pope. 15 The sons of Clearkes,
not borne of lawful matrimony, shall not have any Benefice, or ministry in
Churches where their fathers have, or have had a Benefice, nor have any
Pensions in Benefices, which the fathers either have now, or have had: and if,
at any time, the father and son shall be beneficed in the same Church, the
son shall be bound to resign within three months; prohibiting also
resignations which the father shall make to another, that he may resign his
own to his son. 16. Benefices with cure shall not be converted into simple
Benefices, and in those which are converted already, if the perpetual Vicar
has not a convenient rouenue, it shall be assigned to him, at the pleasure of
the Bishop. 17. Whereas some Bishops carry themselves basely toward the
Ministers of Kings, men of pre-eminence, and Barons, as well in the Church, as
without, and not only give them place, with too much indignity, but serve them
in person, the Synod detesting this, and reviving the Canons concerning the
Decorum of Episcopal dignity, does command Bishops to forbear this, and
regard their Decree, both in Church and without, remembering they are Pastors;
and also commands Princes, and others, to give them honor, and reverence,
due to fathers. 18. The Canons shall be observed indistinctly by all, and shall
not be dispensed but for a cause, heard with maturity, and without cost. 19.
The Emperor, Kings, and Princes, who shall grant duel between Christians,
shall be excommunicated, and deprived of the dominion of the place in which the
duel is committed, if they hold it from the Church; and the Combattants, and
Judges of the combat, shall be excommunicated, have their goods confiscated,
and be perpetually infamous: and if they die in the duel, they shall not be
buried in any sacred place, and those who give them counsel either in iure or
in facto, or persuade them to the duel, and the lookers on shall be
excommunicated. 20. In The reformation of Princes.
the end, the Article of Ecclesiastical liberty, or reformation of Princes,
which had been so much examined, was read. In it the Synod does admonish
secular Princes, hoping they will grant to the Church the restitution of her
rights, reduce their Subjects to reverence the Clergy, and not permit their
officers and inferior Magistrates to violate the immunitie of the Church and
Ecclesiastical persons, but that, together with themselves, the Princes, they
will be obedient to the constitutions of the Pope, and of Councels, determining
that all constitutions of general Councels, and of the Apostolic Sea, in
favor of Ecclesiastical persons, and liberty, shall be observed by all:
admonishing the Emperor, Kings, Republiques, Princes, and all, to reverence
the things that belong to Ecclesiastical right, and not to suffer them to be
violated by inferior Lords, their Magistrates, or Ministers; that the Clerks
may reside and perform their duty, without impediment, and with edification
of the people. After this a Decree was read, never mentioned A Decree
concerning the Apostolic Sea never mentioned before.
in any Congregation; by which the Synod does declare, that in all the Decrees
of reformation, made under Paul, Julius, and Pius in the Council, with what
words or clauses soever, it shall be understood, that the authority of the
Apostolic Sea is excepted and preserved.

Being not able to dispatch all, the day being far spent, the residue was
deferred until the next morning, according to a determination made in the The
Decrees of Indulgences, finishing the Council, and of demanding the Popes
Confirmation, etc.
general Congregation; in which the Congregation was made before day,
howsoever, news was come that the Pope was better, and out of danger of death.
The decrees of Indulgences, finishing the Council, and demanding confirmation
were read, and approved by all. After dinner, the Session was held, in which
the decree of Indulgence was read, containing in substance. That CHRIST has
given authority of granting them to the Church, and has used the same from
all antiquity. And therefore the Synod does teach, and command, that the use
of them ought to be continued as profitable for Christian people, and
approved by Councels; and does anathematize those that shall say, they are
unprofitable, and that the Church has not power to grant them. And to
preserve the ancient custom, and provide against abuses, it does command
that all those offices of Pardonmongers be abolished, and, for the other
abuses, it does command the Bishops, that every one shall collect all of his
own Church, and propose them in the Provincial Synod, to be referred to the
Pope, who will take order therein. Concerning fasts, difference of meats, and
observation of feasts, it exhorts Bishops to observe the precepts of the
Roman Church; and for the Index, howsoever it was finished, in regard the Synod
has not time to judge of it, it does ordain that it shall be carried to the
Pope, and referred to his censure; and the same shall be done concerning the
Catechism, Breuiaris, and Missall. It published also mother decree, that, by
the places assigned to Ambas. it shall be understood that no man is prejudiced.
In the end it prays the Princes to use means that the decrees of the
Council be not violated by the heretics, but received and observed by them,
and by all: in which if any difficulty or necessirie of declaration shall
arise, the Pope, calling The Decrees of the two former conuocations are recited.
those whom he shall judge fit, from the places where the difficulty is or
calling general Councels, or by some other means, will make provision.
Afterward all the decrees of reformation made in this Council under Paul and
Julius, as well of faith as of reformation, were recited. For the last thing,
the Secretary, going into the midst, did interrogate, whether the Fathers were
pleased that an end should be made of that Synod, and in the name of it, of
the Legates, and Presidents, a confirmation demanded of Pope Pius the fourth,
of all things decreed under Paul, Julius, and his Holiness. And they answered
not one by one, but all together, Placet. Cardinal Morone, as chief
President, granted to every one that was present in the Session, or had
assisted in the Council, a Plenary Indulgence, and blessed the Council, The
Council is ended. And a plenary Indulgence is given.
and dismissed them all; saying, that after they had given thanks to GOD, they
might go in peace.

It was an ancient custom in the Oriental Churches, to handle the matter of
Councels in a public meeting of all, and, upon occasion, popular acclamations
did often happen, and sometimes tumultuous, which notwithstanding did conclude
in concord. And, in the end, the Bishops, transported with joy, for the
uniform determinations, did pass to acclamations, in praise of the Emperors
who had assembled and favored the Council, in commendation of the doctrine
declared by the Council, in prayers to The custom of Acclamations is imitated
in Trent.
GOD for his continual divine assistance to the Church, for the welfare of the
Emperors, and for the health and prosperity of the Bishops; which were not
premeditated, but as the spirit did excite some Bishop more zealous to break
out fitly into some one of these conceits, so the common concourse did cry
with him. This was imitated in Trent, yet not giving place to the extemporary
spirit of any, but meditating what should be proposed, and answered, and
repeating it out of a paper. The Cardinal of Loraine Wherein the Card. of
Loraine was chief.
took upon him to be the chief, not only to compose the acclamations, but
to thunder them out also; which was generally construed for a lightness and
vanity, not beseeming such a Prelate, and prince, to do an office which did
belong rather to the Deacons of the Council, then to so principal an
Archbishop and Cardinal. The Cardinal roaring, and the Fathers answering, A
long life for his Holiness, and eternal felicity for Paul, and Julius, were
prayed for; likewise eternal memory for Charles the fifth, and for the Kings,
protectors of the Council, long life for the Emperor Ferdinand, and for the
Kings, Princes and Repuqligues, many thanks were given to the Legates and
Cardinals, and long life wished unto them, life and happy return to the
Bishops, and the faith of the holy general Synod of Trent was commended as the
faith of S. Peter, of the Fathers and of the Orthodoxe. An Anathema An
excommunication of heretics in general only.
was denounced against all Heretics in general, in one word only, not
specifying either ancient or modern. The Fathers were commanded, upon pain of
excommunication, to subscribe the Decrees with their own hand. The next day,
being Sunday, was spent in this: and to do it in order, there was, as it were,
a congregation. And the subscriptions were of four Legates, two The number of
those that suscribed.
Cardinals, three Patriarchs, five and twenty Archbishops, 268. Bishops, seven
Abbats, nine and thirty Proctours of men absent, seven Generals of Regular
orders. And howsoever it had been determined that the Ambassadors should
subscribe after the Rathers, yet a contrary resolution was then taken, for two
respects. One was, that the French Ambassador being not The ambassadors did
not subscribe, for two causes.
there, if the subscriptions of the others should be seen, and not his, it
might be thought a manifestation, that the Frenchmen would not receive the
Council. The other because the Count of Luna had said that he would not
subscribe absolutely, but with reservation, because his King had not consented
to the ending of the Council. And the Legates published, that it not being the
custom that the Decrees should be subscribed by any that has not a
deliberatiue voice, it would be a thing unusual, if the Ambassadors should.

In Rome when the Pope fell sick, all fearing his life, there was much (...)
Popes (...)e made (...) confu(...) the (...).
confusion in the Court. For never having known a Pope die in time of a
Council, they were very fearful what might happen. They had the example of
the Council of Constance, which, in the election, joined other Prelates to the
Cardinals; and they were afraid that this, or some worse thing might happen.
And howsoever the Spanish Ambassador Vargas affirmed, that the Spanish
Ambassador and Prelates in Trent had commission, that the election should be
made by the Cardinals, yet in respect of their small number, these words did
not fully assure them. But the Popes recovery gave them much joy: which was
increased by the conclusion of the Council, as being now fully delivered from
great danger. And the Pope ordained a solemn procession to give thanks to GOD
for this great benefit. In Consistory he showed what contentment he had in
the Council. He said he would confirm it, add many reformations unto it;
that he would send three Legates, into Germany, France, and Spain, to
persuade the execution of the Decrees, to grant things honest, and to ease them
in matters of positive Law.

The Legates, Morone and Simoneta returned to Rome before Christmas, from whom
the Pope was willing to have a particular relation, in many audiences, of all
that happened, and took a note of the names of the Prelates A dispute in Rome
about (...)confirmation of the (...).
who had taken pains in the Council, that he might create them Cardinals. The
Court, understanding that the Pope was resolved for the confirmation, changed
their joy into grief; and all the officers complained of the loss they should
receive in their offices, if that reformation were executed. And they
considered moreover, that those Decrees being conceived in general terms, and
without clauses of subtle explication, as often as any difficulty did arise,
the world now accustomed to bark against the Court, would make an
interpretation contrary to their interests; which would be embraced, as a thing
of fair show, covered with the title of Reformation. Supplications and
memorials were given to the Pope by those, who, having bought the offices, and
foreseeing this loss, demanded restitution: a thing which the Pope did not
neglect, and thought it did deserve a good remedy, lest there might be a
desolation in Rome. Whereof of having diligently considered, he deputed
Cardinals to consult upon the confirmation, and to think upon some remedy for
the complaints of the Court. Some Cardinals did advise to confirm immediately
the Decrees of faith, and to proceed with maturitie in the other. For some did
deserve much consideration, in regard of their small profit, and great
confusion they might bring, and others must be necessarily dispensed with, in
regard of their impossibility, or great difficulty, at the least; which could
not be done with any decorum, nor without giving much matter of discourse.
Besides, it would be necessary to have much consideration that they might be
so executed, that no man might receive loss or prejudice, that provision not
deserving the name of reformation, which is with the detriment of any; but by
deferring, time, and the diligence of many would discover what might be done
with common satisfaction of all, without which all reformations are turned in
to deformations. The Pope therefore elected eight Cardinals to reuiew them, who
after long discussion were almost all of opinion, that it was fit they should
be moderated before the confirmation, and thought, that, being to suffer some
opposition, it was better to do it in the beginning, then giving them
reputation by confirming, to moderate them afterward. It is certain, that
they who did procure the Council, had no aim but to pull down the Popes
authority, and while the Council did last, every one did speak as if it had
power to give laws unto him. Notwithstanding, it must now appear by
nullifying or moderating some of those Decrees, that the Pope is not to receive
laws, but to give them to Councels.

The Pope being of himself inclined to the confirmation, and induced also
thereunto by the persuasions of Morone, and Simoneta, yet perplexed with the
querimonies of the Court, and the general opinion of the Cardinals, that he
might come to a resolution, besides those aforenamed, he called the Cardinals
of Bordissiera, and Amulius, as also the principal officers of the Chamber,
Chancery, and Rota: to whom the matter being proposed, the four Cardinals did
uniformly advise that the Council should be confirmed absolutely. Cardinal
Amulius, in whose memorials I have seen this negotiation, said, that his
Holiness by his patience, wisdom, virtue, and with immense charge, and with
the pains and charge of so many Prelates, had seen the end of a great and
difficult enterprise, to assemble direct, and finish the Council; now a
greater did remain, but without difficulty, that is, to keep himself, the
Apostolic Sea, and all the Ecclesiastical order, from returning into the
same straits, danger, inconveniences, and expenses; that, for these forty
years, the world has spoken of nothing but of the Council, which the Popes
could not, by any means, divert, in regard of the certain persuasion
conceived of the necessity thereof, and of the fruit it would produce. But if,
so soon as it is ended, question be made of correcting or moderating it, or it
be left in suspense for want of confirmation, it will be a manifestation that
provision has not been made in Trent, for that which was necessary, and
expected, and suddenly another means of provision will be used, either by
National Councels, or another general. And here behold the same straights,
out of which the Church, with so great difficulty, has been delivered by
God. But approouing the Decrees, as a perfect reformation, and giving them
credit, and as much execution as is possible, many will believe that nothing is
wanting; and nothing is more profitable for the present times, then to spread a
fame, and nourish it, that the Council has made an holy, necessary, and
perfect reformation, not suffering it to be known that any Cardinal has
doubted that it has not performed that for which it was called. By so doing,
the humor of the world will be quiet by degrees, and his Holiness may provide
for his ministors and servants by dispensations, without violating the Decrees
of the Council, because in them the Apostolic authority is reserved; which
may serve him for a buckler to deny the importunate demands of those whom he
will deem unworthy of favor, and, in time, things will insensibly, the world
not observing it, return unto the same state. He said this course was taken
heretofore when necessity compelled to yield to these humors, which usually are
bred in subjects against the governors, that when others do oppose the
Decrees, it was fit to maintain them, for reputation of so many of his
creatures, of his Legates, and of himself also; much more ought he not to
nullify them wholly, as would be done by every little moderation, correction,
or delay of confirmation; which the world would judge to be a mortal wound
unto them all. Besides, the vulgar, who do always make the worst
interpretation, will have nothing to say, but that the Court and Pope will not
endure a reformation.

This was opposed by almost all the officers of the Court, representing their
losses and preiudices, and showing how all would redound to the offense of his
Holiness, and of the Apostolic Sea, and diminution of his revenues. Only
Hugo Buoncompagno, Bishop of Bestice, who was Cardinal afterward, a man much
conversant in Court affairs, said he could not choose but wonder at this
great fear, which he saw did arise without reason; that, by confirmation of
the Council, more authority was not given it then other general Councels had,
or then was given to the Decree, or Decretals, by the great number of which,
and by their plain speaking against the present manners, many more preiudices
and offenses might arise, then could do by these few decrees of Trent, much
reserved in the former words; that no law does consist in the terms, but in
the meaning, not in that which the vulgar and Grammarians do give it, but
which use and authority does confirm; that Laws have no power but what is
given them by him that governs, and has the care to execute them; that he,
by his exposition, may give them a more ample, or a more strict sense, yea and
contrary to that which the words do import, and that it would be no more to
restrain or moderate the Decrees of Trent now, then to suffer them to be
restrained by use, or by exposition, in times convenient. He concluded that
he saw no cause why there should be any difficulty about the confirmation.
But he put them in mind to withstand presently the inconveniences which might
arise by the temeritie of the Doctors, who, the more ignorant they are of
government and public affairs, the more they take upon them to give
interpretation to Laws, which does confound authority; that experience
shows that Laws do no hurt, nor cause any suit, but by the diverse senses
given unto them; that by the constitution of Nicolas the third, upon the rule
of Saint Francis, a matter full of ambiguities in it self, never any disorder
did arise, because he forbade all Glossators, and Commentators to expound it;
that if such provision be made for the Decrees of Trent, and all men forbid to
write upon them, a great part of that which is feared will be withstood. But
if his Holiness will forbid all interpretations, even to the Judges also, and
ordain that in all doubts they shall come for exposition to the Apostolic
Sea; no man will be able to make use of the Council in prejudice of the
Court, which by use, and by interpretations, may be accommodated to that which
will be for the benefit of the Church. And as there is a Congregation which,
with great fruit, does take care of the Inquisition, so his Holiness may
appoint another for this particular of expounding the Council, to whom all
doubts shall be referred from all parts of the world. This being done, he
said he foresaw that, by the Decrees of the Council, the authority of the
apostolic Sea, the rights and prerogatives of the Church of Rome will not
only not be diminished, but increased and enlarged much, in case they know how
to make use of these means. Those that heard him were moved by these reasons;
and the Pope saw it was necessary to come to the absolute confirmation,
without any modification; and being persuaded that it would fall out as the
Bishop All glosses or interpretatio^s are forbid to be made upon the Decrees of
the Council.
had said, he was peremptory not to hearken to any thing that could be spoken
against it, but, full of hope to collect much fruit by the pains taken for
finishing the Council, he resolved to confirm it, to reserve the
interpretation to himself, and to institute a Congregation, as the Bishop had
counseled: and, having imparted this to the Cardinals apart, he determined to
effect it.

Therefore the six and twentieth of January, Morone and Simoneta having
related in Consistory the tenor of the Decree, made in the last Session, that
the confirmation should be desired by them, they demanded that his Holiness
would vouchsafe to confirm all that which has been decreed, and defined in
that Council, under Paul, Julius, and his Holiness. The Pope, first causing
the Decree to be read, asked the opinions of all the Cardinals. They were all
for the confirmation uniformly; except the Cardinals, Saint Clement, and
Alexandrinus; who said that too much authority had been given to Bishops in
that Council, and that it was necessary to moderate it, and then to make an
exception of those points that did enlarge it too much, which were noted
already. In the end, the Pope concluded, that it was good to confirm all
without exception, and so he did in words, in the consistory, confirming
them, and commanding that they should be received; and inuiolably observed by
all the faithful; and the same day he published a Bull, subscribed by all the
Cardinals; in which, having related the causes of calling the Council, the
progress, the impediments and difficulties which happened from time to time,
and his diligence in favoring the liberty thereof, granting them free power
over the things reserved to the Apostolic Sea, he thanked God that it was
ended with an entire consent. Therefore, being desired, in the name of the
Synod, for confirmation, knowing the Decrees to be all Catholic, and
profitable for Christians, he has confirmed them in Consistory, and does
confirm them by that writing, commanding all Prelates to cause them to be
observed, and exhorting the Emperor, Kings, Republiques, and Princes, to
assist for the observation of them also, to favor the Prelates, not to permit
their people, but rather to prohibit them by all means to embrace opinions
contrary to the doctrine of that Council; and, to auoidconfusion, for bad all
sorts of persons, as well Clerks as Laiques, to make any Commentaries,
Glosses, Annotations, or any interpretation whatsoever upon them, or to make
any kind of Statute, though under pretense of great strength, or better
execution of the Decrees, but that, if any obscure place wanted interpretation
or decision, they should have recourse to the Apostolic Sea, because he did
reserve unto himself power to declare the difficulties or controversies, as
also the Synod had already decreed.

This Consistoriall Act of confirmation, and the Bull, were printed, together
with the decrees; which gave matter of speech, it appearing by the tenor of
them, that the Decrees had not vigor, as constituted by the Council, but as
confirmed by the Pope. Whereupon it was said, that one had The Decrees of the
Council have power from the Popes confirmation.
heard the cause, and another had given the sentence. Neither could it be said
that the Pope had seen the Decrces before he confirmed them, because it did
appear, by the consistoriall Act, that he had only seen the Decree for
desiring the confirmation. They said also, that the Decrees made under Paul and
Julius were read in Trent, and that it was fit they should be confirmed by
those that heard them, rather then by him that did not know them. But others
answered, that there was no need the Pope should then see them, because
nothing was done in Trent which was not first resolved by him. In many
consistories following the Pope spoke for the observation of the Decrees of the
Council, saying he would observe them himself, though he was not bound, and
gave his word that he would never derogate from them but for evident and
urgent causes, and with consent of the Cardinals. He charged Morone, and
Simoneta, to be diligent in aduertising him, if any contrary thing were
proposed, or handled in consistory: which was but a small remedy against the
transgressions, because not an hundredth part of the grants made in Rome are
dispatched in consistory. He sent the Bishops to their residence, and resolved
to make use of the Protonotaries, and Referendaries in governing the city of
Rome, and the Ecclesiastical state. But howsoever he was freed from great
trouble, by the conclusion of the Council, yet there were some remainders of
it in all kingdoms, which brought new difficulties upon him.

Advice came out of Spain that the King was offended with the ending of And
are executed in Spain by the Kings authority only.
the Council, and determined to call the Bishops and agents for the Clergy of
Spain before him, to set down in what manner it might be executed. And the
advice was not false. For not only all that was done in Spain, for receiving
and executing the Decrees of the Council that year, partly in the Spring, and
partly in the Autumn, was by order and resolution taken in the Kings Council,
but the King sent also his Presidents to the Synods, which were held, causing
to be proposed that which pleased him, and was fit for his service; to the
great distaste of the Pope, who was angry the King should take so much upon him
in matters Ecclesiastical. But he made no demonstration Which makes the Pope
angry.
hereof to his Ministers, purposing to make use of it in another opportunity,
designed by himself; which shall be related in due place.

The President de Ferrieres, having, while he remained in Venice, made
observations upon the Decrees of the two last Sessions held after his departure
from Trent, and sent them to the Court, the Cardinal of Loraine, at his The
Card, of Lorain is taxe^ in France at his return.
return into France, had many assaults, and reprehensions, for consenting to
things prejudicial to the Kingdom. They said, that, by the words of the first
Article of reformation in the last Session, where it is said, that the Pope
has charge of the universal Church, in Latin, Sollicitudinem Ecclesiae
Vniuersae, he had yielded the point which himself and all the French Bishops
had so long contended for, and obtained, that prejudice might not be done to
the opinion of France, of the superiority of the Council above the Pope; that
he might have remedied this with one little word, by making them say, as S.
Paul had done, care of all the Churches, because no man would have denied that
kind of speech which S. Paul did use; that prejudice was likewise done to the
same opinion of the superiority of the Council in the one and twentieth
Article of the last session, saving, in all the Decrees, the authority of the
Apostolic Sea: and in the last Decree for demanding the Popes confirmation.
It was opposed also, that the King, and French Church, having contested that
the Council might be declared to be new, and not the old continued, the
continuation was declared, that it was one Council with that of Paul and
Julius, in the said one and twentieth Article, and in the Decree for reading
the things constituted under those Popes; by which all was basely yielded which
had been two years maintained by the King. They said moreover, that the
approbation of the things done under Julius was dishonorable, and prejudicial
to the protestation then made by King Henry the second. But they reprehended
above all, that honorable mention having been always made under Paul and
Julius, of King Francis the first, and King Henry the second, together with
Charles the fifth, the Cardinal had not caused a memory to be made of them
in the acclamations, when it was made of Charles, nor the present King to be
named, when the living Emperor was. The Cardinal excused other things,
saying, that, with six Prelates, (for he had no more in his company) he was
not able to resist the consent of more then two hundred. But this last
opposition he knew not how to excuse, though he said it was to preserve the
peace of the two Kingdoms. For it was replied that he might have suffered
others to make the in^onation, and not to have been the author himself of
that prejudice. And so it is seen, that vain men often times, thinking to
gain reputation by retaile, do lose it in gross.

But the Counselors of the Parliament found many other things to oppose The
censure of the Parliament of Paris upon the last Session.
against the Articles of Reformation, published in those two Sessions, where
the Ecclesiastical authority they said was enlarged beyond its bounds, with
the wrong and diminution of the temporal, by giving power to Bishops to
proceed to pecuniary mulcts, and imprisonment, against the Laity; whereas no
authority was given by CHRIST to his Ministers, but mere and pure Spiritual;
that when the Clerg^e was made a member and part of the policy, the Princes
did, by favor, allow the Bishops to punish inferior Clergymen with
temporal punishments, that discipline might be observed amongst them, but to
use such kind of punishments against the Laiques, they had neither from the
Law of God nor of man, but by usurpation only; that, in the matter of Duel,
they pretend to proceed against the Emperor, Kings and other Sou^reignes, who
grant it in their Kingdoms, even by excommunication, whereas their opinion
was that to permit Duel, in some cases, was not amiffe, as the permitting of
fornication, and other offenses, howbeit they are sins, was not ill, in
regard of public utility, and to avoid greater inconveniences. They said,
that this power being natural, and given to the Princes by God, could not be
taken away, or restrained by any power of man. They thought it also
intolerable, to excommunicate Kings and Princes, holding it for a sure maxim
in France, that the King cannot be excommunicated, nor his officers, for
execution of their offices. They added, that to deprive Princes of their
States, Lords of their Fees, and to confiscate the goods of private men, were
all usurpations of the temporal authority, because that which was given by
CHRIST to the Church, does not extend it self to things of this nature.

Concerning Patronages, they said great wrong was done to the Seculars, in
disabling their proofs, and that the whole Article was grounded upon a false
maxim, that all benefices are free, if the Patronage be not proved. For
Churches have no temporal goods but granted by the seculars, who can not be
presumed to grant them so, as that they may be managed and dissipated at the
pleasure of the Ecclesiastiques: by which means it ought to be presupposed,
that every benefice had a Patron, from the beginning of it, except an absolute
donation, with a total cession of the patronage, can be showed. And as the
Commonwealth or Prince does succeed him that has no heir, so all benefices,
the Patronage of which does not belong to any, ought to be under the public
patronage. Some mocked that form of speech, that benefices which had Patrons
were in servitude and the others free, as if it were not plain servitude to
be under the disposition of the Court of Rome, which does manage them contrary
to the institution, and foundation, whereas the seculars do preserve them.
Besides the censure of some decrees for this cause, they added, that others
were against the customs and immunities of the French Church; as the
reservation of great criminal causes against Bishops to the cognition of the
Pope alone, taking away the power of Provincial and National Councels, which
have always adjudged them in all cases, and burthening the Bishops, by forcing
them to litigate out of the Kingdom, contrary not only to the custom of
France, but to the Canons of ancient Councels also, which have determined that
such causes should be judged, and ended in their proper Countries. They said
it was against justice, and the use of France that benefices should be clogged
with Pensions and Reseruations of Fruits, as was obliquely determined.
Likewise, that it was not tolerable, that causes of the first instance should
be taken out of the Kingdom by the Pope, because it takes away a very ancient
use, confirmed by many constitutions of Kings. Neither could it be justified
by the exception, of urgent or reasonable cause, experience of all times having
showed, that all causes may be taken out of the Kingdom by this pretense. For
he that would dispute whether the cause were urgent or reasonable, does enter
into a double charge and difficulty, because not only the principal cause,
but that Article also must be discussed in Rome. They did, by no means,
approve that the possessing of immoueables should be granted to begging
Friars; and said, that they having been received into France with that
institution, it was just that they should be maintained in the same state;
that this was a perperuail Artifice of the Court of Rome, to take goods out of
the hands of seculars, and to draw them into the Clergy, and afterward to
Rome; that the Munkes did first gain credit, by pretense of the vow of
poverty, as if they aimed at no temporal thing but did all in charity, for the
good of the people; afterward, having gained reputation, the Court do the
dispense with them for their vow, by which means the Monasteries being made
rich, are given in Commenda, and finally all comes to the Court. To this they
added an exhortation in the twelfth article, made to all the faithful, to give
largely to Bishops, and Priests; which had been good, in case they did serve
the people as they ought, and were in need. For so Paul does exhort, that he
that is instructed in matters of faith, should give some part of his goods to
him that does instruct him. But when he that bears the name of a Pastor,
does intend rather any other thing then to instruct the people, the exhortation
is not fit; and the rather, because Ecclesiastical goods formerly were for
maintaining the poor, and redeeming slaves; for which cause not the
immoueables only, but even the very ornaments of the Church, and holy vessels
were sold. But in these last times it is prohibited to do it, without the
Pope; which has enriched ^he Clergy exceeding much. In the Mosaicall law, God
gave the tenth to the Levites who were the thirteenth part of the people,
prohibiting that any more should be given unto them; but the Clergy now, which
is not the fiftieth part, has gotten already, not a tenth only, but a fourth
part, and does still proceed and gain, using also many Artifices therein. They
said that Moses, having invited the people to offer for the fabrique of the
Tabernacle, when as much was offered as did fuffice, did forbid them, in the
name of God, to offer any more; but here no end will be found, until they
have gotten all, if men will continue in the lethargy. If some Priests, and
religious persons be poor, it is because others are excessiuely rich; and an
equal division would make them all rich abundantly. But to omit these so
evident considerations, if they did exhort the people, to assist the poor
Bishops and Priests in their necessities, it would be tolerable; but to say
they should be assisted to maintain their dignity, which is their pride and
luxury, does signify nothing but that they are quite without shame. It is
true that, in exchange, another Decree was made in the eighteenth Article,
infauour of the people, that dispensations should be given gra^is; which being
commanded by CHRIST, and not observed, there was no hope that this Decree would
do any more good.

These things being objected to the Cardinal of Loraine, that he had
authorized them, against the express commandment of the King, in his letters
of the twenty eighth of August before mentioned he defended himself in one
word only, that in the Congregation of the tenth of November, the The defense
of the Card, of Loraine.
Decrees being read, to be published in the Session, the next day, the rights
and authority of the French King, and privileges of the Gallican Church were
reserved. Whereunto Monsieure le Feure replied, that himself and his colleague
having used all diligence to have a copy of that Decrce, they could never
obtain it, and that, in humane affairs, not to appear was as much as not to
be. Besides, this did not serve to excuse the things published in the last
Session. But that which was said concerning the Synod in the Councels of the
King and Parliament, was nothing to that which the Bishops and Divines, and
their servants also, according to the French liberty, did relate to every one,
upon all occasions, making jests at the discords, and contentions between the
Fathers, at the practices and interests with which the matters of reformation
were handled. And those who were most familiar with the Cardinal of Loraine,
spoke most of all. And The censure made by the French BB. of the Council,
after their return into France. A Prouer be made in France concerning the
Council.
it passed in France, in manner of a Proverb, that the modern Council had
more authority then that of the Apostles, because their own pleasure only
was a sufficient ground for the Decrees, without admitting the holy Ghost.

But, in Germany, the Decrees of reformation were not thought considerable,
neither by the Protestants, nor by the Catholics. The Protestants did examine
the matter of faith only. They said, that to have spoken one word incidently
in handling the Mass, that it does assist the dead, which The censure of the
Council in Germany.
also may receive diverse senses, and, in the decree of Purgatory, to allege
it as a definition of the Article, was a thing not to be used in Councels,
especially in this, where the matters were minced, and an Article of faith made
of every question, which could be moved in any matter. And to commend Bishops
to teach the sound doctrine of Purgatory, without declaring what it is, did
show that the Fathers had great have to depart from Trent. But in the matter of
Saints the have was greater, condemning, in one breath, and in one period
eleven Articles, not declaring what condemnation it was, or whether they were
condemned of heresy, or for any other cause, and, after a long discourse of
Images, anathematising those that speak against the Decrees, without letting
them know which it does comprehend under the Anathema, whether the immediately
precedent concerning Images, or all the others above written. But of
Iudulgences they spoke more then all the rest; that these gave occasion of the
present division amongst Christians; that the Council was principally
assembled for these; that, in that matter, there is no part which is not
controuersed, and uncertain, even amongst the Schoolmen themselves; and yet
the Synod has passed them over, without clearing any doubt, or deciding any
controversy. And concerning the remedy of abuses, they spoke in such ambiguous
terms, that it could not be understood what they did approve or disapproue;
saying, they did desire a moderation, according to the old custom approved in
the Church. For it is certain, and cannot be concealed, that, in no Christian
Nation of the Eastern Church, either in ancient or modern times, there never
was any use of Indulgences, of any kind whatsoever. And in the west, if by
ancient custom, they mean that which was observed before Urban the second, in
the year 1095. no proof can be brought of the use of Indulgences. If from
that time until the year 1300. It will appear, that the use of them has
been very sparing, and only to free men from punishments imposed by the
Confessor. Afterward, from the Council of Vienna the abuses began, which did
increase very much, until the time of Leo the tenth, so that the Council
desiring the restitution of the old custom, approved in the Church, it was
necessary to declare in what Church, and in what time. But those words, that
the Eclesiasticall discipline is weakened by too much facility in granting
Indulgences, are a plain confession, that they belong not to the conscience,
not do free men from any thing in the fight of God, but touch the external
only, that is, the Ecclesiastical discipline. For the difference of meats
and fasts, they, said, that to command them was good, but that was not decided
of which the world complained, that is, that they did bind the conscience.
Therefore the Princes of Germany held none esteem of this Council. Only some
few ministers of the Augustan confession published a protestation, of which but
little account was made. The Catholics did not think of the doctrine of
Purgatory, and of Indulgences, desiring only to obtain the Communion of the
Cup, marriage of Priests, and relaxation in the multitude of precepts De iure
positiuo, concerning fasts, feasts, and such other things.

For whose satisfaction the Emperor, and Duke of Bauaria made instance The
Emperor writes to the Pope about the communion of the Cup.
to the Pope. The Emperor wrote letters to him, dated the foureteenth of
February; saying, that, during the Council, he had labored to obtain the
grant of the Cup, not for any private interest, or scruple of conscience which
he had, but because he did believe, and does still, that the grant is
necessary, to bring back to the Church those that wander; that he did then
tolerate the impediments interposed, to treat there of with the principal
Prelates, and Princes of the Empire, with whom having conferred whether it were
expedient to renew the same request, they thought fit he should move his
Holiness therein. Therefore, calling to mind what the Cardinals Morone and
Loraine had caused to be told him, which was confirmed also by the Bishop of
Liesina his Nuncio, he would no longer defer to demand the grace of him,
without repeating any more the weighty causes that did constrain him, desiring
him to assist the Germane Nation, to which all wise Catholics do think that
the grant will be very beneficial; adding, that to preserve the remainder of
Religion in Germany, and extirpate heresies, it will be of great moment to
grant, that Priests, who are separated because they are married, may be
reconciled, and retain their wives, and that hereafter where there is not a
sufficient number of Priests, married men of good life and fame may be admitted
to the Priesthood. For this he prayed him in his own name, and in the name of
the Duke of Bauaria, his son in law, assuring him that he should do a thing
worthy of his piety, and most acceptable.

The letters of the Duke of Bauaria did contain; that, having sent often And
so does the Duke of Bauaria.
to his Holiness, to show the miserable State of Germany in matters of
Religion, he did hope he should not long desire the medicine; which seeing it
was not applied until then, he, together with the Emperor, and
Ecclesiastical Electors, did pray him to grant power to the Arch bishop of
Salzburg to give leave to Catholic Priests to administer the Cup to those who
have confessed, and are penitent, and do believe the other Articles of
Religion: which grant would give satisfaction to his Subjects, who remain in
his State, and to those also who go forth of his Dominions to seek those who
will minister it unto them; that himself will always be content with one
kind, nor will force any to use the Cup, who, as himself, will be content
with the bread only; that for these he demands nothing, but that it seems
to him not inconvenient for the Vicar of CHRIST to have pity upon the others
also. Likewise he prayed his Holiness that he would grant, for some time at
the least, that married Priests may be reconciled to the Church, keeping their
wives, and married men ordained also.

To these Letters was added a Remonstrance, or consideration, composed by the
Divines of Germany; in which it was said: That it was plain, that the
Scripture of the New and Old Testament does permit Priests to A Remonstrance
concerning the same Grant.
have wives, because the Apostles, some few excepted, were married; neither is
it found that CHRIST, after their vocation, did separate their wives from them.
That in the Primitive Church, as well Oriental, as Occidentall, the marriages
of Priests were free, until the time of Calistus the Pope; that the civil
Laws did not condemn the marriage of Clerks; that it is certain, that
single life is better in the Clergy, and more to be desired, but that, in
respect of the fragilitie of nature, and difficulty to be continent, there are
but few who do not feel the pricks of the flesh. Therefore Eusebius
relates, that Dionysius did admonish Quintus the Bishop, that he should
consider of the weakness of the mayor part, and not lay the burden of single
life upon the brethren. And Paphnutius, in the Council of Nice, saying, that
the use of ones own wife was chastity, persuaded the Council not to impose
the law of single life. And the Synod of Constantinople did not for bid the use
of wives, but in the time when they were to offer sacrifice. That if ever there
were cause to permit matrimony unto Clerks, it was in that age. That amongst
fifty Catholic Priests, hardly one can be found that is not a notorious
fornicator. That not the Priests only desire matrimony, but the Seculars
also, that they may not (...) such beastly behavior, and the Patrons of
Churches will not give the benefices but to married men. That there is great
want of Ministers only for the prohibition of Matrimony. That the Church has
formerly remitted the severity of the Canons for this cause alone. That the
Pope did confirm a Bishop in Saragosa, who had a wife and children, and a
Deacon, who had been twice married, and committed the Sacrament of Confirmation
to simple Priests, in defect of a Bishop. Therefore many Catholics did then,
and do now think better to dispense with the law of continency, then, by
retaining it, to open a gate to unclean single life, leaving marriage free for
all; and the rather, because Cardinal Panormitan does hold, that it would be
good for the salvation of souls to grant Matrimony; and that there are
examples of the old Church, and in the Anciran Council, of Adam, and
Eupsychius Cesariensis, Priests. That it is certain, that the Pope may
dispense with Secular Priests; which some also extend unto Regulars. That it
seems a great absurdity not to admit married Clerks, and to tolerate
fornicators and to remove both would be as much as to remain without
Ministers, and that if they ought to be bound to the vow of chastity, none
should be ordained but old men. That it is not a good reason to retain single
life with the teeth, to preserve Ecclesiastical goods, it not being just, in
respect of temporal things to make shipwreck of souls. Besides, provision
might be made herein, by some other means; which being done, concubinate
would be banished out of the Church, and the scandal which offends many
taken away.

The Pope, considering these remonstrances, was of opinion to call to Rome
pious and learned men, of all Nations, to handle this point with maturity, and
spoke of it to the Ambassadors residing with him. But Cardinal Simoneta did
dissuade, saying, it would be a kind of Council, and that if men should come
out of France, Spain, Germany, and elsewhere, they would bring intelligences
and instructions of Princes, and would be governed and speak according to
their interests, and that, when his Holiness would be quit of them, he could
not do it at his pleasure; that, if he did not follow their opinion, it would
distaste the Princes; that he should remember what troubles the Council put him
to, and not fall into the like dangers. The Pope thought the counsel was
sincere, and profitable, and therefore, thinking no more of strangers, he
deputed nineteen Cardinals, giving them order to examine diligently the
writing that came out of Germany.

The twelfth of March the Pope made a promotion of nineteen Cardinals, A
promotio^ of 19. Cardinals.
for reward of the great service they did him in Council, in which he
resolved not to comprehend any of those who held the Residence, and Institution
of Bishops, to be de iure diuino, howsoever their qualities might otherwise
deserve the degree; and did not forbear to discover so much to all sorts of
persons, upon every occasion. He created Marcus Antonius Colonna, Archbishop of
Taranto. Aluise Pisano, Bishop of Padua. Marcus Antonius Bobo, Bishop of Aosta.
Hugo Buon Compagno, Bishop of Bestice. Alexander Sforza, Bishop of Parma. Simon
Pasqua, Bishop of Serzana. Carlo Visconte, Bishop of Vintimiglia. Franciscus
Abondius, Bishop of Bobio. Guido Ferrier, Bishop of Vercelli. Johannes
Franciscus Commendone, Bishop of Zante. Gahriel Paleotto, Auditor of the Rota:
all which had labored faithfully in Council for the service of his Holiness.
To these he added Zacharias Delphinus, Bishop of Liesina, who, being resident
with the Emperor, took no less pains for concluding the Council then the
others had done in Trent.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
NOw that thou have perused this History, I entreat thee to read over these
small parcels following. The first is an Epistle of S. Gregory the great, who
was Bishop of Rome about six hundred years after CHRIST, and was as learned,
and as conscientious, as any that preceded in that Sea, or that followed after.
Thou can not but perceive, that howsoever he ascribes to S Peter as much
pre-eminence as any other ancient writer has done, if not more, yet he does
renounce in most ample terms, or rather abominate that swelling Antichristian
power which was then challenged by John the Patriarch of Constantinople, but
long since has been practiced by the Bishops of Rome, and never more, nor more
preiudicially to the Church Catholic, then in this pretended Council of
Trent.

And that thou may not wonder how these Bishops could sore so high as to be
at last above Kings and Emperors, to whom S. Gregory and his predecessors
professed and performed all duetifull obedience and service, I have tendered
unto thee in the next place three several passages out of the History of
Francis Guicciardine, a famous Florentine, who knew their practices as well as
any, and has dared to relate them plainly. The Papalins have been so wise in
their wicked generation, as in all late Editions, to cause them to be left
out; thereby the better to conceal their unjust usurpations, against both
Ecclesistiques and Laiques.

Now, lest any might vncontrolably say, that howsoever they might be faulty at
other times, yet those were worthy who governed the Sea of Rome when this
Council was assembled, to clear the truth concerning these, look over the
passages following, taken out of some Epistles written by men of great esteem,
who resided in the Council, and gave account to their Superiors of all that
passed, or by their Superiors to them back again. By these it will appear
that the spirit of Antichrist, and not the holy Ghost, did govern in it. They
show the practices of Rome to be so gross, and so abominable, that thou
may easily believe, that Invita Pauli 3.
Papirius Massonius, a Popish writer, had just cause to say, speaking of the
Popes who lived in the time of this Council; In pontificibus nemo hodie
sanctitatem requirit; optimi putantur si vel leuiter mali sint, vel minus boni
quam caeteri mortales esse solent. Englished thus: No man expects any sanctity
in Popes now a days; they are thought to be excellent Popes, if they have
never so little honesty, or be not so wicked as other men use to be.

Last of all, thou may read an Epistle written by that famous Prelate,
Bishop Jewel, as an answer to a friend of his, who lived near the place, and
in the time of this unlawful assembly, or conuenticle at Trent. In it thou
may find reason enough, why the Church of England did neither send Prelates
to it, nor receive afterward the Decrees and Constitutions of it. As likewise
the Church of France refused to do, though their Bishops were present in it.
When thou have read these things, consider well of them, and the Lord give thee
a true understanding in all things.

GREGORY

GREGORY to the Emperor MAVRICIVS, concerning JOHN Bishop of Constantinople,
who has assumed the name of Universal Bishop. Chap. 76.
OVrmost religious Lord, whom God has placed over us, Ep. 32.
amongst other weighty cares belonging to the Empire, does labor (by the just
rule of holy writ) to keep the Clergy in peace and charity. He truly and
piously considers that no man can well govern matters terrene, except he can
manage well things Divine also, and that the Commonwealths peace and quiet
depends upon the tranquillity of the Church Universal. For (most gracious
Sovereign) what humane power or strength would presume to lift up irreligious
hands against your most Christian Majesty, if the Clergy, being at unity
amongst themselves, would seriously pray unto our Savior CHRIST to preserve
you, who have so well deserved of us! or what Nation so barbarous as would
exercise such cruelty against the faithful, except the lives of us, who are
called Priests, but indeed are not, were most depraved and wicked. But whilst
we leave those, things which belong not unto us, and embrace those things for
which we are not fit, we raise the Barbarians up against us, and our
offenses do sharpen the swords of our enemies, by which means the
Commonwealth is weakened. For what can we say for our selves, if the people
of God, over whom we are, though unworthily, placed, be oppressed by the
multitude of our offenses? if our examples destroy that which our preaching
builds, and our works give, as it were, the lie to our doctrine? Our bones are
worn with fasting, but our minds are puffed up: Our bodies are covered with
poor clothing, but in our hearts we are as brave as may be: We lie groueling
in the ashes, but aim at matters exceeding high: We are teachers of
humility, but patterns of pride, hiding the teeth of wolves under a sheep
countenance. The end of all is to make a show to men, though God knows the
truth. Therefore our most pious Sovereign has been most prudently careful
to set the Church at unity, that he might the better compose the tumults of
war, and to join their hearts together. This verily is my desire, and do
yield, for my part, due obedience to your sovereign commands. Howsoever, in
regard it is not my cause, but Gods; and for that not I only, but the whole
Church is troubled; because religious Laws, venerable Synods, and the very
precepts of our Lord JESUS CHRIST are disobeyed by the invention of a proud and
pompous speech, my desire is, that our most Religious Sovereign would lance
this sore; and would tie the party affected with the cords of his Imperial
authority, in case he shall make his resistance. By binding of (...) the
Commonwealth is eased; and by the paring away of such excremen(...)as these,
the Empire is enlarged. All men that have read the Gospel do know, that, even
by the very words of our LORD, the care of the whole Church is committed to S.
Peter the Apostle, Prince of all the Apostles. For to him it is said, John 21.
Peter love thou me? Feed my sheep: Luke 22.
behold, Satan has desired to winnow thee as wheat, and I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith should not fail: and thou being at the last converted
confirm thy brethren. To him it is said, Matt. 16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. And to thee I will give the Keys of
heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be bound also in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. Behold,
he has the Keys of the Kingdom, and the power of binding and loosing is
given unto him. The care and the principality of the whole Church is committed
to him; and yet is not called Universal Apostle: howbeit this most holy man
John, my fellow Priest, labors to be called Universal Bishop. I am
enforced to cry out, and say, Oh corruption of times and manners! Behold, the
Barbarians are become Lords of all Europe: Cities are destroyed, Castles are
beaten down, Provinces depopulated, there is no husbandman to till the ground,
Idolaters do rage and domineere over Christians, and yet Priests, who ought to
lie weeping upon the pauement, and in ashes, desire names of vanity, and do
glory in new and profane titles. Do I (most Religious Sovereign) plead
herein mine own cause? Do I vindicate a wrong done to my self, and not
maintain the cause of God Almighty, and of the Church Universal? Who is he
who presumes to usurp this new name against both the law of the Gospel and of
the Canons? I would to God there might be one called Universal, without
wronging of others. We know that many Priests of the Church of Constantinople
have been not only heretics, but even the chief leaders of them. Out of
this school proceeded Nestorius, who, thinking it not to be possible that God
should be made man, did believe that JESUS CHRIST, the Mediator between God
and man was two persons, and went as far in Infidelity as the Jews
themselves. Thence came Macedonius, who denied the holy Ghost, consubstantiall
to the Father and the Son, to be God. If then every one in that Church does
assume that name, by which he makes himself the head of all good men, the
Catholic Church (which God forbid) must needs be overthrown when he
falls who is called Universal. But let this blasphemous name be far from
Christians; by which all honor is taken from all other Priests; while it is
foolishly arrogated by one. It was offered to the Bishop of Rome by the
reverend Council of Chalcedon, in honor of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles:
but none of them either assumed, or consented to use it; lest while this
privilege should be given to one, all others should be deprived of that
honor which is due unto them. Why should we refuse this name when it was
offered, and another should assume it without any offer at all? This man,
contemning obedience to the Canons, is the rather to be humbled by the commands
of our most pious Souereignes. He is to be chastised who does injury to the
holy Catholic Church, whose heart is puffed up, who seeks to please himself
by a name of singularity, whereby he would make himself to be above the
Emperor. We are all scandalized herein: Let the author of this scandal
reform himself, and all differences in the Church will cease. I am servant
unto all Priests so long as they live like themselves, but if any shall vainly
set up his bristles contrary to God Almighty, and to the Canons of the Fathers,
I hope in God that he shall never be able to bring my neck under his yoke, no
not by force of arms. What has happened in this City by occasion of this
name I have more exactly declared to Sabinianus the Deacon, my Agent. Let
therefore my religious Souereignes think of me their Servant, whom they have
always cherished and vpheld more then others, as of one who desires to yield
them obedience, and yet am afraid to be found guilty of negligence in my duty
in the later fearful day of judgment. Let our most pious Sovereign either
vouchsafe to determine the business, according to the petition of the
forenamed Sabinianus the Deacon, or cause the man, so often mentioned, to
renounce this claim. In case he do submit to your most just sentence, or
favorable admonitions, we will give thanks to Almighty God, and rejoice for
the peace of the Church, procured by your clemency. But if he shall persist
in this contention, we will hold the saying to be most true: Luke 14. 18.
Every one that exalts himself shall be brought low. And again it is
written, Prou. 16.
Before a fall the heart will be lifted up. In obedience to my Souereignes, I
have written to my brother Priest both gently and humbly that he would desist
from the pursuit of this vainglory: if he give ear unto me, he has a
brother devoted unto him: but if he continue in his pride, I see already what
will betide him; he will make him his enemy of whom it is written, Iam. 4.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

A part of the History of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE, stolen out of his third Book
concerning Pope ALEXANDER the sixth.
But he could not always avoid domestical misfortunes, which troubled the
affairs of his family with tragical examples, proceeding from such lust and
cruelty, which would be accounted horrible even in any barbarous nation
whatsoever. For having resolved from his first entrance into the Papacy, to
put all the temporal greatness upon his eldest son the Duke of Candia, the
His second son.
Cardinal of Valentia, whose mind was wholly auerse from all ecclesiastical
profession, and desired rather to be exercised in military affairs, not
enduring to be prevented herein by his brother, and besides being impatient
that he had a greater share in the love of the Lady Lucretia, who was common
sister to them both; caused him to be murdered as he rid alone one night
through Rome, and secretly to be cast into the river Tiber; being incited
thereunto partly by lust, and partly by ambition, powerful ministers to effect
any wickedness. There was a fame (if possibly so enormous an abomination may
be believed) that not only the two brothers, but even the father himself were
corriuals in the love of this Lady Lucretia. Before he was created Pope he
gave her in marriage to a man of mean degree; from whom, so soon as he began
to sit in Peter's chair, he did separate her, as being now unworthy of her.
Then he married her to John Storz^, Lord of Pesaro. After that, not enduring
that this her husband should be partaker of her love with him, he dissolved
the marriage, although consummated, by suborning false witnesses to depose
before Judges, appointed by himself for the same purpose, who gave sentence
that this John was frigid and impotent by nature. This did afflict beyond
measure, etc.

A second place containing a large discourse by what means the Popes of Rome
attained to that greatness which they now enjoy, taken quite out of the fourth
Book of the History of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE.
FOr the liquidation whereof, and of many other things which happened in after
ages, it is necessary to relate what title the Church has to the territory of
Romania, and to many others which it either has possessed at diverse other
times, or does possess at this present: as also by what means, it being
first instituted (as was fit) for Spiritual government, it came to possess
temporal States and Empires. Likewise it is convenient to express (as a
matter belonging to this argument) what contentions have happened at several
times between the Popes and the Emperors upon these and the like occasions.

The Bishops of Rome, the first whereof was the Apostle Saint Peter, their
authority being founded by JESUS CHRIST in things Spiritual only, did
abound with charity, humility, patience; and many miracles were wrought by
them. At the first they were not only destitute of all temporal power, but
were persecuted by it; neither was their name so much as spoken of, but for the
afflictions and the torments which they and their followers did endure. For
howsoever their proceedings were sometimes not observed, by reason of the
multitude and variety of nations and professions in Rome, and some of the
Emperors did forbear to question them, but only when their actions did seem
to cross the public government, yet some others, either because they were
inclined to cruelty, or for the love they bare to their own Gods, did
bitterly persecute them, as inuenters of new superstitions, and enemies of true
Religion.

In this state of life they continued, until the time of Siluester the Pope,
to be most famous for their voluntary poverty, sanctity of life, and
martyrdomes. Afterward, Constantine the Emperor being turned Christian, moved
thereunto by the holiness of those who followed CHRIST, and by the miracles
done by them, the Popes came to be secure from those dangers to which they had
been subject for the space of 300. years before, and had free exercise of
their Christian profession. Hereupon, for the reverence which the holiness of
their life and religion had procured them, and because men are prone to follow
the example of their Prince, by reason either of ambition or of fear,
Christianity began marueilously to spread it self, and the poverty of
Christians not to be so great as it was. For Constantine having built the
Church of Saint John in Lateran, of Saint Peter in the Vatican, of Saint Paul,
and many others in diverse places, not only gave them plate and ornaments, but
also, that these might be preserved and renewed, the Churches repaired, and
the Clergy belonging to them maintained, he endowed them with possessions and
with revenues. In after times many, persuading themselves that they should
gain heaven more easily by being liberal toward Churches, either built and
endowed other Churches, or gave to those which were built before. In like
manner every one paid them tithes due either by law or custom, as in the old
Testament is commanded. Wherein every one was the more forward, because
Clergymen in those times contented themselves with necessaries only, and
bestowed the remainder either to repair their Churches, or to adorn them, or
in works of charity and piety. Now the Bishops of Rome (pride and ambition
having not as yet possessed their hearts) were acknowledged by all Christians to
be superiors of all Churches, in all Spiritual government, as successors
unto the Apostle Saint Peter; because that City, by reason of the dignity and
greatness thereof, retained the name and majesty of the Empire as head of all
the rest, and because Christian Religion was thence diffused into the greater
part of Europe, and because Constantine (having been baptized by Siluester)
did willingly acknowledge that such authority belonged to him and his
successors.

Besides, there is a fame that Constantine, being constrained to translate the
seat of the Empire to Bizantium, now called (by his name) Constantinople, by
occasion of some accidents happening in the Western Provinces, gave to the Popes
the Lordships of Rome, and of many other Cities and Provinces in Italy. This
fame, though cherished by succeeding Popes, and believed by many, by reason of
their authority and credit, is not only disproued by more probable authors,
but even by the very things themselves. For it is most manifest that Rome, as
also all Italy obeyed the Emperors and their Magistrates, both then and many
years after. Some will not believe any thing at all that has been spoken
concerning Constantine and Siluester, (such is the obscurity of things done so
long ago) affirming that they lived not at the same time: yet no man denies
that the translation of the Empire was the first cause of the Popes authority.
For the people of Rome withdrew their obedience from the Emperors by occasion
of their absence, and of the difficulties which they found in the East, and did
the rather perform willingly some certain obsequiousness to the Bishops of
Rome, though indeed no absolute subjection.

These things appeared but slowly because of the inundations of the Goths and
Vandals, and other barbarous nations into Italy; by which Rome having been
often sacked, the Popes, in respect of temporal matters, were obscure and
mean, and in Italy the Emperors had very small authority, having left it as
a pray to the Barbarians. Of these nations, the rest being past away like a
torrent, the Goths, who were Christians both by name and by profession, and
had their (...) from some parts of Dacia and of Tartaria, continued their power
there seventy years together. When these were driven out of Italy by the
Emperors, the Country began again to be governed by Greek magistrates, the
chief of which, called (by a Greek word) Exarke, kept his residence at
Rauenna, a City very ancient, and then very rich, and much inhabited by reason
of the fertility of the Country. This City being much augmented by the great
armada which Augustus Caesar and other Emperors continually maintained in the
Port near adjoining, which now is vanished, was inhabited by many Captains,
and after a good while together by Theodorick King of the Goths, and by his
successors, who made choice of it for the seat of their Kingdom, because that
Sea was nearer to the Emperors of Constantinople, whose power they suspected.
The Exarks seated themselves in the same place, because of the opportunity
thereof, though upon a contrary ground, and deputed particular magistrates,
whom they called Dukes, to govern Rome and other Cities of Italy. Hence the
Exarchate of Rauenna took the name, under which was contained whatsoever was
not governed by particular Dukes. In those times the BB. of Rome had no
temporal power at all; and having lost their former Spiritual reverence,
because their lives began to be more corrupt, they were subjects to the
Emperors, without whose confirmation, or of their Exarks, they durst not
accept the Papacy, though they were solemnly chosen by the Clergy and people
of Rome: Nay, because the principal seat of Religion follows the power of
the Empire, and of armies, the Bishops of Constantinople and Rauenna did often
iustle with them for superiority.

But the State of those Countries was changed not long after. For the Lombards,
a fierce Nation, entered into Italy, possessed that part which was called
Gallia ^isalpina, and now Lombardia from their name, as also Rauenna and the
whole Exarchat, and advanced their forces as far as the Marquisate of Ancona
Spoletum, and Beneuentum: in which two last places they created particular
Dukes. The Emperors made no provision against these things, partly by reason
of their negligence, and partly because they were hindered by the affairs of
Asia; so that Rome, having no assistance from them, and the Exarks being
driven out of Italy, began to govern her self by the advice and authority
of her Bishops. These, together with the Romans being a good while after
oppressed by the Lombards, did finally implore the aid of Pipin King of
France: who passing into Italy with a great army, chased the Lombards from a
part of their Dominion which they had enjoyed more then two hundred years.
This part (being become his by right of war) he gave to the Bishop and
Church of Rome: that is to say, Vrbino, Fano, Agobbo, and much land near Rome,
Rauenna and the whole Exarchat, under which is comprehended all from the
confines of Placentia which are contiguons to the territory of Pauia unto
Arimini, between the river of Po, the Apennine mountain, the lake of the
Venetians and the Adriatique Sea: as also from Arimini to the river of Toglia,
now called Isauro.

The Popes being molested by the Lombards after Pipins death, Charles his
son (justly surnamed the Great, for the great victories he achieved) utterly
rooted them out, and confirmed his father's donation to the Church; and while
he made war with the Lombards, he gave to the Bishop of Rome, the Marquisat
of Ancona, and the Dukedom of Spoleto, which comprehends the City of
Aquila, and a part of Abrazzi. These things are reported for certain; and some
Ecclesiastical writers add that Charles gave to the Church Liguria unto the
river Varus, which is the utmost border of Italy, Mantua, and whatsoever the
Lombards possessed in F(...)li; and Histria. Another writer says as much of
Corsica, and of the whole territory between the City of Luni and Parma. For
these merits the Kings of France have been magnified by the Popes, and have
obtained the name of Most Christian Kings.

Afterward in the year 800. after CHRIST, Pope Leo, and the people of Rome,
by the Popes authority only as head of that people, made this Charles
Emperor of Rome, separating this part of the Empire from those Emperors which
had their seat at Constantinople, because Rome and the Western Provinces,
being abandoned by them, could not well subsist without a Prince of their
own. The Emperors of the East were not deprived by this division neither of
Sicilie nor of that part of Italy which, coasting from Naples to Manfredonia,
is bounded by the Sea, because they were always under those Emperors. By this
alteration the custom that the Popes election should be confirmed by the
Emperors was not changed at all, neither did Rome cease to be governed by
them: nay the Popes did date all their Bulls, Privileges and Grants with these
formal words, In the reign of such an Emperor our Lord and Master. In this
easy subjection or dependencie the Popes continued until their own
prosperity gave them courage to govern themselves. But the Emperors power
being weakened by the discords of Charles the Great his posterity, and the
Empire being transferred upon the German Princes, which were not so potent as
those who were before, by reason of the greatness of the Kingdom of France,
and of the successors of Charles, Rome began to be governed by her own
Magistrates, though but in a tumultuous manner; and the Popes, withdrawing
themselves from the Emperors obedience as much as they could, decreed that
their election should no more be confirmed by them. This decree was diversely
observed according as the Emperors power did rise or fall.

This power being become great in the Otho's of Saxony, Otho the third made
means to choose Gregory the fifth, his own countriman, for Pope; who, for the
love he bare to his own nation, and for the persecutions which were raised by
the Romans, gave the Germans, by his Decree, power to choose the Roman
Emperors, in that form as is now used. And (to give some pre-eminence to the
Pope) he forbad them to use the title of Emperor or of Augustus, but only of
King of the Romans, or of Caesar, until they had received the crown of the
Empire. Hence grew the custom of coming to Rome to be crowned.

After the Otho's the imperial power, being not hereditarie to great Kings,
was much diminished. Hereupon both Rome and many Cities besides, when Conrade
of Sueuia was Emperor, did openly rebel. The Popes, taking advantage to
advance their power, made themselves Lords of the Romans, though many times
they were much troubled by them. But the better to repress them, they obtained
of Henry the second Emperor, when he was at Rome, that the Cardinals only
should choose the Pope.

This their greatness was increased by a new accident. For the Normans (the
first of which was William surnamed Ironarme) having taken Puglia and Calabria
from the Empire of Constantinople, Robert Guicciard, one of them, either to
fortify himself by this color, or to make himself the stronger against these
Emperors, or for some other reason, first restored Beneuent to the Church, and
then acknowledged that the Dukedom of Puglia and Calabria were held in
vassallage of it. In conformity of this example Roger, one of his successors,
having chased William, a man of the same family, out of this Dukedom, and
then possessed himself of Sicilie, he acknowledged in the year 1130: that
he held these Provinces in vassallage of the Church, under the title of King
of both the Sicilies, the one beyond the other on this side Faros. The Popes
refused not to cherish the usurpation and violence of others, in regard it
served to advance their own ambition and profit. For they proceeded further
(as the desires of men are never satisfied) and deprived one of the Kings of
these kingdoms for disobeying their commands, and gave them to another. By
this means they came to Henry the son of Frederick Barbarossa; from him to
his son Frederick the 2. all which three were Emperors of Rome successively.
But Frederick being a bitter persecuter of the Church, and the factions of
Guelfs and Ghibelius being on foot, of the one of which the Pope, of the other
the Emperor was head, the Pope after the death of Frederick, granted these
kingdoms to Charles, Earl of Aniou and Prouence, of whom we spoke before,
upon condition he should pay 6000. ounces of gould yearly for tribute, and that
neither he nor any of his successors should accept of the Roman Empire. This
condition has been specified ever since in the inuestiture of the kingdom of
Naples. The kingdom of Sicilie, being usurped by the Kings of Aragon, withdrew
it self within few years from the obedience of the Church, both for the
tribute, and for the vassallage.

There has been a fame, though not so certain as those things which have
been spoken of, that the Countess Maude, a potent Princess in Italy, gave
long before to the Church that part of Tuscanie which is bounded by the torrent
Pescia, the castle called Saint Quirico in the county of Siena the Sea called
Mare inferum, and the river Tiber, now known by the name of the Patrimony of
Saint Peter. Some add that she gave to the Church likewise the City of
Ferrara. These things are not certain: and it is more uncertain (which
notwithstanding is related) that Authpertus King of the Lombards then
flourishing, gave the Pope the Alps called Cocciae, in which they say that
Genua, and all the tract from thence to Prouence is contained: as also that
Suithprandus, King of the same Nation, gave him Sabina, a Country near to
Rome, Naruia, Ancona, and certain other Lands.

As these things did vary, so the affairs of the Popes and Emperors did vary
also. At the first, for many ages together, the Popes were persecuted by the
Emperors: afterward they were at quiet, Constantine being converted to the
faith; but so as that they meddled with Spiritual matters only, and were
little less then wholly subject to the Emperors. After that they lived a long
time in very mean estate, and had no commerce at all with them, by reason of
the great power of the Lombards in Italy. But after they had gotten temporal
authority by the assistance of the Kings of France, they adhered very much and
very willingly to the Emperors, so long as the Empire continued in the
posterity of Charles the Great, in regard of benefits given and taken, as
also in regard of the greatness of the Emperors. But when the Imperial
greatness declined, they withdrew themselves from the Emperors, and professed
that the Bishops of Rome ought to give laws to them, rather then to receive
any from them. Now because they hated to come under the old yoke, and feared
that some of the Emperors, according to the example of their most potent and
brauest predecessors, would attempt to recover the rights of the Empire in
Rome, they openly opposed them by war, assisted by some Tyrants who called
themselves Princes, and by some Cities who had set themselves at liberty, and
did no more acknowledge the authority of the Empire. Hence it came to pass
that the Popes assuming every day more and more, they converted their
Spiritual weapons to maintain their temporal affairs. For making this
interpretation, that, as Vicars of CHRIST on earth, they were above the
Emperors, and that in many cases the whole care of matters terrene belonged to
them, sometimes they deposed the Emperors, and moved the Electors to make
choice of others in their room, and sometimes the Emperors chose new Popes,
or caused them to be chosen by others.

By these controversies, and by the Popes abode seventy years at Auignion, and
by means of a Schism which happened in Italy after that the Popes were
returned to Rome, it came to pass that in those Cities which were subject to
the Church, especially in those of Romania, many potent Citizens, each in his
own Country, attained to sovereign power. The Bishops of Rome either
persecuted them, or, not being able to overcome them, gave them these Cities,
to be held of them in Vassallage, or invested other commanders in them. So the
Cities of Romania began to have particular Lords, by the name, for the most
part, of Vicars of the Church. Thus Ferrara, first given by the Pope to Azo de
Esti to be governed by him, was afterward granted to him under the title of
Vicarship. This family was in process of time exalted to more illustrious
honors.

Bolonia being thus possessed by John Visconte Archbishop of Milan, was after
given him by the Pope as a Vicarship of Rome. Upon the same occasions there
arose many particular Lords in many places of the Marquisat of Anconia, of the
Patrimony of Saint Peter, and of Vmbria, now called the Dukedom of Spoleto:
all which was done either against the Pope his will, or by his forced consent.
The same variations being also in Lombardie, amongst the Cities of the Empire,
it sometimes fell out that the Vicars of Romania, and of other Ecclesiastical
territories, withdrawing themselves openly from the Church, acknowledged to
hold those Cities in Vassalage from the Emperors, and those who possessed
Milan, Mantua, and other Imperial places, were contented to hold them from the
Bishops of Rome.

In these times Rome, though still named the Domaines of the Church, was
governed by it self. When the Popes returned from Auignion into Italy, for a
while they were obeyed as Lords: but the Romans soon after erected the
magistracy of the Banderefi, and relapsed into their wonted contumacie.
Hereupon the Popes, retaining but small authority, absented themselves wholly
from thence until the Romans, being fallen into great poverty and grievous
disorders, by the absence of the Court, and the year 1400. approaching, in
which they hoped if the Pope were at Rome, there would be a great concourse of
all Christendom, by reason of the Iubelie, they most humbly besought Pope
Boniface to return to them, offering to put down the office of the Banderefi,
and to yield him absolute obedience. Upon these conditions he returned to
Rome, and, while the people were intent upon their gain, made himself
absolute Lord of the City, and fortified and put a garrison in the Castle of
S. Angelo. Those who succeeded until Pope Eugenius found many difficulties;
but then the souereigntie was so well established, that all his successors
governed the City, even at their own pleasure.

Being raised by these steps unto earthly power, they laid a side by little and
little the care of souls, and of divine precepts: so that setting their
affections wholly upon earthly greatness, and using their spiritual
authority only as an instrument of their temporal, they seemed rather to be
secular Princes then Priests. After this their care and business was no more
sanctity of life, increase of religion, love and charity toward their
neighbor, but armies, and wars against Christians, handling the sacrifices,
even with bloody hands; but heaping up of wealth; but new laws, new arts, new
snares to scrape money from all parts. For this end they used their spiritual
weapons without respect, and sold things both sacred and profane, without any
shame at all. The Popes and the Court thus abounding with wealth, there
followed pomp, riot, dishonestie, lust, and abominable pleasures: no care of
posterity, no thought of maintayning the perpetual dignity of the Papacy;
but in place hereof succeeded ambitious and pestiferous desires to exalt their
sons, nephews, and kindred, not only to immoderate riches, but to
Principalities and to kingdoms; bestowing their dignities and benefices not
upon virtuous and well deserving men, but either selling them to those who
would give most, or misplacing them upon ambitious, covetous, and impudently
voluptuous persons.

Having lost by this means that respect and reverence which formerly the world
did give them, they did notwithstanding maintain in part their authority by
the powerful name and majesty of religion; and somewhat they were helped by
the faculty which they have in gratifiing of great Princes, and those who were
potent about them, by bestowing some Enclesiasticall favors and dignities upon
them. Hence it comes to pass that they are in high respect amongst men; so
that whosoever takes arms against them is esteemed infamous for it, and
finds many oppositions by other Princes. Whatsoever happens, there is but
small gain to be made by striving with them: For those that conquer them use
the victory as the Popes will, who being conquered obtain what conditions
they please. Now because they have a great desire to raise their nearest kindred
from the state of private men to be great Princes, oftentimes they have been,
for very many years last past; the occasions and the instruments of raising now
wars and tumults in Italy.

But to return to our principal purpose, from which my most just grief for
the public loss has transported me further then the laws of an history
do well permit, let us declare that the Cities of Romania being vexed, etc.

A part of the history of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE stolen out of his tenth Book.
Saying, that the great oppression endured by the generous Romans, and that
those spirits which conquered the world should become servile, may in part be
excused in respect of former times. Such honor was then given to religion, and
religion was so graced with miracles, and sanctified manners, that their
ancesters, without any constraint of arms or violence, yielded obedience to
the government of Ecclesiastiques, and willingly submitted their necks to the
sweet yoke of Christian piety. But now what necessity, what virtue, what
dignity is there which can cover in any part the infamy and shame of this
seruilitie? Is it integrity of life? holy examples given by these Priests, or
any miracles done by them? what generation is there in the world more corrupt,
or more defiled with brutish and debauched manners? It is miraculous that God,
the fountain of Justice, has so long endured such abominable wickedness.
Some peradventure may say that this tyranny is supported by prowess of arms,
or men's assiduous care and industry for the preservation of the Papal
greatness. But what generation is there in the world more auerse from the
studies of war, or more unwilling to endure the labors belonging to it? more
given over to idleness and pleasure? more negligent of the honor and profit of
their successors.

The principality of the Soldans of great Caire is the most like in all the
world to this of the Bishops of Rome. For neither the dignity of the Soldans,
nor the honors of the Mammalukes are hereditarie, but, passing from one family
to another, do sometimes fall upon strangers. But the seruilitie of the Romans
is more base then that of these Egyptians and Syrians. For the infamy of these
is somewhat covered in that the Mammalukes are warlicke and valiant men,
accustomed to labor, and wholly auerse from pleasures. But whom do the Romans
serve? marry idle and slothful persons, strangers, and such as many times
are as base for their descent as for their manners. It is high time to awake out
of this lethargy, and to remember that to be a Roman is a most glorious name
when it is accompanied with virtue; and that their shame is doubled who have
forgotten the honor and renown of their ancesters. They have now a most fit
opportunity to free themselves. For when the Pope dies the Cardinals are
disunited, the Grandies are of diverse factions, Italy is full of arms and
tumults, and the Papal tyranny is now (...) more odious to all Princes then
ever it was before.

In a Letter of Monsieur de LANSAC the French Ambassador, resident in the
Council of Trent, written to the King his Master.
We have not as yet proposed the articles of Reformation, because we well
perceive that they will give ear to nothing that may hinder the profit and
authority of the Court of Rome. Besides, the Pope is so much master of this
Council, that his Pensioners, whatsoever the Emperors Ambassadors or we do
remonstrate unto them, will do but what they list.

In a Letter of Monsieur de PIBRAC, the French Ambassador in the said Council,
to the Queen mother.
MY Lords the Legates, together with the Italian Bishops which came from Rome,
made a kind of Decree, that nothing should be This was done that nothing might
be moved in the Council to diminish the Popes greatness.
proposed for the Fathers to consult of, but by the Legates only, or, at the
least, nothing but what pleased them. This we have seen observed even to the
shutting up of the Council.

In another place of the same Letter.
MAdam, that they, may the better keep the power which they have, to be the
only men that may propose and put into consultation what pleases them, they
hold it for a matter already determined that the Ambassadors of Princes may
not make any remonstrances in the assembly of the Prelates, fearing perhaps
that, if they were heard and understood by the Fathers, they might yield to
their demands, especially being reasonable.

In a Letter of Queen Mother to Monsieur de LANSAC.
IF the promises which the Legates do make unto you, and the opinion which I
have of their dignity and integrity do compel me to hope for some good from
the Council, on the other side that which I have hitherto observed concerning
their manner of proceeding quite contrary to their words, makes me fear that
this whole Council of ours is nothing but a fair appearance of flours,
without any fruit or amendment at all.

The King of France, in a Letter to the Lords du FERRIER and PYBRAC, his
Ambassadors in the Council.
MY Lords, as far as I perceive by your Letters of the eleventh of this month,
I am quite out of all hope of that which I expected from the Council, in case
the Fathers do proceed to determine of the These were Articles for the
Reformamation of Secular Princes, which the Legates set on foot to hinder the
proposing of the Articles for the reformation of the Ecclesiastiques.
Articles which they have been pleased to communicate unto you. This would be
to pare the nails of Kings, and let their own grow. etc.

In a Letter to the King of France by the Lords du FERRIER, and de PYBRAC, his
Ambassadors in the Council September 25. 1563.
OF an hundred and fifty Prelates, which then were present in the Council a
whole hundred had A conspiracy in ye Council to hinder the reformation of the
Ecclesiastiques.
conspired together, and subscribed (as the said Legates have assured us) not to
vote any Article of the said reformation, until the Articles of Princes were
proposed and given to the Fathers. This has not only been done, but it has
been done more rigorously (contrary to all law both divine and humane) then at
the first. etc.

ANDREW DVDITHIVS, Bishop of Five Churches, in an Epistle to MAXIMILIAN 2.
Emperor, in which he delivers his opinion about the ministering of the Cup to
the Laity, and the marriage of Priests.
WHat good could be done in that Council, in which the votes were not
weighed, but numbered? If goodness of the cause, if reason had been the weapons
to fight withal, though we were but few, we had vanquished a great army of
our enemies. But seeing that number only came into the field, in which we were
far inferior to them, though our cause were good, we could not possibly
prevail. The Pope had an hundred for one: and in case those had not been
enough, he could have created a thousand more to have helped at a need. We
daily saw hungry and needy Bishops come to Trent, youths for the mostpart,
which did but begin to have beards, given over to luxury and riot, hired only
to give their voice as the Pope pleased. They were both unlearned and simple,
yet fit for the purpose in regard of their impudent boldness. When these were
added to the Popes old flatterers, iniquity triumphed, and it was impossible
to determine of any thing but as they pleased, who thought it to be the highest
point of their religion to maintain the authority and luxury of the Pope.
There was a grave and learned man, who was not able to endure so great an
indignity: he was presently traduced as being no good Catholic, and was
terrified threatened and persecuted, that he might approve things against his
will in sum, matters were brought to that pass, by the iniquity of those who
game thither fitted and prepared, that the Council seemed to consist not of
Bishops, but of disguised maskers, not of men but of images, such as Deddas
made, that moved by nerves which were none of their own. They were (...)ing
Bishops, who, as Country bagpipes, could not speak but as breath was put into
them. The holy Ghost had nothing to do in this assembly: all the counsels
given there proceeded from humane policy, and tended only to maintain the
Popes immoderate and shamfull domination. Answers were expected from thence,
as from the (...) of Dolphes and Dodona: the Holy Sp(...) which, as they boast,
does govern their Councels, was sent from thence in a postilion's cloak-bag;
which, in case of any inundations, could not come thither (a thing most
ridiculous) until the waters were assuaged. So it came to pass that the
Spirit was not upon the waters, as it is in Genesis, but by the waters side. Oh
monstrous extraordinary madness. Nothing could be ratified which the Bishops
(as if they had been the common people) did Decree unless the Pope made
himself the author of it.

An Epistle written by JOHN JEWEL, Bishop of Sarum, unto one Seignr SCIPIO, a
Gentleman in Venice, in answer of an expostulatory letter of his concerning
the Council of Trent.
1 SIr, according to that intimate acquaintance, Which has been between us,
ever since we lived together at Padua, (you being employed in the affairs of
your Commonweal, l in my studies) you write unto me familiarly, that your
self, and many others there with you, wonder, that since a General Council
at Trent has been summoned by the Pope, for the settling of Religion, and
remoouing of Controversies; and seeing already all other Nations from all
parts are there assembled; The Realm of England alone, has neither sent any
Ambassadors thither; nor by any message or letter excused their absence; but
without any Council, has altered almost all the form of the old ancient
Religion; the former whereof, as you say, argues a proud stubbornness, the
other a pernicious Schism. For it is a superlatiue crime, for any man to
decline the most Sacred Authority of the Pope of Rome; or, being called by him
to a Council, to withdraw himself. As for the Controversies about Religion,
that it is not lawful to debate them other where then in such Assemblies; For
there be the Patriarchs and Bishops: There be the learned men of all sorts;
from their mouths the truth must be required: There be the lights of each
Church: There is the Holy Ghost: That all godly Princes, if any doubt had risen
concerning Gods worship, still referred it to a public consultation: That
Moses, Joshua, David, Ezechias, Josias, and other Judges, Kings, Priests, did
not advise, concerning matters of Religion, elsewhere then in an assembly of
Bishops: That Christ's Apostles, and the Holy Fathers held Councels: That by
this means the Truth displayed her beams: Heresies were subdued: so was
Arrius vanquished, so Eunomius, so Eutiches, so Macedonius, so Pelagius, And
that by the same means the present distractions of the world may be composed,
and the breaches of the Church made up again, if contentions and factions laid
aside, we would come to a Council; without which nothing can lawfully be
attempted in Religion.

2 This in effect was the sum of your Letter. I do not now take upon me to
answer you in the behalf of the Realm of England, by what advice ^^^ry thing
has been done, neither do I think that you expect it from me, or desire
it. The Counsels of Kings are hidden and secret, and so ought to be. You know
the old saying, nor every where, nor to all, nor to all sorts of people: Yet
(...) ^ur old and intimate acquaintance (because I see you desire it so
earnestly) I will briefly and freindly show you what I think, but, as he
sales^, as far as I Know, and am able; and I doubt not but that will
satisfy you.

3 We wonder, say you, that no Ambassadors from England come to the Council.
I pray you Sir do Englishmen only not come to this Council? Were you your
self present at the Council? Did you take a muster of them? Did you count
them by the Poll? Did you see that all other nations were met from all parts,
except only the English? If you have such a mind to wonder, why do not you
wonder at this too? that neither the three memorable Patriarchs, of
Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria, nor Presbiter John, nor the Grecians,
Armenians, Persians, Egyptians, Mores, Ethiopians, or Indians come to the
Council. For do not many of these people believe in CHRIST? Have they not
Bishops? Are they not baptized in the name of CHRIST? Be they not, Christians
and so called? Or did there come Ambassadors from all these nations to the
Council? Or will you rather say that the Pope did not call them, or that your
Ecclesiastical Decrees take no hold of them?

4 But we wonder more at this, that the Pope would afterward call such men to
a Council, whom before hand he had condemned for Heretics, and openly
pronounced them excommunicate, without hearing either them or their plea. For
that men should be first condemned and punished, and afterward brought to
their trial, is absurd, and, as we say, The cart before the horse. But I would
feign be resolved of this, whether the Popes meaning be, to advise in the
Council concerning Religion with us, whom he accounts Heretics? or rather
that we should plead our cause at the Bar, and either change our opinion
presently, or out of hand be condemned again. The former is without example,
and denied heretofore by Julius the third, to those of our side; The other is
ridiculous; if he think so; that the English will come to the Council, only
to be indicted, and to plead for themselves, especially before him, who long
since is charged with most heinous crimes, not only by our side, but also by
their own.

5 Now if England only seem to you thus stubborn, where then be the
Ambassadors of the King of Denmark, of the Princes of Germany, of the King
of Sueden, of the Suitzers, of the Grisons, of the Hanse Towns, of the Realm
of Scotland, of the Dukedom of Prussia? Seeing so many Christian Nations are
wanting in your Council, it is absurd to miss in your reckoning only the
English* But why do I speak of these? The Pope himself comes not to his own
Council; and why do you not wonder at that also? For what a pride is this,
for one man for his own pleasure, to assemble together all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Bishops, when he lists, and to require them to be at his call,
and himself not to come in their presence. Surely when the Apostles summoned
assemblies at Jerusalem, Peter the Apostle, of whose Sea, and Succession they
brag, would not be absent. But, as I conceive, Pius the fourth, the present
Pope, remembers what happened heretofore to John the 22; that he came not in
a very happy hour to the Council of Constance: for he came Pope, but
returned Cardinal. Therefore, since then, the Popes have provided for
themselves in the rere, and kept home, and have withstood all Councels, and
free disputes. For above forty years since, when Doctor* Martin Luther was
cursed by the Pope with Bell, Book, and Candle, because he had begun to preach
the Gospel, and to reform Religion out of GOD's word, and had humbly
requested, that his whole cause might be referred to the cognizance of a
General Council, he could have no audience. For Pope Leo the tenth did see
well enough, if the matter should come to a Council, that his own state might
come in danger, and that he might perchance hear what he would not willingly.

6 Indeed the name of a General Council carries a fair show, so it be
assembled as it ought, and (affections laid aside) all things be referred to
the rule of Gods word, and the truth only aimed at. But if Religion and
godliness be openly beaten down, if tyranny and ambition be established,
if men study faction, gluttony, lust, there is nothing more pernicious for
the Church of God. All this I have spoken hitherto, as if this Council, which
you call so did subsist somwhere, and were indeed a Council which I think
absolutely to be none. Or if it be one, and subsist any where, sure it is an
obscure one, and kept very close. For though we are not very far off, yet we
can by no means learn, what is done there, what Bishops have met, or rather
indeed whether any at all are met. Nay besides, above twenty months since,
when this Council was first summoned by Pope Pius, the Emperor Ferdinand
answered that though all other matters were accommodated, yet he did much
dislike the Place, which the Pope had made choice of for himself. For Trent,
though a pretty City, yet neither was commodiously enough seated for the
receipt of so many Nations, nor able to receive so great a multitude of men, as
were likely in reason to meet at a General Council. The same answer was
returned from other Christian Princes; and from some, much sharper. Therefore
we believed that all these things, together with the Council it self, had
been vanished away into smoke.

7 But I pray you, who is he that has summoned this Council, and called the
world together? You will say, Pope Pius the fourth. And why he, rather then the
Bishop of Toledo? For by what power, by what example of the Primitive Church,
by what right does he this? Did Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, thus toss and
tumble the world with their Proclamations? This was always whilst the Empire
flourished, the proper right of the Emperors of Rome. But now, since the power
of the Empire is lessened, and Kingdoms by succession share part of the
Imperial power, that power is communicated to Christian Kings and Princes.
Search the Annals, lay together the memorials of all Antiquity, you shall
find the ancientest Councels, the Nicene, the Ephesine, that of Chalcedon,
that of Constantinople, to have been called by the Roman Emperors,
Constantine, Theodosius the first, Theodosius the second, Martian, not by the
Popes of Rome.

8 Leo the Pope, a man otherwise loving enough to himself, and no way
neglectfull of the authority of his Sea, did humbly beseech Mauritius the
Emperor, that he would summon a Council to be held in Italy, as being the
fittest place. All the Priests says he, beseech your Clemency, that you
would command a General Council to be held within Italy. But the Emperor
caused that Ceuncel to be assembled, not in Italy, which the Pope earnestly
labored, but at Chalcedon, in Bithynia; to show, that that was his right, and
belonged to him only. And when Ruffinus, in that bickering which he had with
Jerome, had alleged a certain Synod, Tell me, says Jerome, what Emperor
caused it to be called. Jerome did not think the authority of a General
Council firm enough, unless an Emperor had called it. I demand not now,
what Emperor has commanded the Bishops to be called to Trent at this present:
But with what Emperor did the Pope, that has taken thus much to himself,
advise of holding the Council, what Christian King or Prince did he make
privy to his design? To intrude upon another right by fraud or force, and to
usurp for his own, what belongs to others, is injurious dealing. But to abuse
the Clemency of Princes, and to rule over them as his vassalls, is an egregious
and an intolerable disgrace to them. But for us, by our complying, to go
about to back such an injury, and disgrace, were no less injury. Wherefore
if we should only say thus much, that this Trent Council of yours is not
lawfully called, that Pope Pius has done nothing rightly or orderly, no man
could justly find fault with our absence.

9 I pass over the wrongs, which the Popes of Rome have done us: That they
have as often as they pleased, armed our People against their Sovereign: That
they have pulld the Scepters out of our Kings hands, and the Crowns from off
their heads: That they would have the Kingdom of England to be theirs, and
held in their name, and our Kings to Reign by their favor: That within these
later years, they have stirred up against us, sometimes the French, sometimes
the Emperor. What the intentions of Pius himself have been toward us, what
he has done, what he has spoken, what he has practiced, what he has
threatened, it is needless to rehearse: For his actions and his words are not
so close, so concealed, but that the aim of both may be discovered. By what
courses he was made Pope, and by what steps he mounted to so great a dignity,
I say nothing. I do not say, that he aspired to the Popedom by corrupting of
Cardinals, buying of voices, by price and purchase, by underminings, and
ambushes. I do not say that lately, being not able to quitt skores, he cast
Cardinal Caraffa into prison and there murdered him, by whose assistance he
had compassed the rest of the Cardinals voices, to whom for that service he
owed a great sum of money. These, and diverse other things, I leave to you,
who both behold them at a nearer distance, and better understand them. And can
you wonder then, that wecome not to a man of Blood, one that purchases voices,
that denies to pay his debts, to a Simoniacal person, to an Heretic? Believe
me, it is not the part of a wise man wilfully to run into a place infected,
and to consult of Religion with the enemies of Religion. My mother, says one,
forbade me the company of infamous persons. John the Apostle durst not sit in
the same Bath, nor wash with Olympius, lest he should be struck from heaven
with the same thunder. I have not sat, says David, in the assembly of
Vanity, neither will I walk with the workers of iniquity.

10 But admit that this is the Popes proper right; let it be in his power to
call Councels, to govern the whole world: Let those things be false and
vain, whatsoever we have spoken concerning the power of the Emperor, and the
right of Kings: Grant that Pope Pius is an honest man; that he was duly and
lawfully made Pope; that he sought no man's life; that he did not kill Caraffa
in prison: yet it is fit that Councels should be free, that every man may be
present that will, and those, with whose conuenience it stands not, may be
absent. And such was anciently the equity and moderation of those better men.
The Princes were not then called together in such a slavish manner, that if any
one of them had stayed at home, or had not sent Ambassadors to the Council,
presently every eye was upon him, every finger pointing at him. In the Nicen
Council, in the Ephesine, in that of Constantinople, what spy observed who
were absent? But there was never an Ambassador then, neither from England, nor
Scotland, nor Poland, nor Spain, nor out of the two Pannonia's, nor out of
Denmark, nor out of all Germany. See, read, reexamine the Subscriptions, you
shall find it so, as I say. And why do not you marvel then, that the
English came not to those Councels, being so full, so famous, so renowned, so
frequented? Or that the Popes in those times were so patient, as not to
condemn them of contumacie? But this tyranny of the Popes was not yet grown
up; it was lawful then for holy Bishops and Fathers, as it stood with their
conuenience, to stay at home without prejudice. The Apostle Paul would not put
himself upon the Council at Jerusalem, but rather appealed to Casar.
Athanasius the Bishop, though the Emperor summoned him to the Council at
Cesarea, yet he would not come. The same man, in the Syrmian Council, when he
saw that the Arrians were like to prevail, presently withdrew himself, and
went his ways: and the Western Bishops following his example, refused to come
to that Council. John Chrysostom came not to the Arrian Council, though the
Emperor Constantius called him, both by letter, and also by message. At what
time the Arrian Bishops assembled in Palestine, and drew with them the votes of
the mayor part, old Paphnutius and Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, went out
together out of the midst of their assembly. Bishop Cyril appealed from the
Council of the Patropassians. Paulinus Bishop of Triers would not come to the
Council of Millan, because that he saw, that by the favor and power of the
Emperor Constantius, all ran of Auxentius the Arrians side. The Bishops that
had met in a Council at Constantinople, being called to a Council at Rome,
refused to come. Which notwithstanding turned not to their prejudice, though
they were called by the Emperors letters. In those days the excuse seemed
reasonable enough, that they were to intend the charge and reformation of their
own Churches. Though they saw that the Arrians did play reakes in all
Churches and that their presence would have been of great importance for the
abating of their rage.

11 What if our Bishops should now give the same answer, that they can spare
no time from their sacred function; that they are wholly employed in setting up
again their own Churches; that they cannot be absent, five, six, seven
years, especially there, where they should be able to do no good. For our
Bishops are not so idle, as those at Rome that frolic it in their palaces, and
dance attendance upon the Cardinals, and hunt after livings. Our Churches are
so miserably wasted and ruined by them, that they cannot be repaired in a
small time, or with ordinary diligence. But now we see plainly that these
men seek to incroach upon our times, that without any necessity we might be
drawn abroad and so disabled to advance the Gospel at home, and in the
Council be hindered by them.

12 For the Pope, that you may not be mistaken, does but make a show of a
Council, and means it not, for think not that he does any thing sincerely
or truly. Lewis the eleventh was wont to say to Charles the eighth, that He
that knows not how to make shows of what he means not, kens not Kings-craft:
But, as the times go now, he that knows not how to make no show of what he
means, and to cloak his designs under a disguised countenance, is much more
ignorant how to play the Pope. For that Sea is wholly supported with mere
hypocrisy, which the less natural strength it has, so much the more color
it needs. For if the Popes thought a General Council so effectual for
removing of Schisms, why did they differ a thing so necessary thus long?
Why did they sit quiet thirty years together, and suffered Luthers Doctrine to
take root? Why did they not call a Council, with the first? Why did they
assemble the Trent Council with such reluctance and unwillingness, more by
the instigation of the Emperor Charles, then of their own accord? And having
been at Trent well nigh ten years, with all this deliberation why have they
done just nothing? Why have they left the matter undone? Who hindered, who with
stood them? Believe me in this, Good Brother, the Popes are not in hand now to
Keep a solemn Council, or to restore religion, which they make a mock of.
That which they intend, and seek, and labor for, is to delude the minds of
godly men, and the whole world with a pompous expectation of a General
Council.

13 They see that their wealth has been lessening now a pretty while, and
declining: That their tricks do not find the same credit now, as heretofore:
That an incredible number of men every day fall from them: That men do not now
run to Rome in such troops: That there is not now a days so high an
estimation, or so dear a price given for indulgences, interdicts, blessings,
absolutions, and empty Bulls: That their Mart of Ceremonies and Masses and all
their whorish paintings are slighted: That a great part of their tyranny and
pomp is shruncke: That their revenues are slenderer then they were wont to
be: That they and theirs are laughed at every where, even by very children:
That their whole rest lies now at stake. And indeed it is no wonder if those
things fall, which had no roots to hold them. Our Savior JESUS CHRIST
extinguished all those things, not by arms or force of men, but by the
heavenly blast and breath of his mouth; but will consume and abolish them with
the brightness of his coming. This is the force of Gods word; this is the
power of the Gospel; these be the weapons, by which is overthrown every
fortification, which is raised against the knowledge of God. This doctrine
shall be preached through the whole world in despite of them all: the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it. The merit-mongers shopps wax cold now
at Rome; their wares, as if Porsenna's goods were put to sale, are very low
pric'd, and yet can scarce find a chapman. The indulgence-broker trots up and
down, and finds no fools. This is it; Hence grows their grief; This vexes
the Popes. They see that this so great light broke forth from one spark: What
is it like to do now, when so many fires are kindled in all places of the
world? And so many Christian Kings and Princes acknowledge and profess the
Gospel? For they serve not CHRIST JESUS, but their Bellies. They say that
Carneades the Philosopher, when he was at Rome, and made that memorable speech
against Justice; amongst other things he added this, that this virtue, if it
were one, would be less profitable to no kind of men, then to the Romans:
For they by force and robbery had subdued other men's dominions to themselves,
and had compassed the Empire of the World by high injustice. Now if they would
at length observe Justice, they must restore all those things, which they
possess unjustly: They must return to their shepherds houses, and their cold
Cottages, which was all they had in the beginning. So verily these men, if they
would deal plainly, and lay aside their disguises, and do their duty, and
render every one his own, they see they must come to their staff and scrippe
again, to sobriety and modesty, to the labors and function of the Gospel.
For they have heard Austin say, that, The name of a Bishop, is a name of work,
not of worship; and, That they are no Bishops that would have the preeminence
above others, but not benefit them. And therefore they see, that it is less
expedient for themselves, then for any sort of men, to have the Gospel spread
wider, and further propagated: for they cannot be safe, if they will be
sound. Therefore now they raise tumults, and puzzle all, as Demetrius the Smith
did of old, when he saw that his hopes of gain were cut. Now therefore
Councels are summoned, the Abbats and Bishops are called to make a party. For
this they thought the cunningest plot, to spinne out the time for some years,
to hold men's minds in suspense with expectation: many things, as it uses,
might fall out in the mean time: Some War might be raised: One of these
Princes might die: that this so sharp edge of theirs for the Gospel, might in
process of time be dulled: men's minds might wax cool: In the mean while,
as one says, somewhat will be done I hope.

14 Long since, the Persians having been vanquished and led in triumph, when
as the Athenians had begun to repair their walls, which the Persians had laid
level with the ground; and the Lacedaemonians had straightly interdicted them, to
the end that they might keep them the easier under their check: Themistocles
the Athenian General, a wise man, seeing the safety of his Country might be
hazzarded, promised that he would come to Lacedemon to confer with them about
it. So, being upon the way, to spend time, he faignes himself sick, that he
might dwell the longer upon his journey. At length, being come to Lacedemon,
he began to make many cauils on set purpose: Sometimes the covenants did not
please him: Sometimes he demands time to advise: Sometimes he must wait for
his fellow Ambassadors, without whom nothing could be done: otherwise he
must send Ambassadors to Athens. In the mean time, whilst he trifles, the
Athenians had walled their City round; and, if any force were offered, were
provided of a defense. So these men, whilst they putt off from day to day, and
will have all referred to Councels; in the mean while they build up their
walls, whilst we sit idle, looking after we know not what; that at the last,
when they have made all safe, they may shutt us out wholly, and neither
Council, may be held, nor any thing at all done.

15 For it is worth the pains to observe their tricks, and fetches; How often
Councels have been summoned, and not met. How often a poor rumor has dashed
all their preparation, and all the expectation! How often have the Fathers made
a stand upon the sudden in the midst of their journey! How often have the
scarlet Counsailers, slipped home in the midst of the Council, having done
just nothing; and have reiourned the next Session till the ninth or tenth year
following! How often have they quarrelled with the air, the victuals, the
place, the time! For the Pope only assembles the Councels, and he alone
dismisseth them when he lists. If any thing please him not, or the business
begin to go awry, presently the solemn close of the Plays is heard,
Valete, and Plaudite, Farewell, and clap your hands. A Council is warned at
Basil: They meet from all parts in great numbers: They fall earnestly upon
many matters: Eugenius the Pope is cast by all the voices, as a Simoniacall and
Schismatic Person: Amideus, Duke of Sauoy is put in his place: Eugenius, as
he was to do, takes this indignely, thinks with himself, that this might
be a dangerous president for posterity: That his power and strength was far
above all Councels: That a Council could not meet but by his command: nor
determine of any thing, but what he pleased: That it was an ungodly act, to
inquire into his life in a Conuenticle of Bishops: Presently he calls back the
Council to Ferrara in Italy; afterward translates it to Florence. Why what
doings is this, I pray? Did Eugenius think the climate would alter men's
minds, or that the Holy Ghost would give discreeter answers in Italy, then he
had formerly in Germany? Nay, nay, in all those changes he sought not after
CHRIST, but his own benefit. He saw that his enemy Sigismond the Emperor, did
ouertoppe him in Germany, both in power, and in favor; And that those Fathers
which had met at Basil, if they were removed out of those harsh and rough
Countries into Italy, they might (as trees when they are transplanted) be
made more mellow. For now adays (merciful God!) the intent or scope of
Councels, is not to discover truth, or to confute falsehood. For these later
ages, this has been the only endeavor of the Popes, to establish the Roman
Tyranny; to set wars on foot; to set Christian Princes together by the
ears; to raise money, sometimes for the Holy Land, sometimes for the building
of Saint Peter's Church, sometimes for other uses; I know not what, or rather
abuses; all which money was to be cast into some few bellies, in gluttony, and
lust. And this has been the only cause or course of Councels for some ages
last past. For of errors and abuses, as if there were none at all, nothing
ever could be handled.

16 Peter de Alliaco made great complaint in the Council of Constance,
concerning the covetousness and pride of the Court of Rome, but what good did
he? Was there any part of their controversy or pride restrained by the
authority of the Council? The same man says, that Holy days, and the flocks
of idle Monks ought in his opinion to be lessened: And another (in a certain
Work entitled, Tripartite, and joined to the Lateran Council) The whole world
almost, says he, speaks against it, and is scandalized at the infinite
multitude of beggarly Friars. And the Fathers in the Council of Lateran, we
strictly command, say they, that for the future no man invent a new religious
order. Since that time what has been done for Holy days. I know not: it is
probable, that no abatement is made. But for the Orders of Monks, they are
infinitely multiplied. For the last Popes have added Jesuits, Capuchins and
Theatines; as if there had not been yet enough of these slow-bellies. John
Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, exhibited in the Council of Constance, seventy
five abuses in the Church of Rome, which he did earnestly desire might be
reformed. But of so great a number, what one abuse did they take away? John
Picus Mirandula writes to Pope Leo, to abridge idle ceremonies, and to
restrain the luxury of Priests. The Bishops afterward, in the Lateran
Council sat in great numbers, and moved much expectation. But what one
ceremony did they abate? what one Priests luxury or lewdness did they
condemn. Mantuan the Poet complains by name of the manners of the Church of
Rome. Bernard the Abbot writes thus to Pope Eugenius: your Court receives good
men, but makes them not: lewd men thrive there, the good pine and fall away.
And speaking of the woeful state of the Church in those days, From the sole
of the foot says he, to the crown of the head, there is no health in her.
And again says he, where is there one to preach the acceptable year of the
Lord? Now a days, says he, they keep not Christ's spouse, but destroy her;
They feed not the Lords flock but slaughter and devour it. Pope Adrian the
sixth, when he sent his Legate into Germany, confessed truly and ingenuously,
that the state of the whole Clergy was most corrupt. All we Prelates, says
he, have swerued every one to his own way, neither is there now any one that
does good, no not one. Albertus Pighius confesses, that in the Mass it self,
(which they would have to be most sacred, and in which alone they place the
main of Christian Religion) are found errors and abuses. What needs more? I
pass over other witnesses, for they are infinite. There were many Councels
held after this; the Bishops were called together; the Synod of Basil was
summoned, as they then made show, expressly for the reformation of the whole
Clergy. But since that time, the errors have been increased in all places;
nay the vices of the Priests themselves doubled.

17 The Cardinals chosen by Pope Paul the third, to consider of the State of
the Church, made report, that there were many corruptions in it, especially in
the manners of the Bishops and Clergy men. That the Bishops were idle; did not
instruct the people, nor feed the flock, nor look to the Lords vineyard:
that they lived in Princes Courts, and kept not home: That the Cardinals had
sometimes three, sometimes four Bishoprics in Commendam, not without great
prejudice to the Church: for that those offices are not, as they say,
compatible, or to be held together. That the Couents ought to be clean
banished out of the Church. Since this, the Trent Council has been held: But
have the Bishops since then begun to feed the flock? Have they left their
nonresidence, and living in Princes Courts? Have the Cardinals left to be
Bishops? Or is it provided, that the Church sustain no prejudice thereby? Has
the number of Couents been abridged, or religion amongst them reformed? What
need then was there of calling together so many Bishops so far off, or to
advise so many years in vain of reforming the Church? This is just the
Pharisees going about to repair Gods Church.

18 They confess errors and abuses: they call Counsels, and pretend a zeal
of Religion and Godliness: They promise their pains and endeavors; that they
will join with us, to build up again, whatsoever is fallen down. Just so, as
the enemies of Gods people said they would join with Nehemias to build the
Lords Temple. For they did not intend the building of the Lords Temple, but by
all possible means to hinder it. They will be reconciled to us, but so as Naas
the tyrant would long ago with the Jews of Iabes, upon no other conditions,
but that we must suffer our right eyes to be plucked our; that is, that we
should suffer our selves to be bereaved of Gods word, and the Gospel of our
salvation.

19 For have they any care of Religion? Care they for Gods Church, that care
neither for Gods vengeance, nor the salvation of the people, nor any part of
their own duty? Let Pan, say they, look to his sheep; they in the mean
time, manage wars, hunt, fare deliciously; to say no worse of them, Immortal
God! who would believe that these men ever think of Gods Church, or Religion?
What errors will these men ever take away or when? What light will they restore
unto us? Whatsoever you say, though you carried the sun it self in your
hands, yet they will not see. Open errors they excuse as far as they are
able, and color and smooth them, as anciently Symmachus or Porphyrie did the
errors and fopperies of the Heathen: And indeed they are wholly set upon
this, not to seem to have led Gods people astray, or at any time to have
erred themselves. Or if it come in their heads to amend any thing, which either
they never do, or very seldom and sparingly) as it is reported of Alexander
and Emperor of Rome, that being not altogether auerse from the Christian
Religion, he worshipped Christ and Orpheus in the same Chapel: and as in
times past the ancient Samaritans did retain the worship of the true God,
and of Idols both together.) So they will receive perchance some part of the
Gospel upon this condition, that therewith they may admit of superstitions,
and old wifes tales: they receive truth, so that they may retain falsehood:
they allow of ours, so that they may not disallowe their own: And so they
do not take away but color abuses and only new plaster old pillars.

20 In this manner do they reform Gods Church; so be the Council and Synodes
kept: Truth is not followed, but men's affections: The better part is mastred
by the greater. Indeed the very name of a General Council carries a glorious
luster: But yet oftentimes poison is carowsed out of a fair cup. For it is
not enough for a few Bishops and Abbotts to have met in one place; The virtue
of a Council consists not in Rochetts, and Skarletts; neither is every Decree
of a Council presently to be received for an Oracle. That was a Council of
which the Prophet Chap. 30. 3.
Esaias writes.

21 That was a Council of which the Prophet David speaks, The Kings of the
earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord
and against his anointed. That was a Council which condemned the Son of God
Christ Jesus to the Cross. That was a Council which was held at Carthage under
Cyprian; in which it was Decreed that those, who had been baptized by
Heretics, when they returned to the Church, ought to be baptized again.
Which error could not be afterward repealed but so many Councels and writings
of the Fathers. What needs many words? The Second Ephesine Council openly
took Eutyches his part, that the humane nature in Christ was turned into his
divinity. The second Nicene Council decreed flatt Idolatry about adoration
of Images. The Council of Basil, as Albertus Pighius says, decreed against all
antiquity, against nature, against reason, against the word of God. The
Council of Ariminum decreed for the Arrians most impiously, that Christ was
not God. Many other ensuing Councels, that of Smyrna, the Arrian, the
Seleucian, the Syrmian did both condemn the Homousians, and also subscribe to
the impiety of the Council of Ariminum. What would you have more? The
Council of Chalcedon it self, which was one of those four that Gregory
compares with the four Gospells, Pope Leo did not stick to challenge it of
unadvisedness.

21 Therefore we see Councels have been often opposite one to another: And as
Leo the Pope abrogated the Acts of Adrian, Stephanus of Formosus, John of
Stephanus; And as Sabinian the Pope commanded all Pope Gregory's writings to
be burnt, as erroneous and impious: So we see oftentimes that a later
Council, has repealed all the Decrees of a former. The Carthage Council
decreed, that the Bishop of Rome should not be called either The High Priest,
or The chief of Priests, or by any other the like name. But following Councels
have styled him, not only Chief Priest, but also Chief Bishop, and Head of
the Catholic Church. The Eliberine Council decreed that nothing should be
painted on the walls of Churches, that ought of right to be worshipped. The
Council of Constantinople decreed that Images were not to be suffered in
Christian Churches. On the other side, the second Nicen Council, determined,
that Images were not only to be placed in Churches, but also to be
worshipped. The Lateran Council under Pope Julius the second, was summoned for
no other cause, but to repeal the Decrees of the Pisan Council. So oftentimes
the later Bishops oppose those that went before them, and Councels damme up one
another lights. For these men will not be tied, no not to their own Councels,
but as far as they please, and is commodious for them, and will bring grist to
their Mill. The Basil Council determined that a Council of Bishops was above
the Pope. But the Lateran Council under Leo decreed, that the Pope was above
the Council. And the Pope does not only bear himself so, but also commands
him to be held for an heretic that shall think otherwise. But yet all the
Bishops and Abbats in the Council of Basil say thus, He that opposes these
truths is to be accounted an heretic. How will you behave your self, I beseech
you! Whatsoever you say, or think, either the Pope or the Council will
esteem you an heretic. All Popes, for some ages last past, have opposed
these trueths: therefore all Popes, that lived in these ages, have been
Heretics, in the judgment of the Council of Basil. The same Council did
with an uniform consent remove Pope Eugenius, a Simoniacal and Schismatic
person, and put Amideus in his place. But Eugenius vilifies the Councels
Decree; and though he were most Simoniacall and Schismatic, yet he
continued to be the Successor of Peter, the Vicar of CHRIST, and Head of the
whole Church of GOD. He retained his former dignity in despite of all their
teeth, and was magnificently carried, as before, upon noble men's shoulders.
Amideus, as one fallen from his horse, walked on foot like a simple man, and
thought himself happy, that of a Pope he was made a Cardinal. The Council
of Trent commanded that Bishops should teach the people, and that no one man
should have more then one Spiritual preferment at one time: But they, contrary
to the Edict of their Council, accumulate Benefices, and instruct not at all.
So they make Laws, but obey them not, but when they list. This is the esteem
they have always made of their own Councels, and the Decrees thereof.

22 And why should we hope for better success at this present? With what
expectation or hope can any one come to the Council? Do but think with your
self what manner of men they be, upon whose fidelity learning and judgment,
the weight of this whole Council, the discussing of all questions, and the
whole state of all things must lie and rest. They are called Abbots and
Bishops, grave persons, and fair titles, men (as it is believed) of great
importance for the government of the Church of GOD. But take from these men
their titles, the persons they bear, and their trappings, there will nothing
that belongs to an Abbot or a Bishop remain in them. For they are not
ministers of CHRIST, dispensers of the mysteries of GOD; they apply not
themselves to reading, or to preach the Gospel; they feed not the flock,
they till not the ground, they plant not the Lords Vineyard, nor kindle the
fire, nor bear the Ark of the Lord, nor are the Ambassadors of CHRIST: they
watch not, nor do the work of an Evangelist, nor perform the duty of their
ministry: they entangle themselves with secular businesses; they hide the
Lords treasure; they take away the keys of the Kingdom of God; they go not
in themselves, nor suffer others; they beat their fellow servants, they feed
themselves, and not the flock: they sleep, snort, feast, and riot: they are
clouds without water, stars without light, dumb dogs, slow bellies; as
Bernard says, not Prelates, but Pilats; not Doctors, but seducers; not
Pastors, but imposters: The servants of CHRIST (says he) serve Antichrist.
The Popes will allow none but these to have place and suffrage in the Council:
The care and charge of Christ's Catholic Church must depend upon their power
and judgment: Upon none but such as these does Pope Pius rely. But (good GOD)
what manner of persons are they? They hold it ridiculous to ask that question.
It is no matter (say they) how learned, or how religious they be; what their
aim is, or what they think: If they can sit upon a Mule; if they can ride
through the streets with pomp, and with a noise; if they can come into the
Council, and say nothing, it is sufficient. If you believe me not, and think
I speak in jest, hear what the faculty of Divinity, and the whole Sorbone,
have determined concerning this matter. That which our great masters affirm
(say they) concerning the due assembling of a Council, is to be understood
thus; that for the lawful calling of a Council it is sufficient, that the
form of Law be solemnly observed. For if it should be disputed, whether the
Prelates there assembled have a good intention; whether they be learned,
especially in the Scriptures, and are willing to obey wholesome doctrine, it
would prove an infinite business. Those, forsooth, who fit mute, like the
statues of Mercury, not knowing what belongs to Religion, will determine well
concerning all points of Religion, and, whatsoever they say, they cannot
possibly err.

23 These are obliged to the Pope, not through error and ignorance, but by oath
and religion: So that although they should understand the truth, they cannot
without perjury make profession of it, and are necessitated to break faith,
either with God or man. For this is the formal oath which they all take. I N.
C. Bishop, will henceforward bear true faith to S. Peter, and to the holy
Apostolic Roman Church, to my Lord the Pope N. and his successors, which shall
enter canonically. I will not be a means, either by word or deed, that he may
loose, either life or member, or be taken prisoner: I will not reveal any
counsel that he shall impart unto me, either by letters or message, which
may be any way dammageable to him: I will help to defend and maintain against
all the world the Papacy of the Church of Rome, and the rules of the holy
Fathers. In old time, when the Priests of Appollo Pytheus began to speak
plainly in favor of King Philip, many would merrily say, that Apollo began to
Philippize. When we see that nothing is decreed in the Council, but at the
Popes pleasure, why may we not say that the oracles of the Councels do
Tapize; that is, say nothing but what the Pope will. When Verres was charged
with many crimes, of which in probability he was guilty, they say he was so
wise, as not to commit his trial to any, but only to some trusty persons of
his own train. The Popes have dealt more wisely: For they have chosen such
judges, whom they know neither will (because it is their own case, in regard
they refer all to voluptuousness and gluttony) nor can if they would (because
they are sworn) decree any thing contrary to his will and pleasure. They set
the holy Bible in the midst, as if they would do nothing against it: they
look upon it afar off, and read it not. Indeed they bring a preiudicated
opinion with them, not regarding what Christ has said, but decreeing
whatsoever they please.

24 Therefore that liberty which ought to be in all consultations, especially
sacred, and which is most proper to the Holy Ghost, and the modesty of
Christians, is quite taken away. Paul says, If any thing be reauealed to
another that 1. Cor. 14 30.
sits by, let the first hold his peace: But these men apprehend, imprison
and burn whosoever dares but whisper against them. Witness hereof the cruel
death of two most holy and resolute men, John Husse and Hierom of Prague, whom
they put to death contrary to their safe conduct, and so brake their faith,
both with God and man. So the wicked Prophet Zedekias, when he had put on iron
horns, struck Micheas the Prophet of the Lord on the face, saying, how has
the spirit of God left me, and is come to thee? Therefore these men alone
domineere in Councels, all others being excluded. They alone give voices, and
make laws; like unto the Ephesians in times past: let no man (say they) live
here, who is wiser then the rest, except he have a mind to be cast into
banishment. They will not hear any of our men speak. In the last conuention of
the Council at Trent, ten years since, the Ambassadors of the Princes and
free Cities of Germany came thither with a purpose to be heard, but were
absolutely refused. For the Bishops and Abbots answered that they would not
suffer their cause to have a free hearing, nor suffer controversies to be
discussed out of the word of God: that our men were not to be heard at all
except they would recant; which if they refused to do, they should come into
the Council upon none other condition but to hear the sentence of
condemnation pronounced against them. For Julius the third in his Bull of
indiction of the Council declared plainly that either they should change
their opinions, or else should be condemned for heretics before they were
heard. Pius the fourth who has now a purpose to reassemble the Council, has
already preiudged for heretics all those who have left the Roman Church,
that is to say, the greatest part of the Christian world, before they were ever
either seen or heard. They say, and they say it often, that already all is
well with them, and that they will not alter one jot of their doctrine and
Religion. Albertus Pighius says, that without the authority of the Roman
Church one ought not to believe the cleerest, and plainest Scripture. Is this
to restore the Church to her integrity? Is this to seek the truth? Is this
the liberty and moderation of Councels?

25 Though these things be most unjust, and most different from the fashion of
ancient Councels and of modest men, yet this is more unjust, that whereas the
world complains of the Papal pride and tyranny, and does believe that
nothing can be amended in the Church of God until he be reduced into order,
yet all things are referred unto him, as unto a most conscientious pence maker
and judge. And unto what a kind of man (good God) are they referred? I will not
call him an enemy of the Truth, ambitious, covetous proud, intolerable, even
to his own followers. But they would make judge of all Religion him who
commands that all his determinations shall be of equal value with those of
Saint Peter himself, and says, that in case he carry a thousand souls with
himself to Hell, yet no man ought to reprehend him for it: who avouches that
he can make injustice to be justice: whom Camotensis affirms to have
corrupted the Scriptures, that he might have fullness of power: and to
conclude, whom his own familiars and followers (Ioachimus, Abbas Petrarch,
Marsilius Patauinus, Laurentius Valla, Hieronymus Sauanorola) do clearly
pronounce to be The Antichrist. All is referred to the judgment and will of
this man alone; so that the same man is the party arraigned, and the Judge:
the accusers are heard from an inferior place, and the party accused sits in
his Tribunal, and pronounces the sentence concerning himself. These laws,
forsooth, so equal, and so reasonable, Pope Julius has given us. No Council
(says he) is of any credit, nor ever will be, unless it be confirmed by the
authority of the Church of Rome. Bonifacius 8. says, That no creature in the
world can possibly be saved, except he be subject to the Roman Church. And
Pope Pascal thus, As though, says he, any Councels have made laws for the
Church of Rome, when as all Councels do subsist by it, and receive their
strength from it; and do expressly except in all their Decrees the authority
of the Bishop of Rome. Another says, That which the Pope approoueth or
disprooueth, we ought to approve or disprooue likewise. And again, It is not
lawful for any man to disallow that which the Pope approoueth. I know not what
Parasite it is who most shamelesly says, that though all the world should be
of one opinion against the Pope, yet it seems to me that the Popes opinion
must be maintained. And another as impudently as he, It is a kind of
sacrilege but to dispute of the Pope's fact, who though he be not always a
good man, yet must he always be presumed to be. Another yet more impudently
says, The Pope's will is heavenly; therefore in those things which he
wills, his will stands for reason; neither ought any man to say to him, why
do you so? To leave many the like sayings, which are infinite, and to make an
end, Pope Innocent the ninth speaks most impudently of all; The Judge will not
be judged, neither by the Emperor, nor by Kings, nor by the whole Clergy,
nor by all the people of the world. O immortal God! how near are they come to
say thus; I will ascend upon the North Pole, and I will be like to the most
High. If the Popes say true, what need we a Council? if they will hold a
sincere and a free Council, away with these wicked and vaineglorious lies: Let
them not only not be practiced, but let them even be rased out of all their
Books, that all may not be left to the will and pleasure of one man who is
most justly suspected. But the Popes, say they, cannot err, and that the word
of GOD is to be regulated as they please: Before they enter into their place
they swear to maintain certain late Councels, which are most fowlly
corrupted, and do religiously promise that nothing shall be changed. What
marvel then that no good comes of a Council, if that errors and abuses are
not taken away? that the Ambassadors of Princes are in vain called thither
from so many remote parts? Notwithstanding I hear that now there are some men,
not ill affected, yet careless what they say, who, though they condemn the
arrogancy and Persian pride of the Pope, and his even Epicurean contempt of
Religion, yet they desire that his authority should be maintained: Though they
sometimes confess him to be Antichrist, yet being mounted into that chair,
they doubt not but that he is Universal Bishop and Head of the whole Church of
CHRIST. Here they triumph and please themselves, as if the Holy Ghost were
affixed to the Pope's palace. Yet the saying is, The place does not sanctify
the man, but the man the place. And Hierome, as he is cited by them, says,
that, They are not sons of the Saints who hold their places, but who imitate
their deeds. Likewise Christ tells us, that the Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses chair, but warns us not to allow of their authority further then they
speak out of the word of God. Augustine says, What said Christ but this;
Hear the voice of the Shepherd even by hirelings? For by sitting in the
chair they teach the Law of God; therefore God does instruct us by them. If
they will teach ought of their own, hear them not, do it not. Likewise Paul
says, that Antichrist, that man of sin, must fit in the Temple. Hierome
says, Well; do thou consider Peter? consider Judas also: do thou allow
of Stephen? mark also what Nicholas was. Ecclesiastical dignity makes not a
Christian. Thus far Hierome. It is reported that Pope Marcellinus sacrificed
to Idols; that Pope Liberius was an Arrian; that Pope John the 22 had an
impious opinion concerning the immortality of the soul; that Pope John the 8.
was a woman, that she committed adultery during her Papacy, and going
pompously in procession about the City, was delivered of a child, even in the
very sight of the Bishops and Cardinals. And Liranus affirms, that many popes
have turned infidels. Wherefore we must not be too confident of places, and
successions, and vain titles of dignities. Wicked Nero succeeded godly
Metellus. Annas and Caiphas succeeded Aaron: and oftentimes Idols are put in
the place of GOD.

26 But what I pray you is this great power and authority, whereof they do so
insolently boast? whence comes it? From Heaven, or of men? Christ spoke unto
Peter, say they; upon this rock I will build my Church; by which words, the
Popes authority is confirmed. For the Church of Christ is placed in Peter, as
in the foundation. But Christ gave nothing to Peter by these words more then to
the other Apostles: neither does he make mention of the Pope, or of Rome.
Christ is that rock; Christ is that foundation. No man, says Saint Paul, can
lay another foundation then that which is already laid, which is Christ Jesus.

27 These words, upon this rock I will build my Church, Saint Augustine
expounds thus: upon this, says he, which Peter confessed, saying, Thou art
Christ the son of the living God. It is not said thou art the rock, but thou
art Peter: the rock was Christ. Saint Basil says thus: upon this rock, that
is, upon this faith I will build my Church. Origin, that most ancient Father,
says that every disciple is a rock, after that he has drunk of that
spiritual rock; and upon such a rock all the doctrine of the Church is
builded. But if thou think that the whole is built upon Peter only, what
say thou of John the son of thunder, and of each of the Apostles. For
shall we be so bold as to say, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
Peter only, and they shall prevail against the rest of the Apostles; and
against good men? Or shall we not rather say, let that which is spoken (and
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against him; and that other, upon this
rock I will build my Church) be true in every one of those of whom it was
spoken. Were the keys of the kingdom given to Peter only, so that none of the
other Saints might meddle with them. Then if this saying, (to thee I will give
the keys of the kingdom of Heaven) be common to others also, why are not the
other sayings so to? Saint Hilarie says, There is but one happy rock of
faith, which Peter confessed with his mouth. And again he says, Upon this
confession of Peter the Church is built: and a little after he says, This
faith is the foundation of the Church. In like manner other Fathers, Hierom,
Cyrill, Beda, say that the Church is built, not upon Peter, but upon his faith,
that is, upon Jesus Christ the son of God, whom Peter, by divine inspiration,
confessed. Peter (says Augustine) takes his name from the Rock, not the
Rock from Peter; neither will I (says he) build my self upon thee, but I
will build thee upon me. So also Nicholas Lira (though he be not always a
good author; for you know in what age he lived) saw thus much: Upon this
Rock, says he, that is, upon CHRIST. By this it appears, that the Church
cannot rely wholly upon any man by reason of any power, or Ecclesiastical
dignity, because many Popes are known to be Apostats, have been Apostats.

28 Why then, wherein does this Papal authority consist? In teaching? They
teach not at all. In administering the Sacraments? They administer them not. In
feeding? Why they do it not. Yet this is the power which CHRIST bestowed on
his Apostles. Go (says he) into the whole world, and preach the Gospel: And
afterward, Ye shall be fishers of men. And, as my living Father sent me, so
send I you. But these men whither go they? what do they teach, or preach, or
fish for? From whence go they, or by whom are they sent? This is not
Apostolical authority, but a proud intolerable domination, usurped by force
and tyranny. None of us (says Cyprian) calls himself Bishop of Bishops, nor
violently compels his Colleagues to any necessary obedience, since every
Bishop may use his liberty and power according to his own discretion, without
being judged by any, seeing that he himself judges no man. Again he
says, The other Apostles were that which Peter was, and had the same
fellowship of honor, and power. Saint Hierome says, the authority of the
world is greater then that of one City. Why do you extol the custom of one
City? Why do you make a paucitie, whence pride began, to give laws to the
Church? Wheresoever any Bishop is, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, he is of the same desert and Priesthood. The
strength of riches, or humbleness of poverty makes a Bishop neither greater
nor less. Gregory says, Peter is the chief member in the body; John,
Andrew, James are Heads of particular people: yet all of them are members of
the Church under one Head. Nay, the Saints before the Law, the Saints under the
Law, the Saints under the Gospel, and all that make up the body of the Lord
are to be accounted members, and none was ever willing to be called
Universal.

29 This is that power which some do so strenuously defend at this day, which,
whatsoever they think of the Popes life and religion, they would have to be
most religiously maintained, as if the Church could not subsist without it; or
as if a Council were no Council except the Pope did will and command it to be
so; or as if the whole world must needs be deceived, if it should think
otherwise. Wherefore now that you see that all things are most unjustly
handled, that nothing is sincerely and fairly carried in Councels, you may not
wonder that our men had rather tarry at home, then take so long, and so idle a
journey, in which they shall both lose their labor, and betray their cause.

30 You will say, it is not lawful to make change in Religion without order
from the Pope and the Council. Yet the Popes have changed almost the whole
state of the Primitive Church without any Council at all. You use a fair
smooth speech, but it is to cover foul errors. The purpose is only to keep
men's minds in expectation, that being wearied with tedious delays, they may at
the last despair of any good. For what? while the Pope assembleth a Council,
while the Bishops and Abbots return home, will they have GOD's people in the
mean while, to be deceived, to err, to mistake themselves, to be
overwhelmed with errors, and want of the knowledge of GOD, and so to be
carried to everlasting destruction? Is it not lawful for any of us to believe
in CHRIST, to profess the Gospel, to serve God aright, to fly superstition,
and idolatry, except they will be pleased to give us leave? The state of God's
children were most miserable, if, there being so many errors, so generally
spread, so gross, so blind, so foul, and so perspicuous and manifest, that
even our adversaries themselves are not able to deny them, nothing could be
done without the whole world should meet in a general Council; the
expectation whereof is very uncertain, and the event much more. In times past,
when the Persians invaded Greece, and began to lay all waste, if then the
Lacedaemonians, whose virtue was then most eminent amongst the Grecians, whose
help was requisite as soon as might be, had expected a more seasonable moon
to make war in (for it was an ancient superstition, which proceeded from
Lycurgus, not to go forth to fight but in a full moon) their Country might
have been spoiled whilst they deferred the time. They say, delay breeds
danger. The safety of God's Church is in question; the Devil goes about
roaring like a Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Simple men are easily
deceived; and though they be often touched with a zeal toward God, yet they
persecute the son of God before they be aware: And, as Nazianzen says, when
they purpose to fight for Christ, they fight against him: Nay the Bishops
themselves, who ought to have a care of these things, are (as though they were
but Ghosts) careless of them: or, to speak truth, they increase the error,
and make the mist that is in their Religion twice as great as it was. Must we
therefore sit idle, expecting how these Fathers will handle the matter? must
we hold our hands together and do nothing. Nay, says Cyprian, there is but
one Bishoprique, of which every one holds an entire part, whereof he is to
give account to the Lord. I will require, says the Lord, their blood at thy
hands. If any shall put his hand to the plough and look back, and be
sollicitous what others think, and expect the authority of a general
Council, and hide the Lord's treasure, in the mean while, he shall here this,
O evil and faithless servant! take him away, and cast him into outward
darkness. Suffer (says Christ) the dead to bury their dead, but come thou
and follow me. In humane counsels, it is the part of a wise man to expect the
judgment and consent of men? but in matters divine, Gods word is all in all:
the which so soon as a godly man has received, he presently yields and
submits himself; he is not wavering, not expects others. He
understands that he is not bound to give care to the Pope, or the Council,
but to the will of God, whose voice is to be obeyed, though all men say nay.
The Prophet Elias presently obeyed God's command, though he thought he was
alone; Abraham, being warned of God, went out of Chaldea; Lot went out of
Sodom; the three Israelites made a public confession of their Religion, and
did publicly detest Idolatry, without expecting a general Council. Go
(says the Angel) out of the midst of her and partake not of her sins, lest
you taste of her Plagues. He says not, expect a Synod of Bishops. So God's
truth was first published, and so it is now to be restored. The Apostles first
taught the Gospel without a public Council; in like manner the same Gospel
may be restored again without a public Council. If at the first, Christ and
his Apostles would have carried, and differred all until a general Council,
when had their sound gone forth into all lands? how had the kingdom of heaven
suffered violence? and how had the violent taken it by force? Where now would
the Gospel, and the Church of God have been? As for our parts, we do not
fear and fly, but desire and wish for a Council, so that it be freely
ingenuous, and Christian; so that men do meet as the Apostles did; so that
Abbots and Bishops be freed from their oath by which they are bound to the
Popes; so that, that whole conspiracy be dissolved; so that our men may be
modestly and freely heard, and not condemned before they be heard; so that one
man may, not have power to overthrow whatsoever is done. But seeing it
impossible (as the times now are) that this should be obtained; and seeing that
all absurd things, foolish, ridiculous, superstitious, impious are defended
most pertinaciously, and that for custom sake, because they have been once
received, we have thought it fit to provide for our Churches by a national
Council.

31 For we know that the spirit of God is tied neither to places, nor to
numbers of men. Tell it to the Church, says Christ: not to the whole Church
spread over the world, but to a particular, which may easily meet in one place.
Wheresoever, says he, two or three shall be, gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. When Paul would reform the Churches of the
Corinthians, and of the Galatians, he did not command them to expect a General
Council; but only wrote unto them, that what error soever or vice was amongst
them, themselves should presently cut it off. So in times past, when Bishops
did sleep, or intended by-matters, or did defile and pollute the Lords Temple,
God did always extraordinarily raise up some, men of great spirit and courage,
who made all well and sound again.

32 For our selves, we have done nothing but with very good reason; nothing
but what we saw to be lawful, and to have been practiced by the Fathers of
the primitive Church, without any reprehension at all. wherefore we called a
full Synod of Bishops, and, by common consent of all sorts, purged our Church,
as it were Augeus his stable, of those excrements, which either the negligence,
or the malice of men had brought in. we have restored all things, as much as
possibly we could, to the ancient purity of the Apostolical times, and the
similitude of the primitive Church. This was justly in our power to do, and
because we could do it, we did it boldly.

33 Here I think it fit that you should hear what Pope Gregory the first has
written concerning this matter; which pleases me the more, because he wrote
it to Augustine, Bishop of the English, about the institution of the Church of
England. He exhorts him not to call a Council, but to ordain that which he
himself in his own wisdom did think would most promote piety and religion.
Your brotherhood, says he, knows the Custom of the Roman Church, in which
you have been brought up. It pleases me to hear, that you have been
careful to make choice of as many things as you can find acceptable to GOD,
either in the Church of Rome, France, or of any other, that you may bring them
into the English Church, which is as yet but new in faith, and, as it were, but
now to be framed. For things are not to be valewed because of the place where
they are found, but places are to be valewed for the things that are in them.

34 So the Fathers in the Council of Constantinople write to Damasus Bishop of
Rome, and to the other Western Bishops: You know, say they, that the old
Decree, and definition of the Nicen fathers concerning the care of particular
Churches, has always been in force, that the husbandmen of the Lord's
vineyard in every Province, taking their next bordering neighbors unto them,
if they please, should bestow Ecclesiastical honors upon those whom they
think will use them well. The Bishops of Africa wrote thus to Celestinus
Bishop of Rome: Let your Holiness, as becomes you, take away all wicked
euasions of Priests, and inferior Clergymen, because none of the Fathers
have denied this to the Church of Africa. And the Decrees of the Nicen Council
do most plainly refer not only mean Clergy men, but even the Bishops
themselves to their Metropolitans. For businesses are best ended in the places
where they are, neither is the grace of the Holy Spirit wanting unto any
Province. Let this equity be wisely observed, and constantly maintained by the
Ministers of CHRIST.

35 Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome writes to Lucius King of Britannie much
better, and more appositely to our present purpose. You have (says he)
desired, that we should send you the laws of the Romans, and of the
Emperors, that you may make use of them in the kingdom of Britannie. These
laws we may abrogate when we will, but the laws of God we cannot. You have
received (by God's mercy) into your kingdom of Britannie the law and faith of
CHRIST; you have there the Old and the New Testament: from them take, through
the grace of God, laws by a Council of your own kingdom, and, God permitting
you, instruct your kingdom of Britannie by them. For you are Gods Vicar in
that kingdom; according to that of the Psalmist, The earth is the Lords.

36 What should I say more? Victor, Bishop of Rome held a provincial Synod at
Rome: Justinian the Emperor commands that Synods (if there were occasion)
should be held in every Province; protesting to punish them, if they did not
do it. Every province (says Hierom) has peculiar manners, and rites, and
conceits, which cannot be altered without a great deal of trouble. What
should I repeat those old provincial Councels at Eliberis, Gangra, Laodicea,
Ancyra, Antioch, Tyrus, Carthage, Mileuitum, Toulouse, and Bordeaux. This is no
new invention. The Church of God was so governed before the Fathers met in the
Nicen Council: men did not presently run to a general Council. Trophilus held a
provincial Council in Palestina; Palmas in Pontus; Irenaeus in France;
Bacchylus in Achaia, Origin against Berillus in Arabia. I omit many other
National Councels held in Africa, Asia, Graecia, Egypt without any order from
the Bishop of Rome; which Councels were godly, Orthodox, and Christian. For
Bishops in those times upon the sudden, if any occasion had been offered, did
provide for the necessity of their Churches by a domestical Council, and
sometimes craved aid from their neighbor Bishops; so that they mutually helped
one the other. Neither did Bishops only believe, that the cause of Religion
belonged to them, but even Princes too. For to pass over Nabuchadnezar, who
commanded upon pain of death, that the name of the God of Israel should not be
blasphemed; to omit David, Solomon, Ezekias, Josias, who partly built, partly
purged the Temple of the Lord, Constantius the Emperor put down Idolatry
without a Council, and made a most severe edict, that it should be capital to
sacrifice to Idols. Theodosius the Emperor caused the Temples of the heathen
Gods to be pulled to the very ground. Iouinian, so soon as he was created
Emperor, made his first law for the restoring of banished Christians.
Justinian the Emperor was wont to say, that he had no less care of Christian
Religion, then of his own life. When Joshua was made ruler of the people, he
presently received command concerning religion, and the worship of God. For
Princes are nursing Eathers of the Church, and keepers of both tables. Neither
is any greater cause that has moved God to erect politic States, then that
always there might be some to maintain and preserve Religion and piety.

37 Princes therefore now a days do more greiuously offend, who indeed are
called Christians, but sit idly, follow their pleasures, and patiently suffer
impious worships and contempt of God, leaving all unto their Bishops, whom they
know to make but a mock of Religion: as if the care of the Church, and of
God's people belonged not to them, or as if they were Pastors but of sheep and
oxen, as it were, to be careful of their bodies, and neglect their souls.
They remember not, that they are God's servants, chosen of purpose to serve
him. Ezekias went not into his own house, before he saw God's Temple purified.
King David said, I will not give any sleep unto mine eyes, nor suffer mine eye
lids to slumber, until I have found a place for the Lord, a tabernacle for the
God of Jacob. O that Christian Princes would hear the voice of the Lord! Now,
says the Lord, understand O ye Kings, and learn ye that be judges of the
earth: I have said ye are God's, that is, men chosen by God to honor his
name. Thou, whom I have raised out of the dust, and placed in the highest
degree of dignity and honor, and set thee over my people, when thou art so
careful to build and adorn thine own house, do but think with thy self
how thou can contemn mine house? Or how do thou pray daily, that thy
kingdom may be confirmed to thee and thy posterity? Is it that my name may be
contemned? That the Gospel of my CHRIST may be put down? That my servants,
for my sake, may be slain before thine eyes? That tyranny may be further
spread, my people always deceived and scandal confirmed by thee? Woe unto him
by whom scandal comes: Woe also unto him by whom it is confirmed. Thou
abhorrest material blood: how much more the blood of souls? Thou remembrest
what happened to Antiochus, Herod and Julian: I will give thy kingdom to thine
enemy, because thou have sinned against me: I change times, and seasons: I put
down and raise up Kings; that thou may understand, that I am the most high;
that I have power over the kingdom of men, and give it to whom I will: I bring
low, and I exalt: I glorify them that glorify me, and put to shame those,
that despise me.

Epistola Reu. P. IOANNIS IVELLI, Episcopi Sarisburiensis, ad virum nobilem, D.
SCIPIONEM, Patricium Venetum.
1 SCribis ad me familiariter pro ea consuetudine, quae inter nos summa semper
fuit (ex eo vsque tempore, quo vnd viximus Patauiae, Tu in Reip. tuae
tractatione occupatus, ego in studijs literarum) mirari te, tecumque alios
istic multos, cum hoc tempore Concilium generale componendae religionis, and
co^tentionis tollendae causa Tridenti a Pontifice indictum sit, and eo iam
reliquae omnes nationes vndique conuenerunt, solum Angliae regnum, nec Legatum
eo aliquem misisse, nec absentiam suam per nuntios, aut liter as excusasse: sed
sine consilio omnem prope rationem veteris, and avitae religionis immutasse:
quorum alterum superbae contumaciae videri ais, alterum perniciosi schismatis.
Nefas enim esse, si quis sanctissimam authoritatem defugiat Romans Pont. aut
vocatus ab illo ad Concilium se subducat. Controuersias autem de religione non
alibi, quam in huiusmodi conuentibus fas esse disceptari. Ibi enim esse
Patriarchas and Episcopos; Ibi esse ex omni genere hominum viros doctissimos,
ab illorum ore petendam esse veritatem; ibi esse lumina Ecclesiarum; ibi esse
spiritum sanctum; Pios Principes semper omnes, si quid incidisset ambigui in
cultu Dei, illud semper ad publicam consultationem retulisse. Mosen, Iosuam,
Dauidem, Ezechiam, Iosiam, aliosque Iudices, Reges, Sacerdotes, de rebus
diuinis non alibi, quam in Episcoporum Concilio deliber ass; Apostolos
Christi, piosque Patres inter se Concilia celebrasse; sic veritatem emicuisse;
sic expugnatas esse haereses; sic Arrium, sic Eunomium, sic Eutychetem, sic
Macedonium, sic Pelagium succubuisse; sic hodie dissidia orbis terrarum
componi, and ruinas Ecclesiae sarciri posse, si positis contentionibus and
studijs veniatur ad Concilium: sine Concilio autem quicquam in religione
tentari nefas esse.

2 Atque haec quidem fere literarum tuarum summa fuit. Ego vero non id mihi
nunc sumo, vt tibi pro regno Angliae, quo quidque consilio factum sit, quicquam
respondeam. Neque te id a me requirere, aut velle arbitror. Regum consilia
recondita and arcana sunt, and esse debent. Nosti illud, nec passim, nec
omnibus, nec quibuslibet. Tamen pro nostra inter nos veteri and priuata
consuetudine (quoniam te id video ita prolixe petere) quid mihi videatur,
breuiter and amice respondebo: sed ita, vt ait ille, quantum sciam poteroque,
idque tibi non dubito fore satis.

3 Miramur, inquis, Legatos ex Anglia ad Concilium non venire. Obsecro te, An
Angli soli ad Concilium non veniunt? an ergo tu Concilio interfuisti? an censum
egisti? an capita singula enumerasti? an videbas alias nationes vndique omnes
conuenisse, praeter Anglos? Quod si tibi mirari tam cordi est, cur non miraris
hoc quoque: aut tres illos memorabiles Patriarchas, Constantinopolitanum,
Antiochenum, Alexandrinum, aut presbyterum Ioannem, aut Graecos, Armenios,
Medos, Persas, Egyptios, Mauritanos, Aethiopas, Indos ad Concilium non venire?
An enim multi ex estis omnibus non credunt in Christum? non habent Episcopos?
non baptizantur in nomine Christi? non sunt, appellanturque Christiani? An vero
ab istis singulis nationibus venerunt Legati ad Concilium? An tu hoc potius
dices, Papam illos non vocasse, aut ilios ecclesiasticis vestris sanctionibus
non teneri?

4 Sed nos hoc miramur magis, Papam eos, quos inauditos, indicta causa, pro
hereticis iam antea condemnauit, and public excommunicatos pronunciauit,
eosdem postea vocare voluisse ad Concilium. Homines enim primum damnari at que
affici supplicio, deinde eosdem vocari in iudicium absurdum est, and (...).
Verum hoc mihi velim responderi, vtrum id agit pontifex, vt nobiscum, quos
habet pro haereticis, in Concilio de Religione deliberet; an potius, vt nos ex
inferiori loco causam dicamus, and vel statim mutemus sententiam, vel iterum e
vestigio condemnemur? alterum nouum est, and prorsus nostrarum partium
hominibus iam pridem a Iulio Papa tertio denegatum: alterum ridiculum est, si
id put at Anglos venturos esse ad Concilium, tantum vt accusentur and causam
dicant, apud illum praesertim, qui iamdudum non tantum a nostris, sed etiam a
suis grauissimis criminibus accusetur.

5 Quod si Anglia sola tibi adeo videtur esse contumax, vbi ergo sunt legati
Regis Daniae, Principum Germaniae, Regis Suetiae, Heluetiorum, Rhetiorum,
liberarum Ciuitatum, Regni Scotiae, Ducatus Prussiae? Cum in Concilio vestro
tot desiderentur nationes Christianae, ineptum est Anglos solos numerare. Sed
quid ego istos dico? Pontifex ipse ad Concilium suum non venit, and cur tu hoc
etiam non miraris? Quae enim est ista superbia, vnum hominem animi causa, cum
libet, conuocare omnes Reges, Principes, Episcopos Christianos, eosque velle
dicto esse audientes: ipsum solum in illorum conspectum non venire? Certe quum
Apostoli agerent conuentus Hierosolymis, Petrus Apostolus, de cuius isti sede
and successione gloriantur, abesse noluit. Verum opinor meminat Pius Papa
quartus, is qui nunc Pontificatum obtinet, quid Ioanni 22. olim acciderit:
illum non satis auspicato venisse ad Concilium Constantiense: venisse enim
Papam and rediisse Cardinalem. Itaque ex eo tempore pontifices, cauerunt sibi
post principia, and se continuerunt domi, and omnibus Concilijs ac liberis
disceptationibus obstiterunt. Nam ante annos quadraginta cum Doctor Martinus
Lutherus omnibus Diris and fulminibus a pontifice peteretur, quod docere
cepisset Euangelium, and ex verbo Dei religionem instauraret, and summisse
petijsset, vt causa sua integra reijceretur ad cognitionem Concilij generalis,
audiri non potuit vllo modo. Leo enim decimus Papa satis videbat, sires ad
Concilium redijsset, suam etiam rem venire posse in periculum, and seipsum
fortasse audire ea posse, quae nollet.

6 Pulchrum quidem est nomen Concilij generalis, modo ita, vt oportet,
conueniatur, and positis affectionibus omnia referantur ad praescriptum verbi
Dei, and vni veritati seruiatur. At si aperte religio, and pietas opprimatur,
si tyrannis, and ambitio confirmetur, si factionibus, ventri, libidini
studeatur, nihil potest cogitari Ecclesiae Dei perniciosius. Atque haec quidem
hactenus ita dico, quasi Concilium istud, quod tu dicis, vsquam aut vllum sit:
quod ego prorsus nullum esse arbitror. Aut si vspiam aut vllum est, certe
obscurum and valde arcanum est. Nos enim quamuis non ita procul absumus, tamen
quid agetur, qui Episcopi conuenerint, vel potius an vlli omnino conuenerint,
scire adhuc nullo modo possumus. Immo etiam ante viginti menses, cum Concilium
istud a Pontifice Pio primum indiceretur, Ferdinandus Imperator, respo^dit
quamuis aliaomnia conuenirent, locum tamen, quem Papa delegerat sibi magnopere
displicere. Tridentum enim etsi bella sit Ciuitas, tamen nec satis opportuna^
esse tot gentibus, nec tantam frequentiam hominum, quantum ad generale
Concilium conuenire par sit, posse capere. Eadem fere ab alijs Principibus
Christianis, a quibusdam etiam non paulo asperiora respondebantur. Itaque nos
ista omnia vnd cum Concilio in fumos abijsse credebamus.

7 Sed obsecrote, quis ille tandem est, qui istud Concilium indixit, and orbem
terrarum conuocauit? Pius, inquies, Papa quartus. Et cur ille potius quam
Episcopus Tolletanus? qua enim potestate, quo exemplo primitiuae Ecclesiae, quo
iure haec facit? An ita Petrus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, edictis suis orbem
terrarum commouerunt? Fuit hoc semper, saluis rebus, ius Imperatorum Romanorum
proprium: Nunc autem postquam imminutae sunt vires Imperij, and regna in partem
Caesareae potestatis successerunt, ea potestas communicata est cum Principibus
and Regibus Christianis. Scrutare annals, collige memorias vetustatis.
Inuenies antiquissima Concilia, Nicenum, Ephesinum, Chalcedonense,
Constantinopolitanum ab Imperatoribus Romany, Constantino, Theodosio primo,
Theodosio secundo, Martiano indictafuisse, non a Romany Pontificibus.

8 Leo Pontifex, satis alioqui sui amans, and nulla in re negligens
authoritatem sedis suae, Mauritium Imperatorem suppliciter orauit, vt Concilium
indiceret intra Italiam: quod ille tum locus ei negotio conuenire maxim
videretur. Supplicant, inquit, omnes Sacerdotes mansuetudini vestrae, vt
generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari. At Imperator Concilium
illud non intra Italiam, quod Pontifex maxim contendebat, sed Chalcedonem in
Bithyniam inssit conuocari: vt ostender et ius illud suum esse, and ad se vnum
pertinere. Et cum Ruffinus in illa concertatione, quam habuit cum Hieronymo,
allegasset Synodum, doce inquit Hieronymus quis Imperator came iusserit
conuocari. Non putabat D. Hieronymus satis firmam esse authoritatem Concilij
generalis, nisi illud Imperator coegisset. Ego vero non id quaero, quis
Imperator Episcopos hoc tempore iusserit Tridentum euocari: sed Papa, qui
tantum sibi sumpsit, quocum Imperatore de habendo Concilio deliberauerit, quem
Regem aut Principem Christianum conscium fecerit voluntatis suae. In ius
alterius per fraudem aut vim irrumpere, quodque alienum sit, id sibi tanquam
suum vsurpare iniuri^mest. Abuti autem clementia Principum, illisque tanquam
seruis suis imperare, insignis est and non ferenda contumelia. Nos autem
obsequio nostro velle tantam iniuriam, and contumeliam confirmare, non minus
magna esset iniuria. Quare si hoc tantum diceremus, Concilium istud vestrum
Tridentinum non esse legitime conuocatum, nihil a Papa Pio rite atque ordine
esse factum, nemo posset absentiam nostram satis just reprehendere.

9 Mitto quibus nos iniurijs a Romany Pontificibus affecti simus. Illos
quoties libuit, populum nostrum in Principem armauisse: Illos Regibus nostris
sceptra de manibus, and diadema de capite detraxisse: Illos Regnum Angliae suum
esse, and suo nomine possideri, and Reges nostros suo beneficio regnare
voluisse: Illos proximis istis annis modo Gallum in nos, modo Caesarem
commouisse. Quid autem Pius iste de nobis consilij caeperit, quid egerit, quid
dixerit, quid molitus, quid minatus sit, nihil opus est commemorare. Facta enim
eius, dictaque non ita tectasunt, and recondita, quin intelligi vtcunque
possit, quid velit. Quibus autem ille rationibus Pontifex factus fuerit,
quibusque quasi gradibus ad illam tantam dignitatem ascenderit, nihil dico. Non
dico illum corruptis Cardinalibus, emptis suffragijs, mercede ac pretio per
cuniculos and insidias ad Pontificatum aspirasse. Non dico illum nuper admodum
cum soluendo non esset, Cardinalem Caraffam, cuius open reliquorum Cardinalium
suffragia collegerat, cuique eo nomine debebat magnam vim auri, vinctum in
carcere interfecisse. Ista, aliaque complura vobis relinquo potius, qui ea and
propius videtis and melius intelligitis. An ergo tu nos adhominem sanguinarium,
ad mercatorem suffragiorum, ad aeris alieni negatorem, ad Simoniacum, ad
haereticum miraris non venire? Non est prudentis (mihi creed) velle se
conijcere in sedem pestilentiae, and cum hostibus Religionis velle de Religione
consilium capere. Ad infames (inquit quidam) vetuit me matter accedere. Ioannes
Apostolus non est ausus in eodem balneo sedere, and vna lauare cum Olympio, ne
vna cum illo fulmine de coelo feriretur. Non sedi, inquit David, in consilio
vanitatis, and cum iniqua agentibus non introibo.

10 Sed esto: sit hoc jus Papae proprium: possit conuocare Concilia: possit
terrarum orbi imperare: sint ea falsa and vana quae diximus de potestate
Caesaris and iure Regio: sit Pius Papa vir bonus, sit recte, sit legitime
factus Pontifex: nullius vitam petiuerit; Caraffam in carcere non occiderit:
tamen Concilia aequum est esse libera, vt adsit, qui velit, cui adesse non sit
commodum, abesse liceat. Ea olim melioribus aequitas and moderatio seruabatur.
Non ita tum seruiliter cogebantur Principes, vt si quis forte mansisset domi,
aut Legatos ad Concilium non misisset, statim omnium digitis atque oculis
notaretur. In Concilio Niceno, in Ephesino, in Constantinopolitano, in
Chalcedonensi, quaeso te, quis explorator obseruauit, qui abessent? Atqui
nullus tum adfuit Legatus, nec ex Anglia, nec e Scotia nec e Polonia, nec ex
Hispania, nec e Pannonijs, nec e Dania, nec ex tota Germania. Vide, lege,
recognosce subscriptiones: inuenies ita rem habere, vt dico. Et cur non miraris
Anglos, tum ad illa Concilia ita plena, ita praeclara, ita celebria, ita
frequentia, non venisse? Aut Episcopos Romanos ita tum fuisse patientes, vt
illos non condemnarent contumaciae? Verum nondum creuerat ista Tyrannis
Pontificia: fas tum erat Sanctis Episcopis and Patribus pro suo commodo sine
fraud manner domi. Paulus Apostolus noluit sese dare in Concilium
Hierosolymitanum, sed potius appellauit ad Caesarem. Athanasius Episcopus,
quamuis vocaretur ab Imperatore ad concilium Caesariense, tamen venire noluit.
Idem in Concilio Syrmiano, cum rem videret inclinare ad Arrianos, statim
subduxit se, atque abijt: eiusque exemplum sequuti Episcopi Occidentis ad illud
Concilium venire recusarunt. Johannes Chrysostomus ad Concilium Arrianorum non
accessit, quamuis ab Imperatore Constantio and literis and nuntijs vocaretur.
Cum Arrianorum Episcopi in Palestina conuenissent, and maximam partem
suffragiorum secum traberent, Paphnutius senex, and Maximus Hierosolymorum
Episcopus vna e medio conuentu discesserunt. Cyrillus Episcopus a
Patropassianoru^ Concilio appellauit. Paulinus Episcopus Treuirensis venire
noluit ad Concilium Mediolanense, quod videret propter gratiam and potentiam
Imperatoris Constantij, omnia iuere ad Auxentium Arrianum. Episcopi qui ad
Concilium Constantinopolitanum conuenerant, ad Concilium Romanum, quo
vocabantur, venire noluerunt. Quod tamen illis fraudi non fuit, quamuis
Imperatoris literis vocarentur. Satis ea tum iusta excusatio esse videbatur,
quod Ecclesiarum suarum curae, atque instaurationi studendum esset. Quamuis
viderent Arrianos per omnes iam Ecclesias grasari, and ad minuendam illorum
rabiem magnum pondus habituram esse praesentiam suam.

11 Quid si idem illud Episcopi nunc nostri responderent, non esse otium a
sacro Ministerio, sese prorsus occupatos esse in restituendis Ecclesijs suis:
non posse abesse domo quinque, sex, septem annos, ibi praesertim, vbi nihil
possint promouere? non enim ita otiosi sunt Episcopi nostri, vt sunt qui Romae
delitiantur in palatijs, and sectantur Cardinales, and venantur sacerdotia. Ita
enim misere perditae sunt ab istis, atque euersae Ecclesiae nostrae, vt nec
paruo tempore, nec mediocri diligentia possint instaurari. Nunc autem aperte
videmus obsideri ab istis nostra tempora, vt cum minime necesse sit, for as
distrahamur, and nec domi propagare possimus Euangelium, and in Concilio ab
ipsis impediamur.

12 Simulat enim Papa, ne nescias: non cogitat Concilium: neque enim tu illum
quicquam putes sincere, and vere agere. Qui nescit simulare (dicere solebat
olim Rex Ludouicus vndecimus Carolo octauo) nescit regnare: multo vero magis,
qui nescit dissimulare, and consilia sua vultu tegere, vt nunc quidem est,
nescit agere Pontificem. Illa enim seeds tota merae nititur Hypocrisi: quae quo
minus habet natiui roboris, eo pluribus coloribus opus habet. Nam si putabant
Pontifices, tantam esse vim Concilij generalis ad tollenda Schismata, cur illi
rem tam necessa iam tam diu distulerunt? cur triginta totos annos quieuerunt,
and Lutheri doctrinam radices agere pertulerunt? Cur Concilium non primo quoque
tempore indixerunt? Cur Synodum Tridentinam reluctantes and inuiti, magisque
Imperatoris Caroli impulsu, quam sua voluntate conuocarunt? Cumque Tridenti
december prope annos versarentur, cur tanta deliberatione nihil egerunt? cur rem
infectam reliquerunt? Quis impediebat? quis obstabat? Creed hoc mihi, mi
frater, non agunt id nunc Pontifices, vt Concilium celebretur, aut Religio Dei
restituatur, quam illi prorsus habent pro ludibrio. Id agunt, id quaerunt, id
pugnant, vt magnifica expectatione Concilij generalis hominum piorum animos,
atque orbem terrarum ludi ficentur.

13 Vident iamdudum imminui, and ruere opes suas: arts suas non esse nunc
eodem loco, quo fuerunt olim: incredibilem numerum hominum in dies singulos a
se dilabi: non esse nunc, qui tanta frequentia current Romam: non esse, qui
Indulgentias, interdictiones, benedictiones, absolutiones, and inanes bullas,
aut tanti faciant, aut tanti emant. Ceremoniarum suarum, and Missarum nundinas,
and omnem illum fucum meretricium, non magni fieri; magnam partem tyrannidis,
and pompae suae concidisse: reditus suos angustiores nunc esse, quam solebant;
sese, suosque rideri passim a pueris: omnino in discrimen venisse summam rerum.
Nec mirum, si ea corruant, quae nullis radicibus sustinebantur. Extinxit illa
omnia saluator noster JESUS CHRISTVS, non armis, aut vi militum, sed Coelesti
impulsu, and spiritu oris sui. consumet autem, atque abolebit claritate
aduentus sui: Haec est vis verbi Dei, haec est potestas Euangelij, haec sunt
arma, quibus euertitur omnis munitio, quae aedificata est aduersus cognitionem
Dei. Praedicabitur haec doctrina, inuitis omnibus, per vniuersum orbem. Portae
inferorum non preualebunt aduersus eam. Frigent nunc Romae tabernae meritoriae:
illorum merces (quasi bona Porsennae vaenirent) vilissimo pretio proscribuntur.
Et vix quisquam est, qui velit emere. Circuit mercator Indulgentiarius, and
fatuos non inuenit. Hoc illud est, hinc illae lachrymae, haec res Pontifices
male habet. Vident hanc tantam lucem ex vna scintilla erupisse. Quid nunc
futurum, postquam tot ignes vbique terrarum accensi sunt, and tot Reges and
Principes Christiani agnoscunt, and profitentur Euangelium? Non enim illi IESV
CHRISTO seruiunt, sed suo ventri. Aiunt Carneadem Philosophum, cum olim esset
Romae, and memorabilem illam haberet orationem contra, Iustitiam, inter alia
hoc etiam addidisse: Eam virtutem, si quidem ea virtus esset, nulli hominum
generi minus ex vsu fore, quam Romany. Illos enim per vim, and latrocinium
regna sibi aliena subegisse, perque summam iniustitiam ad imperium orbis
terrarum peruenisse. Quod si nunc tandem velint Iustitiam colere, restituenda
esse illa omnia, quae unjust teneant: ad casas pastoritias, and frigida
tuguria, quae sola hahuerant ab initio, esse redeundum. Ita prorsus isti, si
vere velint agere, and simulationem ponere, and officium facere, and suum
cuique reddere, vident sibi redeundum esse ad virgam and peram, ad sobrietatem,
and modestiam, ad labores, ad munus Episcopi. Audiuerunt enim Augustinum
dicere, Episcopum nomen esse operis, non honoris: and illos non esse Episcopos,
qui velint praeesse, and non prodesse. Itaque istud Eua^gelium latius diffundi,
and ad plures propagari, vident, nulli hominum generiminus expedire, quam sibi:
se enim saluos esse non posse, si sani esse velint. Ergo nunc tumultuantur, and
turbant omnia, vt olim Demetrius faber, postquam vidit sibi perisse spem lucri.
Ergo nunc Concilia indicuntur, and Abbates atque Episcopi ad parts aduocantur.
Haec enim illis ratio visa est callidissima, vt tempus in aliquot annos
protraberetur, vt hominum animi expectatione suspenderentur: multa, vt fit,
posse interuenire: bellumposse excitari: aliquem ex istis principibus posse
mori: istos tantos impetus ad Euangelium diuturnitate posse obtundi: languere
posse hominum voluntates. Interea, inquit quidam, fiet aliquid, spero.

14 Olim cum (victis ac triumphatis Persis) Athenienses moenia sua, quae illi
solo aequauerant, caepissent instaurare, and Lacedaemonij, quo magis baberent
eos in potestate, ne id facerent, magnopere edixissent: Themistocles dux
Atheniensis, vir prudens, cum videret salutem patriae suae venire posse in
periculum, pollicitus est sese venturum Lacedaemona, and deea re velle cum
ipsis vna deliberare. Ille vbise dedisset in viam, quo tempus eximeret, primum
morbum simulauit, vt diutius haereret in itinere: Deinde cum venisset
Lacedaemona, multa de industria frustrari coepit, moao pacta non placere: modo
deliberationem petere: modo socios legationis, sine quibus nihil agi posset,
expectare: modo legatos Athenas mittere. Interea, dum ille cunctatur,
Athenienses clauserant moenibus ciuitatem, and si vis fieret, sese parauerant
ad defendendum. Ita isti, dum diem de die proferunt, and rem omnem referri
volunt ad Concilia, aedificant interea sua moenia, nobis otiosis, and nescio
quid expectantibus, vt ad extremum, confirmatis suis rationibus, nos prorsus
excludant, and neque Concilium haberi, neque quicquam omnino agipossit.

15 Operaepretium enim est videre istorum arts, and stratagemata; quoties
indicta Concilia no^ coiuerint quoties exiguus rumusculus vniuersum apparatum,
and omnem expectationem disturbarit, quoties patres in medio itinere repent
substiterint: quoties purpurati Amphictyones e medio conuentu, re infecta,
dilapsi sint domum, and proximum actum in nonum, decimumque annu^ distulerint?
quoties Coelum, quoties annona, quoties locus, quoties tempus non placuerit?
Pontifex enim solus conuocat Concilia, and solus dimittit, cum vult. Si quid
no^ placuit, aut si res non recte ire caepit, statim auditur: valete, and
plaudite. Indicitur Concilium Basileam: conuenitur vndique magno numero, agitur
serio de rebus multis: Eugenius Papa vt Simoniacus and Schismaticus omnibus
suffragijs condemnatur: in eius locum Amideus dux Sabaudiae surrogatur. Accipit
id indigne, vt debuit, Eugenius: rem eam pessimi exempli esse ad posteros:
potestatem, and vim suam long esse super omnia Concilia: Non posse Concilium
nec conuenire, nisi iussu suo: nec decernere quicquam, nisi quantum ipse velit.
Impium esse in conuenticulo Episcoporum inquisitionem fieri de vita sua. Non
mora, Concilium Ferraram reuocat in Italiam, post idem transfert Florentiam.
Quid hoc, quaeso, rei est? An putabat Eugenius Papa coelum animos mutare, aut
Spiritum sanctum prudentius in Italiaresponsurum esse, quam antea responderat
in Germania? Imo vero, ille tot illis mutationibus non Christum quaerebat, sea
suum commodum. Videbat in Germania Imperatorem Sigismundum inimicum suum,
nimium and authoritate valere and gratia. Et patres illos, qui Basileam
conuenerant, si ex illis duris and asperis regionibus migrassent in Italiam (vt
arbores, cum transplantantur) fieri posse mitiores. Nam (o Deum immortalem!)
non id nunc agitur, aut quaeritur in Concilijs; aut vt veritas inueniatur, aut
vt mendacia refutentur. Hoc solum semper fuit proximis istis saeculis studium
Pontificum in Concilijs, vt Tyrannis Romana, constitueretur: vt Bella
susciperentur: vt Principes Christiani inter se committerentur: vt pecunia
colligeretur, modo in terram sanctam, modo in fabricam Petri, modo in nescio
quos vsus, seu verius abusus alios: quae tota in paucos quosdam ventres, in
luxum and libidinem conijceretur. Atque haec vnica fuit aliquot iam saecula
ratio Conciliorum. Nam de erroribus and abusibus, quasi nulli essent, nihil
vnquam agi potuit.

16 Petrus Alliacensis in Constantiensi Concilio multum questus est de
auaritia, and insolentia curiae Romanae. At quid promouit? quae vnquam pars
illorum auaritiae aut insolentiae Concilij authoritate repressa est? Idem ait
festos dies, and otiosorum Monachorum greges sibi videri minuendos: and alius
quispiam (in opere quodam, quod appellatur tripartitum, and adiunctum est ad
Concilium Lateranum) totus, inquit, fere mundus obloquitur, and scandalizatur
de tanta multitudine religiosorum pauperum. Et patres in Concilio Lateranensi,
Firmiter, inquiunt, praecipimus, ne quis de caetero nouam religionem inueniat.
Ex eo tempore quid de festis diebus factum sit, nescio: probabile tamen est,
nihil esse imminutum: At Monachorum ordines aucti etiam sunt in infinitum. Nam
a proximis Pontificibus additi sunt Iesuitae, Cappuchini, Theatini: quasi
pigrorum ventrum nondum etiam esset satis. Johannes Gerson, Cancellarius
Parisiensis, in Concilio Constantiensi obtulit patribus septuaginta quinque
abusus in Ecclesia Romana, quos vehementer cuperet emendatos. At ex tanto
numero, quem illi vnum abusum vnquam sustulerunt? Ioannes Picus Mirandula
scribit ad Leonem Papam, vt minuat inanes ceremonias, and coerceat luxum
sacerdotum. Sederunt postea Episcopi magna frequentia, and magna expectatione
in Concilio Laterano. At quam vnam ceremoniam imminuerunt, in quo vno sacerdote
luxum and nequitiam damnauerunt? Mantuanus poeta queritur nominatim de moribus
Ecclesiae Romanae: Bernardus Abbas ita scribit ad Eugenium Papam: Aula tua
recipit bonos, non facit; mali ibi proficiunt, boni deficiunt. Et de miserabili
statu Ecclesiae, qui tum erat; A planta, inquit, pedis vsque ad verticem
capitis non est in ea sanitas. Et rursus, Vbi est, inquit, qui praedicet annum
acceptabilem Domini? Non custodiunt, inquit, hoc tempore sponsam CHRISTI, sed
perdunt: non pascunt gregem Domini, sed mactant, and deuorant. Adrianus Papa
sextus, cum Legatum mitteret in Germaniam, ingenue, and vere fassus est
corruptissimum esse statum vniuersicleri. Omnes, inquit, nos Praelati
Ecclesiastici declinauimus, vnusquisque in viam suam, nec est iam qui faciat
bonum, non est vsque ad vnum. Albertus Pighius fatetur in ipsa Missa, quam illi
sacrosanctam esse volunt, and in qua vna Cardinem religionis Christianae
constituunt, abusus and errores inueniri. Quid plura? mitto alios testes; sunt
enim infiniti. Habita sunt postea Concilia complura, conuocati sunt Episcopi,
Synodus Basiliensis indicta est nominatim, vti illi tum prae se ferebant, de
reformatione totius Cleri: At ex eo tempore errores vbique aucti sunt, vitia
etiam sacerdotum conduplicata sunt.

17 Cardinales a Paulo Papa tertio delecti ad considerandum statum Ecclesiae,
renuntiarunt, multa esse in ea, and praesertim in Episcoporum and Clericorum
moribus vitiosa. Episcopos otiosos esse, non docere populum, non pascere
gregem, non curare Vineam: versari in aulis Principum, abesse domo:
Cardinalibus Episcopatus, modo ternos, modo quaternos commendari, idque magno
cum Ecclesiae detrimento fieri: illa enim officia non esse (vti loquuntur)
compatibilia. Conuentuales ordines prorsus ex Ecclesia tollendos esse.
Posteahabitum est Concilium Tridenti: sed an Episcopi coeperunt ex eo tempore
pasceregregem? an desierunt, aut abesse domo, aut versari in aulis Principum?
an Cardinales desierunt esse Episcopi? aut prospectum est, ne quid Ecclesia ex
ea re detrimenti caperet? an imminuti sunt ordines conuentuales? an religio
apud eos est emendatior? quid ergo necesse fuit tot Episcopos tam procul
conuocari, aut de emendanda Ecclesiatot annos frustra deliberari? hoc scilicet
illud est, Pharisaeos restituere velle Templum Dei.

18 Fatentur errores and abusus: conuocant Concilia, simulant studium
religionis and pietatis, pollicentur operam and industriam, quicquid collapsum
est id omne se velle vna nobiscum instaurare; sic scilicet, vt olim hosts
populi Dei dicebant, se velle vna cum Nehemia aedificare Templum Domini. Non
enim illi id quaerebant, vt Templum Domini aedificarent, sed vt quam maxim
possent aedificationem impedirent. Redire volunt nobiscum in gratiam, sed ita,
vt olim Naas tyrannus cum Iudaeis Iabensibus, non alia lege, quam vt sinamus
nobis exculpi dextros oculos: hoc est, vt verbum Dei, and Euangelium salutis
nostrae nobis eripi patiamur.

19 An enim illis curae est religio: an illi curant Ecclesiam Dei; quibus nec
Dei vindicta, nec salus populi, nec vlla pars officij sui vnquam curae fuit?
Pan, inquiunt, curet oues, ipsi interim belligerantur, venantur, obsonantur: vt
ne quid dicam foedius. O Deum immortalem! quis istos putet vnquam de Ecclesia
Dei, aut de religione cogitare! quando isti, aut quos errores vnquam tollent?
quam lucem nobis restituent? quicquid dicas, etiamsi solemn ipsum geras in
manibus, tamen videre nolunt: manifestos errores, quantum possunt, excusant,
pingunt, comunt, vt olim Symmachus, aut Porphyrius errores, and ineptias
Ethnicorum: omninoque id agunt, ne populum Dei in fraudem induxisse, neue quid
ipsi vnquam errasse videantur. Aut si quid in animum inducunt emendare, quod
aut nunquam, aut valde raro and perparce faciunt; vt olim Alexandrum
Imperatorem Romanum, quum non prorsus abhorreret a religione Christiana, aiunt,
in eodem Sacrario, and Christum coluisse, and Orpheum: vtque veteres olim
Samaritani vna and very Dei cultum retinuerunt, and cultum Idolorum: ita illi,
ea lege recipere volunt partem forte aliquam Euangelij, vt vna superstitiones
and aniles errores admittant: ita recipient vera, vt falsa retineant: ita
probant nostra, vt sua non improbent. Atque ita non tollunt abusus, sed
colorant: and veteres columnas nouo tantum tectorio inducunt.

20 Ad hunc modum ab istis Ecclesia Dei emendatur, sic conuentus and Concilia
celebrantur: veritati non seruitur, sed affectibus. Melior pars a maiori
superatur. Pulchrum quidem and gloriosum est nomen ipsum Concilij generalis:
sed ex pulchro calice saepe venenum propinatur. Non enim satis est Episcopos
aliquot and Abbates vnum in locum conuenisse: non in mitra, aut purpura sita
est vis Concilij, nec quicquid Concilium decreuit, statim habendum est pro
oraculo. Concilium erat, de quo Propheta Esaias scribit; Vae filijs
defectoribus, dicit Dominus, qui cogunt Concilium, and non ex me: and, in te,
inquit, Concilium, and dissipabitur. Concilium erat, de quo Propheta David ita
loquitur; Excitati sunt Reges terrae, and Principes conuenerunt in vnum
aduersus Dominum, and aduersus Christum eius. Concilium erat, quod filium Dei
Iesum Christum damnauit ad crucem. Concilium erat, quod Carthagini celebratum
est sub Cypriano, in quo decretum est, baptizatos ab haereticis, quum redissent
ad Ecclesiam, esse rebaptizandos: quem errorem oportuit postea tot Concilijs,
and patrum scriptis reuocari. Et quid multis opus est? Concilium Ephesinum
secundum aperte fecit pro Eutycbete; humanam in Christo naturam conuersam esse
in diuinitatem: Concilium Nicenum secundum decreuit manifestam Idololatriam de
adoratione statuarum: Concilium Basiliense, vt Albertus Pighius ait, decreuit
contra omnem antiquitatem, contra naturam, contra rationem, contra verbum Dei.
Concilium Ariminense impie decreuit pro Arrianis, Christum non esse Deum. Alia
Concilia deinceps multa, Smyrnense, Aerium, Seleucianum, Syrmianum, and
Homousianos condemnauerunt, and Ariminensis Concilij impietati subscripserunt.
Quid quaeris? ipsum etiam Concilium Chalcedonense, quod vnum erat ex illis
quatuor, quae Gregorius cum quatuor Euangelijs comparauit, Leo Papa non
dubitauit accusare temeritatis.

21 Itaque videmus, Concilia Concilijs saepe contraria extitisse: vtque Leo
Pontifex acta sustulit Adriani, Stephanus Formosi, Ioannes Stephani: vtque
Sabinianus Papa, Omnia scripta Gregorij Papae, vt peruersa and impia iussit
comburi: ita videmus Concilium posterius saepe omnia superioris Concilij
decreta sustulisse. Carthaginense Concilium decreuit, ne Romanus Episcopus
appellaretur, aut summus sacerdos, aut princeps sacerdotum, aut aliud quippiam
simile. At postera Concilia, illum non tantum summum sacerdotem, sed etiam
summum Pontificem, and caput vniuersalis Ecclesiae appellauerunt. Eliberinum
Conciliu^ decreuit, ne quid, quod colitur ius fasque esset, vt in templorum
parietibus pingeretur. Concilium Constantinopolitanum decreuit, imagines non
esse ferendas in Templis Christianorum. Contra, Concilium Nicenum secundum,
imagines in templis non tantum ponendas esse censuit, sed etiam adorandas.
Lateranense Concilium sub Iulio Papasecundo, non alia causa indictum est, quam
vt Pisani Concilij decreta rescinderet. Ita Episcopi saepe posteriores
prioribus aduersantur, and Concilia alia aliorum luminibus obstruunt. Isti enim
ne suis quidem Concilijs teneri volunt, nisi quantum placet, quantumque
commodum est, and facit (...). Basiliense Concilium decreuit, Concilium
Episcoporum esse supra Papam. At Concilium Lateranense sub Leone decreuit,
Papam esse supra Concilium. Papa vero non solum ita se gerit, sed etiam si quis
contra sentiat, eum habere iubet pro haeretico. Atqui omnes Episcopi and
Abbates in Concilio Basiliensi, si quis, inquiunt, istis veritatibus sese
opponit, pro haeretico habendus est. Obsecrote, quid tu hic facias? quicquid
dicas aut sentias, vel Papa te, vel Concilium habebit pro haeretico. Omnes
autem Papae, aliquot iam saeculis, sese istis Basiliensis Concilij veritatibus
opposuerunt: ergo iudicio Basiliensis Concilij, aliquot iam saecula omnes Papae
fuerunt haeretici. Idem Concilium omnibus suffragijs summouit Papam Eugenium,
hominem Simoniacum, and schismaticum, and illi successorem dedit Amideum. At
Eugenius Papa Concilij decretum flocci fecit, et quamuis maxim esset
Simoniacus and Schismaticus, tamen non defijt esse successor Petri, and
Vicarius Christi, and caput vniuersae Ecclesiae Dei: and inuitis omnibus
dignitatem prior em retinebat, vtque anteasolitus fuerat, in ceruicibus hominum
nobilium sublimis magnifice ferebatur. Amideus autem homo simplex, quasi ex
equo delapsus humi pedibus ambulabat, satisque si(...)tus esse videbatur, quod
de Papa factus esset Cardinalis. Concilium proximum Tridentinunt dixit, vt
Episcopi docerent populum, neus quisquam vnus d^o, plur d^^ sacerdotia haberet
eodem tempore: isti contra edictum Concilij sui cumulant sacerdotia, (...)nibil
docent. Ita scribunt leges, quibus ipsi teneri nolint, nisi quum lubet.
Tantis(...) semper secerunt Concilia, and decreta sua.

22 Nunc vero quid est, (...) meliorem: qua enim gratia, qua expectatione, qua
spe venitur in Concilium? Hoc enim tantum recum cogila, quinam tandem homines
illi sint, quorum side, doctrina, iudicio, moles totius Concilij and omnium
istarum quaestionum disceptatio, and summa rerum (...) debeat? Abbates quidem
appellantur, and Episcopi, graves personae, and pulchra nomina: vtque
existimatur, magni instar momenti in administranda Ecclesia Dei. At si illis
nomina tantum ea, and personam, and vestem tollas, nihil habent aliud nec
Abbatis, nec Episcopi simile. Non enim sunt ministri Christi, non dispensatores
mysteriorum Dei, non incumbunt lectioni, non docent Euangelium, non pascunt
gregem, non colunt terram, non plantant vineam, non accendunt ignem, non
portant arcam Domini, non obeunt legationem pro Christo; non vigilant, non
faciunt opus Euangelistae, non implent ministerium suum: implicant se negotijs
secularibus: abscondunt thesaurum Domini sui, auferunt Claues regni Dei; non
ingrediuntur ipsi, nec alios ingredi patiuntur, pulsant conseruos suos, pascunt
seipsos, gregem non pascunt: dormiunt, stertunt, conuiuantur, luxuriantur:
nubes sine aqua, stellae sine luce, canes muti, ventres pigri: vtque Bernardus
ait, non Prelati, sed Pilati, non Doctores, sed Seductores, non Pastores sed
impostores, serui, inquit, Christi, seruiunt Antichristo, Istis solis
Pontifices volunt locum esse, and suffragandi potestatem in Concilio: in
istorum iudicio ac potestate versari volunt curam, and procurationem vniuersae
Ecclesiae Christi: istos nunc solos Pius Papa delegit ad spem suam. At quos (o
Deus bone,) homines, quales viros? quanquam, vt ipsi quidem putant, ridiculum
est, velle hoc quaerere. Quam enim docti, quamque pij sint, quid velint, quid
sentiant, inquiunt, nihil refert. Satis videlicet est, si sedere possint in
mula, and magna pompa, and strepitu vehi per publicum, and venire in Concilium,
and nihil dicere. Si mihi forte non credis, ac me potius putas animi causa ista
fingere: audi ergo iudicium Honorarium, quid en dear sacrosancta facultas, and
Sorbona tota decreuerit. Quod magistri, inquiunt, nostri, dicunt de legitima
congregatione, notandum est ad hoc, vt Concilium legitime congregetur,
sufficere quod solemnitas, and forma iuris solemniter sit seruata. Quia si quis
trahere vellet hoc in disputationem, vtrum Prelati, qui ibi sedent, habeant
rectam intentionem, and vtrum sint docti, and vtrum habeant scientiam sacrarun
literarum, and animum obediendi sanae doctrinae, esset processus in infinitum.
Isti videlicet, qui tanquam Mercuriales statuae muti sedeant, and quid fit
religio prorsus nesciant, de vniuersa religione recte and commode respondebunt,
and quicquid dicunt, errare non queunt.

23 Istos omnes Pontifex habet, non tantum errore and ignorantia, sed etiam
iureiurando, and religione obstrictos sibi: vt etiamsi recte sentiant, tamen
nisi peri^ri esse velint, quod sentiunt pronuntiare, and veritatem palam
profiteri, and praese serre non possint; prorsus, vt vel homine fides fallenda
sit, vel Deo. Sic enim omnos inrant conceptis verbis. Ego N. Episcopus ab hac
hora inantea fidelis ero sancto Petro, sancta que Apostolicae Romanae
Ecclesiae, Domino (...) Papae N. eiusque successoribus Canonice intrantibus:
Non ero, neque in consilio, neque in facto, vt vitam pendat, aut membrum, vel
capiatur mala captione. Consilium, quod (...), aut per ^iteras, aut per Nuncium
manifestabit, ad eius damnium nulli pand(...) Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae, and
regulas sanctorum patrum (...), and (...) contra omnes homines* (...)
sacerdotes Apollinis (...) aperte loquerentur in gratiam Philippi Regis, erant
qui facete dicerent, Pythium caepisse (...) Nos ^ Papae, our non (...),
Conciliorum Gracula(...) id est, tantum dicere, quantum Papae velit. Prudenter
olim Uerres, quem (...), quum multis criminibus non obscure teneretur, noluisse
existimationem and (...) suam committere* nisi hominibus been fidis de grege,
and cohertesua. Multo autem prudentius Pontifices, qui illos sibi i^dices (...)
volunt, quos sciunt, nec venlle, quia (...) turati sunt, quamuis (...), posse
quicquiam statuere prater voluntatem suam. Collocant illi quidem in medio
sacrae Biblia, quae specianteminus, non legunt, quasi contra ^^orum
praescriptum nihil facturi. Re autem vera secum ipsi a^ferunt praeiudicatam
sententiam: nec attendunt quid Christus dieat, neo statuunt quicquam, nisi quod
lubet.

24 Itaque libertai illa; quam oportuit esse in omnibus consultationibus,
maxim vero de rebus sacris, quoque maxim conuenit Spiritus sancto, and
modesty hominum Christianorum, prorsusism fr mrfio sublata est. Paulis ait, si
alteri assidenti reuelatum 1. Cor. 14. 30.
fuerit, prior aceat: isti vero comprehendi iubent, and in carcerem detrudi,
and ignilus mandari, si (...) quicquam contra multiat* Testis adhuc est
crudelis interitus duorum sanctissimorum hominum, and fortistimorum virorum,
Iohannis Hus, and Hieronymi Pragen^is; quos illi duos contra sidem publicam
inter ^ecerunt, and fidem Deo, hominibusque (...). Sic impius propheta
Zedechia^, cum aptasset sibi corn^^ (...) impegit Micheae Prophe^tae Domini:
and mean, inquit, reliquit Spiritus Domini, and accessit ad (...) Ionque nunc
exclusis omnibus, soli regnant in Concilijs, and soli obtinent suffragia, atque
ita scribunt, and promalgant leges, vt (...) Ephesij, (...) (...) illi) hic
viuat (...) prudentior, nisi malit exul, atque extorris viuere. Nostrorum enim
isti hominum prorsus nominem audire volunt. Ante 10. annos (...) Concilio
proximo (...) Legati Principunt Germaniae* and liberar^ (...)tum, qui cacusa
(...), vt audirentur, ab omni colloqu^^ and conuen^^ (...). Episcopi (...), and
Abbatos respondebant, nolle (...) liberum causae cognitionem, neo ve^^t
controuersias disceptari ex verbi Dei: nost (...) autem (...) homines nullo
modo ess^ ^udiendos; nisi (...) vellent recantare* quod si notent non alia lege
venturos esse in Concillunt, quam ut audirent (...) suam. Number Julius; in Brent
illo su^, quo (...), public (...), ut aut (...) sententiam, aut cuasa in
audita condemnarentur pro (...). pius antem Papa quartus is qui nunc instituit
Concilium, reuocare* omnes cos, qui ab Ecclesiae Romanae author (...)
(...)cesserunt* id est, maxima^ partem orbis Christiani, neo visos vnquam, nec
auditos iam antea (...)praeiudicio prohiereticis haberi iussit. Omnino, aiunt
taque semper in omni sermon tactare solent, recte habere sua omnia: s^ (...)
tantillum (...) de doctrina and religione sua mutatum (...)* Albertus* (...)
Ecclesiae Romanae ait, ^^^portissimae quidem scripture credendum esse. Hoc
(...) est Ecclesiam in integram velle restituere* hoc est veritatem velle
(...)* hac illa est libertas Conciliorum, and moderation.

25 (...) omnia sint iniquissima and a ratione (...) Conciliorum, and ab
hominum modestorum deliberatione alientissim^: (...) tamen multo est (...),
quod (...) de Pontificis Romani ambitione ac tyrann(...) conqueratur, and de
instaur, (...) Dei (...), and nihil ag^ (...), nisi i would in ordinem ^ loco
haberi iubet, quo voces ipsius Petri: qui si mill animas abducat secum ad
inferos, tamen negatse ea ca^^a posse a quoquam reprehendi: qui ait, se ex
iniustitia facere posse iustitiam: Quem Camotensis ait corrupisse scripturas,
vt haberet plenitudinem potestatis. Quid plura? quem ipsius contubernales and
satellites, Ioachimus Abbas, Petrarcha, Marsilius Patauinus, Laurentius Valla,
Hieronymus Sauanorola non ambigue pronunciarunt esse Antichristum. Huius vnius
iudicio ac voluntati omnia subijciunt, vt idem reus sit, idemque iudex: vt
accusatores ex inferiori loco audiantur, reus autemsedeat sublimis
protribunalibus, and ipse de se pronuntiet. Has enim leges tam aequas, tamque
rationi consentientes scripsit nobis Papa Julius. Nullum, inquit, ratum
Concilium est, aut erit vnquam, quod Romanae Ecclesiae non fuerit authoritate
fulcitum. Bonifacius octauus, omnem, ait, creaturam oportere subiectam esse
Ecclesiae Romanae, idque de necessitate salutis. Et Palchalis Papa, quasi
inquit, Romanae Ecclesiae legem Concilia vlla praefixerint, cum omnia Concilia
per Romanae Ecclesiae authoritatem, and facta sint, and robur acceperint, and
in eorum statutis Romani Pontificis authoritas patenter excipiatur. Et alius
quispiam, quod Papa, inquit, approbat vel reprobat, nos approbare, vel
reprobare debemus: Et quod Papa approbat, non licet alij improbare. Et nescio
quis parasitus, amissopudore, Etiamsi totus mundus sententiet in aliquo contra
Papam, tamen videtur quod standum sir sententiae Papae. Et alius quispiam non
minus impudenter; Sacrilegij, inquit, instar esset, disputare de facto Papae,
qui tametsi non sit bonus, tamen semper presumitur esse bonus. Et alius etiam
impudentius, Papa, inquit, habet celeste arbitrium: ergo in illis quoe vult,
est illi pro ratione voluntas: nec est qui dicat illi curitafacis? Vtque alia
complura, quae buc adduci possunt, sunt enim infinita, relinquam, and finem
aliquando faciam; Innocentius Papa nonus, omnium impudentissime, Neque ab
Augusto, inquit, neque a Regibus, neque ab vniuerso Clero, neque a toto populo
iudex rudicabitur. O Deum immortalem quantiaum abest, vt hoc etiam dicant:
Ascendam super Aquilonem, and ero similis altissimo? Si ista verasunt omnia,
and Papae nihil mentui sunt, quid opus est Concilio? Aut si Concilium fincerum
and liberum habere volunt, vollantur ista omnia, vt improba and superba
mendacia: nec tantum ex vsu and foro, verum etiam ex libris omnibus auferantur,
ne summarerum in vnius hominis, eiusque multis iustissimis de causis suspecti
voluntate, ac libidine relinquatur. Atqui Pontifices aiunt, se errare non
posse, and ad praescriptumsuum exigendum esse verbum Dei. atque etiam antequam
adeant ad dignitatem Pontificiam, iurantur in fidem recentium quorundam
Conciliorum quibus omnia foedum in modum sunt depranata, and sancte promittunt
se nolle quicquam ^immutari. Quare quid mirum est, si in Concilijs nihil
proficitur, si errores and abusus non tolluntur, si Legate Principum frustra
tam procul ex omnibus terris conuocantur? Tamen audio esse quosdam hoc tempore
homines, non malos, sed paxum, quid dicans, attendentes: qui quamuis
arrogantiam in Pontifice, and fastum Porsicum, and Epicur eum contemptum
religionis damnent, tamen eius authoritatem saluam and incolumem esse vesint:
Et quamijis cum interdum fateantur esse Antichristum, tamen eundem, post quam
semel ascendit inillam sedem, non dubitent esse Vniuersalem Episcopum, and
caput vniuersae Ecclesic Christi. Atque bic itatriumphant, and sibi placent, ne
si Spiritus sanctus affixus esset ad Molem, (...)ni. At non locus sanctificat
hominem, inquiunt, sed homo locum. Et Hieronymus, quemadmodum citatur ab ipsis
Non filij, inquit, sanctorum sunt, qui tenent loca sanctorum: sed qui imitantur
facta illorum. Alioqui CHRISTVS ait, in Cathedra Mosis sedisse scribas, and
Phariseos: authoritatem autem illorum monet tantisper esse agnoscendam, si
respondeant ex verbo Dei. Quid aliud, inquit Augustinus, dixit Christus, nisi
per mercenarios vocem pastoris audite? sedendo enim in Cathedra legem Dei
docent; ergo per illos docet Deus. Sua vero si illi docerevelint, nolite
audire, nolite facere. Paulus etiam ait, Antichristum, hominem illum peccati
sessurum esse in loco sancto. Itaque Hieronymus recte monet, Attendis, inquit
Petrum, sed and Iudam considera: Stephanum suscipis, sed and Nicholaum respice.
Non facit Ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum; Haec Hieronymus. Et certe aiunt
Marcellinum Papam sacrificasse Idolis, Liberium Papam fuisse Arrianum: Ioannem
Papam 22. impie sensisse de immortalitate animarum: Ioannem Papam 8. fuisse
foeminam, and in Papatu incesta libidinecum adulteris concubuisse, and in
lustranda ciuitate, in ipsa pompa, atque in oculis Episcoporum and Cardinalium
peperisse: Et Liranus ait, multos Pontifices Romanos a fide Christi defecisse.
Quare non nimium fidendum er at locis and successionibus, and inanibus titulis
dignitatum. Impius Nero successit Metello pio. Annas and Caiphas successerunt
Aaroni; and Idolum saepe successit in locum Dei.

26 Sed quaenam, obsecro, est illa tanta vis and authoritas de qua
istiitainsolenter gloriantur? aut vnde ad eos delata est? de coelo, an ex
hominibus? Christus, inquiunt, ait Petro, super hanc petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam: his verbis authoritatem Pontificiam confirmari. Ecclesiam enim
Christi in Petro, tanquam in fundamento collocari. Atqui Christus his verbis
nihil Petro dedit seorsim a caeteris Apostolis. Neque aut Pontificis mentionem
vllam facit, aut vrbis Rome. Christus illa est petra, Christus est illud
fundamentum. Nemo, inquit Paulus, potest aliud fundamentum ponere, quam quod
iam antea positumest, quod est Christus Jesus.

27 Et Augustinus, super hanc Petram, inquit; aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: super
hanc, inquit; intelligitur, quam confessus est Petrus, dicens, tu es Christus
filius Dei viui. Non enim, inquit, dictum est, Tu es petra, sed tu es Petrus;
petra autem erat Christus. Et Diuus Basilius, super hanc Petram, hoc est,
Tract. 1. in Matthew.
inquit, super hanc fidem aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Et antiquissimus pater
Origines, Petra, inquit, est quisque discipulus Christi, ex quo biberunt de
spirituali consequente Petra: Et super talem petram co^struitur omnis
Ecclesiastica doctrina. Quod si super vnum illum Petrum tantum existimas
aedificari totam Ecclesiam, quid dicturus es de Ioanne filio Tonitrui, and
Apostolorum vnoquoque? alioqui enim audebimus dicere, quod aduersus vnum Petrum
non praeualiturae sint portae inferorum, aduersus caeteros Apostolos ac
praefectos sint praeualiturae? ac non potius in omnibus and singulis eorum, de
quibus dictum est, sit illud, quod dictum est, and portae inferotum non
praeualebunt aduersus eam: and illud, super hanc petram aedificabo
Ecclesia^meam? an vero soli Petro dantur a Christo claues regni Coelorum, nec
alius beatorum quisquam eas accepturus est? quod si hoc dictum, Tibi dabo
claues regni coelorum, caeteris quoque commune est, cur non simul omnia and
quaeprius dicta sunt, and quae sequuntur, veli^t ad Petrum dicta sunt omnium
communia? Vna, inquit Helarius, est foelix fidei petra, quam ore suo Petrus
confessus est. Et rursus, Super hanc, inquit, confessionem Petri aedificata est
Ecclesia. Et non ita multo post, Haec inquit, fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est.
Ad hunc modum alij etiam patres. Hieronymus, Cyrillus, Beda Ecclesiam
exaedificatam aiunt, non in Petro, sed in fide Petri, hoc est, in Christo Jesus
filio Dei, quem Petrus coelesti instinctu professus fuerat. Petrus, inquit
Augustinus, a petra dictus est; non petra a Petro. Nec ego me, inquit,
aedificabo super te, sed te aedificabo super me. Imo etiam Nicolaus Liranus,
etsi non semper bonus author, scis enim in quae tempora inciderit eius aetas,
tamen hoc recte vidit, super hanc, inquit, petram, id est, super Christum. Ex
quo non potest Ecclesia constare in aliquo homine, ratione potestatis, vel
dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, quia multi Papae inuenti sunt Apostatae.

28 Qua ergo in re sit a est ista authoritas Pontificia? In docendo? at nihil
docent. In ministrando sacramenta? at non ministrant. In pascendo? at nihil
pascunt. Atqui haec est illa potestas, quam Christus contulit in Apostolos.
Ite, inquit, in vniuersum mundum, and praedicate Euangelium: and, posthac
eritis piscatores hominum: and, sicut me mifit viuens Pater, ita ego mitto vos.
Isti vero, quo eunt? quid docent? quid praedicant? quid piscantur? vnde eunt? a
quo mittuntur? Non est ista authoritas Apostolica, sed superba and
intolerabilis dominatio, per vim and tyrannidem vsurpata. Nemo nostrum, inquit
Cyprianus, Episcopumse Episcoporum dicit, aut tyrannico terrore collegas ad
obsequendi necessitatem compellit; quando habeat omnis Episcopus prolicentia
libertatis and potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab altero
non possit, quum nec ipse possit, alterum iudicare. Et hoc, inquit, erant
vtique caeteri Apostoli, quodfuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris,
and potestatis. Et Diuus Hieronymus; Mayor, inquit, est authoritas orbis, quam
vrbis. Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem? quid paucitatem, de qua
ortum est supercilium, in leges Ecclesiae vendicas? vbicunque fuerit episcopus,
sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, five Constantinopoli, sieve Rhegij, eiusdem est
meriti, and eiusdem sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiarum, and paupertatis humilitas,
superiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Et Gregorius, Petrus, inquit,
praecipuum in corpore membrum, Ioannes, Andreas, Iacobus particularium plebium
capita: omnes tamen sub vno capite membra Ecclesiae sunt. Imo sancti ante
legem, sancti sub lege, sancti in gratia, and omnes perficientes corpus Domini
in membris sunt constituti, and nemo se vnquam vniuersalem dici voluit.

29 Haec illa est potestas, quam body quidam ita strenue defendunt, and
quicquid de Pontificis vel vita, vel religione sentiant, tamen illam
sacrosanctam and integram esse volunt, quasi sine ea Ecclesia Dei incolumis
esse non possit: aut nisi Papa velit and iubeat, Concilium non sit Concilium;
and si totus mundus contra sentiat, nihil sentiat. Quare cum videas haec omnia
iniquissime esse comparata, nihil hodie in Concilijs sincere and vere fieri,
mirari non debes, si nostri homines, domi manner malint, quam tam procul
frustraproficisci, vbi and operam lusuri sint, and causam perdituri.

30 Sed iniussu Pontificis, inquies, and Concilij, nefas erat in religione
voluisse quicquam immutare. Imo vero, Pontifices ipsi vniuersum prope statum
primitiuae Ecclesiae sine vllo Concilio mutauerunt. Est quidem ista speciosa
and pulchra oration, sed erroribus foedissimis praetexitur. Morari enim tantum
volunt expectatione animos hominum; vt mor a ac taedio hebescere incipiant, and
ad extremum spem abijciant. Quid enim? an dum Papa conuocet Concilium, and
Abbates atque Episcopi domum redeant, volunt interea populum Dei falli, errare,
decipi, circumfundi erroribus and ignoratione Dei, and abduci ad interitum
sempiternum? non licet cuiquam nostrum credere in Christum, profiteri
Euangelium, rite and vere Deum colere, sugere superstitiones et cultus
idolorum, nisi isti velint? miserabilis vero esset status Ecclesiae Dei, si in
tot erroribus tam late diffusis, tam crassis, tam coecis, tam foedis, tam
perspicuis, et manifestis, vt eos ne aduersarij quidem nostri negare queant,
nihil possit efsici sine concursu orbis terrarum, et Concilio generali, eius
praesertim, cuius et expectatio incerta sit, et exitus multo incertior. Quum
Persaeolim in Graeciam irrupissent, et coepissent omniapopulari, and
Lacedaemonij, quorum virtus inter omnes tum Graecos eminebat, quo que oportuit
primo quoque tempore procurrere, ad rem gerendam Lunam oportuniorem expectarum
(erat enim ea inis tam inac a Lycurgoauita superstitio, ne proficiscerentur ad
pagnam nisi inplenilumo) patria intorea dum illi cunctabantur diripi, and
incendi potuisset Portcululij inqutunt est in mora. Agitur salus Ecclesiae Dei,
diabolusrugit vt Leo, and circuit and quaerit quem deuoret: homines simplices
facile trabuntur in fraudem, and quamuis saepe tanguntur zelo Dei, tamen
imprudentes persequutur filium Dei vtqu Nazianzenus ait, Quum putent se pugnare
pro Christo, pugnant saepe contra Christum. Episcopi autem, quious oportuit
ista esse curae, aut ut inanes laruae omnia susque aeque ferunt: aut, ut quod
res est dicam, augent etiam errorem and conduplicant caliginem. An ergo nos
oportuit sedere otiosos, and huiusmodi patrum cognitionem expectare, and manur
comprimere, and nihil agere? Imo, inquit Cyprianica, vnus est Episcoputus,
cuins a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, and certe pro sua cuique part Domino
redaendaest ratio. Sanguinem illorum, inquit Dominus, de manu tua requiram.
Quod si quis admoueat manum ad stiuam, and respiciat atergo, and sollicitus
sit, quid alij sentiant, and expectet authoritatem Concilij generalis, and
interea recondat thesaurum Dominisui, audiet, Serve male, and pexside: tollite
illum, and abiicite intenebras exteriores. Sinite, inquit Christus, mortuos
sepelire mortuos suos. Tu veni and sequere me, veritas Dei non pendet ab
hominibus. In humanis quidem Concilijs prudentis est expectare iudicium and
consensum hominum: In rebus autem diuinis vox Dei debet instar esse omnium:
quam postquam men's pia semel accepit, statim cedit, and manus dat, non
tergiuersatur, aut expectatalios Intelligitenim se non Pontisicis, aut Concilij
arbitrio oportere credere, sed voluntati Dei: eius autem voci obtemperandum
esse, inuitis omnibus. Propheta Elias Domino iubenti statim obsequutus est,
etsi se credebat esse solum. Abrahamus monitu Dei migrauit e Chaldea. Lot
egressus est e Sodomis. Tres illi Israelitae public ediderunt confessionem
religionis suae, et public aetestati sunt Idololatriam: nihil expectato
generali Concilio. Exite, inquit Angelus, de medio eius, et nesitis participes
peccatorum eius: neue accipiatis de plagis eius: Non dicit, expectare Synodum
Episcoporum. Sic primum publicata est veritas Dei, sic eadem nunc restituenda
est. Sine publico Concilio Apostoli primum docuerunt Euangelium. Sine publico
Concilio idem potest postliminio reuocari. Quod si Christus ipse ab mitio, aut
eius Apostoli cunctari voluissent, et rem omnem ad futurum Concilium
reiecissent, quando tandem exiuisset sonus illorum in omnem terram? quomodo vim
pertulisset regnum coelorum, aut violenti in illud inuasissent? vbi nunc esset
Euangelium? vbi nunc esset Ecclesia Dei? Nos quidem non formidamus, aut
fugimus, imo multo potius optamus et cupimus Concilium: modo liberum, modo
ingenuum, modo Christianum, modo ad Apostolorum exemplar conueniatur, modo
Abbates et Episcopi a religione iurisiurandi, quo nunc Romany Pontificibus
obstricti sunt, eximantur. modo vniuersa illa coniur atio dissoluatur: modo
nostr arum partium homines modeste, ac libere audiantur: modo ne inauditi
condemnentur: modo ne quic quid agatur, vnus quispiam infirmare et rescindere
possit omnia. At cum id his moribus et temporibus impetrari non posse, et omnia
absurda, inepta, ridicula, superstitiosa, impia, tantum quod semel recepta
essent, consuetudinis causa pugnacissime defendi videremus, proprium esse
iudicauimus, vt municipali Concilio Ecclesijs nostris prospiceremus.

31 Scimus enim spiritum Dei nec lecis allignum esse, nec numeris hominum. Dic,
inquit Christus, Ecclesiae: non sane Vniuersae, quae diffanditur in totum
terrarum orbem, sed particulari, quae possit vnd aliquem in locum conuenire.
Vbicunque, inquit, erunt duo, aut tres congregati in nomine meo, ibi sum ego in
medio illorum. Sic Paulus, vt instauraret Ecclesias Corintbiorum and Galatarum,
non iussit expectare generale Concilium: ad ipsos scripsit, vt quicquid esset
erroris aut (...), id (...) resecarent. Sic olim, cum Eoi copi dormirent atque
aliud agerent, aut etiam contaminarent and polluerent templum Dei, temper Deus
extraordinaria ratione ^lios (...) excitauit, magno viros spiritu, atque animo
qui omnia in integrum restiterent.

32 Nos vero nhil temere, nihil nisi summa cum ratione fecimus, nihil nisi quod
videba^^is and semper licuisse fieri, and a sanctis patribus saepe sine vlla
reprehensione fi^^e factum. Itaque convocatis Episcopis frequenti Synodo,
communi consensu omnium ordinum, Ecclesiae sordes, quas vel incuria hominum,
vel malitia infuderat, tanquam Augiae stabulum repurgavimus, and quantum
assequi maxim potuimus, omnis ad pristinum nitotem, ad postolicorum temporum,
and primitivae Ecclesiae similitudinem rev^c^uimu. Idque and potuimus recte
facere, and quia potuimus fidenter secimus.

33 Libet hic audire, quia Gregorius Papa. 1. hac de re scripserit, quanquam
magis libet, quo ille de Anglicarum Ecclesiarum institutione ad Anglorum
Episcopum Augustinum ea scripserit. Hortatur autem, non vt ad Concilium
referat, sed vt ipse pro sua pradentia id instituat, quo videat pietatem maxim
posse promoueri. Nouit, inquit, fraternitas tua Romanae Ecclesiae
consuetudinem, in qua se meminit esse nutritum. Sed mihi placet, vt sieve in
Romana, sieve Gallicorum, sieve qualibet Ecclesia invenisti quod plus omnipotenti
Deo possit placere, eligas solicit, and in Anglorum Ecclesiam, quae adhuc in
fide noua est, and inconstitutione, praecipua, quae de multis Ecclesus
colligere poteris, infundas. Non enim pro locis res, sed pro rebus loca amanda
sunt.

34 Ad eundem modum scribunt Patres in Concilio Constantinopolitano ad Damasum
Episcopum vrbis Romae, and reliq os Episcopos Occidentis. De Cura, inquiunt,
administrationis singularum Ecclesiarum scitis veterem sanctionem and
definitionem Nicaenorum patrum semper invaluisse, vt in vnaquaque prouincia
cultores, assumptis etiam, sivideatur, finitimis, conferant Ecclesiasticos
honores ijs, quo^ vtiliter gesturos esse confidunt. Et Aphricani Episcopi ad
Celestinum Romanum: Praesbyterorum, inquiunt, and sequentium. Clericorum
improba refugia, sicut te dignum est, repellat sanctitas tua. Quia and nulla
patrum definitione hoc Ecclesiae denegatum est Aphricanae: and decreta Nicaena,
sieve inferioris gradus Clericos, sieve ipsos Episcopos suis Metropolitanis
apertissime commiserunt Prudentissime enim iustissimeque quaeque negotia in
suis locis, vbi orta sunt, esse finienda: nec vnicuique prouinciae gratiam
sancti spiritus defuturam. Quae aequitas a Christi sacerdotibus and prudenter
videatur, and constanter retineatur.

35 Multo vero melius, and ad hanc rem, qua de nunc agimus, accommodatius
Eleutherius Episcopus Romanusad Lucium Regem Britanniae: Petiistis, inquit, a
nobis leges Romanas, and Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in regno Britanniae
vti voluistis. Leges Romanas, and Caesaris semper possumus reprobare: Legem Dei
nequaquam. Suscepistis enim miseratione diuina in regno Britanniae legem and
fidem Christi: habetis penes vos in Regno vestro vtranque paginam. Ex illis Dei
gratia per concilium regni vestri sum legem, and per illam Dei patientia
poteritis vestrum Britanniae regnum instituere. Vicarius vero Dei est is in
regno illo, iuxta Psalmistam: Domini est terra.

Quid multis? Victor Episcopus Romanus habuit Romae Synodum provincialem.
Iustinianus Imperator mandat, si quid opus sit, in singulis provincijs habere
Synodos: Id ni fiat, se fore vltorem and vindicem. Vnaquae que, inquit
Hieronymus, prou incia haber mores and ritus and sensus (...) facile non possis.

(...) Laodicenum, Ancyranum Antiochenum, Turonense, Carthaginense,
Mileuitanum, Toletanum, Burdeg^lense; non (...) est Ista noua ratio. Sic (...)
regebatur Ecclesia Dei antequam patres ad Nicenum Concilium conuenissent. Non
enim statim decurrebatur ad Conciliu^ generale. Theophil^^ habuit Conuentum
provincidlem in Pa^aestina: Plamas in Ponto: Irenaeus in Gallia: Bachylus in
(...): Orige(...) in Arabia. Mitto alia Concilia municipalia quamplura, quae
(...) (...) in Africa, Asia, Graecia, Aegypto, pia, orthodoxa, Christiana,
miussu Pontificis Romani Episcopi onim tum pro renata vt quidque incidisset,
statim domestico Concilio succurrebant Ecclesiis suis, and modo vicinoru^
Episcoporum fidem imploravant, modo oper as mutuas tradebant, and si quid opus
esset sese vicissim vltro invabant. Nec tantum Episcopi, sed principes etiam
indicabant religionis causam ad suum officium pertinere. Nam vt mittam
Nabuchadnezarem, qui capitale sancivit, si quis blasphemasset Deum Israel: aut
Dauidem, Solomonem, Ezechia^, Iosiam, qui partim ex ^dificarunt, partim
repurgarunt templum Dei: Constantinus Imperator sine Concilio suslultt e^ltum
idolorum, and gravissimis verbis edixit, capitale fore, si quis Idolo
sacrificasset. Theodosius Imperator solo aequari iussit templa deorum.
Iovinianus Imperator, statim vbi esset renunciatus, tulit primam legem
dereducendis exulibus Christianis, Iustinianus Imperator dicere solebat
Religionem Christi non minus sibi esse curae, quam vitam suam. Joshua quum
sactus esset Dux populi, statim accepit praecepta ae religione and de colendo
Deo. Sunt enim Principes nutritij Ecclesiae, and custodes vtriusque tabulae.
Nec alia magis causa Deus semper voluit Politias existere, quam vt essent, qui
religionem and pietatem incolumem conservarent.

37 Quo magis hodie grauiusque peccant multi Principes, qui appellantur quidem
Christiani, qui sedent otiosi, and indulgent voluptatibus, and patienter ferunt
impios cultus and contemptum numinis, and haec omnia deuoluunt ad Episcopos, ad
i^os ipsos, quibus sciunt omnem religionem esse ludibrio: quasi cura
Ecclesiarum and populi Dei ad ipsos nihil pertineat, aut ipsi tanquam pastores
quidem sint armentarij, and corporum tantum, ac non etiam anima^ um curam
gerant. Non meminerunt se servos esse Dei, ea causa delectos, vt seruiant
Domino. Ezechias rex non prius ascendit in domum suam, quam vidisset
perpurgatum templum Dei. Et David rex, Non dabo, inquit, somnum oculis meis,
nec patiar vt conniveant palpebrae meae, donec inveniam locum Domino, and
Tabernaculum Deo Jacob. O si Principes Christiani audire vellent vocem Domini
sui. Nunc reges intelligite, inquit Dominus, erudimini, qui iudicatis terra^.
Ego, inquit, dixi, dij estis, hoc est, homines divinitus electi, quibus nomen
meum esset curae. Cogita tu, quem ego desterquilinio excitaui, and in summo
dignitatis and honoris gradu collocavi, and praefeci populo meo, cum ita
studiose aedifices and ornes domum tuam, quo animo potes contemnere domum meam?
Aut quomodo quotidie oras, vt regnum tuum tibi posterisque tuis confirmetur? An
vt nomen meum semper afficiatur contumetia? vt evangeliam Christi mei
extinguatur? vt servi mei mea causa, ante oculos tuos, te inspectante,
tracidentur? vt tyrannis longius grassetur? vt populo meo semper imponatur? vt
per te scandalum confirmetur? Vae illi per quem venit scandalum; vae etiam
illi, per quem confirmatur scandalum. Horres sanguinem corporum, quanto magis
horrere debes sanguinem animarum? Memineris quid acciderit Antiocho, Herodi,
Iuliano: Ego regnum tuum transferam ad hostem tuum, quia peccasti adversum me:
ego muto tempora and vices temporum: abijcioreges and instituo, vt intelligas
me alu^ssimum esse, and vim habere in regno hominum, and illud dare cui volo:
ego humilio, and ego exalto, ego glorificantes me, glorisico, and eos, qui me
contemnunt, afficio contumelia.

ANDREAS DVDITHIVS EPISCOPVS QVINQVEECCLESIENSIS in Epistola ad Maximilianum
II. Caesarem; vbi sententiam suam refert de Calice Laicis concedendo, and
Sacerdotum coniugio.
QVid profici potuit in eo Concilio, in quo numerarentur, non suis momentis
ponderarentur sententiae? si caussa, si ratione pugnandum fuisset, si pauci
quidam socij nobis adfuissent, viceramus, quamuis pauci magnas copias
aduersariorum. Sed cum numerus tantum prodiret in aciem, quo long inferiores
futuri fuissemus, in optima causa victores discedere non potuimus. Singulis
nostrum centenos de suis Papa potuit opponere: ac, si centeni parum multi
viderentur, repent mill creare potuit, quos suis laborantibus subsidio
mitteret. Itaque videre erat, quotidie famelicos and egentes Episcopos,
exmaiori part barbatulos adolescentes, luxuque perditos Tridentum volitare,
conductos ad sententiam secundum Papae voluntatem dicendam, indoctos illos
quidem and stolidos, sed tamen impudentia and audacia vtiles. Hi cum ad veteres
adulatores Papae accesserant, tum vero victrix exultabat iniquitas, neque
decerni iam quidquam potuit, nisi in eorum sententiam, qui Papae potentiam,
luxumque defendere, summam religionem arbitrabantur. Erat aliquis vir grauis
and eruditus, qui tantam indignitatem far not poterat: hic, vt non bonus
Catholicus, terrore, minis, ac insectatione a Concilio ad probandum quae
nollet, traducebatur. In summa, in eum statum res est adducta, istorum, qui
illuc facti institutique venerant, improbitate, non vt iam Episcoporum, sed
laruarum, non hominum, sed simulacrorum, quae neruis mouentur alienis, vt
Daedali statuae fuisse perhibentur, Concilium illud videretur. Erant Episcopi
illi conductitij plerique, vt vtres, rusticorum musicum instrumentum, quos, vt
vocem mittant, inflare necesse est. Nil habuit cum illo conuentu S. Spiritus
commereij, omnia erant humana consilia, quae in immodica, and sane quam pudenda
Pontificum tuenda dominatione consumebantur. Illinc responsa, tanquam Delphis,
aut Dodona expectabantur: illinc nimirum Spiritus ille S. quem suis Concilijs
prae esse iactant, tabellarij manticis inclusus mittebatur: qui, quod admodum
ridiculum est, cum aliquando, vt fit, aquae pluuijs excrescebant, non ante
aduolare poterat, quam inundationes desedissent. Ita fiebat, vt Spiritus non
super aquas, vt est in Genesi, sed secus aquas ferretur. O portentosam and
singularem dementiam! Ratum nihil esse poterat, quod Episcopi, tanquam plebs,
sciscerent, nisi Papa author fieret.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF ALL THE Principal matters contained in this
History of the Council of TRENT.
A
ABuses in the Church of Rome are collected, to be reformed. page 83, 84
Acclamations used in former Councels, and imitated in Trent. 813 Adrian 6. is
created Pope: is much feared for his severity. 19 Is learned in
schoole-diuinitie: was borne in Vtrect: resolves to reform the Court of Rome.
20 Is dissuaded from it. 23 He lamenteth because the Popes cannot do good,
though they desire it never so much. 24 He confesses the abuses of the
Clergy, not exempting the Apostolic Sea. 25 His death, and praises, 30
Amante Seruita a Friar of Brescia concurreth in opinion with Luther concerning
the Eucharist, and is silenced. 522 Ambassadors in Trent hold a consultation
how to remedy the proceedings in Council, and choose the French. Ambassador
Lansac to speak for them. 570, 571 The Ambassadors in Trent did not subscribe
the Decrees when the Council was ended. 813
Andreas Vega, chief of the Franciscans, disputes, that the opinions of the
Lutherans ought not to be condemned without declaring the opinion of the
Catboliques. 179 He writes against Soto. 216
Anna du Bourg is burned in France for religion; and his constance causes a
great increase of the reformed religion. 419 Annats are spoken against by the
Bishop of Nismes. 716 Appeals, and their original. 334, 335 Apostolic Sea
what it is. 321 Archbishop of Collen is cited by the Emperor to clear
himself of Lutheranisme objected against him. 124 and by the Pope at the same
time. 125 Is sentenced by the Pope; but the sentence is not executed by the
Emperor until certain years after. 165 He is obeyed by his people. 189 is
proceeded against by the Emperor, and Prince Adolphus put in his place. 259
Arch-bishp of Otranto opposes the Cardinal of Loraine, and has forty voices
at his command. 719 is reprehended by the Spanish Ambassador for making
private congregations, 759
Archbishop of Toledo is in the Inquisition of Spain; his book is examined
in Council, and approved. 750 Aremboldus is agent for the Popes sister, to
vent her indulgences. 5 Augustan Confession whence it had the name; and when
the first liberty to beprofessed publicly. 63 Auignion rebelleth against the
Pope. 429, 430
B
BAndo set forth by the Emperor against the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraue
of Hassia. 201 Baptism discussed. 242 Whether that of John be equal to
Christ's Baptism. 243
Battle of S. Quintin, in which the French King received a great overthrow.
406 Battle in France between the Protestants and Papists, in which the
Prince of Conde was taken prisoner, 647 Causes much joy in Trent. 649
Bauaria desires liberty of religion. 397. 398 The Bauarian Ambassador
makes a biting Oration in Council against the corruptions of the Clergy. 527
A tumult is raised in Bauaria for the communion of the Cup; and marriage of
Priests. 716
Bessarion was created Cardinal, and wanted not much of being Pope. 75 Beza
speaks in the Colloquie of Poisi. 452, 453, 454. Birague the french
Ambassador comes to Trent. 714 The Councels answer. 718 He parts from
Trent, and goes to the Emperor: His negotiation. 720
Bishop of Bitonto makes a foolish Oration when the Council was opened. 132
is in danger to be excommunicated in Rome for not paying his Pensionaries. 153
Bishops of Ficsole and Chiozza are complained of to the Pope by the Legates for
speaking freely in Council. 167 Bishop of Vintimiglia is the Popes secret
minister in Council. 517 Bishops employed in the Council by Card. Simoneta to
jest at others. 526 Bishops what qualities they ought to have. 249 261. By what
law Bishops are instituted, is not permitted to be disputed in Council. 589
Whether their degree be an order, 591 How they are superior to Priests. 595.
596 Whether their institution be de iure diuino, or Pontificio 596, 597, 598,
599, 604, 636, 637. Laynez General of the Jesuits spends a whole
congregation to show that it is de iure Pontificio. 609, 610 The French Prelates
would have this question wholly omitted. 634 Bishops not made nor confirmed by
the Pope. 635. Cannons of the Institution of Bishops are made in Rome, and
brought to Trent. 657 The Decree of the Institution is made. 723 but deferred,
for fear of making the Council too long. 731, 732 A question is discussed in
the Council, whether the most worthy ought to be elected Bishops. 725 The
Spanish Prelates will not abandon their opinion, that the institution of Bishops
is de iure diuino, 735 But are persuaded to be quiet. 737
Bull of Leo the tenth against Luther. 10, 11 A Bull of the convocation of the
Council, to be (...) in Mantua. 79 Another of the convocation of the Council
to be held in Trent, against which the Emperor excepteth. 101
Bull of faculties for the Legates of the Council of Trent. 112 Bull for the
dissolution of the Council. 112 Bull of the Translation if the Council. 128
Bull of the Legation the Legates will not suffer to be read. 130 Bull of the
translation of the Council to Bolonia. 266, 267, 268 Bull of the restitutio^ of
the Council to Trent. 307 which the Emperor would have to be altered. 307,
308 Bull of Pius 4 for the intimation of the Council in Trent. 435
C.
CAictan, the Popes Legate, in what sort he treats with Luther. 7 is blamed
in Rome for using him basely. 8
Calistini in Bohemia. 2 Camillus Oliuus, Secretary to the Card. of Mantua, is
in disgrace with the Pope. 518 Campegio is sent Legate to the Diet in Noremberg.
31 He makes a little reformation of the clergy of Germany. 32 Which is
received by some few Princes. 33 Is made Legate again. 52, 53 Is sent into
England about the divorce of Henry the eight, and recalled to gratify the
Emperor. 68
Canonical books of the Scripture. 152, 153 Catherinus writes against Soto,
concerning the meaning of the council in the point, De natura and gratia. 229
Caracter imprinted in the collation of the Sacraments, what it is. 239, 240 It
is imprinted in the collation of Priesthood. 738
Card. Colonna is cited to Rome. 38 sacketh Rome. 41 is excommunicated, and
appealeth to a Council. 42
Cardinals imprisoned, mocked, and beaten in Rome 44 Cardinals created. 74,
272, 361, 396, 825 Cardinals are not contained within any general terms of
any law, if they be not particularly ^amed. 262 Card. Poole is made Legate for
the Council in Trent. 111 And after his return from thence, is made one of
the Deputies in Rome over the council in Trent. 168 Is named to be Pope, but
not elected for suspicion of Lutheranisme. 298 Is made Legate for England by
Pope Julius the third. 384 Comes to London with the cross before him, and
makes an oration in the Parliament. 385 is deprived of his Legation of England
by Paul the 4. 405
Cardinal Crescentius, the Legate in Council, ^doteth. 375 Is carried to
Verona, and there dies. 377
Card. Morone was imprisoned, and ready to be sentenced for an heretic by
Paul. 4. 416 Is made prime President of the Council by Pope Pius 4. and have
secret instructions. 688. his entry into Trent. 693 Is received in
congregation. 694 His public negotiation with the Emp. 695 His private
negotiation with the Empe. 705 He is taxed by his fellow Legates for taking too
much upon him. 724.
Cardinal of Loraine speaks in the Colloquie of Poisi. 453 Had a desire to
be Patriarch of France 603 Enters. Trent with many French Prelates. 624 Makes
an oration in Council. 629 Goes to Ispruc to consult with the Emperor about
the affairs of the Council. 664. 668 Writes a consolatorie letter to his
mother after the death of his brother, the Duke of Guise. 681 Goes to Venice
to put away grief. 689 Is said to speak in Council like a Lutherane. 704
Remitteth his rigor for matter of the Council, by reason of the great change
in France. 712 Is opposed by the Archbishop of Otranto. 719 Resolves to give
the Pope all manner of satisfaction. 733 Is complained of by the Spanish
Prelates. 743. 744 Excuses his change of mind. 751 Comes to Rome, where he
is lodged in the Popes Palace, and visited by the Pope in person. 767 His
negotiation. 768 He taxes the French Ambassadors for protesting in Trent. 778
Returns to Trent, and hastneth the ending of the Council. 781 was the chief
man to make and roar out the acclamations in the end of the Council. 813 Is
taxed in France at his return. 818 His defense. 821
Cardinal of Ferrara is sent Legate into France, where he is ill entertained
at the first. 455 He muketh acquaintance with the Hugonots. 456 Has a grant to
exercise his faculties; which the Chancellor refuses to subscribe. 458 He
meets the Card, of Loraine in Asti of Piemont, to persuade him to favor the
Popes affairs in Council. 700 But cannot effect anything. 711
Cardinal of Mantua, Legate in the Council, is distasted by the Pope. 507 Is
opposed by Cardinal Simoneta. 513 The dispatches are not addressed to him. 517
Is reconciled with Cardinal Simoneta. 54 writes to the Pope that he can
dissemble no longer. 675 He dies. 678
Cardinal of Burbon desires a dispensation to marry. 668 But the Frenchmen
dare not propose it in Council. 680
Cardinal Seripando, one of the Presidents, dies. 687 Cardinal Nauaggero,
the new President enters Trent. 699 Cardinal Chastillion calls himself
Count of Beauuois, quitteth the Cap, mocketh the Pope and is deprived by him.
767 Catechism is handled. 802 Ceremonies used in opening the Council. 130
Charles the fisth Emperor is suspected by the Pope for his greatness. 35
Makes two answers to the two Briefes of the Pope. 39 writes to the
Cardinals. 40 Makes show of grief for the Popes imprisonment, but keeps him
fast. 44 Is crowned in Bolonia. 52 Goes to Rome; is proud of his victory in
Africa. 78 Is distasted with the Pope. 110 And reconciled again, 111 Makes
the Pope afraid by residing at Ispruc, so near the Council. 355 Uses means
to make the Empire hereditarie; but is crossed by his Nephew Maximilian. 382
Quitteth the world. 404
Charles the ninth the French King, seems to favor the Protestants. 449
Alieneth Ecclesiastical goods without the Popes leave. 712. 713 Wherewith his
Holiness is very angry. 713. 793
Church, what power it has concerning the Sacraments. 669 Whether it can make
marriages void. 756
Clement the seventh Pope, thinks a Council to be dangerous when the Popes
authority is in question. 34 Makes a league with Francis the first, the
French King, and inueigheth against the Emperor. 37 He was illegitimate, and
created Pope by Simony. 42 Is taken prisoner 44 Escapes out of the Castle in
the habit of a Merchant. 45 Does suddenly recover his greatness. 47
Disswadeth the Emperor from desiring a Council 50 And persuades him to
proceed severely against the Lutherans. 51 Shows a desire to call a Council,
but means to avoid it. 58 Is aliened from the Emperor, and joins with
France. 64 His death, virtues, and vices. 71
Colloquie between the Protestants and Papists. 56 Another in Aganoa. 92 In
Worms. 93 In Ratisbon. 95 And again in Ratisbon. 126 Colloquie in Worms of
four and twenty Doctors. 407 Of Poisi in France 451
Commendaes, what they are, is showed by the Author in a large discourse. 500
Commenda of all the Benefices in the world, given by Clement the seventh to his
Nephew Hippolitus Card. de Medici. 251 Communion of the cup denied by the Pope.
290 Treated of in France. 457 Demanded, and discussed in Rome. 458, 459, 519,
520, 522, 523, 526, 528, 529, 537, 556, 559, 560. Is denied in Council by
plurality of voices. 567
Concubines of Priests are of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 82 Conclauists and
their privileges, 554 Conference at Marpurg between Luther and Zuinglius. 49
Conference in Nizza between the Pope, French King, and King of Spain. 85
Conference between the Pope and Emperor in Lucca. 100 And another in
Busseto. 104
Confirmation, the Sacrament, is handled; and a question disputed whether
Bishops be the only ministers of it. 244 Confirmation of the Decrees of the
Council, whether it ought presently to be made by the Pope, is much disputed.
814, 815 etc. Conseruators are Judges granted to some particular men by the
Pope, to maintain them in their pretended rights. 352, 353 Conspiracy in
Genua of the Fieschi against the Dorij. 222 Conspiracy in France against King
Francis the second. 421 Contarini is Legate for the Pope in Ratisbon. 94
Speaks as ambiguously as an oracle: his exhortation to the Prelates. 96
Complains that his answer was mistaken. 97. Is suspected to be a Lutheran.
100 His death. 103
Continuation of the Council is disliked by the Emperor and the French King,
but approved by the King of Spain. 441, 477, 506 The Pope resolves the
continuation shall be declared, that the Council may be dissolved, but dares
not stand to it. 511
Coronation of the Emperor in Bolonia. 49. 52 Councels for what causes they
began to be celebrated. 2 Council of Trent is opened by singing amasse of the
holy Ghostonely. 116 Councels held by Secular Princes. 136 Councels do
deliberate of faith, not by divine inspiration, but by humane disquisition. 230
The question, whether they have greater authority then the Pope is forbid by
the Legates to be handled. 231 How the Spirit did work in the Council of
Trent. 276 The Council is remanded to Trent from Bolonia. 302, 303 Councels
do not bind by their decrees the Churches absent. 320 The Council of Basil
what authority it had. 566. The Council of Constance is commended by the
General of the Serui. 567 The Council of Trent was assembled to remedy
abuses, but was used to increase them, The State of it is quite altered. 782
The conclusion of it. 803
Count of Luna is received in congregation, and protests about his place.
707, 708 Creed established in the fourth Session. 147
D.
DEcrees of Justification. 223 And of Reformation. 226 Are censured in Germany.
227 A decree concerning the Sacraments. 263 Concerning Baptism. 264 Concerning
Confirmation. 264 A decree of Reformation. 264 A Decree concerning the
Eucharist. 339 A decree of Reformation. 340 The decree (Proponentibus Legatis)
is made, and contradicted. 469 The Spanish Ambassador desires it may be
abrogated. 720 The Emperor disswadeth the King of Spain from desiring the
abrogation of it. 727 A decree of the institution of Bishops, and of Residence.
723 Another concerning Residence. 736 Concerning Priesthood and the other
Orders. 738 Another concerning Order. 740, 741. A Decree of reformation. 787,
788 Another concerning Purgatory. 799
Decrees of the Council of Trent must not have any glosses or interpretations
made upon them, but all doubts must be referred to the Pope. 817 Degradation
of Prelates, and the laws thereof. 336, 337 Denmark embraces the reformed
religion. 84 Deputies appointed in Rome over the Council. 168, 256, 257 Diet
of Worms. 13 Of Noremberg. 24. Of Spira. 35, 36 Of Ausburg. 52. Of Aganoa. 92
Of Ratisbon. 94, 126, 183 Diets in Ausburg. 272, 292, 306, 388
Diocesan Counsels held in diverse Provinces. 296, 297 Dispensations, whether
they may be granted without a lawful cause. 253 What they are. 675 are
maintained at large by Laynez, General of the Jesuits. 721 Whether they have
brought more advantage or disprofit to the Sea of Rome. 791
Distributions called Canonical, what they are. 495 The power of Bishops
concerning them. 556
Divorce is handled by Dominicus Soto. 670 and by John Ramirez. 671 The
Venetian Ambassadors desire that the Grecians within their dominions may be
permitted to put away their wives for fornication, because they have always
done so. 755
Dominicans were employed in Saxony to vent Indulgences. 5 are opposite to the
Franciscans in the point of the real presence. 328
Duke of Saxony, called John Frederick, disputes whether he may carry the
sword before the Emperor, and stand at the Mass. 52 He publishes a Manifest
against the Emperor. 190 Who sets forth a Bando against him. 201 He had
equal authority with the Landgraue of Hassia, which makes them both
unfortunate. 204 He is taken in battle, and condemned to die. 270 But
pardoned upon very hard conditions. 270
Duke of Saxony, called Maurice, created Elector by the Emperor Charles the
5. sends ambassadors to the Council. 362 Who demand a safe conduct. 363 One
of them makth an Oration in Council. 367 The Duke takes Ispruc, scarreth
Charles the Emperor very much, who sets John Frederick the deposed Duke at
liberty. 378
Duke of Wittenberg sends ambassadors to the Council, who present the
Confession of their faith. 355 He sends order to them to proceed in their
negotiation. 359 The Presidents will not suffer their confession to be disputed
of in Council. 359, 360 One of the Ambassadors makes an oration in Council.
369
Duke of Alua might have taken Rome, but instead of that goes thither for
absolution. 406 Duke of Sauoy takes arms against the Protestants of his
valleys. 421 Is overthrown by them, and makes a peace. 446. Has many
Protestants within his territories. 710
Duke of Bauaria sends ambassadors to Rome for the Communion of the Cup. 646
And desires that his Priests may marry. 679

E.
ECchius opposes Luther. 6 Ecclesiastical goods are aliened in France without
the Popes consent. 93 Ecolampadius dies with sorrow for the death of his
fellow Zuinglius. 60 Edict of Ausburg about religion. 57 Edict of the French
King H(...)y 2. concerning religion. 297 Edict of Iuli made in France. 448
Edict of March made in France. 471 Edward 6. King of England, makes a change
in Religion. 295 He dies. 283
Electors of Mentz and Triers, crave leave to depart from the Council. 362 And
do depart. 374 And so does the Elector of Collen, 374
Elizabeth obtains the crown of England: the Pope refuses to acknowledge
her: she causes a disputation to be held in Westminster in matter of
religion. 411 She is invited to the Council in Trent. 436 But will not suffer
the Popes Nuncio to come into England. 440 The Council would have proceeded
against her; but is dissuaded by the Emperor. 727
Episcopal jurisdiction is discoursed of by the Author. 330. 331. etc. Erasmus
is condemned for his annotations upon the New Testament, which are confirmed by
Pope Leo the tenth. 473 Excommunication is denounced against all Heretics in
general only, in the end of the Council. 813 Exemptions what they are, is
showed in a large discourse made by the Author. 220 Exemption of Cathedral
Churches in Spain from the jurisdiction of Bishops, raises a great stir in
the Council. 797
F.
FAber, sent to Zuric by the Bishop of Constance, refuses to dispute with
Zuinglius. 17 Faction made in Council by the Pope and Legates. 142. 256 A
faction between the Dominicans and Franciscans. 175. 229. 258 A faction made
in Council by the Pope. 463. 504. 580 The Papalins themselves did not like
that the Pope should labor so openly to make a mayor part. 585 A faction made
by Cardinal Simoneta about the institution of Bishops. 607 Practices used by
the Legates to persuade the Prelates. 621 A factious banquet made by the
Archbishop of Otranto. 627 Cardinal Madruccio said openly there was a Council
within the Council. 658. 659
Faith how many significations it has. 194. 195 Ferdinand desires to possess
Transiluania, and causes the Bishop of Veradino to be slain: is absolved by
the Pope. 373 Publishes an Edict against innovation in Religion. 387 And a
Catechism. 387, 388 Is installed Emperor, and not acknowledged by Pope Paul
the fourth, but after is acknowledged by Pope Pius the fourth, unto whom he
renders obedience. 420 Goes to Ispruc, that he may be near the Council.
649 Puts in consultation seventeen very important points, concerning the
present Council. 673 Writes to the Legates and the Pope very effectually for a
serious reformation. 682. 683. Gives his word to Cardinal Morone to use
conniuencie hereafter for matters of the Council. 705 His sudden sickness
makes the Fathers in Trent afraid. 779, 780
Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, is created Cardinal for his great worth; and is
beheaded 43. days after. 74 Florence becomes free, and does deface the
Statues of Leo the tenth, and of Clement the seventh. 44 Form of proceeding in
Council. 344 Francis the first, the French King, is taken prisoner at Pauia.
35 It set at liberty, and absolved from his oath. 37
Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, dies. 77 Francis of Toledo is Ambassador for
the King of Spain in Council. 154 Persuaded that the reformation should be
handled before the doctrine. 166
Francis the second, the French King, persecuteth the Protestants. 417, 418 He
dies. 436
Free will is discussed 208, 209, 210 French Ambassador speaks in Council.
509 The French Ambassadors desire that their Prelates may be expected. 552 The
French Ambassador De Ferrieres makes an oration. 631 And another. 666 Which
vexes the Fathers. 667 The French Ambassadors go to Venice. 790
French petitions are written against in Rome. 674 The Pope resolves not to
consent to them. 690
French Prelates cited to Rome for Lutheranisme. 693 Sentence is pronounced
against them, 790 They are defended by the King. 795

G.
GEneua promoteth thereformed religionin France. 422 The Pope persuades the
French King to make war against that city. 423
George Fransperg, General of an army of Dutchmen, carries an halter toward
Rome, to hang the Pope; but dies before he comes thither. 43 George
Martinaccio, Bishop of Veredino, desires to hold Transiluania in liberty;
refuses the offers of K. Ferdinand, and is slain by his ministers. 873
Germany is in the power of the Emperor, the two Protestant Heads being
retired into their countries. 221 Glosses are forbid to be made upon the
Decrees of the Council of Trent. 813 Granuell publishes a book, to compose
religion in Germany. 95 He is sent to the Diet in Noremberg. 103
Groperus discourses of Appeals. 334 Guise passes into Italy with an army to
assist the Pope. 404 Is defeated by the default of the Caraffi. 405 Is recalled
by the French King. 406 The Guisards hold a parley in Germany with the Duke of
Wittenberg. 480 The Duke of Guise is slain under Orlience by John Poltrot, a
private Gentleman. 681 His death makes a great alteration in France. 682

H.
HEnry 8. King of England, writes against Luther, and gains the Title of
Defender of the Faith. 16 Marries Anne Bullen. 68 Withdraws his obedience
from the Pope, and denies to pay the Peter pence. 69 Protests against the
council of Mantua. 83 And again against the council of Vincentia. 85 is
excommunicated by the Pope, and the reasons are declared. 86, 87 The
excommunication was generally contemned. 87 He makes an Edict in matter of
religion. 89 He dies, and his death causes much joy in Rome and Trent. 260
Henry 2. the French King, makes a solemn entry into France: proceeds
severely against the Protestants. 297, 298 Professes extraordinary good will
to Pope Julius the 3. 305 Protecteth Parma against the Pope and the Emperor.
311 Protests against the council of Trent. 315 319 Persecuteth the
Protestants. 322 But afterward uses moderation. 407 Proceeds against the
Counselors of Parliament in a Mercutiall. 414, 415 He dies. 416
Hermit Friars were ordinary publishers of Indulgences in Saxony, but were
excluded by Aremboldus. 5 Hierarohie of the Church, what it is. 589, 590, 591.
The form of Hierarchy in what it consists. 591, 592 it should rather be
called Hierodoulia. 743
Hugonius a French Divine, betrayeth his contrymen in Council. 632 but
cannot endure the flattery of Laynez, the Jesuit, in maintaining the Popes
authority. 722
Hugonots in France do wax bold. 470 they have 2150. Churches in France. 480

I.
Jesuits will observe no rule in Council. 543 why their General is not in
the Catalogue of the assistants in Council. 554 Salmeron the Jesuit
proceeds by faction in matter of faith. 555 Laynez, General of the Jesuits,
spends a whole congregation in a discourse concerning the Institution of
Bishops. 609, 610, 611 His suffrage concerning dispensations. 721 Favors done
to him in Council by the Legates. 721. 722 The Jesuits do profess to live by
begging, but will not be bound to it. 799 They make use of the negligence of
the Fathers in Council, to raise their order to more greatness. 801
Images, and their doctrine. 806 Index is disputed on. 474, 475, 502 a Decree
made concerning it. 480 Indulgences when they began to bring money to the Popes
coffers. 4 a plenary Indulgence granted by Urban the second, and Leo the tenth.
4 the profit of the Indulgences of Saxony is granted to the Popes sister. 5
The doctrine of Indulgences was never well understood before Luther wrote
against them. 6 four different opinions concerning them, and all Catholic.
22 The Council dares not handle Indulgences exactly. 801 The Decree
concerning them. 812 an Indulgence granted by the Legates in Trent without
authority. 113
In quisition brought into Naples. 271 and into the Low Countries. 300 the
office of Inquisition is mainly promoted by Paul the fourth. 409 the
Inquisition should have been brought into Milan: which causes a great tumult
there, and in the Council. 757, 758
Intention of the Ministers to do as the Church does, whether it be
necessary in Baptism, and the other Sacraments. 240, 241, etc. Interim, or
peace of religion, is made in Germany. 62 It displeases both Papists and
Protestants. 294. Is abrogated. 379
John Tancherel is condemned in France, for maintaining that the Pope may
depose kings, 463, 464 Ireland is made a kingdom by Pope Paul the fourth,
which title it had long before. 392 Ispruc is taken by the Protestants. 378
Iubile published in Rome. 130 And in Trent. 203 Another Iubile celebrated in
Rome for joy of the determination to celebrate the Council 435
Julius the 2. Pope was more a soldier then a Clergy man. 3 Julius the 3
created Pope. 298 Is more inclined to pleasure then business: creates a young
Car. of unknown parents. 299 Restores the Council to Trent. 302, 303 Is
aliened from the Emperor. 371 Suspendeth the Council. 376 Maintains his
reputation by the Patriarch of Armenia. 382, 383 Rejoices for the restitution
of the obedience of England: he dies. 389
Justice, by whom it is to be administered in Council. 82 Justification is
discussed in many articles. 192 Which did trouble the Prelates and Divines,
because it was never well discussed by the Schoolmen. 194

K
KIng of Denmark embraces the reformed religion. 84 King of Navarre has a
guard set upon him. 436 Is set at liberty, and governs France. 437 Writes
to the Protestant Princes in Germany, that he will preserve Religion in
France. 480 Was slain with a Bullet at the siege of Roan. 640 His death makes
a great alteration in France 641
Knights of Malta send an ambassador to the Council; who is received in
Congregation, and makes an Oration. 762
L.
LAndgraue of Hassia preuenteth a division amongst the Reformatists in the Diet
of Spira. 47 publishes a Manifest against the Emp. 190 who sets forth a
Bando against him. 201
Landgraue and Saxon had equal authority in the war against the Emperor,
which was a great disadvantage to them. 204 He yields himself prisoner to
the Emperor. 270 is set at liberty 379
Lateran Council what advantage it brought to the Sea of Rome. 19 Latin
translation of the Bible is discoursed of 155, 156, 157, etc. and is approved.
159 it is said that no errors of faith are in it. 161
Laws of Popes are more strictly observed then the laws of God. 488 League
between the Pope and the French King is confirmed by marriage. 67 between the
Pope and the Emperor against the Protestants. 188 the League between Charles
the Emperor and Henry 8. King of England offends the Pope. 105 a league of
all Catholics against the Protestants is treated by the Pope. 515 but cannot
be effected. 516 a league between the Pope and the French K. against the Emp.
confirmed by marriage. 252 another of the Protestants in Germany against the
Emperor. 312, 484
Legates in Trent desire to have two sorts of letters from the Pope and a
cipher. 113 Leo 10, Pope his description. 3 Lewis 12. French King is
excommunicated. 3 Liberty of Friars is held dangerous by the Legates, and
repressed. 228 a Friar of Brescia is disgraced for speaking of the Eucharist
like Luther. 422 Liberty of the Council violated by the Pope. 503 Liberty of
the Council is thought by the Speaker to be too great. 533 and by the French
Ambassadors to be none at all. 542 as also by the Spaniards. 551 The
Presidents use means to curb the Spanish Prelates. 620 the Cardinal of
Loraine said openly the Council was not free. 635 The Bishop of Veglia
quitteth the Council for fear. 644 the Prelates are terrified with the Popes
authority. 645 Martin Guzdalin, a Spaniard, complains that the Council is
not free. 661 and the Spanish Ambassador does the like: who is answered by
Cardinal Morone. 754
Limbo is the place where children are, who die without Baptism, before the
use of reason. 178 Luther speaks against Indulgences. 5 And against the Popes
authority. 7 Appealeth to the Council. 8. 12 Passes to other points of
doctrine. 9 Burns the Popes Bull, and Decretals in Wittenberg. 12 Is called
to the Diet of Worms. 13 And an Edict is published against him after his
departure. 15 Which was never executed by the Princes of the Empire. 26, 27,
etc. His answer to Vergerius. 75 He dies. 148 Diverse fables are raised of
his death. 149

M.
MAntua is chosen to hold the Council in. 79 Wherewith the Duke is contented at
the first, but repents afterward. 82
Marcellus the Second created Pope. 389 Purposes to make a severe reformation
of the Court and Clergy, and to erect a religious Order of an hundred persons.
390 He dies, having sat but two and twenty days. 392
Marriage of Priests what inconvenience it brings. 460 Why it is forbid. 680
Matrimony is proposed to be disputed. 662, 665. The inconvenience of secret
marriages. 665, 668, etc. Whether Priests may marry. 678, 679 A marriage is
desired and sought by the King of Spain between his sister, and his son
Charles. 685 Marriage of children without consent of their parents is spoken
against by the French ambassadors. 746, 747, 754 Marriage of Priests is
promoted, and opposed in council. 747 The abuses of matrimony are discussed.
747, 748. A question discussed, whether one may be forced to marry. 749, 750
Diverse opinions concerning clandestine marriage. 782 The doctrine of Matrimony
is decreed. 784 The reformation of the abuses of it is decreed. 784, 785 The
impediments of Matrimony are decreed. 785.
Mary obtains the Crown of England. 383 Establishes Popery. 384 Is married
to King Philip. 385 Appoints ambassadors to go to Rome. 386 Persecuteth the
Protestants. 387 Her Ambassadors come to Rome. 391 She dies. 411
Marquis of Brandenburg sends Ambassadors to the Council. 342 Mass is
discussed. 542 they dispute to prove it to be a sacrifice. 544, 545, etc. a
Portugal Divine says it can be proved by tradition only. 546. the doctrine
of it. 573 the abuses of it. 574
Mattheo Langi, Archbishop of Salzburg, did not dislike the assertions of
Luther, but scorneth that the world should be reformed by a Monk. 55 Maxim
in Council about the mayor part of voices. 576 Maximilian the son of
Ferdinand passes by Trent. 360 promises the Protestants there to labor with
his Uncle, the Emperor, that the Council may be free. 361 is thought to be a
Protestant. 426 which he does not deny to the Popes nephew. 429 is crowned
King of Bohemia, and elected King of the Romans. 641 refuses to promise
obedience to the Pope. 723
Merits, whether they go before grace, or follow. 198
N.
NAples does mutin, because of the Inquisition brought in, and is cherished by
the Pope. 271 Nations, whether they ought to have voices in Council, or
particular persons. 137, 508 National Council is prepared in France. 314,
425. Number of the Prelates in the Council of Trent. 317, 462 the number of
those who subscribed the Decrees of the Synod. 813
Nuns which are called Penitenti, or Conuertite, have been Courtesans. 808
O.
OAth prescribed to be taken by those who are to be admitted to Bishoprics,
Abbacies, Benefices, etc. 732. 733 Octauius Farnese co^ducteth the Italian
troops into Germany against the Protestants. 203 receives a French Garrison
into Parma. 311 Oration made in the Council by the Bishop of Bitonto. 132
another made by the French Ambassador, Guido Faber. 508 Displeases the
Fathers. 509 And is answered. 511 An Oration made by the Bauarian Ambassador.
527 An Oration made in Council for the Count of Luna. 709 Displeases all the
Ambassadors. 710 Oration made by the French Ambassador de Ferrieres against
the reformation of Princes 771, 772, 773 Is answered. 775 Which causes him to
make an Apology 775
Order is held to be a Sacrament, and is discussed. 586 Seven orders, and all
Sacraments. 587 How the holy Ghost is given in ordination. 592, 593 What
ceremonies be necessary in conferring orders. 593 The number of orders, and
their several functions. 734 The Decree concerning them. 738 And the
Anathematismes. 739
Ordination to the title of the Patrimony is discoursed on by the Author. 490
Diverse opinions concerning it. 491
Oriental Christians. 572
P.
PAlatine of Rhene speaks bravely in the Diet. 14 Embraces the reformed
religion. 148, 398 Parishes how they came to be divided. 498 Parma and
Placentia are given by Pope Paul the 3. to his bastard son. 121 Whereat the
Cardinals do murmr. 128 Parma is restored to Duke Octauius by Pope Julius
the 3. 311
Pasquins made in Rome, against the Council. 148. Patriarch of Armenia comes
to the Pope. 382 Paul the 3. created Pope. 71 His chiefest virtue was
dissimulation. 71 He persuades the Cardinals to reform themselves. 72
Labors to gain Milan for his family. 104 Recalleth his forces out of
Germany, and is jealous of the Emperor by reason of his victory. 222
Recalleth the whole business of Reformation to himself; of which the Legates
durst not make use. 254 He dies. 298
Paul the 4. receives the English Ambassadors. 391 Commands the restitution
of the Church goods in England, and the Peter pence. 392 Is proud and
choleric. 394 Creates Cardinals contrary to his oath. 396 Pretends to make
peace between the Emperor, and French King, but intends nothing but war.
401 Proceeds against the Colonnesi. 402 Threatens the Emperor and his
son, and provides for war. 403 Imprisoneth many great persons. ibid.
Creates 10. Cardinals more. 404 Persecuteth his own family, and instituteth a
new government in Rome. 408 He dies; for which the Romans rejoice, and show
they did detest him 416
Peace concluded between the Pope and Emperor. 46. is renewed. 64 a peace
between the Emp. and French K. 109 Peace made between the French King and the
Hugonots displeases the Pope. 693, 695. The conditions of it. 696. Peace is
concluded between the Emperor and the Protestants. 378 a peace of religion is
established in the Diet of Ausburg. 394 the peace of Cambray between the Kings
of France and Spain. 412
Penance and the Decree thereof. 346, 347, etc. The censure of the Decree. 357,
358 Petrus Aloisius, the Popes son, Duke of Placentia, was murdered in his
own Palace. 273 Philip, King of Spain, is in great peril at Sea in his
journey into Spain. 417 He persecuteth the Protestants at his arrival. ibid.
is angry with the Pope for countenancing the King of Navarre. 443 and with the
French King, for making peace with the Hugonots. 701
Picards in Bohemia. 3 Pius the fourth is created Pope. 418 hastneth the
General Council in Trent for fear of a national in France. 425, 426 but
does secretly cross it. 427, 433 makes leuies of soldiers. 551 Plotteth to
make a mayor part in Council. 580 which the Papalins themselves said he did
too openly. 585 is afraid to be accused of simonie. 628 complains that he is
suspected to hold the council in servitude. 595 gives rewards to those that
favor him in council. 660 resolves to join with the King of Spain, and to
neglect the Emperor and French King. 685 falls very sick; which causes the
Fathers to anticipate the Session, and precipitate the Council. 802, 803, etc.
Reserueth power to the Pope only to interpret, the Decrees of the Council.
817, 818
Placentia is seized by the governor of Milan, the Duke being slain. 273 and
the restitution is demanded by the Pope. 287
Plurality of Benefices how it began, and the progress of it. 250, 251,
etc. A dispute by what law it is forbid. 253
Polonian Ambassador makes five demands in Rome all distasteful to the Pope.
399 Polonian Ambassadors come to Trent, and depart presently. 460, 463 Polonian
Ambassador is received. 617
Polygamie how it was permitted. 671 Popes authority was reserved in Council,
by saying, Saving in all things the Popes authority, but it is not suffered so
to pass. 260 Popes laws are more strictly observed then the laws of God. 488
Laynez says the Pope is about the Council. 613 Pope dying in time of the
Council, whether the successor ought to be created in Rome by the Cardinals,
or in Trent by Nations. 627 The French opinion concerning the Popes authority.
641, 661 How far he may dispense. 675 The Emperor is of opinion that the
Council is above the Pope. 683 But Pius the fourth goes about to prove the
contrary by many quotations, which her sends to the Emperor 684 Which are
examined by the Cardinal of Loraine and the other French Prelates. 687 The
Popes authority is much extolled by Laynez. 721 To the great distaste of the
Frenchmen, 722 The point concerning the Popes authority is deferred for fear
of prolonging the Council. 731, 732 The Decree is read for saving the Popes
authority, which was never mentioned before. 812 The Popes authority whether
it be necessary to confirm the Decrees of the Council 812
Pope only must interpret the Decrees of the Council of Trent. 818 Portugal
Ambassador is received in Congregation. 476 Preaching claymed by the Regulars,
as belonging to them; which is denied by the Prelates. 161, 167 Precedence is
claimed by Don Diego the Spanish Ambassador before the Cardinal of Trent.
114, 117 By the Duke of Florence before the Duke of Ferrara. 443 Princes of the
blood in France have precedence of the Cardinals. 449 The Prelates in Trent
differ about precedence. 467 and so do the Ambassadors of Portugal and
Hungary. 480 Likewise the Bauarian and Venetian Ambassadors differ about
precedence. 501 and so do the French and Spanish Ambassadors in Trent. 663 In
Rome. 713 and again in Trent. 727, 728, 729
Predestination is discussed. 210, 211, etc. Presidents, sent by the Pope, did
never govern Councels before that of Constance. 137 They gave auricular voices
in Trent. 616 Presidents named for the second reduction of the Council in
Trent. 310 For the third reduction. 444, 445 The Presidents only do give
audience to the Ambassadors. 553. Two new Presidents. 681 Presidents of
Councels, what authority they have. 707
Priesthood, and the decree concerning it. 738 The Anathematisme belonging to
it. 739
Prince of Conde is imprisoned. 436 Prince of Orange marries a daughter of the
Duke of Saxony. 456 Proctors sent by the Viceroy of Naples to give voice in
Council for all the Clergy of that kingdom. 118 The Pope decrees that none
shall give voice by Proctor. 118 The Proctors of the Archbishop of Mentz are
about to leave the Council. 122
Prohibition of Books is discoursed on by the author. 472 Protestants make a
conditional submission to the Council. 274 A consultation how they are to be
received in Council. 367 Protestant Divines of Wittenberge and Strasburg come
to Trent. 374 Fifty thousand Protestants were executed in the Low Countries
within a short space. 413 The Protestants assemble in Noremburg, and the Pope
sends Nuncii unto them 439
Protestations of Doctors, that they refer themselves to the Church, are but
words of complement and of good manners. 249 Protestation of the Emperor
against the Council of Bolonia. 279, 280 Another Protestation in Rome before
the Pope. 281 Which the Pope says the ambassador did make without commission
from his master. 282 The ambassador protests again. 284 The French K.
protests against the Council in Trent 319 The intended protestation of the
French ambassador about precedence 730, 731
Proverb in Trent very blasphemous about the bringing of the holy Ghost from
Rome. 497 Another proverb in Council, We are fallen from the Spanish Scab to
the French pox. 640 A kind of proverb made in France concerning the
authority of the Council. 822
Purgatory is spoken of. 799
Q.
QVeene Mary, gouernesse of the low Countries, favors the Protestants. 89
Queen mother of France refuses a Spanish army to assist her against the
Hugonots. 648 Writes to the Pope and Cardinal of Loraine 712 Is complained of
by the Pathers for being ruled by the Chastillons and other Hugonots in France.
776
Queen of Scotland writes to the Council of Trent. 703 Queen of England
should have been proceeded against in Council, but the Emperor would not
fuffer it. 727 Queen of Navarre is cited to Rome for Lutheranisme. 780 And is
defended by the French King. 794, 795

R.
REformation made by Cardinal Campeggio in the Diet of Noremberg. 32, 33, etc.
A reformation made in Rome under Paul the third, was suppressed. 79 A
reformation of the Court of Rome is set on foot and much discussed. 83, 84 The
Emperor would have Reformation handled before Doctrine. 202 It is wholly
recalled by the Pope to be handled in Rome; but the Prelates will not yield
254, 255 A reformation of the Clergy published by the Emperor. 292 A
reformation made in Council is complained of by the Priests. 343 Another is
made in Rome of small matters only. 505 Twenty points of reformation are
proposed by the Emperors Ambassadors. 513 Nine points of reformation. 532,
538 The chief points of reformation are omitted. 568 Reformation is mainely
promoted in Council by the Imperialists and Spaniards. 588 The free speeches
in Council concerning reformation, do trouble the Legates. 595, 600 The
reformation of Princes how it began. 617 Articles of reformation proposed in
Council by the Frenchmen. 650, 652 The Pope thinks that a reformation will
not reduce the heretics. 700 A reformation of Cardinals is mainely promoted,
but vanishes quickly. 726 A reformation proposed by the Imperialists. 751,
752 The reformation of Princes is deferred 760 An hundred Prelates do combine
to promote it. 766 It is declared at large. 769, 770 The Emperor distasteth
it, and the French ambassador de Ferrieres, makes an oration against it. 771,
772 The Decree of the general reformation. 808, 809, etc. The reformation of
Princes. 811, 812, etc.
Regulars are complained of by the Prelates, and defend themselves. 169 They
begin to mutine about their exemptions. 761 Their reformation. 806
Religion is changed in England. 295, 384, 421 Religion is changed in Denmark.
84 Religion is changed in the Palatinate. 148, 398 Religion is changed in
Scotland 426, 451 Reputation is the chiefest ground of the Papal greatness.
29 Residence is treated of. 191, 216, 217, etc. Whether it be de iure diuino.
218, 219 The Cardinal of Monte will not suffer that question to be decided.
232 The question is set on foot again. 486, 487, etc. It causes great fear
in Rome. 502 Is disputed on again. 505, 510 The disputation of it is diuerted
by the Legates. 550 Residence is decreed. 723, 736 The reformation of it is
decreed. 739
Richard of Vercelli dies with grief because he was in disgrace with the
Legates for speaking freely in Council. 566, 569 Rites of the Roman Church are
diverse. 548 Rome is taken by the Colonnesi. 41 And by the Dutchmen, and Duke
of Borbon. 43 Rota in Rome (which is the greatest Court of justice there)
rejects a cause of the Bishop of Segouia assisting in Council, for suspicion
of heresy, because he did not second the Popes designs. 678
S.
SAcraments in general are handled. 234, 235, etc. How they do contain and
cause grace. 237 A decree of reformation is made concerning them. 245 and
Anathematismes. 248
Safe Conduct is required by the Protestants to go to the Council. 316 The
Contents of it. 341 It is disliked by the Protestants, 343, 344 The Council
refuses to alter it. 369
Santa-Croce the Legate is threatened by the Emperor to be cast into the river
Adice. 202 Schism in the Council, some remaining in Trent, and others being
gone to Bolonia. 269, 274 Scotland shakes off obedience to the Pope. 426, 451
Session the first, held in Trent, Deocin. 13. an. 1545. 130 The second Ian. 7.
1546. 139 The third, Feb. 4. 1546. 147 The fourth, Apr. 8. 1546. 162 The fifth,
June 17. 1546. 184 The sixth, Ian. 13. 1547. 223 The seventh, March 3. 1547. 263
The eight, March 11. 1547. 267 The ninth, and first in Bolonia April 21. 1547
270 The tenth, and second in Bolonia June 11. 1547. 276 The eleventh Session,
and first in the second reduction in Trent May 1. 1551, 313 The twelfth and
second in the second reduction in Trent Sept. 1. 1551. 317 The thirteenth
Session Oct. 11. 1551. 339 The fourteenth Nouemb. 25. 1551. 356 The fifteenth
Ian. 25. 1552. 369 The sixteenth, which is the sixth and last under Pope Julius
the third April 28. 1552. 376 The seventeenth, and first under Pope Pius the
fourth Feb. 26. 1562. 469 The eighteenth, and second under Pius the fourth Feb.
26. 1562. 480 The nineteenth, May. 14. 1562 506 The twentieth June 4. 1562. 511
The one and twentieth Iul. 16. 1562. 539 The two and twentieth Sept. 17. 1562.
572 The three and twentieth Iul. 15. 1563. 737 The four and twentieth Nouem.
11. 1563. 783 The five and twentieth and last of the Council of Trent.
December 3. and 4. 1563. 805 Session in the Council of Trent had no real
difference from a general congregation. 662
Siluester Prierias writes against Luther. 6 Simoneta makes a faction about
the Institution of Bishops. 607 Simonie is discussed, with all doubts belonging
to it. 398, 399, 492, etc. Simonie is laid to the charge of Pope Pius the
fourth. 628 Smalcalda, in which there was a great assembly of the Protestants.
77 Soto is suspected to be a Lutheran. 178 writes three books De natura and
gratia, as a Commentary upon that Decree of the Council; and is opposed by
Andreas Vega. 216, 229 Being ready to die he writes a letter to the Pope
concerning Conciliarie matters. 693
Subscription of the Decrees of the Council. 813 Suisses are divided in
religion. 45 Make a league after the death of Zuinglius 60 are invited to the
Council by the Pope. 164 are much favored by Pope Julius the third. 313
Supplication sent out of France into Spain. 447
Suspension of the Council is made for two years. 376, 377 But continues ten
years. 381

T
THechel, a Dominican, writes again Luther. 5 Title of the Council is much
questioned 134, 141, 142, 481. Titular Bishops spoken against and defended. 717
The Bishop of Conimbria speaks against them. 735
Traditions are di^oursed on. 151, 152, etc. Are made to ^e of equal authority
with the Scriptur. 154
Translation of the Council to Bolonia is resolved on in Rome. 259 and
executed in Trent. 266, 267, etc. The discussion of the cause thereof is
referred to certain delegates in Rome. 283
Treasure of the Church what it is. 6 Trent is named for the place to hold the
Council in: but the Protestants will not consent. 101 The Legates are recalled
from Trent, because they were left alone. 104 and are sent thither again. 111
The Council of Trent is protested against by the Protestants. 126 It begins
the 13. of December, Anno Dom. 1545, 129, 130

V.
VErgerius is sent Nuncio to King Ferdinand. 52 Is made Nuncio in the place of
Hugo Rangone, Bishop of Rheggio. 66 Is recalled out of Germany. 72 and sent
back. 73 His negotiation. 74 Returns to the Pope, and is rewarded. 78 Goes
to the Colloquie in Worms under a false name. 93 Flies to the Council for
succor, and after quitteth both it and Italy. 154 Discovers the plots of the
Romanists to the Suisses and Grisons. 345 Writes against the Bull of the
intimation of the Council. 436 Being in Valtellina, makes objections against
the Council. 743
Vincentia is chosen to hold the Council in. 84 Three Legates are sent thither.
85 The Council is deferred. 86 and afterward suspended during pleasure. 90
The Venetians will not suffer the Council to be held in Vincentia. 100
Virgin Marie is exempted from sin by the Franciscans. 175, 180 How she came
to be worshipped. 181, 182
Unction, and the doctrine of it. 350, 351 Unction of Benefices was invented to
Palliate Plurality. 251 Universities of Louaine and Collen condemn Luthers
Books. 9 and so does the University of Paris. 16
Voices in Council to whom they belong by right. 62 How they have been given
in Council in all ages. 135 Whether they may be given by Proctors. 707
Vulgar tongue in the Church what inconvenience it brings. 460 How it has
been used in former times. 577, 578

W.
WAldenses, or Albigenses in the Alps. 3 are miserably slain by the
Frenchmen. 119 Obtain a great victory against the Duke of Sauoy. 446
War between the Emperor, and the French King. 102 The Pope does more intend
the war against the Protestants, then the Council. 144 Rumors of the
Protestants arms causes the Counsel to be suspended. 377 War in France
between the Protestants and Papists. 647
Wolsey is delegated by the Pope to hear the cause of the divorce of Henry the
eight. 68 Works of good men how they are to be valued. 196 Works before
grace. 198 Works after grace. 199

Z.
ZVinglius in Zuric opposes the Pope, beginning from the abuse of Indulgences
preached by Friar Samson amongst the Suisses. 9 The Bishop of Constance
writes, and the Dominicans preach against him; by which means he is the more
stirred up. 16 His difference with Luther. 48 Is slain in battle. 59
Zuric makes a Decree in favor of the reformed religion. 17
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

ANNO DOM. M. DC. XXIX.


