VINCENTIO SAVIOLO his Practice.

Jn two Books.

The first entreating of the use of the Rapier and Dagger.

The second, of Honor and honorable Quarrels.

LONDON Printed by JOHN WOLF. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY singular good Lord, Robert Earl of Essex and Ewe,
Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghchier and Louain, Master of
the Queens Majesty's horse, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and
one of her Highness most honorable Privy Council.
Having of late, (right Honorable) compiled this simple Discourse, of managing
wepons, and dealing in honorable Quarrels (which I esteem an Introduction to
Martial affairs) I have thought good to dedicate the same unto your Honor, as
unto him whose bounty most binds me: whose valor inforceth all soldiers to
acknowledge you the English Achilles: whose favoring good literature
celebrateth your name for the students Mecenas: whose benign potection and
provision for strangers, makes you reported off as their safe sanctuary. This
work, I must needs confess, is far unworthy your Lordships view, in regard
either of method or substance: and being much vnperfecter than it should have
been, if I had had copy of English to have expressed my meaning as I would.
But I humbly beseech your good Lordship to accept this Book, howsoever it be,
as a new years gift proceeding from a mind most dutifully affected toward
you, that wishes and prays, that your Honor may enjoy many good and
prosperous years: and is presented by him that is and will be ready every
year, day, and hour to live and die at your Lordships foot to do you service.

Your Honors in all dutifulnes, Vincentio Sauiolo.

TO THE READER.
THE means whereby men from time to time have been preferred even to the
highest degrees of greatness and dignity, have ever been and are of two sorts,
Arms and Letters: weapons and books, as may most plainly be proved out of
antique and modern histories. Let it not seem strange unto any man that I
have placed Arms before Letters, for in truth I have found by observing the
course of times, and by comparing the occurrents of former ages with those
which have fallen out and followed (as it were by succession) in later years,
that the first Princes and patrones of people did obtain their titles and
dominions by force of Arms, and that afterward learning and virtue did (as it
were by degrees) grow and succeed for the making and establishing of good
orders, customs, and laws amongst them. And then did commonwealths begin
first to flourish, when their Princes were like Minerua, whom the Poets fained
to be the goddess not only of studies but also of Arms, inspiring wit into
scholars, and favoring those that follow wars. Wherefore knowing that such
men as endeavor themselves to attain unto the excellency of any art or
science, are worthy both of praise and preferment, because they seek for that
only true nobility, which is in deed much more to be accounted of than birth
and parentage. I have been induced (for the satisfaction of such, and other
like noble spirits, desirous to imploie either their studies in the
profession, or their lives in the practice of the art military) to bestow my
pains in the writing of this Treatise concerning the Art, exercise, and
manneging of the Rapier and Dagger, together with the ordering and moving of
the body in those actions: A thing I confess in show the least piece and
practice (as a man might say) of the art Military, but in very deed to most
important, excellent, and noble practice thereof. For when I consider with
myself how some Authors do write, that hunting, hauking, wrestling, etc. are
things in some sort belonging unto Military profession, for that men thereby
do both make their bodies strong and active, and also learn to mark the
situation of hills, woods, lakes, and valleys, together with the crooked and
turning courses of rivers. It seems unto me that I may with far greater
reason say that the Art and exercise of the Rapier and Dagger is much more
rare and excellent than any other Military exercise of the body, because
there is very great and necessary use thereof, not only in general wars,
but also in particular combats, and many other accidents, where a man having
the perfect knowledge and practice of this art, although but small of stature
and weak of strength, may with a little removing of his foot, a sudden turning
of his hand, a slight declining of his body, subdue and overcome the fierce
brauing pride of tall and strong bodies.

Moreuer, it does many times come to pass that discords and quarrels arise
amongst soldiers and Gentlemen of honor and account, the which (when they
cannot be accorded and compounded by law, learning, and persuasion) must be
determined, and the truth thereof tried by arms and combat. And therefore he
that is wise, careful of his safety, and provident against danger, will be at
all times stored and furnished with this honorable urgent necessity, and
instant shortness of time, he shall be constrained to expose himself unto
evident danger.

Wherefore upon these occasions, and also for that I have bin thereunto
requested by sundry Gentlemen my good friends, I have endeavored to express
in this discourse, and to make plain by pictures all the skill and knowledge
which I have in this art: Exhorting all men of good minds and noble spirits
to learn and purchase the same, not to the end to abuse it in insolences and
injuries, but to use it in cases of necessity for the defense of just causes,
and to the maintenance of the honor of themselves and others. For whosoeur
will follow this profession must fly from rashness, pride, and injury, and
not fall into that foul falt and error which many men incur, who feeling
themselves to be strong of body and expert in this science, presuming
thereupon, think that the may lawfully offer outrage and injury unto any man,
and with cross and gross terms and behavior provoke every man to fight,
as though they were the only heirs of Mars, more invincible than Achilles: not
remembering how it has oftentimes happened, that a little wretched man of
stature by skill and reason has overcome a vast mighty man of person, and
overthrown the unwieldy mass and burden of his body upon the face of his
kind and liberal mother the earth. This manner of proceeding and behavior
does plainly show that these men (although peradventure they have learned the
use of the weapon) have not yet been fufficiently instructed in the Art of
Arms. For by the rule and precept of this Art, men are taught by how much they
are resolute in courage, and skilful of the use of the same weapon, by so much
the more to show themselves virtuous, humble, and modest both in speech and
action, and not to be liers, vanters, or quarrellers, for those which in this
sort demean themselves, (notwithstanding their skill or courage) do commonly
carry away wounds and dishonor, and sometimes death.

I have seen and noted in diverse parts of mine own country and in other
places of the world, great quarrels springing from small causes, and many men
slain upon light occasions. Amongst other things, I remember that in Liesena
a city of Sclauonia, it was once my chance to see a sudden quarrel and
slaughter upon very small cause between two Iialian captains of great
familiarity and acquaintance. There was in the company a foolish boy
belonging unto one of be Captains, who going carelessly forward, and approaching
near unto the other captain, began to touch the hilts of his sword, whereupon
the captain lent the boy a little blow to teach him better manners: The other
Captain (the boys master) taking this reprehension of his boy in worse part
than there was cause, after some words multiplied began to draw his sword,
the other Captain in like sort betaking himself to his rapier did with a
thrust run him quite through the body, who falling down dead upon the place
received the just reward of his frivolous quarrel. And to confess the plain
truth in this point, it is not well done either of men or boys to touch the
weapons of another man that wears them. Nevertheless a man ought in all his
actions to seek and endeavor to lieu in peace and good agreement (as much as
may be) with every one: and especially he that is a Gentleman and conuerseth
with men of honorable quality, must above all others have a great regard to
frame his speech and answers with such respective reverence, that there never
grow against him any quarrel upon a foolish word or a froward answer, as
it often has and daily does come to pass, whereupon follow deadly hatreds,
cruel murders, and extreme ruins. Wherefore I say and set down as a most
undoubted truth, that it is good for every man to be taught and instructed in
the Rapier and Dagger, not the rather thereby to grow insolent, or to commit
murder, but to be able and ready in a case of just necessity to defend
himself, either at the sudden, or upon defiance and in field assigned: for at
that time it is too late to look back and to intend this study, as many do,
who having appointed the time and place for fight, do practice some point or
other of this art, the which being so lightly learned and in such have, does
afterward in time of need prove but little helpful or auailable unto them.
But this knowledge does more particularly appertain unto Gentlemen and
soldiers that profess and follow wars, for they more than other men, will
(for the credit of their calling, and the honor of Arms) dispute and
determine with the point of the sword all points that pass in controversy,
especially amongst themselves, who had rather die than not to have reason and
satisfaction for every word of prejudice and disgrace offered unto them. Now
in this case I am to exhort and advise men of all sorts and condition, as well
the skillful as the unskillful, not to be in any wise too suspicious, nor to
catch (as they say) at every fly that passes by, for in so doing, they
purchase to themselves endless trouble, and enter into actions full of danger
and dishonor, but rather to shun as much as they can all occasions of
quarrel, and not to fight except (as has been said) upon a just cause and
in a point of honor. And to the end that every man may know what to do, and
be able to practice as much as he knows (at the request of certain
Centlemen my good friends, and to make the world witness of my grateful mind
toward them for the many courtesies which I have received at their hands since
my first coming into this Country) out of those precepts which I have
learned from the most rare and renowned professors that have b n of this Art in
my time, and out of that experience which I have observed in diverse fraies and
fights, I have composed and framed this little work, containing the noble Art
of the Rapier and Dagger, the which I have set down in manner of a Dialogue,
etc.

VINCENTIO SAVIOLO HIS PRACTICE.
I Have long and greatly desired (my dear friend V.) to learn this noble
science, and especially of you, who did put the first weapons into my hands:
wherefore (seeing so good opportunity is so fitly presented) I could wish
that we might spend this time in some discourse concerning the Art of the
Rapier and Dagger, to the end that I might thereby, both the better retain the
title which I have already learned, and also add some new lesson thereunto.

V. Ce^tes (my loving friend L) as well for that I have found you to be a man of
a noble spirit, as in regard of the great love which I bear unto you, as also
to the end that hereafter when time shall serve, you may be better known unto
sundry Gentlemen my good friends, I am content to yield unto your request, and
therefore demand boldly any thing wherein you desire to be resolved.


L. Sir, the love which you bear me I know to be exceeding great, and
therefore have no doubt that you will fail me in any part of your promise,
for the which favor I acknowledge my self infinitely beholding unto you. I
shall desire you therefore, according to your judgment and skill, to resolve
and instruct me in such doubts as do occur unto me, for I know, and many
noble men and Gentlemen do likewise know, that you are exquisitly able not only
to resolve us of any doubt readily, but also to instruct us in this science
perfectly.


V. Sir, I desire nothing more than to please and satisfy you and such other
Gentlemen my good friends, and therefore you may expound questions at your
pleasure.


L. From my first years I have liked this noble Art, but now do much more love
it, having seen such diversity of this exercise, together with the danger
thereunto belonging, and (since I came to be your scholar) plainly perceived
how that a man in one moment may be slain. And therefore I give God thanks
that in some measure he has given me the knowledge of this science, and I
hope through your good help to be more fully informed therein. Wherefore I
desire you to tell me, if there may be given any certain instruction and
firm rule whereby to direct a man to the true knowledge of hereof.


V. Since my childhoode I have seen very many masters the which have taken
great pains in teaching, and I have marked their diverse manners of play and
indangering: wherefore (both for the particular contentment and pleasure of the
Gentlemen my friends, and for the general help and benefit of many) I have
changed five or six sundry manner of plays, taught me by diverse masters, and
reduced them unto one by my no little labor and pain, and in this will I
resolve you, and give you therein so direct a rule and instruction, as that
thereby (being my scholar) you may attain unto the perfect knowledge of this
science.


L. But tell me sir of courtesy, those which have not been your scholars, are
they therefore debarred from the understanding of your said rule?


V. In truth sir, well they may learn and conceive much, but of those secrets
which I will reveal unto you they are not so capable as those whom I have
taught?


L. Show me (I pray you) what may be the cause, why this art (being so
necessary and noble) is of so many so little esteemed?


V. You have moved a question whereof I am grieved to speak, when I consider
with my self the slight account wherein this so worthy science is held, I
deem the cause hereof to be either because many which do (peradventure)
understand the same will not profess to teach it, or that many (having in deed
no understanding thereof) do judge the same to consist in their great strength
and brauing courage, but they deceive themselves. Moreover, I am of this
opinion, that many (not knowing this art to be the beginning and foundation of
the art Military) do therefore neglect and contemn it, because they esteem
the same to be a thing unto them altogether impertinent.


L. By what reason can you show this science to be the ground and foundation of
the art Military?


V. You shall hear. This word Schermize et Scharamuzare, to skirmish or fence,
may be taken either generally or particularly. Generally, for every kind of
fight. Particularly for single combat: and so it is taken as often as it is
indefinitly set down, and not expressly. And being taken in this sense, that it
does necessarily belong unto the art Military may many ways be proved, for
in the art Military it is requisite that a man know how he may best overcome
his enemy, and which way to entertain him, and as it were to dally with him
until such time as he can epsy some advantage. Again, we do many time see
that a great man or a Captain does wrong an inferior person or a soldier,
who for that they are men of meaner fortune, do seldom by law recover right
or credit, wherefore the Prince or General (after that the party wronged has
done his duty, in complaining unto him of the injury received) ought to
require and command him by whom the wrong was done, either to make
satisfaction unto the party wronged, if the fact were against reason, or by
way of disgrace, or else to fight the combat with him. Then (being to accept
one of these conditions) if he try the combat, he can never acquit himself
without danger and dishonor, if he have not first learned this noble science.

Moreover, if a man follow the wars and converse with Captains, and incur
a quarrel, and have no knowledge of this art, what shifte shall he make? Or
how shall he behave himself being challenged the combat for his Country or
his Prince, which has often happened, not only in the time of the Romans,
but in our days, as we may read in the life of Charles the fifte, and of
other Emperors: Paulus Iouius and Guicciardino do make mention of many combats
fought in the kingdom for Naples between Frenchmen and Italians for their
Country, whereunto were required and chosen most famous and skillful men both
of the French and Italian Nation. Wherefore a Captain or a General is not
perfectly accomplished in all points appertaining to his place and profession,
if he be disfurnished of this science: for admit (as it may fall out upon many
occasions concerning his Country and his own honor) he be challenged the
combat, and chance to be overcome therein, although he have bin renowned for
infinite victories, he has now lost in one moment all his foregotten glory,
for both the honor of the fight, and the triumph of the victory does wholly
redound unto him who has overcome in combat. Neither were his many victories
gotten in the field unto him more glorious, than this one foil in single fight
is dishonorable, for those victories had many helps, as horse, armor,
opportunity of time, advantage of place, etc. Those glories many parteners,
as soldiers and under officers, but this dishonor does wholly fall upon
himself, as purchased by some imperfection in himself, as namely for want of
this science, without the which no man professing the Art Military, can be
called perfect in his profession, but rather maimed in the principal part
thereof, and most concerning the safety and defense of a man's own life, for
this is a branch of that wisdom which holds the first place and chiefest
pre-eminence in matters of war, for he that is deuoid of art and skill, does
rashly encounter with his enemy, and so is slain with scorn and dishonor.


L. This which you say seems to stand with great reason, yet nevertheless
we see by experience, that men unskillful and altogether ignorant in this
art, have vanquished and overthrown those which practice the same for their
daily exercise whereas (if your assertion were true) the skillful should
evermore conquer the unskillful*


V. Sir, you are to understand, that many are called professors of their
Rapier and Dagger, and yet be overcome by men that never practiced the same,
but how ever, not as professors of this science, but as base and unskillful
persons. For in him that will be rightly called a professor of this art, and
in him that shall go into the field to fight a combat, are required reason,
animositie, strength, dexterity, judgment, wit, courage, skill, and practice:
wherefore it may be that those which are overcome be men of base minds, or
void of reason, and falsely called professors of that art whereof they have
no understanding, and which they do but discredit. Others are so headstrong
and rash, that they do like rams which kill themselves by running full but
at their enemies. But to have recourse unto the first and highest cause, these
actions are evermore directed by the secret will of God, and are the executions
of his hidden judgments.


L. Certainly sir, when I consider your reasons, I am confounded in mine own
judgment, for your speech does necessarily infer, that if a man be able,
strong, active, wise, skillful, valiant, and not quarellous, he shall be
conqueror, if otherwise, conquered.


V. Let us omit therefore as a special and extraordinary cause, that
sometimes God suffers and permittteth the contrary: and take this for an
infallible rule and ground, that every one renounceth and forsakes that
help which God has appointed, as often as he despises and contemns this
Art, and that God has given us wit and understanding to discern and know
the good and the badde: which being so, it must needs follow, that if a man
will not defend himself nor do his best to obtain victory, he must be
overcome although his quarrel and cause were most just and reasonable, because
he will not use the means which God has appointed, and therefore must blame
himself only for his ill hap and success. Wherefore it cannot be denied but
that this knowledge and skill which grows and rises from this art of Defense
is necessary. And therefore I say that when upon just ground and occasion a man
shall take a quarrel in hand, and shall have courage, reason, boldness, and
force to maintain it, having also the means and help of this art, it will
seldom or never chance but that he shall overcome his adversary, and upon
this reason and ground proceeds my argument. But when he forsakes the favor
and benefit granted by God, in that he will not learn how to defend himself:
if the quite contrary happen to him he must impute the fault and blame to
himself. And therefore I must tell you this also, that he has most need of
this art which lacks courage and strength, because that by this art and
practice he grows in ure with his weapon, and to have skill and judgment to
defend himself. And this also I say, that strength and valiant courage is not
it which gives victory, but a skill and knowledge in the use of his weapon,
and a certain nimblenes and actiuitie as well of the body as of the hand and
the foot.


L. In sooth by that which you say, it seems to me that nature is she which
works and perfourmeth all, and not art, because that from nature comes
courage, force, and a right frame and aptnes of the body, therefore he which
shall be furnished with these parts and shall undertake a right and just cause,
is like to bear away the victory without having any or very little skill in the
art of Defense.


V. Certes we may grant, that nature may do very much to frame a man apt and
fit for this exercise, both in respect of convenient courage and strength, but
all these abilities and gifts which nature can bestow on a man, are nothing
except he have knowledge or art, for we see that the very things themselves
which are brought forth by nature good and perfect, if they be not helped by
art, by very course of nature become naught and unprofitable. As the Vine if
it be not helped by art comes to no proof nor profit, so likewise other trees
how apt so ever they be to bring forth excellent fruits, if they are not
husbanded grow wild, and degenerate from their natural perfection. Suppose
that nature bring forth a most goodly and beautiful tree, if it begin once to
grow crooked and be not helped it loses all his beautye, and therefore as
you see, art is an aid and help to nature: so that one having those good
parts and abilities by nature before mentioned, yet not knowing them, he
cannot use them to his benefit but by the means of skill and judgment, which
a man by his industry and practice attaineth unto. And although he may strike
right and cross blows and give the foyne and thrust, yet these being not
guided by reason and skill, may as well harm him as profit or procure him any
advantage: but art which imitateth and perfiteth nature, if a man apply his
mind thereunto, by many experimentes and much practice, will make him skillful
and capable of great perfection. And to prove that this is true, we see little
infants which although as soon as they are borne they have a tung, yet they
cannot speak, and after when they have learned to speak, yet they want
eloquence: nature may bestow a gift of memory, which when it is accompanied
with art and knowledge, they are able in good sort to express their mind and
conceit. How can you be skillful in riding if you have not learned the art,
nature may help, but not bring to perfection: how is it possible that you
should prove a skillful Carpenter or Saylor, if you have not by practice
acquainted your self with those things which appertain thereunto? how can a
man be a professor in any art or science, unless he have learned it first
himself? and therefore they which make so small reckoning of art, in my fancy
and conceit in this respect are worse than beasts, especially those which are
practiced in fight, in which a man may perceive a kind of reason and art, and
for proof of this, take a young Dog which has not been accustomed to fight,
and set him on a Bull, and you shall see him assail him with more courage and
fiercenes then another which has been beaten and practisde in the matter, but
you shall see him by and by hurt and wounded: whereas in the other you shall
see the quite contrary, for before he set upon his adversary you shall see him
spy all advantages that may be, and having found his advantage he will after
make an assault; wherefore these braggers which without judgment and reason
will take upon them to kill the whole world, at the least wise should order
and govern themselves more discreetely then beasts: and if they being without
reason can help themselves with art which is taught them? how much rather
should a man which is endued with reason make his profit thereof, seek to
learn it and not to scorn and despise it, especially in such a case where so
deeply it concerns a man's life, that in the stirring of a foot he may be
soddenlye overtaken and slain: but the more skill a man has of his weapon the
more gentle and courteous should he show himself, for in truth this is rightly
the honor of a brave Gentleman, and so much the more is he to be esteemed:
neither must he be a bragger, or liar, and without truth in his word, because
there is nothing more to be required in a man then to know himself, for me
therefore I think it necessary that every one should learn this art, for as
a man has voice and can sing by nature, but shall never do it with time and
measure of music unless he have learned the art: and as a horse may he
strong and fyt for fight by nature, but can not serve a man to any use in the
feelde unless he have been first broken and taught, and framed to be obedient
to his masters pleasure and mind: So much more should a man learn how to
manage and use his body, his hand and his foot, and to know how to defend
himself from his enemy. And hereupon we see, that how stout or courageous
soever a man be, yet when he is challenged into the feelde he seeks then to
learn the skill and practice of his weapon of some brave and skillful man
against the day of the fight and combat, and for no other cause but that he
knows that it is necessary for him, and that it concerns his honor and
life: and they which affirm the contrary, if ever they have occasion to fight,
shall perceive to their disadvantage and discredit, how much they have erred
and been out of the way: and this which we have discoursed hitherto as I think
may suffice to prove the necessity of this art.


L. You have with so many reasons and proofs showed the necessity of this
worthy art, that in truth I greatly esteem and honor it, and could wish that
every man of honor would seek to know it and practice it, that it might be
more esteemed: but now that I know the excellency of this art, I would gladly
know wherein consists the order and manner to understand it.


V. Certes my friend L. I will not fail in that which I have promised. And
therefore I will begin this small work, to leave some remembrance of me, with
these Gentlemen and my good friends, and with you who are desirous to
understand it, and especially because I have always found you to be a lover of
gentleman-like qualities.


L. I thank you sir for your good will and good opinion conceived of me, and
therefore according to the desire which you have to make me understand this
worthy art, I require you to tell me with what weapon a good teacher minding
to make a good scholar ought to begin.


V. Sol will, yet I must tell you, that I have seen many brave sufficient men
teach with great diversity and diverse sorts and fashions of play: and I my
self have had many teachers, and found them all to differ one from the other.


L. But I pray you of freendship tell me how there can be such disagreement,
since that all that art consists in downright or cross blows, thrustes,
foynes, or overthwart pricks.


V. That which you say, verilye is true, but consider also that we see many
precious stones, and yet the one to be more esteemed then the other, although
they be of the same sort and kind: and we see many excellent men which study
the same art, and yet one is more esteemed then the other, as well ingrauers as
Painters: the same is seen amongst learned men, all are learned, but one
better learned then the other: and the like is to be seen in all sciences and
arts, and so in this noble art God has given more to one, then to another. I
will begin therefore to tell you how that of many that teach, some begin and
enter their scholars with the rapier and Dagger, some with the Rapier and
Cloak, some with the Rapier and Buckler, and some with the Rapier alone: some
after one forte and some after an other.


L. Is it not all one for a scholar to begin with the Rapier alone, or with
the Rapier and Cloak, or any other weapon: may not he become a brave man, as
well with one weapon as with an other?


V. Surely, they may prove well, but not so well as those which begin with the
true ground, the which scholars should learn of good masters, and teachers
should with all diligence teach their scholars.


L. And what I pray you is this ground?


V. The true foundation verily and the true beginning from whence you may
learn all things belonging to this art, is the Rapier alone, and from it will
I begin, and you shall perceive of what great importance this beginning is, and
how without it hardly or never any comes to true skill and perfection: yet
proceed you to ask such questions as you shall think best, and take good
heed to that which I shall say, for I will begin as I told you.


L. In truth M. Vincent, although as yet I have no great skill, yet me thinks
you have reason in your assertion, and that you have got the right and true
knowledge of this science, and therefore I pray you show me the reason why the
Rapier alone is the ground and beginning of this art.


V. The reason as I take it, is because that amongst Knights, Captains and
valiant Soldiers, the Rapier is it which shows who are men of arms and of
honor, and which obtains right for those which are wronged: and for this
reason it is made with two edges and one point, and being the weapon which
ordinarily Noble men, Knights, Gentlemen and Soldiers wear by their side,
as being more proper and fit to be worn then other weapons: therefore this is
it which must first be learned, espcciallye being so usual to be worn and
taught. In my discourse therefore of this fight of the single Rapier I will
speak only of three wards.


L. Tell me I pray you first how it is best to hold a man's Rapier in his
hand, and how to stand upon his guard.


V. For your Rapier, hold it as you shall think most fit and commodious for
you, but if I might advise you you should not hold it after rhis fashion, and
specially with the second finger in the hylte, for holding it in that sort,
you cannot reach so far either to strike director cross blows, or to give a
foyne or thrust, because your arm is not free and at liberty.


L. How then would you have me hold it?


V, I would have you put your thumb on the hylte, and the next finger toward
the edge of the Rapier, for so you shall reach further and strike more readily.


L. You have fully satisfied me concerning this matter, but I pray you proceed
and show me how I must stand upon my guard, or assail mine enemy.


V. So I will, and as before I have told you of diversity of teachers and
variety of wards, so in this point also must I tell you that men's fashions
are diverse, for some set upon their enemies in running, and there are other
which assail them with rage and furye after the fashion of Rams, and both
these sorts of men for the most part are slain and come to misfortune, as
may be seen in many places of such like fights. Which I speak not as though
those two fightes were not good for him which knows how to use them, because
that sometimes they are very necessary, according as a man finds his enemy
prepared with his weapon: but then they must be done with time and measure,
when you have got your enemy at an advantage, with great dexterity and
readiness. But as for me I will show you the wards which I my self use, the
which if you well mark and observe, you cannot but understand the art, and
withal keep your body safe from hurt and danger.


L. At this present I take wonderful delight in your company, and nothing
pleases me so much as this discourse of yours, to hear you give me the
reasons of those things which so much concern the life and honor of a man:
wherefore perform that which you have promised, wherein you shall not only
pleasure me, but many other gentlemen and Noblemen will think themselves to
have received a favor at your hands, therefore begin I pray you.


V. That which I have promised you I will now perform, therefore I say, that
when a teacher will begin to make a Scholar, (as for me I will begin with the
single Rapier, and at this weapon will first enter you, to the end you may
frame your hand, your foot, and your body, all which parts must go together,
and unless you can stir and move all these together, you shall never be able
to perform any great matter, but with great danger) I come therefore to the
point and say, that when the teacher will enter his scholar, he shall cause him
to stand upon this ward, which is very good to be taught for framing the
foot, the hand, and the body: so the teacher shall deliver the Rapier into his
hand, and shall cause him to stand with his right foot foremost, with his knee
somewhat bowing, but that his body rest more upon the left leg, not
steadfast and firm as some stand, which seem to be nailed to the place, but
with a readiness and nimblenes, as though he were to perform some feate of
actiuitie, and in this sort let them stand both to strike and to defend
themselves. Now when the master has placed his scholar in this sort, and
that the scholar has received his Rapier into his hand, let him make his hand
free and at lyberty, not by force of the arm, but by the nimble and ready
moving of the joint of the wriste of the hand, so that his hand be free and at
liberty from his body, and that the ward of his hand be directlye against his
right knee: and let the teacher also put himself in the same ward, and hold
his Rapier against the midst of his scholars Rapier, so that the point be
directlye against the face of his schooler, and likewise his scholars against
his, and let their feet be right one against another, then shall the master
begin to teach him, moving his right foot somewhat on the right side in circle
wise, putting the point of his Rapier under his scholars Rapier, and so giving
him a thrust in the belly.


L. And what then must the scholar do?


V. At the selfsame time the scholar must remove with like measure or
counte-time with his right foot a little aside, and let the left foot follow
the right, turning a little his body on the right side, thrusting with the
point of his Rapier at the belly of his teacher, turning redily his hand that
the fingers be inward toward the body, and the joint of the wrist be outward.
In this sort the said scholar shall learn to strike and not be stricken, as
I always advise the noblemen and gentlemen with whom I have to deal, that
if they cannot hit or hurt their enemy, that they learn to defend them selves
that they be not hurt. Then to make the scholar more ready, the teacher shall
cause his scholar first to part, wherefore he shall remove with his right
foot on the right side a little in circle wise as the master did before to
the scholar.


L. What then must the master or teacher do?


V. At the same time that the scholar remoueth his foot, the teacher shall
play a little with stirring of his body, and with his left hand shall beat
away his scholars rapier from his right side, and shall remove his right foot
behind his left striking a cross blow at the head.


L. And the scholar what shall he do?


V. When I remove with my foot and lift up my hand, let the scholar pass
with his left foot where his right was, and withal let him turn his hand,
and not loose the opportunity of this blow, which must be a foyne in manner of
a thrust under his Rapier, and let him lift up his hand with his ward that he
be guarded and lie not open, meeting with his left hand the rapier of his
teacher, and let him hot beat aside the blow with his Rapier for he
endangereth the point and bringes his life in hazard, because he loses the
point: But I will go forward. At the selfsame time that the scholar goes
back, the master shall play a little, and shifting his body shall break the
same imbroccata or foyne outward from the left side, removing with his left
foot, which must be carried behind the right, and withal shall give a
mandritta at the head of his scholar, at which time the scholar must remove
with his right foot, following with his left, and let him turn his Rapier
hand as I have said, and that the scholar observe the same time in going
back as the teacher shall, to the end that his point may be toward the bellye
of his master, and let him lift up his other hand with his ward on high, that
he be not stricken on the face with the mandritta, or in the belly with the
thrust or stoccata. Wherefore at the selfsame time that the scholar shall
deliver the fore said stoccata to the teacher, the teacher shall yield and
shrink with this body, and beat the stoccata outward on the left side, and
shall bring his right foot a little aside in circlewise upon the right side,
and shall give an imbroccata to the face of his scholar, at which time the
said scholar shall go back with his right foot a little aside with the same
measure, and shall beat aside the imbroccata of his master with his left hand
outward from the left side, and withal shall deliver the like imbroccata of
counter-time to the teacher, but only to the face, and then the master shall
go back with his right foot toward the left side of his scholar, in
breaking with his left hand the said imbroccata outward from the left side,
and shall strike a downright blow to his head, because that by beating aside
his foyne with his hand, he shall find him naked and without guard.


L. And what then, cannot the Scholar defend him self?


V. Yes very easilye with a ready dexterity or nimblenes, for at the same
time that the master shall give the said mandritta, the scholar shall do
nothing else but turn the point of his foot toward the body of his master,
and let the midst of his left foot directly respect the heel of the right,
and let him turn his body upon the right side, but let it rest and stay upon
the left, and in the same time let him turn the Rapier hand outward in the
stoccata or thrust, as I have given you to understand before, that the point be
toward the bellye of his master, and let him lift up his hand and take good
heed that he come not forward in delivering the said stoccata, which is
half an incartata, for how little soever he should come forward, he would put
himself in danger of his life: and believe me, every man which shall not
understand these measures and principles, incurres the danger of his life: and
who so despises these grounds which are necessary as well for the school as
the combat, it may be to his confusion and dishonor, and loss of his life:
wherefore every one which makes profession of this art, should seek to learn
them and understand them.


L. For this master I am fullye satisfied, wherefore I pray you proceed to
teach me that which remains to be taught for this ward.


V. When the master will make his scholar ready, he shall practice him to
be the first in going back, by removing his right foot a little aside in
circle wise, as before his master did to him, and let him with great readiness
thrust his Rapier under his teachers, and give him a thrust or stoccata in the
belly.


L. What then shall the teacher do?


V. He shall shift his body a little, and shall beat the stoccata or thrust
outward from the right side, and shall remove with his right foot, which must
be conveyed behind the left, and shall strike a rinuersa at his scholars
head, as before: and further, to the end his scholar may have judgment to
know what fight means, with measure and time, he shall teach him to give a
mandritta, and to know when the time serves for it.


L. What I pray you, cannot every one of himself without teaching give a
mandritta?


V. Yes, every man can strike, but every man haths not the skill to strike,
especially with measure, and to make it cut: and hereupon you shall see
many which oftentimes will strike and hitte with the flat of their Rapier,
without hurting or wounding the aduersarye: and likewise many, when they would
strike a downright blow, will go forward more then measure, and so cause
themselves to be slain. Wherefore I say, when the master and scholar shall
stand upon this ward, and that the point of the scholars weapon shall be
against the face of the teacher, and the point of the teachers weapon nigh to
the ward of the scholars Rapier, and that it be stretched out, the^ the
scholar shall remove with his right foot a little aside in circle wise, and
with the inside of his left hand barrachet wise shall beat away his masters
Rapier, first lifting his above it, and let the left foot follow the right:
and let him turn skilfully his body, or else he shall be in danger to receive
a stoccata either in the face or bellye. Therefore he must take heed to save
himself with good time and measure, and let him take heed that he step not
forward toward his teacher, for so he should be in danger to be wounded: but
let him go a little aside, I have already said.


L. Me thinks the master is in danger, if the scholar at this time keep
measure.


V. If the master stood still, he should be in danger, but when the
scholar shall give the mandritta, the master must shifte a little with his
body, and shall remove with his right foot, which must be carried behind
his left, and shall strike a riuerso to the head, as I said before, when I
began to speak of stoccata.

Furthermore, the Scholar may likewise give a mandritta at the legs, but it
stands upon him to play with great nimblenes and agilitye of body, for to
tell the truth, I would not advise any friend of mine, if he were to fight
for his credit and life, to strik neither mandrittaes nor riuersaes, because
he puts himself in dagner of his life: for to use the point is more ready,
and spendes not the like time: and that is my reason, why I would not advise
any of my friends to use them.


L. But I pray you of freendship tell me, if a man were to go into the feelde
with some friend of his whom he would be loath to kill, should not these
mandrittaes be good to wound him, and not put him in danger of his life, I
pray you therefore tell me your opinion, and how a man in respect of his
honor were to use and order himself, put the case he would not kill his
friend, but would willingly save and keep him from harm.


V. I will speak mine opinion of these things which concern a man's life and
honor, and first I would wish every one which is challenged into the feeld,
to consider that he which challenges him, does not require to fight with him
as a friend, but as an enemy, and that he is not to think any otherwise of
his mind but as full of rancour and malice toward him: wherefore when you see
one with weapons in his hand that will needs fight with you, although he were
your friend or kinseman, take him for an enemy, and trust him not, how great a
friend or how nigh of kin soever he be, for the inconvenience that may grow
thereby, is seen in many histories both ancient and modern. But when you see
the naked blade or weapon, consider that it means redress of wrong, justice,
and revenge: and therefore if he be your friend that will needs fight with you,
you may tell him that you have given him no cause, nor offered any wrong, and
if any other have made any false report, and that he is to prove and justify
it, that for your self, if by chance without your knowledge you have offended
him, that you are ready with reason to satisfy him and make amends. But if
they be matters that touch your honor and that you be compelled to accept of
the combat, do the best you can when you have your weapon in your hand, and
consider that fightes are dangerous, and you know not the mind and purpose of
your enemy, whom if you should chance to spare, afterward peradventure he
may kill you or put you in danger of your life, especially when you use the
mandritta or right blows: for if he be either a man skillful at his weapon, or
fierce or furious, he may peradventure do that to you, which you would not
do, (when you might) to him. Wherefore if he be your friend go not with him
into the field, but if you go, do your best, because it seems childish to
say, I will go and fight, but I will spare and favor him. For if you were the
valiauntest man in the world, and had no mind to do him any harm, yet when
you see the fury and malice of your enemy, you shall be forced, as it were,
to do that you thought not to do, for which you may peradventure be sorry,
and disquieted in mind as long as you live, as well in respect of friendship,
if you kill your friend, as for the punishment which the laws will inflict and
lay upon you, whether it be loss of goods, imprisoment, or death. And on
the other side, if you be slain or wounded, it is no excuse for you to say
afterward, that you favored him and did not so much as you might, for in such
a case every man will think as he lift: so that if your enemy were the most
coward and base man that might be, yet he shall be counted the more valiant
and brave man. Therefore if it happen that some friend of yours has a quarrel
against you, tell him that you will not have any thing to do with him: and
fight with your enemy, not with your friend: neither account him your friend
that will fight with you: well you may be his friend, but you shall find him
to be your enemy. Therefore whenever you see any man draw upon you, stay
not until he do his pleasure, and trust him not, for he has not his weapon
drawn to no purpose: and if in that sort he will talk of the matter with
you, cause him to stand aloof off, and so let him speak: for of the
inconvenience that has grown thereby we have many examples, as I will show
you more at large by and by I would wish that every one should beware to
offend any man either in words or deeds, and if you have offered offense,
seek to make amends, as a civil and honest man should, and suffer not the
matter to grow to such extremity and inconvenience, as we see examples every
day, whereby God is highly displeased. And amongst others I will tell you of
an accident which has happened in Padoua, where I my self was borne, of a
master of Fence called M. Angelo of Alezza, who many years brought up,
maintained, and taught a nephew of his, in such sort, that he became a very
sufficient and skillful man in this art. Which his nephew, whereas by reason
should have been loving and faithful to him, as to his own father, having so
long eaten of his bread, and received from him so many good turns, especially
having been brought up by him from his childhoode and infancy, he did the
quite contrary, for his uncle Angelo yet living and teaching scholars, he
openly did teach and play with many, and by that means came acquainted with
many Gentlemen, so that he set up a school of Fence, and began to teach,
entising away many which were scholars of his uncle Angelo. A part truly
very vile, and of an unkind unthankful man. Whereupon the said Angelo
complained of this injury and wrong offered by his nephew, to a gentleman who
was his scholar and loved him entirely, showing how his nepbew had not only
impaired his credit, but defrauded him of the aid and help which he looked
for at his hands, having brought him up, as I have said, and especially being
now grown old. Which nephew (as he said) in respect of kindred, bringing up,
and teaching of his art and skill, was bound to have showed him all friendship
and courtesy. Heereuppon the Gentleman, Angelo his scholar, promised to seek
redress, although he was a friend also unto the nephewe of Angelo. And so,
by badde hap, finding the said nephew of Angelo, told him that for the
wrong offered to his master and uncle, he would fight with him, and
therewithal put hand to his weapon: the other refused to fight with him
because he was his friend: but the Gentleman told him that if he would not
defend himself he would run him thorough: as he did in deed, for whilst
he stood upon terms, and would not do his best to defend himself, he
ran him quite thorough the body. Therefore when a man sees any one with a
drawn weapon, let him take care to defend himself, because it is nota master
of friendship. But I think verily in this man, that the justice of God and
his own conscience took away all courage and wit of defending himself. And
this was the end of his unthankfulness, which God would not leave unpunished.
And if all unthankful and treacherous men were so served after the same sort,
I think there would not be found so many: and truly of all vices, I take this
unthankfulness to be one of the greatest that is incident to man. Therefore to
conclude this master, I would counsel and advise every one, to give as small
occasion of offense any way unto any as may be, and especially unto his
friend, to whom he is in any sort beholding: but when that he is forced to
lay hand on his weapon, to do the best he can, as well in respect of his
credit, as for to save his own life.


L. Verily this example which you have here brought in, is very good and
necessary, as well to instruct and teach a man not to trust his enemy when he
sees him coming with his weapon in his hand, as also to warn these
unthankful men to be more true and faithful. But I pray you go forward to
tell me that which is behind concerning this ward.


V. I will very willingly, but I pray mislike not that I have somewhat
digressed from the master which we were about, for I have spoken these few
words not with out cause, but now I will go forward with that which remains.
Therefore I say, when the master and scoller stand upon this ward, and that
the point of the scollers weapon is toward the face of the teacher, and the
point of the masters without the body of the scoller toward the right side,
both of them being upon this ward, the scholar must be ready and nimble to
remove with his left foot, that the point or end thereof be against the
midst of his masters right foot, turning his Rapier hand, and that his point
be in imbrocata-wise above his teachers Rapier, and that his left hand be
toward the ward of his teacher: and let all this be done at once, by which
means the scholar shall come to have his masters weapon at commandment, and
if it were in fight, his enemies.


L. This play which now you tell me of, me thinks is contrary to many other,
and I my self have seen many play and teach clean after another fashion, for
I have seen them all remove in a right line, and therefore you shall do me a
pleasure to tell me which in your opinion, is best to use, either the right or
circular line.


V. I will tell you, when you stand upon this ward, if you remove in a right
line, your teacher or your adversary may give you a stoccata either in the
belly or in the face. Besides, if your master or your adversary have a Dagger
be may do the like, hitting you with his dagger either in die belly or on the
face, besides other harms which I lift not to write. And therefore to proceed,
I say, that in my opinion and judgment, it is not good to use the right line,
whereas in remoouing in circular-wise, you are more safe from your enemy, who
cannot in such sort hurt you, and you have his weapon at commandment: yea
although he had a dagger he could not do you any harm.


L. But I pray you tell me whether the master may save himself when the
scholar makes this remove upon him in circular-wise, without being hurt.


V. When the scholar remoueth with his left foot, the master must step
back, but yet in such sort, that the left foot be behind the right, and
that he remove to the right side, and shall strike a mandritta at the head of
the scholar, and whilst the master shifteth with his foot and strikes the
mandritta, at the self same time must the scholar be with his right foot
where the teachers was, being followed with his left, and shall deliver a
stoccata or thrust in his masters belly, turning his body together with his
hand on the left side, and lifting his hand on high, to the end the master may
in striking hit his Rapier, and withal shall strike at the teacher, at which
time the teacher must remove with his right foot a little aside, followed
with his left, and shifting a little with his body, shall beat outward the
thrust or stoccata of his scholar, and shall deliver an imbroccata to his
scholar, as I have told you before in the beginning.


L. I pray you therefore tell me if there be any other points in this ward.


V. With all my heart, and therefore I must tell you of an imbroccata in manner
of a stoccata, which is very good and excellent, as well for practice of
play, as for fight, but they must be most ready both with hand and foot that
use it: therefore when the scholar shall find his masters Rapier in this ward,
that it be held upright or toward his face, then the scholar shall win
ground a little with his right foot, being moved somewhat aside, and withal
let him remove with his left foot, that it be toward the right foot of the
teacher, and that your right foot be against the midst of his left, as I have
said before, and in removing let him turn his Rapier hand, that the point be
conueighed under his masters weapon, which being done, promptly and readily his
point will be toward the belly of his master, which must be followed with the
left hand, and let the scholar lift up his hand to the ward that his fist be
somewhat high, and let him take heed that he loose not his point, because the
teacher may give him a stoccata or thrust in the belly or face, for that he
has lost his time.


L. But I pray you, cannot the teacher then defend himself?


V. He may do the self same which I told you before, when I spoke of the
imbroccata delivered above the Rapier, and certainly this is a very good play
when it is performed with good measure, and great agilitie and readiness. But
besides this, I will now show you the manriuersa in this ward. Therefore when
the scloer shall find his teacher with his point somewhat at length, that it is
not toward his face, but toward his belly, then must the scholar with his
left hand beat aside his masters rapier, not at the point, but in the strength
and midst of the weapon, and withal must remove with his left foot, both
which must be done at once: and let the same foot; be against the right foot of
the master, as he did before in the foine or imbroccata, delivered above and
under the rapier: and the teacher at the same time must do the like, remoouing
with his right foot, as I have said before. And as the scholar remoues and
beats aside the weapon, let his left hand be suddenly upon the ward of his
teacher, and in giving the say de riuersa or cross blow, let the scholar
skilfully turn his Rapier hand, that the knuckle or joint may be toward the
head of the teacher, for otherwise he may give him a slicing or cutting blow,
which we call Stramazone: therefore let him perform those things skilfully and
at once, and especially let him beware that he do not beat aside his teachers
weapon toward the point, because he should be in danger to receive a thrust or
stoccata either in the face or belly. Besides, the scholar, so that he find
his teacher in the same ward, that his Rapier be somewhat at length, and not
directly upon the face, may strike the said riuersa or cross blow at his
legs: but beating aside the Rapier with his hand must be done readily, and
he must remove with his hand in such sort, that his Rapier when the left
hand beats it by, may be between his own hand and his teachers weapon: and
with this readiness must he strike this riuerso, but withal, his left hand
must be upon the ward of his teacher.


L. But tell me I pray you, is it not all one if I take hold of the arm of
my teacher or adversary, in sted of laying my hand upon his ward.


V. No in deed, for if your enemy were skillful in this art, whilst you
catch him by the hand or arm, he might with his left hand seize upon his
weapon and put you in danger of your life. So that you must take heed to have
all advantage of your enemy, that he may not in any sort do you any harm:
in doing of which, you shall always be to good for him.


L. But tell me of friendship, if you take this ward to be good, as well for
the field as the school.


V. This ward which I have showed you, in my opinion, is very profitable to
be taught, because it breeds a judgment of the time, and a readiness and
nimblenesse as well of the hand as the foot, together with the body: and from
this you come prepared to learn other wards with more facility, and to have a
greater insight and understanding in many things, so that for many respects it
is very commodious, good, and necessary. Now also for fight, this ward is
very good to be understood, and to be fullye had and learned with being
much practiced therein, and made very ready as well with the hand as the
foot without loosing any time: and so much the rather for that we see many
Nations use this ward in fight very much, especially with the single rapier,
both Italians, Frenchmen, Spaniards, and Almanes. Wherefore I advise every one
to seek to understand it, learn it, and acquaint himself with it, that he
may come to that readiness and knowledge to do all at once, without making
any fault or false point in the said ward: by reason of many inconveniences
which have chanced, and which daily chance, which I will speak of when time
serves: but in the mean while we will go forward with this second ward, in
which the scholar shall learn to give the stoccata and imbroccata.


L. I think my self very fortunate that it is my hap to find you at this
time, in so pleasant and convenient a place, where we may pass the time in
some discourse under the shade of these delightful trees, and therefore
according to your promise, I pray show me your second ward, which I shall be
attentive to mark.


V. M. Luke, if all men were lovers of virtue as your self is, these things
would be held in greater account, but thorough the love of vices, wherewith
men are carried away, they are little regarded, wherefore I will do my best
endeavor to instruct you and all other that are lovers of virtue, imparting
unto then that knowledge which God has given me. Therefore for your better
understanding, I will first show you how this ward is good, either to offend
or defend, and cheefelye with the single Swoorde and the glove, which is most
in use among Gentlemen, and therefore I advise you and all other to learn to
break the thrustes with the left hand, both stoccataes and imbroccates, as I
purpose to show you.


L. But I pray you tell me, is it not better to break with the Swoorde, then
with the hand? for (me thinks) it should be dangerous for hurting the hand.


V. I will tell you, this weapon must be used with a glove, and if a man
should be without a glove, it were better to hazard a little hurt of the hand,
thereby to become master of his enemies Swoorde, then to break with the
sword, and so give his enemy the advantage of him.

Moreover, having the use of your left hand, and wearing a gantlet or glove of
maile, your enemy shall no sooner make a thrust, but you shall be ready to catch
his swoorde fast, and so command him at your pleasure: wherefore I wish you not
to defend any thrust with the swoorde, because in so doing you loose the point.


L. But I pray you, is it not good sometimes to put by a thrust with the sword?


V. I will tell you when it is good to use the sword: but now I will tell you
how to use your hand in that case, and cheefelye in this ward wherewith I will
begin.

Therefore if the master desire to make a good scholar, let him begin in this
sort, causing his scholar to place his right leg formoste, a little bending
the knee, so that the heel of his right foot stand just against the midst of
his left foot, holding his sword hand close on the outside of his right knee,
with his swoorde held in short, least his aduersarye should gain the same,
ever keeping the point directlye on the face or bellye of his enemy, and the
master shall dispose of him self in the same manner, as well with his foot as
with his point.

Moreover, you must observe just distance, which is, when either of you stand
in such place, that stepping forward a little, you may reach one another, and
then the master shall make a stoccata to his scholar, going aside somewhat
with his right leg, and following with the other in manner of a circulare
motion toward the left side of his scholar: and so he may have the
advantage if he take it, within distance, and the scholar shall remove his
right leg in counter-time, after the same order that his master does,
answering him with a stoccata to the belly: but he must take heed not to
remove too much aside, or retire too far backwarde, for so the one shall
never hitte, and the other shall never learn.

Moreover, he must beware of coming too much within his just distance,
because if he hit his adversary, he may be hitte again by his aduersarye:
wherefore I will teach you how to offend and defend in the same time. As the
Scholar parts in the counter time, he must in the same instant break the
stoccata with his left hand, and answer again with an other: also the
Master, to make his scholar quick and ready, shall use to answer him in
the same time that his scholar delivers his stoccata, going aside with his
right leg, and following with the other toward the left hand of his scholar,
breaking the said stoccata with his left hand, and shall aim the imbrocata
at his face, and the scholar must part also with his right foot toward the
left side of his master circularlye, beating the thrust with his left hand
outward toward the left side, and then he shall in like sort make an imbrocata
to the face of his master, and the master parting again with his right foot
aside toward the left hand, breaking the said imbrocata with his left hand,
shall thrust a stoccata, as I said before, to the belly of his scholar, and
the scholar in the same instant shall part with a counter-time with his right
foot aside toward the left hand of his master, breaking it with his left
hand downward, and shall make a stoccata again to his master, and the master
therwithall shall retire a little with his body, breaking the said stoccata
outward toward his right side, parting with his right foot backward to the
left hand, and shall answer with a punta riuersa, to the head of his scholar,
wherewithal he shall part suddenly, stepping forward with his left leg
before his right, turning his point quickly to the belly of his master,
bearing up the dagger hand, that he be not hitte in the face with a riuerso,
and so he shall be well guarded: then the master shall part with his right leg,
offering him a straight stoccata to the head, as in the first ward.


L. But I pray you why do you use so many stoccataes and imbroccataes.


V. Because they may learn the just time and measure, and make the foot, hand
and body readily agree together, and understand the way to give the stoccata
and imbroccata right: so that these principles are very necessary, and will
serve for the Rapier and Dagger, therefore whosoever will make a perfect
scholar, let him show the principles in this ward.


L. I perceive very well, that these things which you have spoken of, are to be
done with great agility and quicknes, but especially by the master, if he
entend to make a perfect scholar, because the master often puts him self
in danger, and the scholar regards him not, neither is his hand firm: and
therefore the master must be respective two ways: in saving him self, and
not hurting his scholar: but (I pray you) are these things as good in fight,
as necessary to be practiced?


V. I have taught you already how to place your self in this ward, with the
just distance and time belonging thereunto.


L. But I pray you instruct me a little further concerning time.


V. As soon as your Rapier is drawn, put your self presently in guard,
seeking the advantage, and go not leaping, but while you change from one ward
to another, be sure to be out of distance, by retiring a little, because if
your enemy be skillful, he may offend you in the same instant. And note this
well, that to seek to offend, being out of measure, and not in due time, is
very dangerous: wherefore as I told you before, having put your self in
guard, and charging your aduersarye, take heed how you go about, and that your
right foot be foremost, stealing the advantage by little and little, carrying
your left leg behind, with your point within the point of your enemies
sword, and so finding the advantage in time and measure, make a stoccata to
the belly or face of your enemy, as you shall find him unguarded.


L. Are there many sorts of times?


L. Many are of diverse opinions in that point, some hold that there are four
times, other five, and some six, and for mine own part, I think there are
many times not requisite to be spoken of, therefore when you find your enemy
in the time and measure before taught, then offer the stoccata, for that is the
time when your enemy will charge you in advancing, his foot, and when he
offers a direct stoccata, in lifting or moving his hand, then is the time:
but if he will make a punta riuersa within measure, pass forward with your
left foot, and turn your point withal, and that is the time: if he put an
imbroccata unto you, answer him with a stoccata to the face, turning a little
your body toward the right side, accompanied with your point, making a half
incartata: if he strike or thrust at your leg, carrye the same a little
aside circular-wise, and thrust a stoccata to his face, and that is your just
time: and if he offer you a Stramazone to the head, you must bear it with your
sword, passing forward with your left leg, and turning well your hand that
your point may go in manner of an imbroccata, accompanied with your left hand,
so that your point respect the bellye of your adversary, and break this always
with the point of your sword, for of all stoccataes, riuersaes, and
Stramazones, I find it the most dangerous. And remember, that whilste your
enemy strikes his ma^dritta, you deliver a thrust or stoccata to his face, for
the avoiding of which, he must needs shrink back, otherwise he is slain:
and how little so ever your enemy is wounded in the face, he is half undone
and vanquished, whether by chance it fall out that the blood cover and hinder
his sight, or that the wound be mortal, as most in that part are: and it is
an easy matter to one which knows this play, to hit the face, although every
one understands not this advantage. And many there are which have practiced and
do practice fence, and which have to deal with those which understand these
kind of thrustes or stoccataes, and yet cannot learn to use them, unless these
secrets be showed them. Because these matters are for fight and combat, not for
play or practice: but I will come back where I left. Therefore, when your enemy
makes as though he would strike at your head, but in deed strikes at your
legs, loose not that opportunity, but either in the false proffer that he
makes, hit him, or carry your foot a little aside, that his blow may hit the
ground. So when you deal with those which thrust their points downward, at
the same time strike you at the face: and when you find the point of your
enemies weapon on high, get your point within his, and when you have gotten
this advantage, immediately give him a stoccata or thrust, or else let it be a
half incartata: and take heed when you deliver your stoccata, that you come
not forward with both your feet, because if he be skillful at his weapon, he
may meet you with counter-time, and put you in danger of your life: and
therefore seek to carrye your right foot together with your hand, being a
little followed with your left foot.

Moreover, when you find that your enemy holds down his point, and his hand
alofte, seek to stand well upon your guard, that your hand be ready with your
right knee somewhat bending toward your enemy, and your body somewhat leaning
on the left side, because if your enemy would give you a thrust or stoccata,
he should come a great deal short of reaching your bellye with his point,
and especially he wanting that knowledge, which those have who are furnished
with the right skill of this art. Wherefore if he give you a stoccata or
thrust in the bellye, you must beat it down with your left hand, outward from
your left side, and withal you may give him a stoccata or thrust either in
the bellye or the face: and if he make a foyne or imbroccata to your face
above your head, you must be nimble with it, and may beat it aside with your
hand, the inside outwward toward your left side, or else without beating it by,
deliver him a half incartata with your point, which must be within his, and
let it be toward his bellye, so that all these be done with measure and time.
But if you find your enemy with his point down, you must stand upon a low
ward, and carry your body very well, leaning upon the left side, and when
you have got him within your proportion, you may give him a stoccata or thrust,
either in the belly or the face, and you are safe from his point: for if he
will make a stoccata to you, if you have skill to beat it aside with your
hand, and to answer him again, you must needs hit him. And if he give a foine
or imbroccata, you may reach him the incartata, as before I have told you.


L. You have done me a great pleasure, and I know it will stand me in great
steed if I should have occasion to fight, to know these times and proportions,
which are to be observed: but I pray you tell me if one, who is skillful and
valiant should assail me, whether this ward be good to be used in fight, or
else whether I also should strike and answer him with the same.


V. If you will do as I will advise you, I say it is very good either to
assail any, or to tarry and watch your advantage, if you have skill to stand
upon it, and to carry your foot, hand and body together, holding your Rapier
short, and that your point be toward the face of your enemy. For if your
enemy have skill in fence, and should not find you to stand surely upon your
guard in this assault, he might deliver a straight stoccata to your face, not
purposing fully to hit him, which if you should break with your Rapier, he
might put his under yours, coming forward aside toward your right hand, and
might give you a stoccata in the face. Moreover, putting the case that your
adversary were skillful and cunning in fight, and you not much acquainted
therewith, if he should not find you upon a sure ward, he himself being in
proportion, and finding your point without his belly, he might reach you a
stoccata in the belly, or an half incartata, especially if he know in fight
how to use his body.

Besides, in these assaults, when he is without your right side with his right
foot, he might offer a stoccata from the outside of your weapon, and if you
break it with your Rapier, he may pull his point under yours, and withal
remove toward your left side with his right foot, and give you a stoccata in
the belly, turning skilfully his Rapier hand, so that his fist be toward his
left side. Also if you should deliver a stoccata to your enemy, and that he
should break it with his Rapier, immediately you might remove with your left
foot, your left hand, waiting on the weapon of your enemy, and give him an
imbroccata or foine under or above his Rapier, and may be master of his
weapon. But if your enemy strike a mandritta at the legs, if you strike it
by with your weapon, he may give you a venew either by stoccata or imbroccata.
Therefore it is not good for any man to use these things prescribed, because,
as I have already said, he had need to understand well his times and
proportions, and to know how with skill to shifte and move his body, and to
be ready and nimble as well with his foot as hand, otherwise, by his own
means he may be wounded or slain: so that he had need to be very cunning
and perfect in these matters, whereupon many good masters do practice their
scholars in these assalts to make them ready. But I will let them pass, and
will satisfy you concerning the skill of this ward, which you have required to
know. Therefore I say, when you shall stand upon this ward, and that you be
assailed and set upon, keep your point short, that your enemy may not find
it with his, and look that you be ready with your hand, and if he make such a
false proffer as I spoke of before, you being in the same ward and in
proportion, may with great readiness put a stoccata to his face, shifting
suddenly with your left foot, being a little followed with the right, and that
suddenly your Rapier hand be drawn back. But if he should give a stoccata to
your face with full force from your rapier side outward, you may a little shrink
with your body and beat his point with your hand outward from your right side
toward your weapon, and withal you may strike a riuersa. Furthermore, if he
should pull his rapier within at the same instant, to be more sure, you must
carry your right foot a little aside toward his left hand, and with great
readiness of countertime you must put a thrust or stoccata to his face, turning
your hand most nimbly. So also in such like assalts if your enemy should come
to strike down right blows or riuersi, do as I have told you before, in moving
your hand with great readiness, and finding your time and proportion.
Wherefore I hold this Ward to be very good, as well to assail, as for to
tarry and watch for an advantage. And you must especially take heed that you
put not your self in danger, because if your enemy should find you without
your sword at length, being nimble and strong, striking upon your weapon, he
might make a passage with great espeede, and make himself master as well of
you as of your weapon, and put you in danger of your life. Whereas
contrary-wise, when you do hold your Rapier short, as I have told you, and
that your point is toward his face, you make him afraid, especially when
he comes forward with his hand and body to find your weapon with his, he
must needs come so far that you may easily hurt him without being hurt.
Besides all this, if your enemy should come to deliver a stoccata, imbroccata,
mandritta, or riuersa, you have great advantage, for he cannot so readily
strike, nor with such surety as you may.


L. But I pray you tell me this, if mine enemy should charge me with his weapon
at length, as putting forth half his weapon in his ward, must I answer him
with the like?


V. This ward truly is very good against all other wards in my opinion,
especially if you knew how to charge your enemy, and to find time and
proportion to strike knowing how to turn and shift your body as well on the
one side as the other, and understanding the skill of fight, and being most
nimble, you may answer him with it. But yet I would have you to mark and
consider well in what sort your enemy behaueth himself, and how he holds
the point of his weapon: if that you find him holding his point alofte, that
it be above yours, when that you hold it right against his face, you must
seek to win ground a little with your right foot before you remove, and
your hand must be nimble and ready, and at that very instant make three
times with your feet at once, moving a little with your right foot, a little
with your left, and again a little with your right. But this must proceed from
very great skill and knowledge, for if your left foot tarry behind, he may
give you a prick in the face or in the belly, or a cut upon the legs.
Wherefore you must so come forward with your right foot at once, that you may
have the weapon of your enemy with your hand, and your point toward his
belly. So that as you see, many and very many things may be performed by this
ward, if, as I have said, one be skillful and nimble. But this I would advise
you, when you would make these passages, or put your weapon under your enemies,
that you do them not in vain nor without some advantage. There are many
which oftentimes by chance and hap, do many things in fight, of which if a man
should ask them a reason, they themselves know not how they have done them.
And sometimes men very sufficient and skillful at their weapon, are hurt,
either by their evil fortune, that they suffer themselves to be carried away
and ouermastered too much with choler and rage, or else for that they make no
account of their enemy. Wherefore as well in this ward as in the other, take
heed that you suffer not your self to be blinded and carried away with rage
and fury.


L. I perceive very well that the secrets of this noble art are very great,
and that with great travel and pains a man must come to the knowledge and
skill both to rightly understand and practice it, for otherwise I see, that by
very small error a man comes in danger of his life. But I pray you instruct
me somewhat farther, as if at this present I were to undertake a combat with
some valiant man in defense of my credit and my life.


V. In truth the secrets which are in like fightes are such, that unless one
have a skillful man in this science to instruct him, and that loves him, he
shall never come to the right understanding of them. There are many which will
think they know enough, but most commonly are deceived: and others there are
which the master or teacher loves, and shows them faithfully all that he can,
and yet they can never come to any great matter in this science, but they who
are framed of nature as it were, both in respect of abilities of body and
mind fit to learn this art, if they use the help of a skillful teacher, come
to great perfection. And these abilities are the gifts of God and nature,
wherefore as in others, so in this worthy art you shall find some more apt
than others, and especially to give a right thrust or stoccata, which is the
chiefest matter of all. For all the skill of this art in effect, is nothing but
a stoccata: wherefore if you shall have occasion to fight, I could wish you to
practice this short ward, and to stand sure upon it, and to seckey our
advantage with time, which when you have found, give the stoccata withal,
somewhat moving your right foot, and at the same instant draw back your left,
and let your rapier with your body shift upon the left side, because if your
enemy be cunning, he may suddenly answer you with a thrust, and beat aside
your weapon* and therefore if you mind, to give a right stoccata, there is no
other way to save your self from harm. But if your enemy be cunning and
skillful, never stand about giving any foine or imbroccata, but this thrust or
stoccata alone, neither it also, unless you be sure to hit him: suffer your
enemy to do what he list, only stand you upon a sure ward, and when you
find opportunity and time, deliver the stoccata, and shift with your foot.
And this also you must mark, that sometimes it is good to give the stoccata to
the right side, which must be done when your enemies right foot is over
against yours, and sometimes to the left side. Wherefore when you will deliver
a stoccata to the right side, see that you go not aside with your foot, but
give the thrust, and then shifte backward with your left foot, as also when you
deliver your stoccata to the left side, you must shift aside with your right
foot. These things must be known and much practiced. But if your enemy use a
mandritta or riuersa, you have had instructions already how to behave your
self. There are many other secrets of this ward which cannot be written nor be
made plain or sufficiently expressed to be understood. And that it is so,
many Gentlemen can witness, who although they have seen me do, yet could
neither understand nor practice them until that I showed them the way; and
then with much adoo and very hardly. Therefore I think I have spoken enough
concerning this ward: and if you can perform all that I have told you, it
will suffice, and this our discourse may pleasure many, which take delight to
understand and learn these things: but if they will repair to the teachers of
the art, they shall better and more fully understand and conceive of all,
because both knowledge and practice is required.


L. I would think my self happy, Master Vincent, if I could remember and
perform all which you so courteously have imparted unto me of the former
fight, and as far as I may, I will do my diligence to practice that which
you have taught, but having found you thus friendly and ready to show me what
favor you may, I am emboldned to trouble you farther, and your courtesy has
increased my longing and desire to know more in this matter, and therefore I
pray you make the understand the other kind of fight which heretofore you have
told me of, and you call it Punta riuersa.


V. I have alredie showed you of what importance and profit the two former
wards are, as well for exercise of play, as for combat and fight, if a man
will understand and practice them. Now also perceiving you so desirous to go
forward, I will not fail in any part to make you understand the excellency
of this third ward, which notwithstanding is quite contrary to the other two.
Because that in this you must stand with your feet eue^ together, as if you
were ready to sit down, and your rapier hand must be within your knee, and
your point against the face of your enemy: and if your enemy put himself
upon the same ward, you may give a stoccata at length between his rapier and
his arm, which shall be best performed and reach farthest, if you shift with
your foot on the right side. Moreover, if you would deliver along stoccata, and
have perceived that your enemy would shrink away, you may, if you list, at
that very instant give it him, or remove with your right foot a little back
toward his left side, and bearing back your body, that his point may miss
your belly, you may presently hit him on the breast with your hand or on the
face a riuerso, or on the legs: but if your enemy would at that time free his
point to give you an imbroccata, you may turn your body upon your right knee,
so that the said knee bend toward the right side, and shifting with your body a
little, keep your left hand ready upon a soddaine to find the weapon of your
enemy, and by this means you may give him a punta riuersa a stoccata, or a
riuersa, to his legs. But to perform these matters, you must be nimble of body
and much practiced: for although a man have the skill, and understand the whole
circumstance of this play, yet if he have not taken pains to get an use and
readiness therein by exercise, (as in all other arts the speculation without
practice is imperfect) so in this, when he comes to performance, he shall
perceive his want, and put his life in hazard and ieopardie.


L. But tell me I pray you, if my enemy should first strike at me, how may I
defend my self?


V. If your enemy be first to strike at you, and if at that instant you would
make him a passata or remove, it behooves you to be very ready with you feet
and hand, and being to pass or enter, you must take heed when he offers
a stoccata, that you do not put it aside with your weapon, because if he
should find you in good time and measure, you could not so readilye put it by,
as he should be ready to give it you. But when that he offers the said
stoccata, be ready to turn the knuckle of your hand toward you right side,
and let your point be right upon the belly of your enemy, and let your left
foot accompany it in such sort, that the point thereof be against the right
foot of your enemy, and let your right foot follow the left, that the midst
thereof be straight against the heel of your left, the one being distant from
the other, half a pace, that you may stand more sure upon your feet, and be
more ready to perform at things which shall be required.


L. But tell me I pray you, whether this ward may serve me to any other
purpose, then for this stoccata.


V. If you mind to deliver a stoccata like to the before mentioned, you must
win ground with your right foot, toward the right side of your enemy, and as
you find the time and measure, give him a stoccata either in the belly or in
the face, and if your enemy shrink at that time that you deliver your
stoccata, it stands upon you to be most ready and nimble, shifting with your
body and weapon, and somewhat with your right foot, a little aside toward
the right side of your enemy, turning readily your body and knee upon your
right side, so that your enemy himself shall come with his body upon your
point, and the more furious he comes, the greater danger shall he incur,
because he cannot help nor recover himself. But remember to thrust always at
the face, if you may, for thereby you shall the better save your self, and have
the greater advantage. Moreover, if your enemy should make a false proffer, or
deliver a little stoccata, to the end to procure you to answer him, that
presently he might make you a passata or remove, if you be in good proportion
and measure, if he thrust at you, answer him, and if you will you may give it
him full and home, or somewhat scant: and with great agilitie, whilst he
makes his passata or remove, turn ready your body with your knee, but yet
upon the right side, and take heed you shift not with your feet at this time,
but only turn your body, as I have told you, otherwise you should be in
danger of your life, how little soever you shrincke back: and therefore I
advise you to beware that you go not beyond that which I have taught you.
Morouer, if you can win ground on the right side of your enemy, and become
master of his sword, you need not thrust a stoccata, but rather pass on him
with your point above his sword, turning well your hand as in an imbroccata, or
else give him a stoccata by a fincture, under his sword hand, which is sooner
done, remembering to pass forward with your left foot toward his right, and so
let your right foot follow your left: but beware in any case that you never
pass directly upon your enemy, for endangering your life. If your adversary
thrust directly to your face within measure, answer him with a stoccata, in the
same time that he lifts up his hand, but if you be out of distance, answer
not, for then you put your self in danger. And when your enemy offers a
stramazone or back blow, receive it on your sword very readily, turning your
point, and passing speedly with your left leg, as before taught: but if he
make a punta riuersa, break it with your left hand toward your right side,
and give him another: and if he use any fincture or false thrust, answer him
not. Now if your enemy hold his sword out at length, and you perceive his
point to be any whit without your body, especially on the left side, you
must charge him, being ready with your left hand, so that finding his point
any whit high, you shall falsefie with your sword hand under his Swoorde,
passing forward with your left foot in the same instant, still following your
enemy without retiring, for so you shall be commander of his Sword, and may
use him at your pleasure: but remember to be very ready, for you must make but
on time, and take good heed that you stand not still in doing this, for so, if
your adversary have any skill, he may greatly annoye you, either with thrustes
or blows. And oftentimes your enemy will give such advantage of purpose to have
you pass on him: therefore you must well understand what you do.


L. I pray you is this all the use of that ward?


V. When you perfectly understand your weapons, it may serve you otherwise,
so that you hold not your sword hand within your knee, for if you find your
enemy to bear his sword long, being in distance, you may sodenlie beat it
aside with your sword, and withal give him a stoccata in the belly, which
must be done all in one time, speedily turning your body on the right side,
or else retyring with your right foot toward the right side of your enemy:
otherwise, if you stand upon it, as many do, you might much endanger your
self thereby, for if your adversary being furious should pass on you in the
same time, he might put your life in ieopardie: but by the agilitie of the
body, it is easily to be avoided: and again, when you find his point long,
you may break it aside with your swoorde, and give him a Stramazone, or a
riuersa to the head, but with readiness of the body, or you may thrust a
stoccata, either to the belly or face: and if your enemy offer to break it
with his swoorde, you may falsefie suddenly above his swoorde, and if he
break it above, falfesie again underneath his swoorde, or if you be ready
with foot and body, you may pass on him whilste he breaks your fincture
with his sword, fastening your left hand on the hiltes of his sword, and you
may give him a stoccata, either direct, or with a riuersa: but look that you
lay not hold of his arm, for if your enemy perceive it, he may change his
Rapier suddenly into his other hand, and so have you at a great advantage, and
therefore I teach you to lay hold on the hilts, because you have then commanded
his sword surely: and if your enemy finding your point out at length, would
beat it aside with his rapier, to pass upon you, retire your left foot a
little backward, and with great promptness in the same instant, falsify with
a riuersa either to the face or bellye, of which kind of thrusts you shall
often have use, but you must be very ready and well practiced therein:
therefore you must labor it, that when occasion require you may perform it.


THE FIRST DAYS Discourse, concerning the Rapier and Dagger.
Luke. IF any had ever cause to be sorrowful for their departure from
friends and parents, then had I just occasion to take our departures one from
the other most grievous. And therefore our meeting again in so pleasant a place
as this, must needs be very joyful and delightsome: wherefore among other
favors you have done me in instructions of the single Rapier, I entreat you
to show me the like touching Rapier and Dagger.


V. That which I have heretofore showed you, is but small in regard of that I
mean to teach you hereafter, so that having delivered you the manner of the
single Rapier, you may the better conceive my discourse of the Rapier and
Dagger, because it serves much to the use thereof: and it shall not be
necessary wholye to repeat the same, but I will only show you how to put
your self in guard with your Rapier and Dagger, for if I desire to make a good
scholar, I would my self put his Rapier in one hand, and his Dagger in the
other, and so place his body in the same sort, that I have before spoken of in
the single Rapier, setting his right foot foremost, with the point of his Rapier
drawn in short, and the Dagger held out at length, bending a little his right
knee, with the heel of his right foot directlye against the midst of the
left, causing him to go round toward the left side of his adversary in a good
measure, that he may take his advantage, and then I would thrust a stoccata to
his bellye beneath his Dagger, removing my right foot a little toward his left
side.


L. And what must your scholar do the whilste?


V. The scholar must break it downward, with the point of his Dagger toward
his left side, and then put a stoccata to my belly beneath my Dagger, in which
time I breaking it with the point of my Dagger, go a little aside toward his
left hand, and make an imbroccata above his Dagger, and the scholar shall
break the imbroccata with his Dagger upward, parting circularely with his
right foot toward my left side, and so thrust unto me an imbroccata above my
Dagger, in which time, with the point of my Dagger, I will beat it outward
toward my left side, and answer him with a stoccata in the bellye under his
Dagger, parting circularely with my right foot toward his left side: and in
the same time he must answer me with the like under my Dagger, breaking my
stoccata outward toward his left side, stepping toward my left side with his
right foot, at which time I must move with my body to save my face, and
break his point toward my right side, answering him with a riuersa to the
head, and so retire with my right foot, at which time he must come forward
with his left foot in the place of my right, and his Dagger high and strait,
turning his swoorde hand, so that his point may go directlye to my bellye,
and he must take the riuersa on his sword and Dagger.


Luke. But is it not better for the scholar to hold his Dagger with the point
upward, as I have seen many do to defend a riuersa?


Vincentio. He that holds the point upward, is ever in danger to be hurt on
the head, or to receive a findure in the bellye or in the face, and likewise he
is in ieoperdye to be hurt with a Stramazone, between the Rapier and the
Dagger, because he closes not his weapons: therefore remember well how to
carrye your Dagger, and by exercise you shall see the Dagger, for there are
many that break the stoccata inward.




L. Why then do you never break any thrust inward?


V. All stoccataes coming under the Dagger, and imbroccataes above the Dagger,
are to be beaten outward toward the left side, but an imbrocata by a riuersa
either in the belly or in the face, should be broken inward toward the right
side, with a little retiring of the body, which must be answered with a
riuersa well followed, in which instant the scoller must pass forward with his
left foot, then will I retire with my left foot behind my right, and
yielding back with my body, I will beat the point of his swoorde with my
dagger toward my left side, and so make a direct thrust to his head: then the
scholar must step with his right foot in the place of my left, carrying his
Dagger not too high, but so that his arm and his Dagger be held straight out,
to receive a blow if it be offered, and then he shall thrust a stoccata to my
belly, which I will beat toward my left side, and make an imbrocata above his
Dagger, stepping with my right foot toward his left side, then must he beat
my imbrocata toward his left side, parting with his right foot on my left
side, and so make an imbrocata above my Dagger, then I parting with my right
foot on his left side, will beat his imbrocata toward my left side, and
make a blow to his head: in which time he must do the half incartata, that
is, he must be ready while I lift up my hand, to put a stoccata to my belly,
bearing out well his dagger to receive the blow, turning suddenly his body on
the left side, so that the heel of his right foot be just against the middle of
his left, and this is the true half incartata.


L. I pray you why do you make your scholars use so many stoccataes and
imbrocataes?


V. To make my scholars apt and ready with rapier, dagger, and foot, that
they may accompany one another in one instant, whereof there is great use in
fight. But one that would teach these principles and cannot play with his
body, puts himself in great danger to be hit on the face, especially if the
scholar be any thing ready, and thrust a long stoccata, for if the scholar
answer readily, his dagger cannot save him. Therefore he that will exercise
these rudiments must have a very apt and well framed body, so that if you
desire to be made ready and perfect, practice these principles, learning well
the time and measure, and thereby you shall open your spirits in the knowledge
of the secrets of arms: neither do as many do, who when they are to fight,
play like children that run to learn their lessons when they should repeat
them, therefore learn, that in time of peace you may use it for a good
exercise of the body, and in time of war you may know how to defend your
self against your enemies: and do not as many, that when they have just
occasion to fight, withdraw themselves, despising knowledge and virtue, not
considering that almost every little prick kills a man, and I have seen which
thorough a foolish conceit of their own ability, have been wounded and
slain: therefore if you will prevent the fury of such, you must be well
practiced in your weapons.


L. As far as I can perceive, the rules of the single rapier, and of Rapier
and Dagger, are alone, and I see well, that to learn first the Rapier alone,
is very necessary to bring the body, hand, and weapon to be ready together in
one instant, but one difference I find between the single Rapier and the
other, because in managing the Rapier alone, you cause the scholar to hold his
left hand short, and in the other to hold out his hand and Dagger as straight
as he may, whereof I would gladly know the reason.


V. At the single Rapier if you hold forth your left hand at length, your
enemy may wound you thereon, because you are not so well guarded as if you
withdrew it shorter, neither so ready to put by the swoorde of your aduersarye
as with a Dagger, and therefore remember this well.


L. I see it stands with good reason, but I pray you show how I must assault
mine enemy in fight? or how being assaulted by him, I must defend my self?


V. There are many that when they come to fight, run on headlong without
discretion, because finding themselves injured, they hold it their parts to
assault first.


L. Why? is it not the challengers part to be the first assaulter?


V. Yes, if you find time and opportunity, for (I pray) tell me why go you
to fight?


L. To defend mine honor and maintain my right.


V. What is to defend your reputacion, but so to hurt your enemy, as your
self may escape free? for when you go to fight, put on this resolution,
either to take away his life, or to cause him to acknowledge his fault, with
seeking pardon for the same, which is more honorable then a blody victory:
neither do like children, which in their wanton fighting stand far a sunder,
and make semblance to beat one another: therefore note it well, for if your
adversary be a man of judgment and valor, and you be the first in offering,
you bring your life in ieopardye: for either of you being within distance
observing time, the first offerer is in danger to be slain or wounded in the
cou^ter time, especially if he thrust resolutelye: but if you be skillful and
not the other, then may you gain time and measure, and so hit him, saving your
self, and then the more furiously your enemy comes on, the more he runs
headlong upon his own danger. Some are of opinion that they can hit him that
shall hit them first, but such as have never fought: or if by chance in one
fight they have been so fortunate, let them not think that Summer is come
because one swallow is seen. Me thinks more commendable for a man to defend
himself, and not offend his enemy, than to hurt his enemy and be wounded
himself, for when you shall perceive the danger that insueth by every assault
without time and measure, you will change your opinion: arid some others there
are that hold it a shame for a man to retire.


L. In deed it is accounted disgraceful to give ground, because therein a man
seems to fear his enemy.


V. There is difference between retiring orderly and running backward, for to
hit and retire is not discommendable, though the other be shameful, and he
that holds the contrary, understands little the danger of weapons.


L. And I pray you what good does retiring?


V. If you be assaulted on the sudden, your enemy having gained time and
measure, so that you are in evident danger to be slain, had you rather die
than retire a foot?


L. Some are resolute rather to die than yield an inch.


V. But if such knew they should be slain, and that so small a matter would
save their lives, I doubt not but they would retire with both feet rather then
fail. Many talk as they have heard, and not as they know: whereupon I will
recite a Combat performed by a great Captain called Signior Ascanio della
Cornia.


L. Truly I have heard of one such but I know not whether it were he that was a
master of the Camp in that great army of Don John d'Austria against the Turk.


V, He was the very same, but to come to the matter touching the opinion of the
ignorant: this Captain being entered the listes against his adversary in the
presence of many Princes and great men (which listes enuironing the circuit
appointed for the Combat, and being touched by either of them, the same person
is held vanquished, as if he had been driven out) was very furiouslye charged
by his enemy, and sought at the first only to save himself by retiring,
which the other perceiving, began to scoff at him, bidding him beware of the
listes, wherewithal the Captain espying advantage, made a resolute stoccata
clean through his body, and so slew him, now whether of these think you won
most honor?


L. In my judgment Ascanio, who entertained the fury of his aduersarye, till
in discretion he found opportunity to execute his purpose.


V. I am glad to hear you of that opinion, for we see the like in martial
policye, where oftentimes retraites are made of purpose to draw the enemy
either into some imboscata or place of advantage, and such as are most insolent
and presumptuous, are easiest drawn into those plots, who run headlong on
their death like beasts. In like sort, he that understands the true use of
his weapons, will suffer his aduersarye in his rashness, until he find time
and advantage safely to annoy him. And since I have begun to speak of
combats, I will recite one other performed in Piemont, in the time of Charles
the 5. between two Italians, and two Spaniards, as I have heard it delivered
by diverse Gentlemen present at the action. A Spanish Captain, more brave in
show then valorous in deed, to insinuate himself with the Emperor, began in
scornful sort to find fault with other nations, and among the rest, with
Italians, where the Spaniard had never had foot of ground, if the Italians
themselves had not been made instruments of their own conqueste: but to let
that pass, this Spaniard having in words disgraced the Italian nation, it
came to the Italians ears, whereupon two Italians, the one of Padua, and the
other of Vicenza, wrote a cartell unto the Spaniard, which was carried by him
of Vicenza, who finding the Spaniard accompanied with diverse Gentlemen,
delivered him the cartell, which he received, saying that he would go to his
Chamber and read it, whereunto the Vicentine replied, that he should read it
ere he departed, and that it was a cartel. Which the Spaniard having read in
presence of the whole company, asked the Vicentine whether he or his fellow
would maintain the cartell, to whom the Vicentine answered, that the words
repeated in the cartell was a lie, and that he was present to avouch it:
wherewithal he offered to draw forth his sword, and so the Spaniard and his
companion accepted the combat against the two Italians, of which matter the
Emperor having advertisement, conceived displeasure against the presumption of
the Spaniard, and so, place of combat was prepared in presence of many great
personages: the combatters being entered the listes, one of the Italians (who
were both in their shirts only) rent of the left sleeue of his shirt, which
the Spaniard beholding, said he needed not take so much pain, for he meant
to have cut of his arm sleeue and all: to whom the Padouan replied, that he
meant to have cut of the Spaniards head first, and therefore prepared his arm
for the purpose, wherwithall they encountered all very furiouslye, so that the
Vicentine was first wounded, who crying out to his fellow that he was hurt, the
Padouan comforted him with hope of better success to come, and began warely to
keep his guard, but the Spaniards presuming on the victory, charged them so
much the harder without regard, till at length the Padouan finding his time,
with a resolute stoccata ran the one through the body, and with a sudden
riuersa, cut the others neck almost quite in sunder, and so they were both
slain together: I have induced these examples for two causes, the one, for
that many contemn this art, and make no account thereof, and the other because
there are some so insolent, as they seek nothing but to sow discension between
friends and allies, which if they were restrained, it might save the lives of
many men: for as we see in the last example, there wanted not much to have
caused a general mutiny between the Spaniard and the Italian, through the
insolency of the Spaniard, if the Emperor had not drawn the matter to a
shorter trial, by forbidding any one to offer the first blow amongst them,
upon pain of death: pronouncing the Italians victors, that had acquitted
themselves in so honorable sort. Therefore you may see how dangerous the
company of these quarrelsome persons is, who do less harm with their swords
then with their tungs: for as the Italian proverb is, La lingua non ha osso,
ma fa rompere il dosso, that is, the tung has no bones, and yet it breaks
the back: ill tunges are occasions of much debate. But to return from whence
I have digressed, you must never be too rash in fight, account of your enemy,
yet fear him not, and seek all means to become victor, and so you shall
maintain your reputation, and not endanger your self in unadvised hastines.


L. I have taken great pleasure in these discourses, which in my opinion
importe very much the knowledge of Gentlemen, and truly the Spaniards were
justly punished for their pride, in scorning other nations: you shall see many
of that humor, that will blame other nations, who deserve to be rejected out
of all civil company: for if one man have a fault, his whole country is not
straight to be condemned thereof. But show me I beseech you, how I must behave
my self when I am to fight, you have already taught me the time, measure,
and motion of my body, and now I would learn something of resolution.


V. Having taken weapons in hand, you must show boldness and resolution against
your enemy, and be sure to put yourselfe well in guard, seeking the advantage of
your enemy, and leap not up and down. And beware in charging your enemy you
go not leaping, if you be far off, but when you approach, guard your self
well, for every little disorder gives advantage to your adversary, therefore
learn to know advantages, and thrust not at your enemy until you be sure
to hit, and when you have given measure, note when it is time to thrust: then
finding your enemy out of guard, make a stoccata resolutely, or else not at
all: for although you be in time and measure, and yet your enemy be well
guarded, he may very easily hurt you though his skill be but small. As may be
seen in many, which altogether ignorant in the use of weapons, will naturally
put them selves in some guard, so that if one look not well about him, he shall
be much endangered by such a one, not because he knows what he does, but by
reason that not foreseeing the danger, he follows his purpose with
resolution, without being able to yield a cause for that he has done.
Therefore (I say) you must seek to gain not measure only, but time and
opportunity as well to save your self as any your enemy, if you will do
well, and then if it happen not well unto you, think that God does punish you
for your sins: for we see often that at some one time a man will do
excellent well, and yet afterward he shall seem as though he had never taken
weapons in hand. And to make it the more apparent: There was a soldier in
Prouence for his valor in many exploites before showed, generally reputed a
very gallant man, who on a time being in a town besieged, was so suddenlye
stricken with the terror of the battery, and dismaide therewith, that he
could no longer refrain from seeking some cave to hide himself: who afterward
taking heart agresse, came forth again, and being demanded of the Captains
where he had been, who told them the truth of the whole matter, and afterward
behaved himself very valiantly.

In like sort Marco Querini a gentleman of Venice, Captain of the Galleys
belonging to the signorye of Venice, in the sea Adriaticum, living delicatelye
in all carelessenes, suffered the Turks to run over the gulf, spoiling and
robbing at their pleasure, not daring to make resistance, which the General of
the Signory understanding, repaired thither with all expedition, thretning
Querini Captain of the gulf, if he performed his office no better, the
whole shipping should be taken from him, and he sent home to Venice on foot.
The shame whereof moved him so far, that afterward he became famous for his
exploites.

Moreover in the time of the Venecians wars with the Turk, the General of
the Turkish forces being come into the Sea Adriaticke, near unto Schiauonia,
Allibassa and Carracossa, who afterward died in the battle of Pautou, would
needs invade the Isle Cursolla with some forces, and batter a town there,
where the men disinaied with the soddainnes of the attempt, betook themselves
to flight, and left the place to the desence of the women, who quitted
themselves with such undaunted courage, that one of them betaking her self to a
piece of artillery, played the gunner so artificially, that she directed a
shot clean through the ship where Allibassa was, much spoiling the same, which
he perceiving, presently commanded the ancker to be waied, and hoising up
sails, retired all his forces, by which means the women saved the city: so
that heerin we see the difference of men's dispositions in courage at diverse
times, and yet I commend it not in any man to want valor at any time. But to
come to the purpose, albeit one be not so well disposed to the managing of
weapons at one time, as at some other, yet having the practice and
understanding thereof, he shall ever be sufficient to maintain his part.


L. It may well be that you have said, and I think that he that has the
perfect use of his weapons, may very well defend himself against any man,
though he find his body but ill disposed: but seeing you have begun to
discourse of time, I pray you teach me something concerning the difference of
time.


V. You know what I have said concerning the same, in my discourse of the
single Rapier, and in like sort I must instruct with Rapier and dagger:
therefore you must at the first charge your enemy, and having gotten advantage
of ground on the left side, you must make a stoccata under his dagger, if he
hold it too high, retiring immediately a little with your left foot,
accompanied with your right, but finding his dagger low you must make a
fincture underneath, and thrust above his dagger, and that is the just time, in
doing whereof you must remember to carry your right foot a little aside,
following with the left toward the left part of your adversary, and if he offer
you either stocata or imbrocata, you may answer him with a half incartata,
turning your hands as in doing the stoccata: or otherwise if he bear his
dagger low, you may thrust to his face, which is les danger for you, because
every little blow in the face staieth the fury of a man more than any other
place of his body, for being through the body, it happens often times that
the same man kills his enemy notwithstanding in the fury of his resolution:
but the blood that runs about the face, dismaieth a man either by stopping
his breath, or hindering his fight: and he shall oftener find advantage to hit
in the face than in the belly if he lie open with his weapons: but mark well
how he carries his rapier, if long and straight with his Dagger aloft, you
must charge him low on your right foot, and having gained measure, beat down
the point of his sword with your dagger, and make a stoccata under his dagger
without retiring, but beware that in breaking his point you put not down his
dagger arm, but hold it firm, neither draw it in, least your enemy hit you
on the face, or give you an imbrocata above your dagger: but bearing your
dagger firm and straight, if your enemy should answer your stoccata, he
might be in danger to receive a thrust. If your enemy carry his sword short,
in an open ward, you may come straight on him and give him a puntariuersa
either in the belly or face, with such readiness, that your sword be half
within his dagger before he can break it, turning nimblye your hand toward
your left side, so that in offering to break he shall make himself be hit
either in the face or in the belly: and forget not to retire an half pace with
the right foot, accompanied with the left.

Moreover, if your enemy lie with his sword alofte, and the point downwards,
you may charge him four ways, first on the right side, closing your weapons
in a low guard, and your right foot within the right foot of your enemy toward
his left side, and then being within distance, give him a stoccata, sudenly
drawing home your point again, or you may play with your body, but hold your
dagger firm, marking (as it were) with one eye the motion of your adversary,
and with the other the advantage of thrusting.

Secondly, you may make a stoccata to his bellye, not resolutely, but to cause
him to answer you, and then you must play with your body toward your left
side, and bearing the thrust on your right side, pass a little on his right
side, and make a riuersa above his sword.

Thirdly, you may come upon his point with your dagger, closing well your
weapons, and then beating away his point with your dagger, in the same instant
put a stoccata either to his face or bellye, but in any case stir not your
dagger arm, least he falsify and give you an imbroccata above the dagger:
therefore remember to bear your arm strait, and only your wrist higher or
lower.

Fourthly, you may charge him on the right side in the same ward, but
contrariwise, for where before you bent your body on the right side, you must
now turn on the left, so that his point may still be without your body, and
hold your dagger at length, then being within measure, you may suddenly pass
with your left foot, carrying the point of your dagger upward, and turn your
point under his Rapier, that it go directly to his belly, in manner of an
imbroccata, in doing whereof you must turn your body well, lifting up your
sword hand, and with your Rapier and Dagger, assure your self of his,
otherwise your weapons lying open, if your enemy be skillful, and know how to
turn his hand, he might hit you either in the bellye or face with a riuersa,
or cut you on the head, for every disorder endangereth a man's life.

Furthermore, if your enemy carry his sword low, charge him directly, turning
your body on the right side, with your dagger at length, the point hanging
something toward the ground, and then as you find his dagger, so make your
thrust: if high, to his belly, if low, to his face: if his head be above, put
a stoccata to his face by a trauersa (as it were) under his dagger, and forget
not to retire withal with your right foot: and if he hold out his sword with
the the point upward when you are toward his right side, you shall put your
self in the ward aforesaid, bending your body on your left side, and so
gaining ground, make a stoccata under his sword, so that your dagger be under
his rapier, and keep it without your body from your left side, and your point
in his belly: and remember always that in taking your enemies point, you stir
not your dagger arm, because he may then endanger you, as I have before said.
Moreover, if your enemy put himself in the same guard, with his rapier at
length, and you in your guard with your right foot foremost and your point held
short, so that your right foot be opposite to his, you shall little and little
steal ground with your right foot, and follow with the left, till you are
within distance, and then with agilitie thrust either to his belly or face: and
this is a notable thing if it be well understood, for beside the knowledge it
requires practice, that you learn not to approach nearer to your enemy then
you may save your self: otherwise you may charge him on the right side, bending
your body to the left side, and then having gotten the advantage, you must
suddenly pass with your left foot, turning withal your point under his
sword, that it ascend to his bellye, and clap your dagger as near as you can
to the hiltes of his swoorde, all which together with the motion of the body,
must be done at one instant. I shall not need to discourse much of your enemies
holding of his dagger, but as your enemy carries it, either high or low, so (I
say) you must with discretion thrust either to his face or belly: but you must
be very well exercised in these passataes, for perfourming them with quicknes
of the body, albeit you happen to fail of your purpose, yet your enemy
shall be able to take no advantage thereof, but you shall be ready to anoy him still
either above or beneath, wherein you must follow him in moving his body: so
shall you still hold your advantage, and hit him where you will, and if he
thrust again, you shall break toward your right side, and reply with a riuersa
to the face. Again if your enemy bear his rapier long and straight, you may
charge him, and beating away his sword with your own, sudenly turn in your
point to his face or belly, which is a very good thrust, being done with great
agilitie,

If you perceive your enemies rapier far out, and that he go about to
falsify upon you either above or underneath your dagger, then put your self
in your ward, with your weapons close together, and as low as you may, holding
firm your dagger hand, and whatsoever falsifieng he makes, never move away
your Dagger hand, neither lift it high or low to get your enemies Rapier,
and if you lie below in the ward when he falsifieth, remain so without
styrring any higher, (for otherwise he might at that time find fit
opportunity to hit you, if he be skillful in wepons) but follow him close, for
if he once thrust resolutely, be it above or beneath, he must needs lose his
whole Rapier, and you may easily hit him: and in your thrusting stand firm
with your body and dagger. Also if he hold his dagger straight upward, and
that the point of his rapier be at the hiltes of his dagger, as you shall find
occasion, so do, that is, if his dagger hand be high, thrust a stoccata to him
under his dagger: if low, make a stoccata to his face, either close by the
hand, or by the midst of his arm, and and if you will thrust as you are in
your ward you may, or else with retiring. Moreover, if your enemy turn his
dagger point toward his right side, charge him on that side, with a punta
riuersa to his face, remaining in your ward, or retiring as you please.
Again, if he lying in that ward, carry his point out of the ward of your
dagger any whit a little too high, charge him close, and holding forth your
Dagger, you may suddenly take his point with your Dagger, or if you will you
may by removing the right foot a little forward, give him a stoccata, but
keep steadfast your dagger hand, as I taught you before, least otherwise he
make an imbroccata to your face. Again, if he carrye his point any whit too
much toward your right side, turn your body on your left side, in a good ward,
charging him on the right side, and bring your right foot clean without his
right foot, and having so done, thrust your rapier under his about the middle,
and so make a passata upon him, or you may charge with a riuersa to his throat,
or such like, either abiding in your ward, or suddenlye scaping away with your
body. If you perceive he hold his rapier far out, and not turned, charge him
below, turning your body on the right side, and turn your dagger point
somewhat low upon your enemies point, and having gotten this advantage, being
within measure, thrust either to his bellye or face, as you shall best see
cause.


L. I find now that after a man has the art, he must also have great
exercise and practice to bring his body to a true frame. But as you have
hitherto showed me to charge mine enemy in due time, so now I pray you teach
me to defend my self when my enemy charge me.


V. If your enemy charge you, and have gotten any advantage of you either
with his foot, or turning of the body, or rapier, or dagger, or by what means
soever, seek to put your self in a sure ward, and retire a little, keeping
your self still in guard, least else by retiring, if you move up your body or
dagger, your enemy might by dexterity and quicknes offend you greatly: but
whilst he charge you, covet to turn your body to one side or other, as
you find the point of your enemies rapier, and even at that instant that he
moves his foot in charging you, as you find him open in any place, so seek
to offend him, and beware (as I said before) in what sort you retire, for
sometime there is a fit time; when you thrust to retire, and some times not,
therefore take diligent heed thereunto.


Moreover, when he has gotten advantage, being in his ward, if he would thrust
a stoccata to you under your dagger, you shall be nimble to avoid it by
turning your daggers point downward, and you shall answer him with a stoccata,
or imbrocata, or punta riuersa, as you shall find opportunity: but if he make
an imbrocata above your dagger, you may avoid it by lifting up a little the
point of your dagger, and by turning the wrist of your hand to the left side,
for that his imbrocata shall go clean without your left side, and you may make
a thrust to him, as you shall find him open in any place. Again, if he make
an imbrocata to your body, you may give back a little with your body, and
beat it away with your right side, and may make to him a punta riuersa to his
body or face: likewise if he be toward your right side, and thrust at your
face, you may yet beat it away, and answer him with a punta riuersa or a
passata. Again, if he make an imbrocata above your dagger, beware that your
rapiers point be within his, and make unto him a meza-incarta, turning the
point either to the belly, face, or throat: but you must with great agilitie
turn your point and body on your right side. Again, if he make a blow to
your head, at the instant that he moves his hand make you suddenly a stoccata
unto him, and (if you be in a good ward) you may make a punta riuersa to his
thigh, but if he make a blow to your leg, stand fast in your ward with your
body far out, and in his thrusting come forward with your right foot,
whereby you shall cause him to leese the greatest part of his rapier, and turn
your dagger point low, receiving the blow on the same, and you may make unto
him either a stoccata to the face, or a riuersa to his neck or arm. Again,
when he thrusts to your leg, remove your right foot to your right side, as
it were making a circle, and so offend your enemy: as if he make a riuersa to
the head, you may take it upon your rapier and dagger, passing with your left
foot, turning your rapier hand and making a stoccata: and if you will you may
by passing receive the riuersa upon your dagger only, but look you carry
your dagger point aloft, as I have told you before. Again, if he make the
riuersa to your leg, you may sodeinly pass with your left foot to his right,
and take the riuersa on your dagger, for thereby you get the strength of his
rapier, and are master of it, and may easily strike him. Again, if he make any
violent blow at your head, retire a little on your left side, and receive it
with your rapiers point, passing with your left foot, and turning your point
to his face, and clapping your dagger on his rapier: all other blows and
riuersaes you may easily receive on your dagger, but it behooves you to receive
the^ with the point of your rapier, otherwise your enemy might thrust his
rapier between your rapier and dagger especially if he cast his hand upward,
and his point downward, therefore take heed how you thrust, for these are all
good times. If your enemy come furiously upon you to assault you, keep you
still in your guard, and in his coming near to you, thrust at him, for he is
neither in ward nor yet stands firm, and the more resolutely he comes upon
you, the more he is in danger, and the worse is it for him, because he may
easily with a little prick be slain: but courage joined with skill and
knowledge is very good.

Again, if a tall man should assault a little man, this ward is exceeding good
for the tal man, because if he charge the other, and the tall man thrust, being
within rech, he loses his point, and the little man may give him a stoccata, or
make a passata at him, but if the tall man know how to put himself in ward and
thrust, he might have great advantage by the length of his reach, in thrusting
a stoccata, and retiring with his body. Again, if your enemy would make a
passata on you with his left foot, when you find him to remove, and would
beat your weapons a way with his dagger, move your right foot a little
backward, and sodeinly turn your point over his dagger, and make an imbrocata
to him, for in his passing he loses his dagger, and whilst he passes, you
may retire a little into your ward, and make a stoccata to his face, and such
like, whereof I cannot now stand to write.



The first Book. THE SECOND DAYS Discourse, of Rapier and Dagger.
Luke. I Have been so well satisfied with this first ward of Rapier and
Dagger, that I should think my self very happy, to put in practice, as much
as you delivered unto me in precept: but I will not spare any labor to
exercise all. But now you shall do me much pleasure, if you will teach me the
other ward, which you call Puncta riuersa.


V. I have discoursed unto you, how profitable the former wards be, as well
to learn as to fight, being well understood and practiced: and even so will
I now make you acquainted with the worthiness of this ward, and of what
importance it is, notwithstanding that it is quite contrary to the other:
especially, in learning of it. Therefore he that will teach that ward, must
place his scholar even as at single Rapier, that is, that his feet stand both
equal with toe and heel, even as if he were to sit down, and that his
Rapier handle be held within side of his right knee, and that somewhat short,
and that his Dagger be held out at length with his arm stretched out, holding
the point of his rapier continually upon the face of his master, who ought to
set him self in the same ward, and to give a stoccato in the middle of the
Rapier, in punta riuersa to his scholar, or else between the arm and the
Rapier, or in the belly, or in the face, escaping a little backward with his
right foot, accompanied somewhat with his left, toward his left side.


L. What shall the scholar do in the mean while?


V. While your master gives you the thrust, you shall not strike it by with
your dagger, but only turning your Rapier hand, pass with your left foot
toward his right side, and the point of your Rapier being placed above his,
and thrust forward, shall enter right into his belly.


L. And what shall the master do to save himself?


V. When he gives the thrust, and you pass toward his right side, he shall
with great nimblenes recoyle a little backward with his right foot, accompanied
with the left toward the left side, bearing his body backward, and pearching
your Rapier with his dagger, shall strike it outward from his left side, and
give you a Mandritta at the head.


L. Then what remains for me to do?


V. You shall come with your right foot, to the place where your masters right
foot was, and shall give him a thrust in the belly or in the face, receiving the
mandritta upon your Rapier and Dagger, and the event will be no other then the
same of the former ward: and by this means you shall become very nimble and
quick, both with foot, hand, and body: otherwise, if you have not all these
parts ready and perfect, by offering the stoccata, you hazard your self
greatly and dangerously.


For while you thrust, if your adversary surpass you in nimblenesse, and be
ready, he may enter with his left foot and put you in great danger, bringing
your weapon into his own power. Therefore when you will give this thrust
either in the bellye or face, pass with your right foot toward the right
side of your enemy, so that your right foot be somewhat on the outside of
your enemies right foot, and so being in right measure, you may give him the
said thrust either in the belly or in the face with great celeritie and
aptness, recoiling somewhat with your left foot, accompanied with the right:
and if your enemy enter with his left foot, you shall speedily turn your
body on your left side, whereby, the more secretly your enemy comes upon
you, and the more forcibly he enters, the more hurt shall he do himself,
and the more easily shall you be able to master him, and become Lord of his
own weapon.

Besides, if you place your right foot a little toward your enemies right
foot, you may make a thrust toward his right side, but in thrusting, see you
bring your right foot toward your enemies left side: if you see that he
goes about to enter with his left leg, turn your body well on your right
side, for then if he enter with his left leg, the point of his Rapier will
go by the out side of your body, and you may give him a riuersa upon his
leg with your Rapier, and stabbe him with your dagger in the body. All which
you must do with great celeritie and quickness, turning your body with great
nimblenesse on your left side, and recoiling somewhat with your left foot,
being accompanied with the right, and so you shall deliver your self and your
rapier withal out of the power of your enemy, but if you be not passing
ready with your foot, and in turning your body well and fitly on your right
side, your enemy entering may thrust you in the belly with his Rapier, and
give you a stabbe with his Dagger besides. Therefore I advertise you to
exercise your self continually, that occasion being offered you to fight, you
may perform the same with much readiness, and without danger, otherwise,
if you only fail in one and even the least point, you endanger your life. For
it is not maine force that does the deed, but readiness, dexterity, and use
of knowledge and art. You must therefore labor and take pains, which being
joined to the great desire and love you bear to this art, will bring you to
the perfection thereof. Insomuch that you shall be able to turn and wind your
body which way you will, and therewithal know how and which way you ought
to turn it.

Again to the purpose: If your enemy make toward your right side, and offer
a thrust, happily pressing too much forward, you shall immediately turn your
body on the left side, so that the point of his Rapier passing beside your
body, you may give him a stoccata: or you may play with your body, and
beat his Rapier point outward from your right side with your Dagger, and give
him a punta riuersa over his Rapier in the belly or face. Or also while he
thrusts, you may beat it by with your Dagger, and carrying your right foot
toward his right side, give him the same thrust. Or again, whilst he does
thrust, you may stand firmly, turning your body a little upon your left
side, and strike by his Rapier point with your Dagger, and therewithal give
him a riuersa upon the leg. And if he be skillful in managing his weapon,
take heed in any case that you let him not get within you, or win ground
of you, but seek still to grow upon him with your foot, that is, that your
right foot be without side of his right foot, and when he gives the
foresaid thrust, take heed you strike neither with your Rapier nor Dagger, if
you mean to enter upon him with a passata, because he having once gained of
you both opportunity of time and measure of ground, you endaunger your self
very much: but you shall only turn your Rapier hand inward, passing
speedily with your left foot to his right foot, placing the midst of your
right foot just at the heel of your left foot, holding your body on the
left side.

As for your Dagger, that must be held up with the point alofte, to the end
that it may be master of his Rapier: and so shall hurt him either under or
above his Dagger. But you must beware and take great heed, not to pass
directly right upon him, when you make your passata with your left foot
toward his right foot, for if that he be any thing skillful, he may give
you a stoccata or imbroccata. Wherefore when you make toward him, see you throw
your self wholly on the left side, accompanying your left foot with your
right, in the manner aforesaid.

Furthermore, if your perceive your enemies Rapier point to be borne toward
your right side, having gotten upon him with your right foot, pass with your
left foot very speedily and quickly to his right foot, and carrying your
Dagger, as in the manner aforesaid, and give him an imbroccata upon his Rapier.
But if you find his Rapier point born upon your body, you shall turn your
body on your left side, and with great celeritie draw your point under his
Rapier, that the point thereof be upon his belly, and your left foot by the
right, your dagger being ready with the point upward, to command his rapier,
resting your body on your right side.

Furthermore, if you perceive his Rapier to be long, and the point thereof
borne somewhat high, you shall nevertheless answer him in this ward: now not
holding your Rapier hand on the inside of your knee, but carrying your dagger
straight out, and winding your body on your left side, you shall make
semblaunce to beat by his weapon with your dagger, and with great quickness
you shall draw the point of your dagger under his Rapier, readily turning your
body upon your right side, and carrying your right foot together with your
left somewhat toward his left side, etc. But beware how you use this passata,
unless you be well practiced in it, and see you hold stiff your dagger
hand, for if you suffer your hand to swerve any thing downward, your enemy
may give you an imbroccata in the face.

Moreover, in your passata lift not your dagger too high, because (if he be
skillful with whom you fight) whilst you lift up your dagger, or hold your
Rapier and Dagger too open, and not enough closed, he may retire a little,
and so give you a stoccata or imbroccata, insomuch that you must have an
especial care of all, or or else you, cannot avoid danger of death. Again,
when you make this passata, see that you remain not with your left foot, he
cause he may give you a mandritta upon the leg, or else a stoccata in the
belly. Also in the same passata, see that your body rest not wholly upon
your left side, because that so doing, you shall your self bear your
enemies Rapier point upon your face.

Besides this, when you lie in this ward, and make upon your enemy toward
his right side, if you perceive that he hold his Rapier hand somewhat high
and far off from his body, follow you well in this ward, and getting
sufficient ground of him, you may give him a stoccata in the belly: and in
giving it, see that the point of your Rapier enter under the midst of his,
being your self ready to wind away with your body.

Furthermore, in charging him, if you find that his point be carried to the
ground-ward, turn steadfastly upon your left side, and hold your dagger out
in length toward his right side: and if you can beat the midst of his
Rapier with your Dagger, at the same instant give him a stoccata. You may also
in the same ward make a passata with your left foot. But if perhaps your
enemy when you lie in this ward, should make semblaunce to thrust you, not
meaning so to do, but only for vauntage, so you be in equal measure,
answer him, and loose not that time: but if you be not in equal reach, thrust
not earnestly, nor make a passata upon him, for so you should endaunger your
life: but in aunswering him make but a short thrust at him, to the end that if
your enemy or adversary afterward make a true thrust, or else come forward
with his left foot, to make a passata upon you, you may suddenly turn your
body on your left side, and place your Dagger-hand right with your right
knee. And so you may give him a stoccata in the b^llie, or else a riuersa upon
the leg, and become master of his weapon: and by how much the more strongly
he thrusts, and the more furiously he enters with the passata, by so
much the more easily may you hurt him: but have a great and special regard
to do it with much nimblenesse and dexterity both of body and hand.

Furthermore, if you find his Rapier long, in charging him you may strike the
middle of his Rapier with yours, and suddenly give him the punta riuersa: but
it must be done with great quickness of the hand, being ready with your
right foot to step toward your enemies right side, or else to recoile
somewhat with your body backwardes as swiftly as you can: for else if your
enemy at that instant should enter with a passata something fiercelye, your
life were in great hazard, and especially if you should make your thrust
straight, carrying your foot right toward his, as many do: but if you
step with your right foot aside, you may very easilye avoid the danger.

Again, if you find his Rapier point out at length, you may strike his
Rapier with yours, and give him a great mandritta or riuersa at the head, but
with great swiftenesse of hand and body. Also lying in the same ward
toward the right side of your enemy, you may give a false stoccata at his
belly, and if your enemy do hap to strike it back with his Rapier, you
shall suddenly put the point of your Rapier over his, and give him a stoccata
or punta riuersa upon his face, or his belly, if he should too much hang
down his hand, at which time you must bear your right foot aside toward
his right side. You may also offer a false thrust at his face, and if he go
about to strike it by with his Rapier, you may put your point under his
Rapier, and carrying your right foot side-waie, give him a stoccata in the
belly: or in both these false thrusts, when he beats them by with his
rapier, you may with much sodainnesse make a passata with your left foot, and
your Dagger commanding his Rapier, you may give him a punta, either dritta,
or riuersa.

Moreover, if your enemy finding you with your Rapier point borne out in
length, should strike by your rapier with his, in the very instant that he
strikes, you may pass with your right foot toward his right side, and with
great quicknes putting your Rapier over his, give him a punta riuersa in the
face, and if he be not very skillful at his weapon, you may suddenly make a
passata upon him, and this may happen unto you very often: but you ought to
be well exercised in these points, which may make you very nimble and quick
with your foot, body, and hand, least for want of knowledge and practice in
this faculty, you fall not into some inconvenience and dishonor, for in the
very least point consists life and death.

Therefore neglect not these things, but rather take pains and travail in the
knowledge of them, honoring and esteeming them both excellent and profitable:
neither have I entered into this charge, to discourse and explain these
points for their sakes that hate valor and knowledge, for unto such do I not
direct my speech, but unto those that love, regard, and honor virtue: who
being worthy of this knowledge, may always command my service.

But to return to our purpose: if your enemy find you in this said ward,
holding your body toward your left side, and toward his right side, and
give you a mandritta at the head, you shall speedilye and with great agility
turn your body on your right side, and receiving his mandritta upon your
Dagger, return him a stoccata either in the belly or in the face. Likewise,
if he give you an imbroccata over the Dagger, you shall (turning your body
upon your right side) answer him with a stoccata. But if he when you lie in
this ward, give you a riuersa at the head, you may immediatlye make a passata
with the left foot, and so presentlye requite him with a stoccata.

If you think it not convenient, and therefore will not pass with your left
foot at the same instaunce that he gives the riuersa, you shall turn your
body on your left side, and so have your choice either to give him a stoccata
in the belly, or a riuersa at the legs: and if you be thoroughly exercised
and practiced in charging, you may give him a dritta or a riuersa at his
legs, being the first to strike.

Many things more may you do in this ward, according as your enemy fights:
and you may use this ward after many manners, so you be throughlye acquainted
with it, and have by continual practice brought your foot, hand and body to
it. But this shall suffice until another day.

THE THIRD DAYS Discourse, of Rapier and Dagger.


Luke. I Know not certainly, whether it has been my earnest desire to
encounter you, that raisde me earlier this morning than my accustomed hour, or
to be assertained of some doubtful questions, which yester-night were proposed
by some gentlemen and my self, in discourse of arms: for they held, that
although a man learn perfectly the dritta, riuersa, the stoccata, the
imbroccata, the punta riuersa, with each several motion of the body, yet when
they hap to come to single fight, where the trial of true valor must end the
quarrel, they utterly forget all their former practices. Therefore would I
request of you, (if you so please) to know your opinion, whether in single
fight a man can forget his usual wards, or use them then with as much
dexterity and courage as he accustomed in play.


V. It is very likely, that many are of this opinion, for there are few or
none that in cause of quarrel when they come as we term it to buckling, but
suffer themselves to be overcome with fury, and so never remember their art:
such effect choler works. And it may be some being timorous and full of
pusillanimity, (which is ever father to fear) are so scarred out of their
wits, that they seem men amazed and void of sense. Or some may be taken in
the humor of drink, or with diverse other occasions, that may enfeeble their
understanding. And by these reasons well may they forget in fight, what they
learned in play: but in them in whom no such effects are predominant, neither
are assailed with such accidents, they behave themselves discreetely, and are
not distempered with any such perturbations: and besides this, I have seen many
that being fearful by nature, through daily practice have become courageous,
and always so continued. Neither is it possible, but in practice he should
obtain courage and increase his valor more then before.


L. But to what end do you teach such skill, if it be scarce secure, and hard
to perform.


V. To this I answer, that this virtue or art of arms is proper and
behouefull to every one for their lives, because that no man on earth, but
has had or has in presence some difference or contention with some of his
companions, which most commonly is decided by fight. To them that are of an
hautie courage, this skill adds advantage: to them whose nature is fearful,
the use of weapons extenuateth a great part of fear: and these, both the one
and other, ought as much as in them lies, to avoid all cauilling, and such
disordered speeches as procure contention: but especially, let such men take
heed, to whom nature has not given a valorous spirit: as for others, whose
courage is hot, it importes them very much, to have great skill in their
weapon, for being ouer-mastered with heat and courage of their hearts, if in
managing their arms they want a skillful dexterity, they soon spoil
themselves: for through want of knowledge, they come to be overthrown, where
rather it behooves them with aduisement and discretion, not only to spy their
own faults, and soon to amend them, but also thorough his enemies ouer-sights,
to take his own advantage.


L. True it is I confess what you have said, for sure, who so wants
courage, must of necessity forget his cunning. But tell of courtesy, were it
that a man were to combat, and through brevity of time it were not possible
to be perfect in the depth of this knowledge, what order would you take, to
instruct him that he might be safe and dangerles.


V. I will tell you, I would acquaint him with one only ward, which amongst all
other is the best for fight, to him who will understand it: of which I mean
now to entreat, to the end I may enstruct you in it, that being thoroughly
practiced in that only ward, you may combat securely. Therefore to make my
scholar perfect in that manner of lying, I would place him with his left
foot and dagger before, extending his body far, and I also would lie so, then
would I have him trauerse toward my left side, and I circularly would pass
with my right foot, thrusting a stoccata either at his face or breast.


L. And what shall the scholar do then to defend himself, and offend you?


V. Whilste I thrust my stoccata at him, and that I pass about toward his
left side, in that moment that I part from him and thrust, he shall likewise
in that counter-time pass circularly toward my left side, and then shall
thrust a stoccata at my breast or face, winding his body upon his left side.


L. And how will you save your self?


V. In that instant, wherein both my self and he do pass thrusting at me in
that counter-time, if I be not very prompt, with the motion of my body, he
may easily strike me in the breast or face: therefore whilst that I thrust at
him and he at me, I will break it with my Dagger from my left side, turning
the point either high or low, according as he thrustes, and I would help my
self with drawing my body backwards, and in that time I would carry my right
foot toward his left, and then would I thrust an imbroccata above his Dagger.


L. And what can he do?


V. He shall do the like, guiding his right foot toward my left, and shall
break my imbroccata outward from his left side, and thrust an imbroccata at
me above my Dagger: and I will retire aside, as I have told you in the former
wards, and make at him with a dritta, or riuersa, or an imbroccata with the
dritta, as in the others.


L. I am of this mind, that whosoever would perform this ward, had need to
be perfectly instructed and thoroughly exercised, and that he be of good
knowledge: for certainly this I think, it is an excellent ward for him that
knows to do it well, but very dangerous for a raw scholar or imperfect. And
if you would mamifest some lying to counter-check this ward we have spoken of,
I should think my self highlye beholding for such a favor.


V. Observe this first, if you were in fight, to use this ward, and that your
enemy in like forte should guard him self with the same lying: mark this
cheefely and first how he bears his weapons and his body, high or low, and
how he holds his Rapier and Dagger, and according to his lying, assault and
offer to him. Therefore in the encounter that you shall make, charge him
toward his left side, keeping your self safelye in your ward, and have
this regard, to keep your point within his. And if he lie high with his
body and Dagger, keep your point under his Dagger hand, and thrust your
stoccata at his breast: but if you see him lie with his Dagger low, thrust an
imbroccata at his belly with great celeritye, or at his face, avoiding with
your right foot circularlye toward his left, turning quickly your body upon
your left side, in manner of an half wheel: but it behoues you to be very
ready, otherwise, in staying in your passage, if he avoid in that
counter-time, he may put you in danger of life: the like is, if you pass
directlye, you are both of you in danger of death: or if you should pass
directlye, and he keep him self in safe ward, or that he avoid in
compass, he may well save him self and endanger you. Therefore finding your
enemy in this ward, ever observe to carry your self in compass.


Moreover, if you assail your enemy with this ward, and he lie with his
right foot foremost, if he hold his Rapier far from him, you may directlye
take his point, keeping your dagger long out, and your body low: and if he
thrust either above or below, keep your Dagger ready to break his thrust, and
offer home to him upon the left foot, or pass toward him with your right
foot, as you shall find best. And in your caricado see if you can command
his swoorde with your Dagger; either from your left or right side, and then
thrust your stocceta or punta riuersa. If you see him lie displaied, follow
him, bearing your Dagger within his sword, and you may well thrust your
stoccata either at his face or breast: or else make a passata resolutelie,
wheeling half about, keeping your self presently in a good ward, upon your
right foot.

Moreover, in this ward you may easily give him a mandritta or riuersa upon
his leg, or you may use a caricado upon his right side, keeping your ward,
and carrying well your body, that the half of your right foot guard your
left heel, and guiding your body directly upon your left side, make forward
directly upon his right foot, thereby to command his swoorde, and then may you
strike him upon the left foot. Again, if you see he keeps his Dagger
point upon you, thrust a stoccata at his face: if you find him not well
commanding his point, charge him upon his right side, bearing the dagger long,
and break his thrust outward, offering your stoccata at his face or breast.
Likewise, if you see he command not his point, and being aduantaged upon his
right side, you may with great readiness put your point under his sword,
lifting your sword hand and your dagger, when in the mean time you may give
him a stoccata or imbroccata, and be master of his swoorde with yours and your
Dagger. And in charging him upon his right side, you may give him a riuersa
upon his leg.

Again, if he offer a mandritta at your head, in the lifting of his hand
advance your self with your right foot, and receive it upon your Dagger,
giving him a stoccata at his breast or face: so if he thrust a riuersa at your
head, you shall lift up the point of your Dagger, and receive it on your dagger
and sword, and in the same time thrust an imbroccata at his belly, or else
taking the riuersa upon your Dagger, you shall give him another upon the
legs, or a stoccata in the belly. Likewise, if your enemy shall give you a
mandritta upon the leg, you shall nimbly pass circularly with your right
foot toward his left side, for so he cannot offend you, and you may hit him
either in the belly or face.

Moreover, if your enemy thrust an imbroccata above your Dagger, you must
readilye pass with your right foot before he retire with his point, and you
may well hit him in the face, breast, or legs. Again, if when you charge him
toward his right side, you see his point be far out and somewhat hight,
keep your body upon your left side, and lie low covered in your ward,
bearing your dagger at the length of your arm, keeping good measure: and in
your carriage, make show to put by his Rapier with your dagger, and so dainly
fall your point under his sword, traversing with your right foot round, turning
your body upon your right side, and so thrust your stoccata at his face or
breast. And if he hold his point high, you may charge him directly with his
point, for if he thrust either above or below, in the time of his thrust
advance your left foot, extending your dagger, and by that advancing he
shall loose his point, and you may hit him with a dritta or riuersa at your
pleasure. And if he thrust at you, and you pass about with your right foot,
then you may likewise hit him.

L. Truly you have given me to understand excellently of this ward: but let me
entreat you to teach me how I may defend my self if one assail me in that
ward, and how I may best offend my enemy, keeping my right foot foremost.


V. I have told you many things concerning this ward, if you know how to do
them and practice them. Besides, there be diverse other things which I cannot
show you with speaking: but for this time it will be sufficient if you can
perform what I have declared. And I will tell you: if you lie with your right
foot foremost, and he keep his left foot forward, according as you mark his
lying, so do, charging him either on the left or right side. And although you
hit him not, and that he pass upon his right foot, do you but change your
body to your left side, lifting up the point of your poniard, firming your
hand on your right knee, so shall you he master of his sword, and may easily
strike him, and the more fierce he is, the more shall you command his weapon
and endanger him: neither can he strike you either within or without your
dagger, or on the legs. And if you see he keeps his dagger winding toward
his right side, thrust a riuersa at his face, so that your point may enter in
the midst of his dagger, and so dainly recoile, and if he likewise part, turn
your body, as I have told you, upon your left side, and as you see him lie,
so guarde your self, bearing your body on which side you think best.


And surely believe me, the first ward I taught you of Rapier and dagge, is
absolutely the best both against this and any other kind of lyings. Therefore
I would wish you to learn it perfectly, and exercise it thoroughly, that if
occasion happen, you may be both skillful and well practiced. But take heed of
one fault, which many incur, who if in play they receive one or two
stoccataes, they enforce themselves to give one to be revenged. But this is
neither fit for a scholar, nor orderly, since in play we should behave our
selves friendly, both to learn and pass the time, and also to exercise our
selves in stirring our bodies, and use this art for the right effect. Wherein
we ought especially to avoid choler and anger. For where occasion happens to
fight, in deed, rapiers are not as foiles, which cannot do much hurt, but a
small prick of a Rapiers point may either kill, or at the least maime. So
that in any wise avoid so dangerous an oversight. And if you hap to wound
your enemy, though very smallie, yet by the sight of his blade, he heeing
kindled with fury, shall both enfeeble his strength, and fall from his right
bias. Therefore I wish you take good heed, and if you see your self apt to
incline to such a fault, amend it, and learn perfectly to defend your
self well, to the end that if perhaps you cannot hurt your enemy, either
for that he surpasses in skill, or you want strength, yet you may avoid
danger of being hurt your self, which will be both honorable and profitable
to you, considering that even the very first thrust is sufficient to end the
whole controversy. Therefore be heedfull and wise, and remember I have told
you soundly for your own safety.

L. I assure you I will follow your advise, which I see grounded on such
reason, as every wise and reasonable man ought to follow it, estraunging
himself from all furious fellows, who think to purchase honor by running
headlong on their death. Therefore will I sequester my self from their
acquaintance. But I pray you prosecute and go forward with the rest of this
ward.


V. Sithence I see you conceive such pleasure in it, I will proceed on and go
forward a little farther. Many there be which exercise this ward upon their
left foot, but therein they differ. Therefore it importes to be well
instructed in the diversity: for if your enemy lie in that ward, and you
upon your right foot, and he bear himself and his Dagger high, charge him
toward his left side, and in the approach, see you part with great
readynesse with your right foot toward his left, and speedily thrust you a
stocata in his belly, and in the thrusting, look you enter under his arm or
hand, turning your body on the right side, and the back side of your sword
and toward your left. If he hold his dagger low, charge him toward his left
side with your right foot side-waies, and thrust either a stoccata or
imbroccata, as you shall think best, above his dagger, and for your own
safeguard, turn your body upon the right side. And if you see him lie
displaide, carry your body on your right side, and trauerse to his left, and
then thrust your stoccata between his sword and dagger.

Moreover, you may thruste your stoccata either at his face or breast, but do
it with great promptness, and in the same time recoile with your left foot
drawing after your right, and be quick in the retire to recover your rapier,
that if your enemy make forward, you may be ready again to thrust: therefore
be quick and vigilant, otherwise if in your thrusting you be not ready, in
that self same time your enemy may well hit you: but retiring with your
feet, and escaping with your body, you shall shun all danger. Again, if
you find his rapier point high, charge him low upon the left foot, and
directly with your dagger at his Rapiers point, bearing your Dagger as I have
taught you: so you may thrust either at his face or breast without retiring,
but being sure to lie well in your ward, for in the time whilst you retire or
withdraw your feet, you shall be in danger, but keeping that ward sure, you are
without peril, for whether he thrust above or below, you being in that ward
are safe, and more ready to wind your point above or below his dagger, or
you may give him a mandritta on the legs: neither can he hurt you in his
circular or turning, if he should so recoile. Again, if you see him lie
upright, lie you so likewise, but ever keep your Dagger ready, and you may
feign a stoccata at his face, and whilst he goes about to break it, wind
your point quickly under his dagger, and wheel with your body half
compass, avoiding with your right foot side-waies, as I have told you. And
if he charge you low and lie open, coming directly on your point, give
back your body a little, and thrust a riuersa or a stoccata like an
imbroccata, and readily remove with your right foot backward: or if he lie as
many do, with his sword upon his dagger crosse-wise, you may redilie thrust
him in the face, and retire backward toward his left side. Again, in that
manner of lying, you may charge him toward his right side, and thrust a
stoccata at his face, between his Rapier and Dagger, ever remembering that your
sword pass by the midst of his Dagger, and give him a riuersa in recoiling
backward toward his right side. And if you fortune not to hitte him, and that
he pass upon his right foot, do you but change your body to the left side,
lifting up your poniard, and holding your hand firmly on your right knee, so
shall you be master of his swoorde, and may easily hit him: and the more
fierce he is, the more you shall command his weapon, and mangle him, neither
can he strike you, either within or without your Dagger, or with a dritta or
riuersa upon the legs. Again, if you see him hold his dagger with the point
turning to his left side, thrust at his face a riuersa, guiding your point to
enter in the midst of his dagger, and suddenly recoile: and if he likewise
part, do as I have already told you, winding your body well upon your
left side: if you find him lying open, use your caricado toward his right
side, and lie low in your ward, carrying your body on your left side,
bearing your Dagger out at length, as I have taught you in the first ward: but
let your hand being directly with your knee, turn with your body, and in
this manner you may offer a thrust: and if he thrust first, bear your dagger
ready to defend your self, and your rapier to offend him. But in this be very
heedful, as I have often told you, neither eleuate nor abase your dagger hand,
nor bear him over the one side or the other, for if your enemy have good skill
in his weapon, and withal a ready hand he may easily bear his point
compass and hurt you: or many times feign a thrust to deceive you. Therefore
be always advised to keep your hand firm, not abasing or lifting up your
point, or turning your wrist on the one side or other: and if he thrust at
you, you may well readily both defend your self, and offend him.

Moreover, if he abase his point, lie in your left foot ward, and use your
caricado upon his right side, and if he thrust either an imbrocca above your
Dagger, or a mandritta at your head, removing his right foot, turn readily
your body on your right side, lifting up your Dagger, and turning your wriste.
Again, is you find his point far out, charge him in your left foot ward
toward his right side, and charge him with your Dagger close to his sword,
and letting fall your point under his, you may easily thrust a stoccata or
imbroccata, but ever keep firm your Dagger hand, and lift not up your body,
and in breaking his thrust toward his left side, you may give him a riuersa
either in the breast or on the legs. Besides this, many more practices there be,
which with good exercise of body, and readiness of hand, might easily be
effected. But because it grows somewhat late, and our discourse has lasted
so long, I will take my leave of you, retiring my self to dispatch some
business before my going home.


L. I am infinitely beholding unto you for these good instructions, and to
morrow I will meet you, to understand somewhat more, for my farther skill, and
avoiding of idleness.


V. God be your guide, and to morrow I will expecte you.


THE FOVRTH DAYS Discourse, of single Rapier.
Entreating how a left handed man, shall play with one that is right handed.
Luke. AFfter your departure yesterdaie in the afternoon, I was in an
honorable place, where upon occasion of some jealousy of love of certain
gentlewome^ two gentlemen of the company fell at words, and from words to
deeds, but they were not suffered at that time to proceed to any further
action, nevertheless they gave their faithes the next morning to try it with
their weapons. and so accordingly they met, and bravely performed their
combat: in the execution whereof I took great pleasure to be a beholder, not
that I had any delight to see them kill one another, but for another cause,
(and that was) to see by experience the truth of that which I have heard many
affirm: and seeing there is so good an opportunity offered, I will entreat you,
having troubled you in a greater matter, that you will assoyle me certain
doubts, which I shall demand of you, and make me rightly understand them,
whereby I shall remain greatly bound unto you.


V. I pray you tell me, what were these gentlemen which fought, and whether
any of them be hurt: after, be bold to declare to me your doubts, and I will
not fail to resolve you the best I can.


L. Sir, I doubt not of your courtesy, which I have found you always willing
to show to every man, but cheefely to your friends: but to tell you the
truth, I have forgot the gentlemen's names, but this I can well say, that in
the handling of their weapons they behaved themselves very manfully, neither
of them receiving any wound, for they were both very quick with the rapier to
offend, and with their daggers to defend: but the greatest reason that led me
to be present there, was to see how well they managed their weapons, one of
them being right handed, and the other left handed: because I know many of
opinion, that the left handed have great advantage of the right, yet I see both
do their uttermost this morning, without any hurt of either party, and in
beholding both the one and the other diligently, I could not discern any jot
of advantage between them: therefore you shall do me great favor, if you
discourse unto me, whether the left hand can have any advantage of the right,
or the right of the left: withal instructing me, both how to defend my self
from such a one, and how to offend him.


V. Of this question, I have heard many times much reasoning, and many there
are indeed which so think, but believe me, the left hand has no advantage of
the right hand, nor the right, of the left no otherwise than you your self
find your own advantage.


L. Tell me therefore, if you would teach a left hand, how would you begin?


V. I would teach him first with the single rapier, making him to stand with
his left foot forwards, and that his heel should be right against the middle
part of his right foot, and I would put my self with my right foot forward,
as I told you before concerning the single rapier, and I would that the
scholar should hold his sword our at length, that the point thereof be
directly at my face, and that he hold his swoord-hand, as it were in a line,
from his body, and outward of my sword toward my right side, passing withal
with his left foot toward my left side, putting his rapier under mine, and to
give me an imbroccata in the belly, by turning the knuckle of his hand
downwards toward his left side.


V. It seems that you do all contrary to the right hand, because in
teaching the right hand, he uses the stoccata, but the left hand, you make
him to begin with the imbroccata. But what will you do to defend your self in
the mean time?


V. I will avoid somewhat with my body, and with my hand beat down his
imbroccata without my left side, and carrying my right foot after my left foot,
give him a riuersa at the head.


L. What shall the scholar do in his defense, both to hurt you and save
himself?


V. He shall do quite contrary unto him that is right handed, because the
right hand, when I offer him a riuersa at the head, passes with the left
foot, and gives me the imbroccata under my rapier: but the left hand,
whilst I go back with my right foot, and that I lift my rapier to give him
the riuersa, he swiftly passes with his right foot before his left, and gives
me a stoccata, lifting his hand from behind: and so in the passataes which he
shall make, standing with his left foot forward, and passing with his right
foot to strike his enemy, whereas the right hand passes with his left foot
when he gives a stoccata to his enemy, the left hand clean contrary, in
passing gives the imbroccata to his enemy: and whereas the right hand shall give
the imbroccata, the left hand quite contrary shall give the stoccata, and that
which I say, is for the left hands instruction against the right, But now I
will speak no further of this ward, for so much as no other thing follows
but that which I have told you already concerning the first ward of the
single rapier, and I will declare unto you the ward of the rapier and dagger,
both to instruct the left handed how to deal against the right hand, and how
the right hand ought to behave himself against the left hand, which shall be
our next discourse. And for this time I pray you pardon me, having occasion to
go a little way hence, to take up a matter between two of my friends, upon
certain differences happened between them, and by and by we will meet again.
Farewell.


The left hands Ward at Rapier and Dagger.
L. Seeing you have already declared how a left hand is to be taught at
single Rapier, I pray you also tell me, how you would likewise instruct him
at Rapier and Dagger, and afterward the defense against him.


V. If I should make a good left handed scholar, I would place him with his
left foot forward, and his left heel against the middle of his right foot,
making him to hold his Rapier short, and his Dagger out long.


L. In what ward would you put your self?


V. I would put my self in the first ward of Rapier and Dagger, carrying my
body in good ward toward my left side, and I would give him a stoccata under
his Rapier, bearing my right foot toward his left side, turning well my
body circularlie upon my right side, and he in the same time turning the point
of his dagger down, shall beat by my stoccata from his left side, and
withal passing with his left foot toward my left side, he shall give me
an imbroccata under my Dagger: I in the mean while will avoid a little with
my body, striking by his imbroccata from my left side, and carrying my right
foot again toward his left side, I will give him an imbroccata under the
Rapier: then he shall turn his Dagger point upward, and strike by my
imbroccata from his left side, going with his left foot circularly toward
my left side, and shall give me a stoccata in the face over my Dagger, and I
will beat by his stoccata outward from my left side, going again with my
right foot circularlye toward his left side, and give him another stoccata
under the Dagger, and he shall beat it by as before, going aside with his
left foot toward my left side, and shall give me an imbroccata under the
Dagger, as before, and I avoiding a little with my body, will beat his
imbroccata outward on my right side, parting at the instant with my right
foot, and carrying after my left: and give him a riuersa at the head, and if
I should not bow backward with my body when I did beat by his imbroccata
toward my right side, I my self should receive it in mine own belly, or
the face: and whilst I go with my right foot, and give him a riuersa, he
shall go with his right foot where my right foot was, and give me a stoccata
in the belly, whereas he shall receive the riuersa upon his Rapier and Dagger.


L. These things would seem very strange to such as understand them not,
because when you offer that riuersa to the right handed man, you teach him to
pass with the left foot, and to give you the imbroccata, contrarily you in
the same case make the left handed man, to pass with his right foot, giving
you the stoccata.


V. Did I not tell you that the left hand had no advantage of the right, nor
the right of the left? only use and knowledge gives the better either to
the right or the left: and oftentimes you shall be occasioned to do many
things, dealing with the left handed man, which you must do clean contrary to
that which you would do, dealing with the right handed man: wherefore seek to
learn and to practice your self, that when occasion shall be offered, you
may know how to behave your self, and contemn the opinions of these Spaca
montagne, which despise art, because ignorance was ever the enemy of
knowledge. Is it possible that he which never saw the wars, can be better
knowledged then he which has spent his life wholye therein, and borne
honorable charges? can he which never made shot in any piece of artillery or
hargebuse, or bow, be more perfect, or at least know so much as they which of
long time have made profession thereof? so it is in the use of weapons, and in
every other faculty: for example, take a Cannoneer which well understands
his art, and he will charge his Pieces in such good sort, that it shall be a
hard matter, or almost impossible for them to break: afterward take one of
these contemners of art, who with their blind judgment presume to be able to
do all things, to such a one give the handling of a Piece of ordinance, and
let him not want powder, shot, or any necessaries thereto belonging, and let him
charge according to his vain knowledge, you shall see him presentlye break all
and kill himself. The like falls out in the handling of arms, the ignorant
will do one thing for an other, which shall turn to his own confusion, for by
the moving of his body or foot only out of time and order, he may easily
overthrow him self, and hasten his own death.


L. It has been seen nevertheless, that many altogether unexperienced in the
hargebuse, have made as good shot as they which have long practiced the same.


V. It is an old saying, that one flower makes not a spring, for although
this unskillful man have made, or may make at any time some good shot, assure
your self it is to be attributed to chance or fortune, or as it is said, to
his good hap, and if he should be demanded at what thing he made his level,
if he will confess a truth, he will not deny, that his level was set at an
other mark, and in truth it may not be otherwise: for trial whereof make him
shoot again, and you shall see having no more knowledge then before, nor
practicing the said exercise, that scarce ever he will make the like shot
again. But they which are well instructed and exercised therein, will seldom
make one fault. In like sort in the use of other weapons, one may give a
cunning stroke, but it shall be by fortune, and no cunning: so that thinking to
give the like blow again, he will occasion his own death, and that only by
not knowing what time to strike: after the same manner he that will take upon
him to charge a Piece of artillery, not knowing the charge thereof according
to the weight of her bullet, will soon break all, and murder him self: but
he which truly has his art, you shall see him with dexterity charge and
discharge, without any encombrance, having his secrets ready to cool the
Canon when she is ouerheated, and other artificial feats which he can make
to serve his turn: so that it is no marvel that he which is guided only by
presumption, and will thrust him self into matters which he knows not, if
he overthrow him self and such as rely upon him: and especially certain
harbrainde wits, who use to despise every thing, with whom I exhort you to
have no dealing, seeing they are men void of al reason, which ought to be the
rule of man's life, and without which a man is no man, but the outward shape of
a man only.


L. Truly I know you fay the truth, and of force the knowledge of al good
sciences must come from God, which is of a divine nature. But let this pass, I
pray you resolve me in this: wherefore use you not to strike at the poniard
side, as well as at the right side, and by what reason strike you at the sword
side? tell me also which is the better side to strike, either the poniarde side
or the sword side, and which of them is more safe?


V. When you go to charge a left handed man in your ward, look first in
what ward he lies, and how he holds his weapons, answering him in the same
form: and touching your demand, to know wherefore I strike not at the Dagger
side, I will tell you: when I find him in this ward carrying his left foot
foremost, if I should make at his Dagger side and strike first, I put my self
in danger to hurt my self, because in thrusting I run upon the point of my
enemy: but making at his left side, I am out of danger of his point, whereof
making to his Dagger side I am in peril: for if you strike first and the
left handed man have a good Dagger, and be quick with his sword, he will
always put you in hazard of an imbroccata: and in truth there are few left
hands which use stoccataes, but for the most part imbroccataes. Now if he
offer you the imbroccata first, being toward his dagger, and you being nimble
with your body, whilst he strikes at you, you shall a little bow aside with
your body, and be at by the point outward from your left side, and you may
easilye give him a stoccata or an imbroccata: but if you strike, first you
endanger your self: and if you will strike the first, you shall go toward his
left side, to be in more safety, and offering your blow, seek to be without
his point, striving to fasten your stoccata at his face, and retire your left
foot back with great swiftnes, your right foot accompanying your left: but
finding him in his ward, to bear his swoorde out at length, if you be well
advised, you shall carry your right foot after your left, and lie in the third
ward I taught you concerning the left foot: and regard well whilst you are in
ward upon the right foot, and if you will, out of the first ward of Rapier and
dagger, enter into the third: be sure that you pass not forward with the left
foot first, for in so doing he might give you a stoccata in the belly or face:
therefore carry your right foot after your left, and in the said ward, charge
him toward his left side, who lying with his left foot forward, as you do, if
you charge him on the left side, unless he be very ready and perfect at his
weapon, you shall have great advantage of him, and make your self master of his
weapons, and greatly endanger his life. Nevertheless if he be skilful, and
know how to play with his body, he may avoid the foresaid dangers, and
hazard your life, if you be not the more skillful, albeit you find him, as l
said before, lying with his left foot forward. Wherefore it is necessary that
you vnderstandand and practice well your self, seeing the least error you
may make, may be your great hurt.


L. But suppose that one be altogether ignorant, and have not these turnings of
his body in a readiness, you told me there was no difference between the
right hand and the left hand, neither of them having advantage of the other.
And now you tell me, that the right hand, in case he lie in the third ward,
traversing toward the left side of his enemy, has great advantage of a left
hand. I pray you therefore show me if there be any other ward, wherein the
left hand may so lie, that the right hand shall have no advantage upon him.


V. You know how I said there was no advantage between them, besides that
which use and knowledge gives to either party, wherefore if the right hand
change from the first ward into the third, to assault the left hand, then the
left hand shall carry his left foot after his right, so lying with the
right foot fowarde in good ward, and the right hand lie in the third ward,
with his left foot forward, and so shall neither the one or the other have a
jot of advantage, except that which he can give by true observation of time
and measure, and his better knowledge: so that if the left hand be well
instructed, finding his adversary with his right foot forward, and with his
own right foot forward chargd toward the right side in good ward, then shall
he have the advantage upon the right handed, and be able to make him self
master of his, enemies arms. But if the right hand be well knowledged and
be acquainted with the turnings and windings of the body, and be quick and
ready with the rapier and dagger, he may avoid these hazards, and endanger
the left handed man. And this is one of the special points which either the
one or the other can learn. This which I have told you (especially if either
of the^ have to deal with one that is ignorant) will give him the advantage
against his adversary. Furthermore, if you shall lie in the first ward with
your right foot foremost, bearing your self somewhat toward the right side of
your enemy, and he offer a mandritta at your head, be you ready with your
dagger bearing the point high, and turning your body upon your left side, for
so you shall give him a stoccata, or imbroccata, or punta riuersa, in the belly
or face, according as you shall find your best advantage, and your enemy most
discovered: you may also standing steadfast in good ward, give him a riuersa at
the legs. But if you should offer to avoid it by turning of your body, and
be not quick therein, your adversary might give you a mandritta upon the face
or head: for there are many who in avoiding with their bodies, lose their
daggers, arid put themselves in great danger: also the escape which you make
with your body upon the left side, is clean contrary to that which you use
against the right handed man, because that when the right handed makes a
mandritta at your head, you do not raise the point of your dagger much, and
turn your body upon your right side, but dealing with the left handed, you
turn your body upon your left side: also when he gives you a riuersa, you
shall turn your body upon the right side. Moreover, if you shall have
occasion to make a mezza incartata, you shall do it in a sort clean contrary
to that which you make dealing with a right handed man, for you make your mezza
incartata to the right handed man, giving him a stoccata, but to the left
handed by an imbroccata, playing well with your body: if you be well skilled
in your weapon, exercising your self in the first, second, and third wards,
you shall do many things more then I speak of. Likewise the left handed, if
he practice well these foresaid wards, shall be able to defend himself, and
to deal against any other ward. And for this time I will not discourse to you
any farther, only I advise you to exercise your self in all these points I
have set down unto you, because besides the knowledge, you shall make your
practice absolute in such sort, that when occasion shall serve to speak of
such matters, you may be able to give a sufficient reason thereof, and also
defend your self against such as will offer you injury, for the world is
now subject to many wrongs and insolences. But you shall thereby make your
self most perfect, and know far more in this behalf then I have uttered unto
you, for it is not possible in this art to express all by words, which by your
own experience and diversity of occurrences you shall find. But for this time
enough, let us pray to God to defend us from all mishaps.


L. Amen, say I, thanking you hartilye for your courtesy and favor showed me
in these matters, and I will not fail hereafter to visit you now and then,
that our friendship may daily grow greater, offering at all times my small
power to do you service in acknowledgement of this your goodness.


V. And I also thank you for your kindness and loving offers. Adio.


L. Adio.


The end of the first Book.
OF HONOR AND HONORABLE Quarrels.

The second Book.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN WOLF. 1594.

THE PREFACIE.
FOrasmuch as diverse and sundry persons have heretofore treated of the matter
of single combats (whereof I have also framed this present discourse) and have
not only grounded their opinions upon deep judgment and exact consideratition
of the subject they were to handle, but also with all furniture of wit and
words commended the same unto the view of the world: J might justly doubt (as
being inwardly guilty of mine own weakness and insufficiency) to go forward
with the enterprise J have presently taken in hand. But for that my purpose
herein is rather to discharge my duty and zeal to the Nobility and Gentry
of England, and by publishing of this Treatise to yield a testimony of my
thankful mind for their manifold favors, than by froth of speech to make my
matter saleable, or to purchase either credit to my self or acceptance of the
Reader: my hope is, that such persons to whose rank it belongs to manage
Arms, and to know the use of their weapon, will no less favorably conceive of
my endeavors, and with their courtesies supply my defectes, then J have bin ready
by my painful and liberal diligence to deserve their likings, and do now
present my labors in the most humble degree of reverence.

A DISCOVRSE OF SINGLE COMBATS: WITH SOME Necessary considerations of the
causes for which they are undertaken.
WHen I enter into due examination, of the first original ground and occasions
of this kind of encounter, and with-all consider the corruption of man's nature
thorough whose ambitious and insolent humors these violent trials have been
often practiced: I cannot but allow of the just complaints framed against man
by Philosophers, and wise men of former times: as that being by his industry
and knowledgeable to search out and attain unto the amplitude of the air, the
hidden secrets of the earth, and the reuolutions of the heavens: yet is so
disguised and masked in the judgment of him self, so retchles in his own
affairs, as that he never effectually considers of his own proper nature and
inclination, much less endeavors to reform, what by the eye of reason he
might find controllable and blameworthie in his disordered affections. For if
as every man is by nature capable of reason and understanding, so he would
dispose and order the conueigh of his life, as he might be reported no evil
speaker, no liar, no deceiuer, no quarreller, no traitor to his friend, or
injurious to his neighbor: they which have written of this subject might well
have spared their labor, and this rigorous kind of congresse had been either
not known at all, or much less practiced then it is. But sithence it is a
thing common in experience, and usually seen, that through want of government
in some persons (who giving themselves to the full current of their disposition,
making their will their God, and their hand their law) matters are carried in a
contrary course: it is necessary that something be written of this action,
even as much as shall be consonant to reason and judgment, at least to
limit and restrain the manner of proceeding in quarrels, if not utterly to
remove the occasion of so unnecessary strifes and fruitless contentions.
Otherwise, in steed of order, we should follow confusion, and deprive both
our own actions and all things else of their due and just ends.

The premises considered, it is no marvel if diverse persons giving themselves
wholye to the bent of their own indiscretion and want of judgment, esteem
of things clean contrary to their nature and qualitye. For if a man frame
himself to lead a civil and temperate course of life, some will say he is
a fool: if he be not quarrell-some, he is a cowarde: if no gamester, he is
of base education: if no blasphemer, an hipocrite: if neither whore-monger nor
baude, he is neither man nor courteous, but altogether ignorant of the rules
of humanity and good fellowship. A lamentable state is that, where men are so
misled by ignorance and self love, as thus to ouersmoothe and color their
vices and imperfections with the names of virtues, and to think any action
current that is done by them, and authorysed by their irresistable swaye, and
distempered appetites.

What is become of the gentilitie and inbredde courtesy of ancient noble
Gentlemen? where is the magnanimitye of the honorable Knights of foregoing
times, whose virtues as they are recorded in histories wherein we read of them,
so ought to have been left to their posteritye, that in them we might see the
image (now forgotten) of ancient true Nobilitye? But since all things fall to
decay, it is no marvel though virtue (I speak with all due reuetence and
favor) be not found but in few: for surely there be many in whom nothing
remains but the bare title of nobilitye, in that they be Gentlemen borne: who
in their manners wholly degenerate from their ancestors, and make no account
either of honor or dishonor, giving themselves to such pleasures, as their
unbridled appetite leads them unto. Neither can I ascribe any reason to this
their slyding from virtue unto vice, contrary to the course taken by their
honorable ancestors, but this, that whereas while their fathers lived, their
bringing up was committed to tutors of good government and discretion, their
parents being dead, they withdraw themselves from their virtuous kind of
life, leaving and rejecting the sage counsels of their instructors, and
cleaning to their own devises. To whom, if they amend not and take a better
course, will lighten shame and destruction.

Wherefore by way of advise, I wish all men to avoid evil company, which for
the most part is the cause of great and infinite loss, as well of honor and
life as of goods and possessions: and to follow virtue, bearing themselves
with a sweet and courteous carriage toward every man, by which course they
shall gain commendation and credit, and shall be esteemed of all men: and
avoiding all such occasions of dislike as may be offered, obtain a good and
honorable reputation. Does not God forbid a private man to kill his neighbor?
as it is manifested in sacred scriptures against Caine, to whom God said,
that the blood of Abel his brother cried from the earth for vengeance against
him, showing thereby that he abhors murder, and will revenge it in due time.

Moreover, he created us naked, without any thing naturally given us, wherewith
to offend or hurt: whereas other creatures have some of them horns, others
claws, others strong and sharp teeth, and others poison: And thus were we
created of almighty God, to to the end we might live in peace and brotherlye
concord, as the sons of God, and not as the children of the Devil, who are
the inuentours that found out the use of weapons, therewith to offend their
neighbors, and to maintain the authority of their father the Devil: who was
a murderer from the beginning, and takes pleasure in the destruction of men,
raising discention between families, cities, provinces, and kingdoms. Upon
which occasion, the necessary use of arms has gotten such credit in the
world, as Kings and Princes have nobilitated some with the name of Knights for
their excellency therein: which name is made noble, and that upon great
reason, for such men as have purchased nobility, by conquering kingdoms for
their Princes, more respecting their honor and countries good, then any other
thing, and esteeming less of life then of death, in regard of preserving that
honor vnblotted, which belongs to Knights, ought not in any wise to be
destitute of high reward. In so much, that arms being doubled by so many
valorous men, it were a great shame for one of noble offspring, not to be able
to speak of arms, and to discourse of the causes of Combats, not to know how
to discern the nature and quality of words and accidents which induce men to
challenges, not to be acquainted with the manner of sending cartels and
challenges, and how fitlye to answer the same: and in a word, not to have so
much experience in these affairs, as to accord the parties challenging and
challenged, bringing them from their hostile threats, to loving embracementes:
and of quarreling foes, to become loving friends, al causes of disconcontent
being taken away on either side. The ignorance whereof, has in these times
bred great mischief, for many think that an injury being offered in deed or
word, the matter may not with their credits be taken up before they have
fought, not regarding if they be iniuried indeed, that they ought first to
examine what he is that has done it, and upon what occasion he might do
it: if in word, what quality the person is that spoke injuriously, and
whether he deserve an answer or no. For a man being carried away with chollor
or wine, may chance to utter that, for which, (his fury being past) he will
be willing to make any satisfaction: wherefore it were fondly done by him that
would fight upon every word. Neither can I be induced to think, that there is
any injury (which is not accompanied with villainy) for which with due:
satisfaction, all cause of fighting may not be taken away. But if the injury
be such, that either murder be committed by treachery, or rape, or such like
villainies, then is it necessary to proceed in revenging it, as in due place I
will more largely declare.

In the mean time, I think it necessary to set forth some considerations of
circumstance belonging to this subject of quarrels, not because I take upon me
to teach or correct any man, (for that belongs not to me) but only by way of
advertisement, to warn gentlemen to avoid all dangerous occasions, growing
for want of foresight.

And first considering the little understanding and small discretion of many,
with the daily danger which such men run into by indiscretion, it is fit
for a man to consider his own estate, for if he be a Gentleman borne, he
ought even for that respect with great regard abstain from any act
whatsoever, whereby his woorthye calling may be stained, he ought to embrace
myldenes and courtesy, as one that has a heart of flesh, not of stone, more
enclyned to clemencye, then to crueltye: to the end his conversation be
acceptable, by reason of his sweet and loving behavior, he must also be in
mind magnanimous, not base or abiecte, as one ill borne, and worse brought up:
for so will he easilye be discerned from that rascal sort of lose minded
companions, unfurnished of all ornaments beseeming a gentleman, whose repair
into company is commonly without using any courtesy or salutation, where
having intruded themselves among honest gentlemen, if chance they are
acquainted with any of them, without craving leave either of him or the rest
of his company, they take him by the sleeue, urging him to go with them,
without any consideration of the person so taken, or of offense thereby offered
to the rest of the company, who in all likely-hoode might be offended with his
unadvised folly, in playing so unmannerly a part: thinking themselves if not
altogether wronged, yet at least discurteously dealt withal, in that their
company should be so neglected and little set by: insomuch that through such
ill demeanor, they oftentimes purchase unto themselves much iniurye. For it
may happen, that some fantastical mad conceited fellow, taking this kind
of discurtesie in evil part, will fall a reasoning with him that offers it,
and so by multiplying of speech, they may fall from words to blows, whereby
some or other may be spoiled upon a matter not worthy the talking of: for all
men be not of one mind, and a mad brainde fellow may easily light upon
another as fond or fondlier fantastical then himself, whereby both of them may
fall into diverse unlooked for inconveniences and mischeefes on the sudden.

Moreover, at weddinges or great feasts, where is great resort both of
gentlemen and gentlewomen, it may happen that a company of gentlemen retire
aside from the rest of the company, taking with them some gentlewoman or other
to deceive the time with talk, or discourse on some other pastime: where if
some one of these mannerles gentlemen should chance to come and solicit the
gentlewoman so retired, to dance with him, without craving either her good
liking, or the ge^tlemens with whom she was discoursing, or otherwise passing
over the time: undoubtedly, if some of the gentlemen of the same company
should happen to be mad conceited, he might chance to be well beaten for his
pleasure: whereof also further inconvenience might arise, and perchance the
whole marriage might thereby be disturbed, and quarrels might grow among the
friends and kinsfolk of either party, whereupon much hurly-burly may ensue: and
experience teaches us, that diverse men of account have lost their lives, upon
like disorders. Whereupon I conclude, that modestye and courtesy are most
convenient ornaments, as whereby men shall avoid many dangers and quarrels.

There be also certain indiscreet men, whose gross fault I cannot ouerslip
without blaming: these men use as they either stand or go in streets, so to
stare and look men passing by them in the face, as if they would for some
reason mark them: which breeds such an offense unto some men so marked, that
they cannot take it in good part, and therefore it is very dangerous. For it
may happen, that a man may look so upon one that either is by nature
suspicious, or by reason of some secret thing known to himself, may suspect,
that he is therefore looked upon. Whereupon great quarrels may arise, for the
man so looked on may fall a questioning with him that looks on him, who
perhaps answering him ouerthwartly, may both move him to choler, and be moved
himself also, and so bring the matter to some dangerous point. Whereof I have
my self seen a notable example, passing through the City of Trieste, in the
uttermost part of the territories of Friule in Italy, where I saw two
brethren, one a most honorable Captain, and the other a brave and worthy
soldier, who walking together in the streets, were very steadfastly e^ed of
certain young Gentlemen of the City, who stared the Captain and his brother
in the face something unseemly, and (as they took it) discurteouslie:
whervppon they asked the Gentlemen in very courteous manner, whether they had
seen them in any place before, or whether they knew them. They answered no.
Then replied the Captain and his brother, Why then do you look so much upon
us? They answered, because they had eyes. That (said the other) is the crows
fault, in that they have not picked them out. To be short, in the end one word
added on the other, and one speech following the other, the matter came from
saying, to doing: and what the tung had uttered the hand would maintain: and a
hot fight being commenced, it could not be ended before the Captains brother
was slain, and two of the gentlemen hurt, whereof one escaped with the rest,
but the cheifest cutter of them all was hurt in the leg, and so could not get
away, but was taken, imprisoned, and shortly after beheadded: he was very well
beloved in the City, but yet could not escape this end: being brought thereto
by following his mad brained conceits, and by being misled by evil company:
the rest of his company were banished their country. Now if these gentlemen had
more courteously and wiselye demeaned themselves, no more hurt had followed
that bad beginning: every man therefore shall do well, to have a great regard
in this respect, least like disorders be to their danger committed.

Furthermore, I like not the custom which some men have meddling with other
men's weapons, especially with theirs that profess arms, neither can I think
it an ouer-wise part for men to be viewing one the others Rapiers, whereof may
this inconvenience rise, that a man may so take occasion to kill his enemy,
toward whom in outward appearance he carries him self and his very
freende: for all is not gold that glistereth, and you may think a man to be
your friend, whose heart as it is hid from your eyes, so also is unknown unto
you: all which mischief may by discretion and foresight be avoided, in
offering no occasion or opportunity for the effecting thereof.

Moreover, when men light into the company of honorable Gentlemen, they ought
to have a great regard of their tung, to the end the say nothing which may be
evil taken or mis-constred: and in talking or reasoning to girde at any man, of
find fault with him, howbeit you do in never so truly, for it is ill playing
so as it may prick, and it is not good jesting to the disgrace of another.

It is no less behouefull for men to beware that they entise or suborne not
other men's servants, which of it self is odious, and purchases naught but
shame and reproach to the performers of such base practices.

I must also mislike them that offer wrong to other men's servants, for besides
this, that they bewraye their baseness of mind, they seem also to resemble him
of whom the proverb says, that being unable to strike the horse, beats the
saddle, which signifies as much, as when he is not able to deal with the
master, the wreaketh it on the servant: I hope therefore that gentle men will
consider how base a thing it is to do this, and also how that oftentimes much
hurt ensues: for one house is by this means stirred up against another, and
whole families are turned up side downewarde: for whosoever sees his servants
abused, will think him self wronged: and will therefore endeavor to revenge
such wrongs, as offered unto him self: according to the proverb, love me and
love my dog.

Also Gentlemen ought to abhor carrying of tales, and reporting of other men's
speeches, for that is a very vnchiristianly actio^, unworthy to proceed from a
brave and free minded man: for such as use tale-bearing, oftentimes thinking
to report but words, report that which causes a man's destruction: on the
other side, if an man chance to speak evil of you in your absence, you ought
not to seek means to be revenged of him that so does, despising and
contemning him. For a common saying it has been of old time (be it spoken
with reverence) he that speaks of me behind my back, speaks with that which
is behind my back: And sure it is that no man of value or virtue will speak
any thing of a man in his absence, but rather to his face; neither must a man
easilye give credit to all things which he hears, for whatsoever he be
that carries tales, he does not nor can not truly deliver a man speech
wholly without addition or substraction: for a word or two is easily adjoined,
which notwithstanding is of efficacy sufficient to alter the whole state of
the speech. Which may move any man to think it a vain matter for to go about
to maintain any quarrel upon no better grounds: and it may fall out, that by
giving credit to tales, one may in danger himself and his friends. Every
man shall therefore do well to bridle his own tongue, and to consider of
other men's speeches before he credit them, and not report unto his friend
every thing he hears spoken of him, except it concern his life or
reputation: for in such a case a man ought to warn his friend, to the end he
may be provided against the wrong which is intended against him. And in this
case also I wish this observation to be kept, that the party grieved first go
to him which spoke the words, and ask him in courteous manner (not without
courage) whether he have reported or spoken such words, etc. Which if he deny
in presence of credible persons, then is he that reported it to be charged
with the injury: who if he acquire himself by proving that to be true which
he reported, yet considering that the party accused has denied them before
witness, you are to rest satisfied and contented: for by denying them he
recalleth them.

Furthermore, let every man take heed he maintain not any dishonored or
infamous persons quarrel, of what condition or calling so ever he be.

Also it is wisdom for a mean man not to deal with men of great calling,
for he shall be sure howsoever the matter go, to get little by it. And if
chance, some occasion of quarrel being offered, he let it slip, suffering the
matter to be taken up, he shall do well to retire into some place further of:
for it is better for men to live as friends asunder, then as enemies together:
whereas else every small matter that might happen, would renew the old
quarrel. Hence comes it that this proverb was used. That the eye sees not,
the heart greeues not.

Contrarilye, a man of great calling and authority ought not to wrong any man
of the meaner sort, for there be many who, howbeit they be but poor and of no
authority, yet they want neither valor nor courage, and will rather dye,
then take any injury. Whereof I will rehearse two or three examples which I
have my self seen.

There is a certain village about a mile distant from the famous City of
Padua in Italye, where the Boggiarini dwelt, men well to live for their
calling, wanting neither heart nor courage: and as it is a custom throghout all
Lombardie, in Sommer-time there be many places, where in Castles and in
Villages also, great markets and wakes be kept, upon the days of such Saints
as the parish Churches are dedicated unto: whither resort merchants and
Cuntry-men of all sorts, from places far and near, to make merry and good
cheer, having good Country music: the younger sort after dinner and supper
use all exercise and pastime, dancing with their loves on a fair green, kept
for the purpose. To which dancing diverse gentlemen would resort, only to see
the cuntrymen and women sporting and using their rural pastimes: among which
gentlemen were two nephews to the Duke, who espying two maidens among the
cuntry wenches surpassing all the rest in beauty and comelines, being sisters
to the Boggiarini, fell into such liking of them, that within some few days
they went unto the house of the said Boggiarini, accompanied with certain
gallant youths, thinking by gifts and fair smoothing speech, to persuade and
entice the maidens to become their paramours, and to follow them home to their
places: but the maidens father and two of their Brethren, came to the
gentlemen, having had an inckling of their intent, and told them that they
were very poor, and not able to entertain them according to their calling,
yet that notwithstanding such was their honesty, that they greatly regarded
their reputation: wherefore if it pleased them to come to their house with
honest intent, they would stretch their power to the uttermost to pleasure them,
and their gratefulnes of mind toward the^ for their courtesy in vouchsafing
to come unto them: but if they came to any other intent then virtuous, then
they beseeched them to depart. Hereupon the mad youths that accompanied the
Gentlemen, began to draw upon the countrymen, who being less in number far
then the gentlemen, were forced to retire and save themselves in their house,
and for that time the matter was so ended. But not long after the Boggiarini
chanced to meet with some of these gallants, where two of them were shrewdly
handled: for which cause the two Boggiarini were committed to close prison by
the Maiestrates, and remained so for the space of eleven or twelve months, and
then were released: the gentlemen understanding that they should be released,
departed soddenlye the next day from Venice, with seven lusty fellows well
armed, intending to kill the Boggiarini, and so went to Padua: on the other
side, the Boggiarinies kinsemen being informed of their cosins release out of
prison, hastened to Padua to bring them home, and carried them their weapons:
they therefore having discharged all duties, after they were set at liberty,
took their journey in hand and went homeward, but the gentlemen meeting them
at a place called Seruy rushed violentlye upon them on the soddaine, crying all
with a loud voice, kill, kill, kill. they not knowing what they meant at first,
but quickly after perceived who they were, would not willinglye have had to do
with them, as by oaths and protestations they declared, defending themselves as
well as they could, and retiring back to escape them: but being compassed
round about, and seeing no way to escape death but by the death of those that
assailed them, when they perceived that neither entreaty nor protestation, nor
any thing could move the reuengfull Gentlemen to hold their hands, even
after so many injuries before that by them offered, as having gone about to
violate their sisters, having beaten their father, and having obtained
punishment for themselves by the Maiestrates, with a years imprisonment, being
content with nothing but their lives, at length after they had retired much,
and sought all means to avoid the fight, they began to set aparte all
respects, abandoning their lives: whereupon laying about them withal strength
and no less courage, in short space they slew the Dukes Nephews both, and
another Gentleman, and hurt diverse of the others that accompanied them, only
one of the Boggiarini being harmed with the loss of three fyngers. The fight
being ended, one of the Boggiarini getting on a Millars horse escaped, the
other three purposing to save themselves in a Monastery, were taken and put in
prison: afterward their cause being brought before the Council of Venice, an
uncle of the gentlemen that were slain, undertook the patronage and defense
of the poor cuntrymen, (they being in truth guiltless) and making a speech
for them, obtained so much that they saved their lives, howbeit they were
banished out of all the territories of the Venetian seignory. The end of these
gentlemen that were so pitifully slain, may be an example to all others how
to behave themselves toward men of meaner degree.

In the same city of Padua, happened another cause not much unlike to this,
between a Gentleman of Brescia and a Baker. This gentleman having many houses
in that city, (in one of which a baker was tenant) upon some small occasion,
gave the baker warning to provide him another house: the baker being an honest
man got all his neighbors to entreat the gentleman to let him continue his
tenant, but their entreaty served not, and the poor man to his utter undoing,
was thrust out of his house, which so grieved him, that he vowed his Landlords
death: who having had some notice thereof, took as great heed as he could,
continually coming home before night, least by his late being abroad he might
be endangered. Thus two years being past, he began by little and little to
wexe more careless, thinking in that space a man might forget any wrong: but
the poor baker had not so forgotten that great injury, for I have heard many
say, that the offender writes in the sand, but the offended in marble: and so
this baker meeting the Gentleman late in the night, hastilye runs into a
shop where Cheese and such like things were sold, where borrowing a knife,
makes after his old Landlord, and ouertaking him, cutteth his throat, so that
the Gentleman within few hours dyed, and the Baker was bannished by the
Maiestrates, because they could not otherwise punish him, he being fled.

I have read in the history of the last wars in Persia, how Mahomet Bassa
General of the Turkishe Empire, took a certain pension from a Soldier (who
for his valor had well deserved it) and bestowed it on some other whom he
better thought of: whereupon the soldier being with great reason offended,
feigned himself mad, and the better to effect his purpose, seemed to think
that he had entered into some order of Mohammedan religion, and so came daily
into the Bassaes chamber mumbling out his prayers, whereat he and all the rest
about him laughed, but the soldier used this so often, till espying fit
opportunity he slew the Bassa, and being taken and brought before the great
Turk, was by him given to the Bassaes slaves to do their pleasure with him,
for he had confessed the whole matter unto the Turk.

Before the overthrow of the Turkish Navy, which was in the year 1571. the
Sates of Venice had a little before sent Sfortia Palauisino their General into
Slauonia by land, and into other Eastern parts, with that authority as in
time of wars Generals use to have: he being arrived in those places, espied
opportunity to take a certain City called Margarita, in a country:
wherefore he leauyed an army with all speed, and marching toward the
City, planted his ordinance, and began to batter the walls of the same
City. At the assault whereof he bare in his hand a kind of pickaxe, with a
thing like a hammer at one end, and a long pike at the staff end, able to
pierce any body armed with a curats: which kind of weapon is much used by the
Sclauonians, Croacians, Turks, Albanoies, and Hungarians: with this pickaxe
did Sforcia Palauicino encourage his soldiers to strike those that returned
from the assault, or were not so forward as they ought to have been, and
among others would have stricken a certain Venetian Gentleman, whose servant
presently stepped before his master to Sforcia with his piece in his hand, and
bad him hold his hand, for that he whom he went about to strike was a
gentleman of Venice and his master, and therefore willed him to take heed of
touching him, purposing, if Sforcia had not retired from his master, to shoot
him through with his Piece. Sforcia noting and admiring the fellows valor and
fidelity, in hazarding his own life to save his master from wrong,
earnestlye requested the Gentleman, to let that his servant be his, promising
to show him much favor, which the Gentleman both to gratify Sforcia and to
advance his man to preferment, did: and Sforcia made him a Captain, and
wonderfully enriched him, insomuch that in few years after he became a great
man.

It is a gross follye for men to scoff and jest at others, is what case
soever it be: neither ought those men who by nature are framed comely and tall,
to be girding at those unto whom nature has not been so beneficial. There be
many that being carried away with plausible conceit of their own manhood and
strength, by reason of the propernes and greatness of their well shapen bodies,
despise men of less stature, thinking that in respect of themselves they be
nothing, and that if occasion were offered them to fight with them, they think
they were able to minse them as small as pye-meat, not knowing that men are not
measured as woollen Cloth by the yard, or that little men have oftentimes
overthrown great fellows. In consideration whereof, I will recount unto you
that happened in Italye, in the City of Boulogna.

When the Emperor Charles the fifth, came to be crowned by Pope Clement the
seventh. This Emperor had in his train, a great Moore like a Giant, who
beside his tallnes wanted no valor and courge, being wonderful strong: he
enjoying the favor of so great an Emperor, was respected of all men, and
particularlye of diverse Princes which accompanied the Emperor: which brought
him to such a proud conceit of himself, and his own worthiness (ascribing the
good favor of all the Princes and gentlemen that followed the Emperor to his
own deserts, and not to the good will that they saw the Emperor bare him)
that he laughed al men to scorn, thinking none able to encounter with him.

Whereupon he obtained leave of the Emperor, that proclaimation should be
made, that if any one in all that City being so full of people, would wrestle
with him, he would challenge him: which being published, every man was sorelye
afraid of his hugenes, strength, and eager countenance. Insomuch that none
could be found that durst undertake that match, save the Duke of Mantuaes
Brother called Rodomont, who though he was but of an ordinary stature, yet was
he both very strong and nimble withal, and (as it was credibly thought,) all
his breast was wholly made of one bone: he was very valiant, and by report could
break at one course seven staves tied together, insomuch that if he had not
had a good horse, he should break his back: but for many rash enterprises, he
was bannished from all tylt-yardes and iusting. This Rodomont seeing that no
man else durst undertake to be matched in wrestling with the proud boasting
Moore, notwithstanding that his brother the Duke and the rest of his kindred
used all means to dissuade him, would nevertheless himself wrestle with him,
to make it known unto all the world, that he would not suffer so beastly a
creature, to stain the honor of Italian Gentlemen, and to give the Emperor
(who was a stranger) occasion to laugh at the Italians, seeing them put down
by a monstrous Moore. Rodomont therefore buckling with the Moore in presence of
the Emperor and all the Princes, behaved himself in such sort, that the Moore
could not foil him with any fall, insomuch that he was brought only to touch
the ground with one knee, howbeit the Moore strained himself to the uttermost
strength: and so the night drawing on, after they had tried their force a long
time, the Emperor caused them to cease till next day, at which time Rodomont
came to meet the Moore again with great courage, and having now had good
trial of his strength, and knowing what he was able to do, as soon as he
saw fit opportunity, nimblye took the Moore about the middle, and clasped
him hard against his own breast, holding him so until he perceived him to be
breathless, and then letting him slip out of his arms, the Moore fell down
dead so heavily, that the whole place shaked, as if some steeple had been
cast down: which Rodomont perceiving, presentlye got from the whole company,
and taking post horse fled, fearing least the Emperor should have done him
some displeasure: but he went not about it, considering that the challenge
was publiquelye proclaimed by his own leave and authority. Howbeit he was
grieved for the loss of his stout Moore.

One example more will I recount concerning insolencye, especially because
this Rodomont of whom I spoke, was an actor in the tragedy. It happened that
the Duke of Mantua and his brother Rodomont being in the same Emperor Charles
his Court about certain affairs of their own, they on a time walked in a
great chamber, expecting that the Emperor should send for them when his
Majesty were at leisure: into which chamber at the same time, came a certain
Spanish Captain, who without any greeting or salutation, came by them and
bravely walked, even between the Duke and his brother, nothing respecting the
greatness of that prince, and so braued them three or four times: wherewith
Rodomont being greatly offended, with the discurtesie of this proud and
insolent Captain, went to a window which he perceived to be open, and staying
til the captain came that way, took him by the collar with one hand, and
putting the other under his breeche, thrust him out at the window, and brake
his neck: Whereupon he fled from the Court with all speed he could. But the
Emperor being informed of the matter, blamed not Rodomont, considering the
Spanishe Captain had so insolently behaved himself to Rodomonts brother the
Duke of Mantua. It were an endless thing for me to rehearse all the examples
that I have heard, concerning this vice of insolency, which are infinite, and
happen daily in all countries, by reason of the little regard that is had in
the bringing up of young men: and so I will only exhort every man to take heed
least him self fall into like folly.

I will not omit to speak of a certain vice, and part not to be used by a
gentleman, seeing it proceeds of mere cowardice: which is, when a man having
fallen out with one or other, and wanting courage to deal with him in single
fight, procures base and cowardly means by the help of some of his friends,
with whom he plotteth how they may circumuent his enemy. And so watching him at
some time or other, will draw upon him, as if he had met him by chance, who
thinking upon no villainy, without any suspicion at all, likewise draws to
defend himself, as a man ought to do, which when the other plotters epsy
standing a far off, draw near as strangers to them both, and unwilling any
hurt should be done on either side, whereas they most traiterouslie will either
themselves impart a thrust by the way, or so strike his weapon, that his enemy
may take occasion to hurt him: which villainy (for I think no term bad enough
to express it by) you may escape, if you take heed when any one draws upon
you, that none else come near you, willing them to retire, with protestation,
that you will take them as your enemies, if they do not: for by reason that
you know them not, they cannot but like of your protestation, if they mean
you no evil, seeing that you not knowing the^ can not assure your self of
their good affection toward you, and care of your safegarde. Therefore in any
case, at such time as you shall happen to be enforced to defend your self on
the sudden, let no man come near you, for it is very dangerous: and I speak
this because I have seen the like done very often, and found it confirmed by
great experience. And to say some thing of parting, I will by the way declare
thus much. That he that will part two that are fighting, must go betwixt the^
both, having great regard that he nether hinders one more then the other, nor
suffers the one more to endanger his enemy than the other: and if more come
to part then one, they must divide themselves, and some come on one side, and
some on the other, taking great heed that neither of them be any way either
prejudiced, or favored: wherefore I do not mislike with the great Duke of
Florence his opinion, who upon pain of great forfeiture, forbad all men to
part those that should fight, for he would have them suffered to fight til
they parted themselves, and if any one chanced to be hurt, they should blame
themselves, seeing they were the only cause thereof.

If the like were used in all places, I think we should not have so much
quarrelling by half as we daily see among Gentlemen: for surely many will
be very ready upon no occasion to draw upon a man, only because he knows
that he shall not be suffered to fight.

Some others there be, who to wreake themselves upon their enemies will do it
by a third means, by gifts or promises, persuading some needy fellow to
pick a quarrel, with their enemy, whom either the poor fellow hurts or
kills, and so encurreth danger of death: or at the least is hurt or maimed
himself. Therefore I could wish every man to meddle with his own quarrels only,
neither revenging his own wrong, by another, nor wreaking other men's injuries
by himself, unless he have good reason to the coatrarie, as in diverse cases a
man may honestly and honorably both entreat others to revenge his wrongs, and
be also intreted of others.

There be also some gentlemen so careless, that being in company with honest
gentlemen, think that whatsoever folly they commit, the company will be
ready to defend them, and so will either scoff or gybe with them that pass
by, or use some knauishe trick toward some one that is not of their company,
or fall a quarrelling with one or other whom they think good, and so having set
many together by the ears, they are the first that will run away, or hide
themselves in some corner till all be done. By my counsel therefore shall no man
be so fond as to back any, or take part with any that are so void of
discretion or government.

Like unto these you shall see others, who will inuit their friends to some
dinner or pastime abroad, only to serve their turns in revenging their
wrongs, having plotted means for the execution thereof, whereby many times
much harm has been done, sufficient to cause any man to beware of falling
into like inconveniences.

All which I have here said, because I have my self had experience thereof.
And these be the things whereof quarrelles proceed, which beginning but
between two or three, sometime are so far increased, that whole families are
wrapped in quarrels and broils, which oftentimes are not ended without great
hurt and bloodshed. Every man ought therefore to know how to behave himself
in these cases, and not to presume upon his own skill or knowledge, but to
learn how he ought to proceed in matters of combats or quarrelles: For a man
may daily learn more than he knows, and especially they that want
experience: seeing it is a matter seldom seen, that he shall be able to know
what is good, that has not had some trial of that which is evil. According
to a verse of Petrarke, Every one must learn to his cost: which saying
pertains especially to young men, who for the most part can never learn to
govern themselves aright, until such time as they have had experience of some
mishappe or other, concerning either their goods, life, or credit. But as
nothing is so dangerous but may be prevented, so in this point, that men
take good heed and arm themselves with the sure shield of sound counsel and
advice, that they may easily avoid such errors as I have in these my
aduertisements discovered and made known for their profit and commodity.

A Discourse most necessary for all Gentlemen that have in regard their
honors touching the giving and receiving of the Lie, whereupon the Duello and
the Combats in diverse sorts does ensue, and many other inconveniences, for
lack only of the true knowledge of honor, and the contrary: and the right
understanding of words, which here is plainly set down, beginning thus.
A RVLE AND ORDER concerning the Challenger and Defender.
ALL injuries are reduced to two kinds, and are either by words or deeds. In
the first, he that offers the injury ought to be the Challenger: in the
later, he that is iniuried: Example, Caius says to Seius that he is a
traitor: unto which Seius answers by giving the lie: whereupon ensues,
that the charge of the Combat falls on Caius, because he is to maintain
what he said, and therefore to challenge Seius. Now when an injury is offered
by deed, then do they proceed in this manner. Caius strikes Seius, gives him
a box on the ear, or some other way hurts him by some violent means:
Wherewith Seius offended, says unto Caius, that he has used violence
toward him, or that he has dealt injuriously with him, or that he has
abused him, or some such manner of saying. Whereunto Caius answers, Thou
lie: whereby Seius is forced to challenge Caius, and to compel him to fight,
to maintain the injury which he had offered him. The sum of all therefore,
is in these cases of honor, that he unto whom the lie is wrongfullie given,
ought to challenge him that offers that dishonor, and by the swoorde to
prove himself no liar.

There be many that delighting to find fault with that which is set down
by others, be it never so truly and exactly performed, will in this case
also seek to overthrow the rules which I have above alleged concerning
Challenging and Defending, opposing many Arguments and objections, which I
think frivolous to trouble the Reader withal, and therefore wy1l neither
rehearse them he^re, nor sp^nde so much labor in vain as to answer them,
considering that men but of mean capacity will be able to discern and judge
of the small reason that they are grounded upon. For who is there that sees
not, howbeit some men finer witted than endued with valor and courage, will by
multiplication of speeches give cause of greater offense, and thereby give the
other occasion to challenge the combat, rather than to do it themselves. Yet
that notwithstanding the true and perfect manner of proceeding in cases of
honor is, that whosoever offers injury by deed, as striking, beating, or
otherwise hurting any man, ought presently without any further debate or
questioning, to be challenged to the Combat, unless he refuse the same by
making satisfaction for the offense or offered injury.

And in injuries offered by word, no respect ought to be had of all the
words which by aunsweres and replies are multiplied, (as when one says, Thou
lie, the other answers with the same words, and the first replieth, with
thou lie also, and so may perchance make a fraie with words only, which
foolish and childish manner of proceeding cannot but be misliked of by
Gentlemen of reputation) but to whom so ever the lie is unjustly and
wrongfully given, unto him shall it belong to become Challenger, by Arms to
maintain what he spoke or did, whereupon the lie was given him.

What the reason is, that the party unto whom the lie is given, ought to
become Challenger: and of the nature of Lies.
SOme men marvel why that he unto whom the lie is given, ought rather to
challenge the Combat, than he that is called a traitor or a villain, or by
some other injurious name, seeing that it would seem more reasonable, that
he which is most iniuried, ought to become Challenger, and not the other, and
that this is a greater injury to say unto a man, Thou art a thief, thou art
a villain, and a traitor, than this, Thou lie. But the laws have no regard
of the words, or of the force or efficacy of them, but provide that the
burden of the challenge shall ever fall on him that offers the injury: for
it is thought that every man is honest, just, and honorable until the
contrary be proved. And therefore as in common trial by civil judgment and
order of law, whosoever is accused of any crime, is by simple denying the
same delivered from condemnation, unless further proof thereof be brought
against him: even so in this case, whosoever speaks of another man contrary
unto that which is ordinarily presumed of him, it is great reason that the
charge of proof should lie upon him, to make that manifest unto the world by
force of Arms, that such a man is guilty of such and such things as he has
laid to his charge. Heereuppon some may cauell, and ask how that he that
is iniuried by deed shall become challenger, (as I have said) if that the
laws provide that the burden thereof shall belong unto him that offers the
injury.

Whereunto I answer, that if I beat or strike any man, thereof proceeds
no cause of proof, it is manifest that I offend or hurt him, and I know no
cause why I should prove that I do so. But if the other say unto me, that I
did not as a Gentleman worthy to bear Arms, or that I dealt not honorably,
or any such thing, I repel his sayings with the Lie, and force him to
maintain what he has spoken: whereof I am acquitted with sole denial, till
he make further proof.

And now as concerning the nature of Lies, I say that every denial, be it
never so simple, bears the force of a Lie, being altogether as much in
effect. And I see no other difference between a simple denial and the lie,
than is betwixt a speech more or less courteous. Wherefore although the names
of denial are diverse, as Thou lie, Thou say untruly, Thou speak
falsely, Thou sparest the truth, Thou tellest tales, Thou regardest not how
falsely thou reportest a matter, Thou art wide from the truth, This is a lie, a
tale, a falsehood, etc. Yet all these manners of speech import the Lie, whether
he unto whom they were spoken spoke injuriously or no. For though I say not
any evil thing of any other, but chance to discourse of some matter, or
rehearse some tale or history, or report any thing, as occasion of speech
may be offered me, if some one that stands by tells me that I say not
truly, or use any of the foresaid forms or manner of speech unto me,
surely he brings my truth in question, and causes me to be reputed for a
liar, and so consequently offers me injury. And forasmuch as every injury
offered by words, may be the first time wreasted and returned upon him that
offers the injury, I may lawfully repulse that injury with a second
denial, which shall bear the force of a Lie, where his first shall be
accounted of the nature of an injury, by which means the burden of the
challenge shall rest whol^e upon him. But if he chance to say only thus, or
after this manner unto me, This is not so, or the truth hereof I take to be
otherwise, etc. I cannot take any such speech injuriously, for it may be the
thing whereof I spoke is not true, and yet I do not lie, and therefore such a
speech so spoken cannot any ways burden me, unless I shall make some
injurious reply thereunto, which he repealing with the lie, may lay the
burden of challenge on me: for a word comes sometimes to be iniuryous,
and sometimes not, only by being sometimes injuriously spoken, and sometimes
not. As for example: If one man do say unto another, Thou say not true,
he does thereby make him a Liar, and so he does injury him. But if he do
replye and say in this manner, That which thou say is not so, or it is not
true, etc. No such manner of speech or saying can be injurious, for that, as I
have above said, the thing may be false, and yet he no Liar, by reason that
he either may be evil infourmed, or else not understand the matter as it
was, or some such other thing might happen, whereby he might be moved to
report and speak that again which is not true: wherefore any such answer
whatsoever cannot in any sort fall burdenous unto him. One case excepted,
which is, if he say that he did such a thing, or that he did say such a
thing, or that he had been about such a matter, or that he dealte in such a
case, etc. And another answer him that he did not, or that the same which he
said was not true, etc. For so he us burdened being accounted a liar, because
a man cannot be misinformed in any thing which he said or did himself, which
injury he is to repulse with the lie, and so the charge of challenge
remains on the other, unless he in saying that he did or said such or
such a thing, do thereby offer some man injury, who by giving the Lie may
repulse the same injury, and so cast the charge of challenge upon him. To
conclude, by all this which is said it manifestly appears, that whosoever
takes heed that he offer no offense in his words or speech, shall never be
endangered to be iniuried with the lie.

Of the manner and diversity of Lies.
TO the end that the nature of Lies may the more easilye be known, and when
the Lie ought to be given and when not, and in what cases, it is requisite I
should particularly discourse thereof: For some Lies be certain, and some
conditional, and both the first and the later, some of them are general and
some of them special. Unto which two sorts, I will add a third kind of lies,
which may be termed Vaine-lies.

Of Lies certain.
LIes certain, are such as are given upon words spoken affirmatively, as if
any man should say or write unto another. Thou have spoken to my discredit,
and in prejudice of my honor and reputation, and therefore do lie. And in
this respect is this a lie certain, because I affirm that such a one has
spoken evil of me: yet because I do not particularly mention wherein or how
he has offended me by speech, the lie which I gave him is general, and
therefore of no force. For to have the lie given lawfully, it is requisite that
the cause whereupon it is given, be particularlye specified and declared.
Wherefore lies special, and such as are given upon sure and express words,
are such as assuredlye bind the parties unto whom they be given, to prove the
same which they have spoken, when as they cannot deny that they have said,
whereupon the lie was given them, as for example; Alexander thou have said,
that I being employed by his highness in his service at Pauia, have had secret
conference with the enemy: wherefore I say that thou have lied. This is a sure
and a specially, and by consequence lawfully given.

Of conditional Lies.
Conditional lies be such as are given conditionally: as if a man should say
or write these words. If thou have said that I have offered my Lord abuse,
thou lie: or if thou say so hereafter, thou shall lie. And as often as
thou have or shall so say, so often do I and will I say that thou do lie. Of
these kind of lies given in this manner, often arise much contention in words,
and diverse intricate worthy battles, multiplying words upon words whereof
no sure conclusion can arise: the reason is, because no lie can be effectual
or lawefull, before the condition is declared to be true, that is, before it
be justified that such words were certainly spoken. For the party unto whom
such a lie is given, may answer according as he finds him self guilty or
not: if chance he have so said, he may by general words seek means to
escape the lie which is given him: and withal upon those words which the other
has spoken or written unto him, he may happily find occasion of a mere
quarrel, and give him a lie certain. And on the other side, if indeed he have
not spoken those words whereupon the lie was given him, then may he say
absolutelye, that he spoke them not: adding thereto some certain or
conditional lie, as for example: Whereas thou chargest me that I should say
that thou art a Traitor, and thereupon say that I lie: I answer, that I
never spoke such words, and therefore say, that whosoever says that I have
spoken such words, he lies. Yet notwithstanding I cannot like of this manner
of proceeding, because thereby men fall into a world of words.

Some hold an opinion, that such an answer might be framed: Thou do not
proceed in this case like a Gentleman, neither according to the honorable
custom of Knights: which when thou shall do, I will answer thee. Unto whom I
cannot give applause, considering that the other may replye, that he lies,
because he says he did not as a Gentleman, etc. alleging that many
Gentlemen have observed and used that manner of proceeding, and so shall the
other have occasion by his ignorance, in not knowing how to answer the lie
conditionallye given him, to give him a certain lie: therefore not to fall into
any error, all such as have any regard of their honor or credit, ought by all
means possible to shun all conditional lies, never giving any other but
certain Lies: the which in like manner they ought to have great regard, that
they give them not, unless they be by some sure means infallibly assured, that
they give them rightly, to the end that the parties unto whom they be given,
may be forced without further Ifs and Ands, either to deny or justify, that
which they have spoken.

Of the Lie in general.
THe lie in general is considered in two sorts, the one having respect to the
person, and the other to the injury. That which touches the person, is termed
general, when no especial person is named to whom the same is given: as if
one should say, whosoever has reported of me that I have betrayed my lord,
does lie falsely. And to this lie it is holden of brave men of reverence, that
no man is bound to answer the same: which seems to me to be excellent well
understood, because this charge or imposition may seem to touch many,
being that many have spoken the same, and so one with many should be bound to
fight: which were to grant an conuenience directly, for it is not allowed that
any man should enter into combat more then once for one quarrel, and that no
man shall put his honor upon another man's sword or valor: so might it come to
pass that such a one might take the quarrel, that the lie was never meant unto.
whereupon, to avoid such disorders, the best mean is, that this lie so given be
not adjudged lawful, nor approved for sufficient.

The other lie which we have termed general in respect of the injury, is this:
Antony thou have spoke ill of me, or thou have said some what in prejudice of
my reputation, and therefore I say that thou have lied. This lie for that it is
upon words in which the lie especially declared not what is the thing from
whence the slander was, or speech prejudicial to reputation spoken is, for
that in many sorts a man may be ill spoken of, and ones reputation
prejudiced: happening very often, that he whosoever talks of another man,
in diverse matters speaks that which he of whom they were spoken, might
esteem them to his shame and disgrace: and therefore it is most necessary to
express the point whereupon he holds himself offended: to the end that it
may be considered, Specification of the quar^ell.
whither he will take upon him to prove his sayings, or whither he will prove it
with his weapon, or ciuillye by the law. And thus for these causes this lie
cannot be accounted no ways of value nor lawful: and he that has given the
same, if he will come to the definition or determination of quarrel, must
write the particular and declare it: for in right he is bound so to do, if so
much time be permitted.

And this I say, a lie given in this sort, does not only bind, but is very
dangerous to be wrested, and the danger whereof I speak, is thus: as by this
case following you may easily see. Paul understands that Nicholas has said
of him that he is an Usurer, and having understanding of these words, writes
unto him: Nicholas thou have spoken ill of me, and therefore I say thou
lie. Paul peradventure knowing many defaults more then this in Nicholas, may
answer him thus: I confess that I have spoken ill of thee, but I specified
the particularitie of that which thou have done, and I said that long since
thou committedst such a fault, and such another, and show how and thus bring
forth the ground of his speech, without making mention at all of that
particularity of which Paul charged him with: and this may add more, that so
thou lie thy self, saying that I speaking ill of thee do lie. Here if Paul
return to write, should reply, I say that thou lie in saying that I am an
Usurer. Not for all this shall his lie make him guilty, because the general
lie permitting an exception, it may be well wrested, being apparent that in
speaking ill of Paul, Nicholas did not lie. And after the first lie is
accounted false, it is to be presumed that also the second contains a kind
of falsetie: for whosoever is accounted once naught, is always esteemed naught
in the same kind: and the presumption being against Paul, it behooves him to
be the actor, so as for the effect in the generality of the lie, he shall fall
into this inconvenience. Besides, such may be his default as the same by law
might be proved against him, that neither as Defendant or Plaintiff, he may
enter the duello or combat. I conclude therefore, for the small validity of
the general lie, that it has quality to put an other man to the pains of
proof: as for the danger that it brings with her, all cauilieres, and brave
men ought to take heed of it altogether. Although there were no other thing,
then to avoid the multitude of cartelles, being a thing more comely for
gentlemen to bind themselves to the action, then lay themselves open with many
words.

Of the Lie in particular.
THe special lies are those which are given to special persons, and upon
express and particular matter, and the example is this: Siluano thou have
said that at the day of the battle of S. Quintin I did abandon the Ensign,
whereof I say thou lie: and this is that lie that before we termed assured
and lawful. It is very necessary that he that goes thus to work, must
have such profes, and witness of the speech of that he which intends to
begin the repulse with the lie, that the other may not deny it: for if I
have not proofs convenient, he may answer that I have lied my self in so
giving him the lie, and in such a case I shall not only be driven to prove
that I abandoned not the Ensign, but prove that he has laid that blame upon
me unjustly: but if he cannot justly deny it, then there is no doubt but that
he must also prove it. But when he shall deny that he spoke these words, and I
have proved them by just circumstance, if then he ask the combat to prove his
saying that way on me, the same then is to be utterly refused, for the denial
of his speech comes so to be an unsaying of his word: and thereupon it is
to be presumed, that as well in his accusation as denial, The office of great
Lords. The office of Caualieres.
he was a liar. And in these quarrels, wherein appears manifest falsitie,
those who command (as sovereign Lords) ought not to permit the combat, nor
brave men (I mean caualieres) ought not to be ashamed in such cases to refuse
the battle, being more honorable to avoid it with reason, then to enter it
against all right, and all bond of duty. Now this true and lawefull lie
being that we would in this chapter specify, with which only brave men
ought to give the repulse unto all injuries, wherewith they find themselves
offended with any body, and will either by mouth or writing give it, they must
so perfectlye manifest themselves in the words wherein they find themselves
outraged, and in such sort build their intent, that no one of their words may
be denied nor wrested: if they determine not afterward to have question or
doubt of the Challenger or the accused, which is in english Plaintiff and
Defendant.

Of foolish Lies.
THe common opinion is, that he who gives the lie, loses the election of
weapons, so that he say unto another that he lies, without having regard to
the manner how he does it, whereby he thinks to have done great matter. And
hereupon it comes, that every day there rises from the common sort new
and strange foolishnesses, The lie the other speaks.
as he who will give the lie ere the other speak, saying: if thou say that I
am not an honest man, thou lie in thy throat.

And this is a changing of nature, for the lie being but an answer, in this
manner it comes to answer that which was never spoken. Here let us put a
case, it is true that sometime one hearing that another has said that he is a
thief, will answer: If thou say that I am a thief thou lie: this Lie is
general, held incontinentlye to charge another. A lie that gives means to
be repented.
But the form of this gives (as it seems unto me) means and way to the
speaker thereof to resolve with himself well whether he will continue therein
or no, as though he would say to himself, take heed if thou will affirm
that which thou have spoken, that auouching it I pretend to give thee the Lie,
and he not returning to say the same, that lie does not bind, for that a
man may sometime repent himself, saying somewhat in choler or with little
consideration. But now to return to our foolish Lies, A lie at pleasure.
whose fashion will give cause of laughter. If thou will say that I am not thy
equal, thou lie: where he does not only answer himself before the other
has spoken, but also puts himself upon his pleasure, that say I what I
can, till I have spoken it I do not lie: as I cannot say that I am going
into France, until that I am in the way, and that I am imbarqued. And of such
like Lies I have heard some good store amongst no common men. There are not
any of these more right than this, which is much used, in that thou have
spoken ill of me, thou lie: and if thou deny the same thy saying, thou
lie also. That if I have spoken il of thee, or if thou can prove that I
have spoken it or no, if thou can prove it, it behooves thee to tell it. Let
this be an example, thou have said that I am an heretic, and show plainly
that I have said it, and upon the express and particular injury, give me ^
certain and especial lie, if thou can not prove that in such words I have
iniuried thee, and wilt enter into qu^rr^ll with me, then it is thy part to lay
before me that I have spoken ill of thee: so it touches me to answer and
repel the blame that thou do give me. It is no reasonable matter that thou will lay upon me the title of a slaunderer, and yet take away the means both
of my answer and repulse, and be both Challenger and Defender in one matter.
But these are certain fashions of writings or challenges, found out either of
men which think themselves too wise, or those which understand very little.
These kind of lies I esteem not only to be unlawful, but that they may be
turned back with a lie in the throat: that I who know that I have not injured
him, may safely answer him that he lies, that I denying that I have spoken
ill of him do lie.

And I may speak of the other, that one meeting with his enemy says: hold
or give me thy hand, that I may tell thee that thou art a liar, and he
answers that thou lie: and so not using any otherwise his hands, thinks
sufficiently that he has discharged himself of his adversaries charge, and
does not understand that these words, hold thy hands, will signify, I will
prove it if thou hold thy hand: and not holding his hand, he is not bound to
go any further. It is sometime seen that one asking another a thing, as a man
should say: have not thou said such words? wast thou not such a day in such
a place? in stead of answer yea or no, it is answered by a lie: of all such,
and such like, I do not intend to mention or remember, being to great a labor
to gather them together, for that they are worth no more, A lie given without
cause,
than as he that had lost his girdle, said that whosoever had taken away the
same lied. Or he that heard another break wind behind, said, if you speak to
me sir, you lie in your throat. To these I will join others as vain and
foolish, whereof I will give examples. I say to you, A lie given after an ill
sort.
like to like, whosoever you be, that he is an whoremonger, and he then not
give them one word, but another day with advantage of weapon or company, will
tell me that I lied. The other being himself likewise iniuried, will make no
answer, and afterward out of audience will say unto the giver of the
injury, that he lied, or will publish a cartell full of giving the lie. These
I say, and such like are of no worth, for that they are not given like
Gentlemen or Caualiers, In disgrace given and received in the presence of
others with out advantage, there must no advantage be sought in the answering
of them, but unto the injuries presently given, present answer must be made.
To those a far off given, far they are to be answered: and such as are
writ, written answers are allowed. Neither must that lie be called lawful
which is given with more advantage, than the injury was given, because no
respect ought to withdraw me to answer him who does injury or hurt, so that
he be not armed, or so accompanied, that I answering him, he might do me
wrong in odds of weapon, in such manner iniuring me, I ought not vnsaie my
word in seeking my advantage, yet it is certain, that if any person, I
having means to do supersticery and wrong, should charge me with infamy, I
ought not to stay from giving him the lie therefore, for so is my dementie or
lie lawful. Neither can he allege, that my challenge therein was
supersticery, the fault being to be given by him who saw me so aduantaged
under him, and would come to outrage me. But Gentlemen out of this case must
observe, that the lie or dementie ought to be given in more honest manner than
the injuries are done. And if that one far off thee have spoken ill of thee
thou straight may give him the ly, and may write to him that he lies in
his throat, and so likewise present. And if he have written any thing in
preiud^ce of thy reputation, thou by writing may answer him, and very
honorably thou may also give it him present. And seeing now mention is made
of writing to him who far of speaks ill of another, I will add this, that
I know that of some it is said, that whosoever is the first that writes he is
accounted Chalenger, which opinion is in no sort to be allowed, for the
Challenger is he that moves the quarrel, and he offers the quarrel that
gives the injury, whether it be by word or deed present or far off: and
for that the other shall not prejudice the matter with the manner of writing,
the writing first or last is no matter at all. But I have seen it disputed
amongst the wisest sort of Gentlemen, that cartelles of dementies or giving
the lie, being here and there cast abroad, every one did defend for
themselves to be the first that published, pretending amongst themselves,
that he who was the first that wrote have the best advantage.

And because we have spoken of supersticerie, which is not only considered in
respect of the advantage of weapons or of persons, but for respect of
privileged places, or the sight of the prince, where it is not lawful for one
that he may freely show his grief.

Here one may ask me what he ought to do, if in the presence of the Prince,
one will give me outrageous words? An answer in the view of the Prince,
To this I will always thus answer, that neither, he ought to let pass the
repulse by the lie, nor the Prince ought at all to take it in disdain, for he
ought rather to be tolerated that gives another a repulse of an injury,
then he who does it. and he that bears that in his presence an injury
should be done me, of a greater reason ought to bear that I defend the same:
but yet so, and with such reverence must he answer the same by adventure, as
the same may seem full of modesty. And this I will now say, that so much the
more I hold my self bound to answer, by how much that I know that he that
did me injury, is accounted of the Prince, before whom I may be accused: but
herein I prescribe no law to any body, but only show mine opinion, which
whosoever follows, shall do honorably and for his reputation: whom it shall
not like to follow, let custom stand in stead of law. And now turn to say,
that Princes ought more patiently comparte the discharge, then the charge that
another has given in his presence.

A conclusion touching the Challenger and the Defender, and of the wresting and
returning back of the lie, or Dementie.
TO come to the end of this Treatise of Dementies or giving the lie, and to
conclude the question of the Challenger and the Defendant, seeing already we
have determined, that he to whom the lie is given for repulse of an injury,
he is properly the Defendant. To the end that more clear contentment therein
may be given, we are very diligently to examine the lawful dementies of lies,
and by this examination remember our selves (if it be convenient) of those
things which before we have treated of, and of their manner, and principally
of the proper nature of the Lie, the which is to put back the injury* and
when it does not this office, it becomes of it self an injury, and with
another lie the same may be repelled: and upon this consideration, I say that
the Lie may be given in the affirmative, and so upon the negative, and
sometime it falls out, that upon the affirmative it cannot be given, and
sometime upon the negative it has no place, and so consequentlye both here
and there being given, it may be wreasted and sent back, and yet it may be
given both in the affirmation and negation in the same quarrel, without that
it may be subject to any repulse of either of the parties.

And here of each my opinion, I will give an example, The Lie lawfully given
upon the affirmative, is such as before we have set down more than in one
manner. One says of another, that he is a rebel unto his Lord, he who
answers, says that he lies. This lie cannot be avoided, being that it is
given in the repulse of the slander which is laid upon him. But if I should
say of any man, that he were an honest man, and one should give me the Lie
upon these words, in this it requires not repulse but an injury, and I may
say, that he should lie that thinks that I should lie. Now is it his part
to prove that he is not an honest man, as well by reason I gave him cause of
injury, as also that it is presumed of every one that he is honest, if the
contrary cannot be apparently proved: and whosoever says that another is
dishonest, must prove his fault therein committed, for the which he ought not to
be esteemed an honest man.

Now let us pass over to the Lies which are given upon the negative, whether
they be lawful, or lawfully may be turned back or no: as if one should
say of me, that in some matter of arms or fighting I did not my duty, and
I should answer him with the lie, the same shall be a most lawful
answer: for that in that speech, that I had not done my duty, he puts
on my back no small burden of infamy, wherein it shall be most lawful and
convenient that I should discharge my self with the lie, and here the
repulse of an injury being the lie, and the presumption being in my favor,
and that a man must not presume of another, but that he does his duty in
all respects, whosoever goes about to give me that blame, to him it
appertains to be esteemed Challenger. But if one say that he has not
failed in his loyalty to his Lord, and I should answer him that he lies,
he may say unto me, thou lie in that thou say I lie, and with great
reason it may be said, having answered me so, for he not doing injury
unto any body with those words, nor any man ought to presume that another
should be disloyal, that with the lie which I give him, I do not defend my
self nor any other of any injury, but go about to outrage him, when he
may lawfully return back that lie, and I come directly to be dementied, and
so consequentlye must become Challenger.

Now it rests that we show unto you the examples of these cases, in which
in every and the self same quarrel, both upon the affirmation and negation
you may give the lie, that neither of the one side nor the other there is any
means or way left to give them the repulse, and it is thus.

Two Gentlemen or Caualiers are brought to the steccata to fight, there are
weapons presented unto them, upon the which they reason and debate between
themselves whether they be to be refused or no, so long that the day is
passed with out coming to the battle or fight, there does arise a question
heerevpon amongst them, whether they be refused or no.

This man whosoever he be says, that with reason they might be refused,
does charge him that brought them, and he who says that they may not be
refused in reason, charge him that refuses to fight with them, and therefore
the task being given as well on the affirmative as negative, the lie may
accordingly be given, and no more the affirmative than the negative may it be
wrested or sent back, being both in the one and in the other manner given for
repulse, and not of any injury. And thus much may suffice to be spoken of
this subject, seeing that of the other manner of Lies, how they ought to be
given, and which of them may be wreasted, and which not, thereby appears that
they are fully demonstrated which are lawful: and those known, it follows
consequently to know who ought to be accounted chalenger. And so (God be
thanked) we find that almost we have dispatched this matter, no less uneasy
(as it is said before) to be handled and understood, than necessary to be
known of all caualiers and Gentlemen.

Of injuries rewarded or doubled.
Here yet there rests a new question, yea, even in the Challenger and
Defendant, which we will not let pass without some declaration, and this is
in such cases, as when on the one part they speak, and on the other they
answer with injurious words, and that either they reply the same, or do
adioyne unto them others, of which I have made this title of requited injuries
or redoubled.

For requited injuries I understand, when one replieth only the injury that was
given him, and does adioyne nothing thereunto: as thou are a thief, a thief
thou art. The redoubled I call those, when one is not contented to have said
to his adversary the self same words of outrage, but does join thereto an
other or more, as if I should say to another, that he is a false money maker,
and he should say to me I am so, and an homicide withal: upon these causes the
writers of Duello move many questions, whither upon them there should be any
fighting or no: and if they should fight which should be Challenger and which
the Defendant: herein to show you that which I think, before I will speak
thereof any thing at all, I do adiudge him an ill brought up gentlemen, who
feels himself to be charged with any blot of infamy, shall not be as well
atte^tiue to take away that, as to seek with like or greter injury to slander
his adversary, that he ought with a lie put back that which shall be spoken to
him, rather then either reply the same, or multiply any other in words: and so
doing, two commodities will follow him, the one that with the lie he shall
charge his enemy with that duty to be Challenger: the other that he shall
make himself known a person far from injurious intention. But if the case
happen in any of the forms aforesaid, there is somewhat to be marked how a man
must behave himself therein. I say therefore when one calls me traitor, and I
say thou art a traitor, and do not thereto only ioyn any word that has not the
force of the lie, no combat is to follow: An injury no thought.
and if he come to replye, the same injury many other times, it shall be as
much as if an injury once repulsed, there is no more repulse to be spoken of.

But if it should be answered, thou lie that say I am a traitor, for that
thou art the traitor: I do not see wherefore the combat should not follow
here, for with these words I have discharged my self with that he charged me,
and laid upon him the slander of traitor, which is that I send back the
injury done to me, and injury him with the repulse thereof, binding him to
his proof: and although he should replye, but thou lie thy self that I am
the traitor, for all this he is not discharged, but answered to that iniurye
that I gave him: and because the lie was given of me in time, it will have the
greater reason, and is required at his hand to prove the truth of his speech:
but having called me traitor, I should answer him, thou art the traitor, and
he afterward subioyne thou lie: now the case of Challenger will come upon
me, because he does not stay himself upon the first iniurye, but answers
to that I said to him: and now to me there remains no more means to bind
him to the proof, being already with the lie given me made Challenger.
Neither can it be said, that that answer, thou art the traitor, has so much
the force of a repulse, as of an injury: for that the repulse stands in the
negative, and if the negative have not the force of a lie, it charge not: and
that being answered Traitor, the injury with a lie may be put back lawfully,
that although it be true, that an injury once wrested will not permit any more
writing: it is to be understood that there is great difference between the
wresting and repulse: with the wresting, I say to thee that thou say of me,
but with the repulse I give thee not that blame that thou give me, but only
do free my self thereof, charging thee with no blame at all, but with the
duty to prove that thou have said, and that that which I say should be so:
if one should say that I am a thief, and I should answer him that he lies,
this shall be termed injury, and not wrested, but repelled: and if to one of
these lies which we have showed before, which have the nature of an iniurye, an
answer should be made to them by another lie, this shall be called wresting. And
this is a true resolution, and so to be approved and followed according to the
style and order of Gentlemen and Caualiers. And that which I have said of
rewarded injuries, I say the same of the redoubled, that he must not be
termed Challenger by the multiplication of injuries, but must be ruled by the
lie, having said to you before that about question of words, the proof of the
laws are appointed to the iniuryer, and not to the injured: true it is, that
when neither of the one side nor the other the lie is, he shall not remain
without some blame to whom the same was first spoken, how many or great
soever they be.

Nor that is not to be taken for good advise which is set down by some
writer, that if I should call another Traitor, and he should answer that I am
a Traitor, a Thief, a robber by the high way, I should subioyne I will prove
it to thee with my weapon, that I am neither Traitor, Thief, nor robber by the
high way, but that thou art the traitor thy self.

What a foolish enterprise shall this be of mine, that having the means to
make me Defendant, will make my self Challenger, Quarrels must be simple.
and offer my self to the proof. Besides, what an ill kind of proceeding
should mine be, to come to the determining of so many quarrels with one
battle or combat, the same not being to be granted for diverse things
together: for it may come to pass in the one they may be true, in the other
false: and so fight for the one with reason, and the other without: about
which, those that will form quarrels ought to be well advised: and if they be
not rightly framed, the Lord before he gives license for the field, must
reform them, or at the least provide that when the gentlemen or caualieres be
conducted thither, that their godfathers in capitulating, give them a
convenient form.

That straightwaies upon the Lie, you must not take arms.
NOw if in the discourse about the lies which we have made, it is concluded
that the lied, which is he that has the lie given to him, is to be Challe^ger,
we do not say therefore that is to be understood, that presently for the lie
a man should run to his weapon: for the trial of the sword being doubtful,
The sword and civil proof.
and the civil certain, the civil is that way by which every man of
reckoning and reputation ought to justify himself. For he ought to be
esteemed honorablest, who with certain proof approves his honor, then the
other that with an incertaine testimony, does think to answer his reputation.
But I see amongst Gentlemen to be noted such an abuse that they think
themselves to have committed villanye, to attempt any other means than by the
sword: wherein how much they deceive themselves which think so, I will say
nothing else at this present, but that the civil proof is the proof of reason,
and fightting but the proof of force: and that reason is proper unto man, and
force of wild beasts. Leaving the civil proof and taking the arms, we
leave that which is convenient for men, to have recourse to that which is
belonging to brute beasts: which peradventure Gentlemen would not do very
often, if they understood well their duty, and when they would well consider
that it is no less the part of a Caualier to know, to put up well his sword,
then well to draw it out.

Those therefore which think they have the lie duly given them, ought if they
have means by the way of reason to prove their saying, they ought by the same
I say, prove it, and not follow the other way of arms, if thereto they be not
constrained by necessity, and so as they could not by any other means
justify themselves.

Those other which are offended for that they have not the lie duelye given
them, those may wrest the same, or by some means lightly reprove it.

Of the form of Cartels, or Letters of Defiance.
WHen Cartels are to be made, they must be written with the greatest breuity
that may be possible, framing the quarrel with certain, proper, and simple
words: and specifying whether the cause was by word or deed, you must come to
the particulars of the same, showing well the persons, the thing, the times and
places, which do appertain to the plain declaration thereof, so that one
may well resolve to the answer: for the Duello being a form of judgment, as
in the civil, criminal, and in action of injury, a particular setting down
is required: no less can be said of the judgment belonging to Gentlemen and
Caualiers, theirs being of no less force. And he that shall be Challenger, shall
call his party adversary to the field, he that shall be the Defendant, shall
join thereto his lie.

And in such manner of writing, the least eloquence and copy of words that
may be must be used, but with naked and clear speech must knit up the
conclusion.

And this I say principally of the Defendant, which with superfluous speech
most commonly confound themselves, and in that they are not content to have
repelled the injury with the lie, and will set down the field, and say that
they will defend their saying with their weapon: which things are not only
superfluous, but dangerous, because when one has given the lawful lie,
certain, and particular, so incontinent is he to whom the lie is given made
the Challenger, and the proof belonging unto him, it is in him to choose what
way best likes him to prove his saying: whether it be civil, that is by law,
or by arms: and mine adversary choosing the proof by arms, the choice of
them comes unto me.

Now if I give the lie, and afterward set down the proof of arms, I enter
into his jurisdiction, and do the office of Challenger: whereupon it is most
reasonable that mine appertain to his, and seeing that I have elected the
proof of arms, the election of them does not remain to him: for it is no
reason nor honestye, that I both call him to arms, and also take the choice of
them.

And here I must adioyne another thing, that albeit that ordinarily he that
has the election of arms, is accounted the guilty or Defendant, I should
say that the same should cease in this case, that if peradventure by speaking
of arms I happen to prejudice my self in the election of them, for all that
the quarrel does not alter; but he that has accused me of any default, is to
prove his saying, and not I to prove my repulse: and therefore we say, that by
the force of the iniurye done unto me, and by me put back, he is to be
Challenger, and I for having called him unto arms, do lose the election of
them: whereupon it follows that he must be forced to prove his intention with
those arms which shall be elected by himself.

And although it seems to me superfluous to remember it, yet for that it is a
thing not to be passed in silence, for that it is often to be considered, because
there must be always had in regard, what words they use every time they speak
of the fight: and the proof and maintayning are taken in the same sense or
signification, and do appertain to the Challenger: where the Defendant ought
not to put forth himself, but to defend and sustain: and if he should offer
to maintaiaine or defend, he should become presently upon the same to be
challenger. Of the answers which are to be made unto the cartels, there is no
more to be said, but so much as is spoken already. In the giving of the lie,
the answers yet may be ruled and ordered, and that when upon the lie there
happens no disputation unto him that receives it, there rests nothing but
his justification, either unto the proof, or satisfaction of the injury.

And here I will not stay to tell you, that it seems unto me a most
gentleman-like thing, in all manner of writings to speak honorably of his
enemy, for so a Gentleman or Caualier does honor to himself, showing thereby
to have quarrel with an honorable person: whereas otherwise, he dishonoreth
himself, and shows himself rather to have mind to fight with the pen then
with the sword.

Of the manner of sending of Cartels.
GEntlemen were wont to send a glove for a defy, and with fierce words did
dispatch the same, when they came unto the fight: for it was not then amongst
them esteemed peradventure any advantage to be Defendant, not using that (I
cannot tell what to term it) witty or cauelling kind in election of Arms,
which in these our days are accustomed. The electi^ Arms is cauelling.
Afterward came the custom of sending of Cartelles, in which manner of
proceeding there was much difficulty and newness, and diverse offenses to be
carried. Lastly, the publication is taken up, the which is more sure and more
ready, chiefly the Lords having seen the multiplication of quarrelles, have
provided that in their states no cartels may be presented, which being so
effectually brought to pass that every one of them does use it, it leaves no
occasion to speak many words upon it: Thus much I say, that as Cartels are
published, and in assurance thereof the day intimated and notified, then there
is no place left of excuse or alleging of ignorance. And by this means all
manner of hiding the matter, and all other euasions that might have been used
in the time of appresentation are clean taken away.

This I shall say more, which I have touched before speaking of the foolish
lies, that when any man whosoever shall give me a lie present, and without
advantage of weapons or of men, if then I do not answer him, to come afterward
to publish a Cartell with the Lie, I can not hold my self satisfied: for not
being charged with out any supersticerie, and I not answering the same, and
going about a far of to answer him, I do in a manner confess that I am not
a man to stand face to face with him, and thus by my deeds consent that he is
superior to me, how shall I by writing equal my self to him, and my
opinion is, that such a lie shall never be counted lawful. Truth it is, if I
do not answer presently the injurious words, I am not of opinion that
therefore another time I shall be barred to make my answer to the same, and to
him that gave them me, only this, that I must so hold the same, that thereby
I take not any advantage in the doing of it. And if one shall be so lame or
weak, that answering it is seen manifestlye that the other without any pain
may hurt or offend him: to this man it may be lawful to seek assured means
to answer. And so in all matters of injury which are committed with
supersticerie, although they be spoken to a man's face, it is a thing clear,
that aunswering by writing, and by the way of publication, is an answering to
one most legitiuely, and when the other with another supersticerie should
answer him it, that answer shall also be lawful.

After the defy it is not lawful that the one Gentleman should offend the
other, but in the steccata, which is the place of Combat.
AFter that the one has called the other to the battle, as well in the
requirer as the required, it is not lawful that either may offend his
adversary any more, for that that request or calling binds gentlemen to the
ordinary way: and although there should arise amongst them questions or
strife, they must observe this rule, for whilst this question does hang, no
other thing is to be innouated. And if either of them should assault his
adversary in this time, he is to be esteemed, adjudged, and declared a
breaker of faith, and amongst other Gentlemen from henceforth, in any other
quarrel to be refused and put back. And this censure is so universally
approved, that I need not endeavor my self to confirm it any farther.

When one does call another for an offense done unto him by a third person.
IT happens sometimes that one offended with another man's words, or
otherwise, makes another strike him, or gave him the bastonado, ought he that
is stricken to be called Challenger, or else the striker? unto which demand we
have a ready answer. That as the civil laws do proceed as well against the
one as the other, so in such case the combat being permitted, a Gentleman
ought to proceed as well against the one as the other of them.

True it is, it is said, that when the one has to endure, and the other
endured, that when the thing is no more but manifest, he that is offended
ought not to leave the certain for the uncertain. And being assured that he
is oppressed of some body, his doubt or presumption does not make him apt to
require another person of estimation before he do discharge himself of him
that oppressed him, and be offended against him that has with hand offended
him, and ouercomming him, it is clear that he remains discharged. But to
kill or overcome him that required him as principal Challenger, I do not see
how he is relieved or eased, for the other may always say that he struck
me, for his own particular interest, that the proof of Arms is an uncertain
proof, but the stroke is certain, in such case the blame or grief will still
remain upon himself. Whereupon I resolve to say, that the manifest deed of
the offense, and not the occult author of the same is to be called. And this
assure again, that although there are some shows of them, a man may also
doubt whether they may be false, but there is no doubt of him that is the
offender.

What is to be done if question rise upon the quarrel, or upon the person of
the Challenger.
MAny times if falls out, that one calls another unto the field, and
therefore must accept the defy, but answers the same with some exception,
obiecting either that he did not understand the quarrel, or that it does not
touch him, or that the caller is infamous, or has other charge, or is not of
like condition, or such like. In which case there is nothing to say, but that
it is necessary before we pass any further, that such difficulties be made
clear, and the mean to clear them is, that the gentlemen submit themselves to
the judgment of some prince or noble man trusted on both parts, and chosen of
both the parties, and accordingly as they do censure it, so the quarrel to be
left or followed. And be it that the one will not accept the proposed judgment,
the opinion of gentlemen shall be of him, if he were Challenger, that the
oppositions made were justly made to him, and if he were Defendant, that he
had an unjust quarrel to defend. And when the Challenger should be the man
that should refuse the judgment, to the Defendant remains naught else to
do, but to stand upon it firmly: truly yet when the Defendant shall avoid
the determination, then it appertains to the Challenger to proceed further,
having showed or sent him the letters patents or of the field, he has more
to do, he must send them him, and notify them, requiring him that either he
accept the one, or send back the others, or else let him choose one of them
with protestation that if he do not accept the same, or refuse to send, he
does cause him to understand that she shall avoid it, and is to accept such
an offer, specifieng one of his patents and letters, and that in convenient
time he shall find him in that place or field to make an end with his weapon
of the quarrel if he shall be there, otherwise with all disdain and
contumacie he shall proceed to his infamy, with those clauses which shall
be necessary for such an effect. And this is both a Gentleman's course and
reasonable order of proceeding, for if there were not such an order of
proceeding found out, for every one that would find out means to avoid
all calling into the fields, most men would refuse all fighting, and
judgment, and the required shall remain mocked without any remedy. And this
remedy is lawful to be used when the Defendant does fly the judgment
thereof, that the same should be chosen of both the parties by common accord:
for when the quarrel is contested and clear, no matter now stands to be
determined on, for there remaining any one Article to be determined on, they
cannot bind another to accept it, nor to send patents or letters of the
field, for that has his time and place when all controversy is past, and
that done, then there rests nothing but to come to blows.

Whether the subject ought to obey his Sovereign, being by him for bidden to
Combat.
THis doubt is often moved by them that write of this matter, concerning which
Gentlemen are resolved, that for their Prince and Sovereign they will gladly
hazard their lives even into greatest dangers, but their honor will they not
in any case suffer to be spotted with disgrace or cowardice, whereby they are
grown into this custom, that being challenged to the combat, or
understanding or perceiving that others mean to challenge them, or else
intending and resolved with themselves to challenge others, they will retire
into some secret place, where it shall not consist only in their Princes
power, to forbid, or stay them from it, and so laying aside all respect
either of their Princes favor or loss of goods, or bannishment from their
Country, they take the combat in hand. And whosoever should do otherwise
amongst men professing Arms, should be judged to have greatly empayred his
credit and reputation, and dishonored him self in high degree.

Also he should be esteemed unworthy to converse with Gentlemen, and if
chance he should challenge any man afterward, he might deservedly be
repulsed, and lawfully. Which manner and order being confirmed by long custom,
and universally approved and held for sterling among knights and Gentlemen of
all sorts, I think it needles here to trouble my self with aunswering all
such frivolous objections as diverse make that have written of this subject
whereof some allege the ancient description of war, wherein it was not
lawful for any soldier to combat against the commandment or without
special leave of the General: for they consider not the difference of the
cases, which is great, seeing it is another matter to be in an army, where a
man is bound to attend to especial enterprises, and to be idle at home.
Besides this, there is also much difference between the defiances used in
ancient times, and ours, which being in no use or custom, and scarce known
unto the Romans, how could they make any laws or take any order concerning
them?

Furthermore, those Gentlemen or Soldiers that in ancient time challenged one
another to the combat, being of contrary armies, and enemy one to the
other, (whom these writers allege against us) were induced to seek the
trial of arms, for one of these two causes: either for that the decision of
the whole war was agreed upon by both parties, to be committed to some few
of each army, as it fell out when the Horatij and Curatij tried their valor
for the whole armies: and in this case it is most necessary that the election
of co^batants should apertain to the superiors and chief governors: neither
can it by any reason be lawful for each one to take any such enterprise in hand
that is willing to do it, or else for proof of their valor: in which case
also no Soldier ought to go to the combat without license, neither does any
burden or charge remain upon him, if he deny the combat, for that he is to
use his valor in that war not according to his own pleasure, but his unto
whom he has sworn his service and obedience, without any respect of
particular interest: yet it may so fall out, that a Soldier being burdened
with some especial quarrel concerning his reputation, ought so much to
regard the same, that he ought to abandon both the army, his country and
natural Prince, rather then to suffer it to pass unanswered. Concerning which
point, I will say as much as I can presently call to remembrance.

True it is, that if there rise any quarrel between two gentlemen of two
adversary armies, they ought not either to challenge, or answer a challenge
without the authority of their General: for that without his leave, it is not
lawful for any man to have any intelligence or dealings whatsoever, with any in
the enemies Camp: but if that the quarrel were such, that either of the
parties should be dishonored either by delaying the challenge, or not
aunswering the same, then ought he whose honor and reputation is in danger of
stain, to enlarge himself as much as in him lies, from that subjection he
is in, and bring himself into the way whether the safegarde of his honor
inuiteth him. Insomuch that among Gentlemen this opinion is current, that if a
man were in some City besiedged by the enemy, and could not obtain leave of
the Governor to come forth, he ought to leap over the walls, to go and
defend his honor. Yet will I not deny, but that if a man's country or natural
Prince should be interessed in the matter, he ought to have a respect both of
the one and the other: and especially when a great part of the quarrel should
concern either his Country or Prince: for that the^ the manner of proceeding
therein, ought to be platted by their counsel and advise. But in all other
cases, when the matter only concerns a man's own interest, then ought not any
gentleman be backward in challenging, or answering the challenger: and in no
case either upon commandment, or upon any penance whatsoever, refuse the
combat.

Neither according to my simple conceit, ought any prince to look for any
thing at his subjects hands that may empaire their reputation, or work their
dishonor.

How Gentlemen ought to accept of any Quarrel, in such manner that they may
combat lawfully.
THey that maintain any quarrel, use most commonly to undertake the combat
with such intent, that howbeit the cause of their quarrel be just, yet they
combat not justly, that is, not in respect only of justice and equity, but
either for hatred, or for desire of revenge, or for some other particular
affection: whence it comes to pass, that many howbeit they have the right on
their sides, yet come to be overthrown: For that God whose eyes are fixed even
on the most secret and inner thoughts of our hearts, and ever punishes the evil
intent of men, both in just and unjust causes, reserueth his just chasticements
against all offenders, until such times as his incomprehensible judgment
finds to be most fit and serving to his purpose.

Wherefore, no man ought to presume to punish another, by the confidence and
trust which he reposeth in his own valor, but in judgment and trial of
arms, every one ought to present himself before the sight of God, as an
instrument which his eternal majesty has to work with, in the execution of
justice, and demonstration of his judgment.

If therefore any man violate the (...) of my wife, sister, niece, or
kinse-woman, I ought not or may not call him to (...) of the (...), to the end
that I may be revenged of him. Nor if any one should prove disloyal to his
Prince or Country, ought I challenge him to the combat in respect of the
hatred that I bear him, or to obtain favor at the Princes hands, or to
purchase honor in my Country, or if any of my kinsemen or friends were slain,
may I challenge the murderer to the field, in respect of the kindred or
freendship I had with him, but my intent ought to be such, that howbeit I had
not been especially offended, and no particular affection or respect should
induce me thereunto, yet for love of virtue, and regard of the universal good
and public profit, I was to undertake such a combat. For I ought in all
particular injuries present unto mine eyes, not the persons either offending or
offended, but rather fall into consideration how much that offense displeases
almighty God, and how much harm may ensue unto human kind thereby. And for
adultery ought a man to combat, not as to revenge the wrong done to one
particular person, but in regard of all, considering how holy and religious a
bond matrimony is, being a lawful conjunction instituted and ordained by God,
to the end that man and woman therein should not as two, but one person, live
together in such manner, that nothing except death only might separate and
disioyn them. Wherefore perpending the dignity and worthiness hereof, and how
that by adultery this divine ordinance and institution is violated,
matrimonyall conjunction infringed, and lawful procreation corrupted, every
Gentleman ought to undertake the combat, not so much to revenge himself, or
his friends, or to thastice or punish the offenders, as to preserve and keep
from violence a bond so sacred and inviolable, with sure hope, that God, who
(as S. Paul says) will judge the Adulterer, will by means thereof give most
severe judgment.

In like manner, if some man have mis-behaued himself in any matter concerning
his prince or cuntrie, each Gentleman ought to think, how that God has
ordained and authorized Princes to be above us, to the end that under him they
may as his ministers and officers govern us his humble flock, how that
nothing being move grateful and acceptable unto God, then good government
among men (who assembled together, and living under the same laws, bear
themselves orderly, governing their lives and manners aright) we are not so
much bound in duty toward any, as toward them that are as it were
lieutenantes unto almighty God in earth, for so I call our princes and
governors: and toward that assembly and congregation of mankind, under whose
laws we are borne and bred, I mean our Country, and how that no greter
wickedness can be committed than for a man to rebel against him whom God has
ordained Lord and governor over him, or to wrong him unto whom he has given
his faith, or to betray that city unto which he is both for his living,
bringing up, and many benefits besides infinitely beholding. In respect
whereof, I say each Gentleman having considered and weighed all this, ought as
a public plague, and not as a particular enemy, to persecute him that
commits any of these odious excesses: calling him to the trial of the
swoorde, confidentlye hoping and trusting with assured faith, that God will
chastise and punish him that has so greeuouslye offended both him and his
people, violating his sacred ordinances and constitutions. And for the same
reason, if some man have committed murder, he that will combat with him, must
not do it to this end, only to wreake the death of him that is murdered, in
respect that he was his friend or kinseman, but he ought to call to mind what
a noble and excellent creature man is, who being taken away and brought to
naught by murder or slaughter, the fairest and notablest work which almighty
God has framed, is marred, and spoiled. Insomuch that whosoever commits
murder, does dissolve and break the most perfect piece of work that the
creator of heaven and earth has made, and defaceth the image and likeness of
God. And for that God in his sacred law ordained, that man-slayers should be
carried from his alter and put to death, the party that will combat, knowing
how greatly his divine majesty is offended with this sin, ought not to
undertake the combat, because he would kill him, but because he might be as
it were, the minister to execute Gods divine pleasure, and most holy
commandment.

By these examples may a Gentleman perceive what ought to be done in all
other cases, so that it shall be needles for men to seek examples for each
offense, troubling both my self and the Reader. In the mean time, take this
by the way, that whatsoever I have here said of the Challenger, is also in
the same manner to be understood of the Defendant: insomuch that both the one
and the other ought to regard the preservation of their honor and innocence
by just means: the one never challenging but with just cause and upright
meaning, and the other never accepting any challenge, unless he know himself
to be guiltles: and in such sort, that he may take it with a good conscience,
as to do or perform any action that concerns his honor, to live and dye in
defense thereof. For, as it is shameful to do any dishonorable act, so is it
more shameful and opprobrious to maintain the same, and stand in defense of it.

And again, a man finding himself innocent and wrongfully dishonored, ought
not to fear any danger, but to venture his life at all times, for the righting
either of private or public wrongs: in all things, considerations, and
circumstances, having a special regard unto justice. For God gives right
unto him that is just, and overthrows the unjust: whosoever therefore shall
take arms for justice to repel unjust injuries, may be assured to prevail,
and with an vndismaied courage go about what he undertakes.

OF INIVRIE, OF the Charge, and of the shame.
WHereas I have before sufficientlye entreated upon the quality of Lies, and
showed the nature of them to be to return injuries, peradventure some will
marvel why I should again speak thereof in this place, seeing that the
injury must needs be before any return, which (though I confess) be out of
order to reduce it under this title, yet in diverse respects I have been moved
thereunto, as namely, for that I find a very ill custom generally followed
in quarrelles, where by contempt of right course and law it self, Gentlemen
are rashly carried to take weapons in hand, not considering first if it be a
lawful quarrel, or such as may deserve a Combat, nor do they ever desire to
be directed by an orderly proceeding. But Gentlemen of discretion ought first
before they enter into arms rightly to examine the quality of their quarrel, if
it be worthy the proof by weapons, and by this means make a right
introduction to the truth, so as men be not rashly lead on to the slaughter.
Again, the ground of all quarrels betwixt Gentlemen is this, that they think
themselves iniuried or charged, whereof my purpose is chiefly to entreat, so
far forth as I shall think it needful.

To begin then with injury, Injury.
it is nothing else but a thing done without reason, as (as we use to say)
wrongfully. Charge.
And Charge is no other but an inforceing of a man to return, or to prove or
reprove any thing alleged, which is so termed by this name, because that the
lawiers affirm, that the charge of proving rests on the Challenger. He that
is ged.
Whereby it appears that the man charged ought to be the Challenger: and
touching these two words, it is to be understood that sometime both injury
and charge are at one time done, and sometime charge without injury, and a man
may also injury and not charge. Touching the first thus it is, I am charged
by one with an offense I never committed, wherein he does me injury, Injury
charge.
because he does unlawfully seek to defame me, and then lays the charge on
me, in that he forces me to seek to return the injury, and make answer to
his opprobrious words, unless I would suffer my self to be shamed. Charge
wi^^out injury
Whereupon I give him the lie, and so discharge my self and come to charge
him, which sets me free, and binds him to maintain his words, which is
as much as to urge him to challenge. Wherefrom we are to note, that I only
charge him without iniuring, because my answer is but reasonable, and so the
charge rests on him, as I said before. Injury without charge is of two
sorts, viz. of words and of deeds. Of words thus, if one man should speak
any thing of another, which were manifestly known to be false, to this he
should not be bound to answer, because the first without any return would
be accounted a false accuser and a liar: and in mine opinion, it is a more
honorable reputation for a man to be silent in such a case, than by
aunswering to seem to make any account of the words: as a noble worthy man
said unto a Gentleman that had slaundered him, that he would neither hold
him a friend nor an enemy, not yet answer his words, reckning him unworthy
to be well spoken off by an honest man, and too base a subject for a man to
speak evil off. But if in case of such shameful and false words, a man
should be urged and give the lie, it is more than is requisite, as a thing
whereof a quarrel ought not to be taken, for quarrels are to testify a truth,
and where that is once manifest, the quarrel is not required.

Injury by deeds without charge is, when a man by advantage or such like
means offers a wrong, and it is evident that such a fact was villanouslye
done, and this injury I account done without charge, in such like sort as
that was by words, because that if he that is iniuried would demand the
other a reason of his villainy, how could he otherwise maintain it unless
by alleging that the other had taken advantage of him, or done him some
wrong. And if this be so, what needs farther proof? But perhaps some man
will ask me if in this case he should put up this injury without revenge?
To whom I answer, that Combat was ordained for justifying of a truth, Combat
no^ ordained fo^^ revenge.
and not to lay open a way for one man to revenge him of another, for the
punishment of such things rests in the Prince for the maintenance of peace
in the realm, which if it should be severely executed, no doubt but there
would be fewer quarrelles by many degrees. And in troth, the offense is the
greater in this Realm, where we know God, and hear his Gospel daily
preached, which expreslie forbids manslaughter: by how much that he that
kills makes a massacre of the very true image of the living God.

Wherefore we ought only to fear, reverence, and obey him, and not follow
our own vain appetites, which carry us headlong into utter ruin and
destruction. But to return to revenge, he that needs will follow it, ought to
take another course then combat, albeit many no doubt will advise a man to
return like for like, which in no case I would not wish should be followed.
But many perhaps that are rather led by an ill custom than reason, will
wonder at this I have already alleged, because hereafter I will also
affirm, that where an injury is shamefullye done, not only the iniuried is
free of the charge, but the iniurier rests with the shame, for in matters of
chivalry, where a man commits no shameful, dishonorable, or vile fact,
he cannot truly be said to have done unlike a Gentleman: and me thinks
it an impossible thing to avoid receiving injury from another, therefore when
any thing happens which a man cannot escape, it ought to be judged
shameful. For a shameful thing is, where a man commits villan^e which was
in his power not to have done: From what a man ought to ^efrayne.
as for example, I have power in my self to refrain from iniuring an other,
from committing wicked facts, from breaking my promise, from committing
treason, which things if I observe not, I bring upon my self the greatest
infamy and shame that possibly any man may bring on himself: his then ought
the shame to be that has done this beastly act, and not his to whom it was
done. Which may be yet farther confirmed by this argument: that where a man
proceeds not like a Gentleman, he shows a cowardly fear in himself, not to
dare to maintain it in equality against him whom he sought to have wronged.
The iniurye is his who does it
And touching this opinion, ancient men before us have said, that the injury
is not his to whom it was done, but his who does it. Again, my opinion is
that in case of some former quarrel, he that does any dishonest injury may
be denied the Combat, as one that has before committed a defect, and he that
receives it ought (as the case may be) to be received always, supposing
always that this defect of him that iniurieth is manifest. And I will not omit
in this place to speak of an ill custom used now a days, which ought no
less to be confuted by reason, He is dishonored that does any ill act.
than it is commonly followed with great affection, which is, that when a man
knows himself to have rightly received the lie, by and by to avoid the
proof, he seeks to give the bastonado, or such like fact, and many times
turns his back and runs his way, to the end that he that is iniuried may
not presently take revenge, and in this sort he thinks to be valyantly
discharged, which likewise the common sort do verily judge, and do not
perceive their error, and how grossly they are deceived. The reueng ought to be
done honor
For first of all, if for honor sake I would do any thing, I am to do it
honorably and like a Gentleman, and not villanously and like a traitor: nor
must I think that a shameful fact can grace or disgrace me, but must rest
assured, that the charge don me by another is yet still upon me, and that I
bring a greater shame unto it by this dishonorable deed. Next, if I cannot
commit a more odious thing in combat than to run away, how may I think to
have done honorably by running away? And wherefore should not he be
accounted of all sorts of Gentlemen more honorable from whom I run, than I
who run, albeit I have done him some great disgrace: for to injury another
is no honor, and to run away is a shame. Who he is th^^ offends in (...)
ill sort.
Therefore I will never be persuaded, that a man that has justly received the
Lie, can by any such act discharge himself, or that he is not bound to
prove that whereon he received the Lie, but that he ought to be the
Challenger: and this opinion do I hold upon the reasons before alleged,
which me thinks a Gentleman ought sooner to follow, than a blind opinion
of the vulgar sort, which has in it neither law nor reason. And I would
wish Gentlemen by these rules to examine the causes for which a man intends
to fight, and first to understand the nature of quarrels if they deserve
Combat, or if they may otherwise be answered than by the sword, and not to be
persuaded by entreaty or favor of any, to agree to unnecessary quarrels,
because that besides the offense toward God, it is an injury to a man to
draw him to fight that is not bound, and it is also a wrong to the magistrate
before whom such controversies ought to be decided, intruding themselves into
their office and function. Nor yet may we allow a quarrel upon every Lie,
as I have at large showed in my discourse of Lies: and we may also note here
that a Lie lawfully given, is that which makes the charge, whereby the other
is bound to the proof simply, and not to the proof of Arms, because (as I
have said before) in such a case where other proof may be made than by
weapon, the Lie does not only not bind a man to the Combat, but every
Gentleman is bound to desist from the trial by Arms, and to rely on the
trial by reason.

I must also add heereunto, that every Lie whereof a man cannot make
justification by civil law, does not yet by and by deserve combat. For I
would not have any think that there is such efficacy in a Lie to bind a man
to fight, as it seems some hold opinion, which in deed proceeds from a
corrupt use of certain that have been before us, who for want of
understanding, Duello is not neces^arie upon every Lie
without law, reason, or right course of Chivalry, in the beginning did give
liberty to infamous persons, to require the Combat, (as men desirous and
willing to behold others in fight) as if it were at the baiting of a bull, or
some other wild beast, whose successors imitating their predecessors, have
brought these things to this pass, as generallye it is holden, that whosoever
he be that receives the Lie, be it upon whatsoever occasion, he is
presently bound to discharge himself thereof only by his swoorde, and not
by any other means. Which disorder being thus far proceeded, ought no
doubt to be carefully redressed, that Gentlemen may be reduced from their
erroneous opinion by the self same way and means that they fell first into
it. And to the end that men may be rightly persuaded, The Lie does not lead
a man to fight.
I say that the Lie is not the thing that induces fight, but the occasion
whereupon it was given, and if there were no proof of the defect whereof a man
is blamed, that he can in no sort bind the other to fight, because the
regard ought to be to the quality of the injury, and not to the Lie.

But I am sure some will account this opinion newly vpstart: to whom I
answer, their custom and opinion is far more new, and that mine is rather
to be proved ancient, because no law can be found, that commands a man for
the receiving of the Lie to fall presently to fight. but all those laws
whereon the Combat has been granted, have expreslie rejected the occasions,
amongst which, no mention is made of the Lie: and this is the true and
ancient custom approved by the laws of the Lombardes, and by the
institutions of the Emperors.

And if a man ought presently to fight upon the Lie, it is vain that the
Lombards and other Princes after them, have taken pains to set down the
particular causes for which a man ought to fight, and those also for which it
is not lawful to fight: so as I conclude that in all cases a man ought with
great judgment and circumspection behave himself wisely.

For what causes Combats ought to be granted.
SO greatly different is our custom now a days, from the orders and laws of
the first institutors of Duello, as if a man should go about to reduce them
into particular cases, it were not only a trouble to some, but a very
impossible thing: for which cause I will only treat of that which I shall
judge meetest by a general rule to be observed, and include all combats under
two heads.

First then, The causes of Duello.
I judge it not meet that a man should hazard himself in the peril of death,
but for such a cause as deserves it, so as if a man be accused of such a
defect, as deserve to be punished with death, in this case Combat might be
granted. Again, because that in an honorable person his honor ought to be
preferred before his life, if it happen him to have such a defect laid against
him, as in respect thereof he were by law to be accounted dishonorable, and
should therefore be disgraced before the tribunal seat: upon such a quarrel
my opinion is, that he is not to be denied to justify himself by weapons,
provided always, that he be not able by law to clear himself thereof, And
except a quarrel be comprehended under one of these two sorts, I do not see
how any man can by reason or with his honor, either grant or accompanye an
other to the fight.

Moreover, The duty of gentlemen^*
such Gentlemen as do counsel or accompany a man, ought to be judges of the
quarrel, for unto them it belongs cheefely to know if the quarrel deserve
trial by arms or no, if the person be suspected of the defect laid against
him, and if there be presumption thereof. But if these things be not well
justified and proved, the combat ought not to be admitted, because that the
proof by arms being ordained, as a means to sift out the truth, as in civil
judgment, where the proof is reasonable and certain, no man can be put to
torture without due information, and sufficient witness, much less ought it to
be done in the judgment of weapons, which perhaps may fall out to be as
little to reason, as very doubtful.

Again, those Gentlemen are to understand if the quarrel have been undertaken
heretofore by any of the parties to be proved by law, or otherwise: The
quarrel (...) said at the civil law.
and then whether it be proved or no, it is not lawful afterward to bring it
to combat: besides, they are diligently to consider, Civil Pro^^^
if it may be justified by any other means or no. And if in case it may be
done by law, weapons are not to be allowed: for if by civil cause
controversies are remitted from one judge to another, as actions more belonging
to one then to another, much rather is the like to be done, from the
judgment of arms, to civil law, seeing the inequality is much the greater:
An oath required.
and upon these two last articles these gentlemen ought to take oath of him
that demands the field, and without justification thereof, there is no
reason to grant it to any man: which thing is so much the more to be
observed, by how much it is a common case, that men are moved to fight upon
such quarrels as might be ended by civil law, and whosoever is once challenged
the field, it is accounted a shame for him to refuse it in which case the
vulgar opinion is, that it is not manlynes in a gentleman to stand upon
reasons.

Moreover, if happily in cartels there be any mention made, that not
withstanding he could prove his intent by civil testimony, yet he inten death
to do it by weapons, this I say is a very great abuse, and Gentlemen ought to
take oath of infamy, that is, that they do not require the field
maliciouslye, or with a mind to infame another, but only for proof of the
truth, and this oath has been ordained and put in practice of men long ago.
And we must also add, that those gentlemen ought fullye to be satisfied by
oath, from the^ that demand the field, if that which they pronounce, be their
true quarrel, because many times some men will not stick to determine to
themselves one pretense of their fight, and yet make known to the world
another, which abuses gentlemen ought diligently to take heed of, because many
times such malice has been discovered. Touching all such matters whereon any
controversy or dissencion may grow, men ought specially to beware, not to be
self-willed, but are rather to take counsel and advise both of their friends
and experienced men, and if there be cause to judge this course necessary in
any matter, it ought cheefelye to be in such cases, wherein a man's life and
honor is touched, for we see that even the wisest sort to study and endeavor
by all means possible to furnish themselves with men experienced and seen in
chiualrye and arms, that they may be counseled and advised by them, and may
in such sort wish them to the field, as may best stand with reason, which
office may only be executed by learned men and gentlemen, whereof the first are
termed counsailors, and the second Padrini: Padrini, are those that are chosen
by the combators on either side.
but if happily one man be seen in both, he may very well suffice to execute
both offices, but because the charge consists principally on the Padrini, we
will speak somewhat of them.

First then my opinion is, that they were so called, either because such
gentlemen as had remitted themselves unto them, ought to account of them as
their fathers, or else that this mutation of letters is derived from the latin,
which terms those patrones, Patrones, Padrini. Pattini.
which take upon them the defense of another: some also call them not Padrini,
but Pattini: which if we will allow, it must be, for that they do make the matthew
of the co^bate: but howsoever they be called, or whencesoeuer their
denomination be derived, they are very necessary, and their very office is to
defend, as advocates do their clients: and as this is their duty, so me
thinks they deserve no less privilege then advocates do.

And therefore as in civil controversies advocates are not to satisfy or pay
any part of that wherein their clyents are bound or condemned, There ought no
controversy to arise betwixt the Padrini.
so in reason the other oght not to be charged to the field in those quarrels,
wherein they are but as it were proctors, for the injuries, the lies, the
cartels, and challenges, that are already past betwixt the principalles, and
the Padrini speak but as procurators, which is as much as if the principalles
themselves spoke: and if happily the principals should have any words together
after the quarrel concluded, yet new charge or lies should be of no force,
which if it be betwixt the principals granted, much more ought to be to them
that speak for them, which as it is reasonable, so is it to be observed for
the better conservation of the right use of chiualry, and to the end every man
may freely execute his function, which thing I note, because it happens
sometimes, that such men take upon them to be Padrini, who do it more to take
hold of a new quarrel, then for the defense of their gentilitie. And this is
a wonderful abuse, as it has been showed before, as also for that the nature
of Duello is rather to restrain a man, than to give him liberty, being very
unmeet: then upon one combat should still ensue another. In which respect
gentlemen ought strictlye to observe this rule before: and as often as it
happens to grow any quarrel betwixt Padrini, gentlemen ought to condemn
it as unlawful, The duty of gentlemen.
and seek by all means possible to prevent such dishonest actions.

That men should not fight without weapons of defense.
THe opinion of our ancients is, that whensoever any man is licensed to the
Combat, in all other cases, except for infidelity, he is to fight with a
staff and a Buckler, whereby I conclude, that duello was not instituted for the
honor of chivalry, as our late combators have wrested it, but only for the
sifting out of the truth, which was not done with the weapons of a Gentleman,
but with a staff: and therefore to go about to reduce our customs now a
days, to those of former ages, were more ridiculous then possible to be done:
but I will only treat of the weapons belonging to Gentlemen, which I think
meetest for Combats.

First therefore it is to be understood, that the wisdom and discretion of
a man, is as great a virtue as his magnanimity and courage, which are so much
the greater virtues, by how much they are accompanied with wisdom: for
without them a man is not to be accounted valiant, but rather furious* neither
is he valiant that rashly and without advise hazardeth himself in great
matters, or endaungereth himself most: but he that advisedly behaueth
himself in actions belonging to a gentleman, and where a public benefit or
his own honor requires it, does not retire himself from danger: for (as a
Philosopher well says) neither is he valiant that is afraid of every bugge,
nor yet he that does not temper his fears.

Again, as the courage of the mind imboldeneth a man to assault his enemy, so
wisdom teaches him likewise how to defend himself: so as I will never hold
him courageous, that will be led to fight without sufficient weapons of
defense. And albeit the common sort think the single Rapier in the shirte, or
the poniard or such like weapons, wherein there is a manifest judgment of
death to one, most honorable, nevertheless I am not of that opinion, nor will I
account them that enter the combat in such sort more honorable, then wild
beasts that wilfullye run upon their own death.

And touching such as think it an honorable thing not only not to esteem their
life, but voluntarilye to run on their death, I will account their life at a
very low and base price, seeing they themselves set no greater reckoning on it.

It is held a most shameful matter, if when the custody of a Castle shall
be committed to a man, he shall without license forsake it: and shall we that
have our lives lent us in keeping from our creator, have no respect of so
goodly a receptacle of our souls, but wilfully destroy it, making our selves
as it were, rebels unto God, and so bring both body and soul to perdition?

Moreover, if a Gentleman go to the wars, we see him so esteemed of as he
is in show of his armor* and therefore I see no cause at all that a man
should in public matters seek to be well armed, and in private quarrelles
come naked: and me thinks a man should at all times and in all places show
him self valiant and desire the victory: which if it be granted, they should
likewise in all matters of moment prepare themselves armed.

And if Gentlemen will have this respect of courtesy toward their enemy, as
to give him weapons wherewith he may end the controversy: I think it reason
they should be such as may arm him, and not burden him.

The duty of every Gentleman, is to temper his courage with wisdom, that it
may be known, that neither he sets so highlye by his life, that for
safegarde of it, he will commit any vile fact, nor yet that he so slightlye
regards it, as that without just cause he will deprive himself thereof:
albeit I do not account it a dishonorable act, to come armed like a man at
arms, if the weapons be such as belong to a Gentleman, and hurt not a man
privily.

Again, I would that arms should inco^tinently be used, and that a man should
not then enter the combat, when the time is for him to leave: and above al,
that the weapons of defense, were both weapons of arms and war: and if so be
a man would fight with weapons only of defense, the gentlemen should in no case
admit it, but that they should fight like gentlemen, as it has been many times
done.

Touching the choice of your weapons, and of the inequality of them, The
advantage of the Defen. dant.
and the imperfections of the body, the Defendant has great advantage, and it
is not without just cause, for seeing he is both accused and constrained to
fight, it is great reason that he should have all the honest favor that might
be, and it is no little honor to him that in case he only be not overcome, he
is accounted the vanquisher: where contrarily, the Challenger is to overcome,
unless he will altogether loose the quarrel, whereof there is great reason,
because to the one it appertains to prove, and to the other it is sufficient
only to defend.

Likewise, it is as great a favor that he has to choose the weapons, which
is also very meet, for if a man choose to call me to fight, the election of
the weapons is mine.

In this choic it is certain, that there is not the liberty given, as is
thought: for this part also, as all other parts of duello is grounded upon
reason, and if we will be nyce to see how a man is authorized to make the
choice, wise men are of opinion, that gentlemen should receive their sentence
of weapons from divine judgment, if in case the justification cannot by other
means be made: How to appoint the weapons.
and if they will have the benefit of that, it is necessary that they abandon
all violence and deceit, which (as Cicero says) are the properties of the
Lion and the Fox, and far from the nature of man.

Now if these things should in the whole course of our life be held and
performed, much more should they be desired in the sifting out of a truth, and
in the direction of judgment.

And touching violence, me thinks the law has well provided, by giving the
advantage of the weapons to the Defendant, which if it were not so, every
naughty man would embolden himself to make wrong accusations, and urge every
man of less strength to fight, persuading himself to be able to beat him
down to the ground. But seeing the law has so well provided against this,
seeing that deceit (as the same Cicero likewise affirms) is worthy of much
hatred, it is a commendable thing that it is so. For in the choice of weapons,
it belongs to us to make some law for the Defend^nt, which should be such,
as he should not use any deceit in, nor grant such wepons as fit not with the
disposition of a man's body. For albeit a man may say that we are natuly apt
in all exercises to use both hands, yet it is manifest, that use does
overcome nature, to make us right or left handed. And therefore if I shall be
known to be right handed, I cannot force my adversary to fight with a weapon
for the left hand, seeing the disposition of my body is not such. And if I
have no defect in my arm, or my thighe, or leg, I cannot come to fight with
vambraces or such like harneis, for those parts, which hinder the bending of
the elbow, or of the knee, for this is an apparent deceit and ought to be
refused in the Combat, and the Padrini ought not to admit such weapons.

If in case I be lame or hurt in one of mine arms, or my hands, or want an
eye, I may very well appoint my enemy such weapons as may in like sort bind
his leg, his arm, or his hand, or that may hide one of his eyes, but yet if
he be lame of one arm, I may sure appoint him such armor as may hinder the
other that is sound.

And to conclude, if it be lawful for me to appoint such weapon or armor to
mine enemy as may hinder him in the same sort that I am hindered, yet I must
not hinder him unless my self be also hindered: as thus, If I be blind of my
right eye, and he of his left, I must not therefore also hinder his right eye,
for this is not to make equality of my wants, but to take his whole sight from
him.

Likewise a right handed or left handed man, or a man weakened or maimed so of
his hand as he cannot well close it, or that wants a finger, whereby he is
not able to hold his weapon in his hand, in my opinion, is not to be
constrained to fight with his imperfect hand, but may lawfully and justly deny
the challenge, which is also to be understood of all other members and lims,
so as it is requisite that all things be guided with reason and judgment for
both parties, that it do not appear that that which is done, is done for
revenge or to infame another, but only for the justifying of the truth.

Of the time for Duello.
THe time appointed for Duello has always been twixt the rising and setting
of the Sun, and whosoever in that time does not prove his intent, can never
after be admitted the Combat upon that quarrel. And in case the day be spent
without any combat, it cannot be remited to the day following without the
consent of the Defendant, who being challenged for that day, and appearing
there, has performed all parts of his honor and duty (unless thorough any
default of his the combat was not attempted) and is far from all matters
touching that quarrel. But it is not sufficient for the Defendant only to
consent, except likewise the Lord that grants the field do condescend
thereunto: for having once admitted the field in a prefixed day, that being
past, he is discharged. Again, such may the case be, as the first day being
gone, the combat may be lawful on the second day, but without new
conditions, in ordinary course we are to observe that which we said before.

Of accidents that happen in the Combat.
AS I have alredie begun for to treat of Duello, so I do mean to prosecute
it, according to our use now a days. First then after that the Combatters are
entered the lists, if they have no further agreement betwixt them, which of
them so ever shall happen to touch the railes or bounds, or shall have any
part of him out of the lists, is not to be accounted neither prisoner, or ought
he to have that member cut off, but the fight is to continue to the death or
flight, or til it be forbidden* But if any of them go out of the lists, he is
become prisoner: if his horse be wounded or slain, or if any part of his
armor break, he is not to be supplied. And if he let fall his weapon out of
his hand, it is lawful for the other to wound him unarmed, I say lawful in
this respect, that it is accounted an honor to the other to bid him take up
his weapon, and to stay from hurting him til he have recovered it again:
albeit that in case the victory should afterward happen to the other, whereas
he might first safely have overcome, he should be accounted a fool, and
very well served.

These things I account ordinarily to be observed unless it were otherwise
agreed upon, which conditions are to be held inviolable under the pain
appointed: and albeit no punishment were allotted, who so ever should do
contrary to the agreement, were to be held a traitor: which agreement
likewise is to be with consent of both parties, wherein one man cannot bind
another to accept any condition that is without the limit of the law. I
think it necessary to set down that the Chalenger is to give the first
assault, for whereas he is to prove, and the other but to defend, it is plain,
that if he begin not, the other is not bound to stir a foot, yea, and
whatsoever he should attempt before he should perceive the Challenger coming
to assault, were mere superfluous. Again, at the entrance of the Combatters
within the listes, let it be proclaimed, that no man under pain of death
speak a word, nor make any sign, which if it happen to be done, ought
severely without favor to be executed, as one that intermedleth in a matter
of life and honor of other men.

If Gentlemen being in the Lists may repent them of the Combat.
ANother question is held, whether Gentlemen brought into the field may repent
them of the combat, which I persuade my self will never happen twixt honorable
persons: for how can a Challenger repent him of the ending his quarrel
without perpetual shame and dishonor, and never to be allowed to require
battle of any other, because he proved not that to be true for which he once
undertook weapons. I would wish every one that thought his quarrel unjust,
not to take it upon him, and rather than fight against a truth, make full
satisfaction to the iniuried, which should be done in a zeal and love of
virtue: for the standing obstinate in his purpose until the time that he come
to have his weapons in his hand, and then recant, me thinks, it argues a
most vile and wicked mind. And I do not see how this repentance can come from
the Defendant, except he be content to give over the quarrel and acknowledge
himself such as he was accused for. Which (as I said of the Challenger) he
might do with less shame before he took weapons than after. And whenever
without farther satisfaction they should come to agreement, doubtless the
Challenger should receive the shame: so as I see not how such a case should
happen: but if it should be, my opinion is, that if the quarrel were of a
matter belonging to the Prince, or in another man's interest, the honor ought
to constrain them to fight, or to make manifest the truth of the fact: but if
it were touching their particular causes, it might be licensed without Combat,
but not without shame.

Whether Gentlemen may in the Listes change their Quarrel.
I Cannot pass over another doubt, which is this: Two men fighting together,
the one says, Defend thy self traitor. And the other answers, I grant thee
the first quarrel, and I do now fight with thee upon the second. In which
case I think it clear, that he to whom the quarrel is refused, is the victor,
and yet if the other overcome in the second, he is likewise to be accountted
victor. But notwithstanding, my opinion is, that neither of them can with
honor depart the lists, but that they are both blame-worthie as dishonorable
Gentlemen, taking upon them to fight in unjust quarrels, which must needs be
presumed by both their losses, for the victory of one cannot take away the
loss of the other: wherefore in this like case, he that would take hold of a
new quarrel, should not say, I remit thee the first, but only thou lie in
saying I am a traitor, and upon this hereafter I will defend my self, and
then if he chance to overcome in this, it cannot be said that he has lost
the other, but the presumption should be favorable on his side, for if his
adversary have had the worst in one, it is to be presumed the like in the
other: but he to whom it belongs better to fight on the first quarrel, should
not condescend to the second, but answer, that he will make an end of the
first, and afterward speak of the rest. And where the other has remitted him
the first, he is to take advantage thereof, and to demand of the Lord of the
field the patent of his victory, and not to fight any more, nor should the
Lord himself suffer him to fight again. And this is as much as I thought
good to speak of that which appertains to the Gentlemen.

Now will I come to the office of the Lords of The field, who if after the
Letters of the field are dispatched, the gentlemen will either in the field or
with out it change their quarrel, may at their pleasure revoke those letters,
and forbid them the battle, because they are not bound to grant the field but
upon that special quarrel which was referred unto them, and whereupon they
granted their letters, whereby also for this cause it should not be, unless the
quarrel were expressed in the patents.

Again I say, that if the Gentlemen change their quarrel in the listes,
without assent of the Lords, and that one be slain, the Lords ought to punish
this fact in the slaier, as manslaughter, having kilde a man in his
jurisdiction, without the privilege of a free field, for the field is not to
be accounted free and privileged, but only for that special quarrel whereupon
it was granted: except some men may say, that the Lord perceiving them to
undertake a new quarrel, and not forbidding them, seems by his silence to
consent: which I will neither affirm, nor deny.

Who is not to be admitted to the proof of Arms.
FOrasmuch as Duello is a proof by arms, which appertain to gentlemen, and
that gentry is an honorable degree, it is not meet to admit proof by arms
to any but to honorable persons, and therefore as before civil judges it is not
permitted, that infamous persons can accuse any other, so in the judgment of
gentry, an honorable person cannot be accused but by an honorable person:
for how shall he be able to accuse another of any defect of honor, that in the
like is faultye himself: and whereas the use of weapons has been ordained to
an honorable end, for to punish the wicked, how can they be received to this
office, that are worthy themselves of punishment?

Therefore it is to be concluded, that they are not to be admitted proof by
arms, who have committed any treason against their Prince or Country, or
shall have had conference with enemies, which may be prejudicial to any of
them, nor they who having been taken of the enemy, having means to return
do not return, or being sent as spies, do remain with the enemy, or have
become spies on both sides, or such as having taken oath, or have not served
out their full pay, do run to the enemy, or not having taken oath, do go to
the enemy, at such time as both parties are in arms, for this fact is of the
nature of treason, because that thou making semblance to be in my favor, and
I trusting thee, when time is that I stand most in need of thee, thou
becommest a rebel against me.

Moreover, such are to be denied the field, as in battle have abandoned
their leaders or ensigns, or either by night or day shall have forsaken the
guard of the enemy or Prince, that was committed unto him.

To these we may also add freebooters, and all such as for any military
disorder are banished.

Likewise, all thieves, robbers, ruffians, tavern hunters, excommunicate
persons, heretics, usurers, and all other persons, not living as a Gentleman
or a Soldier: and in conclusion, all such as are defamed for any defecte, and
are not allowed for witnessses in Civil law, are comprehended in this number.

And of these I say that not only they are to be refused upon challenging
another man, but all honorable persons or Gentlemen should abandon their
company, and whosoever should fight with them, should injury himself, making
himself equal with dishonorable persons.

But it is very meet that he that will refuse another upon his infamye,
should be sure that the other is faulty thereof, or that it is so apparent, as
he cannot deny it: for otherwise he should turn the quarrel upon his own
back, and then shall be forced to prove it.

And as it is not lawful for such manner of men above recited, to challenge
another, so if they be once challenged, advantage cannot be taken against them
of in famie: nor is it meet to accept a man's excuse, that should say, he knew
it not before, for whosoever will challenge another, ought advisedly to
consider, that he binds himself to such matter as he must not repent
himself of.

But I do not include in this, that if after the challenge, he should commit
any infamous act, whether he were Challenger or Defendant, he should not yet be
refused. Moreover, if an honorable person, should challenge a defamed person,
or contrariwise he being challenged by a base person, should accept of the
challenge, which is not only an act of private interest, but a prejudice to
the degree of gentrye: in this case it is the office of the Lord of the field,
not to suffer this combat to proceed, nor to grant them letters of combat.

Touching those that do not answer, or do not appear in the field.
WHen a man is challenged to the field, he is to answer by wepons and not by
words, unless the challenger be such as with reason he is to be refused,
provided always that a man cannot by civil law defend himself, and that the
quarrel deserve combat. But where these respects want, whosoever being
challenged does not answer, or without cause, does not accept the letters of
the field, or accepting them, not having a sufficient excuse, does not
appear, is to be reputed dishonorable in every man of woorths judgment: and
the challenger at a convenient time is to appear in the field, to use the
accustomed solemnities. For the day before the combat, the Padrino is to come
before the Lord of the field, and tell him that his champion is come to prove
his quarrel, and for that cause he as his procurator does appear, to see if
the contrary party be come, and if he intend to capitulate or bring to pass,
that they may be in the greater readiness, against the next day protesting that
his Champion is in readiness, and is to beseech the Lord of the field, to
cause enquirye to be made, if either he or some body for him be present, and
that if there be no notice of his coming, he will make open proclamation, that
whosoever is there for the contrary part should appear: for if he do not
appear, it shall proceed against him, as one contumacious, and that has
failed of his duty, which the Lord of the field is not to deny the other: and
on the day appointed, he is to appear in the lists at a convenient hour,
where his Padrino offering him to the Lord, and showing that his Champion is
come to fight, is to make a new instance, for a new proclamation touching the
quarrel, which he is likewise to do at noone and at the evening, and withal
shall make show of his armor and of his horse, wherewith he came furnished to
fight: whereby he shall have cause to accuse his aduersarye of contumacye, and
to demand that his Champion be admitted to run the field, and to be
pronounced victor, and that the other be condemned of contumacy, of failing,
and vanquished in the quarrel.

And that he pronounced vanquisher, may use such terms against him, as by
the order of gentrye is permitted: all which things the Lord ought to grant
him: and the Gentleman shall go about the field three times, with an
honorable pomp of his Horse and armor, and sound of Trumpet, and shall
carrye with him the letters: which being done, he may likewise carrye the
portraiture of his aduersarye.

And whatsoever has been said of the Challenger, may the Defendant in like
case do.

What is to be done upon the alleging of any impediment, for not appearing
in the field.
WE are now to consider what course is to be taken, if any gentleman do not
appear in the field at the appointed time, nor do not prove a lawful
impediment that hindered him: in which case I affirm, that first if the
impediment happen, at such time as notice might be given thereof, before the
contrary party should appear himself to the field, it is then to be
admitted, upon defraying the others charge and pains, and upon the
justification to him of his lawful excuse, offering himself also at
convenient time to procure a new field, and to satisfy any loss which the
contrary party should suffer by means of prolonging of time.

But if this let should fall out so suddenly, as in no sort there could any
knowledge be given of it, before the very day appointed, yet is the excuse to
be approved, so as the impediment be lawful, and then is he likewise to
defraie the charges of him that appeared: for if I make agreement with thee, to
meet thee on such a day at such a place, and for such a cause, and I be there
present and thou be hindered, whereby I am put to a new charge, there is no
reason that thy commodity should return a discommodetie and a loss to me.
But excuses of lawful impedement, should be great infirmities, tempests, or
waters that may stop passage, the war of a man's country, or Prince, or
against infidels, and such like accidents, which any indifferent judge may
think lawful. Imprisonment also is a lawful excuse, unless it be such as a man
at all times may be freed of: for Gentlemen that are to go into the field,
ought by all means to avoid every occasion, that may hinder them from their
intent, for whosoever in matters of honor does not seek all that he can to
salve his honor, or has other respect at all than to his honor, makes a
great breach of his honor: and therefore whosoever should procure himself to
be commanded to stay by his Prince, is to be adjudged as one that procures
his own imprisonement.

Again, I do not allow it as a lawful means to prolong time, if after a
quarrel be once concluded, a man should take upon him any new charge of
office, for I would think this sought after to that end, and is not to be
approved good, because that being bound in honor, he is first to satisfy
that, before he go about new matters.

And yet I grant, that if in this mean time (be it by succession or good
fortune) any lordship or great title should befall a man, by means whereof,
his adversary that before was his equal, is now become far his inferior:
in such case this accident is to be taken for a new and just impediment, not
so much to win time, as to fight in his own person: for in this case the
quarrel begun, should be performed by a substitute or Champion, as we
term him.

In how many cases a man may overcome in the Lists.
THe success of fighting in the Listes may happen diversely, for sometime it
may be that the Combat enduring to the Sun set, the Challenger may neither
overcome the Defendant, nor yet be overcome by him, in which case the
Defendant is to be adjudged the vanquisher, and to be absolved of the blame
objected him by his adversary, and the Challenger shall be accounted the
vanquished, and an ill Combatter, and may be refused if afterward he
challenge any man upon any other quarrel, but yet he shall not be the
Defendants prisoner, unless he shall overcome him. And in this one case only
the Defendant fighting and not overcome, does overcome the other Other cases
are common both to the Challenger and Defendant, whereof one is in killing his
adversary, another is, when a man yields, be it in whatsoever kind of
words. A third is, when a man does expresselye disclaim from the quarrel,
confessing himself either truly accused, or to have falselye accused: and
last of all is the running out of the Listes. Of which sorts of loosing the
field, every one is by so much the more shameful, by how much the mose I
have placed and set him down in his lowest place or room: and to be slain
in the field, as it is less shameful, so it is far more dangerous and
hurtful.

It may also happen, that a man by strength may overcome his adversary or his
enemy, and bind him, or in such sort hold him in his own power, as every
one that sees may judge, that if he will he may kill him, and thereby end the
field: for holding him in such sort, and requiring him to yield, and the
other not agreeing, it is certain he may lawfully kill him: but if he should
not kill him, and thereby the day be spent, it may be doubted wha^ judgment
should in this case be given. But if the Defendant be the better, there is no
question to be made, but he is to be pronounced vanquisher, although there
could not be so full a judgment given of his ouercomming, as we have spoken
of before. And if the Challenger should be he that should chance to have
the Defendant in his power, the matter could hot so easily be determined of.
But in this case their Articles are chiefly to be considered, which may be
drawn in such manner, as without any adoo at all the matter may be
resolved. For if in them it be expressed and set down, that the Challenger
is not to be held vanquisher, unless he either kill, or make the Defendant
deny his accusation, in this case he cannot be accounted vanquisher: but if
it be concluded, that the Defendant be not accounted vanquished except he
be slain or deny his words, I would not then condemn him as vanquished:
and yet I would say that the Challenger had well discharged his part, being
in his power to have killed his enemy. And if the Defendant would renew this
quarrel on any other day, I do not think it in any wise lawful that it
should be granted him. And if in case there should not be any words in
their Articles touching this point, the one holding the other in his power,
(as I have said before) me thinks he is less to be adjudged and taken to
be his prisoner than if he had yielded himself unto him, and so voluntarily
to have become his prisoner, but that he should be sentenced to be
vanquished and overcome, and the vanquisher were devoutly and reverently to be
esteemed and honored, as one that only satisfieng and contenting himself
with the victorie^, did not seek or desire cruelly to imbrue his hands in his
enemies blood.

Touching accidents that happen to the victory of the Lists.
HE that is overcome in the Listes, is thereupon the others prisoner, and he
is to have both his armor, garments, horse, and other furniture whatsoever,
which he brought with him into the Listes, as ornaments for his fighting: and
this is the right case in this matter, for the spoils of the vanquished are
the vanquishers Ensigns.

The person of the vanquished by an honorable custom has been given by the
vanquisher either to the Lord of the field, or to some other prince or noble
man whom he served or followed. Which custom albeit I commend, and wish
every one to follow it, yet I must confess that the vauquisher may if he
list, use his own discretion, and hold has prisoner, which no man can deny
him, because he is to serve him, but not in base offices, nor in any other
but such as belong to a gentleman: and the prisoners taken in the Lists may be
constrained to discharge the expenses of the Combat, and they may be ransomed
for money, even as Gendemen taken in the wars.

The diversity of old and new customs concerning the vanquished.
I Must not omit to tell you, that that which I have before spoken of
prisoners, has rather ben brought in by custom of Gentlemen since they began
to enter quarrels upon their honor, than by any ancient institution of
Duello. For by the law of the Lombards, he that was overcome in fight, was hot
given as prisoner, nor yet pronounced infamous for ever performing any
after-quarrel, but diversely sentenced for that fault whereof he was accused.
For, as it appears plainelye in writing, whosoever accused for manslaughter
was overcome, lost one of his hands: and whosoever was condemned of adultery,
was adjudged to die. And touching the witnesses, who for consummation of their
words did combat, the vanquished lost his hand, and his other companions did
redeem their lives by money: so severely did they execute the judgment of their
Duello. And our learned men allege, that because this proof is uncertain,
albeit a man should in the Listes be found in fault worthy to receive
punishment, yet he were not to suffer death, but a mitigation ought to be
used, giving him some easier punishment. Which as they allege truly and
very commendably, so is that custom of theirs to be condemned, who in case
of Duello cause galowses to be set up near to the place, and do immediately
hang up the vanquished. But what greater punishment can there be, than that
which our laws do inflict upon the vanquished, they do not chasten them in
the purse, nor in cutting off any member, nor in their life, but in that which
to every wise man is more dear than all the rest, for they deprive him of his
honor, for love whereof there is no noble mind that will not spend his blood.
Those that issue vanquished out of the Lists, carry away so much the more
shame, by how much they came thither desirous of honor, and that not because
one man overcame another, for of necessity, two fighting together, one must be
the victor, and (as I have said before) the Challenger not loosing does loose,
so as he is not dishonorable for being overcome, but because he is accounted
a badde man that would take upon him an unjust quarrel, and that he would
fight against the truth, which he is chiefelye bound to maintain. And
therefore weighing and considering the great danger those men incur that
commit these things to the proof of the sword, Gentlemen ought to be more
slow in fighting, except great occasion urge them, and unless they be
certain to fight upon justice, so as they may have great hope to obtain Gods
favor in it.

Touching the vanquished, and of the restoring of Honor.
AS I said before, so I will here again say, that the chalenger that does not
overcome his adversary in the Lists, does remain the looser, not having
proved so much as he ought, and that he may never after challenge any: which
is confirmed with this reason, that whosoever proves not his words true, is
to be thought a false accuser, and consequently is regarded and esteemed a
badde man. And the like is also of every other man whether he be Challenger
or Defendant, that is overcome by force, or made to yield, or deny his
words, or run away, for he can never after that time demand Combat nor
be allowed it.

But I know some that are of opinion, that if I overcome one in the Listes,
and afterward release him, if a new quarrel or controversy befall him with
another, by my leave he may challenge his adversary the Combat, whereto no
man of any reason or understanding ought to consent. For if I ouercomming him
shall have condemned him as infamous, how can I allow him fit to fight with a
man as good as my self? And if he challenge me, I shall refuse him. I cannot
take away his fault that has been overcome by me, unless that I confess I
overcame him wrongfully, and so condemn my self of infamy: and if I cannot
take away his blotte from him, I cannot make him equal with an honorable
person: and therefore this opinion is wholye to be reproved of every Gentleman.

And as this restoring of a man to his honor, is by occasion given me to
speak of, it brings me in remembrance of the restoring which Princes were
wont to make of treasons and rebellions done against them, and such like
faults. Wherein, to speak my opinion, I think well that albeit the Prince may
after my treason committed, grant me favor and pardon of my life and goods,
and give me honor, and a thousand other favors, yet she cannot make, that
that which is done should be undone, or that the ill fact past be not an
ill fact, or that I committed not any treason, or that my soul is not
defiled, and that I am not any notorious vilaine. And that Prince whatsouer
that shall restore me, ought never to trust me, but should rather still
presume, that whereas I was once inueigled and drawn to betraye my master, I
will easilye be persuaded again to the like: and every honorable person
should conceive ill of me, and avoid my company. And it ought rather to be
said, that I am restored to my goods, and the favor of my Prince (if happilye
she will take me into her favor) than to my former honor, because that albeit
my Prince restore me to all those degrees that she may, yet she cannot restore
me to my first innocence: as for example: if I be good, she cannot make me
bad, for it is not in her power to reform my mind. Princes cannot take from
good men their goodness, nor from the wicked their wickedness: for their power
extends on their goods and person, but not on their minds: my Prince may
make me poor or rich, but not good or bad, for God only has power over our
affections. I conclude therefore, that if one that is restored from some
notable and manifest villainy, would challenge another to combat, and that this
other refuse him, I would judge him to have behaved himself honorably, and
that in reason he might refuse him: for if (as I have said before) a Princes
restoring to honor is not lawful, I will less think that a gentleman by
licensing one overcome by him in combat, can make him lawful to fight with an
honorable person.

But returning to the restoring which I spoke of before used by Princes, my
opinion is, that it ought to be good in the children of traitors, and in the
rest of their descent, as in those that ought not bear the punishment of
others offenses, especially seeing that those that are baptized, are by Gods
laws freed from the sins of their fathers.

Whether one once overcome and afterward being vanquisher, may challenge
another.
SOme men doubting whether one once overcome in the listes, and afterward
challenged to fight, do overcome, be to be said that he has recovered his
honor, and if after that he may challenge any man to the field: it has been
thought that by the honor of his second combating, he has taken away the
blotte of the first, but yet for the better conclusion, we are to think that
the first loss cannot be recovered by any new combat.

And upon this question I have seen the judgment of Alfonzo d' Auolos Marquis
of Vasto, which was this. The duty of gentlemen is to prefer their honor
before their life, and he whosoever goes the looser out of the listes, shows
that he accounted more of his life than honor, and therefore albeit he should
afterward enter combat and overcome, yet it is not to be said that he has
recovered his honor, because it may be presumed, that he came thither with an
intent to try his fortune if he could overcome, and yet with a mind in all
accidents, to save his life, because worse could not befall in honor then had
done before, which he had once lost. And whereas such presumption may be had
of him, and that a man may well think that he came into the field with
intent to do any thing, rather than dye, he is in no sort to be said, to have
revived his honor, that was before dead in the dust: but if afterward he would
challenge any man, he ought to be refused.

This was the opinion of that gentleman, and this hold I for a gentlemanlike
opinion, which every wise man ought to allow and follow: and this exposition
is to be understood, not only of those who confess themselves the loosers,
or run away, but of those also who having had the charge of proouing, have
lost, by not satisfying the proof: because that they being bespotted with
blame of false accusers, by means of their loss, cannot be forced from fault
of false accusation, for that they were afterward falselye accused: nor can
they take away from themselves the presumption, to be accounted false accusers,
if they should accuse any man, seeing they have been once before condemned in
the same: so that in what sort soever a man go out of the lists looser, he
is subject to the judgment before given.

Again, after that a man has been once overcome in the lists, every
honorable person ought to beware not to enter into proof of weapons with him,
as also with all other infamous persons: and the like is also to be observed*
albeit being challenged by an other the second time, he should yet then
overcome.

After the challenge, for some causes the Combat may be refused.
IF after an agreement of Combat betwixt two, one of the^ should commit some
de fault, which should bring him into such infamy, as who soever were staind
therewith, could not challenge another to the field, in this case he that had
committed this fault, might be refused by his adversary, as one that was
grown worse in his condition, and that had changed his nature from that which
he was, when their quarrel was first begun betwixt them.

But here is to be understood, that this new occasion for which a man may be
refused the field, should be infamye, which a man by his own fault was fallen
into, as treason, false oath, or other notable matter, and not any injury or
charge done him by some other, which might require revenge by weapons: for in
such case, as the first which had a quarrel with him, might refuse him, as
become worse in his condition, for the second should not refuse to come to
combat with him with whom he entered into quarrel, albeit he had received
charge from any other. And there is no reason that a man should remain charged
of all hands, without any means to discharge himself. Therefore he is to take
upon him the second quarrel, and perfourming that with honor, he may and
ought to follow the first.

But this is to benoted, that the refusal of a man for being become worse in
condition, appertains to the Defendant, and not to the Challenger: for they
that are charged ought to seek to discharge themselves, and not suffer that
another man do in any sort take from them such occasion: and to be able to do
this the better, let them follow this rule of reason, that whosoever is first
in time, is also to be preferred in way of reason. And because that many times
one contrary is to be governed by an other, I will also affirm, that if a
quarrel depending betwixt two, or the challenge being seen, and the letters
of the field succeeding, if the on of them should come to such degree of estate
and signorie, that the other were now no longer his equal, then might he refuse
to be brought to the proof by weapons in his own person amongst the other: but
yet he is to perform that by his Champion, for the inequality of condition,
is no occasion to break of the definition of the quarrel.

Of the inequality of noble men, and cheefely of commanding Lords.
FOrasmuch as this subject of challenging and defending, and of refusing and
not refusing the field, is very large, and has need of much consideration, I
do not see how a man may truly and fully determine of it, without speaking of
the degrees of nobility, wherein I will not call in question what true
nobility is, because I hold it undoubtedly to be virtue, and that he is truly
noble that is virtuous, be he borne either of great or mean parentage, and
that whosoever has not this nobility of virtue, of whatsoever stock he
proceed, by how much he descends from a more noble kindred, by so much will
I account him the more base, not being able to maintain and keep the honor
left unto him by his ancestors: for nobility is seated in the mind, and by
the mind it is shown. But (as I said before) I intend not to dispute hereof,
for having already before shown, that such as are defiled with infamy, may
be refused from proof by weapons: it is always to be understood, that
nobility is not without virtue, and my discourse is to be in this subject, that
I speak now of Duello, what the degrees of nobility are that may exercise
weapons, by which knights come to be equal or unequal: for albeit that under
the title of Knights, Kings and Emperors, Gentlemen and Soldiers, be
comprehended, yet there is such an evident inequality betwixt them, as every
man knows that a Gentleman cannot compare with a King, nor a soldier with an
Emperor: and albeit this matter has been diversely handled by many, yet I
purpose to speak now thereof after a mew and particular manner, according to
the custom of degrees and worship of our present time. First then I allege,
that there are many ways, whereby we may consider the diversity of degrees:
for concerning the place of dignity, I will first place those Princes that
are not subject to any other, which I will call sovereign Princes: next to
them feodatory Kings, and them I will call most excellent: thirdly, men right
honorable, and after them such as are titled noble men, under which title I
will comprehend all the degrees of worship. These then we are undoubtedly to
account superiors to private Knights, and therefore as they are superiors to
them, so are they twixt themselves unequal: for both noble men are to give
place to the right honorable, and the right honorable to the most excellent,
and the most excellent to the free and absolute Princes. Besides that, betwixt
them of one and the same title, there may also be great inequalitye, forasmuch
as there is a great difference, for one right honorable or noble, to depend on
a free Prince or a Prince feodatorie.

And the like consideration is to be had of feodatory nobility, forasmuch as
one man may assume unto himself the absolute power of a Prince, and another
man can have no greater authority, than as an ordinary judge.

Besides, it is not the least regard that we are to have, to their other
qualities and mightines of signorie, as, if they have vassales noblemen, or no:
if they hold Cities, and multitudes of subjects, and great port, for all these
things are to be respected, whether they be free Princes or feodatorye:
whether they be most excellent, or right honorable, or noblemen: whether they
have this honor of free Princes or of feodatory Princes: if they have noble
and honorable men feodatories, and if they possess noble and great state: and
if we find them not in some of these distinctions to be much different, we
are rather in the controversy of arms, to esteem them equal, then to admit
one of them, to refuse the other. And because there can be no greater
difference, than one to be free, and the other subject: and for that soueraign
Princes are only truly free, and all the rest in some sort subject, we must
conclude, that as a sovereign cannot be challenged the field by any man of
anoprince there degree, likewise, those which we have termed most excellent,
are not to refuse combat with those that are termed right honorable: if they
be equal in feodatory nobility, and not unequal in other qualities.

The like is also to be held betwixt right honorable and noblemen, so as their
condition, as the greatness and nobility of state, be not too much different:
for I see no cause to except against any man in controversy of chivalry, not
to be his equal, because one only degree is different betwixt them. And as I
affirm that one degree only makes no inequality, so I do not allow that
one under the title of most excellent, may be challenged by one right
honorable, of like feodatorye nobility, but that concerning his degree, he is
so far inferior unto him: that in another case he would not disdain to
receive pencion and pay of him. Neither yet will I say, that one right
honorable should fight with a noble man, although his estate be most noble:
nor that one right honorable of great state, may be challenged by one noble,
of small jurisdiction: albeit their feodatorye nobility be equal.

But I will say, that a noble man feadatory to a sovereign Prince, albeit he
be of less degree, may notwithstanding challenge one right honorable, that is
feodatorie to one feodatorie, and has greater signories, for his feodatorie
nobility does satisfy the other inequalities.

And therefore I conclude in this point, that the inequality of persons, is to
be considered from their titles, from their feodatory nobility, and from
their states, and according as they are found to have greater or less parts
equal, so are they to be judged equal or unequal.

Heereunto I will add one other thing, which is this, that albeit their other
qualities were either equal or not much different, yet the quarrel might make
great inequality: as if a prince albeit soueraign, would fight with an
Emperor, for some thing that belongs to the Empire, in such case he might
lawfully be denied, forasmuch as the Emperor by the condition of the quarrel,
is true judge thereof, and consequently also without comparison of any superior.

Of the inequality of private Noble men.
GEntlemen that are nobly borne, are either without any degree, or else bear
office or dignity, as government of cities, embassages, or commandment in
the war: and touching those that have authority, either their office is for
term, or for life: if for term, then upon any quarrel to be decided by
arms, it may stay the execution of their office: if for life, and that his
degree is such as makes him superior to the other, he may fight by his
Champion. But if his office be not of such quality, he that has the charge of
it, is to endeavor the good favor of his Lord, to grant him without loosing
his office, to satisfy his honor: and if he cannot obtain it, he is to
abandon all things, and to resort thither whether he is challenged, or
whether his honor urges him to challenge another: for as a man is not bound
to any thing more strictly than to his honor, so is the lesser to give place to
the greater.

Now in that a man is borne noble, he is equal to all Knights, that are of
private condition: and albeit that one man were borne of a noble house, or
right honorable, being without jurisdiction, or succession of signorie, he
may be challenged the field by any private Knight.

Moreover, forasmuch as the art of war is a noble exercise, and because many
mean men have greatly advanced their houses by it, he that shall ^xercise the
art of weapon, if he be without infamy, or do exercise it without abuse, is
to be reckoned and accounted amongst noble men and Knights.

But I would not that any man should upon this think himself made honorable,
for having been once in the war, and for having taken pay, and served two or
three months without ever drawing swoorde, or seeing enemy, or hearing sound
of trumpet, for this were as much as to dream upon the hill Parnassus that he
is a Poet, and the morning not find himself so. It is expedient for any man
that of unnoble would become noble, to get this nobility by arms, and it is
meet for him that would be accounted amongst Knights, to do the act of a
Knight: and it is required of a man to make honorable proof of his person
more than once, and to continue long in the wars, and to be known for a good
Soldier, and to live as well in time of war as of peace honestlye, and in
such sort that it may be perceived he intends only to be a Soldier, and
to make that his principal butte and drift.

And if in the study of letters a man do not attain unto any degree of
honor or nobility, but with pains and watchinges of many years, let him
then think likewise that hops to innoble himself by arms, to sweat often,
to endure many heates of Summer, and cold of winter, to watch many nights, and
to sleep many times in his armor upon the hard ground, and to spend his
blood, and by many hazardes of life, to manifest his prowes to the world: and
when he shall have performed all these things, then he may think himself
truly noble (for those are noble that deserve to be known for their deeds)
and that he cannot be refused for want of nobilitye. Now amongst Soldiers, a
Soldier may fight with all sorts of men, as the heads of the squadrons,
seriants, and others under the degree of their Captain, for his authority
represents signorie, and they may also challenge them, and they are to
answer them, being about any enterprise, and having degree by a Champion, but
being returned to their private condition, I see no cause why they should not
answer in person. And one Captain may challenge combat of another, except
they be in place so unequal, as one may command the other.

And this is to be said of all sorts of Soldiers, as well foot as horse,
adding moreover, that man of arms having been in honorable and continual
exercise of war, and living in all points as beseems a man of arms,
challenging a particular Captain of foot, is not to be refused, nor may he
refuse any soldier serving on foot.

And I am of opinion, that a Captain of foot might challenge a Captain of
horse, but only that for the most part those places are bestowed on noble
personages, and the conducting of men of arms is also bestowed on right
honorable men: and therefore in this case all conditions are to be considered,
and the quality of the enterprises that they have, for a Captain of foot may
have so honorable a degree, or be of so honorable familye, that there could be
no cause to refuse him.

And this which I have spoken touching captains of foot, of horse, and of men
of arms, of also to be understood of footmen twixt themselves, and horsemen
also, be they either men of arms, or light horse. For besides their degrees of
greatness in war, their degrees of nobility which we have spoken to before
in our treatise of noble men (if any they have) are to be considered, and
according to their greater or less inequalitye, they are equal or unequal:
which rule being general given, may by men of understanding easilye be
applied unto particular cases.

With what persons a Knight ought to enter Combat, and with what he ought not.
WE have long waded through this spacious discourse of chivalry, seeking to
set down who ought to be denied Combat, which matter is so large and copious,
as if a man would particularlye to every mite discourse thereof, it would
contain a greater volume then I intend to make, in the whole subject of
Duello, but it suffices me to have pointed at the fountain where water may
be fetched: and to conclude with my opinion touching the duty of a Knight, I
have in the beginning of this chapter touched two principal heads: that is,
who they are that ought to be clean thrust from combat, and who are only to
be refused, for in those two almost all controversy of persons that enter or
not enter Duello, are as it were contained, forasmuch as the wicked and infamus
persons ought to be refelled by knights: and they may be refused who for
condition are unequal, and if a man would ask why we have not said that in
these two heads all are contained, but almost all, it is for that which we have
before spoken, of learned men, and cleargye men, who are far from the lists,
not as refelled, nor as refused, but as priuiledgd, and as such to the quality
and estimation of whose condition it is not meet, neither to challenge nor be
challenged to proof by arms, because their study and exercise is far from
the valor of the mind.

And to return to our heads before propounded, I say, that to refel the
infamous and wicked, is the duty and band of chiualrye, for a knight is bound
to do so that he do not bring in to the exercise of arms persons unworthy to
appear amongst honorable persons, whereof by their own fault they have made
themselves unworthy. Nor is there any credit to be given them in the proof
of arms, who are not received in civil testimony: neither are dishonorable
persons to enter into battles, that are undertaken for honor sake.

And if any Knight should make a quarrel with any person incapable of Duello,
the Lords (as I have said before) as well in right of chivalry, as not for to
suffer the field to be dishonored, ought not to grant the combat.

The refusal is not of band of chivalry, but of will of Knights, because that
if a man will not enter combat with one of less condition then himself, he
may lawfully do it, appointing a mean champion to decide the quarrel. But if
a man would not respect degree, but would in person fight with one who for his
condition or other defect were not his equal, he could not be said to do wrong
to chiualry, but rather to honor it: forasmuch as chivalry is not the account
of condition, but of valor.

And in the disputations of arts and more nob^e sciences, no man's linnage is
respected but his worth, and therefore a man of base or high degree may be
valorous, and the honor of the listes, is not so much for ouercomming one
borne of noble family, as one that is known for a valiant man.

Again, as great men account it no shame to be called Knights with meaner
men, so they ought not be ashamed to come together, to do the oath of
chivalry: and if a man borne of a great family, have no respect to injury
another, I know not why by reason of his noblenes in blood, he may refuse to
defend the same, and to maintain it against him whom he injured: and in case
that combat were to follow upon it, my judgment is, that the iniurer or
offender, howsoever we term him, is to answer the other in person. And
therefore as I think it a discommendable thing for an honorable person, to
agree to make himself equal to a person that for his vices were odious,
albeit he descended of a noble race: so I repute it a knightly course, not to
be too curious in the differences of conditions, especially when they are not
so diverse as may seem, that the frog strives to be equal with the Ox,
(according to the tale.)

Again, I will add another case, that as I will commend him that should not so
much respect the condition as the valor of him with whom he had quarrel, so I
would blame him, that being of a base estate would compare himself with every
great man, and would not acknowledge nor content himself with his own
condition.

And this I speak, not only of those that are borne me^nely, but of those also
that being borne of noble blood, are yet of a private condition, and in
question of honor, would be equal with right honorable personages: for if
they esteem so much of themselves for having blood, and being in their
families of great Lords, they are to consider, that those Lords have innobled
those houses and that they have received their nobility from Lords, and if
they have received it from them, they are by so much less then they, by how
much he is greater that gives another man nobility, than he that receives
it.

Touching the appointing of Champions.
WE have shown great inequality of noble men, whereby the less cannot bind
the greater to answer him in person* but because no man's greatness can make it
lawful for him unjustly to oppress the lesser, without leaving him
sufficient means to revenge himself, and no man ought to make the shadow of
his nobility a pretense to be able secretlye to commit defectes, without
yielding reason for them. It is very necessary, that as in them there is
respect for the degree of nobility, so also it should be of honor and
justice, to provide a meet remedy for every private person, and that the law
of chiualry should be inuiolably kept as well of great as of small. And
therefore all such as by reason of some excellent degree of nobility, shall be
found not bound to come in person into the lists with another, are also to
know, that in question of arms which they shall happen to have with persons
albeit private, that they shall be bound to appoint a Champion, who being
lawfully overcome or yielding, he is likewise to be said overcome, that
appointed him for his Champion.

And in this point I will deliver the opinion of Doctors, that in case where
combat is to be done by a Champion, such as do present him, ought also to be
present themselves, and be held under safegarde, to the end that a mockery be
not made of Duello, and that if their Champion loose the field, they do not
escape the judgment.

The like also is to be done, when the quarrel is such, as the looser should
be condemned in corporal punishment: but where other punishment is not
requisite, then to be the vanquishers prisoner, it may sufficientlye suffice,
that securitye be given of the charges, and convenient ransom.

The laws of giving a Champion, are these: such ought to be given as are not
infamous, and are equal to them against whom they are to fight, and when one
party should intend to appointe a Champion, the other may likewise appoint one:
But it is meet that he that will take benefit hereof, should use such course
in his writing, that he loose not his prerogative or jurisdiction as we will
term it; for if a man by his writing should say that he will defend the
quarrel in his own person, and afterward would appoint a Champion, the
contrary part might with reason refuse it.

Again, it is to be understood, that the Champions on either side are to
swear, that they think to fight in a just quarrel, and that they will do
their utmost, as if themselves were interessed in the quarrel: and whatsoever
Champion shall willinglye suffer himself to be overcome, is to have one of his
hands cut off, and the aduersarye has not overcome, but the combat may be
renewed: and after that a Champion has been overcome, he may not after that
fight for any other, but for himself he may.

But I will not here omit, that albeit that nobility does privilege the
greaters to appoint Champions, such yet may the cases be, that not only a
great man with an inferior, but a master with his servant, and a Prince with
his subject is bound to fight in person: for seeing that promise is a band
which equally binds the Prince and subject, so no greater or less band has
the one than the other: and whenever one man shall oppose unto another, any
defect of promise and faith, he cannot use his Champion, but the accuser is to
try the quarrel in person with the accused. And therefore when a Lord shall
accuse his subject or his servant, of whatsoever condition he be of violating
his faith, or of women, or of treason against the state, he is to prove it in
his proper person: and the like is also to be observed, when the subject or
servant shall accuse his Lord.

But many Lords have no care nor consider not the oath and obligation of faith
which they have toward their subjects, but rechles of their faith, do
incessantly every day commit new defectes, and perhaps they think that their
greatness does cover their defects, and do not perceive, that by how much they
are exalted above other men, by so much their faults appear the greater: for
wheareas they both by their example and laws ought to instructs others in
their life, they opposing themselves against laws, do give other men example
of wicked living: and therefore seeing that the defect of faith is a defect so
great in Lords, it is great reason that they should have no privilege in
quarrel of faith: and if it be not to be granted to Lords, much less is it
to be granted to persons of other quality or condition.

And further it is to be understood, that besides the inequality of
nobility, there are also such manner of cases, that in respect of persons it
is lawful to appointe Champions, as if a man shall not be of eighteen
years, or if he be decrepite, or sick, or in such forte hindered in his
body, as he is not fit to fight.

This is to be placed before the first chapter of Satisfaction.
Of the Duello or Combat.
HOw and in what manner the Duello or Combat has bin used, they may know,
that have turned over the Records and Annals of passed ages. And seeing it is
now long since out of custom, and not permitted by the laws, I think it not
necessary to be much spoken of in this place. I will only say this, that in
times past it was had in very reverent account, and Gentlemen thought it an
honorable quality to be able to discourse of those points and rules that were
agreed upon amongst Princes, and by them approved, concerning free and open
Combat. My intention is, to give gentlemen warning how they appoint the field
with their enemies, seeing it is not permitted by the laws to be done
publicly, as by ancient custom it was wont to be allowed. For it may so fall
ou^, that a Gentleman having passed his word to meet his adversary in some
secret place^ (...) ^ee has valiantly wounded him, and reporte^ (...) victory
of him in the appointed place, his said (...) ^^ersarie may accuse him of
fellonie, and say that he robbed him, and so where the quarrel should have
an end he shall be forced to enter into new troubles, and begin again. It may
also so chance that his adversary has ambushes prepared for him, and so he
may be murdered, and being dead, his enemy may vaunt of having bravely
conquered him by right and valor. I have my self known in Countries beyond
the seas, two Captains, the one named Faro, the other Montarno de Garda, the
Lord of Mandelot, governor of Leon, met together, whereof the one
trecherouslie minded, prayed the other to show whether he was not privily
armed: whereupon as soon as Captain Montarno had opened his doublet, he
presently ran him through, and seeing him fall down dead (as he thought) on
the ground, returned into the city with counterfeit glory, as if he had done
wonders, until by hap the poor Captain was found by his friends yet living,
to bewraie the other Captains villainy. Like examples many have happened, and
that not so far hence, but many undoubtedly are acquainted with them. I would
in like manner advertise Gentlemen, of an evil custom which of late years
has installed it self amongst men of all sorts and nations: to be delighted
with broiles and hurliburlies, to set men together by the ears, and cause
qurrels betwixt friends, neighbors, and kinsfolk: whereas it was wont to be
a matter of great consequence, and of such nature, as it might not be oth^^
(...) decided, which should bring men so mortally (...) quarrel. Now upon
every occasion Arms are taken, and one friend for a word occasion Arms are
taken, and one friend for a word will not only violate the sacred respect which
ought to be zealouslie observed in friendship, by turning their familiarity
into strangenes, their kindness into malice, and their loves into hatred, but
also accompany this strange and unnatural alteration with a wicked resolution
of seeking one another overthrow, not resting till the enmity be confirmed
by fight, and fight ended by death.

O the reverent esteem and account wherein former ages had the Combat! And why?
Forsooth because no Gentleman sought the ruin or destruction one of another,
and never undertook trial by the sword but in defense of his innocence, and
to maintain his honor unfeigned and blotlesse. Now malice and hatred
ouerrunneth all, strife and rancor are the bellows of quarrels, and men upon
every light cause enter into more actions of defiance, than for any just
occasion offered in respect of justice and honor.

One fault more, besides these which I have alredie mentioned, is fairly
grown amongst us, that if any of our friends say to us but one word to
this effect, Come will you go with me, I must fight with such a one, and I
know not what partakers he has, We are presently ready not only to go with
him our selves, but to draw others into the mind with us also, without any
consideration had of the manner of the quarrel, how justly or iniustly it
grew, and so often times we bolster (...) against right: whereas we should
enter into ^^^^ation of his cause, learn the quarrel, and (...) for the
occasions and causes of their falling out, and being acquainted therewith,
though we find him to have reason for his rage, (for I know not how else to
term that passion that leads men to that mortal resolution, upon what just
occasion soever) yet ought we not to accompany, nor to further him, no not to
suffer him to fight, if the matter can possiblye by any other means be taken
up and ended: for so dangerous a trial in my opinion, is to be reserved for
such occasions as necessarily require it: and what or how many such there be, I
leave to be perpended and considered by them that can best, discern matters of
so great weight: and so I will come to those points, which I imagine it will
not be amiss here to discourse of.

Touching the satisfaction that ought to be made twixt Knights.
Seeing we have already treated sufficiently of Duello, as far as is
necessary for a Knight to understand, me thinks it also very convenient to
speak somewat of satisfaction, which is to be made when a man knows he has
wrongfullye iniuried or charged another. And before I proceed, I cannot but
greatly condemn an old and common opinion, which is this: that when a man
has done or spoken any thing good or bad, he should defend and maintain it
for good, which opinion how it is to be approved, I will lay open for every
man of understanding to judge.

Forasmuch as man is principally distinguished by his reason from brute
beasts, as often as he shall effect any thing without reason and with
violence, he works like a beast, and is transfourmed even into a very
beast, as those before time did very well understand, who describing men
metamorphosed into beasts, signified no thing else but that those men had done
acts proper to those beasts, whereof they termed them to have the shape.

Now then if men be turned into beasts by doing like beasts, we may also say,
that so long they abide in that fourm, as they continue in that action or
opinion, and that their abode in that is so: and they have no other means to
dis-beast themselves (as I will term it) than by acknowledging their fault, by
repenting and making amends thereof, and a man should strictly follow reason,
as the chief guide and mistres of his life: and if happily he should at any
time happen to offend (as it is common to man) he should with all possible
speed recall himself, seeing it is a heavenly thing to amend.

But to speak particularly of matters of chivalry, we take the office and
duty of this degree to be, to to help the oppressed, to defend justice, to
beat down the proud: where some clean contrarily do turn their sword, the
ensign and arms of justice, to oppress reason, to commit injustice, and to
confound the truth: and this wicked opinion and perverse custom is so rooted
in the common sort, as they account it a base thing for a man to proceed with
reason, and to consent to equity: but albeit they be many that follow this
corrupt use, yet the better sort of spirits do approve that sentence which is
preached. And I have heard of Signor Luigi Gonzaga, who dyed Captain of the
Romish Church, whose valor has been so well known, as no man ought to think
that ever he was stayed from any noble enterprise through the baseness of his
mind, that he was wont to say, that if he should be known to have spoken
or done any bad thing, for the which he was challenged to prove it by arms,
rather then he would fight for the false against the truth, and for the bad
against the good, he would freely disclaim from it, and deny it.

And this no doubt is to be held a manlye and a christian like deed, for
reason wills us to do so, and law and the duty of the degree of chiualrye
requires it, and all doctrine as well philosophical as Christian, does teach
us the same.

We are not to follow the opinion of the vulgar.
We see that the earth does naturallye bring forth venomous things, and
thorns, and herbs, and Plants, either not profitable or hurtful, all which
as a mother she does nourish, without any help of man's labor: but those that
are good and profitable and helpful, she receives with noisomnes like a
stepmother, so as they have need of continual culture and yearly renouation.
And that which we see in the earth of the seeds of things, is likewise seen
in men of good and badde minds: for the bad through our natural corruption is
conceived, received, and generally embraced of us all: whereas the good is
vnwillinglye received, and we stop our ears least we should hear of it,
for there belongs great study to understand the truth, and much pains to
bring to pass that our minds be capable of it: and therefore by how much the
pains is the greater, by so much is to be said they are fewer that have true
knowledge of the truth: in which respect, it is no marvel if the vulgar
opinion be so far from the truth.

But because learned men have distinguished man's condition in three sorts, the
first, such as of themselves are apt to seek out the truth, and they are
termed the best: the second, such as finding themselves unapt for so good a
work, do obey others that do truly admonish them, and they are called good:
and the third, such as neither themselves know, nor will hearken to others, and
they are fitlye called bad. Seeing that every man cannot be in the first place,
yet we ought to believe such men, whose authority and doctrine we find
approved, and to follow their direction, and to take heed least through our
obstinacy we fall into the last degree, which is of the wicked: which as we
are to perform in all manner of our living, so it is expedient to do the like
in the order of things of chivalry, abandoning the vulgar opinion, and
following the steps of those, who by valor and knowledge have laid open unto
us, the right way, and governing us by the law of reason, and not after the
vanities of those, who rather by chance or by violence, then by any true
course or judgment of true understanding, do rule their own actions.

Of satisfactions in general.
Knights taking upon them to deal of peace, ought chiefly to provide that
there be hope of the continuance thereof: which they are to do with the least
greeuance that may be of both parties, not burthenyng the one, for the ease of
the other, or many times such things are demanded, as are more heavy to the
offender, than ease to the offended, and this is not a token of seeking peace,
but revenge: and yet it is very meet that when one is grieved in any thing,
the other that has done the wrong should be alike grieved: for if thou take
from me, mine own reason commands that thou make me full restoration, even
with part of thine own.

But in wrongs committed, two things are commonly wont to be considered, the
thing whereby a man is wronged, and the manner how it was done: for from the
deed comes the injury, and from the manner comes the charge: as for
example, Henry gives the bastonata to Edward when he had no cause to take
heed of him, and after he has given it: runs away: in this action the
stroke is the injury, and the charge is, that Edward is bound to prove that he
did it shamefully. And to make them friends, Henry will say that he did Edward
this injury unawares to him, and when he had no cause to beware of him, and
after he had stricken him, he went his way in such sort, as Edward could not
make sufficient revenge, and that he is not a man of equal degree to charge
him, nor wrong him, more then the other is to wrong him: and by these words
manifesting the manner how he wronged Edward, he discharges him from the
band of proouing this act to be villainous* for there needs no proof of that
which is apparent, so as all the injury rests on him, for which be he great
or mean, it is an ordinary matter to ask him forgiveness.

Moreover the words according to conditions, the age, and profession of the
parties, may alter and change it, that it be referred to the judgment of the
meaner. Some men would have, that a man should confess to have done badlye or
trecherouslye, for saying or doing such a thing, and do not perceive that the
signification of these words, is when a thing is done in a bad and evil
manner: and therefore I would not have any man make more account of words, then
of the meaning of them: and after that by the meaning the offended is
discharged, to seek other words, is not to unburden himself, but to burden
the other more grievously. But because there are two sorts of injuries, the one
by deeds, the other by words, we will severally entreat of them both.

Of satisfackion of iniurye by deeds.
MAny I know are of opinion, that satisfaction cannot be made by words for
offenses by deeds, wherein I am of contrary mind, for this is not meerelye to
be considered, from words to deeds, but by the greeuousnes and greatness of
the shame that comes to him by the deed and the words, and by the shame that
he accounts to himself, and that comes to him from others: for which of them
will we repute more honorable or more shameful, he that is trecherously
wronged, or he that commits it? and the like I mean also of disadvantage, by
striking one behind, and other ill manner of outraging others.

In this case me thinks there is no doubt, for neither is his shame the
greater that did the injury, nor his that received it, (according as we have
said before) for if I confess to have committed a defect, and thou through my
confession art justified from not having done amiss, whereof should thou not
be satisfied with asking forgiveness I cannot conceive any so heinous an
injury, as in my judgment such a satisfaction may not suffice, especially
seeing it has ever been the use of most gentlemanlike minds, willingly to
forgive.

But forasmuch as there wants not such, who in case of grievous injury,
would that a man should secretly be committed into their hands and discretion,
I do not see how it is the ready or honorable way to make agreement, for if
the offended should by his own hands take satisfaction, it seems he deals
discurteously, and by such manner of proceeding we have seen that quarrels and
enmyties have not been ended, but redoubled: and if without other demonstration
this remission be accepted for amends, the matter gives suspect of a secret
agreement betwixt them, which is prejudicial to the honor of him that is
wronged. But if one man should unadvisedly against his will offend another,
and finding his error, should yield himself and give him his sword, and put
him self into his hands, using all humility and sorrowfulnes, and that he
that was wronged without further ado should embrace him and lift him up, I
would account a most honorable act twixt them both: but the matter once waxt
cold, and that it is dealt in by means, I cannot think that agreement may
be made by remission. And to confirm that which I said, that words may be
sufficient satisfaction for injury by deeds: I allege, that if happilye one
man were mightilye outraged by another, and should write to him that he meant
to prove it, that he had done a vile act, and like a bad man and ill knight:
and the other answering him, should confess as much, it is certain that no
further quarrel should remain, nor band of honor betwixt them.

Yea, and if being come to the listes, in making the articles twixt the
Padrini, the Padrinio of the challenged should agree to the form of the
quarrel, and confess that to be true, which his aduersarye alleged, and
that if the quarrel should cease, the combat likewise should cease: which if
it be so, as indeed it is, I do not see why those words, which in the
cartels and at the field may satisfy me, the same words should not likewise
satisfy me, in the presence of honorable persons, and of the same mine
aduersarye being spoken, and he also asking me forgiveness. And with these
reasons I do firmly conclude, that words may satisfy injury by deeds.

Of the contradicting certain vulgar opinions or matters of satisfaction.
WE have showed before how greatly they are deceived, that hold opinion, that
after a man has done or spoken any thing good or bad, he is to defend and
maintain it for good: and in the Chapter before we have spoken of the fa^^tie
of that other opinion, that satisfaction cannot be made by words* to injuries
by deeds: in which opinion such as do stand, allege authority from
general Captains, who were wont to say? have thou stricken him? let him do
what he list. Which saying, how far it is worthy to be approved, may be
perceived from that which we have already spoken. And I do not think that any
man of good understanding, (if he shall truly know that he has stricken
another, either with his hand or cudgel) to make peace, will say that he wronged
him like a traitor, or shamefullye. But forasmuch, as we have seuerallye
discoursed before of either of these opinions, now entreating of them both
together, I affirm that from them may be known the falsitie of the vulgar
opinion, so by common consent they are received for good* and yet if we will
with sincere judgment consider them, we shall find that one of the^ does
repugne the other: for if I ought to maintain for good all that which I shall
have done, I shall not be able with my honor to say for the satisfaction of
him that is wro^ged, not only all that which he will have me say, but not so
much as any one thing: and if I may say that which he will, it shall not be
true that I ought to maintain for well done, all that which I shall have done. Now
seeing that so manifest contrariety is comprehended from so open
contradiction, they should also perceive their error, and perceiving it,
reclaim themselves from it: especially considering, that as these two opinions
are contrary twixt themselves, so reason is contrary to them both: and that
surely is a commendable and gentlemanlike opinion which is founded upon law
and reason. And according to this opinion are honorable persons and desirous of
valor, to frame themselves, that no one thing is to be esteemed valorous or
honorable, if it be not accompanied with reason.

Of satisfaction to be made upon iniurye by deeds.
SPeaking in particular of satisfactions that are to be made, the foundation
of them is to be upon truth, that whosoever has done wrong, should confess
it, and whosoever has reason in it, should maintain it. And therefore
whosoever being moved with just disdain, and just occasion, shall conuenientlye
revenge himfelfe against any man, he is not to make other satisfaction, then
to say, that he is soary to have had occasion to have used such an act against
him, and that if he had done it without cause, he should have done ill or like
a badde man, or not like a Gentleman, or knight, or such like words, and he
may also entreat him to be friends with him: and he that has given cause
thereof to the other, acknowledging his fault, should content himself with as
much as reason requires, and not continue in his error, if he will not (as
was said before) remain transfourmed into a brute beast.

And if upon any words, two should fight, and one of them should be hurt,
it were not to be doubted that without further ado they might not be made
friends, for that blood does wash away all blot, of which soever of them it
was: nor can any of them be reproved of defect, when both of them did manifest
a bold and knightly mind.

And if it happen that one man should any way offend another, and that he which
is offended should lay hand on his weapons, and the other should fly, albeit
the offended could not come to him, he that should fly were to be condemned
for a vilde man and a coward, and the other should be honored: forasmuch as
honor is seated in the face and in the hands, and not in the shoulders and
feet. But to come to be made friends, he should confess his baseness, and ask
forgiveness of his offense.

And if one man should offend another not in any ill sort, but wrongfullye,
and the other do not revenge himself being able to do it presently, the
offender according to the quality of the person offended, shall confess to
have done wrong, or to have done against reason, or such a thing as he ought
not, or not like a gentleman: and in all these sorts yet he is to ask him
forgiveness thereof.

But if happilye twixt maskers (as often it happens) not knowing one another,
one of them be injured, the amends should be to say, I knew you not, and if I
had known you, I would not have done so unto you, but if I had done it, I
should have done discurteously, or villanouslye, or like a bad Gentleman,
asking pardon for it the like course is to be held when one man should offend
another by night in the dark.

But I will not omit, that sometime a peace is made twixt men, which is not an
agreement of the fact: as if I say that a man stroke me and he denies that he
touched me, in such case the satisfaction may be, I strok thee not: and if I
have, I have done an ill deed, or such like words to this effect: and by such
like examples other cases may likewise be ruled. And to these and such like
cases may be added those other words, which are commonly used twixt Knights,
according as we have made mention in the chapter of satisfactions in general.

Of satisfaction to be made upon iniurye by word.
IT has been said before, that the foundation of satisfactions does consist
in the truth, and to confirm the same, when a man has opposed against another
any defect untruly, he ought to confess that the matter is not so as he
said, and may allege in excuse of himself (if the truth be not opposite
against it) that he spoke it either thinking it to be so, or because it was
told him, or else in choler: and if he shall say that he thought so, he shall
add, he was deceived, or that he thought amiss, and that he knows the truth
to be otherwise: if he say it was told him, he shall say that he which told
it him, said not the truth: and if he say he spoke it in choler, he shall
then say that he knows the truth to be other, that he is soarye for it, or
discontented or grieved. And in this sort al words spoken may be expressed and
declared with a contrary sense, as for example: I have calde thee traitor, when
I knew thee to be an honorable and just knight: and as often as there is
demonstration that the truth is contrary to that spoken, he that is injured,
is discharged. And if a man would not make mention of the injurious words, if
he should revoke them in such sort as I have said, or with words of
honourarable witness, the change should nevertheless be taken away: and if one
man should give another the lie upon words of wrath, he ought also to revoke
it. But if a man should make daintye, to say I have belyed thee, he might yet
in another sort honestly provide for it, for he may say, I confess the words
true spoken by thee whereupon our quarrel is grown, or else he may express
the very matter it self, and allow it to be true: and I will not omit, that
seeking means to make quietness in controversies, I have sometimes so handled a
matter, as I have made agreement by such away, that he which gave the lie, has
spoken to the other in this sort: I would be glad to know of you with what
mind you gave me hard words the other day, whereupon I gave you the lie, and I
pray you resolve me herein: and the other has answered, to tell you the
truth, I spoke them in choler, and not upon any other occasion: and the first
has replied, since you have spoken those words in choler, I assure you that I
meant not to have given you the lie, unless you had spoken them with a
deliberate mind, to charge me, and I say that that my lie does not charge
you, but rather I acknowledge you for a man of troth, and I pray you remember
no discurteous words past betwixt us, but hold me for your friend: and the
other has answered, and I do likewise judge you a man of honor, beseeching you
also to account me your friend. And this form of satisfaction may be applied
to a thousand cases that happen daily: and by this example other forms and
rules may be found according to the quality of the cases.

Moreover, it does happen, that when a man is grieved at another ill words
of him, he denies that he spoke them, which some men make question whether
it should be taken for a full satisfaction, for some would have him say, I
spoke them not, but if I had done it, I had spoken falsely, or other like
words of sense. And touching this doubt, me thinks that if a man should
speak ill of me, in denying to have spoken it, he should greatly shame
himself, but notwithstanding he should not give me satisfaction, and yet he
should be found to have wronged me: and therefore it is not sufficient only to
deny, but a further matter is convenient. And if a man have not spoken il, he
may recite all things, and if he have spoken it, he ought to say something to
satisfy the other, and the words which he is to say are these. I have not
spoken it, but if I had, I should have spoken untruth, or committed that which
I ought not, nor like a gentleman, or such like. But a gentleman should not be
brought to deny that which he has spoken, but rather should confess it, and
make satisfaction: and if he should not deny it to be true, but should say
that in speaking it it, he has offended him, that he should not have spoken
it, or that he did ill, and crave pardon for it, for in all cases where an
offense is, it is requisite to ask pardon. And a man may also offend in
speaking the truth, if his intent be to offend.

That it is no shame to give another satisfaction.
FOrasmuch as we are to come ordinarily to satisfaction by way of denial (for
so will we term reuocations of words, and confession to have done
iniuriouslye) some perhaps may say, if denial be so shameful, as thereby (as
you said before) a man is infamed, and may be refelled in other quarrels by
Knights: how will you if I have spoken any false thing, or done ill thing, that
I by denying should bring upon me such an infamy? whereto albeit we have
sufficientlye answered before, where we showed, that a man should rather
remove himself from error, then continue in it obstinately: yet I affirm that
there is great difference of that which is done in the listes through force of
arms, and of that which is done abroad for love of the truth: for one is
forced, and the other voluntary: one for fear of death, the other for right of
reason: the one condemns a man for a bad Knight that would fight against
justice, and the other shows that a man will do any thing rather then take
weapons in injustice: and one shows, that he which has once undertaken to
defend an ill quarrel, is like to do it another time: and the other gives
testimony, that renouncing the quarrel, not to fight wrongfully, he will not
be brought to take weapons but for a just and lawful occasion: and in sum,
as one is the part of a bad Knight and disloyal, so the other is the
testimony of sincerity and true faithfulness: for seeing that no man lives
without sin, he is more to be commended amongst men, that having committed
any error, and knowing it, forth with repents him of it, and seeks to make
true satisfaction: and a Knight that acknowledging his fault seeks to amend
it, does not only not deserve blame, but is worthy of much commendation: as
he who like a man governing himself by reason like a Knight, takes justice
for his guide, and like a Christian observes the true law. For these reasons
then all Knights ought to embrace it, and al Princes to esteem it highlye, both
the one and the other accounting no less the faith and purity of the mind,
then the pride and bodily strength. Forasmuch as strength is as profitable to
mankind, as it is governed by reason and integrity, only of it self
suffices to govern innumerable multitudes in peace, where force that is not
accompanied with ripe counsel, is that which with the ruin of nations,
ouerturneth all divine and human laws. And because I know that the vulgar
sort account satisfaction baseness, I will thereto answer no other, but that
the choosing rather to fight wrongfully, then satisfy by reason, is judged
beastlynes of every man of understanding.

Satisfaction done to one in Burgundy, by death for his insolency.
A Certain quarrel rose betwixt two Soldiers which I knew very well, one a
Normand of Roan called James Luketo, a man very well experienced in arms, who
falling into some words with the other (being at Geneua) gave him a box on the
ear, whereupon he answered Luketo, that because he knew him to have great
skill in his weapon, which he had not, but being a soldier would fight, and
challenged him for to meet him with his piece, and going to the General of
the army, obtained leave for the open field with his consent and the other
commanders: who were present at the action, and seeing that many discharges
passed betwixt them, and yet neither of the^ took any hurt, suffered them to
charge their pieces no more, but sought to reconcile them again, and make them
friends: whereupon it was agreed of both parts, that he of Geneua, to whom
the box on the ear was given by Luketo, should in presence of the General
and other Captains of the army, strike Lucheto on the shoulder, and say I am
satisfied, we will be friends. But the Soldier of Geneua being of a stout
stomach, when he came to do as it was concluded, took Luketo a sound blow
on the ear, which Luketo taking for a great injury being in that presence,
and against the order set down, drew his sword presently and ran him
through, and so slew him out of hand, justly rewarding him for his insolency:
sure I think it was the just judgment of God, who uses to show his justice
upon them that are so insolent and full of contumacie and envious malice, that
not regarding neither what they pass their words for priuatelye among
themselves, nor the intercession of noble Gentlemen and worthy personages,
that seek their safety and welfare, care for nothing but the fulfilling of
their headdynes and revenging appetite.

My opinion concerning these reconciliations is, that it were not good in the
making of them to allow any sign of revenge, to pass betwixt the parties that
are to be reconciled, so that if satisfaction in the treating of any peace
betwixt two fallen out, can be made by words, me things were not amiss that
even all tokens or signs of revenge were avoided.

Satisfaction unto one that was trecherouslye hurt.
I Made mention above (upon occasion) of two Captains called Montarno and
Faro, the beginning of their quarrel you heard before, the end was such,
Montarno being ungently and cowardlye hurt, accused Faro as having dealt with
him not like a man, which Faro denying the deed, the matter could not be taken
up between them, howbeit many gentlemen travailed in it, but they appointed to
meet one the other, having each of them a God father (as they call him)
appointed him: whereupon the gentleman that was to go with Faro, being wise and
circumspect, and a very honest man besides, said unto him when he was going
to encounter Montarno, look what you do, for you go to a place, where God
overthrows the strongest, and gives the victory to the weakest if he fight
justly, and therefore if you have offended Montarno, make him satisfaction:
whereunto Faro answered, why what satisfaction will Montarno have? whereupon it
was agreed that Faro should confess that he esteemed of Montarno as of a
brave gentleman and honorable Soldier, and that whilst he did vnbutten his
doublet, he meant not to offer him injury howsoever if fell out, and therefore
would gladlye have him to be his friend, and so the peace was made up between
them. But I think it a folly for men to trust their enemies, having their
wepons ready in their hands to injury or wrong them.

A peace made betwixt two noblemen, by the Archduke Charles, Son to the
Emperor Maximilian.
THere were two Noblemen of account under Archduke Charles, Prince of Stiria,
Carinthia, and some places in Croatia and of Friuli, who were both of the
confines of Friuli, one of them being called the Earl Rimondo of Torre, with
whom I have served in wars when he was Coronell of certain companies of the
Emperors in Croatia, against the Turks, at which time the Christians had as
famous a victory, as likely has been heard of, by the industry and valorous
virtue of general Pernome, and the Lord Firinbergher. But to return to our
purpose, the other noble man was called Lord Matthew Ouuer, they being both in
mortal enmity, one incensed against the other, were cause of much bludshed,
and the death of many fine Gentlemen and Knights: which the Archduke Charles
their Prince perceiving to be a thing lamentable, caused both the noble men to
be called to the Court, and placing them into sundry lodgings about himself
(desirous of his subjects welfare) separately to each, and first to Rimondo,
dissuading him from his hostile mind and hatred toward the Lord Matthew, and
finding him very obstinate and altogether resisting all peace and agreement,
considering he could not be reconciled with honor, and would rather die than
make a peace ignominious unto him. Whereupon the Archduke replied, that if he
were resolved rather to die than to yield to his entreaty, he should be
resolved and look to himself, for he should die in deed, and with all called
for an officer criminal to execute him presently. Which soon moved the Lord
Matthew to alter his resolution, and to promise the prince to be friends with
the Earl Rimondo: to whom he went also, and forced him in like manner to vow
friendship to the Lord Matthew. The prince then having brought them both to
consent to his purpose and demand, made them meet in his presence* where the
Lord Matthew, (who had two very excellent proper gentlewomen to his daughters)
being the eldest spoke first and said: County Rimondo, I am at peace with you,
and accept you for my friend and son, and do give one of my daughters in
marriage unto you, with a hundred thousand crowns: who accepted of the
conditions, and so the peace was concluded to their great contentation, the
princes great pleasure, and the joy of all his subjects, without any more
bloodshed or mortality.

A dangerous Satisfaction between two Gentlemen, one called the Bianchi, and
the other Neri, whereof issued great harms.
I Read in the history of Florence, of two Gentlemen in the City of Pistoia,
who were in very straight league of amity together, and having two sons, it
happened as the two youths kept company together, that once playing at cards
they fell to words, and from words to blows in the end, and one returned
home to his father hurt. His father that was not hurt, understanding the whole
matter, was very sorry that his friends son was hurt by his son, and
rebuked him bitterly, and commanded him expressly upon his blessing to go to his
friend the youths father whom he had hurt, and to ask forgiveness of him
for hurting his son. Now he seeing the youth and his son, and not
remembering or considering the great amity and friendship that was betwixt
himself and the youths father, caused his men to cut off his right hand,
and so sent him back again home to his Father, saying that deeds could not be
recompensed with words. Which act and uncivil part caused great ruin and
slaughter in Tuscane. They therefore that purpose to be reconciled and make
peace, or go about to reconcile others and bring them in league, must take
heed what they do, and never trust to the discretion of him that is offended,
but see the conditions and points agreed upon first, and if any one do not
keep his promise, and do contrary to his faith and word passed, they
themselves that are the mediators and dealers in the making of the peace, as
lovers of honor and justice, to be revenged of him, seeing such villainy and
insolency worthily punished, for such men are commonly for the most part
cause of their own overthrow, of their parents and friends, and also of their
country.

We read in histories of ancient times, that a King of the Persians dying, left
two sons, each demanding the Empire, and yet while the matter was a
debating, they conuersed and lived together in all kindness and brotherly
louingnes, till it was in the end declared by the peers of the Empire, which
of them was chosen and elected to be the King, which the other took so well,
that he would not in any case be brought to think either unkindly of his
brother, or evil of the electors, he having what he aspired unto, and they
doing what they thought best and conuenientest for the Country: Such
discretion would do well in all men, to cut from them many inconveniences,
debates, strifes and quarrels.

The nobility of Women.
Having discoursed of the inequality in nobility, and especially of private
noblemen and gentlemen, I will not take occasion now to say any thing of the
means and manner whereby men rise unto honor and dignity, nor of the greatness
and nobility of kingdoms, provinces and cities, considering that this matter
has been so largelye and laudablye handled by many, as appears by the reading
of the ancient and modern histories, which are filled with discourses tending
to this purpose: this I will only say by the way, that those places have
been famed for most noble, and had in greatest account, which have produced
brauest men, commended unto posterity for their virtue either intellectual or
active, moral or politic, civil or military: and as places are made famous
or enobled by reason of the excellent men that are there borne, so also can no
place how barbarous soever it be, drown or darken the glory and commendation
due unto a man ennobled by valor, prudence, or other virtues whatsoever, as
Anacharsis being noted by one to be a Scithian, answered as sharply as
readily, true indeed by birth, but not by bringing up: so that howbeit he was a
Scithian borne, yet were his manners not barbarous, nor his life Scithian like,
but deserved the commendation due to civil and virtuous education. But I will
leave the virtues and nobilities of men, and turn my speech to women, hoping
they will not be offended with me if I discover the virtues and noble
disposition of their sex, which being such as deserve highest commendation, I
utterly disalow of their opinion, that not only not attribute nobility unto
women, but also abridge them from power and ability, to ennoble and imparte
nobility unto others. We read of many excellent women both of high and low
estate, in diverse histories, whose fame has been carried through the world for
rare virtue, some for valor, others for learning, others for wisdom, others
for chastity, others for other singular virtues and commendable parts: many
Queens and noble Ladies have gotten great renown and become glorious for arms
and warlike exploites: many have had their names dedicated to everlasting
remembrance even by the memorial of their own pens, having been most
exquisite writers and pen-women themselves, both for prose and verse. In my
opinion then are women greatly wronged by them that seem to take from them
power of transferring nobility to others, excluding them from so great an
honor, they notwithstanding having great reason to be copartners with men
therein: for excellency consisting in virtue of the body and the mind, and
women being endewed with both beautye and virtue, and seeing that women can
learn whatsoever men can, having the full use of reason (or else nature who
does never do any thing in vain) should have to no purpose given them the
gift of understanding: I think they deserve fellowship and communing in honor
with men, considering nature has bestowed on them as well as on men, means to
attain unto learning, wisdom, and al other virtues active and contemplative:
which is made manifest by the example of many that have confirmed the opinion
of their valor and excellency, by their rare virtue, and almost incredible
prowes. And to recite the worthy acts of some, I will wholye commit and pass
by the Amazones, their story being counted fabulous, and mention some, whose
valiant and virtuous acts have been recorded in true histories, as well of old
times, as of our times. The king Argus having by reason of long continued wars
great want of men, Theselide a woman of a city wherein Argus was besieged by
Cleomenes king of Lacedemony, provoked the other women in the city to take
arms, and leading them out at the gates, delivered the City from siege, and
put their enemies to shameful flight. I will not here speak of the valor of
Artemisia, of Isicrate, of Semiramis, of Tomiris, of the women of Lacedemony,
of Debora, of Iudi^h, and other virtuous and magnanimous, yea holy and sacred
Ladies, whose historyes are contained in the holy Scripture: but I will come
unto those whose life was not so long since, but that we may well remember
them. About the time that the Englishmen under Charles the 6. had brought in
subjection the gretest part of that kingdom, there was a young maide^ called
Jane Pulzela, daughter to a sheph^ard of the Duke of Loraine, who not yet
reaching to the fifteenth year of her age, was accounted to be a Prophetess,
and of many held to be a witch, but this makes not to the purpose: the King
being in great doubt of his fortune, sent or her to know whether he should
lose the rest of his kingdom also or no, and having answer that he should
become victorious in the end, gave the more credit unto it, because many of
his noblemen assured him that she had the spirit of prophecy, recounting many
things unto him which she had declared in private men's estates. Afterward she
took arms her self, and behaved her self in such sort among the other
Captains and men of arms, that in a very short time she was made Captain
general of the whole army, and being armed and mounted on a barbed horse, in
such sort as she was not known but to be a man, made a sally with all her
troops both horse and foot, and assailing the enemy with an undaunted
courage, followed her enterprise with such valor and prudence, that she freed
the City of Orleance from the siege, being her self shot through the
shoulder with an arrow: thence she led her company to Troe in Campanie, where
being encamped, against the expectation of all the Captains and Soldiers,
took the city in very short time, and caused Charles the seventh to be
crowned in Rheymes, as the ancient custom is, having first delivered the
city from the siege which the enemy had laid unto it. Shortly after
battering Paris, and clambring on the walls as being famous amongst the
stoutest Soldiers, notwithstanding her leg was pierced quite through with an
arrowe, gave not over the enterprise for all that, but persisted till she had
effected it. Petrarch writes, that he knew a damsel at Pozzuelo called
Marie, who borrowing the habit of a young man, after the fashion men wore their
apparel there, armed her self and was even the first that fought with the
enemy, and the last that retired: Vrsina wife unto Guido the chief of the
house of Torrello, understanding how the venecians had laid siege to Guastella
a castle of her husbands, he being abroad, armed herself, and led a company
of men to the place, and spoiling many Venecians, defended the Castle. Margaret
daughter to Valdiner King of Suetia, and wife to Aquinus King of Norway,
remained inheritrix unto these Kingdoms in the right of her husband and of her
father, and in the right of her son Olaus also of Dacia, but the Duke of
Monopoli waging war against her, she encountered him with a mighty army,
defeated his forces, took him prisoner, and led him in her triumph after the
solemn order of the Romans.

Mahomet King of the Turks, waging war against the Venecians, sent a great
army under the conduct of one of his general Captains, to take the isle of
Metelino, and besieging Coccino very strongly, the inhabitants issued and
fought very valiantlye against the Turks: in the same City was a young
maid, who seeing her father slain by the Turks in this fight, and the
Citizens beginning to fainte and fear, got into the former companies, and
skirmished so couragiouslye with the Turks, that all the Citizens ashamed to
see themselves overcome in stoutnes and courage by a simple girl, took heart
and utterly destroyed their enemies, and saved the City.

Bona Lombarda, first servant and afterward wife to Petro Brunoro of Parma,
being in the wars that the Venecians had against Francesco Sforza Duke of
Millaine, after Pauono a castle in the territories of Brescia was taken, with
her courage and gallant forwardnes recovered it again.

Margaret wife to Henry King of England, and Sister to Renatus King of Naples,
being informed that her husband was overcome in battle and taken prisoner,
presentlye gathered certain companies together, and leading them to a place
whereby the enemy was to pass, encountered him, ouerca^e his camp, and pursuing
them that fled with her husband the King, slew an infinite company of men, and
in the end saved him, and returned home with him, and got him this most
glorious victory.

I remember that I being a youth, a friend of mine son to a Trumpet that was
in pay under the Captains of the signorie of Venice, was with a certain cousin
of his set upon by eleven other young men that were their enemies, which his
mother perceiving, took a Partisan in her hands, and defended her son and
cousin, and sorely wounding five of their enemies made the rest to fly.

Being in Rauenna, I saw in one of the Churches the carved image of a Lady,
who, being wife to a Gentleman that was chief of the house of Rasponi, had
ever in her life time accompanied her husband in all his wars, and atchiued
immortal fame by her prowess and valor.

I was in Lombardie on a day which was generally solemnised, according to the
custom over the whole Country, and it happened at that time, that there was a
great quarrel between two rich houses, among the Farmers and countrymen of
that place, the one part of which were called the Romani, and the other the
Ferrarisi, both being under the Duke of Ferrara, and meeting on this
universal feast day at a village called Trefenta, one of the Romani shot a
Pistole at the chief of the Ferrarisi, and thinking to have wounded him,
missed him and hurt one of the Ferrarisi their wives, who was of so valiant a
disposition, that howbeit she was shot quite through, yet said nothing to her
friends, nor complained of it, least they should have left their enemies and
come to help her, and so many of them might have in mean while been spoiled by
the adverse part, but snatching a weapon out of one of the countrymens hands,
slew him that had shot her, and his fellow that fought by him, and so fell
down her self, not able to perform any more, living but four days after.

I have read in the Cronicles of France, that two great men growing to be
enemies, for the dukedom of Bretagne, the one prete^ding an estate in the
same, in right of his father, as being his by inheritance, the other claiming
interest in it by the right of his wife, as her doury, etc. one of the^ was
much favored by the King of France, and the other of the King of England:
these two rising up in arms, one of them whom the King there least favored,
was taken and put in prison, and the Frenchmen began to spoil his country,
and take his tenantes, and coming to a City where the Lady was, wife to him
that was taken, besieged it, and often assailed it though in vain, for she
like a right valiant gentlewoman, and of a manly courage, provided that not one
woman in the City should be idle, but bring her helping hand for the defense
of the City, and maintenance of their honor, causing some to make
instruments of pitch and tar and fire works, others to bring stones,
seething water, and other things necessary at that instant and necessity: and
very oftentimes issued very valorously and brauelye, and firing her enemies
tents, put them to great loss and confusion, slaying many of them, but they
daily receiving new supplies from the King, she was forced to send for some
succor to the King of England, for which whilst she stayed, they drove her to
many inconveniences, for the people began to mutter and to mutiny within the
City, finding great want and scarcitte, by reason whereof many dyed, and she
was much solicited and importuned to deliver up the City to the enemy, and
not knowing how to answer them, she desired them to stay for Gods mercy but
so many days, (limiting a certain time) and if no aid came in the mean
while, then she would do their request: those days being expired, whilste
she was heuilie musing what answer to make her citizens, that had very
earnestlye besought her again to render, spyed the English navy on the seas,
and calling them to her window, comforted them with that sight, and caused all
things to be prepared and made in a readiness, that when her English friends
were landed and should assault the enemy, she might with her companies make a
sallie to meet them and bid them welcome, to the destruction and utter
overthrow of her enemies, which she did, and slew so many of the Frenchmen,
that all the country was amazed thereat, and she maintained wars against
them a long time after.

I have read in the histories of the Turks, how that Selim Sultan having
obtained the Empire after he had poisoned his Father and strangled his Brother
Corcut, who was a Philosopher, with a mighty army pursued his Brother
Accomat, whom the King of Persia Vsan Cassano much favored and help with men,
provision, and monye: but the Brethren meeting together, and the victory
being very doubtful a great while, in the end Selim Sultan overcame by the
valor of his Ianizaries, for the Persians having with their horses broken
quite through the whole battle, and entering on the Ianizaries in the midst
of whom the Turk Selim Sultan was guarded, they discharged a volly of shot upon
the Persians, who unused to hear such a noise, were wonderfullye dismayed, and
instantlye forced to take their flight, by which means Sultan Selim obtained a
wonderful great victory, and his brother Accomat was strangled by his
Ianizaries, who after the fight was done, found among them that were taken and
dead, an infinite company of Persian Gentlewomen that were come all armed as
Knights, to fight with their husbands, but Selim Sultan caused the dead to be
solemnly buried, and those who were saved, to be sent home to their Countries
very honorably.

In the year 1571. at the time that Selim Emperor of the Turks, and father to
Amurat that now lives, waged war against the Venecians, the Bassa that was
general by Sea, went to the city Raguzi in the Isle of Carsola, and began to
batter it, which the citizens perceiving, and fearing the danger, fled with
their goods and such things as they made most account of, into the Isle, and
left none but women at home, who chosing rather to dye then fall into the Turks
hands, went valiantly to the walls, and one of them putting fire to a piece of
Ordinance, struck away with the bullet the lantern of the Bassa, whereupon he
hoisted sail and fled, and so the city was saved.

In the time of Charles the fifth, and Francis King of France, they having
soldiers in Italy, by reason of the discention and factions among the
Italians, the city of Siena was besieged, where a gentlewoman of the house of
Picholhomini was made Coronell of 3000. other women, and atchiued wonderful
matters, to the astonishment of all the people. I have been toulde by diverse, of
a Portingall gentlewoman that for religions sake about 4. years now past, left
of the apparel of her sex, and went as a soldier into Barberie, where she
behaved her self so resolutelye, that she was in short time after made a
Captain, and became very famous, fearful to her enemies, and greatly esteemed
of her friends: in the end she chanced to go to confession, and bewraied her
sex to her confessor, who told her that it was a great sin to delude the
world, in taking upon her the person of a man, which she could not do without
offending God: besides this, he told the Bishop of it, and the whole matter was
known through the Country where she was: whereupon diverse noblemen knowing her
to be a woman, desired to be married unto her, but she refused them, in regard
that she had ever loved a nephew of the Bishops, and conuersed with him very
privately before she was known, and therefore being discovered, would not marry
any one but him, for that she would admit none to that near point of
acquaintance as he was, but him that should be her husband, being of as good a
disposition that way, as she was in matters of valor and courage. She was
seen afterward in Lishbone apparelled like a woman, but armed like a knight,
leading a troop of men, the conducting of which she had obtained for her
husband.

It were a work infinite for me to rehearse all such famous Ladies as have
been renowned for their virtue, neither were it possible for any man truly to
make a collection of all their gallant deeds, seeing they are in number so
exceeding: but as I have mentioned and called to remembrance some who were
excelling in magnanimity, courage, and greatness of the mind, so will I now
also set down the names of some that passed in greatness of understanding, and
excelled in intellectual virtues.

Saffo of Lesbos was inferior to few Poets in that Art, and superior to
many. Erinna wrote a Poem in the Dorike tung, compared to Homers divine work.
Corina five times put down Pindarus that great Poet. Pythagoras learned many
things of his sister Themistoclea, and his daughter Dama was so excellent in
learned mysteries, that she commented and expounded the difficulte places in
her Fathers works. Areta of Cirena, after the death of her Father Aristippus,
kept the school while she lived, and read Philosophy lector daily, and
wonderfullye increased the auditorie. Leontia wrote against Theophrastus
Aristotle's scholar. Hipatia was very skillful in Astronomy, and professed it
publiquelye a long time in Alexandria. But to leave the Grecian Gentlewomen and
come to the Italian, Sempronia of Rome, was excellently well spoken both in
Greek and Latin, she was a fine Poet and wrote very sweetly. Cornelia
Africanus his wife, was nothing inferior unto the former: nor Hortensia who
was in verity her Fathers true heir, in eloquence and Oratorie. Sulpitia a
Roman Lady, in Heroical verse, deplored the pitiful time of Domitian the
Emperor. In our times we have heard of Russuida of Saxony, who was excellent
in the tunges, and has written diverse treatises and Poems, very commendably.
Batista eldest daughter to Galeazo Lord of Pessaro, made many excellent proofs
of her learning, and wrote many pamphlets. In the same City of Pessaro was a
gentlewoman called Laura Brenzara, who has written many verses both Latin and
Italian, and was admirable for her excellency in making of Orations and
extemporall speeches in both tungs, Latin and Italian. At Padua where I was
borne, in my time was a Gentlewoman of good reckoning, that professed the
civil law publiquelye, came daily into the colleges and schools, and
disputed with all the Doctors and scholars of the university. Cassandra a
gentlewoman of Venice, was commended for great skill in languages, and spoke
very eloquently, she could also write very well, as apppeered by diverse books
she has set forth, among which has been known a book of the order of the
sciences.

But I will content my self, having produced these examples, in proof of the
valor and virtue of women, concluding with only one more, which as the best,
I kept to be last: herein imitating the best orators, who ever reserve the
strongest arguments for the last. These lines therefore shall be adorned and
honored with the name of this most glorious Princess Elizabeth our gracious
Queen, whose fame has built her towers of triumphs, even in Countries
farthest removed from her, and forced her very enemies in the storm of their
malice and spite, to praise her name, to admire her mercifulnes and wisdom,
and to fear her power: this is such a manifest and worthy example of womanly
worthiness and feminine perfection, that the perfectest men must by truths
enforcement acknowledge themselves most imperfect, in regard of the meanest
perfection that heaven most bountifullye has bestowed on her sacred majesty,
who lives yet renowned through the whole world, the Sun of Christendom,
and the only Star whereby all people are directed to the place which
abounds in peace, religion and virtue: she being a Princess truly
accomplished with all virtue both moral and intellectual, with greatness both
of mind and understanding, and with heavenly wisdom to govern royallye both
in peace and wars, to the credit and glory of all her sex. God of his mercy
maintain her life in much prosperity, even a whole eternity, that as her virtue
is heavenly and immortal, so she her self may never dye, but when the world
and all must perish, be carried up to heaven by holy Angels, there to live in
Gods eternal glory.

FINIS.

