THE FREE SCHOOL OF WAR, OR, A TREATISE, WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL TO bear
Arms for the service of a Prince that is of a diverse RELIGION.

DIEV ET MON DROIT.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
1625.

TO THE READER.
THis Discourse, by birth an Italian, is now at last upon some advise turned
English. The necessity of these Times and the perturbed Face of Christendom,
wherein it can hardly be judged whither the Distempers or Dangers are greater,
do seem to inuit the publication of the same.

It will serve to open the understandings of sober and dispassionate men, that
they may detest the Practices of Factious Papalines, and discern with what
impious cunning they adulterate Religion, and force her to play a part on the
Stage of their State-reasons, and Temporal interests. And this is the prime
Weapon wherewithal they now fight, which, when it meets with a Conscience
that is Tender or Simple, it easily obtaines the conquest, because it finds
the one without Arms, and the other without Skill. Hence it arises, that the
kindly Warmth which Religion is wont to communicate to men's actions (whereby
they merit the appellation of Zealous) is by this preposterous appliance
turned into Flame and Fury, so that (like the heat of Feauers) it no longer
comforts, but consumes Devotion.

I do not purpose to blot much paper in commendation of the Author. He is as
far from the desire, as he is from the need of such helps to Fame. Yet let
me modestly say this little of him; An Jtalian he is, and a Romanist in
Religion, who living near these Motions, and therefore the better able to
distinguish the Obliquities of them; has with so correct a pen, and with that
judgment and penetration discovered the Masking of Jesuits and some other
Priests under the Garments of Religion, as that a more exact Piece of this kind
is hardly any where to be found. His name (as his own silence bids me) shall
not by any Curiosities or Conjectures of mine be raked into; let him in peace
enjoy his Priuacie, and thou the benefit of his Labor. It appears that he
was desirous to do good, not ambitious to receive honor. And in this quality
I present him unto thy view with his own lineaments and parts, in his Entire;
only I have apparrelled him in English Clothes. Thou may now at thy pleasure
entertain his acquaintance, it will not be the less worthy of thee, because
it is easy and at hand, unless, like some Disseasoned Palats, thou do
nauseate at Plenty, and longest only after things that are hard to come by,
or forbidden.

W. B.

THE TRVE SCHOOL OF WAR, OR, A TREATISE, WHEther it be lawful to bear
Arms for the service of a Prince that is of a diverse RELIGION.
Certain Italian gentlemen, who, for the better attainement of military
skill, served in the Army of the States in the Low Countries, did, the Holy
week last past (which is the week of preparation before Easter) present and
prostrate themselves before a Confessor in the town of the Haghe, that so they
might reveal their sins, and from him receive absolution. But the Priest,
that was thus by them elected for their Spiritual Father, denied absolution
unto them all.

Nothing may be said to be light or of small estimation, where matter of
Religion and of Conscience is handled, but rather to be held full of moment
and consideration: especially ought those points to be so reputed, which
treat of remission of the transgressions committed against the Majesty of
God, and of the means to receive spiritual consolation from the most holy
Sacraments of Penance and Communion. And certain it is, that if the Confessor
shall proceed unjustly by a pertinacious refusal of Absolution to him unto
whom it does belong, he tyrannically usurps upon the Soul, deeply offends the
divine Majesty, abuses the spiritual authority committed unto him, and does
intollerably violence the Holy Church and his Neighbor.

Touching this success, I being to make an answer, and to show what is
consonant to divine and humane Reason, and conformable to the sacred Theology,
and to the Canons of the holy Catholic Church, that my proceeding may be with
order and cleerenesse; I hold that the action of the Confessor in refusing
absolution to his Ghostly Penitents, cannot flow but from one of these Heads,
or from many of them in union and concurrence together.

1 Either from a scruple, What these gentlemen had to do, to be in that
country where they served as soldiers; which is that which concerns the
Penitent. 2 Or, from the Confessors part: for that he had commandment, and
precise instruction so to do. 3 Or, in regard the matter it self does so
require: because it is not lawful for them, being Gentlemen of Italy, to dwell
in the Low Countries, subject to the LL. the States of Holland, without
continuance in sin. 4 Or lastly, because that they, exercising themselves in
a military profession, do this under the banner of the States of Holland
against the King of Spain, or the House of Austria. I cannot devise any other
ground that the Confessor might have. And upon every of these I will very
briefly frame my Discourse: to the fabric whereof I will only bring
materials necessary and agreeable to Catholic Doctrine.
For the first, It is clear amongst Divines primarily, and then amongst
Canonists and Professors of Cases of Conscience, That the error of the mind,
concerning humane actions, which judges of them sinisterly, and is called an
erroneous Conscience, is ligatorie: whence it follows, That if those
Penitents have before their Confessor made it a matter of Conscience, and have
confessed their dwelling and serving as soldiers, as a sin, and cannot calm
and dispossess their Consciences of that error, the Confessor might and ought
by the rules of Conscience, to deny them absolution: because whosoever actually
does persevere in his sin, and is persuaded by his Conscience (albeit
erroneous) that he does sin, and will not abstain from it, he may not be
absolved.

But this cannot be in our Case, because it is known expressly, that the
Confessor was he who raised the scruple in his Penitents, of a matter which
they never held to be a sin: and it came to such terms, that he denied them
the spiritual comfort of absolution, unless they would promise to depart from
those countries. And this is easily euicted by argument: For if it had been a
scruple of the Penitents, it is not probable, that the same should have
happened unto them all, and after the same manner, as that all should frame and
fancy to themselves an incapacitie of absolution. And albeit all of them had
fallen upon the very same scruple, yet did the Confessor know, whether it were
a scruple of reason and foundation, or whether it were deuoide both of reason
and ground. Whether or no it were reasonable shall herafter be demonstrated,
and proof made, that it cannot hold water. If it be without the groundworke of
reason, then was he obliged by the ties of Conscience, to inform them, and to
procure them to lay aside their error. Neither is it likely that all of them
after the same manner, and as if they had had but one brain in common amongst
them, should remain incapable of reason, and should be so obstinated in an
erroneous conscience, that for this respect it should be thought fit to deny
them after one and the same Tenor, the benefit of Confession. Moreover, it
would have been (as a great Doctor said, but to another purpose) an Afinine
ignorance, and a Hare-like fearfulness, if all those Gentlemen, after that
they had a long time advised with their friends and kindred in their country,
to employ themselves in war, and had deliberatly made election of a country
so remote, with so much peril and expense (because it is the learned School
for that kind of discipline, that at this time is in all Europe, yea in the
whole world) should all of them as it were by consent, have waited together a
whole year to raise a scruple of Conscience of that tenacitie, that the
rational persuasions of their Spiritual Father should not be able to obtain
so much upon any one of them, as to remove him from that fancy and to
re-estate and place him within the boundaries of reason. And hence it appears
that this Head is totally excluded.

Concerning the second: It is long since that the Favorers of the Court of
Rome, and those that are dedicated to promote the Spanish Monarchy, did with
such subtlety, and so universally upon all advantages serve their turn with
the Pretext of Religion, that there is nothing by them left unattempted, where
they may with the specious Mantle, and couerture of Religion (a way among men
most powerful) bring unto their part any profit, advance their own interests,
and advantage themselves in their vast pretentions. One way they have opened,
and still beat it as much as may be, and that is this: A custom has been
introduced by a necessity of the Common good, and by the just and legitimate
interest of State and good Government, and by the rules of their own peculiar
preseruations, as it is by all Laws most warrantable, That many both great and
petty Catholic Princes maintain Ambassadors, Secretaries, and other their
Ministers, to be near those Princes, and Potentates, who, although
Christians, yet are not in union with the Apostolic Roman Sea, and do not
yield, no not in Spiritual matters, the obedience which it desires. As soon
as they understand that an Ambassador is chosen, they presently hunt about to
know what Priest he intends to take along with him to administer the holy
Sacraments unto him in those Countries where he is to be employed; and having
penetrated what he is, they instantly assault him with powerful offers and
offices of love; with large promises and hopes, and (according the quality of
the person) with threats and terrors of Conscience, with apparent arguments of
the service of God, and of advancement of the Catholic Religion, which is ever
the Garrison or Centinell, to warn and induce them to receive their
instructions, and to hold intelligence with them; and they are made to promise,
and to swear too, that they will follow their directions with all care and
punctualitie. And as in this manner they infallibly attempt all, so have they
happily prevailed with some; in so much that Ambassadors thinking to carry
Priests with them, who may have care of their Souls, and of their Families,
have given salaries unto persons that observe with all exquisiteness the
interests of the Courts of Rome and Spain, and do usually transmit unto those
Courts, all Relations and Reports; so as in steed of attending on the Souls
committed unto their charge, they become the Priests and Pretors of other men's
subjects, to the no small distaste of those Princes with whom the Ambassadors
endeavor to preserve, and, for the common defense, to augment all good
correspondence. Hence spring the continual doleances of those Princes, that,
from such as these, their subjects are debauched in their Allegiance, and in
their Consciences contaminated; that from hence Seditions are raised,
Rebellions machinated, Conuenticles and unlawful Assemblies celebrated. And
these Princes are powerfully persuaded, that their care for Religion is least
in their thoughts, which merely serves them for a color: but that their real
and true end is, to make a muster and take a survey of all persons
malecontented with their Government, and of all correspondents with strangers
by way of clandestine intelligence; and so under this covert to design and
practice against the State. And they think that they have great reason to be
jealous, and to have vehement suspicion thereof; because the greatest part of
Conspiracies, Machinations and Rebellions, have had their spring from the like
pretexts and practices. And to this purpose do those Princes ever record the
Leagues in France, the attempts upon the lives of so many Princes, the
Powder Treason of England, the revolt of the Valtellina, and other semblable
combinations. And in this discourse of Chaplains, it is fresh in memory, that
a certain Ambassador thinking to take along with him a Chaplain of good
learning and of great aduisednesse, before he departed from his Country, he
had him so well managed and instructed at all points by the Ministers of the
above recited Courts, that afterward in his charge he lost the name of
Chaplain, and was invested with the titles of the Intelligencer and Gazettist
of Rome and Spain. And another did put his Patron into so many disguisements,
that it lost him the name of Ambassador, and gained him the appellation of
Archbishop, which yet sticks upon him with the Nation where he was employed.
And that neither Conscience nor Zeal was the true cause of this, they think
they have sufficient proof, because some one of these did convert to his own
use a huge sum of Donatiues, consigned over unto him, or by him craftily
extorted, to make an offering in the Holy house of Loretto: and that the
Confessions, Reconciliations, and exercises of Religion, were now changed into
so ordinary and so quotidian procurements of wantonness, and entertainements
of pleasures, that the scandal of these defamatorie doings is not yet laid or
extinguished. Whence proceeds this ill issue and detriment, even to Religion
it self, that whereas to the House and Residence of Ambassadors, a good
number of the Catholics of that Country were accustomed to repair, that
they might there partake of Divine Service, and receive the Holy Sacraments
after the manner of the Church of Rome; this sacred custom was as it were
utterly abandoned, which tended so highly to the service of God, and honor of
the Embassy.

These disorders have constrained Ambassadors who are deputed for such
Residences, to apply their cogitations and solicitously to provide, that the
Priests assumed by them for such a charge, should not go with them but upon
resolution to govern themselves with befitting modesty, without exceeding
their limits; and to further the Service of God, and advancement of Catholic
Religion, but with Prudence and Moderation.

And in this I could give many instances of conspicuitie and note, that diverse
Ambassadors without any disgust or giving just subject of complaint, have for
certain done greater Service to the Catholic Religion, by the modest
retirement and moderate temper of their Priests, than those Busibodies, or as
the French have it better, those Remuant spirits, that out of heat and have to
do much, have rather defaced than built. And a demonstration of this may be
drawn from the good effect which has followed thereupon, and every day
increases, that without any occasion of querimony or exception, the same or
greater concourse of Catholics is present at the Divine exercises of the
Catholic Roman Religion than was before, to the considerable advancement of
the Service of God and of Religion, which ought to be the principal object of
humane actions.

It is not improbable that the Confessor, of whom we speak, may have amongst
his Instructions this also expressed, Not to absolve such Jtalian Penitents as
reside in those Countries. For a matter of that importance, as is the exclusion
of men from the participation of the Sacraments, would not be undertaken by a
private Priest, without great motives from abroad; especially, since it is an
action not only repugnant unto Piety, but to Wisdom also; that when with so
much art, they labor the reduction of any from the Protestant unto the
Catholic Roman Religion (of which the best proof is to bring them to receive
the Sacraments) they should notwithstanding exclude those from the
participation of them, who from their infancy have made profession of being
Catholics. And put case that the Priest have received no such Jnstructions
from Jtaly, nor by any letters or faculties, (which is the usual and easy
way) yet may he be induced to such a resolution, in the very Low Countries
themselves, because it is an indubitable truth, That the Nuntio who resides in
Bruxels, does manage all the practices appertaining to Religion in the Low
Countries, and there he appoints his Ministers and Emissaries, who under
other pretenses and habits, promote that work, which we call the Conversion
unto the Catholic Faith, and Protestants term the Seminary of Sedition
against the State. Neither does the Nuntio want bold and potent instruments,
which are diverse disguised and masked Jesuits, and other Religious persons also.

It was in times past an use, and the practice thereof still continues, That
Bishops, and principally the Pope of Rome, were procurers of many expeditions,
sending Religious persons into Regions inhabited by Infidels, with most ample
Spiritual authority, to absolve from Cases reserved, to dispense with Vows,
to grant Indulgences and Graces, and to do all that which was necessary or
opportune for the Conversion of Infidels to the holy Catholic Faith, or for
the corroboration and comfort of those believers, which were still to be found
in those parts, from whence Christian Religion, and the free profession thereof
had, by the Infidels, been formerly discarded. The Sea of Rome in times past
was for the most part wont to steed it self with the endeauours of the Minor
obseruant Friars; concerning whom, we may read in sundry Papal
Constitutions, the Privileges and ample Concessions which they had, with power
also to create titular Pastors of those Countries where they did exercise the
works of so much devotion. But after, the Fathers the Jesuits grew great; and
besides, the fourth Vow (which specially concerns Missions) took into their
secret Institutions a particularitie of their own, to receive power to lay
aside their habits, and to take those whereunto they had the greatest fancy;
so that they could metamorphise themselves into Soldiers, Merchants,
Courtiers, and into any other Trade or Profession, and counterfeit themselves
to be of any Sect or Religion, Gentile, Turk, Jew, Heretic, or any other
which they should conceive propitious unto the ends that they propose unto
themselves (so that from hence it might be, that Father Aio said, Iesuita est
omnis homo) the Missions for the most part (especially in the Countries where
Protestants do rule) consisted of Jesuits, who leave unto other Religious
Orders only those Missions where there is the slenderest hope of gain, and
the greatest fear of danger. And these swarm over England, Germany, and
indeed every where, and now lately more than ever, since the erection of the
new Congregation in Rome, which is conspicuous already both for the greatness
of their riches, and for the multitude of Ministers to be employed by them: and
it goes under the title De propaganda Fide. Of these such as are sent into the
Low Countries, besides the Instructions which they carry along with them from
Rome and from their Superiors, receive also directions from the Popes Nuntio
resident at Bruxells. Whence it may be certainly conceived* that this Confessor
had some such commands laid upon him, and such like seeds sown into him, from
whence these fruits do grow, which have so strangely disturbed the Consciences
of those Gentlemen, that did so little expect in this kind to be disquieted.
Therefore as the introduction of these Missions had in their origin the
respect of Devotion and Zeal of Religion, for their motive and princ^pall
object, together with a burning desire to convert and save Souls, so is it
sure that afterward they degenerated into humane affections and interrests: and
these expeditions have only served to spy into Temporal Gouernements, into
the strength of States, into the factions of Countries, into the deficiencies
of Policy, into the ways and means how to debilitate Government, how to sow
civil Discord, how to diminish the reputation of Princes, or to bring it into
contempt, how to corrupt and entice from them their Soldiers of account and
conduct: Nay, they are passed on so far, as to blow the coals of Sedition,
to foment the Malcontents, to make set and formal leagues against Princes, to
manage Conspiracies, and other like scandalous actions, which have so foulely
denigrated the beauty of these holy Missions, that they have made them to be
esteemed no better than the sending forth of Bloody, Treacherous, and Insidiarie
persons, and have caused them to be branded by the Adversaries with those
abominable attributes which Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans in the
end of the first Chapter does accumulate on those that are of a reprobate
mind. Yea the Catholics themselves have been greatly ashamed of the
villainies that are sprung from these modern Missions. And although the fruit
of such detestable seed is in these days but too rife and plentiful, yet now
that the war is kindled against the Protestants, the fertility is much greater
than formerly it was. So that at this present when so formidable a war is
waged against the States of the Low Countries by the King of Spain, no marvel
if the Emissaries of the Popes Nuntio in Bruxels (who swarm in disguises
through those Provinces) do strain a point beyond their usual manner. To
this ought the Confessor to have had some regard, and by considering, that he
was thus strictly appointed, Not to administer absolution to those that fought
for the defense of the Hollanders; he should thence have inferred, That the
Catholic Religion was the pretext only; but the end is the interest of
factions, the which have nothing to do with Religion; neither have the
Ancients ever taught that it should by such means be ampliated. Further, he
ought to have taken into consideration, that he is not depending on the
authority of the Nuntio, or of any deputed from him that is not his Ordinary:
neither does he receive authority from him to hear Confessions, and that
these secret iuglings are odious before God, and that it is an adulterated
Zeal which under the mantle of Religion covers humane passions and ends. And
it would be too great an inconvenience, that when Ambassadors and their
Families (as good Authors do maintain) are not assubiected to Princes where
they reside, but by the Law of Nations are exempt and free, and only owe
submission unto their natural Lords, yet he which attends them for the
administration of the Sacraments, should take law from one that is an Alien to
that Country, yea and serves such a Prince as makes war against it. Who
can doubt, but that such a one will try to do all the mischief he is able,
especially by disbanding the soldiers that serve the other side, as is
apparent in this very Case? yet it cannot without horror be conceived, how
great an injury is done to the Majesty of God, and to Religion, to make it
like unto Medusas Head, a Bug-beare to scare and intimidate men's Consciences,
for ends merely mundane, and peradventure for designs that taste of tyranny
and injustice, as to seize upon and take away Countries from those persons unto
whom God has given them. For conclusion then of this Head, it was not Justice,
and it is contrary to Religion, that the Confessor did follow the directions
of a professed enemy to those States by virtue of a blind obedience: and he
ought not to have done so notorious a wrong and injury to those Gentlemen,
without examining first, Whether it were just or unjust to deny such a
Penitent, absolution. For I would see great and evident reason, before I would
exclude any man from the participation of the Sacraments, which is a bond of
grievous prejudice. And, as Saint Jerome writes, Priests ought not to put on a
Pharisaicall superciliousnesse, as if it lay in their power to bind and loose,
but they are to consider the Conscience of the Penitent, and the merit af the
Cause. So that you see, all is reduced to the two last Heads, which remain to
be examined, because in them lies the pyth and point of the cause. Of which:

The third is, Whether the Confessor had just cause to deny these Gentlemen
absolution for this respect, That they could not live in the Low Countries
without sin, as being to converse with those who acknowledge not the Pope of
Rome for Head of the Church, and refuse to yield unto him obedience; and, For
that there is not in those parts, the public exercise of the Catholic Roman
Religion.

This reason in times past would have received no show or color, but now, some
shadow of doubt may be put, since that Clement the eight took on him to be
the first that ever made any step and pretention in this matter. For in the
year 1595, he published a Constitution, That no Italian should or ought to
go for any cause whatsoever, no not for trafficking and merchandise, to any
place where there was not a Parochial Priest and a public Church wherein the
Roman service was celebrated, except he first should obtain leave from the
holy Office of the Inquisition or from the Ordinaries, binding also those that
should travel with such licenses, to send yearly to the Inquisitors, letters
of authentical credence, that they had confessed and communicated.
Peradventure this might be the cause why the Confessor, and he who managed
him, did deal so roughly with their Penitents.

But withal you must know, that this Papal Constitution was never entertained
or put in execution by any Prince, but contrariwise totally excluded as if it
had never bin ordained. And to confirm this, it is the received Position of
Canonists and Ciuilians, and of the Popes themselves, and it is a Doctrine also
consonant both to Divinity and Nature, That all humane positive Laws (under
which kind no Catholic Doctor does deny that such like Constitutions are
comprehended; neither can he, unless he will make a man a God, nay above God)
are just so much in force as they are in use, and by not being received, or by
an application of them unto a contrary use, they loose all their virtue
obligatorie, and are as if they had never been ordained. And if it should be
otherwise, there would be nothing but confusion in Government, and
destruction of good Policy: and Popes should not only be Patrons of all
States and Dominions, and Lords of all matters of Judicature, and of all
Tribunals, but the very faculty and means to think of any question, would
be idle and out of use: for what matter is there, that the Popes in some past
ages till now, have not themselves decreed, or else commanded their
determinations? But Jurisdiction is not acquired by commandments, but by
commanding justly, and by being obeyed. So that no foundation must be laid on
this Constitution, which was abortiue in the birth, rejected in the first
beginning, opposed by all, received by none; and by the Declaration of some
Princes against the very Pope that made it, it is apparent that it ought not to
be received: so that it has had no observation at all, but has remained as if
it had not been made; and that with the knowledge of the Ecclesiastics, and
of the Popes themselves, yea and of the very person that made it.

And so it ought to be in reason, because the Pope extended his power to the
restriction and confinement of that liberty which God and Nature, all Laws
divine and humane, and the practice in the general course of all times from
the beginning of the World until the year 1595, have given and granted unto
the Faithful. Whosoever has any insight into the Sacred Stories, knows that
after the Creation of the world, there was a division of Religion in the very
sons of Adam, and that some worshipped the true God with pure and lawful
Adoration, as was requisite; others became Idolaters, and yet he will not find
that the Faithful (I speak not of the separation of Nations, but of particular
divisions, for that was a Case reserved to God alone) ever received prohibition
to inhabit those places where men of impure or false Religion did dwell, but
the true worshippers of God did always enjoy the freedom of going, staying,
and dwelling there where their best commodity did inuit them. The same is
observed to have continued all the while that the Jews did dwell amongst the
Gentiles and in the cities of Idolaters, as served best for their ease and
purpose. And this remained constant and uninterrupted, until the coming of
our Lord into the World, in which tim it apapereth by the Scripture of the New
Testament, That the true Believers, which then were the Hebrews, were
dispersed and scattered in the Countries of Asia, Affricke, Europe, and dwelt
in Rome it self. And in those days there was amongst the Jews a Sect called
in the Gospel, The Heresy of the Saduces; who denied that there were any
spiritual Creatures, or Angels, or Souls, or Resurrection of the dead; and
yet they dwelt with the rest, and they with them: neither did any then ever
pretend to reprove this liberty, or to prohibit men from going or abiding
where they themselves best liked.

And after the publication of the Holy Gospel, the same liberty remained in
all ages, neither shall you find that ever any did pretend to the contrary,
until Clement the eight. And yet there were in the Church so many Sects,
Divisions and Heresies, of that power as that they filled whole Cities,
Countries, Kingdoms and Empires: Witness the Arians in particular, who seemed
to have taken possession of the whole Earth, in so much as Jerome with great
bitterness said of them, That the World was amassed to find it self turned
Arian. And these with the Princes of this Sect held the Eastern Empire,
Affricke, and a great part of Italy; and yet it will not be proved that ever
it was endeavored, that the liberty of Catholics should be taken from them,
so that they might not travel, abide, inhabit, or traffike where it should
seem best unto them. And if there appeared danger to any particular man, to
him in particular did they apply admonitions and persuasions by their friends
and ghostly Fathers, but never durst they form a general Command for the
people of a whole Nation; and of this there can be no example alleged. But
you will find the Apostolical Doctrine of Saint Paul, to the contrary; that,
if of two joined together, the one shall be a Believer, and the other an
Infidel, and this shall consent to live with the Believer, let the Believer
live with him, and not abandon him. And thereupon the Canonists have framed a
Rule, with this exception only, That the separation is commanded then merely,
when they cannot Cohabit without injury unto the Creator. And this Rule will
by reason of this restriction, so much the more serve for our purpose. The
Cannons of seperating a man's self from heretical or excommunicate persons,
do likewise make for our Case; because it is one thing to abstain from the
conversation of a particular person that is censured by the Church, and another
thing not to remain in a Country that is diverse in Faith from us: for so,
that which is done against an Heretic in favor of Religion, might be turned
to the disfavor and disadvantage of the liberty of a Believer and a
Catholic; concerning whom, none will say that he cannot so dwell without an
injury done to the Creator: For otherwise all the Catholics of England,
Jreland, and Scotland, and of other Kingdoms too, should be bound to avoid
their Countries.

And therefore to go, to stay, to inhabit, to traffic, and to serve in war
are all civil actions, and not spiritual. And if any could or ought to frame
commandments on them, it is an office that belongs to Secular Princes, unto
which the Ecclesiastickes can make no pretension, unless they will arbitrarily
usurp upon others authority, without Law or Scripture, nay rather against all
Law and Scripture.

But in the mean time, all the other countries of Christendom do enjoy this
freedom, so that neither Pope nor Prelate forbids the Spaniards, French,
Germans, nor Polackes, that are Catholic, to go and abide where they will;
what reason then is there that only Jtalians should find worse Conditions,
and that this bondage should be imposed on them alone? Either this matter
concerns Salvation, or no; if it do not, why then should the Ecclesiastics
thrust their sickle into other men's corn? If it concern Salvation, in this,
neither the Scriptures nor holy Apostles, ever knew distinction of Nations or
people. Neither would they now give authority unto any Ecclesiasticke to make
decrees in the like matter, although in some sort it might be thought
expedient and conducing to salvation. For the Canonists themselves, who give
power to the Prelate indirectly in temporal things, have not yet dared to
pass further, except as the power in Temporals concerns salvation, out of
necessity only, and not out of congruitie, or for bettering the state of
Salvation. For otherwise Ecclesiastics might in all things command absolutely:
as, it may be, they might think it profitable for the salvation of many
persons, that some should build Churches, others should give all they have unto
the poor; that some should not marry, that others should be clad rather after
one fashion than another, that some should leave marchandising, that a Prince
should renounce his Kingdom and turn private man, that others should lay
aside the art which they profess. And by this means would they become the
absolute Masters of all wealth and of all States; and, which is more, of the
very thoughts. But if the indirect cannot be meant, unless it be for the
necessity of the Spiritual, it will lie on him who pretends to give such
commands, to show how this restraint of the Italian Nation only, is necessary
to salvation, and not of others too; and why Italians alone cannot attain to
their salvation if they dwell in such like Countries: and if it really be an
impediment to salvation, how may it be taken away by a piece of paper that
contains the License which they are to carry with them? Besides, if Superiors
do send Priests into the Protestant Countries, that under other shows, they
may administer the Sacraments unto such, as albeit they live under Protestant
Princes, are notwithstanding, in Religion Catholics; do they not thereby
conceive and approve, that salvation may there be had without abandoning those
Countries? If so, then may Italians obtain the like, and that with less
impediment, because they being strangers may lawfully make public profession
in the Houses of Ambassadors, of the exercise of Catholic Religion: so that
the Priest cannot hereupon constrain them to depart from thence, although he
should judge it to be more commodious for them to live in Italy. Therefore as
it has been showed, necessity only does grant unto them indirect authority
in Temporals, even by the opinion of the Canonists: otherwise, if it should be
judged better for Catholic Religion, That the Pope should in Temporals be
invested with the Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Germany; they might ordain
that those Countries should, by the renunciation of the possident Princes, be
delivered up unto him. And we see that our Blessed Savior himself would have
things that are not necessary, but only profitable and helpful to salvation,
left to Counsel, and not circumscribed in precepts. How much less then can
Ecclesiastickes use their power in Temporal matters, when there is no
necessity thereof, but only because it may peradventure conduce unto
salvation? And in this case least of all, because we understand not for what
such power may be profitable, unless it be for the advancement of the
interests of their temporal Greatness. And this difference touching Italians,
which cannot indeed be admitted in temporal matters, in which Saint Paul knew
no diversity of Jew, Greek, or Barbarian, has been found out by some shrewd
and experienced brains, who by observation of former times, and comparing them
with this, know that the Ecclesiastickes have mightily diminished their
authority in Tramontane Countries, and therefore do procure in Italy
intensiuely, that which has extensiuely been lost in other places; and to
this end they employ all their art and force, and draw every matter to the head
of Spiritualitie or Religion. Unto this, Sovereign Princes ought to have great
regard, as they have had by the exclusion and inobseruance of the foresaid
Constitution. Notwithstanding which, the Italians who are subjects to the most
renowned Republicke, to the Dukes of Sauoy and Tuscany, do repair where they
see cause for matter of merchandise, and for any other concernement that
belongs unto them. They frequent England, Germany, and Cities that are subject
to Protestant Princes, and all places else whereunto their interests do draw
them. And therefore it is lawful by an universal consent of all Catholic
States, to persist in that liberty which God and Nature have granted, and
which is independent of the will of Ecclesiastickes, as being a matter that
touches not spiritual Salvation, at the least not by a necessary connection.

But the importance of this action requires further consideration, because the
offenses of Princes are of greater moment than the faults of private persons.
And this attempt is a beginning of notable usurpation and perturbance in civil
Government. For it is to be held as a constant Tenet (as already we have
touched) that where any matter is handled concerning the salvation of Souls,
in which the Ecclesiastical Prelate has authority to make orders and to
command, there can no distinction or difference of persons be admitted. And
therefore Pope Clement the eight in the Constitutions aforesaid, commands in
general without exception either of Persons or Causes, That none without
license of the ordinary Inquisitors should presume to go into such parts, where
there is not a public Church, Priest, and exercise of the Romish Rites and
Service. So that by virtue of this Constitution, a Prince should not send
Ambassadors ordinary or extraordinary into the Countries that are held by
Potentates divided from the Sea of Rome. And if an occurrence or Case should
happen, that out of the emergency of Reason, or out of necessity of good
Government, it should be held expedient to send a secret person to act some
negotiations, which it were inconvenient that the Ecclesiastickes should know,
yet notwithstanding, all must be revealed unto him, or men must fall into
censures, and be made obnoxious unto the Inquisition. These inconveniences are
so clear and so usual, that they do sufficiently declare the apparancy of
the usurpation. And it would be too great an advantage, that the Pope and
Spain may (as daily they do, and examples hereof are actually practiced) send
into the Countries of Protestants (where there is publicly, neither Romish
Church nor Priest) Jesuits, and some of other Religious Orders in disguise, and
in more private restriction too, whether for business, or for guile, or for
exploration, every man speaks after his own fancy, and that it should be
unlawful for other Princes to send any person without their leave or
knowledge. And in the Leuant too, where the very Soul of traffic breathes,
there is scarce a place convenient for trading, that has the benefit of a
public Church: so that here likewise, if this Rule should hold, there is no
abiding without license. And if Princes must in their interrests depend thus on
others, and submit the groundwork of good Government, and the necessity of
their defense and preservation to other men's ends and arbitrements, they are no
longer absolute Princes; and farewell Soueraignetie, if it be once brought to
such a descent, as to render an account unto any but to God, and to receive
Laws of what it ought to do, or not to do, from any power but Divine.

But it exceedes all belief and Christian charity, to observe the course
which has bin taken with these Gentlemen. The time comes that a Gentleman, out
of compunction for his sins, goes to reconcile himself to God by Confession,
and then is he entreated with such strange and intolerable rigor, that the
spiritual comfort of absolution is denied him* And yet we are impatient to
hear it maintained by such as are separated from the Church of Rome, That
Confession is become the very path through which (insteede of comforting men's
Souls) the interrests of the Courts of Rome and Spain are conveyed, to the
detriment and disadvantage of other Potentates; and that it is distorted from
the original and pure Institution, and made to pry into men's actions, to
debauch the allegiance of subjects, to instill affections, to augment
partialities and sidings, and such like things as these.

By all this that has been said, I remain fixed in my judgment, and it is
sufficiently proved, That if the Confessor have denied his Penitents
absolution, only because they are in a Country which is separated from the
obedience of the Pope of Rome; he has done wrong unto his Penitent, and abused
Confession: and if he have done this by the command of any person whatsoever,
that commandment is unjust and unlawful, trenching, by usurpation, upon the
authority of others, and is actiuely scandalous in abusing spiritual
authority to compass ends that are purely mundane.

So that the cause which may be pretended, can be no other than that which is
in the Fourth Head propounded; that is, Because they profess to march in the
Army of the LL. the States of Holland, against the Catholic King. And this
cannot in our Case arise but from two Heads: Either for that it is not lawful
for Catholics to take arms absolutely in favor of such as the Church of
Rome accounts Heretics, or because the war which they manage is unjust. And
these two Heads will easily reciue their discussion.

Touching the first, it will be necessary to allege the common Doctrine of
Ciuilians, which in matter of defense, aid, or supporting of Heretics, is
void of all contradiction, by distinguishing that a man may favor or defend
Heretics two manner of ways, either formally, or not formally. A formal
favoring or defending of Heretics is (to use the very words of a Ciuilian and
a Jesuit, which in this subject may stand for a thousan witnesses) when a man
does assist and favor Heretics, either because they profess such and such
heretical Doctrines, or when aid is lent out of relation and order unto
Doctrines that are heretical, to the end that Heretics may teach or defend
them. Not formal, is when the cause which moves a man to give favor, aid,
or defense, is not heresy, but friendship, kindred, gratitude, goodness of
nature, want or necessity of help, or the like. And hereupon they decree,
That the Cannon Laws and Papal Constitutions, yea even those which concern
the Lords Supper, which are the most rigorous that Churchmen could ever
invent, ought only to be understood of the first part, when the respect and ^
motive is Heresy or false Doctrine, and not of the second. Nor can laws
Penal or Papal receive such latitude and extension, for that would be a flat
prohibition of all offices of humanity and of good works; and a precept
unjust and tyrannical, that is not of validity to tie any man. To apply this
unto our purpose, it being so, that the only and true cause why these
gentlemen served under the States of Holland, was a mere intent to learn the
art of War under that Captain unto whom without controversy all the
Commanders of our time must give place, without having relation or regard unto
the Doctrine and Religion professed in those Countries; Nay, it appearing in
fact, in that they presented themselves to Confession at the time appointed by
the Bishops of Rome; That they perseuered in the Catholic Roman Religion;
neither do they favor or fight out of respect of the Religion that disagreeth
from the Roman Faith. And it clearly also appearing, as I prove by the
doctrine of the Canonists, who attribute unto the Ecclesiastickes all that they
can, certainly more than they should, That these gent^emen have not in this
case committed any sin, much less a crime inexpiable. How then could the
Confessor deny them absolution, without manifest wrong, and unless he abused
Confession to serve politic and indirect ends?

And here it will not be besides the purpose, to recount two Master-designes
hid under this practice, the one from Spain, the other from the
Ecclesiastickes, who indeed walk hand in hand with them. The Spaniards as it
appears by letters from many Italian Caualiers that serve in the wars under
their Standart against the States, have a purpose and custom to require an
oath from all those that will serve under them, that they shall never serve
without their leave against the House of Austria; and whosoever receives from
them any Military charge or honor, must take this oath irrefragably and
without exception. If then they shall be able to gain this other point also,
by the way of Confession and mantle of Religion, That none shall pass to fight
in the Camps of Protestants; the consequence will follow, that there shall be
none which seeks to attain to Military science, who withal shall not be by
oath obliged to the House of Austria; yea, although it be against their
natural Sovereign. For the World is not so in the infancy and cradle, but
that by a surueigh of the present face of Europe, it can easily presage, That
there cannot be a war, which either in the beginning is not between
Catholics and Protestants, or in the progress will not become so. And in
this period stands the true state of matters at this present: in so much as
other Catholic Princes, either can have no subject that has seen the wars,
or if they have any, they must be such whose fideliltie they have reason to
suspect. And this is one of the weightiest and most important considerations,
that moves many Italian Caualiers to militate in the wars of Holland, there
being none any other-where amongst Roman Catholics.

The other dessigne which is peculiar to the Ecclesiastickes, is yet of more
importance, on which without question they fix their eyes, albeit they dare
not as yet to discover it. But with certain tastes and beginnings, they let
some men a little to understand it, who by observation of their drifts, do
know with what artifice they have so far incroached upon the power of others,
under fained pretexts of Religion, and how they cheat upon the simplicity of
Princes, and prevail by the power of Religion upon the people. If it be a
sin in private men, sufficient to exclude them from the participation of the
Sacraments, to take arms in favor of those which obey not the Pope; how much
greater an offense is it in Princes, who make defensive Leagues with them, and
contribute money unto them, or send them military assistance. This is the
secret and the Center to which all these lines are directed. But as yet it is
an attempt too difficult, neither is the matter yet fitted or well disposed: It
is an Embryo that ripens by little and little, and waits the good hour for
the disclose and delivery. It is true, that in their discourses they will give
you some touches of it, and being Patrons of the Press, they cause some of
their Confidents to print some sentences tending that way; but yet they have
not descended to decree that such Confederations and succors, which are made
through a necessity of a man's own preservation, are utterly unlawful. They
know full well that the Kings of Spain do not hold it a sin to contribute
money underhand to those of the Reformation in France, that whilst war is
kindled in that kingdom, they may other-where oppress minor Princes, with the
greater ease and conueniencie. Neither do the Nuntios themselves disdain to
be made the Ministers and means of such charitable ends. They are not ignorant
that the crown of France has for a long time entered into league with the
Protestant Switzers, with mutual articles of defense; with the Grison
Protestants of Rhetia, unto whom that Crown is to give aid ordinary and
extraordinary, Contra quoscunque: yea against Catholics themselves that shall
invade them, or give them disturbance; that it has contracted ancient alliance
and confederation with the Protestants of Germany, and that it maintains a
Garrison paid, and gives besides an annual sum of money of twenty five
thousand Crowns to the Common wealth of Geneua, that it might be enabled to
defend it self, and likewise has defended the same against Sauoy and Spain,
who are Catholic Princes, as often as they have attempted to make war against
it. And from the beginning of the wars in the Low Countries to this present
time, the most Christian Kings have ever defended the States of Holland, and
maintained Regiments of foot at their own charge and pay, without
intermission, which they do still perform, and besides, administer unto them
extraordinary succors of money. And the French Militia which have gone to these
wars, for the most part did consist of Catholics, and their greatest
Officers were Catholics likewise: Of which, Monsieur de Roclaur, and so many
other Captains of war make sufficient proof, who came from the Low
Countries, to the pay of the most renowned Republicke of Venice. And in all
that time there came soldiers from all the Countries of Catholics, and from
Italy it self, to those wars indifferently to what side they pleased, and
yet the Ecclesiasticke never had the boldness to oppose. Whence we may draw
the common meaning of the whole Church, and of all Christendom, which
conuinceth this novelty of injustice, of usurpation, and of desire to favor
one faction against another, under the show of Religion; a matter scandalous,
of pernicious example, and judged to be tyrannical. And the Reason of State
being as it is, so sacred, and lawful, and supreme in humane actions, yea,
in nature divine, and being recommended to the Sovereign only, who sits
in the seat of Majesty, me thinks the Ecclesiasticke should totally abandon
that vain and ridiculus pretension, That the saftie and defense of Nations,
ought to be regulated by the decrees of the Cannon Law; which is as much below
this supreme reason, as the humane is inferior to the divine, and the
Positive to the natural: and let him consider that God has together with the
Majesty, given unto the Sovereign alone, the authority to make peace, war,
leagues, and allyances, as he shall conceive it necessary and convenient:
neither can any but he know the circumstances of opportunities and needs, as
nothing can govern and actuate the body but that Soul which God and Nature
has given it.

And that the iniquity of this attempt may the more manifestly appear,
letting modern matters alone, we are to know, that Sextus Quintus being
clearly satisfied of the ends of the Spaniards, That they aspired to oppress
all Potentates, under color of making themselves Protectors of the Catholic
Religion against Heretics; did with great efficacy stir up the Crown of
France to defend the States of Holland: and the same apprehensions had Clement
the eight, and Paul the fifth, although it were late ere they came unto it. And
that the falsity of this newstampt Doctrine may the more perspicuously be
discovered, which by these indirect ways, strives to introduce a
prescription, That it is not lawful for Catholic soldiers to fight for
Protestants, that so they may by oblique insinuation arrive unto their design,
to make it unlawful for Catholic Princes to make leagues, or send succors
unto them, excluding under the cloak of Religion, all fundamentals of good
Government, of ones own defense, and of the necessity of men's peculiar
preservation; a deduction hereof may be drawn through all times, of which any
memory in sacred or profane Histories does remain: But I will allege some few
instances of the choicest and most remarkable places.

The first example (and it will be the more singular because it is set down in
Divine Writ) is that of the great Patriarch, who by Saint Paul is styled the
Father of the Faithful, whose actions none dare be so hardy as to blame, or
to esteem them such as are not propounded for examples to be imitated. Of
Abraham then, the holy Scripture does declare, That when his brother Lot had
been made prisoner by certain Assirian Kings, who had waged war against him,
Abraham not having force sufficient of himself, made a league with Ascol and
Annor, Jdolatrous Princes, settled the articles of Confederation with them, and
having joined his forces with theirs, he began the war, recovered his brother,
and got the victory. Behold a league made by an holy Patriarch, with Princes,
not only of a diverse Religion, but also Infidels and Idolaters. Next follows
another example, of a King after Gods own heart, and a Prophet, that according
to the flesh was one of Christ's ancestors, David, in the persecutions which
King Saul raised up against him, fled with all his Company, consisting of six
hundred soldiers, over whom he was chief, and put himself into the pay of
King Achis, made a league with him, received from him places to dwell in, and
it is certain that he undertook to serve him in the war against the
Faithful themselves. For there being war proclaimed between King Achis an
Idolater, and Saul that was King of Gods own people, David would feign have
been at those wars, but the King would not permit him, because he and his
had his fidelity in suspicion, and feared least when they should join
battle, he might turn his banner and revolt. And hereupon David took it
heavily that he was not admitted to this war, as one that held himself
wronged in honor to be had in diffidence. So that it is sure that he was
prepared to have fought in favor of Infidels against the worshippers of the
true God and professors of true Religion. And who so shall consider the person
of David, so mighty a King, so great a Prophet, so holy a Saint, he will be
easily convinced in this point, that it has bin and is lawful for other
Princes to do that, of which in the Sacred Scripture there is found so
illustrous an example, That a Captain with all his Companies of Believers did
serve an Idolatrous King in the war against those of his own Faith, that is,
those of the false against those of the true Religion. It is likewise clear,
that the same David, after he attained to the Crown, entered into league and
established a Confederation with Naas King of the Ammonites, and with Hiram
King of Tire: neither can it be alleged, that this was done in time of
extreme necessity, because those leagues with the foresaid Infidels and
Idolatrous Princes, were stipulated after that David did peaceably enjoy the
kingdom of Israel. And Solomon his son and successor in the Kingdom, joined
in league with the King of Egypt, with whom also he made alliance and married
his daughter. And Assa King of Jerusalem (of whom the Scripture bears
witness, That he had his heart upright toward God like David) called in to
his succor Benadas the King of Damasco, against Baasha King of Israel; which
was to confederate himself with an unbelieving King, against one that was of
the same Religion with him.

In the times which were nearer to the birth of our Redeemer, we have the
example of the Maccabees, who made a defensive league with the Romans, and the
very Conuentions between them are clearly to be seen in Holy writ, that
whenever war should be made against either of them, they should
interchangeably send succors one to another, of victuals, munition, ships,
money, and soldiers, according to their power, and as the condition of the
times would permit them. And the same Maccabees made a confederacy also with
the Spartan Republicke, who then swayed all Morea, often renewing, and from
time to time reconfirming the same. By which examples of holy Scripture it
rests firm, That believing Princes may confederate themselves, give and
receive aid, if their proper preservation shall require it, from Princes that
are Infidels. And the example will serve this present Case of ours, as drawn
from the greater unto the less. For albeit the States of Holland be not
united under the obedience of the Church of Rome, yet are they Christians, and
not Idolaters or Infidels. And the Maxim which the flaterrers of the Court of
Rome do endeavor to sow the propagate, That Heretics be worse than
Idolaters; is finely accommodated to the temporal and worldly interests of the
Ecclesiastickes, but no way conformable to the sacred Scriptures, nor to the
Doctrine of the ancient holy Fathers. And my Soul trembles within me, to
think that he should be held more tolerable and less abominable, That
calls Christ a seducer and a false Prophet, than he that inuocates him as
God, and is baptized in his holy name, and receives his Sacraments, and
confesses that it is the only Name under Heaven, by which mankind may be
saved. And if in some ancient Writers any passage shall be found, that may
seem to favor those opinions, it was because such Heretics denied the
Divinity of Christ, and thereby labored to overthrow the very foundation of
Christianity, by reason whereof, they were rather a Sect of Infidels than
Heretics: But it cannot be understood of these who confess him to be God,
and by this confession acknowledge the ground of our salvation; yet to take
away this cavil too, see here examples (in the particular) of Heretics and
Infidels together.

Under the Roman Empire, in the time that the Princes professed the Christian
and Catholic Roman Faith, Histories both Ecclesiastical and others, do
swell with examples of the greatest and deuoutest Emperors, that have made
leagues and held amity with Infidel Princes and Heretical also.

It is most certain that Constantine, who so well deserved of the Catholic
Church, did for the defense of the Empire, make Conuentions with Tartars and
Vandals, who were Idolaters (with Heretics he could not, because as then
they had no territory) and bestowed places on them to dwell in, amongst the
Provinces of the Roman Empire. And in those times it is well known how
abundantly the Church flourished with holy men, zealous of the pureness of
Religion: and yet you shall not find that any of them did ever reprehend, or
teach that it was not lawful to make such confederacies: the which does
inuincibly argue the approbation of all the holy Catholic Church. Afterward
Valentinian was created Emperor, who was not only a Catholic, but also an
exceeding favorer of the Church and of the Bishops and Prelates of the same.
At the same time was his brother Valens Emperor in the Eastern parts, who was
an Arian heretic, and persecuted Catholics, yet was there ever union,
confidence, and confederacy between these two brethren, (the one an Heretic
and the other a Catholic) for the common defense, and offense of the enemies
of the Empire.

The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, and Valentinian, made many
Conuentions with Goths* Alans, Gepides, Vandals, and French, part of which
were Infidels, and part Heretics, and yet there was none so hardy to
reprehend those leagues as a thing unlawful, although there then lived those
great Fathers and zealous Doctors, the Luminaries of the Holy Church: who, out
of their zeal to truth, feared not to reprove even Emperors to their faces,
and to tell Empresses of their faults and defects. There lived in those days
Ambrose, Jerome, Austine, Chrysostom, Leo, and other most renowned Bishops of
Rome, Patriarckes, Archbishops, Bishops, and Chiefetaines of the holy Church,
whose works and writings remain with us, and it can never be found that they
reprehended these Confederations: And therefore of necessity we must
confess, that their silence in this Case, when the other errors of the
Emperors were exagitated by them with infinite zeal, does demonstrate herein
the consent of the whole Catholic Church.

After the death of the above named Emperors, the Kingdom of the Goths began
to take root in Italy, and continued a long time; These were Christians, but
Arians, who were the most pernicious Sect of Heretics that ever infested the
Church, for they fought against the very person of Christ, whose Divinity they
denied, and shook the Article on which as on a groundwork, Christian
Religion is built, and that is the Article of the Blessed Trinity:
notwithstanding which, the Emperors of Constantinople who were Catholics,
were for the most part in peace and league with them; and the Popes themselves
were their subjects, and yielded them obedience. Yea, one of the Popes was sent
in Embassage by them, about affairs of State, and yet he made no refusal of
such employment; and it cannot be proved that any Writers, or Holy men of those
times, did blame those Catholic Princes for that they held friendship with
kings that were heretical and infected with such monstrous falsehoods. This
labor would be endless, to particularise in all the examples which might be
alleged in this argument.

After that the power of a Temporal Prince was in the persons of the Popes of
Rome joined in Jtaly to the Pontifical Dignity, in which time they have
framed so many Laws, as in the Decretals in the sixth, and in the Clementines
and Extrauagants are comprehended, that there is not a matter of State in which
by extension of their authority, they have not opinated and decreed: yet do
we not want examples of the like Confederations, as may easiely be seen in
the Histories of those times. George Podibras was an Hussite Heretic, and so
held by the Church of Rome, and for that cause he was pursued by Pius the
second, with Censures. This example is obseruable, because it will so flatly
show that there were treaties and leagues then handled, notwithstanding the
matter of Religion. Now in the year 1463, the Emperor Frederick the third
being invested with a dangerous siege in Vienna, called him to his succor, and
made conuentions with him of mutual assistance; and these were approved by
the Pope himself, who hereupon left to prosecute him with Censures. And Julius
the second, in the year 1510, seeing himself in danger at Bologna, by the
vicinitie of the French army, received into the city to his aid Chiappino
Vitellio, with six hundred light horse, and a squadron of Turks, whom he much
entrusted with his person. And in the year 1558, Paul the fourth did hire and
pay many Protestant Grisons, who even in Rome it self performed diverse
actions contrary to the Catholic Religion; and all was told the Pope, who
avouched openly, that they were Angels of God sent for his defense, and that to
preserve a man's self it was lawful to use the service of all sorts of
persons. And he gave an authenticke document hereof, when (the third of
September in the year 1557) he spoke these express words to some that
quipped him for this, It would have been lawful and laudable too, to call in
Turks, Moors, and Jews, for our defense. And it is a matter without doubt,
that he did indeed actually treat with the Turk. To this day, the House of
Austria has amity and league with the Protestant Princes of Saxony, and
others, and gives, and takes aid from them. And for the Crown of France the
matter is so notorious, as that I shall not need to enlarge my self upon this
subject, and besides, it has been formerly touched. If then it be lawful by
Stories out of the Sacred Scripture for Catholic Princes to defend and
succor the very Infidels themselves, much more those that are Christians,
although not obedient to the Popes of Rome, and when they do really aid them
with money, men, and munition; yet does not this derogate a iotte from their
devotion, or profession of the Catholic Roman Religion. Why may it not
likewise be lawful for private men, to defend and aid that sort of people
with their persons, and yet be not only no sin, but also a work pious and
praiseworthy. But if those soldiers be the natural subjects of a Catholic
Prince, confederated with them, and that for common defense and interrest of
good Government, he yields assistance unto those Protestant Princes, and is
thereunto tied by covenants of alliance, the matter is so much the cleerer in
regard of the Connection of a Subject to his Prince:for Subjects are bound by
the divine Law to help on the interests of their Sovereign, neither do they
commit any sin by cooperating and conforming themselves unto them. And
hereupon the Confessor has done great wrong to deny those Gentlemen their
absolution, but much greater injury has he in this Case done the Prince
himself. And he well deserves to be punished, because indirectly it must tend
to the condemnation of leagues already made, and of the succors which shall
hereafter be yielded unto them. The which action, besides that of it self it
is injurious and unjust, in making that to be a sin which is none, becomes
yet the worse, because it is deduced and wrought into Confession. And surely
the rule of good policy requires, that a temeritie and petulancy of that
excess should be ressented, That a religious persons mind should serve him
to condemn the Determinations of his Prince, which have been made according
to all the rules of Wisdom, and for reasons of good Government; of which a
private man cannot be capable, much less become a Judge or Censurer.

But if absolution could not be denied by reason of habitation, or because
they served in favor of the Hollanders, it might perhaps be denied, by reason
of the injustice of that war, especially seeing these Gentlemen were not the
subjects of the Prince that made the war, and so were no way hereunto
commanded, but undertook it voluntarily, and therefore are in the state of
sin.

This is the last point, which I will dispatch very briefly, because all the
Doctors do agree, That the war whereby the State that is possessed is
preserved (and therefore a war defensive) can hardly entertain a doubt that
it is not just. And among the causes, which the skillful in both the Laws and
the Summists also, allege to make the war just, the necessity of Defense
does ever rank it self in the first place. So that without tedious
allegations, it will suffice to conclude this business with the words of
Couarruvias, That amongst other reasons which are held most just whereupon to
ground a war, that is above them all the best approved, and unto which, all
causes else which are alleged, may be referred or reduced, which is
undertaken for the preservation of the Common wealth, and defense of ones own
Dominion or Countries thereunto appertaining: for so it tends likewise to the
defense of a man's own life and goods. This cause then of defense does
exceedingly justify the war, because it is favored and authorized by the
Law of Nature, so that a private man may assist in a defensive war. And that
the war which the Hollanders make is of this nature, that is to say, a
Defensive, it appears out of the evidence of the fact, because they are those
that are invaded by the armies of the King of Spain, and ever stand on their
guard, and upon the Defensive. And it is so far from question, that a
Defensive war is ever just, except there be such circumstances to render it
unjust, as can hardly sink into a man's imagination, that it is an undeniable
doctrine amongst the Lawyers, That although the party assailed have deserved
by his own fault or offense, to have war made upon him, yet for all that, it
shall be lawful for him to defend himself. And if in his own defense he
must take arms and fall to blows, yet shall it be just in him so to do, not
only by the Law of Nature, which teacheh man to repel force with force, but
also because the omission of a man's necessary defense, causes him to commit
his own life, state, and honor to the discretion of others, and many times of
soldiers, of whose excesses and usual deportments against men's lives,
honors, and goods, being no less licencious in sacred than in profane
matters, examples are too too frequent and notorious. Moreover, though the war
should be moved for lawful pretensions, and Restitutions, yet would the
defense be just: For the Ciuilian says, That the Assailant would not be
content with such Restitution as were just, neither could he contain the
fury of his soldiers, that they should not pass the measure of justice. And
the saying of Liuy is received as an Oracle, That to him the war is ever just
unto whom it is necessary; and it is pious and religious for them to take
Arms who have no hope but in Arms, the which ever falls out in Defensive
wars.

And if any should from hence make deduction, that then the war might be just
on both sides, which is denied by the writers of Cases of Conscience; I say,
first, that this ought not to seem so great an inconvenience, because they
themselves, and the best grounded Divines and Lawyers do teach, That in some
Cases the war may be just on both parts: On the one, out of Truth; on the
other, Juris praesumptione. For war between those that know no Superior, is
like a suit in Law: and as it is impossible that both the litigant parties
should have reason on their side, and yet both of them may have a just cause to
sue, because it appears not on which side reason stands, until the Judge
by his sentence shall decide it: And yet in this Case no man will ever make
doubt, that the Defendant ought not to repair to the Court whereunto he is
drawn, but all the doubt will rest on the Plaintifes side: So in a war
between Sovereign Princes, as in a suit, although both parties cannot have
equal justice in the Cause, yet may they both have just occasion to commence
it, for it may be doubtful on which side the reason rests, but it will be
clear that the Assailed makes a just war, and the question cannot fall but
on the Aggressor. And to speak truth, it is a fancy which men's brains do
frame unto themselves, but reason does no way comply with it, That any man
should take on him to judge of the wars which the Spaniards make, as
heretofore some have done of the Schisms in the Church of Rome, That there
having been a matter of fifty several Schisms, yet they which had justice
and right on their side did ever remain the Conquerors: whereupon of five
examples whereof we read, John the tenth, Leo the ninth, Pius the second,
Gregory the sixth, and Julius the second, from the first of these to the last,
the three intermediate Popes were overthrown, and two of those were taken
prisoners, one of them ( Leo the ninth) being a Cannonised Saint.

The Kings of Spain in our memory have in a manner made war against all the
Princes of the world, directly or indirectly. In the Indies and New world, they
have seized on an infinity of Countries, made a world of freeborn people
slaves, and become the Lords and Masters of the lives and goods of those that
were the ancient proprietaries of them. They have attempted England, and fallen
upon Ireland in a very open and notorious manner: They have undermined France
with Leagues which were christened Holy, and with rebellions of the subjects
that belonged to that Crown. They have made war with the Princes of Germany
and taken up names in trust to justify the same. The most famous Republicke of
Venice, the Duke of Sauoy, and the Church, with the Pope himself, may witness
what his goodness has done to Italy, where they sacked Rome, and made the
Pope prisoner. And they speak it openly and aloude, That a great Empire cannot
subsist without war. Is it possible that justice should ever stand on their
side, except it be after the profession of Gentiles, That God favored him that
had most power? and is it sufficient to clear the justness of the war,
although they should attempt the very Heaven it self, because forsooth they
begin it?

But the difference is too large, to speak of a matter in Thesi, and to
discourse of the same in Hypothesi. Let us draw nearer to the particular Case,
and let us give it for granted, though not for true, That the King of Spain
has reason, be it what it will be, to make war against the States, although
they affirm the contrary; and that he first outraged them by the debauchment
of their Counselors and subjects, by seminating amongst them seditions in
State, and divisions in Religion, of which the Jesuits and other Religious
persons have been made the Ministers and inciters, by breach of public Faith
in Truces which he was sworn to keep, and by planting a pleasant credulity
in them, till as it were by a signal given, he might unjustly and suddenly
take arms against them. But as I said, Let the truth hereof appear as it may;
I would in the mean time but ask the good Conscience of this Confessor, or of
others that direct and bend him, Whiles the Spaniard resolves to assault that
Commonwealth, makes his preparations, and his armies are in motion, what
should the States do? are they idle and at leisure to wait on the discretion
of their Enemies, and pray them not to pass the bounds of just Restitution? If
this be the Case, and that his pretense be to make himself Master of those
Provinces by Arms, who can then rest secure of their lives, and of their wives
honors, when they shall suffer him to seize on the Country without taking up
weapons to resist him? These are pretty tales to tell by the fires side for
recreation, not persuasions to be represented to the Majesty of Princes.

If it should fall into deliberation and Counsel, Whether it were fit to make
war, or no? an examination of the justice or injustice of the quarrel might
then be admitted: But my Reverend Confessor takes on him, like a Prince engaged
in war many years since. What does he think? That he is brought hither to
be the Judge and Vmpire, whether the war on the States side be right or
wrong; and that thereupon he is, Ex Tripode, to pronounce his sentence? To say
troth, men of understanding do strangely wonder, and Princes have a just
subject to be highly displeased, and deeply to ressent the timeritie and
petulancy of some Priests and Confessors, who passing the confines of their
Office in Confessions, provoke Soueraignetie, and make themselves Judges and
Censurers of the actions of Princes. A Prince can no sooner procure a
Contribution, or lay on an Imposition, but they will straight sit upon it as
Judges, whether the Cause be just or unjust. The same Masteries they would play
in Confederacies of peace and war: and yet all this were in some sort
tolerable, if they did it in relation merely to themselves, but the importance
of it lies in this, That they taint the fidelity of subjects in Confession,
they put the Prince into scuruie apprehensions, they perturbe the Consciences
of public Ministers, and they do insensibly work such mischief, as the very
Enemies of the State cannot desire more.

Miserable is the condition of the Reason of State, That being a Reason
divine, natural, free, and independent, it should yet be fettered with the
Censures of those, who are no way capable to discern of it: and that the
Reason of War being likewise held, as indeed it is, a Sovereign reason, must
be inthralled, I will not say to the judgment, but to the capriciousness of
one that cannot by any means attain to know the true grounds that are to
govern it. The greatest Statesmen have much doubted, whether it were possible
to give judgment touching the justness of a war: For whosoever will
determine the justness of it, must of necessity ordain it by circumscribing
the ^ame with certain Laws, by which the justice of war is to be regulated:
but so it would leave to be a supreme and soueraign Reason.

But to let alone those disputes, one thing is so certain that no man can
deny it, That a common or public good, is superior to any good that is
private, and this ought to be ruled by that; and that to attempt the use of the
contrary, is the ruin of the State, and the peruersion of all Laws both
Divine and Humane.

The care of the Common good, God has together with Soueragnetie, committed
unto the Prince: for it is his office alone to prescribe the means of
conseruing and maintaining this Good, whether it be by impositions, or by
war, or by leagues, or by any other course whatsoever. And he that in this
point shall intermedle or make himself a Judge and Censurer, whether he be
Confessor, or other, he offends against Sovereignty, and works against that
respect and reverence which is by Nature instilled, and in the Sacred
Scriptures by God himself commanded, and which every one ought to carry toward
the Prince, who is Gods Vicegerent and Lieutenant in the Government of the
State. And therefore Godly men, and conscionable Priests have the deliberations
of Princes in veneration, and do not make themselves Judges of them. As for
the miserable subterfuge of such as excuse themselves, That they do not become
Judges in these Cases of Princes, but that the war may be unjust out of the
notoriousnesse of the fact, it is not applyable to our present purpose; because
first it may be replied, Quo iure, is it notorious? by the Cannon or Civil
Law? But these are inferior and not superior to the Reason of war. Again,
is it notorious by reason of the Public Good, or of the Private? If by this,
why this must be subject and give way unto the Public? If by the Public,
the care of that appertains to the Prince. And lastly, these euasions take no
place in war that is undertaken for necessary defense.

If after all this it should be said, That Lawyers, besides the justice of the
Cause in war, do look after, and that in the first place, the justice and
right of the Dominion, Bellum iustum, Iustitia Imperij, it would be an
intolerable impudence in a Priest, without any regard had of that which passed
in the Truce, wherein the States were by the King of Spain himself
acknowledged for Sovereign, Independent, and Lawful, that he should pass so
far, as to arrogate to himself the examination of Dominions, and the titles
of them, and thereby to ordain himself Judge of Temporal States and
Seigniories. Whereas the Holy Writ commands, That we should look into these
matters no further, than to hold those Princes that reign, to be appointed by
God himself. And scarsely is it permitteed to Sovereign Princes to enter into
the titles of Dominion which the States, or others have; and for private
persons, they ought not to make any judgment thereupon, but by the possession,
leaving the rest to Almighty God, who transferreth Rule and Dominion by those
means which seem aptest and best unto his Divine Providence. And if it should
be held fit to follow the opinions of others, especial of the parties
interessed, in decreeing, Who Rules with just and unjust titles; the world
would be reduced to very few Princes, and by this time there would have been
one Spiritual Pope, and one Temporal King, or else one sole Spiritual and
Temporal Monarke.

FINIS.

