A CONFERENCE BETWIXT A MOTHER A DEVOVT RECVSANT, AND HER Son a zealous
protestant, seeking by humble and dutiful satisfaction to win her unto the
truth, and public worship of god established now in England.

Gathered by him whose hearts desire is, that all may come to the knowledge of
God, and be saved.

2. Corinthians. 11.1. Would to God you could a little tolerate my foolishness,
yea indeed bear with me. For I am zealous over you with a godly zeal.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambrige. 1600.

TO THE REVErend father in God, my VERY GOOD LORD GERVASE by the providence of
God, Lord Bishop of Worcester.
WHat makes me willing to publish this pamplet, your L. will easily judge by
the argument; what helps I have had therein, so many as have hard your
Lorships public exhortations or private conferences in matter of religion,
will as easily conjecture, it being indeed nothing else but a gleaning of your
L. great harvest, and a cluster of your own vintage. And therefore what cause
I have to sue for your honorable approbation, I need not proclaim unto the
world, save that I must needs confess my self by many many bonds, more then
I may well make known, to be tied in all duty unto your L. to whom next under
almighty God and her sacred Majesty I owe whatsoever I have besides this
corruptible man. I may not particularize your honorable and innumerable
favors, least I exceed the limits of a preface, and break the bonds of
sobriety, and so incur the just displeasure of your Lordship. Only I crave
pardon herein to acknowledge that as once in the University by your Lordships
happy hand I was brought into the sheepfolde of the great sheapheard, so in
your honors service I have been led continually by the same gracious hand in
and out to the green pastures and pleasant streams of ever living water, and
learned that which may stead me all my life long, and in the world to come for
ever, it I be not wanting unto my self. Wherefore may it please your Lordship,
to vouchsafe me your wonted honorable favor to cover whatsoever my defects in
this attempt, and to accept this testimony of my true and due affection to
your L. I shall be still more and more bound, and I hope always mindful to
bow the knees of my heart unto the highest, (whose recompense is a sufficient
reward) for the continuance of his gracious eye upon you, and all your
honorable affairs for ever.

Your L. humble chaplain Francis Savage.

To the Reader.
LActantius for eloquence in the publishing of gods holy truth writes
eloque^tly, Licet veritas posset sine eloquentia defendi vt est a multis saepe
defensa, tamen claritate ac nitore sermonis illustranda and quoda^modo
disserenda est, vt potentius in animos influat. Wherein he seems somewhat to
censure all those that want this skill, but by a little transposition we may
keep his meaning, and turn the sentence thus. Although its meet with
perspicuitie and purity of speech to illustrate and set forth the truth, and
so, as it were, (...). 104
with skillful hand to sow it, that it may more forcibly flow into the minds
of men, yet may it be maintained well without eloquence and ornament of words:
which is a sufficient motive to all honest minds which wish well to the
prosperity of Sion, to put to their helping hands though weak and feeble in
the spiritual building of Gods house. Yet a greater incourageme^t is that
which S. Hierom says, Fides pura non quaerit strophas and argumenta verborum.
The purity of faith hunteth not after coulourable sleightes and wil^e wordy
arguments. But Tertullians speech in some sort enioyneth this service and
exacteth it as a duty. Veritas amat Spiritus sancti figuram, ^^ra Valent
Orientem amat, nihil erubescit, nisi solummodo abscondi. The truth loves the
light, the morning star, and breaking of the day, she is abashed at nothing
save only the cover and night of darkness and obscurity. And sure how homely
soever she seem in the eyes of some, and in regard of the habit wherewith
she is some times attired, yet being always in her self like the kings
daughter all glorious within, and in the estimate of the wise full of majesty
and grace, and justified ever of all her children, she comes forth like the
Sun rising, as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and as a giant ready to
run his course. Wherefore (gentle Reader) accept in good part, I pray thee,
this my service and goodwill, woone by these inducements: and if this man of
might meet thee in any corner of this simple cotage, look not upon the
outward earthen walls, but cast thine eye within upon the prince himself,
yielding thine homage of reverence and obedience ever due.

Fran. Savage.

August. de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 2. and 3. Nec pigebit me, sicubi haesito,
quaerere, nec pudebit sicubi erro, discere. Proinde quisquis haec legit* vbi
pariter certus est pergat mecum: vbi paritet haesitat, quaerat mecum: vbi
errorem suum cogno scit, redeat adme: vbi meum, reuocet me. Ita ingreaiamur
simul charitatis viam, Psalm. 104.
te^^entes adeum, de quo dictum est, Quaerite facie^ eius semper.

A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A Mother and her son being a student in the university
and come over into the country to see his friends, profitable to be be read of
all that desire to be satisfied touching matter of religion and coming to
Church.
M. COme Son, you shall go with me to your fathers farm, this fair day is
very fit to walk abroad, and moderate walking is commended of all as good
physic.


S. I will gladly attend you Mother, both in regard of your pleasure, and this
fit opportunity for the exercise of our bodies, which is the best physic that
many a poor scholar has in the university: but I hope the farm you go unto
is not far off, because you speak of mod^rate walking.


M What? know you not your fathers houses? this is the good that comes of
your long absence, and your fathers care to send you so far away, which has
much grieved me, and in which respect I have often reques^^^ him ^o send for
you home.


S Good Mother, I see and feel to my (...) I have ever done, your tend^^ (...)
and bowels of loving kinden^^^ ^^wards me, and I must needs acknowledge my
fathers great love even in this which you seem to mislike, that he sent me to
the university, for sure he did it in his special care over me, and in wisdom
for my safety.


M. Safety? I pray you from what? would your mothers eye have done you any
harm?


S. I would be very loath, mother, to offend you, and therefore if I have
spoken any thing unadvisedly, I humbly crave pardon.


M. Nay son, we have not been so long a sunder, to fall out at first: and
therefore I will not be offended so soon, but I will enjoin you to speak
plain, and to tell me in earnest what you meant by safety.


S. I beseech you good mother, let me go no further in this matter, my coming
home to see you would do me little good if through my folly and unapt speech I
should procure your mislike.


M. I tell you again it shall not be so, and therefore neither stand with me
any longer, nor fear, but tell me your meaning.


S. Surely, upon your kind promise of pardon, I confess I meant safety from
mis-instruction in religion, whilst I was young and easy to be led by those
whom I reverenced.


M. Ah sir: now you deal plainly with me indeed, and I see as plainly the
fruits of your university company, and of your fathers care, even to make a
conceited young man of you, before you have ripeness of years to discern in
matters of such weight, as religion is.


S. Good mother, for mine university company and my fathers most loving care
I bless God, and thank them both as I am bound: neither shall you by gods
grace find me conceyted o^ head strong above my true knowledge: mine hearty
prayer is for humility, and against pride.


M. Son it is well said, and so praying assure your self god will hear your
request and grant your desire: but yet for your knowledge in divinity I hope it
is not so great, but that a poor woman that has neithr Logic nor Rhetoric,
yet a little latin, may argue the case with you, and ask you of your new
doctrine that I see has gotten some favor in your eyes: how you dare take
liking of it, and rest upon it: since by all truly learned, it has been
called and still is reputed and held for very fearful and damnable heresy.
Alas poor boy if thou should miscarrie, thy father should answer God for
thee, and what a grief it is to me, to think either of the one or the other,
let my tears testify.


S. Dear mother, quiet your self, and think of neither: for by Gods grace
there shall be no cause.


M. No cause? when now being but a youth in comparison, you are as full of
heresy as an egg is full of meat, and so like to taste either ever or long of
that liquour that first has been powered into you.


S. You are told it is heresy, by those that are not truly learned, as you
term them, but ignorant, and so lead you and others awry with them: but god
is able in his good time to let you see it is truth and no heresy.


M. That should be a great change, son, as I think, and because I could as
willingly hear you as any, and you seem to think the matter plain, I pray you
let me hear what you can say, and what our new masters have taught you.


S. Your firm and fervent love to me, dear mother, gives me encouragement to
speak boldly unto you what I am able and yet within terms of duty and
reverence ever due unto you: but if you will charge me to speak any more,
double again unto me your comfortable promise of pardon in all things: for my
heart trembles for fear to offend you any ways.


M. Son, I do double it, and assuredly promise it, therefore be not afraid,
your respective affection to me I note, and it shall not hurt you.


S. My answer then good mother, as near as either memory or my note book,
which I have also about me will serve, shall be the very words of such worthy
men as have written on our side, that thereby both the want of authority which
is in my youth may be supplied with their credit, and the profit of reading our
books which papists make so dangerous, better observed by as many as are not
desperately sick of rebellion and contumacy against the Lord. First therefore
touching the name of heresy, Heresy.
which even now you mentioned, and I know you often hear out of their mouths,
who resort unto you: thus has it been answered on our side many a time and
often. As the accusation is bitter and grievous, yea even such as the old
father S. Jerome says, No man ought to be patient no not in the suspit o^
thereof: so is it not new or strange to have gods truth slandered wi^h this
name: and therefore it is a good caveat, not to be carried away with the name,
till we have well examined the matter, and found it to agree with the name, and
rightly to be so called: which that we may do, we must know, that for just
proof of heresy, two things are neccessarily required: first that it be an
Error in matter of Christian faith: secondly, that it be stoutly and
obstinatly maintained: otherwise, an error in Gods truth without obstinate
maintenance is not an heresy. S. Austen says therefore, Errare possum,
haereticus esse non possum; In an error I may be, but an heretic I cannot
be: meaning because he intended not obstinately to maintain an error.
Whereunto is agreeable that good saying of S. Hilary, Illis in eo quod nesciunt
potest adhuc in tuto ^sse salus sicredant, ^^lar. de Trin. 6.
tibi vero iam omnia ad salutem clausa sunt qui negas quod iam ignorare non
potes: They for as much as they know not the truth, may have their salvation
in fafety, if afterward they believe, but all hope of health is shut up from
thee, forasmuch as thou deniest that thing which thou can not choose but
know. See, how dangerous wilful and obstinate maintenance of an error is,
but neither of these two points will be found in us, and therefore far are
we from justly deserving the name of heretics, or our true faith the name of
heresy. This is an old practice of Satan to deal thus with Gods truth and
the professors thereof. S. Paul was called before the judges to make answer to
a matter of heresy, as you may read to your great co^tentment in the Acts of
the Apostles and he answered, Act. 24.
that indeed according to that way which they called heresy, he worshipped
the God of his fathers. But for all their calling and bawling it was far from
being so, because he believed all things which were written in the law and the
Prophets, and for that his manner of worship was wholly agreeable to the
scriptures, which no heresy can be. Christ our dear Savior for no other
cause was called a Samaritane, but only for that he was thought to have fallen
to a certain new religion, and to be the author of a new sect. in Apologe^
Tertullian witnesses that in his time even this very religion which we now
profess, was called a sect and heresy, that thereby Princes ears might be
stopped from hearing any thing spoken or written in defense of the Christians.
Eusebius does the like, 4. c. 18.
saying, that the religion of Christ was called, impiorum Christian orum
Haeresis, The heresy of the wicked Christians. Epist. ad. Tit.
S. Hierome considering well the place before named in the Acts, says, Quod
magis mirum sit, etc. And that we may the more marvel we may once again
read this place of the Acts of the Apostles; where we find that the Christian
and Ecclesiastical discipline was even then of wicked me^ called Heresy. Many
others have witnessed as much; therefore since it is no new thing, but the very
custom of Satan ever, I trust you see there is great cause not to be carried
away with men's speeches, whose eyes be blinded by the god of this world, but
with true and sound proofs. If they cannot show that we have fallen away from
Christ, nor from his Apostles, nor from the prophets, if we believe (as surely
we do) all that is written in them, and maintain nothing as necessary to
salvation, but what may be plainly showed to be taught us by them, how
injurious and shamfull yea fearful a dealing it is nevertheless to call us
Heretics, good mother consider in your self. Me thinks in this place S.
Austens speech sometimes to Petilian the Donatist, is good, who said thus:
contra Petil. 2. cap. 85.
Vtrum nos schismatici sumus an vos, nec ego, nec tu, sed Christus
interrogetur, vt indicet Ecclesiam suam: Whether of us be scismatiques (or
heretics (ask not of either of us, but let Christ be asked for us both, that
he may show us his own Church: that is, let the scriptures be searched and
let them declare the truth, which they will do.


M. Son, for your first point, that it is not safe to judge of things by
names, because Gods truth has bin called heresy as you have showed, and I see
it plainly, I join with you, and take it for a good caveat hereafter to
beware: but for your second point, that therefore you should not be counted
heretics, because you say you hold nothing disagreeable to the scriprures, I
cannot approve it, because heretics as I have heard, at al times have
boasted of scripture as you do.


S. Good mother, I am very glad you perceive how truth has been slandered with
the name of heresy, Scripture.
and therefore how fit it is in matters of salvation not to be moved by
speches of men, but ever to search and seek for due and true proof: and for
the second point, I trust God shall make you see it also, if it please you to
go along with me. True it is which you say you have heard, that heretics
allege scripture, and you know that the devil himself who is as bad as any
heretic, (...). 4.
alleged scriptures: but what then? is not it therefore a safe way to cleave
to the scriptures, and only upon them to ground our faith? yes surely: which
shall appear even by this practice of Satan being duly considered; for such is
the skill of that old subtle serpent, that as he knows to fit his
temptations to the humor and disposition of them whom he tempts, so he
uses to set upon men by those persuasions which he is most likely to seduce
them by, as to Eve in paradise he promised the knowledge of good and evil:
(...). 3. ^^od. 7. (...). Chron. 18.11.
to obstinate Pharaoh he presented lying wonders: to wicked Ahab delighting in
lies he came in the month and consent of many false prophets: to the
superstitious and hypocritical Jews he pretended the temple of the Lord: ^er.
7.4. ^ct. 19.27. and 17.^^.
to the populous and ancient heathen universality and antiquity: and to our
Savior the written word of God, which he thought (if any thing) would prevail
with him. So the devil in alleging only scripture against our Savior
turns himself into an angel of light, and would seem to do that which is
most holy in it self, most acceptable unto god, most comfortable to men, most
sure for their safeguard and protection; which does not di^credit the trial of
truth in points of faith by scripture only, but rather countenance and confirm
it, because it argues the disposition and settled affection of our blessed
Savior toward these sacred writings, that he made them the tower of his
defense, the rock of his safegarde, the foundation of his whole obedience, and
accounted nothing a ground of faith and duty but only scripture, and
therefore that we likewise should cleave fast to the written word of God,
turning neither to the right nor left hand, but walking constantly in the
obedience thereof. Wherefore though this alleging of scripture be a work of
darkness, both because he did mis^alleadge it, leaving out a principal part
of the sentence, and so corrupting it, and also for that he did it as a lying
spirit to deceive. Yet to allege the scripture rightly, with an upright mind
to a good end, shall ever be as the duty of Gods people, so the shield and
buckler of their defense, yea the crown and glory of the children of light,
whereby they shall resemble their head our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, who as
you may see in the gospel gave not over his hold, because the devil abused
it, but with scripture again he answered him, and so both justified himself,
and confounded his adversary, which also has been the manner, good mother, of
the church of God at all times. As namely at the first most holy and vncorrupt
Council held at Jerusalem by the Apostles themselves, (...). 15.
where the question debated was whether the believing Gentiles could be saved
only by faith in Christ Jesus without circumcision and the observation of the
law of Moses, as Paul and Barnabas affirmed and preached against certain who
came from Judea, and taught the contrary. For the deciding whereof, in that
most catholic and orthodoxall Council S. Peter alleged the testimony of God
himself who sent him to the Gentiles (Cornelius and his friends) to preach
unto them, not the law of Moses, but the word of the gospel, that they might
believe, and blessed his ministry with happy success, giving unto them the
holy ghost, and purifying their hearts by says, which he calls Gods
testimony. God (says he) bare witness unto them giving them the holy ghost
etc* (...). 8.^.
And S. James in his sentence alleged the written word of God both to confirm
that which S. Peter had delivered, and to end the controversy: (...). 14.
Symeon (says he) has declared how god first visited the Gentiles, and took
of them a people unto his name, and to this agree the words of the Prophets,
as it is written etc. Likewise at the famous Counsel of Nice, the worthy
Emperor Constantine whom god raised up to end the persecutions of his
Church, and to give it rest, said thus to the bishops assembled there. Theod.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
Evangelicae and Apostolicae literae, etc. the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles and the sayings of the olds Prophets do clearly instruct us, what
judgment we ought to have of the meaning and will of God. Therefore laying
aside all contention let us seek out of those heavenly oracles the assoiling
of our questions. And of the Arrian herericks, who in that counsel were
ouerthrown, another says thus, Explicantes sacras scripturas ill^s euertimus,
Socr. l. 1. c. 6.
by opening and expounding the holy scriptures we overthrowe them. The like
rule was followed at the counsel held at Constantinople, against the
heretic Macedonius, that denied the divinity of the holy ghost: never move
question hereof, says Athanasius, ad Serapion.
but learn of the holy scriptures, for the only proofs that you shall there
find are sufficient. And in another place the same father says, Scripturae
sufficient adveritatis instructionem sieve institutionem: ^^ra Gen^es ^^l Idola.
the scriptures are sufficient to instruct us in the truth: Mark I pray you
the word Sufficient. In the other two Councels also of Ephesus and Chalcedon,
^vagrius.
we read of the same course: all things were concluded by the words of the
Evangelists and Apostles. The ancient father Origin says, Romans lib. 10.16.
Vnde quam prope periculis illi sunt, etc. See and consider in what danger
they be, that have no care to read the holy scriptures, for by the same
scriptures only the judgment of this trial must be allowed. ierom. hom. 1.
And in another place, Necesse est nobis scripturas sanctas in testimonium
vocare, sensus quippe nostri and enarrationes sine iis testibus non habent
fidem. We must needs call to witness the holy scriptures, for our judgments
and expositions without those witnesses carry no credit: a notable saying if it
please you to mark it. And with him S. Austen fully agrees, when he says,
(...) Na^. and Great. ^.
Solis Canonicis scipturis sine vlla recusatione consensum debeo. Only to the
Canonical scriptures do I owe my consent without gainsaying. The same father
again, when he disputed against Petilian the Donatist, ^^c Unit. Ec^les. c. 3.
said, Let not these words be heard between us I say, or you say, but let us
rather speak in this wise, thus says the Lord. Auferantur de medio chartae
nostrae, procedat in medium codex dei, contra li^. P^ l. 3 c. 6.
Away with our books and let Gods book come in place. Sieve enim de Christo,
sieve de Ecclesia sieve de quacunque aliare, quae pertinet adfidem vitamque
nostram, non dicamsi nos, etc. For whether it be of Christ, or of his Church or
of any thing else what soever pertaining either to our life or to our faith, I
will not say if I my self, but if an angel from heaven shall teach us
otherwise then we have received in the books of the law and in the gospel,
hold him accursed. This is the proof (says he again) quae nec falli, nec
fallere potest, de peccat. m^^ and remist. l. 1. c. 2^.
which can neither deceive, nor be deceived. To the very same effect speak
all the fathers I assure you, if it were needful to repeat their words. I
beseech you (says S Chrisostom) weigh not what this man or that thinks, in
2. Cor. ho^^ ^.
but touching all things search the scriptures. S. Hierom says, Quod de
scripturis autoritatem non habet, eadem ^acilitate contemnitur qua probatur, in
23. Mat.
that which is not warranted by the scriptures, may as easily be contemned as
alleged. And so the rest of the fathers particularly every one: and therefore
(good Mother) weigh it and note it, that albeit both heretics and devils
abuse the scriptures by alleging them to evil ends, yet is it the true way
and the only way to be resolved by, and to find rest for our consciences in
all matter of controversy, touching either faith or manners, so taken, so
taught, so held by Christ, by his Apostles, and by all the godly fathers, and
worthy approved Councels in the world.


M. I must confess that if the scriptures be rightly applied, they are
indeed the sure foundation, that ought to be stood upon; but how shall that
appear, that you apply them rightly, more then those whom you acknowledge
heretics, which likewise have alleged them.


S. Good mother, give me leave to make make much of that which I gain from you
in this conference, and to reckon it up as dear unto my very soul, for the
duty I owe you, and for the desire I have, that the truth may be revealed unto
you. This therefore now you see and confess, that although all the heretics
in the world, and all the devils in hell should allege scripture, and abuse
it, yet has it not bin given of God in vain, but serves as a sure ground of
our faith and actions, every thing being alowable that is consonant unto it,
and that always faulty, which is contrary unto it: and therefore that we
ought not to be beaten from it, by any devise of Satan, but steadfastly to stick
unto it, and ever to depend upon it, as the only sure ancher of our souls, in
like manner as all those worthy men and Councels before mentioned have done.
For what quietness to my mind like to this? Thou Lord have commanded me thus to
believe and thus to do, therefore I so believe and so do. Interpretation of
scripture.
Only you stick now at the right application of them, and ask how shall you
know that? Surely mother, you shall know it even to your full contentment if
you will do as others before you godly and holy persons both men and women
have done. lib. 83. quaest. (...)
Saint Austen says, Solet circumstantia Scripturarum illuminare sententiam,
The circumstance of the scriptures is vvout to give light and open the meaning
thereof. in Esai. c. 19
Saint Hierome says, Moris est scripturarum obscuris manifesta subnectere, Its
the manner of the scriptures after hard things to join other things that be
plain. Tertullian says, Opertet secundum plura intelligi pauciora, The fewer
things must be expounded by the more. Hill. de Trin. 9.
S. Hilary says, Intelligentia dictorum ex causa dicendi fumenda est, the
understanding of things spoken must be taken from the cause of speaking the^,
expraepositis and conseque^tibus, by things going before and following after.
S, Cyril says, Cyr. Th^s. l. ^ c. 2.
whenever we would understand any place of scripture, we must consider
three things, the time when it was written; the person that writ, and to whom,
or of whom, and the matter it self. Many such good rules have the fathers
which as you see, greatly help in the thing you desire, and which if we use, no
doubt we shall find as they found: then have we the gracious promise of gods
holy spirit if we ask it; and what a sure guide is that? the performance of
which promise see in the Gospel: c. 24.
then opened he their understanding that they might understand the scriptures.
See it in that good woman Lydia the purple seller, (...). 16.
whose heart was also opened. This blessed gift does the Apostle think of, when
he wishes to the Ephesians the spirit of wisdom and revelation that the eyes
of their understanding might be opened, ^hes. 1.17.
and lightened that they might know, etc. So to the Philippians and to the
Colossians; and of this speaks Elihu in the book of Job, ^lip. 1.9. ^lost.
1.9.
There is a spirit in man but the inspiration of the almighty gives
understanding. Job 32.8.
This did king David know, and therefore asked this heavenly gift by earnest
prayer, often saying, Teach me O Lord, teach me thy statutes, teach me thy
ways, open mine eyes that I may behold the wonderful things in thy law.
Origin says, Orandus est Deus vt aperiat librum obsignatum, we must beseech
God by prayer to open the book that is sealed The Lord is no respect of
persons, but as he has done, he will do, and hear the desires of his
children that wish to know his will. This is the way, mother, this is the way
that never failed any who used it, neither will it fail you. But you shall see
by it the true and right applying of the scriptures, howsoever others abuse and
mis-construe them. In a word therefore mark I beseech you, that we do not
affirm all cases of doubt to be by manifest and open words plainly expressed
in scripture, for so there should need no exposition, but we say and affirm
that there is no case in religion necessary to Gods worship or man's salvation
so dark and doubtful, but it may necessarily be either proved or disprooued
by true collection and conference in scripture.


M Son, I mark your speech well and your words fall not to the ground, yet I
hope you will confess that our men do well in regarding the doctors as they
do.


S. Surely mother, I do confess the doctors of the Church worthy of more
regard then is given them sometimes by Romish Catholics. Doctoures.
And you see by my alleging of them that I greatly regard them. But seeing
you have mentioned this matter I do heartily entreat you to mark a few things
in that behalf. First that they are not Domini sedduces nostri, Not our Lords
but our leaders. And therefore S. Augustine says, Other writers or fathers
(besides the holy scriptures) I read in this sort, that be their learning or
holiness never so great, I will not think it true because they have thought
so, but because they are able to persuade me so either by Canonical writers,
or else by some likely reason. Likewise again, This kind of writings (meaning
the holy doctoures) must be read not with necessity to believe each thing,
but with liberty to judge each thing. For we may not consent to the bishops,
notwithstanding they be Catholic, ^nit. Eccl. c.
if they judge contrary to the holy Canonical scriptures. This is the right
credit of holy fathers; they are not the truth of God it self, but only
witnesses unto the truth: no more have they they themselves ever desired, no
less ought we ever to give them. Hear I pray you the words of the same father
again, we receive not the disputations or writings of any men be they never so
Catholic or praiseworthy, Fortunat. ^^t. 111.
as we receive the Canonical scriptures, but that saving their reverence we
may well reprove or refuse some things in their writings, if it happen we
find they have otherwise though then the truth may bear them out: such am I
in the writings of others, and such would I wish others to be in mine. He
writes to S. Hierom again to the same effect Non puto frater, ep. 19.
etc. My brother I do not think you would have us so to read your books as
if they were written by the Apostles and Prophets. To the like purpose writes
Tertullian of himself and the rest, wherein their holy modesty is worthy
great praise for ever, they took not upon them to be Lords but leaders: and to
that end the Lord has given the^ as excellent lights to his church. So of
Counsels S. Austen tells us, that the former are rejected by the later, etc.
Likewise Panormitan says, we ought to give more credit to on lay man, then to
an whole council and to the Pope, if he bring better authority and more
reason. This is my first observation in this matter of the doctors. My second
is this which I humbly pray you to mark, that as scriptures have been abused
by heretics, so have fathers, and therefore if we must give over the one for
mis-applyings, so must we the other also for the same reason. The Arrian
heretics alleged Origens books for their defense and safeguard: Socr. l. 4.
c. Council. Ch act. 2. p. 732
the heretic Eutiches said, I have read the writings of the father Saint
Cyprian, as also of other holy writers, and of the holy father Saint
Athanasius. Another of his sect cried, this is my faith according to the
exposition of 318 fathers. The Nestorian heretics alleged the Counsel of
Nice: p. ^^7.
and not to weary you with many, Dioscorus the heretic cried out in the open
Council of Chalcedon, (...) 1. p. 767.
Ego habeo testimonia sanctorum patrum, I have the testimonies of the holy
fathers, Athanasius, Gregory, Cyrill, I vary not from them in any point: I am
thrown forth and banished with the fathers, I defend the fathers doctrine, I
have their judgment uttered not by chance or unadvisedly, but remaining
expressed in their books. Therefore you see, good mother, that heretics have
cried as well fathers, fathers as scriptures, scriptures, and yet neither the
one nor the other for this cause to be rejected. My third observation might be
of counterfeit and young yesterday fathers alleged by papists, and of small
credit or reverence given to fathers by them that boast thus of fathers when
they please, whereof I assure you we have notable examples, with many things
more, but that I fear to be troublesome unto you.


M. Yet son, seeing our faith was long before yours, me thinks the fathers
should rather make for us then for you.


S. And why say you not so of the scriptures which were many years before any
of the fathers? Surely if your faith were before ours, Old faith.
as well scriptures as fathers would give on your side, and indeed both would
make for you, New faith.
the fathers desiring to hold nothing but that they judged agreeable to
scripture, which ever they make the rule and ground of faith and truth, and
not their own writings, as you have seen. But good Mother they abuse you and
many more, that tell you your faith (that is, as now you mean, the Romish
faith) was before ours: for I assure you it is not so, but very new and young
in comparison of ours.


M. What? our faith new, Son, and yours old? Alas I see these new teachers
have possessed you mightily, and you are so carried away with them, that they are
able to make you believe any thing. Why tell me the crow is white or the snow
is black.


S. Good Mother, the Lord has moved your heart to hear me speak who am
yours and of you. If I speak amiss, as you think, and so as you cannot
consent unto me and with me, leave we it both to the working power of a mighty
God, who in further time can give further light and understanding to his
children that humbly crave it, and are not lifted up with an high hand to
withstand his offered grace. Only according to this motherly love that you
have began to show me, vouchsafe to here me still, upon what grounds I have
settled my self, and with what proof I am moved to think as I do.


M. Surely son, I could not abide or endure to hear any other once speak
of such a strange thing as this, but say you on what you list, you are my
child.


S. I do verily believe it seems most strange to you and to many more of
your side, to hear that your religion is new and ours old. Yet I doubt not
but to make it evidently apparent unto you and all whosoever shall without
prejudice duly consider my allegations and proof. But first I must interpret
my self in a word or two what I mean by your faith and religion. I pray you
therefore when I speak of your Romish religion think not that I mean the
whole doctrine and all the articles of faith and religion taught and professed
by the Papists, but only those points of doctrine wherein they differ from us.
For in general they hold the doctrine of the law and ten commandments as
we do, saving that they leave out the second commandment which forbids the
worshipping of Idols and Images, making two of the tenth: they profess also
the sum of the gospel, at least in generality and in words, to wit, that
Christ Jesus perfect God and perfect man has wrought our full redemption, and
by the blood of his cross and precious death, and prrfect obedience has
delivered us from eternal death, the fierch and everlasting wrath of God, the
due desert of our transgressions, and purchased for us everlasting peace and
bliss: they maintain also and profess in words as we also do the three
creedes, the Nicene, the Athanasian, and the Apostolic creed, wherein is
comprised the sum of our faith and the doctrine we profess, they acknowledge
that most excellent form and pattern of prayer taught us in the gospel by our
Savior, and use it, and many other good and godly prayers which we also use,
even all those vvelneere in our common liturgy except a very fevve for our
most gracious Queen and. saving that they use the^ in latin, we in english
that all may understand and say amen. Wherefore when I say that your religion
is new, mean not generally, nor of the things before rehearsed, but only in
respect of certain other articles and points of religion maintained by Romish
catholics, as namely, 1. that the traditions of the church are of equal
authority wi^h the word of god to be embraced with like reverence and
devotion. 2. that the vulgar latin translation commonly called Hieromes is
only authentical* 3. that the imputation of Christ's righteousness and
obedience to the faithful is a fantasy without ground in Gods word. 4. that
the bread in the sacrament of the Eucharist transubstantiated into the body of
Christ is to be adored. 5. that the faithful are able to keep the whole law
of God. 6. that the Pope is Christ's general vicar upon earth, having absolute
power to ratify or disanull all manner of decrees and ordinances, and to
dispense with the express and moral precepts of God at his pleasure. 7. That
the whole Church without him can neither enact nor infringe any law
ecclesiastical, nor interpret any scripture. 8. that the holy scriptures ought
not to be translated into any vulgar tongue or read of the lay people. 9. that
the sacrament of the Lords supper is to be administered only in bread and not
in wine, Quia sapor possit generate suspitionem quod esset ibi ^inum.
least as the Sorbonists at Paris say, the people should smell it to be wine
and so doubt of transubsta^tiatio^. 10. that good works are meritorious, and
that by them we are justified in the sight of God. 11. that the souls of the
faithful dying before perfect repentance, suffer the torments of purgatory.
12. that prayers are to be made in an unknown tongue, and such like: of al
which and the rest, wherein they disagree from us, I say they are new and
yesterday opinions in comparison of the faith which we hold consonant to the
holy scriptures, and those famous ancient creeds before mentioned. And
therefore now to proceed to the declaration of that which I have undertaken
touching the novelty of your faith. Thus good Mother, have our men written and
at this day teach: that it goes not with Religion as it does with the statutes
of the realm, and judgments at common law, where the later is thought to be
the better: but in religion the first and eldest is best. Therefore they ever
remember that golden saying of Tertullian, that is true which was first, that
is first, which was from the beginning, and that was from the beginning which
was delivered by the Apostles, but our faith is that was delivered by the
Apostles yours is not, therefore ours is from the beginning, and so first, yours
not, and therefore later. Now that ours is that which was delivered by the
Apostles they prove it thus. Another ancient father says, That which the
Apostles preached and delivered to the world by preaching, Irenaeus.
they afterward by the will of God committed to writing, that for ever it might
be the foundation and ground of faith. Whereupon it follows, that which the
Apostles preached is the old, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic says, but
that which they have written is that which they preached: so says this father;
therefore that which is written is the true ancient Catholic, and Apostolic
faith, and that is ours. For, as I have said, we hold nothing as necessary to
salvation but that which is truly taught us out of these written scriptures.
Therefore our faith is that which was delivered by the Apostles, your faith is
not that which is written. For your men will not be tried by the scriptures
only, as knowing that many things they hold have no warrant there, but have
devised unwritten traditions, therefore yours is not that which was deliueeed
by the Apostles, and not the old faith, but a late new faith devised by men.


M Why? that which was delivered by tradition, Tradition.
was delivered by the Apostles as well as that which they wrote.


S. True Mother, if it could as soundly appear unto us what they delivered, as
it does by their writings what they preached But this father that I named unto
you, says, they wrote that which they delivered, and they wrote it by the will
of God as not trusting tradition unwritten, and they wrote it to be for ever
the ground of our faith, noting that unwritten tradition may not be the ground,
because it is uncertain and full of imperfection as I could show you, if we
were to speak of that matter. Therefore seeing this which is written is
certainly and assuredly that which they delivered, and we hold nothing but that
which is agreeable to this, which is written, you see it is most plain, that
we hold nothing but that which the Apostles themselves delivered, and so our
faith the old faith which was from the beginning and first.


M. Surely if you hold nothing but that which is written, it is certain that
that which was written was delivered by the Apostles, and so it follows that
you hold nothing but that which was delivered by the Apostles and Prophets, and
therefore your faith old indeed and not to be rejected. And for tradition,
although we may be told that this and that was delivered by the Apostles and
their successors, and so by them to theirs again to this day, yet I must
needs confess that is not so manifest and plain as which is written, neither
does it yield such contentment to my conscience. But I can not tell what to say
it is a sure and steadfast way to trust to that which is written, rather then
to that which is reported, and yet I am loath ^o offend, you shall give me leave
to pause and think more of it.


S. Yea dear Mother, and with the heart of a dutiful child I say the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ lighten the eyes of your understanding in all things to
the glory of his great name and your eternal comfort: but be you assured in
this that we hold nothing as needful to our salvation, but that which is
written in express words, or by sure and plain collection, and therefore
make the consequence as the Lord shall direct you.


M. How then comes it to pass that your religion is still called new, new?


S. Even as I told you before, it is one of Satan's tricks to discredit truth,
and has in all times been used of him. But as then your self collected by
that which I alleged, that it is not safe to be lead by terms and names
without due considering how justly and truly they are given, so I beseech you
do here again, and be not moved with the name: for questionles there can
nothing be more spitefully spoken against the religion of God, then to accuse
it of novelty, as a matter lately found out. For as there can be no change in
God himself, so ought there be no change in his religion Yet still I say,
Satan has taken this course even from the beginning to call truth new, which
indeed is not only of greatest antiquity* but also from everlasting. That
ungracious and blood thirsty Haman, when he sought to procure the king
Assuerus his dspleasure against the Jews, used this slander against them of
noveltie, telling the king that he had in his domion a kind of people that
used certain new laws of their own etc. Act. 1^.
When Paul also began first to preach and expound the Gospel at Athens, he was
called a tidings-bringer of new Gods, that is, of a new religion: for said the
Athenians, may we not know of thee what new doctrine this is* Origin again
tells us of Celsus, that when he wrote of set purpofe against Christ* to the
end he might scornefully scosse at the gospel, he accused it of novelty and
said: Orig. con^a C^lsum.
what has God after so many ages now at last bethought himself? whose vile
blasphemies that ancient father in his books written against him answers.
Eusebius also says, that the Christian religion from the beginnnig for very
spite was called new and strange, Eusebius. l. 1* c. 4.
(...) Sentence was given of condemnation that S. Audrewe should be crucified
for teaching and enterprising a new sect and taking away the religion of their
Gods. Shall we then be moved with this term, and carried away with this
name? No, God forbid. These examples are a fair warning for us to take heed
of that lightness and rashness. Let the devil rage against truth with what
names God shall suffer him, and his members, yet this shall ever stand, that
the doctrine of the Church is elder then any Idolatry or superstition of the
Gentiles, that the doctrine of the Gospel was preached in Paradise by God
himself, saying, The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent^ head. That
the writings of Moses are elder the any writings of the Gentiles, the doctrine
of the Apostles elder then Popery or any other heresy, and that we at this day
hold nothing, as I have often said, but what appears out of the Apostles own
writings allowed both by us and our adversaries to be their writings, to be
their own doctrine delivered to the Church to be believed, and for men and
women to be saved by.


M. Surely I see still it is not safe to be carried away with names, and to
believe all to be nevve, which is called so, or all old which is named old:
for so we may be deceived. But yet in shevve of the world ours has had a
longer continuance then yours.


S. I must needs here once again remember you what I mean by your religion,
to wit those points of doctrine only wherein you differ from us. And then I
answer, first that your religion even in show of the world has not had a
longer continuance then ours, especially for the principal points whereon we
stand, as namely, 1. the articles of our Creed which is a brief and sum of
catholic faith, as Athanasius plainly witnesses, Symbol Athanas.
Haee est fides Catholica, and the Council of Trent confesses. 1. the
acknowledgment of gods divine law, and the worshipping of god according to that
law. 3. the doctrine of repentance from dead works and of faith in Jesus
Christ for the remission of sin. 4 the doctrine of the Sacraments, Baptism,
and the Lords supper, which are the fundamental points of out faith and
religion, and the rock whereon we build our souls and Church, and without
controversy of greater antiquity then those points of doctrine which we call
popery. Besides I answer, although your religion in show of the world, were
more ancient then ours, yet that ought to be no disparagement to ours, or
adua^ceme^t to yours: for god afflicts his church as pleases him, and makes
us see that it is like the moon whereunto it is compared, now growing, now full,
now waining, we may not mesure truth by worldly cou^tena^ce, but by that rule
which never fails, the word of God, and if our faith be that which there is
taught and warra^ted, the you have heard which is the old true Catholic faith
indeed and therefore to be received, held and defended, though for a thousand
years the Lord has made it a stranger in this or that place to punish
thereby the sins of a kingdom or country. Vetus consuetudo non praeiudicat
veritate, Old custom does not prejudice the truth: says good S. Austen, Nec
dici debet, ^ug. De Ciuit. l. 10. c. 32.
quare modo? quare sero? quoniam mittentis consilium non est humauo ingenio
penitrabile: Neither may we say, why comes it now? (Good Mother mark it) why
comes it so late? for the council of God that sent it is unsearchable to the
wisdom of man. Thus speak the Papists in these days: where was your religion
before Luther? where has it been this many hundred years? had God no Church
till now? etc. But S. Austen tells the^ they speak not well, they ought not
to say so: for Gods council is known to himself, and we cannot reach unto it.
Religionis autoritas non est tempore estimanaa sed numine, nec quo die, sedquid
colere caeperis iutueri convenit: quodenim verum est, serum non est. The
authority of religion must be weighed by god not by time, and we must consider
not upon what day, but what thing we began to worship, the thing that is true
is never to late. The Jesuits tell us wonders of their converting the Indians
and other people to the Romish faith, and would they like that those nations
should say where has this religion been all this while? would they not say
as Arnobius says, that which is true should ever be vvelcome, Arnob. co^^ Gen^^
how long soever the time of darkness has been? Why do they then teach
any to stand upon such questions against the Gospel now preached? Our Savior
says, If I speak the truth why do you not believe me? and that is the good
issue indeed to consider the matter whether it be true or no: which is ever
found by the weight of the sanctuary, the word of God. Certainly we teach no
false religion but offer the truth for issue, praying that if it be found true
by the touchstone mentioned, it may be entertained, and so much the more
heartily, by how much she has been long from home. For so we deal with our
friends, and do not utterly deny them if they have been long away. Certainly
we have planted no new religion, but renewed the old (I mean in respect of
certain points corrupted by your men) that was undoubtedly founded and used by
the Apostles of Christ, and other holy fathers in the primitive Church, and of
this long late time by mean of the multitude of Romish traditions and vanities
has been drowned with traditions and fantasies though painted with color of
antiquity and continuance, yet are new, vain, and naught.


M. I cannot deny son, but it is true that you say, there may be vetustas
erroris, an antiquity of error (for you know I have some latin, not yet
forgotten) and ^here may be a late beginning of truth in some particular place,
but it follows not that either the error is truth because it has bin
continued long, or the truth error because in that place it was received but
lately: I like not this kind of reasoning whosoever uses it, for it is not
sound neither stateth the conscience.


S. Good mother, I know well you understand the latin tongue, and therefore
have I repeated many testimonies in latin, to give you your due praise, this
ability being not ordinary in women. And what you say, I thank God heartily
for, praying you to consider that there be men on your side which so reason,
and so say: Popery has bin in england so long, therefore it is truth: and the
gospel was revived but of late, therefore it is error, heresy, apostasy, and
what not? Surely mother you have touched the quick, such arguing is loose and
staieth not the co^^cience, it follows not, but is very childish. Men may be
called at the eleventh hour, and yet as truly called as they who were brought
into the vineyard at the very first, and as fully shall be regarded, if they
come then. The Lord may do with his own as pleases him.


M. Yea but what say you son to our baptism? for that is a matter of moment:
we were all baptized into the Romish faith, and vowed at the font to continue
in the same. How then shall we start from it without breaking our vow and
offending both god and man?

In what fait^ baptized.
S. Dear mother, here first I wish a lattise window in my breast, that the joy
of my heart for these your questions so fit and pertinent, and I hope,
profitable, might appear unto you: for they lead us as it were by the hand to
the consideration of those things which may fully satisfy any Christian heart.
And who can tell what the Lord of mercy will do, who wills not he death of a
sinner, but would have al me^ saved and come to the knowledge of the truth.
The Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true sheapheard samp; bishop of our souls,
give a blessing to our conference. Then to your doubt so well and to so good
purpose moved I answer thus: God forbid that either all or any of us had been
baptized into the Romish faith. You are deceived and those cursed charmers that
whisper such things to Gods people, and cast such stumbling blocks before
their eyes to turn the^ out of the right way, shall answer the Lord for so
doing. You are taught and told that all those who were baptized in those times
when popery was received by the realm of England were baptized into the Romish
faith, which is not so: wherein appeared the great mercy and goodness of God
in preserving the Sacrament of entrance and admission into Gods Church pure and
sound concerning the substance of it, even in the greatest darkness and
authority of popery. This therefore I pray you understand that we were all
baptized in the time of popery into the same faith which now we hold, and
baptize children in, that is, into the faith of the 12. articles; for thus said
the priest then in latin, Credis in deum patrem, etc. as the minister does now
in English, Do thou believe in God the father almighty etc. And the
godfathers and godmothers answered then in the name of the child, Credo, as we
do now answer, All this I steadfastly believe. Then said the priest in latin
again, as the minister does now in english, will thou be baptized in this
faith? they answered then for the child, volo, we now, that is my desire.
Then took the p^^^st water and said in la^in, Ego baptizo te in nomine
^atris, etc. we say the same in eng^^^, I baptize thee in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost. And this being the substance of
baptism, see how the Lord preserved it even then pure and holy, and all one
was baptism then and now concerning substance. Will thou be baptized in this
faith, was not meant of the error of the time, but of this faith now rehearsed
contained in the 12. articles, which, except then it was some other because it
was latin, and now is said in English, we see plainly they were then
baptized in the same faith with us, and that was a right true Catholic faith,
and not the Romish errors, that then ruled and were received of the state. Our
godfathers also holding the same faith, to wit, of the twelve articles, and
we being christened in the faith of our godfathers and godmothers, so long as
we hold and continue in this our creed, we continue in the same faith: if
our godfathers and godmothers deceived by the time, held any other points in
deed and truth not agreeing with these 12. articles, we answer that the
sacrament of our baptism does not bind us in all points to the opinions of
them who baptized us, but in the faith of him in whose name we were baptized,
and to the doctrine of the 12. articles then propounded unto us: for, as if a
man were christened of an heretic, the baptism notwithstanding were good,
and the party baptized not bound to hold that heresy: so if our godfathers o^
fathers which christened us were taught any thing not consonant to Christian
doctrine, neither is our baptism worse for that, nor we bound to follow them
in all points, especially being carried away unwittingly by subtle deceivers
from the truth. Thus good mother, is your doubt truly answered, and your
heart, I trust, assured, that by receiving this faith now established through
her Majesty's most blessed hand in England, you shall not depart from your
vow made at the some, but keep it, nor svvarue from your faith wherein you
were baptized, and which your godfathers and godmothers held, but cleave
fast unto it to Gods great glory, and your own souls health.


M. Truly son, you have more satisfied me, then I thought in this matter any
man living could have done. And I see there is great mistaking in many matters
for want of love one to endure talk with another. Whilst I live therefore, I
will never refuse conference, as I have done: and I wish with all mine heart
that others whom I know would do the like.


S. Yea mother but the enemy knowing the good hereof, and what a fall his
kingdom may thus take, labors to stop that willingness in men and women
trained to their errors, by taking oaths of them not to do it, and threatening
all manner of danger to the^ if they do it; and you would bless your self to
hear what gross praises they utter of ignorance and simple obedience without
ground or reason, saying it belongs no more to you or any other to ask a
reason of their teachings, then it does to the horse to know why his master
turns his head this way or that.


M. Mary God forbid. It is but a slander I hope, as we are to light of
belief on both sides.


S. Truly Mother, no slander, nor mean man's doctrine, but a great Cardinal
of Rome, although in this grossly carnal, the Cardinal Cusanus. The place is
known and cannot be denied. Excitationum, lib. 6. page 547. I shall show you
his words if I can borrowe the book.


M There is a story as I remember in the old testament of one that would
condition to have their right eyes, if he made peace with them. Surely this is
to take our right eyes from us, not to suffer us to use reason, and to ask for
a satisfaction where we doubt.

True it is, Mother; It was Naash the Ammonite that so answered the men of
Iabesh Gilead: 1. Sam. c. 11.2.
and you most rightly apply it: full easy was it to rule and over rule, to
mock and abuse the strong Sampson, when once they had put out both his eyes.
To tell us that ignorance is the mother of devotion, when the Council says it
is the mother of error: to tell us, that pearls may not be cast before swine,
the people may not have the scriptures in english, when it is spoken to all,
Ioh. 5.
Search the scriptures: to tell us we will become heretics, if we meddle with
the scriptures, when Christ says you err because you know not the scriptures:
surely this is not to wish us to see, but to wish and end^uour both to make and
keep us blind But I trust the god of all mercy and goodness, will both give
sight, and keep sight in despite of all their fetching policies.


M. To return then where we left, you say our fathers held the faith of the
12. articles, and were baptized in the same as we also are, so that we forsake
not their faith, or the faith of our baptism, if we embrace the gospel now
preached, because in nothing it is contrary to these articles: notwithstanding
you say they were happily touched with some errors of the time. I pray you
therefore what shall we say of them? were they damned or saved: if they were
damned all, why may not we do as they did, and hope of like mercy, god being
the same still, and as rich in goodness and grace, as ever.


S. Your question contains two points, one of the salvation or damnation of
our fathers, another of the imitation of them. what is beco^ of our father
In both which I shall endeavor to give you a true answer. And touching the
first I say, we ought not to sit in judgment upon our fathers, for God was
able to preserve them even in that dark time wherein they lived, as he
preserved the bush in the midst of the flame, Daniel in the Lions den, the
three children in the furnace, and the Israelites in the red sea: for all these
were in man's eye subject to danger, and yet by a powerful hand of an
omnipotent god saved. And by the manifold graces of god vouchsafed vnro our
fathers, we may comfortably hope that almighty God was willing also to preserve
the^ unto an everlasting inheritance and did that which he was able to do unto
them: for they were good me^ and good women in their times, charitable and
merciful, just and true in their dealings, their honest word was better then
many a man's bond, now: they brought up their children in honest labor, not in
idleness and vanity: they were given to hospitality, they hated pride and
loved plainnes, they loved the Church and went duly unto it: in a word, as one
says of them, though they had, minus scientiae, less knowledge, yet they had
plus conscientiae, more conscience. wherefore that god that thus wrought in them
by his guiding grace, I may well and cheerfully hope was further also good
unto them, and had mercy upon them, pulling them out of the fire, as S. Jude
says: yea I have heard of some that in those dark times delivered to their
children some little treatises of Wickleff, and badde them keep them secret
and yet read them and mark them, which argued a touch in their hearts more
then the world saw, or they had strength and boldness publicly to make show
of. One mother I could name to you, that albeit she did as the time then was,
yet had she an old Psalter in english, and before her children, being
young would often read on it, giving them admonition in diverse points,
according to her motherly care, and by name when she came to those words,
They have eyes and see not, feet have they and go not, hands and handle not,
noses and smell not, neither is there any breath in their mouths: cursed are
all they that make them, and so are all they that put their trust in them.
Mark children (would she say) what those Images you see in the Churches be:
they cannot see, go, handle, or smell, they have no life, and therefore we may
not worship or trust in them, they are cursed that make them as you hear, and
no doubt but there will come a time when they will be taken away. By which we
plainly see there was more in many of our good forefathers (for do you think
god was the god only of this good woman?) more I say then the course of time
yielded the^, and therefore great testimonies that god saved them even in the
furnace and in the Lions den, that is, in the dark time, and time of
danger. Therefore far be it from us to judge of them otherwise then well.
They live with the Lord God I most comfortably hope.


M. This reverent conceit of your elders son, I trust is a sign of Gods
grace in you, and your hope is grounded upon good presumptions. But why then
may not we now follow their course as I said, and hope of like mercy also
with them.

why we may not imitate ^^r forefathers
S. Dear mother, let not me answer you, but hear and weigh with your self
what S. Cyprian that learned and holy father answers, whose words are these:
(I know you understand them:) Ignosci potuit simpliciter erranti, post
inspirationem vero and revelationem factam, qui in eo quo errauerat, perseuerat
sine venia ignorantiae peccat, praesumptione enim at que obstinatione superatur.


M. Me thinks I understand this sentence to be thus much in english; To one
that of simplicity erreth, pardon may be given: but who so after knowledge
revealed and graciously offered, continues in his error, that man or that
woman sins without hope of pardon for their ignorance, for he or she is
wholly carried away with presumption and obstinacy. Which sentence if it be
that godly fathers, surely it ought to be well weighed of all that mean not to
be so overcome. And for my part I do think and will think of it.


S. Surely mother they are his very words, and, for the sense, well translated
by you. And blessed be God for your good taking of these grave speeches of
great lights and worthy teachers in their times. The words are in his 62.
epistle, as I shall show you when I come to the book. And since my words
find comfortable favor with you, let me, I pray; further show you how Satan
has always used to deceive men by these means, and how God has given
council to the contrary, Cresconius the heretic said to S. Augustine, Our
fathers received this of their fathers before the^. And S. Augustine answered
him, sed errantes ab errantibus, but them men deceived, received it of men that
were deceived before them. Even as the Jews at this day receued of their
fathers, and their fathers likewise received it before them of their fathers,
and so from father to father since the suffering of Christ, which is now almost
1567 years, that Christ did not rise again, but that his disciples came
whilst the watchmen slept, and stole his body away. Now is this wicked
falsehood true, because by tradition from father to son it has been
continued and taught amongst the Jews for so many years? god forbid. We
believe the contrary as an article of our faith: and therefore you see this
argument from our forefathers is dangerous and may carry us into great errors
if we take not heed. This notable answer of S. Augustine and this worthy
example would never be forgotten. Another great heretic called Eutiches,
that denied the humanity of our Savior, being conuented for it in the
Council of Chalcedon, fled likewise to this defense and cried, ^ct. 1.
Sic a progenitoribus meis accipiens credidi in hac fide genitus sum and
consecratus deo, and inea opto mori: this faith I have received from my
auncestoures and forefathers: in this faith I was borne and baptized, and in
this faith I desire to die. And yet that faith an horrible heresy as you have
heard, denying that Jesus Christ was man. Auxentius the Arrian heretic made
this his refuge, and told the^ that sought his reformation, Quemadmodem ab
infantia doctus sum, ita crediat and credo, Even as from mine infancy I have
heene taught so I have believed and do believe. S. Hilary reports thus of
him. By which examples we plainly see what an old ginne of Satan this is to
entangle us with the doings of our forefathers, and to make us believe that the
following of them in all things is a praise for us, and that we ought not in
any thing to slip away from them. But it is not so. God has otherwise
taught us, ancient fathers have othewise preached and written: and the matter
of our eternal salvation is weighty. We must beware, unto the former examples
ad, that of the Jews so notable in the prophet, where being rebuked of the
prophet Jeremy for their Idolatry (God so commanding him) they flatly answered
as these heretics before named, and as they of the Romish Church still daily
answer The word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hear it of thee but as our forefathers have done, our kings and our
princes in the city ot Judah, so will we do, even whatsoever goes out of our
own mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power out
drink offerings unto her: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well
and felt no evil: but since we left of to burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her: we have scarceness of all
things, and have been consumed by the sword and famine etc. I doubt not mother,
but you mark this place well, for indeed it is a very notable and pregnant
example to this end we now speak of, and the words are as it we heard all the
Romish Catholics speak together, so iumpe they with them. And so like is
Satan to himself in his tricks and devises to deceive Gods people. But now
what says God? Does be like of this answer and of this heady and unadvised
following of their auncestoures. No, No, neither ever will he like of it to the
worlds end. Read I beseech you the chapter your self, and you shall see the
fierce wrath of the Lord against them for this answer, and for this doing. He
swears by his great name (a dreadful punishment) that he will not vouchsafe
to have his name any more mentioned by them: but he will watch over them for
evil and not for good, till they all be consumed by the sword and by the
famine with an utter destruction. This is the liking that God has of following
others before us, and of alleging their examples without due care and
consideration of their doings, whether they were answerable to Gods word the
rule of his liking and pleasure yea or no. By his Prophet Ezechiel again he
instructs us of his pleasure in this matter, ^. 20. v. 18.
and delivers it for his absolute commandment. In statutis patru^ nolite
ambulare, walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe
their manners: meaning, rashly, unadvisedly, hand over head, without
examination, how these ordinances and manners pleased God. For so says the
prophet, you may defile your selves either with Idols, ^.19.
or some other thing displeasing to God. But if you will ever be sure and
safe, follow the true rule and the only right way. I am the Lord your God,
walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments etc. Which sound counsel the
godly father had his eye upon, when he said, Non debemus attendere quid
aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sedquid qui ante omnes est Christus prior
fecerit, we may not regard what some before us thought meet to be done, but
what he who was before all men Jesus Christ our dear Savior did* that that
is our rule in whatsoever we are to imitate him. I cannot omit to remember
Lactantius his words in this matter, Deorum cultores libenter errant, and
stultitiae favent suae, a quibus sirationem requiras per suasionis eius,
Institut. l. 5.^
nulla possunt reddere, sed ad maiorum iudicia confugiunt, quod illi sapientes
fuerint. The worshippers of many Gods (says he) do willingly err, and
favor their own folly: of whom if you ask a reason of their persuasion and
opinion, they can give none, but straight fly to the judgment of their
forefathers, saying they were wise men etc. And is not this the very answer
of Romish Catholics at this day? Can they give any reason a number of them but
even this now mentioned of heretics and Idolatours? I was borne and baptized
in this faith, and mine own father and mother charged me upon their blessing,
to be of this opinion etc. they were as wise men and women as we and such like.
But how good these answers be, you see, if you either regard scripture, or
fathers, to be taught by them. Lactantius nippeth this folly we see by his
words and ever it shall be derided. Our souls cost more then that should pin
them on any men's sleeves, were they never so near or dear unto us. Clemens
Alexand has the like good speech. Alii dicu^t, im pium est si non colamus ea
quae nobis tradita sunt a patribus nostris, and religionem praevaricamur a
matoribus datam. Hac ratione sicuius pater latro fuerit, aut sicuius, leno, a
patribus sibi traditam consuetudinem mutare no debet, nec ad meliorem viam a
paternis erroribus reuocari, Others say it is a great wickedness, if we
worship not those things which are by our forefathers delivered unto us, and we
betray the religion of our fathers: but by this reason if any man's father were
a theife or a bawd, he ought not to change the custom derived from his
father nor be reduced to a better way from his fathers error. Thus derideth he
again this fond kind of argument. My father did so, and so his father before
him again, therefore I will do so ana will not be persuaded. Yea assuredly
thus have ever all truly instructed derided it. And it never was, nor never
shall be a fit answer for a child of God. When I think of this matter
sometimes I make a comparison betwixt the body and the soul, and I ask of a
Romish Catholic, whether if his father and diverse others of his auncestoures
had a bodily disease whereof they died for want of skill to cure it, he now
having the same successively after them, and the cure well known, would yet
wilfully die of his infirmity as his forefathers did, rather then swerve from
the example and be cured; He will answer no. And yet in the matter of the
soul which is far above the body has not grace to consider what an absurd
answer it is to allege his father, unless he know by the rule of gods word,
that his father indeed was to be followed. So you see (dear mother) both your
questions answered, and how it is no new matter but a very ancient subtlety to
entangle men and women's minds with the examples of their forefathers, because
naturally we all reverence and love those of whom we are descended. But it is
no right way: For we both may and ought sometimes to dissent from them, and yet
not sit in judgment upon them as though they were damned, God being indeed
able to save them as we have heard: neither ought we thereby to take occasion
of presumption to condemn the grace offered us, though denied to others, as we
ought not to refuse a bodily medicine to save our life, because our fathers
know it not. Surely if they had had the light that is vouchsafed us, they would
have excelled us, as far as angels excel men.


M. I see son gods spirit blows where it lists, and happy is the man and
woman whose ear he openneth. To hear is good, and either to stop our ea^e,
or to harden our heart with a premeditate opinion is most dangerous: for as the
Apostle persuades to hospitality, because so men have received angels into
their houses: so by hearing is god received who made the angels, and by
refusing to hear the door is shut upon him most dangerously and be excluded.


S. O dear Mother give your own flesh and blood leave with knees of heart
bowed before the Lord to rejoice for this your holy speech, to praise the name
of the most high, whose mercy has neither bottom nor measure, and to beseech
him for his sweet sons sake to go forward in mercy and pity toward his
deceived children, that they may see their salvation in Jesus Christ, embrace
the truth and be saved.


M. To this your prayer son, I say with all mine heart, amen. But yet I have
not done with you. I have heard some say, that if this way that you so dislike,
to follow the church of Rome, and to believe as we are taught by the
successors of Peter, were to go astraie, why has it not been noted so till
now of late years. Can any of you tell where or under what Pope or Emperor
papistrie first began, and what Churches then complained of it.


S. Good Mother your questions still are to good purpose; who firsts (...) Rome
to ^^cline, and (...).
for this is an high point with diverse popish writers, and these think they
have plunged us, when they have made this demand. But I am now comforted
with assurance of your readiness to hear what on our side is answered, which
is thus: That if these false perswaders think (as appears by this question
they do) that the Church standing possessed of a true religion, there cannot
arise a false, but that some either many or few must rebuke it; it is not so
in such errors as creep in at the beginning by hypocrisy, and by a great
show of holiness, as popery did, but only in gross and apparent errors it
is so. Now popery is called of the Apostle, a ministry, and why? because it
is not open to every eye, but under a color and cloak of holiness so
conueieth it self into men's hearts, and into the world, that it is not
observed and noted of many, and scarce by any. Again, as a building makes no
show till it be above the ground, so this synagogue for a time was not noted,
when yet the work men labored hard to raise it and build it. Thirdly, we
are admonished and told even of this error, that so sly, so colorable and
so hypocritical it should be, as the very elect thereby, if it were possible,
should be deceived. Fourthly in reason and experience we see and know that
tares in the corn are not noted till they be come up, the grass is not
seen growing, but when it is grown. And therefore to set this down that no
false religion, no error of heresy may creep into the church, but at the
very first it must be noted of some, is not true, and especially of this error
of popery: for it entered not all at once, but by degrees in diverse ages, and
these degrees so small that they they could not more be discerned then the
grass growing. The hypocritical show of devotion and good intent let
greatly: the woolfe in a sheep skin may deceive. Again it is well known
that these primitive times were greatly exercised with open, gross, and
apparent heresies, seeking the overthrow of the faith directly and manifestly,
as of Ebion, Ce^inthus, Arrius, and others Diverse, of the defenders whereof
were of great gifts, and so their doings were dangerous: upon which the
fathers eyes were bent, that it was not possible to observe little ones
creeping in so colourably as I have said, and so hypocritically. If any did
observe somewhat then, yet never thought they that such small declinings would
grow to such an issue as now we see, and therefore were less careful to
write of them; and if they did write, so many and so great have been the losses
of books since that time by persecutions and troubles, That the bishops of
Rome did use to bur^ all books crossing their errors, vide Council. Romans
Council. Constant. ses^. 8. C^cil. Trident. Bellar. Tom 1. contr. 5. l. 3. de
laicis, c. 20.
and sundry confusions in the world, that well they might perish and be lost
Moreover the bishops of Rome being in credit with the Emperors had ever
oppertunitie to suppress, deface, and alter writings, roules, and records
against them, as they thought good, whose consciences could brook such
dealings well enough, as we see by experience in the council of Nice falsified
by them to their perpetual shame. Finally the credit of diverse good bishops of
Rome at the first, did so stick in the minds of men, that for their sakes the
rest a great while after were the better thought of and not suspected as they
deserved, who indeed succeeded in place, but not in virtue and piety.


M. Son these be good reasons I confess, why the beginning might not be so
well marked: but yet if it had been so false a religion as now is said, it
could not but have been marked of some.


S. Good mother if what I have said be well weighed, it does fully prove
what I undertake, namely, that error may creep in under color of devotion by
small degrees, in the time of greater gross heresies and not be noted for a
time. But if so much may not suffice, we answer further to your question, that
the mystery of Papistrie being antichristianity, began even in the Apostles
times Claudius being the Emperor of Rome, and so continued increasing until
the time of Sigismund, who procured the council of Constance, in which the lay
people were robbed of the cup. So have you the Emperor under whom it began.
But for the pope we use to crave pardon id we cannot show him certainly,
because then there were three popes, and no man could tell which was the right,
but every man spoke as he was affected to one of them. And for complaints
against it the stories make it well known, that in the time of Seuerus
Emperor, Victor bishop of Rome bewraying an ambitious desire of superiority
over other bishopps, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 25
Irenaeus the ancient father, Bishop then of Lions, Polycrates, and many others
reproved him. Afterward in the days of Theodosius, Honorius, and Arcadius,
the bishops of Rome Innocentius, Bonifacius, Sozimus, Anastasius, and
Caelestine usurping more openly and shamfully forging the decree of the Nicene
council were reproved and complained of by the bishops of Africa in open
council, the forgerie detected, and decrees made that none in Africa should
appeal to any bishops over the sea, and that the bishop of the first ^ea
should not be called prince of priests, or by any such name of pride, but
only bishop of the first sea. After this again when John of Constantinople in
the days of Mauritius usurped the title of universal bishop, Gregory the
bishop of Rome reprooueth it himself, and with such vehemence of words ratleth
him up for it, as no more can be said against that point of popery. Then was
Mauritius cruelly murdered by his servant Phocas, and the Empire given to
Phocas, under whom Bonifacius of Rome got that proud title. But the Church
of Rauenna with others complained of such pride, and would not be subject for
many years. Many more have cried out as they could and noted this falling away
from truth and piety to pride and antichristianity. But good Mother, ponder
with your self how needles this is to be stood upon, where there is evidence
of fault and falsehood. Do we not account it folly when we see tares in the
field, to deny they be tares, unless we know who sowed them, what day and
hour etc. If an house be on fire, we seek to quench it, and stand not to
ask who set it one fire. A theife taken with the manner is punished. Popery
compared with the doctrine of the Apostles appears to be tares, and we offer
that issue if we prove it, what though we know not when the tares were cast
into the good field? Shall not a white head be taken so to be unless the
precise beginning of white hairs be known? A chinke in a wall is spied and
mended, but the beginning usually unknown. When the Scribes and Pharisees had
corrupted religion, what books do we read to be written against them? How
able were Joseph, Simeon, Marie, Anna, etc. to confute them? Falsehood is
falsehood though no man write against it. And therefore let the doctrine of
popery he sifted whether it be sound or no, and the beginning let go, of
which yet you see what I have said.


M. Son, you have said much, and still I wish that one of us would hear
another more then we do. I see, I see it is profitable: god has commanded
means, and likes means.


S. Mother, many a good man and woman that now lives in ignorance would
hear and read, but that they are so terrified in holes and corners by false
charmers under the pain of excommunication not to do it, nor to confer with
any. Yea they are often snared with an oath not to do it: and all to keep
them in darkness, because the hooded hawk is quietest, and Sampson when his
eyes be out may be mocked and used at will: but the Lord is able to touch his
peoples hearts to think of their craft, and cast from them such deceitful
works which I beseech him to do even with speed. For the impiety and
boldness of these wicked charmers is great, and worthily reproved by S.
Hierome, who says, of some in his time that they did tantam sibi assumere
authoritate^, in Esai. l. 9. c. 3.
vt sieve dextra docerent sieve sinistra, id est: sieve bona sieve malanolint
discipulos ratione discutere, sed se praecessores sequi, some did take such
authority upon them, that whether they taught right or wrong, good or badde,
they would not have their auditors to examine it, but to follow them.


M. Yea but it is a great matter son, in our eyes, that the Church of Rome
has always been a visible state maintaining that doctrine, visible I say and
still appearing and known, whereas your church before Luthers time, either was
not at all, or was hid, as some say, and your doctrine not received by
public authority.


S. But good mother, you know truth is truth although the whole world were
set against it. And therefore still I wish your eye bent not upon the favor of
the world, for that is commonly against the good and for the badde, but upon
the face of almighty God, his good pleasure, and the rule thereof his word.
And then for answer to this objected, which seems so strong a bulwark in
the judgment of many Papists: ^^e and^ church (...) nor always ^^sible.
first I say, that the true church is not always visible in the world as they
take visible, that is, glorious in credit, and favor, supported by authority
of worldly powers, so that all people may know whether to resort unto it. For
the Church is either Catholic 1. universal or particular. The Catholic or
universal church cannot be seen, and therefore we believe it as an article of
our faith. Credo sanctam ecclesiam Catholicam, Symb. Apost.
I believe that there is an holy Catholic Church, not as some would have it, I
give credit to the church and believe what soever it teaches, for then it
should be Credo Ecclesiae not Credo Ecclesiam. Sentent. l. 3. distinct. 2^
There is great difference says P. Lumbard following S. Austen betwixt Credere
Deum, Credere Deo, and Creaere in Deum: the first is to believe that there is a
God, the second to give credance unto God, and to believe all that t^u which he
speaks, the third, to rely upon god, and to put our confidence in him for
protection and blessing. So doubtless may I say that there is an apparent
difference betwixt Credere Ecclesiam Catholicam, Credere Ecclesiae Caetholicae,
and Creaere in Ecclesiam Catholicam: the first is to be assuredly persuaded and
to believe that there is a Catholic Church, which is the meaning of the
article, as the very phrase of speech shows, and the other articles
following, Credo communionem Sanctorum, I believe that there is a communion of
Saints, Credo remissionem peccatoru^, I believe that there is a remission of
sins, Credo carnis resurrectionem, I believe that there is a resurrection of
the flesh, etc. The second, Credere Ecclesiae catholicae, is to give credit
unto the Catholic Church, and to embrace as truth whatsoever the Church shall
propound unto us, which can not be the sense of the article, except we will
both confound these two phrases Credere Eccslesiam, and Credere Ecclesiae, so
accurately distinguished by the master of the sentences and S. Augustine, and
make the words of men equal with Gods word. The third, Credere in Ecclesiam
Catholicam, is wholly to depend upon the Catholic Church, which we cannot make
the sense of the article without violence to the words and great blasphemy to
God. Thus much by the way and by your gentle patience, good mother, of this
article, and the true meaning of it in general, because the mistaking thereof
has misled some into error. Now to return seeing we believe the universal
or Catholic Church, it follows that it can not be seen. ^eb. 11.1.
For faith, as the Apostle writes, is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. Not seen I say again and entreat you to mark
the word. And that a particular Church is not always seen, the story of
Elias proves pregnantly, who could not see one, and therefore was weary of his
life, ^ing. 19.18.
whereas God had kept unto himself, even then when he complained and in that
place where he lived, yea in the midst of that people of whom he complained
7000. that had not bowed their knees unto Ball. What may we think of these
7000. among the ten trikes of Israel? were they not Gods people worshipping
him in spirit and in truth? or is not the number sufficient to make a church?
Surely the number might well make seven glorious particular Churches, Romans 1^.
and the Apostle says of them, first that God had kept them to himself,
secondly that they were his people, thirdly that he knew them before, to wit,
in his eternal council, and almighty God himself to his prophet acknowledged
them as his beloved, and promised his protection unto them, that they should be
safely kept. Reasons, 1. Reg. c. 19.1^.17. and 18.
I suppose sufficient both for number and weight to prove that God had his
church in that place, and at that self same time, when and where the prophet
Elias complained for want of a Church and fellow members to worship God with
him. O if so many so dear unto god at one time in one country worshipping the
true God, truly, by the testimony of God himself, were hid from so great a
Prophet, why may we not think that in the many mighty nations of Christendom
there have indeed been many thousands more belonging to God then the eye of
any man could discern. S. Augustine says, Aliquando in sola domo Noah Ecclesia
erat, ^^l. 128.
in solo Lot and domo eius Ecclesia erat, in solo Enoch Ecclesia erat,
Sometimes the Church was only in Noah his house, sometime in Abraham alone,
sometime in Lot alone and his house, sometime only in Enoch. Therefore neither
a particular church is ever so visible, as papists would make it, when it lies
hidden sometimes in one house, sometimes in one man. Assuredly S. Augustine was
far from that opinion when he wrote thus: ^nit. Eccl. c3. c. 16. asch. c. 14.
Look therefore how Christ was known when he was upon earth, so is his
Church, namely by the word, not by the outward Pomp and show. She cannot
be hid from those that still diligently seek her in the scriptures, where
only, I say again, the certain knowledge of her is to be found. ^al. 10.
Nevertheless she is compared by S. Augustine and many more, to the moon,
which is often hid, and he acknowledges that she may be so secret that the
members know not one another. Persecutions have bin so great, that the world
saw not for a long time together such an outward show, ^^g. de. bap^^. cont.
Do^. l. 6. c. 4.
as Popery speaks of. Dioclesian and Maximinian boasted that they had utterly
abolished the superstition of Christ (as they call it) and name of Christians.
The like devilish boasting made Nero in his time, where was then this visible
face of the Church so glorious? that notable place of the Apostle, what shall
we say to it? They were tried by mockings, Heb. 11.36. etc.
and scourgings, yea moreover by bo^des and imprisonment, they were stoned,
they were hewn a sunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword,
they wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted and tormented: who^e the world was not worthy of, they
wandered in wildernesses and mountains and dens, and caves of the earth. Were
not these the children of God? were not these the Church? what outward pomp
had these men in the world, to move others led by such inducements to
resort unto them? O folly therefore to dream of any such thing! How differs
it from that error of the disciples, exspecting an earthly kingdom of their
master, and worldly preferments for themselves That vision of the woman forced
to fly into the wilderness to avoid the rage of antichrist, Apoc. 1^.
does it not convince my conscience, that the Church is hid sometimes from
men's eyes! How can that Church be said to fly into the wilderness, which
has always a visible face, a visible place a visible grace and glory, a
great company of favorers, might, power, authority, etc. were not Christ and
his followers on earth the Church? had they any such show? Nay they were
poor, base, and not regarded in comparison of the Scribes, Pharisees, high
priests, and that rabble. You shall be hated of all men for my sake, etc: says
our Savior of his Church: and is this to be visible ever in the world in
manner and form now often mentioned? who sees not that it is far from it.
And thus I hope I have sufficiently cleared this first point, that the Church
is not always visible, as they mean visible, which may suffice for answer to
this vain objection of theirs, as utterly overthrowing the ground thereof: yet
I answer further first to their Church, that no Romish Catholic living (and
I pray you consider well what I say) shall ever be able to prove that there
was any visible Church for five or six hundred years after Christ, which
maintained all or the chief points of popery, wherein they differ from us.
Then for our Church we truly affirm that it was long before Luther, even in
the primitive Church. For we stand upon this, that we embrace and profess
only that doctrine which springs as the water of life out of the sanctuary,
that is, out of the writings of the prophets and Apostles, and therefore that
our Church does not differ save that in degree of excellency from those famous
churches planted and watered by the Apostles themselves; which shall yet more
manifestly appear by the doctrine it self duly considered, the main points
whereof, as has been already touched in another place, are these, 1.
Concerning the moral law of God comprised in ten precepts, that it is the
perfect rule of righteousness, wherein we see as in a Crystal glass, both
what we should do, and what we do not, and how far short we are of that
obedience which is required at our hands by god. 2. The doctrine of
repentance, that finding of our selves transgressoures of Gods divine law, and
guilty of his wrath, we should in due humility and contrition of heart
throw down our selves at the throne of his grace, and in the anguish of our
souls confess our iniquities and rebellions against our selves, and every
man say with the poor Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner. 3. The
doctrine of faith, that traveling thus and groaning under the burden of our
sins, we should go unto our Savior for ease, comfort, and refreshing, that
is, that we should steadfastly believe that he died for our sins and rose
again for our justification and eternal salvation. ^om. 4.
4. the doctrine of good works and a godly life, that we ought ever to be
careful to abound in good works and have our conversation in heaven. 5. The
doctrine of prayer that we should in all our necessities call upon God in the
name of his son, as our blessed Savior has taught us in the Gospel: ^^t.
3. ^al. 3.
and especially that we should frequent the house of God, by public prayer to
speak unto him, and by his word to hear him speak unto us for instruction. 6.
The doctrine of the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords supper. 7. Lastly, the
twelve articles of our creed, I believe in God etc. These are the pillars and
foundation of our religion, yea the very soul and life of our Church, and all
of them founded and grounded upon the rock Jesus Christ, and his sacred word,
and without controversy the very essence and being of all Churches that have
been ever or shall be to the end of the world. Wherefore when our adversaries
ask us (as they do very often) where was your church before Luther, we may
well answer, as our Savior did in the Gospel by another question, videlicet,
These points of doctrine before mentioned were they before Luthers time or no?
If they will answer us to this, we will answer them, yea they shall be
forced to answer themselves, that this doctrine is of god and from heaven, and
that there never vvanted some to profess it publikly in all parts or the most
of Christendom, since the happy time of our blessed Savior: and therefore
that our Church has alvvaies bin a visible state though not so stately as they
boast of theirs to their own shame, if Saint Augustine may be judge, who
calls Rome in regard of this pomp and pride the Western Babylon, the second
Babylon, another Babylon, de cinit. d 16. c. 17. l. 1 22.27
the daughter of the former Babylon the earthly city. Yet for their further
satisfaction I further ask of them: do not they themselves say they believe
all these former points? do they not stand upon it that they have ever so
professed? Is there any thing in there religion of more moment and weight or
any other part of doctrine besides these, absolutely necessary to salvation?
why then do they ask us where and by whom this religion of ours was
professed before Luthers time? May we not well and charitably affirm that it
was professed in France. Spain, and Italy: yea in Rome ever since first Rome
embraced the gospel preached by the Apostles? Doubtless I am persuaded that
many thousands even now in these countries where the popes keys prevail, do
truly hold the 12. articles of the Apostles creed and Athanasius his creed,
which he calls the Catholic faith, with all the other points of doctrine set
down before, which if they do, holding the foundation, though they build upon
it wood, hay, (...) 3.
or stubble, that is some erroneous doctrine, yet they are the true Church of
God and shallbe saved. A pearl, is a pearl, though in an heap of dust, wine
is wine though mingled with water, and wheat is wheat, though covered with
much chafe: and is not the mystery of godliness whereof Paul speaks, god
manifested in the flesh, (...) 3.
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up in glory, still the mystery of godliness, and
that truth and sure foundation whereo^ the house of god is builded, though
matter unsuitable unto it be laid upon it? yes verily. And therefore seeing the
Church of Rome has ever held the mystery of godliness though mingled with
many dregs of men's inventions, I doubt not but God has ever had a people
amongst them and a true Church more then 7000. which have not bowed the knee
unto Baal. what we are to think of their leaders and teachers which indeed
have corrupted this doctrine with their own leaven, and endeavored by all
means to shut up and obscure this mystery, is another question, especially
for those that have done it wilfully and maliciously, and died in that malice.
But of the rest thus we judge and thus we answer, that so many as truly hold
and profess all the former articles of doctrine (as I assure my self many
do) are fellow members with us in the same mysticalll body whereof Christ is
the head. And therefore our church has ever been in theirs, though not ever
so manifest to the eye of the world as it was for the space of the first five
hundred years. Me thinks this answer should well content them and fully
satisfy them, being so charitable toward them. But to give them an answer of
their own and by themselves, to let them see that the true Church is not
always so visible as they pretend. They know that now in England they have
not authority to countenance their religion and Church, and yet they say that
they have a Church amongst us, and where they dare well say it, they are bold
to say it is a great one, yea the greter part, though I trust they shall never
prove it in that number. Why then in persecution and when the Lord punishes
the unthankfulness of men with taking away our public and autorised
assemblies, may not we as well have a church holding the true faith of Christ
according to his word, as they now a flock cleaving to the Bishop of Rome.


M. Rome has always been called the Mother Church, and they do join with
that. Rome is not he mother Church.



S. How can Rome be the mother church, when she is later then those first
churches of Jerusalem, and Antioche? Can a mother be younger then her
daughters, or her daughters elder then their mother? The very scriptures teach
us that all churches, and even Rome it self have risen out of the Church of
Jerusalem. Fou out of Sion shall his law come, and the word from Jerusalem.


M. You answer me well that Rome cannot be the mother Church of al, because
other churches have been before her. Nevertheless of this Church of England
she is rightly the mother, because this land received the faith from her,
first by Eleutherius the Pope and martyr, who sent Daminianus and Fugatius to
teach it to the Britanes at the request of their king who was then Lucius, and
after by Gregory the great, who sent Augustine and Melitus with other holy
priests to teach our ancestors the english, who then were planted here and
had removed the Britains into an other corner.


S. Dear mother all this you are taught and told by them who abuse gods people
bought with his precious blood. But it has been answered truly, that this
can not be so. For first Eleuth confesses in his answer to king Lucius his
message, that he had the scriptures, wherein were the laws of God, far more
to be regarded then the Roman laws: he praises his zeal and tells him,
that out of the scriptures with the advice of his counsel he might draw
convenient laws for his kingdom he being in his own land Christ's vicar etc.
How then was Eleutherius his first Apostle? Again does not Nicephorus
plainly say in his story, Simo^ Zelotes doctrinam Evangelij ad occidentalium
Oceanum in sulasque Brittanicas perfert. Lib. 2. c. 40
Simon Zelotes carried the doctrine of the gospel unto the west Ocean sea and
unto the Islandes of Britraine. This was before Eleutherius Do not others
write that Joseph of Arimathea did it? hat. S. Paul in his passage this way
into Spain did it, and allege authors for it? Might not the Greeks do it,
or some others, since evidently it appears by Eleutherius his own confession,
he was not the first? Then for Augustine and the rest do not these plain
testimonies of the fathers usually alleged to this end satisfy any man
living not way ward, that this land had the faith before him and them.
Tertullian lived about the year of our Lord 210. And his words are these.
Brittannorum in accessa Romany loc a subduntur Christo. (...). Iudaeos.
The countries of Britane which the Romans could never attain unto are now
subject to Christ. Origin about the year 212 writes, Ezech. hom.
Terra Brittanniae in religionem Christi consensit. The land of Britane has
yielded to Christ his religion. ^. Apolog. 2.
Athanasius about the year three hundred thirty four has the like.
Constantine the Emperor makes mention in his time of Christian Churches in
Britane. ^od. l. 1. c. 10.
This was about the year 330. S. Hilary in his time intituleth his letter,
Clericis Tolosanis and provinciarum Britannicarum episcopis. L. de Synod.
To the Clergi of Tolosa and to the bishops of Britane. This was about the
year 360. S. Chrysostom of his time says. m. quod ^ristus sit de
Et in sulae Britannicae extra hoe mare sitae and in ipso Oceano positae
senserunt virt^tem verbi dei. The Islands of Britane being in the very Ocean
and far out of this our sea have felt the power of Gods word. This he wrotte
about anno 400. Theodoret says, Huic fidei consenserunt ou^nes Ecclesiae,
quaeque in Hispania sunt, Histor. l. 4. c.
quaeque in Britannia. To this faith have agreed all the Churches both of
Spain and Britane. What can be more plain and more fully proved if we be not
wilful. Now all these fathers and writers lived sundry years before the
ariuall of Austine the monk and his fellows. Therefore they by no means
could be the first planters and publishers of the faith in this land. Gildas
writes that in the time of Tiberius this land was Christian. Hist. A^g. l. 2
c. 2.
Beda writes that in his time and almost a thousand years after Christ Easter
was kept here in England after the manner of the East Church in the full moon
what day in the week soever it fell on, and not on the sunday as now we do,
whereby it is very manifest and probable that the first preachers in this land
came more rather out of the East, then from Rome. Therefore by all these
proofs and arguments Rome is not the mother Church of England, for it had the
truth long before Eleutherius or Austin. I spare to show the bloody cruelty
of this Austin (whom the papists make an Apostle) with other his foul vices
of pride and disdain, etc. our stories show it: and I may have other
occassion hereafter.


M. Well son, I will now go no further with you in these points: but I
will put a case or two, and tell me your mind. What if a Catholic be sworn
to persist in the obedience of the Church of Rome, and not to revolt, how can
such an one without plain perjury take another course.


S. Indeed this is their devilish practice and policy in these days, to
steal the hearts and loyalty of the people from their prince, as Absolon did
from his father, but came to a foul end; to creep into houses, and lead
captive simple women, (...), 6.
as the Apostle says, to snare them with oaths and vows and promises, and
whatsoever they can devise, cont. Val.
wherein they tread in the steps of the old Valentinian heretics worthily
taxed by Tertullian, of whom that learned father says: Aditum prius cruciant,
they first torment their scholars, at their entrance^ne discipulis quidem
proprijs ante co^mittant quam suos fecerint, they commit not their mysteries
and doctrine, no not to their own disciples, before they have made them their
own. Habent artificium quo prius persuadeant quam edoceant: they have a trick
of legerdemaine, first to persuade before they teach. Even as now our Jesuits
and seminary priests when they seek to reconcile any to their mother the
Church of Rome, they take them sworn upon the sacrament of the altar, that
they shall ever after cleave fast to tha^ synagogue, and renounce all our
doctrine and church assemblies. And before they have thus made them their own,
and fettered their consciences with a vow they do not open their packet of
Romish wares unto them. They beginn with persuasions and end with instructions.
But the truth, says Tertullian, persuades by instruction, instructs not by
persuasion. ibidem. Veritas docen^ persuadet, non suadendo doc.
And doubtless truth is ever strong and will prevail with as many as God
has ordained to eternal life. The Lords sheep may stray a time: bu^ at last
the chief sheapheard that leaves 99 in the wilderness and goes to seek what
is lost, will find them in mercy, and ioifully bring them to his fold, and to
the rest that straied not as they did. Now touching your case, good mother
consider well in your self this one thing; whether any under heaven way
lavvfully give me an oath, or I lavvfully take an oath either to do what God
flatly forbids me, or to leave undone what God flatly commands me.


M. No sure: I am fully resolved of that.


S. Then must I consider not only that I have sworn, but to what I have
sworn, and if I find that unlawful, you see my oath may not bind me against
the Lord. Now we boldly avowe, as you have heard, and ever so did we avowe,
that if any parcel of our christian faith whereunto we persuade be not that
which God in his word has commanded, and forbidden the contrary, we will
renounce it. Therefore I must weigh the doctrine as well as my vow or oath, and
if the doctrine be true that I have sworn against, and that false which I have
sworn to keep, you have confessed that you think this oath wicked and not to
be kept.


M. Surely, I cannot say otherwise, for my conscience tells me it is so.


S. How then is it that many thus entangled never go about to consider the
matter, but altogether stick to their oath, and think with themselves: I have
sworn; therefore I may not change.


M. I know it to be true: and I see it is a falt: for surely no oath ought to
force me either to evil or from good concerning the loosing or saving of my
soul.


S. Your true opinion mother, in this matter, may be confirmed by examples out
of gods book. Iephtha you know made a rash vow, Iud. 11.^.
which is in the nature of an oath, to offer to God what first met him out of
his house, when he returned home, and had gotten the victory against his
enemies. His own daughter met him first. Did he well to kill her? What if a
dog or a swine had met him, being things that God would not abide to be used
in sacrifice, should his oath have tied him directly to do that which god
abhorred? if not those, the^ not his child, if obedience be better then
sacrifice of things lawefull, how much more then sacrifice of such cruelty and
unnatural blooddinesse? Iephta therefore is condemned and ever shall be for
this wicked keeping of his vow. Herod made a promise to his dancing daughter,
you know the story: did he well to keep that oath? Judge in your conscience
how God liked that fact. The ^ext says, Mat. ^^
Herod was sorry when he heard her petition, yet for his oaths sake he sent and
beheaded John Baptist in the prison. O bloody oath and sinful keeping of it.
His conscience whipped him whilst he lived for it, and made him think when he
heard of Christ that John was risen again whom he had beheaded. In the Acts
of the Apostles certain Jews more then forty men bound themselves with an
oath that they would neither eat nor drink till they had slain Paul. (...)
And must they needs either kill that blessed Apostle, or pine themselves to
death by refusing food, because they had sworn? God forbid. I assure my
self you like better of the Apostles words, we must obey God rather then men:
And god says thou shall do no murder. Gehezy in the book of the kings swear
that he would follow after Naaman, and take somewhat of him. he kept that
unlawful oath, and by the fearful plague that fell upon him you may see and
satisfy your self how it pleased God; David a man worthy following took
another course, as we read in his story: when he had sworn to kill Naball,
and not to leave a man of his house to look upon a wall, yet meeting with his
wife Abigail by the way, and admonished by her of so hard a course, he changed
his mind, blessed God that had sent her as a mean to save him from shedding
blood, and thought so well of the woman, that after the death of her husband, he
married her. Had David said, as deceived souls now a days do, I have sworn,
and I must keep mine oath, greatly had he sinned against the Lord to his own
hurt. This is an example chronicled up of God in his own book, to be followed
of all those that fear him. An oath is ordained of God to end strife being
lawfully taken, and to strengthen truth, Firma mentu veri^a^ ^on vinculum
iniquitatis,
but in no case to be vniculum iniquitatis, a bond to tie us to iniquity. Most
worthily therefore answered Agesilaus, when one said, Thou have promisea, Yea,
if it be just, says he, otherwise, loquutus sum, non promisi, I spoke, but it
was no promise, meaning that no promise should be urged beyond right. May we
think that he by the light he had, would have stood upon a wicked oath? no no
assuredly: Non praestabit fides quod exhibuit infidelitas, Faith may not
perform vhat want of faith unlawfully swore and vowed. By the common law
(which is ^he Popes own law) who swear in his heat, was to be enioined
penance, because calor iracundiae non excusat a toto, sed a tanto, The heat
of anger excuses not from all fault, but from so great a fault: neither are
they to be accounted perjured, who can show impossibility, or impiety in
their performance. your heart meant not to swear to evil: it then it prove
evil, and so you change, the fault is in the matter not in you.


M. What shall such do then?


S. Surely choose rather to ask god barrely mercy for a rash and ignorant
oath, the^ by keeping the same to add sin unto sin, yea a far greater to
a lesser; for in presumption to offend is the next consin to the sin against
the holy ghost. Beware that saying in the Psalm. (...)
They encourage themselves in mischeife, that is, are bold and hardy to take
heart to do evil, after they are told of it and know that it is evil.
Remember that in Gods law, there was a sacrifice appointed to make an
atonement for one that had sworn to do evil. ^vit. 5. sal. 5^.
A sacrifice also remains now, even a troubled spirit, sorrowful for mine
unadvised oath, mine unlawful* and wicked oath against my God, against my
prince, against my country to obey a forrainer, a stranger whom I never saw,
never am like to see, against mine own souls health, and to my endless woe. O
Lord, O Lord, a broken and contrit heart thou shall never despise, and therefore
strengthen thy poor creature, to turn unto thee, and rather to lament one
sin, then still still to sin, and so by an imagination of constancy to perish
eternally for their contumacy.


M. Amen, son amen, for sure it is plain that you have said to this point,
and sweet is truth when one does taste it. But the world is so full of prittle
prattle when a man turns that one will be ashamed to hear their speech (...)
some are hindered even thus.


S. No question, mother, but Satan uses this amongst other means to keep
some back from the truth, The pr^^^ i^ pratle of the world keep some from t^^
truth.
and it is a known weakness in our nature to shrink at the talk of me^. But the
proverb is old, a wonder lasts but 9. nights: folly will die, and truth get
strength: god is in this change, and it cannot do ill. Ang. de. (...) 5. c.
1^.
To have it verified of us which Christ spoke of his enemies, is a fearful
thing, namely, that they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God
The blessed Apostle says, Ioh. 1^.^^
Go I about to please men? surely If I should do so, I were not the servant
of Christ. And why? Our Savior Christ's words give one reason, Gal. 1.^0.
because such cannot be true believers. For how can they believe says he, which
receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor which comes of God
alone? There is extant in print a little book containing the recantations of
William Tedder and Anthony Tyrrel sometime two seminary priests of the English
college in Rome, as they were severally pronounced by them at Paul's cross in
the year 1588. wherein they both show what let the^ in their times to be
reformed. and first W. Ted. says, one great cause was this we now speak of,
the fear of wordly shame and temporal discredit: but says he. I did not
consider then, or I cared not for that sentence of our savior. Every one that
confesses me before men, him will I confess also before my father which is
in heaven, (...). 10.
and whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and a
sinful nation the son of man shall be ashamed of him, (...). 8.^.
when he comes in the glory of his father with his angels. This was the
cause that made me take a preposterous way turning all things to mine own
credit, when I should have turned them to the glory of God, according to our
Saviors council: seek first the kingdom of God etc. So thinking to get
credit by mine obstinacy, (...). 6.
I did loose, says he, the favor of God, the love of my sovereign, and the
good will of all true subjects. The other cause says he, was the tickling of
vainglorie, and this I am sure does hold most of the contrary side in their
perverse obstinacy, howesoeuer they brag that they seek nothing by their
dealings but the glory of God. I thought it a goodly thing and worthy
commendation to defend an evil cause by probable reasons, yet I know it was a
hard thing for Anaxagoras to prove that snow was black or incke white, and
for me to prove light to be darkness, and darkness light. Thus spoke this
Tedder, and spared not himself in that open place. The other Anthony Tyrrell
to the same effect used these words: Here, says he I must confess to the
great honor of almighty God, that I have had many and vehement temptations to
hinder me from this action of repentance, but they being worldly and fleshly,
with the sword of Gods spirit I have overthrown them and cut them in pieces,
One was this, the shame of the world, if I should turn: against which I have
learned now to say, Melius est confunai in hoc seculo, quam in futuro. Better
it is to be confounded in this world, then in the world to come: and against
pride and hautinesse of mind, which did also trouble me, I have learned to say
with Augustine, Melior est in malis factis humilis confessio, quam in bonis
superba gloriatio, Better it is when a man has done evil, humbly to confess
his fault, then proudly to vaunt of his well doing: and rather had I with the
penitent publican confess my self an open sinner, then with the proud
Pharisee to prove my self an open liar. Thus do you see, good mother, the
hindrance which you object of talk and speech of the world in these two men,
both scholars and both priests, and yet how God in mercy gave them the upper
hand over such weakness. You know Nicodemus his case. He liked of Christ,
and very willing he was to be his disciple, but he came by night, that he
might not loose his credit of the world: we all confess it a weakness in him.
And so certainly is it to fear the tongues of men that are deceived as we were
before god gave us light. Never had Prophet, Apostle, Martyr, or child of God
done any duty if they had hanged upon men's tongues, and more regarded the vain
breath of their tauntes, which have but a time and vanish as smoke, rather
then that truth and that God which is for ever. It was well said of one, Qui
conscientias suas in alienis labiis posuerunt, modo magni, modo parui, modo
nulli sunt. They that hang their consciences on other men's lips, sometimes
are great me^, sometimes little, sometimes no body: so vile and vain is this
course. ^an. l. 14.
Polycletus (says Aelian) made two pictures, one after the fancy and
correction of every one that found any fault, another after his own true skill
and knowledge: But O the difference of these two pictures! Diogenes is said
upon an extreme cold day to have stood in the water to punish his body, and
many looking upon him had pity on him, but at last Plato seeing what was
done, and vvisely perceiving the man's vanity, said, Masters if you pity him
indeed, go you away from him, meaning that when they were gone, of whom he
vainly hu^ted for praise, he would come roundly out, and to the fire. Such a
gross folly is it to seek to please men and to be highly esteemed of men for
any thing, especially for error and mis-doing. This is as S. Hierom says, to
be gloriae animal and popularis rumoris venale mancipium: Epist. 26.
The vassal of vainglory, and the sold slave of popular praise. The wind
hoisteth up the light dust and scatters all abroad: so does the hanging too
much on men's lips hurt many a man and woman well disposed, and disperse the
good motions of their mind. Therefore wise was that devise of Philippe king of
Macedon, Aelian. l. 12.
who to make a vain Physician delighted with men's praises too much to see his
error, invited him amongst many more to a royal feast, and placing him at a
board by himself, when all the rest had great store of meat, he had only
sweet fumes and smokes made before him, and so rose with an hungry belly. I
will end with that speech which like a dart me thinks pierces when it is
spoken or read with reverence and due meditation. Mercedem habent; verily,
verily, I say unto you they have their reward. Men they would please, and
praise they would have, it is their end, and they have it, says our Savior:
but they had better be without it, for they loose the approbation of the Lord,
and procure themselves everlasting shame. Were the report good, or were the
report evil, Paul did his duty in that which was good and had a blessed end.
(...) bon^m fa^m, and malam ^^^m.



M. I must confess son, you are in the right, if frail flesh would be
ruled. But what say you when a man or woman, have been long of this mind,
(...) change on (...) sudden is ^^d, but delay ^^gerous.
can they change upon the sudden?


S. O mother, what should I say? your self be judge and answer your self. Did
ever any whom we read of in the scripture, feeling the piercing power of Gods
spirit smiting upon the rock of their hidden hearts within, take time with the
Lord, and say they would yield after three months, or six months, etc No,
no, immediately those happy convertes that were pricked in their hearts at S.
Peter's sermon cried out: (...).
Men and brethren what shall we do? Immediately the Eunuch, the laylour, the
happy woman Lydia, Cornelius and all the rest spoken of in scripture were
reformed. (...). c. 16.
They stayed not an hour houering and hammering, z. ^. ^. 16.
looking back to Sodom with Lots wife, or to Egypt with the Jews; but
ioifully embraced the truth without delay. Surely they are set down as holy
examples for us to follow. To day, to day, is the voice of God: and to morrow,
to morrow is the voice of Satan. Herein does sin and Satan deceive us, that
they will have to day, and god must have to morrow. Now, now is the accepted
time, says the Apostle, and illud nunc, nullum habet crastinum, says the
godly father Nazianzen, That now has no morrow. All Satan's fetch (says
another) is to make us defer, and so by deferring to loose utterly Gods
offered mercy; Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit, He that is not fit to
day will certainly be more unfit to morrow: Quot vicibus, tot vinculis, says
Gregory of continuance in any evil: the longer we continue in it, the stiffer
we shall be and the more obstinate. And of doing good its truly said of
another, Quanto magis differtur, tanto difficilius redditur, vel propter
peccati consuetudinem, vel propter maiorem dei offensionem: The longer it is
deferred, the harder it is to perform, either in respect of the strength of
sin through custom, or the offense of god increased by so deferring. Make no
longer tarrying says the wise Siracides, tu turn unto the Lord, neither put
it off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth,
Eccles. ^^
and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time
of vengeance. The Lord will give thee a penny (says S. Austen) though thou
come but at the eleventh hour, but yet he has not promised thee to live to
the second hour: noting the uncertainty of our life not to be presumed upon,
one moment of an hour: tu ergo quo quando vocaris, veni: thou therefore says
he, come vvhither thou art called, and when thou art called, come, come,
without any longer stay, or any more ifs and ands, or consultations with flesh
and blood. It is thy God that calls, who allowed not him to go bury his
father, or to salute his friends that sought that delay, but required
forthwith, Follow thou me: Zacheus when the Lord said unto him, come down for
I will dine with thee, came down hastily and received him joyfully, which God
in mercy make us ever to do: Whose image and superscription is upon you, even
upon your body, and upon your soul? is it not Gods? o give then unto God that
which is Gods, your own self to your own sweet and good God, and see the
comfort of it: Lord strengthen, Lord help for thy sons sake.


M. Amen, son, and god give satisfaction in our consciences ever to choose
what is right in his eyes. For conscience is truly called the bird in my
breast that would not be troubled.


S. True satisfaction of conscience, mother, is a good thing, and ever to be
labored for. But I beseech you mark how greatly this word is abused, when
fancy and will are called conscience. Now a days let it be asked of any
recusant (as we call them) why he or she goes not to Church, the common
answer is, forsooth my conscience will not let me; or, It is my conscience
etc, as though every toy that I take in my head were by and by conscience. Ask
them further, why their conscience will not let them; either they cannot or
will not answer, but think they have said enough when they have named once
the word Conscience. Alas, we know that true conscience has a ground and
reason out of Gods word: as when I say my conscience will not suffer me to kill
a man, and you ask me why? I readily answer, because it is written, Thou
shall not kill, and so in all other matters forbidden and disalowed by
almighty God: which if they could do either in this matter of coming to
Church, or in any other point of obedience commanded by her Majesty and the
law of this land, then might they talk of conscience, and make scruple with
authority, because we must obey God rather then man. But this being not so
forasmuch as nothing is enjoined them that is contrary to the word, therefore
this conscience of theirs is but fancy, wilful obstinacy, and disobedience,
which the Lord will punish: for we are plainly taught that every soul ought
to be subject to the higher powers: there is no power but of God: m. 13.1^.
and the powers that be are ordained of God and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation, all being bound to be subject not for fear of wrath
only, but also for conscience sake. For humane laws enacted of things that be
good in themselves, that is, commanded of God, properly are not humane but
divine laws, and therefore bind conscience not because they were enacted by
man, but because they were first made by God, men being no more but
instruments and ministers in his name to reviue, renew, and put in execution
such precepts and laws as prescribe the worship of God, standing in the
practice of true religion and virtue: and the man or woman that breaks such
laws sins two ways: first because he breaks that which in nature and
conscience is the law of God; secondly because in disobeying his lawful
magistrate, he disobeyeth the general commandment of God touching magistrates.


M. You will have conscience then ever grounded upon Gods word.


S. If it be a right conscience, I say it must needs be so. For it is called
Conscientia, quasi cum scientia (or as some think) quasicordis scientia, as if
you should say with science and knowledge, or the knowledge of the heart. Now
true knowledge what pleases or displeases God, must needs be out of his
word, because therein only his will is manifested unto us Again the actions
of the conscience (says the Apostle) are in accusing and excusing which needs
must have relation to the word. For how can conscience justly accuse me, but
because the thing I do is condemned of God, or how can it excuse me, but
because my deeds by gods word, which is his will, are justifiable. Conscience
therefore without direction of gods word cannot give true judgment either to
justification or condemnation. Whatsoever therefore is done with an erroneous
conscience we see plainly is sin: for evil remains evil, though
conscience say the contrary a thousand times: and so does good remain good. As
if a man come into an house in the dark, where many things are out of order,
which yet for the darkness he sees not to be so, are they not therefore out
of order because he sees them not? The like may be said on the other side
where all things are passing well, and yet he sees it not. Conscience
therefore is a guide to me, and the word of God a guide to my conscience: which
if it were marked and grounded in our hearts, o how would we tremble to be so
ignorant of Gods word, as often we are, and to do as we do, and say as we
say. This makes us to run headlong with good intents, whereas no good
intention is sufficient to make any work good unless withal conscience
approve my action, which it can never rightly do, but by giving judgment
that God approoueth it. This makes us bold to worship God with man's
inventions, ^ay. 29.^3. ^ark. 7.7.
not considering that such devises are mere sins, because conscience cannot
say of them according to her rule, that they please God. Finally as one says
with a godly desire to awake us. This makes man's life flow even with a sea of
offenses against God, men commonly thinking that if they keep themselves from
perjury, blasphemy, murder, theft, whordome, all is well with them. But the
truth is, so long as they live in ignorance, they want true and right
direction out of Gods word: and therefore their best actions are sins, even
their eating and drinking, their sleeping and waking, their buying and selling,
their speech and silence, yea their praying and serving of God. For they do
these actions either of custom or example, or necessity, as beasts do, and
not of faith, because they know not gods will touching things to be done or
left undone. Wherefore the due consideration hereof should make every man most
careful to seek for knowlede of Gods word and daily to increase in it, that
he may in all his affairs have gods laws to be the men of his council, that
he may give heed to them as to a lantarne unto his feet; and a light unto his
paths. So shall conscience be a sure guide, and he reform himself by true
obedience both to God and man. Otherwise as I have said, what we call
conscience, is but a fancy, a conceit, and a false erroneous persuasion, such
as if we still will follow against God, against prince, against country, and
all that ever any governors or friends can say unto us: the day will come
when we shall feel with woe the punishment of such obstinacy, and true
conscience shall witness the want of conscience in so proudly disobeying all
good persuasions, which God forbid in his great mercy, and turn our hearts in
time unto his truth.


M. But I take it there is a plain scripture, that who so does a thing which
in his heart he thinks he should not do, commits deadly sin, because he
does against his own conscience, or against his own pretensed knowledge.


S. Good mother, the scripture you mean (as I conceive) is written in the 14
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, where the blessed Apostle says, He that
doubts, is condemned if he eat because he eats not of faith: and what
soever is not of faith is sin. Which place little helps any popish
ignorance or stubburne wilfulness, but is greatly by Romish Catholics
abused and wrested, as other scriptures to serve for their way wardnesse.
Concerning which text, thus have our men truly and godlily answered long ago
and often: first that the Apostle speaks there of a particular and certain
matter, papists applying these words generally to whatsoever they do contrary
to their erroneous conscience or pretensed knowledge, 2. that the particular
matter which the Apostle speaks of is a thing indifferent, whereas Papists
apply the words to things simply good, and simply evil, saying the former may
be left undone if my erring conscience be against it, the later done without
sin, if my pretensed knowledge lead me to it. 3. That the things which the
Apostle speaks of, were such as God himself was author of in his law, as
distinction of meat and days, which whilst the Jews won to the Gospel did
in those days retain, though they did it ignorantly, not knowing the liberty
of the Gospel, yet till they might be fully persuaded therein by faith, which
is grounded on doctrine and on the word, they were bound to keep by the
commandment of God himself. 4. That the manner and end of the Apostles
bearing is not to nourish error, or to harden such an one in his opinion and
doing, but by patience to draw him to truth in the end, which manner of
tolerance the Apostle calls edification, verse. 19. and chap. 15.2. Lastly the
Apostle speaks not of Gentiles and infidels, nor of stubburn Christians, but
of a brother, a faithful man, and one that has received and embraced the
profession of the Gospel, but is weak through ignorance of some one point
pertaining to Christian liberty in the outward use of Gods creatures wherein he
is not thoroughly persuaded of instructed; of bearing with such an one by those
whom God has called to more plentiful knowledge of his heavenly truth,
speaks he. All which things duly considered, the true sense of the place
appears thus: namely that the faithful for his particular regard being in
doubt, or lacking the full persuasion of faith (which is given by measure, and
has his time of grows and increasing) cannot without danger, (and therefore
ought not) attempt to do that wherein he is not already by the word of God and
faith fully and thoroughly resolved. But mark this double caution; first, that
his absteining from the outward action be without danger of offense, and
scandal and secondly, that he stand not stiff^ly in his own opinion,
flattering himself therein, but ready upon further instruction and knowledge
to grow forward and to profit, yea desirous also of such instruction, and
whatsoever other means may help to the better informing of his conscience in
that behalf, whereby he may both clearly see the thing doubted of to the
good, holy, and lawful, and do the same with all sincerity and faithfullnes.


M. But what if without danger of offending God and prince, I cannot abstain
from the outward action, and yet doubt in my self.


S. Your obedience being due, it less offends to commit one fault then two,
that is to do what you ought though doubtingly, then both do doubt and
disobey. The doubting is a fault, the obedience is none. Amend what is evil by
better instruction, withdraw not what is good and due by all right. He is
condemned says the Apostle, if he eat, not because he eteth but because he
eats not of faith. In a lawefull action therefore it is not the deed which
offends, but the doubting, that is, not the matter, but the manner: perform
obedience with a single heart and God in mean shall bless it with true
resolution.


M. Does not then an erroneous conscience bind.


S. It may be borne withal for a time in charitable regard of weakness, and
in hope of better instruction, but God forbid that it should still bind, and
be a cover or excuse for wilful, waywarde, and malicious disobedience. 2.
These. 2. 1. Tim. 4.
For then to be given over to a strong delusion to believe lies is not such a
judgment as the Apostle makes it, neither yet to have the conscience feared
with an hot iron. 2. Tim. 1.19
It is not right which the Apostle teaches that upon the putting away of a
good conscience their follows any shipwreck of faith, or that the wicked
have their very minds and consciences defiled. 1. Tit. 1.
For if the color of such a conscience bind, excuse and save harmeles, how is
it defiled? can that which is defiled it self make clean any action? But o
miserable doctrine! that false reason should be made a guide to will, and we
bound to follow so blind a guide. The very heathen philosophers were not so
mad. For they talk of recta ratio, and of men's sana in corpore sano, of
right and true reason, and of a sound mind in a sound body, etc. A Jew
sins mortally (say these Catholic teachers) if co^^ratrary to his pretensed
knowledge or against his erroneous conscience he acknowledge in Trinity Jesus
Christ the second person, yea the Jews had sinned mortally if they had not
crucified Christ according to their erring consciences. Again to believe in
Christ, if false reason propound it as evil, is evil, yea to worship the
devil being deceived by the same reason, is not only not a sin, but a good
work. O Catholic doctrine! Then for the second table; if a man leaving his
wife, and going into another country, marry another, and after repenting
himself would leave her, affirming his former wife to be alive, and the Church
suffer him not, being ignorant of the truth of that his assertion, although
this latter marriage be naught and the man consequently an adulterer (Dear
mother mark this stuff) the woman being excused by ignorance, yet compelled
by the disciplin^ of the Church, his obedience excuses him. This is gross and
known adultery excused by these holy Catholics: false reason and erring
conscience rules this kingdom of darkness so shamefully If this be not
libertinisme, what is? Alas why might not this favor be showed in Queen
Mary's days that an erring conscience should excuse? Why were men and women
then compelled to do contrary to their consciences, which at worst must be
granted to be erroneous consciences. Nay see their partiality yet more: for if
one of their prelates command what a man's erring conscience stardeth at, then
they say such a man ought to lay away that his conscience and obey his prelate.
And why not when God commands should a man do the like? O blind guides,
what doctrine is this? if the commandment of an inferior officer or
magistrate bind not when the superior as King or Emperor commands the
contrary, how may an erring conscience ever bind me against the Lord? Gods
book is so far from allowing this erring conscience, and this prete^sed
knowledge, that it only allows good, and suffers not evil to be done,
that good may come of it.


M. Surely, I see more harshnesse in the doctrine then I did before. But on the
other side to compel and force any body by laws and penalty, before the
conscience be fully persuaded, is it not as harsh and hard to?


S Where there is an honest plain meaning to endeavor to be persuaded and
resolved, god forbid but some time should be granted. And I think it is so
in all places. But propound the matter thus: whether a godly prince after a
time given and means granted to be taught and instructed, and after al
gentleness and patience used, his subjects refusing to be taught, and contemning
that gracious and great favor, continuing still perve^sly and obstinately in
Idolatry, and superstition, whether I say, then by laws and punishments to
compel the^ to the true worship of God, be so hard and harsh? And then truth
will answer that it is not, but just, godly, and fit. For not only to maintain
public peace is the sword given, but also to see that God be served according
to his commandments, ^trieis call ^amans ^^tum.
that is, both the tables are committed to him, and the breaches of both ought
by him to be punished, otherwise man should be regarded more then God, and the
lesser duties more then the greater. In which holy and relious duty has not
the magistrate god for his pattern, who after words of admonition given to his
own elect and dear children, if they take no place, co^pelleth as it were by
crosses and rods of his fatherly love to the bettering of their course and
leaving of evil? Yea is not our own practice so with our own children, if
gentle admonition will not serve? wherevpo^ the saying spra^ge; he that spares
the rod hates the child. what shall we say to the Scriptures, that are as
plain for the warrant of this matter as we need to desire: did not
Nabuchodonosor make a law that every people, nation, and language, which spak
any blasphemy against the god of Sidrach etc. should be drawn in pieces, Dan.
3.29.
and. their houses made a ^akes? Darius also made another decree chap 6. In the
book of Chronicles Asa destroieth Idolatry, and commands his people to serve
the true God, 2. Chro. 14.14
yea he swears them, and deposes his mother for adultery: whose erroneous
conscience was in all likelihood as strong as any Papists for his popery. In
the book of Ezra we read that the king of Persia made a decree that the Jews
should build their temple, that they should have all things necessary for
their sacrifices, that they might offer sweet odours unto the God of heaven,
and pray for the kings life, and the life of his sonns. Also he made another
law that whosoever should alter that sentence, a penal stat^^
the wood should be pulled down from his house and set up, and he hanged
thereon, and his house made a dunghill for this. Ezra. 6.11.
And the god that has caused his name to dwell their (says that law) destroy
all kings and people that put their hand to alter and destroy this house of God
which is in Jerusalem: Idarius have made a decree, let it be done with speed.
After again (which I pray you good mother to mark) authority is given to set
judges and arbiters which may judge all the people that is beyond the river, p.
7.25.
even all that know the law of God: and to teach all that know it not: and
whosoever will not obey the law of God and the kings law (says that statute)
let him have judgment without delay: whether it be unto death or punishment,
to confiscation of goods or to imprisonment. What law did ever any prince
make more plain without any regard to a pretended conscience wanting true
ground out of the law of god? For if that might either then or now be
allowed, what law could hold, against which he that list not to be reformed,
would not object his erroneous conscience? What government could any prince in
the world settle and establish? Away therefore with this idle dream of a
pretended conscience, and mark how never in any government it was regarded
after ways and means used for the reformation of it, but ever subjected to
the penalty of the law, being indeed an obstinacy both against god and
prince, worthy punishment. In the new testament is it not said, Luke 14.23.
Go into the high ways ana compel to come in that my house my be full. I
forgotte to remember you of that law and penal statute made by the king of
Ninive, Jonah. 3.
which was so well liked of god: but you may now think of it, and add it to
the rest of the old testament. If we look at practice, Polonia, Russia,
Lituania were forced at the commandment of their rulers to forsake their
ancient Idols, Munst. Cosm. 4. p. 894.902. L. 3. p. 719.74
and to receive baptism. Good princes also maintained long and sharp wars
to compel the Saxons and Vandals to the faith, etc. The laws of this realm
[blessed be god] force to nothing but what is directly proved in scripture.
And the constraint is not outrageous with fire and sword, but tempered with
mercy, that is, free from loss of life and limme, such as the true Church of
god never disliked and Christian princes always used with great and good
success. It is tempered also with good instruction to forsake error, wherewith
Christ is dishonored and his truth defaced. Romish Catholics revenge the
smallest contempt of their idle ceremonies with insufferable torments. Their
prelates make it their occupation to persecute to death all sorts, ages, and
Sexes which refuse their schoole-tricks or dregs of their Clementines or
decretalls How then can they find fault with any due compulsion full of mercy
and profit to all that be not maliciously froward: yea all of them both Clergy
and laity promised in baptism to hold this faith, therefore they may be
compelled to perform their promise. Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius,
and other Christian princes with convenient sharpnes of positive laws,
amerced, banished, and diversely punished heretics. And these coactions when
the Donatists railed on them with open mouth, S. Augustine defended and
commended, writing to Vincentius thus. Think thou (says he) that no man
ought to the forced unto righteousness, ^pist. 49.
when thou read that the master said to his servants compest them to come
in? and also that Paul was forced by loss of his eyes, a greater punishment
then loss of lands and goods. Mark^ Christ here first compelling, after
teaching: striking; then comforting. Let them not mislike that they are forced
but examine whereto they are forced. How do kings (says he) serve the Lord in
fear but when they forbid and punish with religious severity those things that
are done against the commandment of God, as Hezekiah did by destroying the
groaues and temples built against the precepts of God, as did Josiah the king
of Niniveh, Nabuchodonosor, etc. S. Ambrose says, Quoniam futurum iudicium
Deus statuit, and nullum perire vult, hoc in seculo rectores ordinauit, vt
terrore interposito omnibus velut paedagogi sint, in epist. ad. Romans c. 13.
ne in paenam incida^t futuri iudicei. For as much as God has appointed a
future and final judgment in the world to come, and would not that any
should perish, he has ordained rulers in this present world, to be as it were
schoolemasters to all to keep them through terror that they incur not the
penalty of the judgment to come. Thus we see scripture, reason, practice,
fathers, all allowing compulsion of an erroneous conscience or pretensed
knowledge, which surely is enough to any moderate mind desiring satisfaction in
true simplicity, and not making couers for ungodly obstinacy in subtle
hypocrisy.


M. Son your answers are so reasonable, that I will still object, to hear
your answers. What if I say God has made us free, therefore there is no
reason any should be compelled.


S. Then will I answer (Good Mother) that even our first parents, who had
freewill, had also both a law given them of God, and a penalty added to the
same if they should transgress it: much more now then may the like be done,
when we have both lost our selves and our freewill (to use the words of S.
Austin:) By no law is the will compelled, for that still is either free or it
loses his name of will. But men according to their bodies may be forced as
well to keep the commandments of the first table concerning duty to God, as
the commandments of the second table concerning duty to men.


M. But again I will say, this makes men hypocrites, when outwardly they do
that which in their hearts they mislike.


S. And again I answer, that the drift of the magistrate is not to make them
hypocrites, but by these means to draw them willingly to do that which thy
are enjoined. And if it be not so, that is their fault, not the magistrates. So
did God with Jonas, Paul, and others. So says S Augustine of his own cirtie
fallen to Donatisme, ug. contr. auden^^ epi^^m. l. 2. c. 17.
that by outvvard laws they were brought to inward knowledge, and so he saw
the benefit of this course, that the sword should reign with the word,
although at first he says it was his opinion that none should be compelled
before he were persuaded. And S Chrysostom says, Multi sunt qui cum virtutem
primum respectu magistratus exercuerunt, posted etiam illam propter Dei timorem
amplectuntur. a Spist. ad (...). c. 13.
Many men whereas at first they be have themselves virtuously in regard of the
magistrate, and for fear of punishment, afterward do it gladly, even for
fear of God and in reverence of his majesty. We see the judgment of this
holy father: that compulsion by the magistrate is necessary and profitable,
though at first it procure but external obedience, and his reason which
follows is very good, Crassiores enim (says he) non adeo futura tangunt
atque praesentia: ibidem.
for carnal men are not so much touched with future as present things: that
is (as I understand him) the torments of hell in the world to come do not so
much prevail with them, as the punishment of the Magistrate presently to be
inflicted upon them. And that Epistle of S. Augustine is most worthy often
reading, his 48 epistle.


M. Yet forced Religion pleases not God.


S. Surely, it less displeases with one part to do my duty, then with both
parts to offend. To come to Church with my bodies, where by Gods grace I may
be caught, as S. Augustine was at S. Ambrose his sermon, then both with body
and mind to disobey not only prince but God. A part of my duty is something,
though it be not all.


M. The magistrate cannot give faith, therefore he should not compel to faith.


S. He does not compel to faith, but to the means whereby God uses to give
says, namely, to hearing: for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God; which how profitable it may be by Gods mercy, has been already
said: and the words of David show, when he says, It is good for me that I
have been in trouble, etc. and the words of Jeremy, Castigasti, and Castigatus
sum, thou have chastned me, and I have been chastned. The words of Esaias,
Vexatio dat intellectum Vexation and trouble work understanding: The words
of wise Solomon, Da sapienti occasionem, and sapientior erit, give a wise man
occasion and he will be vviser.


M. Why then did not Christ compel any?


S. Christ was no magistrate: and we speak of the Magistrate, and what he may
do by his office and authority given him by God.


M. Surely Son, great is truth, and prevails, I will trouble you no
further in this matter.


S. I will then dear mother, shut it up with S. Augustins words to the
Donatists, Non been facere legibus cogimini, sed male facere prohibemini. Nam
been facere nemo potest, nisi elegerit etc. You are not compelled by laws, to
do well, but you are forbidden and hindered to do evil: For no man can do
well unless he willingly do it: Timor autem paenaru^ cisi nondum habeat
dilectionem bonae conscientiae, saltem intra claustra cogitationis coercet
malam cupiditatem: And the fear of punishment although it have not as yet the
love of good conscience, yet at least it restrains evil within the hidden
cogitation Numquid quia mores optimi liberate voluntatis eliguntur, contra
Petil. l. 2. c. 83.
ideo mores pessimi non legis integritate puniuntur? Because good manners are
chosen by freedom of will, therefore are not ill manners punished by
integrity of law? In a word, Aliter non persequimur vos nisi quemadmodum
veritas persequitur falsit atem: We persecute you no otherwise, but as truth
persecuteth falsehood, namely to salvation, not to destruction.


M. Surely, your answers, I must confess, are far otherwise, then either I
looked for at your hands, or thought could have been given in your cause.
Wherefore I say again we on our side are greatly wronged, when we are
forbidden to read your books, or to confer with you. But yet if some learned
man were here to dispute with you, happily he would contrary this which to me
seems plain.


S. Surely mother, even this also which you name is a good point be touched.
For indeed it is an usual shift of men and women thus given to say. I cannot
answer you, but if such and such were here they would: and, would God we might
have some disputation, then should we see which part were better. Yea such
bragges are made by some learned of your side, to blind the eyes of the
people, as if either there never had bin trial of their strength this way, or
as if they always had had the upper hand in disputation; when God knows, and
the world can witness herein their weakness and great foiles, to the glory of
God and victory of his truth in the hearts of many thousands both men and
women. For confirmation whereof let me remember you of the disputation at
Berne in Heluetia, in king Henry the 8, his days, which is thus published in
Chronicle to the worlds knowledge. There was in the year of our Lord 1527. in
the month of december order taken by the senate and people of Berne, whose
power amongst all the Switzers chiefly excels in regard of the varience of
religion that then was and still more and more increases, that there should be
a public disputation in that city, and to that end they sent forth writings
of the same, and called thither all the Bishops bordering near about them, as
the bishop of Constance, Basil, Sedune, Lausanna, warning them to come both
themselves and to bring with them their devines, or else to loose all such
professions as they had lying within the bounds of their precinct. They also
appointed learned men amongst them, preachers of the Gospel to be ready to
dispute against all comers in defense of their doctrine, prescribing the
disputation to be decided only by the authority of the old and new
testament. They granted safe conduct to all that would come. They appointed
likewise that all things should be done modestly without injury and brawling
words, and that every one should have leave to speak his mind freely, and
with such deliberation that every man's saying might be received by the notarie
and penned. And to the end men might come thither better prepared, they caused
their ministers to publish such questions as they should dispute on before hand
in writing, that every man might study to say what he could against them, and
they were ten in number. 1. The true Church rises out of Gods word,
continues in the same, and hears the voice of none other. 2. The true Church
makes no laws, without the word. 3. Traditions bind not, but as fur as
they are agreeable to the written word. 4. Christ only has satisfied for the
sins of the world, and therefore if any make any other way, the same
denies Christ. 5. The body and blood of Christ cannot be received really and
corporally by the testimony of scripture. 6. There is no place of purging after
this life, and therefore all dirges, prayers, ceremonies, lamps, tapers, etc.
bestowed for the dead profitte nothing. 7. Christ only is to be prayed unto as
the mediator of mankind to God the father. 8. The mass is wicked and
derogatory to Christ's sacrifice offered for us. 9. Images ought not to be set
up in Churches and prayed unto. 10. Marriage is allowed by God unto all degrees.
These things I say, thus agreed upon before hand were sent abroad to al
places, and the day appointed the 7, of January for the disputation to
begin. At which day (now see the courage of Catholics) not one of the
bishops before named came: nevertheless the city of Basil, Zuricke, Schasuse,
Abbacelle, Sangallium, Mallusia with the neighbors of Rhetia, also they of
Strawsburge Vlmes, Ausburge, Lindaue, Constance and Isue sent thither their
Ambassadors. The doctors of Berne began the disputation, whereat were present
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucerus, Capito, and Blaurecus with others. One the
other side of them that were opponents, the chief was Conzadus and Tregerus, a
friar Augustine, who no way able to prove his cause out of the old and new
testament, as was appointed and decreed at first, desired that he might allege
Doctors: which the moderators refusing to grant, because it was contrary to
the order appointed, he to his great shame, and to the prejudice of all his
side departed out of the place and would dispute no more. The disputation
endured 19. days and in the end by the greater part of that assembly the
protestants had the victory, and the Papists the foil. And it was agreed
upon that the themes before mentioned were all true and agreeable to Gods holy
word, that they should be ratified and proclaimed according to promise, and
that masses, altars, images, etc. should in all places be abolished: So they
were at Constance, Berne, and Geneva, they causing the day and year of this
reformation from popery to Christianity to be engraven in a pillar with golden
letters for a perpetual memory to all posterity. This was anno 1528. After
the rumor of this disputation, Reformation followed at Strawsburge, Basil, and
other places, to Gods great glory, the comfort of his people, and the true
witnessing to the world what strength Romish Catholics have in disputation,
when they are desired to keep to the scriptures, which only is the ground of
truth and conscience. I may not repeat others at large, but blessed be God the
like trial of them was made and the like foil given them at Wittenberge, and
Ravensburge, at Ausburge, at Spire at Worms, at Pois, and here in England, at
London, at Cambridge, at Oxford and in private houses and consistories of
Bishops often. That notable service of Beza, at Pois gone through the world,
when the Cardinal of Lotharinge wished that either Beza had been dumme, or
they his auditors and adversaries dea^e, will witness for ever what pith
popish falsehood has had against Christian truth held and taught by
protestants, when they came to disputation. Read our own Chronicles of the
cowardly refusal of the popish Bishops to dispute at the happy entrance of her
Majesty to the Crown, how also they behaved themselves in Queen Mary's time,
when one of them said, we had the word, but they had the sword, etc. Indeed,
indeed, the sword and the fire are their best arguments, and in blood they
build whatsoever they build. Never, never, therefore let them boast of
disputation, or say they have prospered by it: for we need not to fear them,
God be blessed, nor they to brag of any winning. There never wanted yet,
neither ever shall want both learned and unlearned on our side, whose spirits
they shall not be able to resist: writing, preaching, disputing, they are the
Gospels weapons and ways to build by; Popery must take so^e other course as
yet in all times they have done which hold that plough. O that for further
proof of this point me^ would be content without prejudice to read the Acts
and monuments of this our native country, and English Church where we live,
marking with a mind desirous of truth what answers have been made by simple
women, maids, and girls unto great Bishops and Doctoures in causes of
religion and faith, to the great astonishment of their adversaries, and the
high glory of God seen in their weakness so strengthened by him. But nothig
can be more grievous to that Church then to grant leave to do this, which
surely bewrays they are afraid. Hence come their lies and slanders invented
against that book, which would full soon be discried of us would we read it.
If any have been in Westminster ball, at tharraignment of a misdoer, we
willingly hear him a whole day to tell us the manner of it, what was objected,
what answered, what replied, and what concluded: yet we will not read with our
own eyes, having it so notably penned for us, the conventings of holy
Christian men and women before their judges for matter of faith and salvation.
We will talk of disputation, disputations, and o that men might be allowed to
speak freely without danger of law what they are able: and when the time was
for theirs to speak what they would or could, and we stood at the bar in
bolts and iron to answer their objections and profound learning, we will not
now read what was then done and said on both sides; Surely I will say of that
book what I wish tried, that after the ground of holy scriptures, it will
yield the greatest contentment. Men shall see men, women shall see women, age
shall see age, and youth youth brought to the trial, how they answered, how
they suffered, how flesh startled, how the spirit conquered, and in a word,
how God showed his mercy and power infinite ways. If we find they speak
well, we may embrace it, if otherwise leave it. The Lord has given us wisdom
and reason, and of his grace also, I trust to be able to discern, if we would
read. O why should our enemies hoodwincke us so that we must never see but
with their eyes. If the charge of this book be to much for one, an whole parish
might join together and use it by turners, as leisure served.


M. Son, I see you are ready for eueuery way, and therefore having gone thus
far in trial of what you could say, and now being come to our iourneys end,
I will go no further with you at this time, but reserve the particular points
of controversy till we have some fit leisure and opportunity again.


S. Good Mother, when and how you please. But now ere we part I beseech you
let me speak something to you with out offense. I will not say much.


M. Speak on, you shall do more Then as yet you have done, if you any way
offend me.


S. (...) religious ^^ite or a ver^ous child to (...) mother.
My suite is then, most dear mother, with a melting heart of an humble child,
that you would vouchsafe to think of that which has now been spoken, as
also of this fear, full course which you have to long liked of in not coming
to Church, not receiving the sacrament, not hearing Gods word, not obeying the
laws of your dread and gracious Sovereign, and of your native country. It
wounds your credit and estimation with the best, it hurts my father,
daunteth your children, blemisheth your house, and wrongeth your friends both
near and dear most grievously. But o father I say again, my heart bursteth
and bleedeth to see how he is eclipsed by it, in comparison of others to whom
he is no way inferior, either in birth, in living, in wisdom and experience,
or in any gift in body or mind, neither has his country that good from him,
or he that good from his country that might be had if you were reformed. For
how may he be thought so fit to rule others abroad, that cannot be obeyed of
his own at home. His children therefore want him, his friends want him, his
servants want him, yea he himself wants himself many times to his grief.
Other things also I could name that better may be conceived in your tender love
toward him then by me expressed at this time. O mother pardon your own flesh
in speaking thus boldly to you, and know that it is but a part of your self
that speaks to your self in tender louect duty. When first my father
matched with you, he hoped of strength and countenance every way to be
increased to him both by your self and your excellent qualities wherewith God
has endued you, and by your friends and house, to whom by this marriage he
should be united: not of any abashment and abatement in all these to him and his
poor children the pledges of love betwixt you. And thus might it be it you
would, but alas, thus is it not, because hitherto you would not. A few false
charmers have sunk deeper into your heart with their deceits, then all your
best friends can with their faithful aduertisements. And what is this else in
you and others of your persuasion, but that which ever has bin done by the
old serpent the head and guide of these charmers. In the Acts of the Apostles
we read that the Jews hating deadly the truth of the Gospel preached by the
Apostles, and desirous to vex them for it, devised this as the best means to
stir up certain honest and devout women against them, which women should
work with their friends to expel such preachers from amongst them. Now why
women? but because Satan has ever had his advantage against this weak
vessel? why devout women? but because a religious mind meaning well, yet
wanting knowledge is both quicklyer deceived with show of religion, and
hottelier pursues what it once begins, doing more hurt in that false
devotion, then many others not so well thought of. And why honorable women?
but that might being added to blind zeal both by power and example Satan's
cause might go forward. These charmers, says the Apostle again, shall still
be creeping into houses and lead captive simple women. By which often repeated
name of women in the scripture, all good women are effectually warned to
beware. Were there cause for you or any others thus to do, it no way could
stand with religion to diswade you, and in my self to you Mother, it should be
a double sin, because I am yours and above all wordly favors ought to wish
your eternal safety before others: but the Lord knows, whose truth is with
us, that there is no cause. And whatsoever by the power of all popish learning
has been alleged as any cause, we have answered soundly out of Gods book,
our answers standing without reply unto this day. Our service theeefore is
lawful, our prayers are holy, our meetings are Christian: and no better way to
be resolved hereof, then part by part to examine them. So have some done and
been reformed, wondering how so great slanders could be raised where no
cause is found. The authority also of lawefull government commands but
lawefull things, increases the duty to obey, and presses with no smaller
weight then damnation as the Apostle flattely affirms if we resist. Romans 1^.
Conceits may not take place, where such evidence of truth does gainsay them.
If I had a conceit or persuasion that all meats would kill me, must I
certainly die for want of meat and retain my error? The Galatians
prescribed themselves amiss in some things, and the Apostle thought it a
reason sufficient to reform them, to tell them that such a persuasion was not
the persuasion of him that called them, meaning of God. Gal. 5.8.
And the scriptures phrase in the matter of persuasion is to add through the
Lord. Romans 14.24. 2. These. 3.4.
I am persuaded through the Lord: which is worthy noting. Dear Mother, the
Lords anointed over you, her sacred Majesty, commands this duty, and there
is no devil of hell can prove this charge unlawful. Therefore by the bond
of a subject true and faithful you ought to obey. My father with sighs and
groans of a troubled heart desires it, and therefore by the bond of a wife
loving and dutiful you ought to obey. And, which is the greatest of all, the
God that made you commands it to you and all his servants: therefore by the
bond of a child of God you ought to obey. The bonds are great, the duty is
holy, the obedience is everlasting peace, comfort, and life, the danger also is
great to strive to offend. And therefore happy is that heart that yields
betimes. If by reading their books this wound has been given you, then read
our answers and let God heal. They have written no matter of moment these 40.
years in our english tongue, but fully and soundly is it answered to Gods
glory. Yea their new testament, wherein is their whole strength heaped
together, is learnedly answered to the full contentment of any not desperately
given over to his own blindness. In matter of law concerning the goods of
this world, you will hear contrary opinions and choose with judgment. In
matter of physic concerning your body, you will do the like, and beat out a
truth. Shall only the soul be neglected and pinned on other men's sleeves? o
God forbid. He has promised that never deceived, eue^ in this matter also,
Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. Thus shall we find their great wickedness in denying the
scriptures to be read of them that have souls to be saved as well as
themselves: their taking away the cup from the lay people when Christ's
institution was, Drink ye all of this: their leaving the second commandment
out of their catechismes, because it forbid death Images, their multitude of
bodily exercises, when the scripture says they profit little: their killing of
princes, when the Lord says. Touch not mine anointed, and David's heart smote
him for cutting off but the lap of Saul's garment, and to no worse end then
to make him see his innocence, and his guardes negligence: their freeing of
subjects from their obedience, and alliegance when it is written, Let every
soul be subject etc. Their direct crossings of the written word as, when it
is said: No man comes to the father but by me, they say we have many
mediators by whom we may come to the father besides Christ: when it is said,
Thou shall not commit adultery, they say, if not chastely, yet charily, and find
in one fish ponde of Gregory 6000 childrens skulls by that wicked charynes:
when the Lord says, You err because you known not the scriptures, they say
directly contrary you will err if you meddle with the scriptures: when the
Lord says, when you have done all say you are unprofitable servants; they
say, we may do works of supererogation, more then we are bound, and so merit
for others. Also when the Lord forbids a lusting look, their Pope gives
license not only to erect a stews wherein not long since were nu^bred 40000.
harlots that paid a yearly rent, and upon the 12 day at night were seen go
into the Popes palace 17. coaches full of curtizans. But (o horrible) even ^o
practice the sin against nature, and not to be named, during the 3. hot
months in the year, June, July, August. Al which with many more may give any
Christian man or woman not finally forsaken of God and left to a reprobate
mind, a true taste of that Cursed religion, and cause them justly to reason
thus: therefore not true.


M. Dear child arise, and let my silence now content thee, It shall not be
long ere we talk again. Your father comes toward us, whom I pray you go
mere, and let him not know as yet of our speech. When he was turned from her
toward his father, she caught the house upon her, and into her closet she
went with have, where all bewashing her self with tears, she brake out in
this sort. O my God and gracious father, thou have raised out of mine own
body a teacher for me that I might not scorn him, and who by me received life
concerning his body, he by thee has offered me life concerning my soul, if I
will receive it. I cannot, I cannot deny his reasons, I feel them convince
me, I have no excuse against such truth, and such a teacher, but I am caught,
I am caught, o my God, if I will not damnably break out of thy net again, and
run desperately headlong upon mine own destruction. VVo is me that I so long
have erred from thy truth harkning to the vain inventions of man's brain. Thy
word I know is truth, and why should not I ground my self and soul upon it?
Thy word I hear is able to make me wise unto salvation, and so can no writing
of man. To the law and ^o the testimony, says thy Prophet, I now remember,
and if they speak not according to this, it is because there is no light in
the^. Who has grounded upon this rock, and has miscarried? yet my soul
knows how popery abhors this lantarne: we may not read it, we may not go
to Church to hear it, we may not have it translated for us, but darkness,
darkness, that is still the mother of devotion, though the holy ghost has said,
Search the scriptures and be not children in understanding. How can this then
be the true religion, the truth, the light, that forbids al means of
knowledge? They bind and burn, I cannot deny, the Saints of God, and bathe
themselves in innocent blood. All is hypocrisy and vain glory, I see, I see,
that rules amongst them. O father strengthen me, o Savior pity me, o holy
ghost confirm me and finish this work begun in me to the eternal praise of
thy name, and the profitable moving of others by my example that are abused and
deceived by these crafty iuglers and deceitful workers, as I was. Amen, Amen.


FINIS.

