THE LOVE AND ARMS OF THE GREEK PRINCES.

OR, THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS.

Written in French by Monsieur Verdere, And Translated for the Right
Honorable, Philip, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain to his
Majesty.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Walkley, and a^e to be sold at
his Shop at the sign of the flying Horse, near York House, 1640.

CHAP. I. The wonder that ensued the great battle of Aleppo.
THe night coming on, with a lamentable grief in those which were the
victors, for the loss of so many Princes, by the valor of whom, all
Christendom was so much glorified: and with an extreme amazement of all the
Pagans to see such a flaughter of so many Kings, Giants, and Knights, who had
gathered themselves together for the ruin of the Christian Empire. Amadis of
Greece unwilling to expose his soldiers to the hazard of the darkness of the
night, commanded the retreat to be sounded; whereupon fires were made in every
part of the camp, good Courts of Guard were settled, and the charge of the
watch being committed to the trust of the King Melinda, and him of the I Will of
Magera, (as those which we^e less tired than the rest) all those Princes whom
the heavens had preserved from the fury of the sword, rendered themselves at the
Tent of the Emperor Amadis of Greece: who unable to take the care of Council
upon him, by reason of the multitude of his wounds, remitted it wholly to the
wisdom of Prince Florisell, of Niquea his son; he desiring in some sort to
mittigate the sorrow he was in for the loss of his ^insmen, by the utter ruin
of the Pagans, determined no longer to defer his revenge, and therefore
commanded that Don Rogell should march by the first break of day, with the
Army of the King Melinda, and Olidor his brother, which consisted of thirty
thousand horse, for that purpose. And finding that of so infinite a number of
people, which had followed the Christian Colors, there remained onley 36000.
men; he appointed 4000. horse, and 12000. foot for the guard of the camp, and
securing the person of the Emperor Amadis of Greece. Among which was the
valiant Alastaxerea, Cilinda, wife to Dorigell, of the fortunate Islands,
Gelodan, King of Moldavia, Atletta his wife, the Kings of Sardamira and Catay,
with their wives, resolving to pass on with the Emperor Sheramond, the fair
Salvagesse, Dorigell, the two Cenophales, Gin^ldan, Amanio, d'Astro, Silvan,
Liseard King of Licaonia, Filadard, Prince of Poland, Parmenian of Cyprus,
Ladazan of Numidia, Garmanti the Duke of Laiazga, Anaxand^r, Fl^r^din his
brother, and twenty thousand horse, which remained of so great a slaughter.
Things thus ordered, every man was about to withdraw to his Tent to repose
himself, when as a fearful noise was heard in the middle region of the air,
the claps of thunder did so hideously rore, flashes of lightning followed one
another so close, and the winds contested with such violence, that all men
believed the world was going to return into the first confusion of its chaos.
The Princes as^onished with the strangeness hereof, beholding one another,
expected the issue of this tempest: and believed already that the beavens
having care of their quiet, did mean to take them to themselves, that they
might not over-live the anguish of the loss of so many Princes their dearest
friends. But after a while the wi^des w^^e laid, the noise ceased, and the air
before full of lightning flashes, grew so black, that all the fires which they
had kindled in the camp, to cheer and refresh the soldiers, being
extinguished in an instant, they could not discern at all what the matter was.
This second accident would have made them tremble, if their hearts had been
capable of fear: but having always stood firm before the appearance of the
greatest dangers, they remained with a courageous resolution to endure what God
should please to lay upon them. This darkness having endured three or four
hours, the day drew on, with an universal amazement of them all. For in the
midst of the field where the battle had been found, they saw a building
erected of a strange fabrique. The form thereof was round, divided by sixty
five towers of crystal, which altogether did make a Hall of a portentuous
greatness. Into it there was a passage by one only gate, before the which
stood two great Lions of brass, who seemed as if they had been there placed
to tear in pieces such as should offer to come near it. Two columns were
fixed about ten paces from them, on either side one, whereof each had a Table
hanging on it, in which these words were written.

The Prophecy. The glory of all humane knowledge shall never be known, until
the new Lions shall with their roaring, fill the darkesome Forest: then shall
all the Crows gather themselves together to possess the neasts of the
sleeping Eagles; the earth shall open it self to restore the treasure which it
keeps hidden, and the tears shed for a loss not befallen, shall be
converted into joy.

The other spoke thus.

When the dead shall awake to join themselves with the living, then shall
valor be at her height, and beauty in the supreamest point of her glory.

These Princes as much ravished to see that great field cleared of a million of
bodies, which had been slain there the day before, as with the rarity of the
work, did instantly draw near to the columns, read these Prophecies, and
passing on to the Gate, saw in the first tower, the great King Amadis of Gaul,
armed at all pieces, except his hands, upon one of which he rested his head,
sitting in a chair, in the posture as of one asleep: Esplandian was in the
opposite tower over against him on the other side of the Gate, but not in a
like posture to his fathers, for he was laid along, with his arms acrosse, on
the hilt of his sword, the point whereof reached to his feet: the Emperor
Lisward was in the third tower, in the same fashion as his father; and Don
Silves de la Silve, in the fourth seated as Amadis of Gaul. Upon the same
side, and in the same manner, were Agesilan, Amadis d' Astre, Astrapole,
Fortunian, Anaxartes, Penthasilea, Argantes, Florarlan, Lucencio, Falanges, d'
Astre, Arlantog Arlanges of Spain his son, Lucidamon of Boetia, Florenio
Emperor of Rome, Filisu^l de Montaspin, Zain, Don Flores of Greece, Filin,
Artaure, and Lindamart: and on the other side laid along as Esplandian was,
were Galaor, Lucidor, the Kings of Mesopotamia, and of Traramata, Brimart of
Syria, Don Brunco de bonne mer, the two Giants sons of Planacoldo, Ol^rius of
Spain, Farron the second son of Amadis of Gaul; the kings of Corinthe, of
Magadena, and of Paloman, the Prince of Palomar his son, Agrayes, the Kings
of Mont Libanus, of ^oliemia, Galatia, Pantapolis, and of the Garamantes,
Guillan the Penfif, Don Galdes of Rhodes, Vatliades, Circi^ of Ireland, the
giant Girafer, Stilpon, Talanque, Don Frisas of Lusitania, Faenix of Corinthe,
Albion of Bugia, Astibell of Mesopotamia, Brimart of Syria, Garinter King of
Dacia, Dinerpio, Emperor of Rome, Florestan his son, Brian of Moniasta,
Galvanes, son of Agrayes, Pintiquinestro, and Calafio, who filled the towers
that compassed the whole body of the edifice. This object renewed their grief,
and drew from them some sighs: but being certain of their loss^, and
sufficiently generous to bear all the blows of fortune, they resolved to show
the least resentment thereof that was possible. Nevertheless, desirous to see
what was within the Hall, Florisull drew to the gate, with his sword in his
hand, and knocked at it with the pommell, but was deceived in his hope, for no
word of answer was returned him, and therefore was constrained to retire
himself, with some discontent, for having effected so little in his attempt.
Following his example, Don Rogel advanced, but being no more fortunate therein
than his father, he sheathed his sword, and made room for all those young
Princes, who speeding no better, were upon the point of quitting the place:
when they saw the excellent (...) of Greece approach, that notwithstanding the
advice of his Physicians, forbidding him to go^ abroad, would not excuse
himself from the labor of this adventure, no^ lose the contentment of the
honor which out of it (...) hoped to gain. This brave Prince, despising the
greatness of his wounds, and marching with the same courage that he ever
carried in the most difficult enter prises of his youth, ^et his hand bravely
to his sword, and being come close to the gate, raised his a^me to have
knocked, but seeing that it opened of it self, he presently (...) without any
resistance. As soon as he was in, the g^t^ closed (...), with such a trembling
of the earth, that all these Princes, more (...) then they were before, could
not keep themselves from falling down. Nevertheless th^^r amazement
continuing not long, they rose up again much grieved th^^ they knew not
whether that clap of thunder were a sign of that great Emperors death, or
that his entering into that Hall were for the preservation of his life. See
(said Florisull) how fortune makes her self sport with crossing us thus, but
she must not prevail. We are to be victorious over her malice: and make her
bend under the power of our virtue. Let us then pursue our former resolution:
give ch^^e to our enemies, and not pardon their insolence. They are so
dejected, as they will hardly be able to raise themselves again. At these
words, all men disposed themselves to follow their colors: when as a Damsel
appeared, who making her address to Don Florisull, delivered him a paper which
she had in her hand, and without expecting any answer, immediately turned bridle
and departed. Th^^ (...) at this (...) others, but desiring to know what this
letter contained, they presently environed Florisull, who read these words
aloud unto them. To the Greek Princes: I do not write to you with a purpose
to raise up your spirits, nor to comfort you in your affliction: fortune and
your vert^e have already (...). But to advertise you that the heaven taken care
of your quiet, by the preservation of a treasure of infinite value, which you
shall one day find with so much contentment, that you shall not remember your
passed (...). If I had liberty to speak more freely, I would add to your joy,
(...) power being restrained within these only words, which I n^w speak: you
shall i^ you please malie use of them to keep you from afflicting you^selve^
too (...). In the mean time do not prosecute the design you (...)* The (...)
more complete revenge is not yet come, and the sa^^ will have i^ (...), to ma^e
it a more memorable day. Keep that which you have (...) and (...) things to
time. It is by this prudence that you must live, and I testify the desire
which I have to do you service. Alcander.

This Letter held the Prince a while in suspense, for the name being unknown to
them, they were not sure that this advice was without some practice. Our
enemies (said Dorigell) have invented this trick to retard our revenge, and
having no more strength to resist us, they fly to their tricks; let us follow
our fortune. She prospers such as lay hold of occasions, and they that make
themselves unworthy of her favors, never encounter them according to their
desires. Speaking thus, he had almost persuaded all those Lords to neglect the
counsel that was given them, and to pursue the fortune of their victory: but
Florisell, who was endued with no less prudence than valor, fairly
demonstrating that with precipitation they might too much endanger themselves,
and that matters were to be weighed with more deliberation, staid the fury of
these Princes. It is true (said he) that we may with reason suspect this
counsel, since we know not him that gives it. But when I consider this tomb
wherein all our ancestors do now repose with so much glory, I cannot think
there is any deceit intended against us. Where are the bodies of so many Pagan
Kings, and what honor is done them in their obsequies? I see nothing that can
be to their advantage, and all these wonders serve but to increase our
greatness. The advice that is given us, is very good: let us I beseech you
follow it. And not busying our thoughts with the conquest of Pagan Empires, let
us wisely preserve those estates which heaven has bestowed upon us. For mine
own part I am resolved to take into my care the government of Greece, my
sister Alastaxeree shall command in Trebisond, till the destinies do restore
us the Emperor my Lord and Father: my son shall be resident in Persia, and
Spheramond shall maintain the authority that he has among the Parthians; the
rest of you (my Lords) shall every one retire into the Province, which either
his birth or valor has acquired him. The opinion of this judicious Prince
being well approved of, they left twenty thousand men with the Kings Anaxander
and Floradin, to keep the kingdoms lately conquered in awe, fifteen thousand
with Ginoldan and Amano^ D. Astre; and the remainder being otherwise divided,
Florisell set forth for Constantinople, Alastraxeree for Trebifond, Don Rogell
for Persia, Dorigell for the fortunate Island, Melinde and Olidor for their
kingdoms, Gulodan for Moldavia, Fladard for Poland, Gadard for Hungary, and
the rest in general, as either their affairs or their affections drew them.

CHAP. II. Who Alcander was, his enchanting Don Belianis of Greece, the Knight
of the Sun, King Amadis, and the bravest Knights of their time.
IT is most necessary for the understanding of this our history, that you
should know who this Alcander was, of whom we spoke before, for that thereupon
depends one of the foundations of our work: he came into the world in the time
of Don Belianis, Emperor of Greece, and from his childehood gave himself to
the knowledge of letters, particularly to the secrets of Magic, but with such
earnestness of affection, that having bestowed certain years therein, he
became so perfect an Artist, as he surpassed all those that had traveled in
those studies before him, as well as those that came after him: yet was it not
his purpose to make use thereof, as many do, to the hurt or ruin of any, but
for the glory of Christendom, which he so took to heart, that all his actions
had no other aim, but the preservation of those, whose worth was able to
maintain it at the due height, as you may well judge by the sequel of this
History. Seeing then that Don Belianis, a Prince as virtuous and valiant as
could be named, was somewhat enfeebled by the battle that he had fought before
Constantinople, with Perineo, Sultan of Persia, the most valiant of all the
Pagans that then lived, the Empress of Almayne, Claristea, who might also be
termed the mirror of Arms, and Ariobarcan Emperor of Tartary, he wrought so
powerfully upon the minds of that brave Pagan, and of that valorous Lady, as
admiring the virtue of so gallant a man, they determined to turn Christians,
and become his friends, upon condition, that the Persian should marry the
Infanta of Greece, named Sirenna: which was accomplished presently after his
Baptism. In which holy Sacrament he was accompanied with Salinterne, without
Far, his son, and the bastard of Don Belianis, Polistor of Nubia, and
Polistea de la Selva, whom he had by the Queen of the Garamantes, and had
followed the Pagan colors before they knew Don Belianis for their Father. This
peace and this marriage cheered all Greece, and particularly our Alcander, who
then thought it well and sufficiently supported. But being continually careful
for the quiet of these Princes, he had one day a curious desire to understand
what good fortune was to attend their designs and life; withdrawing therefore
himself from all resort of company, he began to make his ordinary
invocations, and found only by the motion and aspect of the stars, that the
house of Greece was to suffer a total ruin; and that these Princes were
threatened with an eminent death. The knowledge hereof did mightily afflict
him; but carrying a greater mind then to yield to this calamity, he made new
conjurations: the spirits were invoked, and all the powers of Hell were
summoned to appear: nevertheless he saw nothing but signs of death, and
presages of misfortune. Let the stars, said he, be froward, let all the
Devils in Hell conspire together, to subvert the Empire of the Christians, yet
will I change their influences, and overturne their designs. For having
sometimes restored life to those which breathed no more, I may be permitted to
preserve such as are yet in the world. Thus speaking, he enfolded himself in
a cloud, and transported himself into the dangerous forests of the great
kingdom of Martan, near to the Empire of Mexico, where long before he had
built a Castle of wondrous workmanship. But doubting that the charms which he
had set upon it, were not powerful enough for the great purpose he had in
hand, he employed all his skill, which surpassed that of all other men, laid
such strong enchantments upon three divisions of lodgings, that he had built
in a triangular form, as those which should be enclosed therein, should not
grow old, or be impaired in any sort whatsoever; yet not desiring that this
his work should last till the end of the world; for he well foresaw that the
necessity of Christendom, would one day oblige him to suffer it to be
dissolved, ordained that the enchantment should be defeated by the valor of
six the bravest Knights, accompanied with as many the fairest Ladies of the
world. Thinking then that he had done enough, he presently transported
himself to Constantinople: and having talked a while in private with Don
Belianis, he desired him to go into his Chariot, and with him his Son
Belforan, Fortiman of Greece, his grandchilde Polistor of Nubia, Polistea de la
Selva, Policentes son to Perineo, Don Clarinell Don Astrides his son,
Perineo, Furibond the brave Giant, Salintern without fear, Hermiliana, the
Amazon, wife to Don Clarinel, Florisbella, wife to Don Bel^anis, the Princess
Belianisa, wife to Belforan, Sirenna wife to Perineo, and the fair Bergeline
her daughter. This done, having touched the Griffons with a rod that he had in
his hand, they cut the air, with incredible swiftness, and carried him to the
house, which he would have called by the name of the Castle of Treasure. Where
with some tears, he enclosed these Princes in one quarter of the Lodgings,
assuring them that they should be enlarged after certain ages, and at such
time as Christendom should have extreme need of their assistance. These
things being done, his mind might well have been contented, but the exceeding
care that he had to effect his designs, not suffering him to be quiet, he
again turned over his books: And finding, that before the time these Princes
should be disinchanted, certain most excellent Knights should be borne, which
yet should not arrive to the perfection necessary for the putting an end to his
enchantments, he resolved also to preserve them in the same Castle with the
Emperor Don Belianis. For which cause therefore, as soon as the incomparable
warrior, the Knight of the Sun was borne, he was infinitely careful of his
safety, assisted him with his Art without his privity, and knowing that after
certain years, he was threatened with a disastrous end, by the practice of
some traitors, who should murder him one night in his bed, he carried him also
away, as he had done Don Belianis, and with him all the principal Knights of
his Court, who were to run no less hazard; and placing them in the second
division of the lodgings, he reserved them for that furious encounter, wherein
the glory of all Christendom, or the ruin of the Pagans was to be disputed.
The names of those enchanted with him, were, his son Claridiano of the
Sphere, Rosiclere, Claramant, Poliphebo, Don Eleno of Dacia, Rosabell son to
Rosiclere, Clarabel bastard to Rosabel, and Leobant his brother, Besson,
Bramidor the brave Giant, the Empress Claridiana, and the Princess Olivia,
wife to Rosicleere. Their life was pleasant, and the contentment of Alcander
infinite. For as often as he considered, that Christendom should one day
triumph over her enemies, by his assistance, he esteemed himself blessed, to
be so favored by heaven, and determining not to neglect such grace he
persevered in his good desire, whence it came that after certain ages were
past, being in the castle of Treasure, he understood the lamentable loss,
which the Christians were to sustain, and the death of those great Monarchs,
Amadis of Gaul and of Greece, with many others of their blood. Which, for the
reasons before alleged, being desirous to remedy, he transported himself,
the same night as that great battle was fought in the fields of the Sultan of
Aleppo, to the place where so many bodies lay extended; gave an honorable
sepulture to those Christian Princes which were dead, as you have heard in the
first Chapter; and carried away those, in whom he found any hope of life, to
that wonderful Castle, appointing them the third division of lodgings; the
names of whom were; The great King Amadis of Gaul, Amadis of Greece, enchanted
as you have heard, Don Silves de la Selva, Agesilan, Amadis d' Astre,
Astropolo, Fortiman, Anaxartes, Penthesilea, Argantes, Florartan, Lucentio,
Falanges d' Astre, Arlantes, his son Arlanges of Spain, Lucidamor of Boetia,
Floreni Emperor of Rome, Filisel of Montespin, Zayr, Flores of Greece, second
son to Esplandian, Filon King of Sibila, Artaur his Brother, King of Mount
Libanus, and Lindamart of Rhodes. But because there may arise a doubt in this
Discourse, for that all these which I now have named, were enclosed in the
Monument, that appeared in the field of the battle after the darkness was
past, the Reader may remember, if he please, that these, of whom I now speak,
were in a posture there, di^^ering from theirs, who were fully and really dead;
and that the wise man did so order it, to comfort those great Knights, after so
heavy a loss. These Princes then being enchanted with Don Belianis, and the
Knight of the Sun, though they knew it not, Alcander, who would not do a
courtesy to halfes, first healed them of their wounds. And then desiring, they
should not be less happy then the rest, presented them a little while after,
with some of the Princesses they loved, whom he had brought from
Constantinople, to the extreme discontent of those that remained behind.
There was the Queen Oriana, the Empress Niquea, delivered not long before of
a son, whose birth was celebrated by an infinity of fires appearing in the
air; and whom at his Baptism she named Amadis of Trebisond, Diana, Axiana,
the Princess Oriana, wife of Anaxartes, Cleosila, Sestiliana, Radiana,
Oristila, Anaxarea, Theodorina, Belisaura, Claire estoille, Sclarimena, and
Timbria. Having then prepared sovereign baths for them, made with a million of
rare simples, gathered at such time as they were in most virtue, he bathed them
eight days together; at the end whereof King Amadis and his wife seemed to be
but forty years old; and every man as fresh and lovely, as they were at that
age; the Emperor Amadis of Greece, and the Princess Niquea, but thirty five:
Don Silves Agesilan, and the rest, not above thirty.

This done, he carried them all into a fair chamber, and thus spoke unto them:
Mighty Princes, you perceive by the help that you have already received at my
hands, the desire I have to do you service: I will not therefore excuse my
self unto you, for holding you restrained in this manner, since I have no other
end for it, but the augmentation of your glory: All things must have their
course, and the malignant influences of the stars, must have time to pass
over. The day will come, when you will see your offspring with more
contentment then ever; expect it with so much the more patience. In the mean
time I will go from hence to take care for the affairs of those which concern
you nearly. Saying thus, he went out of the door, which shut of it self
with a strange violence, leaving those Princes and Princesses so enchanted, as
they did not remember any thing without that place whatsoever.

CHAP. III. Most of the Prin^^^ of Greece die: Alcander goes to visit the wise
Alquif and Urganda.
THE news of the death of so many Kings, Princes, and Emperors, and the
carrying away of the Queen Oriana, with the rest, which were enchanted in the
Castle of Treasure, was the cause of so much grief to those Ladies that
remained at Constantinople, expecting what would be the issue of that war, as
not able to withstand the violence thereof, they yielded to the necessity of
death, leaving Christendom a world of sorrow for so great a loss. The
Empress Leonine was the first that paid that tribute of nature, but followed
so close by the young Princess of Sardamyra, the wife of Sistra, that the
funerals of the one served also for the other. After them died almost at the
same time, the Empress Arbra, Briolania, the Queen of France wife to Lucidor,
the Queen of Traramate and Mesopotamia, Melicia wife to Bruneo of the good
Sea, Lardenia, Laciana, Gricelarie, Olinde, the Queens of Corinth, Saba,
Bohemia, the wife of Guillan the pensive, the Queens of the Garamantes, of
Pentapoly, Galacia and Ireland, the wives of Girafer, of Vaillades, of Don
Frisus of Lusitania, the Queen of Dacia, the Empress Brisenne, Darayde Queen
of Cores, the wife of Stilpon, and the Queen of Rhodes: who were all interred
in the Emperors great Chapel, with so many complaynts and tears, that
nothing was heard in any part of the City but cries and lamentatio^s. Now
whilst the ceremonies of so many obsequies were performing, Alcander, who had
no care more pressing, then the preservation of those Princes, went in his
Chariot of the Griffons, to the unknown Island, wh^re the wise Alquif was,
with Vrganda, Zirzea, and Zirenna; but not desiring to present himself unto
them without some demonstration of his skill, he in a moment raised such
horrible flashes of lightning in the air, so great an earthquake, as those
reverend old folks seeing so furious a tempest beyond the order of nature,
believed that those thunders were presages of their deaths. So that disposing
themselves to seek the mercy of heaven, which never refuses grace to us, when
with humility we seek it, they fell upon the earth, and lifting up their eyes
they met with a new terror when as they espied the fearful Chariot in which
Alcander appeared, seated with such a majesty, that if they had not been
instructed by the light of faith, that one only God was to be acknowledged,
they had adored him: never so much as dreaming that it was done by art Magic,
or that this encounter could proceed from the skill of any mortal man. For
believing that none in the world was more expert in that art then they, they
could never imagine that any man could find them out in their Island, unless
they pleased to permit it. Alcander reading their amazement in their looks and
motions, would not keep them any longer in pain: Most venerable persons, said
he, be not dismayed to see me here at this present, and in this manner: That
almighty God who has endued you with the knowledge of things above nature for
the good of his people, has imparted to me the same favors which he has
bestowed upon you, and made me no less zealous of his glory and service: I am
not come hither now to trouble you, as you imagine, but indeed to confer with
you about certain things, which shall be necessary for the welfare of the
Princes of Greece, whose virtue has begotten such an affection in me toward
them, as I will not entertayne a thought but for the augmentation of their
glory. I know that you have always infinitely loved them; that your assistance
was never wanting to them; and that without your aid they could not so easily
have endured those labors they have passed through. Wherefore I will endeavor
to recompense you for it; imparting to you certain secrets, that as yet are
not come to your knowledge, and that I know you will not a little esteem: But
because your preservation is no less dear to me then their quiet, I do
desire you all to go with me to a Palace that I have, whither we will carry
with us your Books, and such instruments as are fit for those of our
profession; to the end, that my sabour being added to your learning, we may
the more easily find out what shall most conduce to our design. I cannot
doubt but you may have some cause to fear the undertaking of this voyage in
the company of a man, whom you never heard spoken of, and that you may find
reason to decline it in the incommodity of your age; but the good service I
have done to Christendom, which has not undergone so great a loss as you
believe, and that also I intend to you in your own particular, may oblige you
not to suspect any malice in me: I love virtue too well to be a traitor, and
your lives are with me no less considerable then mine own. Resolve with your
selves then, my dear friends, and make no difficulty in following my advice:
Time will make you know me better, and experience; assure you of my zeal to
that, which concerns the affair I have in hand. How pleasing is rest after
labor, and how sweet is assurance after fear? These good folks, who expected
nothing less then so gentle a language, and that made no great account of
their lives, judging by Alcanders courage, that he had no bad disposition, gave
him as many thanks as the favor he did in visiting them seemed great. It is
most true, said Alquif, that we would never have thought any other could have
outgone us in the knowledge of the secrets of Magic. But your coming hither
has freed us of that error: for this our Island being indivisible to all the
world, and so easily discovered by you, our selves also in a manner bereft of
our judgment in beholding you, we cannot doubt but your knowledge is far
beyond ours. Wherefore without any manner of distrust of you, we do withal
acknowledgement accept the honor of your company, and the offer that you make
of acquainting us with such secrets, as have been hitherto concealed from us.
And to testify unto you that I speak ingenuously and freely, I protest
henceforth to depend wholly upon you, so that if we do hereafter undertake
any thing, it shall not be but by your advice: and if our weak indevours may
be of use to the greatness of your intentions, we will join them to yours,
without expecting of any part in the glory of your actions, but that which
shall redound from having been your servants. Let us go then, when you please,
we will carry with us what shall be requisite; and if you think good, leave
nothing behind us in this Island. No, no, answered Alcander, that shall not
need: The best of your books will be sufficient. Vrganda then having made up a
bundle of them, they all went into the Chariot of the Griffons, that is to say,
Alquif, Vrganda, Zirza, Zirenna, Alquifa, and the young Cassandra, who
afterward by the aid of Alcander, became so perfect in that art, as she much
excelled her parents. The beasts having their load, began to cut the air with
an incredible swiftness, and in a little time arrived at the Castle of
Treasure, which appeared to these Magicians so magnificent, that they had never
seen building equal to it. As soon as they were come thither, Alcander not to
lose time, desired them to put off their clothes, and made them go into those
precious baths, which he had formerly prepared to restore the Princes of
Greece to the most flourishing estate of their age; where after he had kept
them eight days, the wrinkles which covered their faces, were clean defaced;
their limbs enfeebled by a troublesome old age, became firm; their backs
bending under the weight of years, were straightned; their hair whited with
time, changed color; in brief, they found themselves wholly altered from what
they were in the unknown Island. Behold, said then this great Prince of
Philosophers, the first favor I will do to you, that to me seems of no mean
importance: But because we are not assembled here only for our selves, let
us take a little pains, and see how we may hinder the mischief which is yet
to fall upon the house of Greece, by the loss of some certain young Princes,
who are one day to be the strongest pillars of Christendom. I propound this
unto you, though I think it unprofitable, for the ordinances of heaven are
inevitable; howbeit our labor shall not be without fruit; and though we
cannot keep them from imprisonment, yet shall we do somewhat to help and
preserve them among their enemies. This said, they began to make their
conjurations apart, which were not altogether unusefull, as you shall know by
the sequel of this Discourse. That done, Alcander thought good to return his
friends to their Island, not discovering to them the enchantment of the Princes
of Greece. And having desired them to watch as till then they had done, for the
benefit of Christendom, he went away, carrying Cassandra along with him, to
show her all the secrets of Magic, and to render her perfect in that Art.

CHAP. IV. The Adventures of the Greek Princes returning into their Empires.
FLorisel of Niquea, approoving of the wise Alcanders advice, did wholly desist
from the purpose he had of ravaging the estate of the Pagans, thereby to render
his revenge the more memorable; and resolved by break of day to depart for
Greece: ordering Alastraxerea to go unto Trebisond, Don Rogell into Persia,
Spheramond into the Empire of Parthia, Lucendus into France, Dorigell into the
Fortunate Islands, the King Gadart into the Island Megera, Anaxander, Florador,
Melindo, Olidor, Ginoldan, Amanio d'Astre, for their kingdoms, and the rest
whither fortune called them. But fearing lest some new war might break
forth after his departure, he left the moiety of his troops with those, whose
Provinces were surrounded with the Pagans estates, that they might not be
surprised with any new garboyle, and also might preserve the Countries they had
gotten. Matters being thus disposed, they attended the next rising Sun, which
presented to them no less wonder then the day before had done: for that vast
and stately edifice, wherein all those Kings, Princes, and Emperors, were
enclosed, appeared no more, nor was there any thing seen in the place thereof,
but only the plain ground, as it was before the battle. This second loss
had afflicted them, for they receyved no mean consolation in seeing their
parents interred with so much glory, but straightway considered that this was
some new device of that Magician, who had written unto them, they were no whit
dismayed; and taking it for a good testimony of his love to them in that he had
not left those bodies in the midst of so many enemies, they prepared for
their departure with the less grief. The time then of their remoove being
come, all those troops began to march several ways. For Spheramond,
Dorigell, Sylvan, Amanio d'Astre, and the fair Savage, took a way far
different from that, which the others had, determining to spend some time in
seeking adventures abroad. The beauteous Savage seeing her self alone, renewed
her sorrow for the loss of her husband, whilst Silvan traveled with no less
discontent for that of his fair Licinia, of whose death he had heard; and that
Spheramond, Amanio d'Astre, and Dorigell lamented so great a disaster, although
the glorious death of their kinsmen did yield them some comfort. Having thus
passed two or three days without meeting any adventure worthy their
undertaking, Spheramond about the time that the Sun was in the midst of his
course, felt himself so drowsy, that he was constrained to lie down to
sleep, commanding his Squire to let their horses graze. The extreme pains
that before he had taken, and the delicacy of the place, made his rest so
pleasing unto him, as he did not wake till night, nor would peradventure have
done till the next day, if the noise of a Chariot passing by him, had not made
him to rise in all haste; he was about to have called his Squire for to bridle
his horse, but the voice of one that lamented, stayed him for to learn the
cause thereof. Listening then attentively, and looking that way the voice came,
he saw a Chariot pass by him drawn with six great horses, wherein sat three
dreadful Giants, every one of them holding a Lady in his arms; two of the
which seemed to be rather dead then alive; and the third was she that made
those cries and lamentations which he had heard. Just Heaven, said she, will
you not send some succor to these great though miserable Princesses? Or will
you permit them to remain in the hands of these villayns, who questionless
will without respect of their quality strive by force to rob them of what is
most dear unto them? O God! what a loss will Christendom receyve? And you,
brave Princes, how much will it grieve you to hear of this disaster? I lament
your misfortune as much as the death they are going to suffer. This voice being
lost in the air, left nodesse pity then anger in the mind of this Prince: For
finding by this speech that they were Christians of eminent quality, and
thinking also that he had been acquaynted with the sound of that voice, he was
moved with an extreme desire to succor them: So calling his Squire, he made
his horse to be brought him; and quickly mounting upon him, he galloped the
same way that he saw the Chariot take, hoping to reach those Giants in a little
time, and to fight with them at any rate whatsoever. But the night was so
dark, that not knowing which way he took, he entered into a Forest, where
the first that he met with, was a reverend old man, holding a torch in his
hand, who taking his horse by the bridle, said unto him: Valiant Prince, be
not offended if I take the liberty to stay you at this present; For desiring
your safety, as much as my own welfare, I cannot let you pass without
advertising you, that you are infallibly lost, if you ob^^inately pursue the
design you have in hand, and light upon those this night whom you now are
following: The day will be more fit for your purpose, then this darkness:
and patience alone is that must procure you what you now so earnestly wish for:
Enquire not what I am, nor why I meddle thus with youraffayres. It is not yet
time that you should know me, nor that you should thoroughly understand my
intentions, as I do your thoughts. Only alight, and go into this Tent, that
you see here; and tarry for day light to finish your enterprise, which is of
more importance then yet you conceive. I do not know, answered Spheramond,
(somewhat wondering to meet that man in such a place, and at so unseasonable an
hour) how you can be obliged to wish and seek my good, with so much
demonstration of friendship, since I do not remember that ever I saw you
before: But happen what may, I will gladly obey you, my necessity and the time
also advising me thereunto: Thus speaking he alighted, leaving his horse with a
little Dwarf who was there as of purpose, and entered the Tent, which he
thought was the fairest that ever he had seen. Without doubt, said he then,
you love me not a little, that have provided me so magnificent a lodging: for I
did not expect to be so well accommodated to night: But believe it, you shall
not find me ungrateful, if you please to make use of me. Saying so, he went to
embrace this man, but he was no more to be seen: whereat he was somewhat
amazed, yet supposing all this to be done by enchantment, he began to survey
the Tent, and found in one of the corners of it, a Table covered with plenty of
delicate meat, which so whetted his stomach, that he sat him down to
supper; where having well assuaged his hunger, he walked about the Tent, and
finding a bed ready made he laid him down upon it, and fell into so sound a
sleep, that the sun was of a good height before he awaked; and then being
much amazed to find himself armed with new and excellent Arms, his Squire
snoring at his feet, and neither Wood nor Tent to be seen, but a plain, so
large as it could not limit his view: howbeit his wonder ceasing by the
remembrance of such like encounters, when as he was a Knight errant, he jogd
his Squire to waken him. And having not forgotten the adventure that he met
with the night before, nor the discourse of the old man, he quickly got to
horse, and took the first way he lighted upon, wherein he rode till Sun
setting, when as he perceived a Castle before him garnished with twelve
towers, so fair and strong that it was impossible to better them: this
curiosity inviting him to view this building nearer hand he approached to it,
and going about it he was so attentive in observing it, as he could hardly
give over. But seeing night now come on, he took the hammer of the gate, and
knocked very hard: At the noise whereof a Giant appeared upon the Battlements,
who with a hoarse and dreadful voice said unto him: Withdraw thy self,
wretched creature, and come not hither to seek that which all men else are
afraid to find: the gate may not be opened this night, for so are we
commanded, what ever occasion shall fall out; but if thou will tarry till
tomorrow, I will be content to hear what thou have to say: Therewith he
retired himself leaving Spheramond ill satisfied with that his arrogant
behavior. Nevertheless, not being able to quit his longing to know what was
within the Castle, he fell off to certain trees, that were not far off from
it: and commanding his Squire to discharge the part of a careful Sentinel,
with much ado he fell on sleep.

CHAP. V. What happened to the Princes Dorigell, Silvan, and Amanio d'Astre.
DOrigell and Silvan having taken almost one and the same way entertained
themselves with diverse thoughts; the one meditated upon the loss of his
dearest half, and the other on the absence of the fair Cilinda, his wife, to
whom he had left the command of his troops, and the government of his
Kingdom. They were two days without lighting on any adventure, at the end
whereof Dorigell entering into a great field met with a Dwarf mounted upon the
bravest horse that ever he had seen: but himself so misshapen and ill
favored, that he wondered how nature could produce a rational creature with
so much deformity: He was about to question him concerning the occasion of his
journey, but the Dwarf prevented him: For drawing near and saluting him in a
more graceful manner, then he expected, he said unto him; Knight, I marvel
much to see you ride alone through these Launds, which are commonly called The
Fearful, in regard of the strange adventures which do happen daily, by reason
of a Castle situate in the midst of them, belonging to an old Sorceresse,
who does entrap all the Knights that pass this way, finding means to entice
them to her house, where all their valor will not serve to free them from
captivity, if they be not slain in fight. For to that end she keeps there
twelve Giants of a monstrous stature, and so strong withal, as they alone are
able to defeat the mightiest Emperor of the World; You shall therefore, if you
please, bend your course some other way, and not tempt Fortune: For it is no
less honor to eschew with discretion an unresistable danger, then being
engaged to fight courageously. Dorigell more delighted with the discourse then
with the person of this gallant, answered him, Thy counsel might indeed be
useful to me, if I had less respect to my honor, then my life; but do
thou not know that worthy Knights must never recuile for any consideration of
danger whatsoever: that glory is not to be found but in the most difficult
enterprises; and that victory is then most honorable, when it is purchased
with blood. I will therefore follow this way, since fortune has put me into it:
but yet before I part with you, I would entreat you to inform me more
particularly concerning this Castle; and why this Enchantresse does live
there, to work so much mischief to Knights that have not wronged her. You
could not, replyde he, have addressed your self better then to me, at the
least to be satisfied in your curiosity; For I do belong to a man, who is no
less a friend to brave Knights, then this woman their enemy, and one whose
knowledge is as much as hers: She is sister to the King of the Frozen Islands,
that was slain in the late and memorable battle of Aleppo, where all the
Pagan Kings ended their lives, except him of Pentapoly, who saved himself with
six thousand men, which were under his command, for the guard of the Camp.
The desire she has always had to ruin the Christians, causing her often to
turn over her Magical books (in which she is very expert) she foresaw the
general defeature of the Pagans, that should unite themselves for that war;
And for that reason would have diverted her brother from it, assuring him of
his death, if he should be present there: but he preferring an honorable end
before the ill report that otherwise he should have incurred by absenting
himself from thence, would needs make one in that expedition, and was there
slain, as I have related: which did so inrage this old Sorceresse, that she
withdrew her self to these Launds, where by Enchantment she built this Castle:
and for the guard thereof drew hither twelve of the mightiest Giants in the
world; who, without regard to any laws of Chivalry, do all of them commonly
fall upon any one man that presents himself, if the first that encounters him
be not able to defeat him: hoping to surprise in their passing this way some of
those famous Knights of Greece, and with a thousand tortures which she means
to make them suffer, in some sort to mitigate the grief she feels for the
loss of the King her brother. Judge now, I pray you, whether my advice do not
concern you, and whether it be not a good testimony of my love, in desiring
you to retire out of these parts, where you can meet with nothing but
mischief. Thou have, said Dorigell, so fully satisfied me, that I will
confess my self much obliged unto thee for thy labor. Thy counsel I
acknowledge for very good, but yet me thinks my reasons against it are much
better: so that I am resolved to pass on, and see what the heavens have
preordained for me. Speaking thus, he would have put his horse forward, but the
Dwarf taking him by the bridle said, Stay a little, Sir Knight, and permit me
to speak a few words unto you; He that appointed me to be here now, has
commanded me to present you with this horse, and the shield which you see
hanging at my saddle bow, assuring you that you will have occasion to use them
in an extreme necessity. Saying so, he vanished away, leaving the horse and
shield with Dorigell: who not more wondering, then pleased with so brave a
present, gave his own to his Squire; and mounting upon his new horse, found him
upon managing, so ready and light, that he liked him much better then he did
before. Following then his way he rendered many thanks in his heart to him that
had so deeply obliged him: but we will let him go with this sense of the
courtesy done him, and return to Silvan amidst his sorrowful meditations. This
young Knight perpetually thinking on his Licinia, whom death had untimely
ravished from him, was even lost in the anguish of his mind, when as he heard
the voice of one that cried for help: whereupon he turned head, and galloping
mainely away, he came to certain trees, to one of the which he saw a handsome
woman bound with cords, and a young Squire of a promising presence, that held
his sword at her throat to make her confess the truth of something which he
desired to wring out of her. Verily, said he then, speaking to the Squire,
Nature forgot her self when she framed you with any kind of perfection, since
you have so little courtesy in you: Why do you so ill entreat one of those whom
we are all bound to protect? withdraw your self, I say, for believe it if you
were a Knight, I would punish you for so great a villainy. I would, answered the
Squire without being at all dismayed, you had known the mischievous disposition
of this woman, before you had been so moved as you are; for then, Sir Knight,
you would not so readily have engaged your self in her defense. I met with her
this morning, and having conversed a while with her, I perceived by her carriage
that the little beauty Nature has bestowed upon me, had wrought some
alteration in her, wherewith I must confess I was well enough pleased: Not
that I found any thing in her which gave me the least satisfaction, but that
from her love I gathered a testimony of some merit in my self: Our discourse at
the first was ordinary, but as her passion transported her, she at length could
not conceal her damnable intentions, but confessed freely to me that she was
upon her way only to wait for some Knight of quality, for to bring him to be
butchered at the Castle of the Towers, where a thousand sorts of cruelties are
daily practiced. I am a friend to virtue, and would with the hazard of my life
preserve a worthy Knight, so that desiring to prevent her wicked purposes, I
bound her as you see, with a resolution to make an end of her, which I had
certainly done: for the point of my sword having forced her to confess that
her principal plot was upon the Princes of Greece, whose virtue all the world
loves and admires: I determined to let her breath no longer then would serve to
recommend her soul into the hands of heaven: you may now dispose of her as you
please; but I advise you to look well to your self, and consider that you
shall be guilty of all the mischiefs that ever she shall hereafter commit,
since you give her her life, which for her treacheries she justly deserves to
lose. With that immediately mounting on his horse he departed, leaving Silvan
somewhat perplexed: for his reasons seemed so good, and with such appearance of
truth, that he was about to pass on, and leave the Wench in the estate he
found her: But being moved with her tears, and not able to persuade himself,
that so fair a creature could be possessed with so much malice, he commanded
his Squire to unbind her: and forgetting the advice of him that but then parted
from them, he began to comfort her, in stead of representing her vice unto her.
I will never believe, said he unto her, that a woman e^dued with so many
beauties, can be so wicked as was but now reported unto me. Wherefore give over
afflicting your self, and tell me truly the cause why this Squire entreated
you in that fashion. Not to dissemble, said she, this cunning was but too well
disguised. For according to the report of the base villain made of me, you
have reason not to trust me, and to believe that I am the falsest woman in the
world: but the matter is quite otherwise then he has delivered: for as soon as
he saw me, he protested that he was extremely enamored of me; and not being
able (as he swore) to endure the violence of his passion, he besought me to
receive him into my favor, and to afford him some more particular grace; which
having refused him, he took me from my horse, and notwithstanding all my best
resistance, bound me as you saw, threatening to kill me if I did not grant his
desire, whereunto without doubt, I should at the last have yielded, not having
courage enough to suffer death, if you had tarried any whit longer. Behold,
noble Knight, the truth of this affair, which I have freely and simply
delivered unto you, hoping that you will not do a courtesy to halfes, and leave
me without assistance in a Country so dangerous, where I travel without any
acquaintance by the command of a Lady, that is ready to perish for the love of
a brave Christian Knight whom I may not name: having so vowed at my departure
for the reputation of her that emploies me. What cannot the persuasions of a
villainous woman effect? Silvan tasting this discourse far otherwise then was
for his behoof, was so taken with the fair pretext of her reasons, that
casting away the ill conceit he had of her, he determined to accompany her till
she were in some place of safety; So causing her to be set on horseback, he
went along with her toward the dangerous Castle, where questionless he had
been lost, if heaven that took a particular care of him, had not miraculously
diverted the mischief that hung over his head. In the mean time, the gentle
Amanio d'Astre followed somewhat a different way from that of Silvan, being no
less busied with his unquiet thoughts: but he was driven out of his dumps by a
Dwarf, who taking his horse by, the bridle turned him aside, and giving him a
jerk with a wand, said; Knight, take this way, I pray you, and let not the
night stay you: for your retardment would be the cause of perpetual sorrow to
you. Saying so he passed on, leaving Amanio infinitely amazed with this speech,
whereof he would gladly have known the meaning, but finding no means to be
satisfied therein, for that the Dwarf was no longer appearing, he put on his
horse with more haste then before; resolving not to discontinue his travel
till he might see what the end of this adventure would be.

CHAP. VI. The Emperor Spheramond being in extreme danger, i^ relieved by
certain Knights.
SPheramond, not able to rest by reason of the choler wherinto the arrogance of
the Giant had put him, rose as soon as he saw the day appear: and having made
himself ready to fight, drew to the gate where he knocked with more violence
then he had done the evening before, which caused him that already had spoken
to him to look out at a window, and with an audacious tone to say unto him:
Wretched Knight, I thought that sleep and the night would have settled thy
brain; But since thou will needs lose thy self out of humor, do but stay till
I am armed, and I will quickly cure thee of thy madness: with that he angerly
clapped to the window, and shortly after sallied out with so furious a
countenance, as had been sufficient to have affrighted any one less assured
then this Prince, who seeing him come on horseback, with a Lance like a mast of
a ship in his hand, took as much of the field as was necessary for his course,
and encountered him with such fury as having pierced his shield, he made him
with a dangerous wound in his side ^lie over the crupper of his horse: but his
own fortune was not much better; for constrained he was to kiss the earth, as
well as the Giant, not being able to bear the violence of that shock, yet
remembering that he was not laid there to sleep, he quickly got up, and bravely
laying hold on his sword he drew to the enemy; who found himself so astonished
with his fall, as he was not able to stir: whereupon Spheramond was going to
present his sword to his throat for to make him yield up the victory unto him;
but hearing a great noise at the gate, he turned about his head, and instantly
saw two other monsters, like him that he had overthrown, come running toward
him with their Cymitars in their hands, and threatening him with no less then
the loss of his life: This object somewhat troubled him, but immediately
resolving himself, he sheathed his sword in the body of his first man, who was
striving to get up, and straightway mounting on his horse the better and more
easily to defend himself, he made toward them, but they were by that time so
near unto him, as he was constrained rather to think of warding their blows,
then offending them. For the one of them laid upon his shield, and the other
upon his cask with such violence, as but for the goodness of his new arms,
his life had then been at its period: nevertheless he was not much dismayed,
yet thinking that such violent incounters might at length be attended with
death, he resolved to fight with judgment, and to stand careful upon his
guard; making them therefore spend the most part of their blows in vain, he
took so good choice of his times, as he often drew blood of them, not giving a
blow which pierced not the flesh, and put them in doubt of their lives: whereat
they were so enraged, as in stead of striking on his arms, they hewed the
stones in pieces, and filled the ground about them full of clefts. Whilst
their fury did thus transport them, the Emperor not willing to let slip any
occasion that presented it self, took his time when as one of them stooped to
pull his Courtelasse out of the earth, whereinto he had sunk it three foot
deep, and hit him with a reverse so just upon the neck, that he laid his great
head at his feet; leaving his companion much amazed to see himself alone,
covered with blood and wounds, and with little or no power to defend himself
any longer, howbeit he recovered some heart with the sight of three other
Giants, that came out of the same Castle; who having encompast his enemy, began
to charge him with such fury, that not being able to ward so many blows which
bruised his bones, he thought that he must needs fall under such an oppressing
violence, but resolving to sell his life at a dear rate, he defended himself
with such courage, and charged them with such force, that he grievously wounded
two of them, when as the third gave him so insupportable a blow on his helmet,
that he laid him quite void of sense on the crupper of his horse, voiding blood
in abundance at his nose and ears. The Giant, proud of his fortune, followed
him with his sword advanced for to finish the work, when as a great Knight
arriving in the instant charged his Lance against him, and running it clean
through his body tumbled him dead upon the ground. Spheramond who while this
was a doing, had some leisure a little to recover his spirits, seeing himself
so opportunely seconded, clasped his sword fast in his hand, and with an
infinite rage for having been reduced into that estate, he let it descend with
such force upon the first Giant, that he divided his head in twain, just at
such time as he which came to his succor, having dispatched the other against
whom he was opposed, taking a new Lance from his Squire, turned himself
gallantly to receive thirty Knights, that sallied out of the Castle, under the
conduct of three dreadful Giants, who made such a noise as the earth seemed to
tremble under them. The courage of these Knights increasing with the difficulty
of enterprises, Spheramond carried with extraordinard fury addressed himself to
one of the Giants, and discharged a blow upon his arm, with such force as he
sent it together with his sword to the ground. That done, falling in amidst
those Knights, he killed the two first that presented themselves before him. On
the other side, the black Knight (so was he called that sided with him) made
the Giant whom he encountered lose his stirrup, and dealt such blows amongst the
rest, as he laid three of them at his f^^^: but the two remaining Giants held
them so short, that with the assistance of those rascals, which would not
suffer them so much as to breath, they had been in extreme danger of their
lives, if two Knights had not at one time arrived there by several ways, who
seeing a fight managed with so much unequality, presently laid hands on their
swords, and attaching the Giants that exceedingly molested the Princes, charged
them with such furious blows, that they were fain to turn head for to defend
themselves, leaving Spheramond and his companion amidst their other Knights; of
whom they made so great a slaughter, that there remained but two of them alive,
who fearing to lose their lives as their companions had done, threw away their
weapons and craved mercy. You shall (said Spheramond) have it granted you, upon
condition that you put us in possession of this Castle. You may, said they,
enter it freely, and without fear, For you shall find no body there to resist
you, so as Argenea the Mistress of the place, does not frame some new
enchantment to make you purchase it with more danger and pain: howbeit I can
assure you that she is not now in the Castle, she having gone from thence not
long since, (as I conjecture) to find some means from hindering it to be taken.
For her spirits (without) letting her know the time) had advertised her of the
misfortune that has this day befallen us: you may therefore boldly enter in,
and your best course will be first to seize upon the ports for your more
security. This counsel seeming good to the Knights, the black Knight staid at
the gate, *whilst Spheramond searched all about the house. But finding
nothing, he returned presently to view the combat between the two Knights and
the Giants, which continued with so much fury, that it was not easy to
determine what the issue of it was like to be. But ere long they perceived the
advantage on their side that came last. For their enemies had lost so much
blood, as they fell both almost at one instant so weak, that there was no need
of any weapon to make an end of them. Spheramond extremely satisfied with this
victory, lifted up the vizier of his helmet and addressing himself to the
Knight that had first succored him: Valiant Sir, said he, You have so
infinitely obliged me, as I cannot doubt of your affection to me: but to render
the pleasure of your assistance and my preservation accomplished, tell me who
you are, that in recompense thereof, I may hereafter seek out occasions to be
commanded by you. Excellent Prince, answered the black Knight, discovering his
face, I will never acknowledge that you are any way engaged to my arms, in the
least obligation: For your valor alone was able to defeat your enemies without
my aid, yet I cannot but give humble thanks unto heaven for bringing me hither
so opportunely to testify the desire I have to do you service; I am your most
humble servant Dorigell, Prince of the Fortunate Island, and more contented for
meeting you here at this time, then I could have been for the conquest of any
enemies Empire. With these words they embraced, as if they had not been
together in a long time before: and were about to draw toward the other two
Knights to give them thanks for their succors; when as they who knew them,
came to them with all demonstrations of respect: My Lords, said they, give us
leave to kiss your victorious hands, as those which will ever depend upon you:
You see here Amanio d'Astre and Silvan, brought hither by most strange means,
but exceeding happy in that our arrival has not been altogether unusefull to
you. Then unlacing their helmets they would have humbled themselves to
Spheramond, but he embraced them with such expressions of love, as more could
not be. The entertainment of these fowr Knights having lasted a while, they all
entered the Castle: and having shut the gates, they were conducted by the two
Knights whom they had saved to the prisons, from whence they enlarged thirty or
forty Knights; amongst the which were Parmenian of Cyprus, and Ladazan of
Numidia, who determining to seek adventures abroad, had left the Army the
evening before their dislodging: and as their fortune directed them, met near
the Castle of the twelve Towrs; where they were surprised by two of the Giants,
who having astonished them with two blows, enclosed them in a Dungeon, with an
intention ere long to sacrifice them to their Gods, in satisfaction of
Argeneaes revenge. The content of these Princes was not small, in having thus
delivered two of their friends; nor did they take care for any thing more, then
how to find out some one that could dress their wounds. For Dorigell was hurt
in three places, Spheramond very much bruised with the blows he had received
(the goodness of his arms having arrested the edge of his enemies swords,) and
Amanio d'Astre had a slash on his shoulder nothing so dangerous as great; but
instantly they had word brought them, that at the gate there was a Dwarf who
desired to speak with them: Let him in, said Spheramond, his presence will not
affright us; only have a care that he be not followed by any other. For the two
Knights we spared have assured me, that three of the guard of this Castle are
yet abroad, and that it is likely they will return this evening. The Sentinel
then perceiving no body but the Dwarf opened the gate, and from thence he was
brought to the Princes, where at first addressing himself to Dorigell he said,
Do you know me, Sir Knight? Yes truly, said Dorigell, you gave me yesterday the
best horse and the bravest shield in the world; for which courtesy you may ask
of me what you please: and be assured you shall not be refused in any thing
that lies in my power. I do not come hither, answered he, to request any reward
for my service, but to do you some more: Go, I pray you presently to bed,
together with these Princes that are hurt, and I will dress you. For knowing
that your wounds would extremely incommodate you without looking to, I am come
to cure you. You have already done so much for me, said Dorigel, that I will
not now refuse your assistance, neither for my self nor my friends. Making then
three beds to be set up in one Chamber, that the time might seem the less
tedious unto them, they went to bed and were dressed by this Dwarf, who enjoining
them to rest till the morning, went out with Silvan that took upon him the
charge of the Castle, appointing Parmenian of Cyprus, and Ladazan of Numidia,
to keep the watch with twelve Knights for fear of being surprised. But little
need there was of that care; for the day came on and nothing appeared to
disturb them. Now were all these Princes ris^n, as whole and sound as if they
had not been hurt at all the evening before, and much wondering they could not
see their Chyrurgian that was not any more to be found, when as the Sentinel
brought them word that he saw a Chariot come almost to the gate, wherein were
three Giants, and three Ladies, who filled the air with sighs and lamentations:
but that withal there appeared a brave and able Knight that made no difficulty
to set on the Giants, for the relief of those afflicted women. Thereat the
Princes called for their arms, fearing lest that Knight should not be able to
withstand the fury of those monsters: and therefore made all the haste they
possible could. The young Silvan who was first ready, knowing the Giants to be
on foot, went out only with his sword in his hand, wherewith he entertained his
enemies in so rude a fashion, aided by the valiant Emperor of the Parthians,
that followed him, as he made them not only despair of the victory, but stand
in fear of a near approaching death. The Knight whom before they had circled
about, seeing himself so well and beyond his hope seconded, did so gallantly
bestir himself, and charged him that opposed him, with such fury, as the grass
round about him was died with his blood. In like sort, Silvan entreated his
man, and Spheramond gave his enemy not so much leisure as to breath; but the
honor of this combat was so well disputed with them, as they could not vaunt
to have lent any thing but upon very good pawns. He that fought with the first
Knight, despaired of his safety, and defying heaven for being so ill entreated
by one man alone, took his curtelax in both his hands, and discharged so
violent a blow on his adversaries helmet, that he laid him in the dust
altogether deprived of sense. That blow naving given him some hope of victory,
he was going to disarm him, but having in that rage and straining of himself,
spent all his blood and strength, he reeling tumbled down on the other side
with apparent signs of death. Spheramond that had observed the misfortune of
the Knight who^ he thought to be dead, was so transported with choler, that
griping his sword fast in his hand he made it descend with such fury on the
cask of his enemy, as dividing it together with his head in two pieces, he laid
him stark dead upon the earth. Thence presently flying to the Knight, that lay
extended by the slain Giant, he unlaced his helmet, to see if he yet breathed,
and found it was the beauteous Savage, who feeling the freshnes of the air,
immediately opened her eyes: His amazement to see her there, was no less then
his content to find her with some remainder of life; but thinking that she
stood in more need of succor then of complement, he went about to help her up,
when as remembering the combat she had begun, she rose with such force and
agility as made them all to wonder that beheld her; and laying hold of her
sword that was fastened to her arm, she was going to fall furiously on the Giant
that fought with Silvan; but she saw him sink under a terrible blow which he
gave him. I am, said she then, fully revenged of my enemies: but yet I desire
to know unto whom I am indebted for this assistance. To your own virtue, said
Spheramond, which had no great need of our arms. God, said she, What do I see?
and what strange encounter is this? Tell me, my Lord, what good fortune brought
you hither? What Knights are these in your company? and what have your
adventures been these three days? Even such, answered Spheramond, as those
that have rendered you here; we arrived here without any particular design, and
have rooted out of this Country a crew of mischievous fellows: but that which
gives me the most content is, that we fell upon this place so happily for your
safety, and the increase of our glory. These that you see here with me are at
your disposing. Here is Silvan, who showed himself the most forward to do you
service, being the first that sallied forth to your succor. This is Dorigell,
Prince of the Fortunate Island: the third is Amanio d'Astre; and these two
Knights are Parmenian of Cyprus and Ladazan of Numidia, whom we have freed out
of prison. Then he told her all the circumstances of his coming thither, his
combat, and how without the assistance of those brave Princes, he had
infallibly lost his life. This discourse having persuaded them, that all those
occurrences had fallen out by the providence of some Magician their friend, she
was about after she had infinitely caressed those Knights to enter the Castle;
but remembering the women in favor of whom she had undertaken the combat,
although she know not who they were, she desired Parmenian and Ladazan to go
and seek them out; for she had observed that at the beginning of the fight they
fled away from that place: This they undertook most willingly, and did
discharge it so happily, as the same day they returned with unspeakable content
of all the company, as shall be related to you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. VII. Who th^se Princesses were that were f^rcibly carried away by the
Giants: as also the Emperor Spheramonds return into Parthia.
WE have in the preceding Chapter told you, that Argen^^ sister to the King of
the Frozen Island, foreseeing the ruin of the Pagan Princes, withdrew herself
into the borders of the Sultan of Aleppo his Country, where by enchantment she
built that proud Castle of the twelve Towrs, and for the guard thereof drew
thither twelve of the mightiest Giants in all the army, in hope by that means
to surprise some of the Greek Princes, and so to revenge her self. But God
whose providence reaches to every thing, overthrew all her designs, making the
Emperor Spheramond fall with that place, and after him Dorigell, Silvan, and
the gallant Knight of the Bridge, by the procurement of the great Alcander; who
desiring to prevent the mischiefs which this woman intended to Christendom,
and which without all doubt had happened in the loss of Spheramond, did
provide that Dorigell should be met withal by a Dwarf, the Knight of the
Bridge by a Squire, and Silvan by a Damsel, to the end they might be conducted
thither to succor that great Emperor. It remains now that we relate unto you
the new design she had to render her malice the more memorable: As soon as
the building was brought to perfection, she took her books, wherewith she often
entertained her self, and straining her skill to the highest pitch, she found
that the Empress Richarda, and the Princess Rosaliana, her sister, were with
child with two sons, who one day should be the support of Christendom, and
the ruin of Paganism; which did so vex her, as she resolved to destroy them
before they should come into the world: Having sought out then from among the
cunningest of her thoughts, for some subtle invention to bring her desires to
pass, she departed with three of her Giants a little before those two great
Armies came to meet, and embarked her self in a ship, which by the guiding of
three Dwarffes, she caused to sail so shiftly, that in two days she was in the
Empire of Parthia at the foot of a Castle by the Sea side, where by chance the
Empress Richarda with her sister were at that time, to find some diversion
from the grief they were in for the absence of their Husbands: Being arrived at
her desired ^^ort, she made certain Characters upon the poop of her Bark; and
redo^bling her charms, she enchanted her Giants that she carried with her in
such sort, as they appeared in the shape of Spheramond, Amadis d' Astre, and
the Duke of Arbamont; that done, she disarmed their heads, caused them to show
themselves upon the hatches, and commanding two of her Dwarfs to sound a
fanfara to awake the Princesses, she sent the third well instructed with his
message, to advertise them of the return of those Princes. Upon the noise of
the trumpets the Ladies looked out at the window that opened to the sea, with a
great desire to know what the business might be: but unable at that distance
to discern the countenance of these transformed people, they did with some
delight lend an ear to the Music, that seemed to presage some good fortune
unto them: and whilst they thus suffered their souls to be drawn out at their
ears, a damsel came to enform them, that there was a Dwarf desired admittance,
to advertise them of some affair which nearly concerned them: whereupon having
commanded him to be brought in, they withdrew from the window to understand
what the Dwarf would say unto them; who being too well taught for to fail
Argenea in her design, presented himself with much respect: and having made an
humble obeisance with a cheerful countenance he said to the Empress Richard^:
Madam, what will you give me for the contentment which my coming will bring
you? The Emperor Spheramond with his cousin Amadis d' Astre, is at the foot of
this Castle: but because they have in their company a beautiful Princess whom
they chanced to meet with at sea, that will not land this evening, in regard
she desires to visit you to morrow with the more magnificence, they humbly
beseech you not to be displeased with their retardment in saluting you, since
it is against their wills and only to discharge themselves of the promise they
have made to this Lady. They have reason to keep their word, answered Richarda,
who was transported with joy and content; no^ will I render them perjured by
commanding them to come hither. But let me not live if I go not my self to
visit them, though for a penance I serve in the morning to glorify the triumph
of this foreign Beauty they bring with them. Having then caused their horses to
be brought, she went down to the haven accompanied only with her sister, and
one maid, where seeing the lovely face of her Husband, she could not without
some trouble bear the little delay which she was forced to endure, before she
could be set aboard the ship; into the which she was with her company no sooner
entered but the Giants reassumed their former shapes, which did so amaze them,
that with grief to find themselves so woefully abused, they fell down more then
half dead upon the deck; Argenea seeing that which she so much desired in her
power, immediately covered the ship with a cloud, took her way back again with
the same speed she had made thither, and landed at the same port from whence
she had weighed ancor not above five days before. But her house being ten
leagues from thence, she presently caused a Chariot to appear, drawn by six
horses of a monstrous greatness; and having found by her last incantations she
was threatened with a terrible mischief, she willed her Giants to pass on and
to bestow the Ladies in safe custody, whilst she went to consult with a great
Magician, with whom she had formerly been very conversant, to the end that by
the help of his skill she might divert the storm which was ready to fall upon
her; yet all her devices were to no purpose: for Alcander (to whose knowledge
all other mortal men's gave place) having foreseen the mischievous intentions
of this Hagg, had first turned the Chariot somewhat out of the right way to make
it come within the view of Spheramond, to whom also he gave the same day those
excellent arms, by means whereof he escaped death, which was otherwise
inevitable, being to fight with three or fowr of the most able Giants in the
world, all at one instant, assembled all those Princes who had been separated
from the Army into that one place being assured that Spheramond would at length
be unable to resist so many Knights as were to combat him together. These then
were the Princesses which he saw pass by when overtaken with the night, he was
sleeping under the trees, and the very same that were brought to the Castle of
the twelve Towrs, by the Giants, when as those Princes sallied forth to second
the fair Savage, who having met the Chariot followed the Giants to fight with
them, being moved with pity at the lamentations of those Ladies. But it is
time to return to our former Discourse of Parmenian of Cyprus and Ladazan
finding these Princesses under a tree who trembled with fear, alighted from
their horses, and putting off their helmets, that the Ladies might by seeing
who they were, be the better assured, they kneeled down to kiss their hands:
but they were so amazed with the encounter of them, as they were not able to
speak a word; which Parmenian observing, to restore them to themselves he said:
I cannot but much wonder (excellent Ladies) to meet you in these uninhabited
parts, and so far remooved from your own Countries. But you will be no less
amazed when I tell you, that the Emperor Spheramond is at the Castle, which
you see yonder, accompanied with certain Princes of Greece, who are merrier
then the loss they have endured might seem to permit, not knowing as yet of
your being in these quarters. Do not then I beseech you, afflict your selves
any further; those that brought you hither are dead; nor shall you find in that
house any but such as were born to do you service. At these words the
Princesses recovered a little courage, yet fearing such another treacherous
trick, as had been played them before, they made but little show of resenting
that news, and rested as it were in an ecstasy, when Ladazan, who marvailed at
that coldness of theirs thus pursued his discourse: Why how now, Ladies, are
not these news pleasing unto you? and will you not return with us to glad the
Emperor? Verily this carriage of yours does amaze me; nor can I imagine from
whence it should proceed, since all fear of danger is past. Let us go, I
beseech you, without any more delay. Well, let us go, said the Empress
Richarda, who was somewhat the heartier of the three, since you will have it so,
at the worst we can be but once more abused: with that they advanced toward the
Castle, before the gate whereof stood Spheramond with Dorigell and the rest. He
at the first sight knowing them was strangely amazed at so unexpected an
encounter. O God! said he, can I imagine or believe that my fair mistrisse is
here, or can any man persuade me that I am not in a dream? Tell me, Madam, am I
in the Parthian Empire? or is it possible that I should meet you in these
desert plains, which are not near it by three hundred leagues? Certainly I am
so confounded and besides my self, as I dare not embrace you, fearing that you
are here through some enchantment. I should have, replied she my dear heart, a
great deal more cause to be astonished beholding you here, seeing it is not
above six days since you were with me in Parthia: but you did so suddenly
change your aspect, that the pleasure of your sight was instantly followed with
an infinite grief for not finding you any more like unto your self; yet I do not
now wonder any longer at it, for by the way I learned that a Sorceres our enemy
had plotted this treason against us, an^ that she had framed that enchantment
for to surprise us; She threatened me with death, and to destroy with me the
fruit that you left with me at your departure. But since I see you here with
me, I do no more fear her charms, and care as little for her menaces: speaking
thus, she gave him a million of kisses, and did so hang upon his lips as he
could hardly have leisure to answer the Infanta Rosaliana, who came to
entertain him, and enquired for some news of her Husband. I would, said he,
gladly satisfy you if I knew how to do it with assurance: but not being able
to say any thing certainly, I beseech you seek not to be informed but with as
little curiosity as your love will permit. In the mean time comfort your self
in his absence, and believe that heaven will not be so much an enemy to your
quiet, as not to render him unto you ere it be long, with more content then
ever you had. These words were extremely sensible unto her, for she imagined
that he was dead among so many other Princes; and did therefore bewail him in
her mind: but unwilling to disturb her sisters contentment, or make it appear
that she distrusted the words of Spheramond, she restrained her tears to return
the salutes which she received from Silvan, Dorigell, and Amanio d' Astre, who
presented their service unto her, having before tendered the same respect to the
Empress Richarda. Some time then being spent amidst these complements, the
Empress would needs visit the fair Savagesse, who was in her bed with three
wounds, being much troubled that she could meet with no body that could dress
them. But as they were consulting about finding out some Chyrurgion, they saw
the little Doctor come in that had cured them the night before; who commanding
them all out, applied such sovereign salves to her wounds, as after eight howrs
sleep, she waked without any pain, and as able to bear arms, as ever she was in
her life. The wonder thereof being no less then their content, they passed on
that night without any fear of Argenaes power. But in the morning upon
consultation they resolved, that this place being in the midst of the enemies
Country, was with much diffi^ulty to be kept, so that Spheramond determing to
quit it, returned toward his Empire, accompanied with the beautuous Empress
his wife, her sister, and her maid, as also with Parmenian, Ladazan, and thirty
Christian Knights, which would needs attend him; the rest took such other ways
as fortune pleased to guide them.

CHAP. VIII. The arrival of the Princes of Greece in their Countries: and the
conveying away of little Amadis of Trebisond.
FLorisell of Niquea being arrived at Constantinople, Alastraxeree in
Trebisond, Don Rogel in Persi^, Spheramond with the Empress Richarda in the
Empire of Parthia, and the other Christian Princes in their several Countries:
tears of joy and grief were mingled together. Sidonia with all kindness
welcomed her Husband, and the Empress of Persia showed no less content for
the return of hers. But seeing that their Courts (in former time so flourishing
by the presence of such a number of excellent Princes) now seemed forlorn by
their deaths, and the absence of so many Princesses as were partly deceased,
and partly carried away, they were not able to master their sorrow; howbeit
time, the common Physician of miseries, and the consolations they continually
received from those brave Princes, having somewhat sweetened the bitterness of
their anguish, they began to restrain their tears and assuage their grief;
seeing that necessity enforced them to so courageous a resolution. When as
fortune that was not yet weary of vexing them prepared them a new occasion of
sorrow: you have seen how the Empress Niquea, before she was enchanted in the
Castle of Treasure, was delivered of a young son, whom she called by his fathers
name, for that he much resembled him in face; and that at his birth there
appeared in the air certain signs which seemed to presage the excellency of
that child. It remains now to tell you what became of him after the
transporting of his mother away. The Chronicle of Alquif reports, that in those
days lived a great Magician of the Pagan sect, who (though he came short of
Alcanders perfection) yet was master of many admirable secrets, unknown to
those of his profession: This man named Dorion, holding nothing in higher
esteem then the propagation of his law, took the same care for the preservation
of the Pagans, as our Alcander did for the welfare of Christendom: so that one
night bestowing himself in the invocation of his spirits, he learned of them
the birth of the little Amadis of Trebisond, knew by his art that he would
surpass his father in valor, and that he should one day be the second pillar
of the Empire of the faithful, as also the subverter of Paganism. This
infinitely afflicted him, and from thencefoorth he vowed his death, protesting
to employ all the secrets of his art rather then fail of his purpose. But he
continued not long in this mind: for turning over his books to find by what
means he might best bring his desire to pass, he found that he whose
destruction he sought, should one day shed his blood for to save him from an
extreme danger: changing then his mischievous intention, he became more
careful of his life, then he had before been eager of his death; yet having
the love of his Religion deeply rooted in his heart, and being unwilling for
the respect of his own preservation to see the ruin of it, he took a middle
way between the fear of seeing the glory of the Pagans defaced, and his desire
to live. This infant, said he, may one day indeed relieve me, for the influence
of the celestial bodies are never fall, but yet I will keep him from
destroying those which profess the same law that I do. I will therefore go and
take him out of his mothers bosom, bring him into these deserts, where I
reside, draw out of him the service that he is predestined to do me, and then
will set such strong enchantments upon him, as he shall never be seen by any
man but my self. Having thus spoken he enclosed himself in a cloud, and went
directly to Constantinople, where the little Amadis was brought up. As soon as
he came there, the Sun began to lose his light, the days brightness was turned
into darkness, and from the cloud wherein he was, such claps of thunder roare^
forth, that every man feared to be grownd into powder. Whilst all these
wonders struck the world with astonishment, Dorion descended, entered the
chamber of little Amadis, who then was but three months old* took him in his
arms, and in the presence of Florisel, that with excessive gr^ef saw him go out
and was not able to hinder it, returned into the midst of his cloud, which
immediately rising up in the air carried him to the monstrous Island his own
habitation, where being settled, he presently caused a woman to nurse him,
commanding her with his milk to infuse into him the directions of their Law, so
soon as she found him capable of any impression of it: howbeit his design there
sorted not to his desire. For Alcander who was not able to hinder the carrying
of him away, for that the decrees of heaven are not to be crossed, made him
understand by certain secret impressions, that one only God was by him to be
worshipped. When the cloud was gone, the Sun resumed his former splendour, and
the air became as calm as before, but with exceeding grief to Sidonio, who
seeing the new loss she had sustained, so exceedingly renewed her sighs and
tears, that if Prince Florisell, which was better able to undergo such crosses,
had not fallen again to his former reasons for to comfort her, she would
undoubtedly have buried her self with her grief. Whilst the people lamented
this misfortune, Florisell to seek some diversion from these sorrows, resolved
to go on hunting, and to that end departing out of the palace for to take
horse, a maid presented herself, and kissing a paper which she had in her hand,
delivered it to him, telling him withal that it came from the wise Vrganda;
with that word he trembled, for not having heard of her since the loss of his
friends, he thought she had not been living, but had accompanied them in death,
whom so faithfully she had served during their lives. But this his perturbation
being of no long continuance, he opened the paper, and therein read these words.

Vrganda to the Greek Princes.

SOvereign Princes: If you had not learned by so many crosses as you have met
withal in the World, what men of co^rage ought to know, I would comfort you in
your losses, and specially for that which has this day befallen you: But
knowing you to be every way invincible, and that you make little account of
fortunes worst attempts against you, I will not present you with reasons to
mitigate your just resentments, though I should be glad that you could reach
unto the meaning of these obscure words.

The Prophecy.

When the strange Lion shall amaze the World with his roaring, and shall meet
with him of the Grecian Forests, the fourth of that name shall see the day for
to render you presently after the lost Treasure.

If you did understand these words, without doubt, you would, brave Princes,
perceive that the counsels of heaven are wonderful, and living with quieter
minds give me means to continue my doing you service with more affection then
ever.

See, said Florisel, how the Sun shines again after cloudy weather: These
good Magicians are still living; and as far as I can perceive by this scroul,
though I do not fully understand it, we shall not suffer so much as we
imagined: Let God that governs our actions, be pleased to direct them to his
Glory; for I will neither murmur at his corrections, nor grow insolent with his
favors. This said, he went down the stairs, mounted on horsback, and better
cheered then he had been in a long time before, went to the forest, where he
had not been long, but he heard one that lamented not far from him, which made
him to gallop that way the voice directed him, so that within a little while he
arrived at a place where under a tree he found a good handsome woman, which
held in herlap a dead Knight, over whom she made exceeding strange moan.
Gentlewoman, said he being moved with pity, if your sorrow be capable of
comfort, I would entreat you to consider that you afflict your self to no
purpose, and that it were fit you should demonstrate your love to this Knight
some other way rather then by your tears, whereof he is now insensible. That
which he now is to expect from your hands is a grave; Let us, I beseech you,
bestow it upon him, and that done we will think of what remains. If he be slain
by the treachery of any, I will, if it be in my power, work your revenge,
otherwise it may be a comfort to you that you have seen him die like a good
Knight, which is the most honorable departure out of this life. And if I shall
not be troublesome to you, I will beseech you to let me know his name, and who
it is that has brought him into this estate. For being engaged by my word to
revenge it, I should be glad to understand if with reason I may do it. This
afflicted woman then lifting up her eyes all drowned in tears, beheld him a
while without speaking a word, but judging by his countenance that he was not a
Knight of any mean quality, at length she very modestly replied to him in this
manner: Do not believe, noble Knight, that my complaint is excessive; for the
valor and fidelity of him whose death I now lament, deserves that my tears
should be perpetual, and might justly persuade me to lend no ear to any
comfort whatsoever. But since with so much courtesy you make a tender to me of
your assistance, I will not be so ungrateful as to refuse you the satisfaction
you desire. Know then, my Lord, that this Knight whose head you see divided in
two pieces, was called Balard of Catabatmon, grandchild to the good King
Manely, who in the time of the Emperor Esplandian was held in the esteem of a
brave Knight; he some months since left his fathers house to be at that great
battle, where the rest of all Christendom was set up; but falling very sick
in a Town of Macedon, he could not bring his purpose to pass, his malady still
increasing, there was little hope of his life, when as his Squire (the
faithfullest that ever served in that kind) remembering that there needed no
more to cheer him up but only to speak of me, assured him that I was upon the
way to visit him, having had advertisement of his sickness: as soon as he heard
my name, his love which yet in the extremity of his disease was still the same,
made him instantly raise himself up, imagining that I had been come. But not
seeing me, he gently laid his head down again upon his pillow, and began to
take a little rest. In the mean time his Squire not intending to lose the
benefit of his invention, instantly dispatched a post to me, knowing full well
that my love was powerful enough to make me undertake more then a voyage of
four days journey; And having gives me notice of the estate his master was
in, he put me in a strange perplexity: for loving him to infinity, I almost
died at the first news of his sickness: but fortifying my self with a courageous
resolution, I wiped my eyes, and taking a good pacing nag, I made such haste,
that three days after I was by his bed side, though wonderfully troubled to
see him brought so low; yet did my presence so work with him, that his blood
returning to all the parts of his body he began to show some signs of
amendment. To what end should I entertain you with longer discourse of his
malady? Time restored him to his health, and when he found himself able to bear
Arms, he departed from thence with me, who would by no means quit him. For I
less valued the opinion of the world then the obligation wherein I was tied to
my affection. Having traveled then twelve days without meeting any adventure,
his courage coupled with his love, made him undertake to guard this passage for
my sake, and to force all Knights that should pass this way to confess that I
was the fairest maiden in the world. This his enterprise though full of danger,
passed with him very happily, and diverse were vanquished by him: but alas!
Fortune forsook him this morning. For a great Knight in flaming colored arms
arrived here; who not satisfied with the conditions of the combat proposed by
him, said unto him. Knight, there are two strong reasons that oblige me to
sight with you; One is, the faith that I ow to my mistrisse much more
beautiful then yours; and the other an oath, which I have taken never to spare
any that are enemies to my Religion. The device which I see painted in your
shield is an infallible argument that you are a Christian, and I know you have
an unjust cause to maintain in affirming your Mistrisse to be the fairest
living; seeing then that you are in case to combat I am ready to follow your
example. Balard, who wanted no courage, not enduring the arrogance of this
Knight, presently set hand to his sword, and a long time made his party good;
but alas! not having a cask of proof sufficient to bear the furious and weighty
blows of his adversary, he was in the end brought into the estate wherein you
now see him. Judge now if I have not reason to torment my self, since I have
lost by his death all that can be dear unto me: and do not condemn my sorrow,
which to me appears but too just and reasonable. I rather said Florisel, do
commend your resentment of such a loss; howbeit I have no great reason to
combat this Knight upon the quarrel, since it has been fairly carried, and
according to the laws of Knighthood, but seeing he professes himself an enemy
to Christians, whose protector I am bound to be, I promise you to seek him to
the worlds end for to revenge the death of Balard, and to rid this Country of
so pernicious a Knight. Saying thus, he sent for his arms, nor would he return
to the City, but went his way with Lidora (so was the Gentlewoman called) not
being to be diverted from this enterprise for any entreaty could be made him.

CHAP. IX. Who the Knight ardant was, and why be hated the Christians.
THey that have bestowed any time in reading this famous history, have found in
the twelfth book of Amadis, that Don Rogel of Greece, being at sea with Persea,
Princess of Persia, and Don Brianges of Boetia, was one day so tossed with a
tempest, that after they had with no good success, used all the labor and
skill of the mariners, he at the last found himself hurried away with the
storm, and thrown into the billows; from whence yet he escaped, rather by the
permission of God, then by the strength and address of his swimming, it being
the pleasure of the Almighty that he should not at that time miscarry. That
afterward he fell in love with Florelle Queen of Canabea, who died the same
day that he left her. And that the great Giant Exceladus opened her womb to
take out the child whereof she was ready to be delivered, being gone nine
months and above of her time; which after he had wrapped up in a virgin
parchment, he carried away with him, and in brief all the rest that is
particularized in the 97. Chapter of that Book. But for that the History of
that miraculous Infant is not as yet come to light, at least only vented by an
ignorant Translator, I held it no lost labor to acquaint you with what I have
found in an old fragment, written by Alquif (entitled, the Oriental History
of the Imperial House of Greece) which was found in Constantinople when it was
taken by the French, in the time of Baldwin of Flanders, and afterward brought
into France by Geffrey de Ville Hardovin, Marshall of Champaigne, who compiled
the history of that expedition, the rather for that the sequel of my discourse
does not permit me to pass by his name and acts in silence. This Infant then
(as you have known) was called Fulgoran, by reason of a little blaze, which
being cut out of his mothers belly, appeared upon his breast, and brought up
with all manner of care by that Magician Giant, who found by his art that he
would be infinitely valiant, and one day do some great mischief to
Christendom: he daily instructed him in the handling of his arms; and often
informed him of the honor that brave Knights had acquired to themselves, to the
end to render him ambitious of such glory and virtue by their example. And in
brief he had so trained up his youth, that except the hate of the name of a
Christian, which he had deeply engraven in his soul, he might boldly vaunt that
he had framed a master piece of him. As soon as he perceived that he was able
to bear arms, he made him a Cuirace of the color of flaming fire, a cask of
the best temper in the world, and a shield of so good proof, as with that
greatness of courage and ability of body which he knew him endued withal, he
might well believe that he was invincible. These being all in a readiness, he
took him one day aside, and thus sp^ke to him: It is in my opinion time, my
son, that you should begin to attempt the effecting those things which the
destinies have promised unto you, to the end you may not frustrate the hope
that I have conceived of your valor. You shall the refore this night watch the
Arms that I will give you, and prepare your self to depart to morrow for to
seek the adventure of the world. Be gentle and easily entreated to pardon,
patient in labor, love your Religion, and above all things take heed that
conversing with Christians do not one day make you of another faith. I shall
have my share with you in the glory that you shall gain, and shall be
infinitely pleased if your praises may reach to the furthest end of the world.
This young Prince, who had naturally a disposition to goodness, with a courage
nothing inferior to his father, promised the Giant with care to remember his
instructions, watched his Arms, was the next morning Knighted by the Giant, and
loath to lose time mounted on a horse, that had not many fellows on the earth,
and departed the same day under the protection of his Gods. Passing then along
with an extreme desire of meeting with some adventure worthy of his courage, he
spent three hours in crossing certain forests without lighting upon any one of
whom he might enquire where he was: but at the end thereof he entered into a
great plain, where under certain trees he saw an old man sitting; who rising up
with incredible nimblenes thus saluted him: Gentle Prince, I have ever since
morning waited here for you, to discover unto you a secret that much imports
you: You believe that Enceladus is your father, because he has hitherto had
the education of you; but from henceforth be not any more of that opinion; for
you are son to one of the bravest and greatest Princes in the World, and whom
you shall never know but with an extreme hazard of your life. For the rest,
remember the good counsel your foster Father gave you; I mean, be liberal,
courteous, patient in adversity, easily entreated to forgive, and ready to
relieve those that are distressed: But do not follow his advice of never being
an enemy to the Religion which you now profess. The time shall come wherein you
shall feel so much delight in another that is better and more conducing to your
happiness then this is, that you will quickly find how much my counsel is more
profitable for you then his. You are amazed to hear me talk to you in this
manner, and it may be will make little account of what I speak because you know
me not; but you will one day see how much my meeting with you at this time did
concern you. Follow now the way you are in, since the destinies have put you
into it, and be assured that in the greatest danger I will not be far from you,
as well for your own merit, as for the affection which Iow to the virtue of
your Father. This said, he vanished out of his sight, leaving our new Knight
much astonished at that he had seen, and extremely pleased to understand that
his parents were of such eminent quality, although as yet he knew them not.
Going on then very joyfully, he entertained his thoughts with infinite designs,
when as he heard a great clashing of arms in a forest that was not far from
him: whereupon clapping spurs to his horse, he entered the wood, where at first he
spied a Coach wherein were two Ladies woefully weeping; and a little beside them
three fearful Giants amongst fifteen or twenty Knights, who (as was easy to be
conjectured) disputed with them the liberty of those women: Fulgoran having a
while beheld them, and seeing that as often as the Giants Curtelaxes lighted
upon any of them, some of those Knights fell dead to the earth, couched his
lance with so good both address and fortune against one of them, that having
pierced him clean through, he laid him dead in the dust. This happy blow, the
first essay of his chivalry, having added to his courage, he set hand to his
sword which he employed so gallantly, that he staid the fury of the second,
leaving the third in the midst of fowrteen Knights, who did extremely trouble
him. But he was therewith so enraged, that as many as he fully lighted upon, he
laid on the grass: so that having dispatched eight of them, all the rest
betook them to their heels saving one, who being richly armed, and obstinately
pursuing his revenge, received so furious a blow upon his helmet, that he fell
from his horse voiding blood at his nose and ears: That so cruel a blow having
extremely affrighted the women, who were before somewhat cheered upon the
coming in of the burning Knight, made them shrike out so loud that Fulgoran
hearing it, gave his opposite so forcible a thrust, as having run him clean
through the body, he laid him on the ground in the same estate his companion
was in. Turning him then about, he perceived that he which survived, was going
to unbuckle the Knights helmet whom he had overthrown, which was the cause of
the women's lamentations: this put him in such choler, as instantly running to
him, and not giving him leisure to rise (for he had one knee upon the ground)
he struck him so just on the neck, that he laid his head at his feet. This
execution done, he drew to the Ladies, and began to comfort them, telling them
that their enemies being dead, they had now no more cause to fear: But one of
them who appeared beautiful in perfection, although her sorrow and tears
hindered in some sort the discerning of her excellencies, interrupted him,
saying: Good Knight, the time does not now give me leave to render you condign
thanks for this happy relief you have given us, for the fear I am in lest the
King my Lord be dead, does so transport me as I scarce know what I speak:
Continue if you please, your assisting me, and help me presently to alight,
that if there be any remainder of life in him, I may preserve it with such help
as in this necessity I may give him. Fulgoran who was naturally very courteous,
took her instantly in his arms, out of the chariot, and led her to him whom the
last Giant would have killed; and pulling off his helmet, he used such means to
him, as he brought him to himself again, being much amazed to find himself in
that estate. Clairangia (for so was that beautiful Princess called) seeing
her husband breathe, recovered somewhat both her color and courage: so that
perceiving a young Squire whom the Giant had bound behind the chariot, she
presently caused him to be freed, and commanded him with all diligence to seek
out those Knights, who by flying had sought their safety, and will them to
return unto her. In the mean time Fulgoran held the King in his arms,
persuading him not to be dismayed with his wounds, which would easily be cured.
The Squire having gladly undertaken this charge, immediately ran into the wood,
but meeting them returning with a resolution to lose themselves with their
master, since he would not save himself with them, he staid his pace, and
having informed them of the issue of the business, he brought them to the
King, where full of shame for the cowardice they had showed, they began to
frame an arm litter, in which they took up Dardan^r (so was the King named)
Fulgoran going into the Coach with Clair^^gia, who much wondering to find such
valor in a Knight so young and lovely, did gently enquire of him what good
fortune had brought him into that Country for to bind her to him in so eternal
an obligation. That Madam, said he, which does ordinarily bind such Knights, as
without defign do go about the world seeking strange adventures. But if you
marvel at my coming hither in so seasonable a time, believe it I am no less
amazed to have found you in so much danger. For your beauty and the greatness of
your estate, were in my opinion likely to have kept you from any sinister
accide^t: although I well know, that fortune does not always consider either
the merit, or the quality of those with whom she means to make her self sport.
For this cause Madam, I would gladly know of you (provided my request heerin
may not be offensive) by what mischance you fell into this mischief. I am too
much engaged to your valor, said she, to refuse you any thing you shall
desire. Know then, my^^ord, that Dardan^r and my self being possessed of the
Crown and Scepter of Romerie, which is but two easy days journey from hence,
did live happily together in our match; for it is but two months since we were
joined in marriage, and had nothing to complain of, but that we could not free
our Court of one of these Giants which now you have slain: for being
pass^onately in love with the Princess Alixea, my sister, whom you see here,
we were extremely discontented at his pretension, which yet we durst not but
under hand oppose. For knowing that his brothers were our neighbors, and
exceedingly redoubted by all the provinces thereabout, we very much feared that
a refusal would so enrage them, as they would make a war upon us, and so
peradventure dispossess us of the estate of Romerie. And indeed we could by no
means have avoided that misfortune without your aid, considering the estate
wherein you met with us: for Bracandor my sisters amoroso not able longer to
endure the violence of his desire, one day took the boldness to move the King
therein after this fashion: Sir, you are not ignorant of my descent, and you
also know (for you have been a witness of my valor) that I am able to purchase
Principalities to my self, and when I please can set a royal Crown upon my
head. I will not therefore fear to discover my intentions unto you, whereof I
make no doubt but you have had some conjecture already: I have long loved your
sister Alixea, and gladly would I be so far obliged to your favor as to be
pleased with my alliance, which will not be of mean importance to you. For the
consideration of my self and my brothers, will make you to be so redoubted,
that all your neighbors will tremble at the very rumor of your arms, and from
my self you shall still receive so many and so agreeable services, that you
shall never have cause to repent of affording me that honor. This discourse
did extremely perplex Dardanor; for the bad conditions of this Giant made us so
to loath him as we resolved to run any hazard rather then yield my sister unto
him, whom by no means she could affect: howbeit not to make him utterly
despair, he answered him, that being a King who desired to do nothing but that
which was good and just, he could not absolutely determine of a matter of such
consequence, without the consent of my sister, and his people: and that
therefore he would first propound the business to the Counsel of his Estates:
and that in the mean time it would be fit for him to go and communicate the
matter with his brothers, to the end he might not render them his enemies by
neglecting their authority. Bracandor being heerby persuaded that all went
according to his desire, was easily carried to take his leave of us, nothing
dreaming of the Kings secret intentions, who not to lose time did presently
after his departure send forth commissions for the raising of soldiers,
fortified his ports and frontier Towns; and with all diligence prepared himself
for a war. Our Amoroso being heerof advertised, was extremely amazed, and
instantly perceived, to what end the King had persuaded him to remove; which
did so inrage him, that he vowed to die, or be revenged of us all. But seeing
the careful order that Dardanor had taken thorowout his Kingdom, and that it
would be impossible for him to bring his designs to pass, he made as if he had
quite forgotten Alixea, so as he suffered six months to pass without declaring
himself any way sensible of my husbands proceeding with him; who in the mean
while not thinking any more of him, determined about twelve days since to go a
progress to all the good Towns in his ^^ngdome; and taking his journey, with
the Princess my sister, and my self, under the guard of two hundred Knights,
he visited some places of most importance: and finding upon his way a very
pl^asing forest, he resolved to spend some days in hunting in it. This while
Bracandor was not sleeping, for being advertised by some, which he entertained
in our Court, of all these passages, as you know that palaces are never
unfurnished of such traitors, he came thither accompanied with his brothers,
where finding us attended only by thirty Knights of our guard, they put us into
this Chariot, and after they had massacred our people, hurrying us away, they
threatened us with no less then ravishment and death. Some of our servants that
had escaped from the fury of their swords, having given notice of our
misfortune to the King, he presently drew together as many of his Knights as
possibly he might, and following us with all diligence, he overtook us to his
certain ruin, without the happy assistance which you, Sir, so luckily brought
him. See here, my Lord, the true narration of our disaster, which I conclude
with a protestation, that I shall never be sparing of any thing in my power
whatsoever your service shall command in, since you have hazarded your life so
nobly for my preservation. While Clairangia was thus discoursing to him,
Fulgoran who never had beheld such beauty before, observed her with a strange
and unusual motion, and in his heart said thus to himself. Good gods, how
blessed a man is Dardanor to be possessed of a creature so full of perfections?
and how much to my prejudice am I to fear the incountring and seeing of her at
this time? I cannot choose but love her, though she be dedicated to the
contentment of another: and spite of my teeth I must yield to the impulsions of
that proud deity which triumphs over all men. Mighty Love, do not, I beseech
thee, refuse me thy aid; and since it is thy pleasure to be acknowledged by me,
grant that the heart of this Lady may prove as pliant, as the glances of her
eyes are pleasing; I will then with a liberal hand present sacrifice to thy
altars, and proclaim to all the world that thou art of more power then all the
gods that we adore. On the other side Clairangia finding him wonderfully
agreeable to her, did insensibly pass from a due acknowledgement of his
assistance, to an height of liking him, being unable with all her modesty to
keep her self from dearly loving him, and wishing that she might in that manes
possess him, as she might one day receive the contentments which Love does
give us in the fruition of our desires. Nevertheless not being willing to
leave a bad impression in him of her weakness, she concealed her mind, and
kept him well enough from discerning her affection. Thus shortning the length
of the way, with the sweet entertainment of their thoughts, they arrived at a
village, where the King had a mind to rest, and cause his wounds to be
carefully looked unto. But having intelligence that some kinsmen of the Giants
had a design to surprise him in that place, and so to be revenged on him, he
presently dislodged, being much troubled, that he had no more of his people
about him to assist him, if the enemy should charge him: but he was quickly
freed of that care, by the coming in of the Knights that he had left in the
forest, who incountred him on the way an howr after: much rejoicing to find
him alive, whom they had given for dead, as soon as they heard he was gone to
set upon the Giants. When he saw them he commanded his tent to be pitched, that
he might repose himself being then out of all fear of danger, since he had in
his company the burning Knight, to whom he did all the honor that possibly he
could devise. The night past sweetly away with every one, but these two hearts
so lately wounded: for fixing their imaginations, she upon the consideration of
what she ought to her honor; he upon the fear of not being entertained with
favor, and the danger that his enterprise might draw upon him, they were both
of them kept waking till day, amidst the perplexity of a world of thoughts: but
if they were tormented that night, the next was so them much more full of
torture. For their conversing familiarly together all that day, having added no
little fuel to their fire, made them feel their desires much more violent, and
so rendered their pains more insupportable. Shamefastness sealed up the lips of
Clairangia, and a due respect brideled Fulgoran, but remembering that lovers are
commonly fortunate, when they are adventrous, he desired to try whether
boldness would acquire him that, which his faintness had not hitherto
permitted him to ask. Whereupon calling for pen and inck he wrote these lines to
discover his love unto her, not being confident enough to do it by word of
mouth.

Fulgorans Letter to his Lady the fair Clairangia.
Madam,
I Believe you will think me very rash in acquainting you thus with my
thoughts, but when you shall consider your own power and my weakness, without
question you will hold me excused; and say, that I have reason being sick, to
seek for recovery, which is in your hands, and the content of my life depends
upon your favor. Do not. I beseech you, refuse it to the passion of a lover,
who never knew what it was to sigh but for you, nor desires any greater
felicity in the world, then the honor of your service. Your eyes in which
shines so much beauty, promise me no less: make not them then the authors of
my despair, as they have been of my captivity, but let your sense of my
suffering, give me ease to bless my good fortune: so shall you put new life
into my courage, and my arms shall make all the earth to know, that it is your
beauty alone which deserves to command the burning Knight, who does not wish a
condition more eminent then to be

Your Servant.


This Letter being by the means of Silesia, the trusty secretary of her
privatest thoughts, cunningly conveied into Clairangiaes hands, was read with
some perturbation; but unresolved as yet to declare her self, she returned no
answer unto it, leaving the burning Knight in such disquiet, as his humor
before so pleasing and sociable, became altogether untractable: he was seldom
seen in the Court, little in his chamber, but commonly in the woods and
unfrequented places, where he entertained himself with the sad consideration of
his miserable estate; in which being denied the happiness of knowing his
parents, he was now also refused the enjoying the first thing that ever he had
loved. Unfortunate Knight, said he, what do thou now dream of, or what can
thou think of that gives thee not occasion to complain? Thou can not be
happy, only because thou art not worthy of so much glory. Retire then in time,
and rather blame thy boldness, then the cruelty of thy Mistress: she is not
guilty of thy misery, it is thy destiny that thou must accuse for it. But alas!
what counsel is this thou harknest unto? Is it likely that thou can leave
her, and love her so dearly? Thou must either die, or vanquish this hard heart
of hers: women do not so easily yield themselves; they will be entreated, and
do often times feign themselves cruel, to try our constancy. If thou should
possess her without pain, her caresses would not be so sweet, nor thy
contentment so complete. Wherefore thou must not be weary of serving her, since
the recompense well deserves thy labor. This Knight thus losing himself in his
meditations made all the Court to wonder at this change of his. The King was
much troubled with it, as admiring his virtue, but Clairangia much more. For
knowing that she only was the cause thereof, she participated with him in her
grief and suffering, which much amazed Silesia, who not approoving this
reservednesse of hers, did one day thus speak to her: I wonder at you, Madam,
and cannot imagine why you afflict your self in this manner, when you may live
contented. You love Fulgoran, he adores you; and you have often told me, that
you would not be ungrateful to the good offices he has done you. His valor,
beauty, love, and the infinite respect that he serves you withal, fill you
full of desire; why then do you not seek for the accomplishment thereof? and to
what end is this modesty, seeing it is so troublesome unto you? Madam, it is
not well done, you tyrannize your life to no purpose; occasions are to be laid
hold on when they present themselves. This Knight has too many perfections to
be despised: open your arms to him, since he offers himself to you; and as he
has not been sp^ring of his blood for your preservation, deny him not your
favor for the conservation of his life, which cannot be long, if you continue
this course with him: his death could be no pleasure to you, but condemning
your rigor, you would say that you had committed an irreparable fault. Ah! how
dangerous it is to meet with one that will push us on when we have our foot
upon the precipice: Clairangia, whom the respect of her greatness, and the
consideration of a husband, did as yet contain, believing that her weakness
might be somewhat warranted by Silesiaes reasons, soon yielding up her self
promised this wench no longer to reject Fulgoran; and permitted her to tell him
that she would the next day go to Cel^bana, a house of pleasure that she had
some three leagues from thence, where she thought she might have more liberty
to confer her favors on him, then amongst a thousand observers, which are
ordinarily in Court. This office Silesia willingly undertook; for as soon as
she had her commission, she past three or four times before Fulgorans chamber
door, till she found an opportunity of meeting him, to let him know how all
things were disposed for his content: how her Mistrisse desired to see him at
Celibana, that there she might give some asswagement to his sorrows: and that
he was happy if he could manage his fortune with discretion. This advertisement
made him to change his countenance, as the fear of being ill used had altered
his humor, he became more jolly then he had been in a good while before, and
at last went to bed with less unquietness then before.

CHAP. X. The Queen Clairangia going to Celibana, is twice surprised, and
rescued by Fulgoran.
THE Queen departing with the Kings consent, under the guard of the Earl of
Clina and twenty Knights, Fulgoran (who had not forgotten Silesiaes directions)
went out armed, as he was accustomed to do, and seeming to be carried by his
ordinary fancies, followed a way a little wide of that which the Queen with her
train had taken, meditating upon the good fortune he was to have in finding his
Lady more gentle then she used to be to him. She on the other side went with no
less contentment thinking on the caresses she was to receive from a lover of
such perfections. But her joy was quickly turned into sorrow: for she espied a
Giant coming out of the wood of a goodly proportion, and not of any monstrous
greatness, but every way so handsome, that notwithstanding the trouble she was
in by the appearance of such an object, yet took she some pleasure in beholding
his gallant demeanor; howbeit considering that such kind of persons are for
the most part cruel and uncurteous, she began to say: O ye Gods! how much I
doubt the meeting with this great Knight? and I am much afraid that the death
of our enemies will be revenged by this encounter. Sister, we are unfortunate,
and can expect nothing from this mischance, but either to be forcibly bere^^ of
that which we ought to hold most dear, or to be reduced into the misery of a
long captivity. Wherefore, said she to her attendants, prepare your selves to
fight, and show in what esteem you hold my safety. Reward shall wait on the
valiant, and punishment on those that are cowards, and that prefer their lives
before their honors. At these words every one made him ready to do his duty;
but the Giant making no account of this troop, first of all addressed himself to
the Coachman, whose brains he presently knocked out with a blow of his armed
fist; then drawing out his Cymitar the first that presented himself to him had
his head cloven in sunder: after that falling in amongst the rest, he dealt his
blows in such manner, as from one he cut off an head, from another an arm, cleft
a third down to the middle, so that within less then half an howr he had laid
fowrteen at his feet; and amongst them the Count of Clina so far from himself,
as he remembered not that he was in the world. The six that survived hoping for
no better entertainment then their companions had received, fled into the wood,
leaving their Queen a prisoner, when as two Giants by much far greater then the
first, came to the place where this fight had been; one of the which having
beheld the excellent beauty of Clairangia, was so far in love wi^^ her as he
resolved either to die, or make her his own; Wherefore ad^ressing himself to the
Conqueror, who was going to play the Coachman, and had the whip already in his
hand, he said: Do not think, Knight, that a treasure of such value as you think
to have, is to be purchased with so little labor: you have in your opinion,
made it yours by the slaughter of these men, the defeature of whom can give you
no true glory; but if you mean to possess it without doubt of a competitor, it
is my death that must give you assurance: therefore you must resolve to fight
for it with me, or acknowledging your self unworthy of such a happiness, give
over any further claim to it, and suffer me to carry it whither I please. The
advantage you have, answered he, of a second, makes you speak with so much
arrogance; for if you were alone, you would rather think of defending your
self, then offer to brave a man of my fashion: howsoever do not persuade your
self that I will so easily yield you the fruit of my labors, neither hope to
be the conducter of these Ladies, to whom I have so just a title; for I intend
not to make way to you for it, but upon very strict conditions. At these words
enraged like two Bulls that were ready to fight for an heyfer, they at one
instant discharged two such heavy blows each upon the other, as they both
staggered ready to fall, had not the shame of being overcome in the presence of
her whom they loved transported them. This beginning but incensing them the
more, they laid upon one another with such fury, as by the noise they made, one
would have thought there had been fifty Knight together by the ears. If the one
gave a blow, the other was not asleep. In In brief, they were so eager, that
their blood running down on every side, did nothing at all a bate their
courage. He that came first not enduring to be disputed with about a thing he
had gotten, struck so furious a blow upon his enemies shield, that having
divided it in two the sword descended upon his casque which it entered, giving
him a slight wound in the head: but well offered was as well returned, he being
paid at the same instant with so rude a thrust that pierced through his armor
a good way into the flesh, which put him into such a rage, as grinding his
teeth, he took his Cymitar in both his hands, and gave his enemy so horrible a
blow upon the head, that without doubt he had determined the combat if he had
made it home. Nevertheless it served not only to give him a slash in the face,
but the point passing on with an incredible violence opened his cuirace and
wounded him dangerously in his breast. This blow somewhat amazing the other, who
yet had not drawn his sword, but was with the Ladies, entreating them not to be
troubled with their meeting them, caused him to lay hand on his Curtelax,
wherewith very rudely he entertained his enemy; who little caring for this
assistance, redoubled his strokes with more fury then before. In the mean time
Clairangia was more liker a dead then a living woman; for well perceiving that
which side soever fortune should favor, her danger was inevitable, she
afflicted her self in such extremity as would have moved any the most
insensible heart to have pitied her, but her sorrow lasted not long; for a
while after she perceived the brave Knight ardant come galloping in, who seeing
so many dead bodies scattered on the ground, his Lady all drenched in tears,
and stretching out her hands as imploring his aid, he became so enraged, that
drawing forth his sword he let it fall with such force upon the head of the
last Giant that he clove him to the teeth overthrowing him dead to the earth.
This brave blow having reinforced his courage, he made so smart a thrust at the
breast of his companion, as meeting just with the wound which the first Giant
had given him there, the point of his sword came out at his back, together with
his life and that little blood he had lest: howbeit not contented to see
himself delivered from those two, he turned him to the first comer for to serve
him with the same sauce; but he retiring a little back said unto him: I cannot
worthy Knight, with reason employ my arms against you; for having given me my
life which was undoubtedly far engaged by the force of these two Knights whom
you have slain, it were base in me to defend it against you, and in you a
cruelty to deprive me of it, after you have so generously preserved it: if you
have any interest in this fair Lady I will no longer pretend to any part in
her, but will rest conte^nted with the honor of your service. Fulgoran
admiring the humility of this Giant, (for he could not doubt his courage having
before his eyes such apparent proofs of his valor) let down his sword which
was advanced to strike him, and very gently answered: I did not look, Sir, to
be vanquished by your courtesy, as I doubted to have been by your arms, wherewith
having made two of the terriblest Giants in the World to tremble, I might very
well fear a bad success of our combat. But since you will have this glory over
me, I willingly grant it you, and shall be well cont^nted to accept of this
obligation, in hope one day to find a means to requite it: let us then, I pray
you, be friends, since you will have it so, and believe it that I shall ever
hold my self honored in your acquaintance. Heerupon with open arms they
embraced one another, to the infinite satisfaction of the Queen, who seeing this
business ended according to her wish, and contrary to the fear she was in
about the issue thereof, knew not well how to look. See, said she to her Knight,
who came to kiss her hands after his victory, and to present the Giant to her;
See, my Lord, how I am doubly engaged to you for my li^^; But you shall not
find me ungrateful, and your services shall be so well recompensed, as you
shall have cause to command my acknowledgement of them; I do willingly receive
this great Knight, although he has strangely perplexed me, but the happiness
to see you by me, and my self at liberty, which I was so lately in despair of,
does not suffer me to think of any passed misfortune; Let us go on, since we
are so near to Celibana, but first it were good to see if among so many Knights
as lie here in the dust, there be any one yet living: for it were not well done
to leave any neglected that have so faithfully discharged their duties.
Fulgoran then lighting from his horse viewed them all over, but found none to
breath saving the Count of Clina, who showed some signs of life as soon as he
had air given him, whereat the Queen very much rejoiced, though I believe she
would have helped to make an end of him her self, if she could have foreseen
the mischiefs which by his occasion did afterward befall her. The Count being
thoroughly recovered, for he had no wound upon him, they began to set on toward
Celibana, where they quickly arrived with much contentment. The news of the
Queens misfortune being carried to Dardanor, the Courtiers were all up in arms,
and every one was ready to get to horse for to succor her, when word was
brought to the King, that she was freed by the valor of the Knight ardant, who
entertaining himself in his melancholy fancies not far from the way which the
Queen went, had heard the noise of arms, and came in just as the combat of the
three Giants was in the highest fury: two of the which passed by the edge of
his sword, the third becoming his friend for the assistance he had given him.
This second advertisement much more welcome then the former, having quieted
Dardanors mind, he sent his Physicians and Chyrurgians to Celibana to look to
those which were wounded. In the mean time our Lovers began to caresse one
another; for Clairangia no longer able to hinder the felicity of the Knight
ardant, whom she thought worthy of her love, as soon as he was unarmed thus
amorously said unto him: I should be ungrateful indeed, if I should not answer
your affection or now refuse you a recompense for those good services you have
rendered me, your valor does enforce me as well as it does Knights that
encounter you; and I am constrained to confess that you deserve my favors, I
will therefore confer them on you, so as you do manage them with discretion,
and will delay your delight no longer then the evening. You shall follow
Silesia when time serves, but take heed you lose not your self in the excess
of your joy, nor let your actions testify the content of your heart. O ye
Gods! said Fulgoran, rapt into a heaven of bliss, how pleasing is this promise
to me, and what cause have I to esteem my self the happiest man on the earth?
Not all the gods, Madam, shall be able to attain to this glory of mine, and I may
well say that all my travels are fully rewarded with these words alone: you
assure me unexpressable felicities, and such as questionles might easily
transport me from my self (for no mortal man can receive them without
passion.) But Madam, I will carry my self (sinc^ you command me to do so) with
such prudence as you shall never repent your so infinitely obliging of me. But
alas! I fear that the time may change, and pardon me. If I say that I doubt
that I am not fortunate enough to merit so much grace. This is, answered she,
to afflict your self without cause: Doubt not, my Knight, that I will fail of
my word, since I am to have a share in the pleasure you hope for; but that we
may begin our love with discretion, I would not have you tarry here any longer,
for fear of giving suspicion to any. There is the Earl of Clina, hold good
correspondence with him if it be possible, for he is a man of whom I stand in
doubt, and that questionless observes our actions. These words making Fulgoran
to withdraw, he went into the garden, not now any more to pass his time among
the trees with ruminating upon the cause of his discontent, but to meditate
with the less diversion upon the good fortune that was promised him. Having
spent some hours in this entertainment the night approached, which he with so
much impatience had expected, to render him contented: For Silesia whom the
Queen had fully informed of her intentions, came to him, and having lead him to
certain trees that made a delicate arbor, willed him not to stir from thence
till she returned to him. His impatience making him think the time long, he
accused his Mistress of sloth, and would willingly have gone to hasten her, but
fearing to offend with much ado he refrained, and staid till at last he saw the
Queen appear, having nothing but a loose white satin garment on, and so gentle
a night dressing on her head, as would have forced the dullest soul in the
world to have loved her. Ravished then with delight he went and fell on his
knees before her, kissing her hands a thousand times: But she that could not
endure to see him in that posture, joined her lips to his with such ardency, as
did well testify that she was no less pressed with her desires then he. These
first caresses serving only to waken their appetites, they sat down upon the
grass, where Fulgoran immediately took possession of his desired bliss, with
so much sweet dalliance, as the Reader must not wonder if I do not take upon me
to describe the pleasure thereof, since all the words in the world are not
sufficient to express it. Having thus past the greater part of the night with
all the content that may be wished for in this world, they withdrew themselves
with a promise to meet there every night, which accordingly they performed with
much secrecy; and certainly their delights had been of longer continuance, if
Fulgoran had well observed the advice his Mistress gave him. But with this good
fortune his humor changed, he was no longer melancholy, he was not to be found
in the woods, he frequented not the fields, he was more curious in his apparel
then he was wont to be; If he spoke it was always in the defense of the beauty
of Ladies; briefly in his eyes was to be read the tranquillity of his mind, and
all his actions being full of jollity, made men judge that joy was more
predominant in his heart then fadnes, so that every man wondered at this
strange alteration in him. The Count of Clina observing him more narrowly then
the rest, because he had a particular design upon him, soon discovered the
secret, and was confident (seeing the Queen so often to eye him) that the
metamorphosis proceeded from some special familiarity that was between them,
which made him infinitely discontented. For being somewhat in love with the
Queen, whereof nevertheles he never durst make any show, it madded him to see
another more happy then himself. What, said he all enraged, shall a stranger
gather the roses, whilst I feel the prick of the thorns? It is unreasonable, I
must at leastwise have a share in her favors, since I cannot wholly possess
them; and she cannot refuse me that, seeing she gives her self to another: but
say she should be so vain as to slight my affection, I have the means to be
revenged of her, and make her f^el the effects of an incens^d spirit. Being
carried then by this heady resolution, he went directly to the Qu^ens Chamber,
where by chance she was alone, and with a low reverence said unto her: I am
come, Madam, to put my life into your hands, and to acquaint you wtth a secret,
which I scarce dare trust my self withal; I am over-rash (it is true) but who
would not be so, when so great a reward is proposed? I love you, Madam, and the
consideration of your greatness, or my duty, could ever divert me from it,
though in so doing I have, as it were foreseen my ruin, but who would be loath
to die for so excellent a cause? No, I will fear no punishments, that it may
appear I am not insensible of the force of your beauty; my sighs do testify
rather your power then my insolence, and from my passion can nothing redound
but your glory. Consider me, Madam, I beseech you, as this great light of the
world beholds all creatures, and remember that the least and meanest of them is
as much obliged to him as the mightiest Monarks: The Gods that have made you so
fair for the contentment of a King, have never forbidden you the conferring of
a like grace on such as have not scepters, but yet many virtues; so that it
lies in your power to make one happy; think me then worthy of that favor, and
let my vow of an eternal fidelity give me a place in your good opinion; I will
never pass by the respect that I ow to your greatness, and the humility of my
services shall so content you, that you shall more esteem the possessing of me,
then regard the satisfaction of another, though greater, yet less virtuous
then I. So kneeling down before her as if he would have demanded some further
grace, he attended not the answer which he hoped for, but that which in all
reason he was to fear. What ^n insolence said the offended Princess, is this?
And how shall I ever endure to look on thee again after so enormous a crime?
Get thee gone, wicked man, and do not force me to show thee how much I am
displea^^^; my carriage I am sure could never put this boldness into thee, and
thy duty should have restrained this affrontednesse. If you must needs have
passion, let it be for one of your own rank; they that resemble me cannot
behold such as you are but with contempt: howbeit I will excuse the love which
you say forces you in this sort, provided my gentleness do not puff you up;
and that I may see you reduced within the terms of your duty, I shall then
forget your folly, and forbearing to question you for it, will say that you
have erred after the ordinary custom of other men; withdraw your self then
with this testimony of my clemency, and never abuse my patience again, if you
mean not to feel the punishments which use to be inflicted on those that
remember not their own condition. With these words shutting her self into her
cabinet, she left him mightily grieved to see himself despised, which he
resolved either to revenge or lose his life. Retiring therefore to his lodging,
he began to plot the villainy wherewith I will acquaint you in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. XI. Clairangia and Fulg^ran are betrayed by the Count of Clina. The Queen
i^ imprisoned. Fulg^rans adventures after he had left Celibana.
THE Count of Clina's spite being greater then his love, he went away full of
infinite discontent. I am, said he, all transported with choler, slighted for a
stranger, and my boldness in discovering my self is threatened with punishment;
but I will make it appear that I am sensible of affronts. The Queen abusing the
easines of the King, does give her self over to the Knight ardant, and refusing
to let me share in her caresses gives me just cause to resent it, and discover
this secret. I will do it then, but with so much safety for my self, that
without any hazard I will taste the pleasure of a sweet revenge. I will accuse
these adulterers, and putting them in the Kings hand will not give this Knight
leisure who trusts in his valor, to make use of his courage, his arms; for the
Law does not allow any man the combat in his own quarrel. And if the
remembrance which the King owes to his precedent services, or the respect of
the Queen, do draw him to dispense with the Law and permit him to combat
himself, I will confront him with the redoubtable brothers of the two Giants
that he last slew, who will be right glad to meet such an occasion to be
revenged of their enemy. They are three, and able alone to defeat a whole army;
I do therefore persuade my self that he will not stand long before them, what
companion soever he gets to assist him. His choler then keeping him from
considering how dangerous the issue of his enterprise might be, he instantly
sent a messenger to Bracandors three brothers giving them notice of his design,
wherewith they were so pleased, as without further delay they came presently to
meet him in the wood, where their conspiracy being contrived and agreed upon,
the Count returned to the Castle to write a letter to the King, the tenor
whereof was as follows.

The Count of Clina's Letter to King Dardanor.
SIR, It much grieves me that in performing the office of a good subject, I
must give you occasion to afflict your self: but since I cannot fail in this
duty without being a traitor, I have resolved to pass by all considerations
whatsoever, rather then have that spot stuck upon me. The Knight Ardant, whom
you have so graced beyond his merits, not being so sensible a^ he should be of
your favors, changes the respect which he owes you into ingratitude, and
forgetting how much he stands indebted to your goodness, has engaged the
Queen to love him with all the most agreeable services he is able to do her;
which have already so gained upon her, as she has wholly given her self unto
him, reserving nothing for you but the appearances of her affection. They are
ordinarily together, their countenances do but too much discover their
thoughts, and their actions are so little concealed, that only those who will
not take the pains to observe them, cannot frame any sinister construction of
them. I have endeavored as a faithful servant ought to do, to divert the
Queen from this course, remonstrating unto her the quality she is of, the
estate of the Knight Ardant, and withal her duty to your Majesty. But my
advice has been entertained with such coldness, or as I might better say, with
such choler, as in stead of the thanks which I expected for my fidelity, I
received nothing but menaces so that unable to endure this wrong to your
Majesty, I have been constrained to advertise you of it, that you may take
present order for your quiet by the resentment which you are to have of so
grievous an offense.


What extremes will not the choler of a King run into, that believes himself
^ffronted? Dardanor having read this letter suffered his passion so to
transport him, that not considering what he owed to the reputation of his wife,
and Fulgorans services, he dispatched away immediately fowr hundred Knights
(having first written a ticket to the Count of Clina) and commanded them to be
at Celibana two howrs after midnight, and obey the Count in all his directions.
Thus was all in disorder, except our lovers, who lived so contented amidst
their ordinary delights, and not imagining they were subject to fortunes power,
did study nothing but how to caresse one another, to the infinite vexation of
the Count of Clina, who tore his hair for despite, but his pain was of no long
continuance: For seeing in the Commission the King had sent him what means he
had to be revenged, his grief was turned into joy: nevertheless not intending
to discover his thoughts he kept the same countenance as before, till his
succor were arrived. This while Clairangia who dreamt not of the mischief that
was to fall upon her head, having not forgotten the place where she met with
such delight, was lying upon the grass with Fulgoran, striving to make her
caresses more pleasing to him with a world of dalliance, when as all on a
sudden she heard a great noise of arms in the Castle. Sin ordinarily makes the
guilty fearful, and we often see that fear does discover a bad design. The
Queen guessing at the cause of all this hurly-burly instantly arose, and
showing the Knight Ardant a place of the wall commodious for him to get out,
she besought him to save himself rather then to lose his life out of too much
courage. Dear friend, said she to him, you may much better relieve me, having
the liberty of the fields then fettred in irons void of all power to make use
of your valor against our enemies. Time presses us, and forbids us any long
discourse: wherefore I will take my leave of you with this kiss, then joining
her lips to his, she speedily retired by a secret pair of stairs up to her
chamber; where she found Silesia nearer dead then alive, with the affright of
hearing the Count bouncing at the door and threatening to break it open. The
escape of the Knight Ardant having rendered the Queen somewhat confident, she
freely opened the door: and seeing the Count come in attended by a number of
soldiers, she said to him with a countenance that testified her displeasure:
What is it (disloiall as thou art) that thou intendst to do, and what means so
many men at arms at this unseasonable howr when every one should be at rest? If
you had, Madam, replied he with a like confidence, continued still in your
virtue, I should be bound to render you an account of my actions, but that now
being wanting in you, I will not tell you the reason why in the Kings name I
arest you as his prisoner, being assured that your offense tells you what is the
cause thereof. Prisoner by the Kings command, said she then all amazed? Oh
traitor! this mischief comes not but from thy villainy. If I would have given
ear to thy base prayers, I should not have received this affront, but the Gods
which never forsake the innocent, will deliver me out of thy hands, and from
this unadvised King, who gives so much credit to thy sl^nderous reports. I will
go to prison then, since it must be so, but remember that chastisement always
follows the offense, and that thy crime will not remain unpunished. Saying so,
she was going out to take her Coach, when as she espied the Knight Ardants
Squire in the custody of thirty or forty soldiers, who entreated him with such
indignity, as she could not forbear saying to the Count: Base man, Is this poor
gentleman also guilty with me? Oh heavens! what injustice is this? and how is
it that you do not punish such enorm iniquities? I would, replide the Count
without being any whit abashed, that his master were in his room, we would make
him know that strangers cannot defile a Princes bed without danger; but perhaps
he may fall into our fingers hereafter. Yes, said Clairangia, or else thou into
his: but I will not wish thee that honor, for thou deservest no better an
executioner then a hangman. With that these speeches serving but to put the
Count into further choler, he presently thrust her into the Coach, with
Silesia, the Squire, and the Knight Ardants arms, and so took his way to the
Court, not a little vexed that he carried not with him the principal piece of
his business. The Giant Grandimore who was become Fulgorans true friend, did not
approve of this proceeding, and had it not been that he was not as yet thoroughly
recovered of his wounds, so as he was not able to wear his arms, he would never
have suffered the Queen to be entreated with so much cruelty: but he was
constrained with patience to expect the issue of this affair, resolved
nevertheless, either to lose his life, or to defend the Knight Ardants right,
who on the other side was no less troubled. For seeing himself without arms,
without horse, and not d^ring to show himself for fear of being made a prisoner
he was so transported with grief, at he was almost beside himself. What, said
he all enraged, and looking toward the town whither they were carrying away his
mistress, is it possible that I should leave my Lady unrelieved? and can I be
satisfied with shedding of tears in stead of spending my blood for her service?
It is not possible that I should be so base? My love is the cause of her
misfortune: my resenting it must also be the cause of her preservation: I have
a sword yet left me, that is enough, for courage cannot be wanting to me in
this occasion: I will break through these armed troops that convoy her, and
make it appear that I am more sensible of her misery, then of her affection.
Therewith he laid hand on his sword and began to follow the Count and his
company, when as he heard the voice of one that called to him, that made him
presently at a stand, imagining that perhaps it might be his Lady, who being
unwilling to fall into the Kings hands, had made an escape as he had done, and
was come to seek him determining to run one and the same fortune with him: but
he continued not long in this error, for though it were night and dark he might
yet discern a maid, that having saluted him, said: Good Knight, I come to
divert you from your design, and to tell you that it is no less glory for a
man to do all things with prudence, then to encounter his enemies with courage:
you are in the way to an inevitable ruin, and of making your Lady culpable in
your death: reason should always predominate in us, and to her should our
passions ever submit: Take this way into the wood, where you shall find a Cave,
out of which you are not to go till you have direction to do it. For you cannot
now be seen without extreme hazard of your life: the time will not seem so
tedious unto you as you apprehend, and believe it you shall find such pleasing
diversions there, as you will never repent the following of my advice. With
that she vanished out of his sight, leaving him so amazed as he could hardly
perswace himself that he was not in a dream: how beit determining to follow her
counsel he took the way which had been showed him, and walked along till the
Sun arose, when as he found himself at the foot of a little rock wherein there
was a cleft, wide enough for two men to enter a front, thinking then that this
was the Cave of which she spoke, he looked round about, and seeing a little
pair of stairs cut out of the rock he went down, without any apprehension of
fear, and at length came into a court so fair and compassed about with
buildings so large and magnificent, that he remained much astonished: the walls
were round about adorned with most exquisire pictures that represented the
heroique acts of Amadis of Gaul, and of all the Princes of his blood, in the
contemplation whereof he took such delight as he would have thought of nothing
else, had he not been interrupted by three damsels of admirable beauty, one of
which spoke thus unto him: It should seem, Sir Knight, that we have nothing in
this house worth your regard but these pictures, Follow us, I pray you, and we
will show you that which will no less transport you? With that she took him
gently by the hand and led him through the Garden, where a thousand sorts of
delicate flowrs divided a great number of quarters, into so stately an hall,
that he was even lost with the admiration of it. For besides the limming of
gold and azure, the walls were adorned about with threescore marble statues of
Knights, which holding up one of their hands supported a throne of crystal,
whereupon Cupid was seated in state, as it were thereby demonstrating that he
had triumphed over al those the most valiant Knights of the World. Being
arested a while with the consideration heerof, he went out of that into another
room, which seemed no less glorious to him then the former, where immediately
six other damsels served a great deal of excellent meat to the Table: but me
thinks it is fit to leave him a while amongst these delicacies, from whence we
shall bring him in convenient time, to relate unto you the lamentations which
in the mean space the beautiful Queen of Romerie made. This Princess being
conducted to the City in all rigorous manner, was yet still in hope to mollify
the King by her tears, and to make him lose the bad conceit he had of her; but
her hope was in vain, for Dardanor being too sensible of his disgrace, refused
to see her, and having committed her to prison determined without further delay
to put her to death, seeking no better proofs against her then the Count of
Clina's information, and the flight of Fulgoran, had not the Lords of his
Kingdom opposed themselves to this injustice of his. The Law, Sir, said one of
his ancienst Counsailor, does indeed adjudge the Adulterer to death, but yet
commands us to proceed upon better evidence then bare opinion; who does assure
us of the Queens offense, besides the words of the Count of Clina? and who can
truly swear that this is not a treachery in him? Silesia maintains that she is
innocent, and no body presents himself as her accuser but only one man, who is
not to be relied upon in this case; why then should we be more led by his
motion then by Law and Custom? Sir, there is no likely hood of it, (pardon me
if the consideration of right makes me speak in this manner) and the conjecture
which you frame upon the flight of the Knight Ardant, is not forcible enough to
prove her guilty; He was not found in the Castle, that is rather a sign of my
mistr^sses innocence, then an evidence of her guilt. I, but he presents not
himself: it is true, and in my judgment he has reason; For being a stranger,
and not expecting to be supported in his right, since you have failed him after
he had so infinitely obliged you, he has withdrawn himself, knowing how
dangerous it is to fall into the hands of an incensed Prince. Sir, you have my
opinion freely delivered to you: the place that I hold by your Majesty's
command, gives me that liberty. And since there is question of your quiet, and
my conscience, I say, that your Majesty ought not to refuse the Queen the
benefit of the Law, which is, that a woman accused may justify her self by the
arms of a Champion. This liberty then she has if her accusers appear. I am
here said then the Count of Clina, ready to accept of this condition, and to
enter the combat with three seconds against an equal number: for being certain
of the thing I shall never fear that the victory should not be of my side.
Heerupon the King seeing that the most apparent of the kingdom were of his
opinion, and that the Count of Clina accepted of the combat, he Decreed, That
he should accompanied with three gentlemen, within fifteen days maintain his
accusation; And that the Queen should within the same term, present the like
number, upon pain of being held culpable and liable to punishment. Matters thus
ordered every one withdrew: The Count of Clina to send for his Giants, and
Silesia who was enlarged, to enquire and search for the Knight Atdant.

CHAP. XII. The horrible combat between the Giant Grandimore, the Count of
Clina; and the three brothers: Grandimore being in extreme danger of his life,
is relieved first by a strange Knight, and then by Fulgoran.
THE Count of Clina highly pleased for that the combat was granted him as he
desired, dispatched presently a servant of his to Bracandors kinsemen,
advertising them of the conditions of the combat, and what day they were to be
in the City for the finishing of their enterprise; being so confident of the
victory, as he made no doubt of being revenged to the full, since Fulgoran
appeared not, to take upon him the defense of his own honor and his Ladies;
who amidst the grief to see herself in captivity had no other recourse but to
her tears; howbeit judging it fit to give them over for to think of some means
for her delivery, she dispatched away Silesia with a command to seek the Knight
Ardant where ever he were, and to acquaint him with the resolution that was
taken concerning this combat, but all her labor was in vain: for having
employed two days in that search without any news of him, she was ready to
make her self away, determining rather to die so then to return to her mistress
with so little satisfaction. Great Gods, said she lifting up her hands, can you
suffer so beautiful a Queen to be lost for want of succor? and what may be
hereafter expected from any man, when the Knight Ardant not only fails of his
promise, but is also wanting both to the life of his Lady, and his own honor?
Is this the recompense of all her love? and how can he excuse so great a
baseness? If he have not feared the hazard of his life for the relief of private
persons, why does he now refuse to employ his valor for a matter that so
nearly concerns him? Truly I know not what to say, and am extremely amazed to
see him thus abandon us without any sense of that affection which lately was so
violent in him. But alas! it may be he is not still in this country, and so is
ignorant of the resolution is taken concerning this affair: wherefore I may
blame him wrongfully: and yet not so, but I have just cause; for the fear of
all the tortures in the world should not have made him quit this kingdom
before he knew whether his presence here were necessary or no. He is guilty,
and my complaint of him not unjust: but what shall I say to this afflicted
Princess? Shall I carry her the certain news of her ruin, by the default of
her Knight? Or shall I persuade her to save her life by yielding to the desires
of this Traitor that accuses her? Neither of them, for so should I be either
guilty of her crimes, or of her punishment, and be the destruction both of her
honor and her life: die I must then, (for without her I desire no happiness
in this world) and declare by a generous resolution that I loved her more in my
death then whilst I lived. Die then Silesia, and let the sacrifice of thy
blood appease the Gods, and make them look upon thy mistress with an eye of
pity. With that she took a little knife that hung at her girdle, with a purpose
to sheath it in her bosom, when as on the sudden she espied hard by her a
maid, that thus spoke unto her: Damsel, do not persist in this furious design
which you are about to execute upon your self: The Gods would rather be highly
displeased with the effusion of your blood, then any way reconciled to your
desires by such a heady violence. They are to be humbly entreated and not
provoked by our desperation. Leave then this course which would be to no
purpose, and ere long you shall meet with a Knight that will be of much use to
you in your business. He is full of courtesy, and will not refuse to be a
second therein; touching the rest never trouble your self, for the first being
found, a third will appear in so due time as these tears will be converted into
joy. This said, she so suddenly left her, as Silesia had not leisure to reply,
being very much grieved that she understood not the meaning of her speech;
nevertheless taking a little better heart upon her promise, she forgot the
nymphs advice, but went into the thickest of the wood, where she had not gone
far before she found a young Knight sleeping under the shadow of certain trees:
He was so lovely, and seemed so handsome asleep, as she could not choose but
behold him with passion. Oh heavens! said she to her self, how liberal has
nature showed her self to this Knight, if he be as brave and valiant as the
nymph would make me believe, I do not think that any one in the world can match
him, except it be Fulgoran, who is nothing behind him in those perfections
which I observe in him? and me thinks he looks very like him; or if there be
any difference, it is that our Knight is somewhat fairer, and has a more
majesticall aspect. Shall I wake him to judge a little better of his
excellencies in observing the gracefulness of h^s motion? that were somewhat
uncivil. But alas! I am as it were bound to do so: for besides my desire, the
business about which I am sent does press me unto it, and does not permit me
to trifle out the time in this manner. I must then interrupt him to procure mine
own quiet, but it must be done in such sort as I may not be taxed of
incivility. Whereupon retiring a little aside, she began to lament so loud, that
the sleeping Knight awaked, and not well come to himself, laced on his helmet,
took his sword in his hand, and drew directly to the place whither the voice
called him. She that saw him coming in that fashion presently arose, and
throwing herself at his feet embraced his knees without any other speaking then
by sighs, which made the Knight take her up by the arm, and say unto her:
Gentlewoman be pleased to rise, and tell me if you have any occasion to use me,
that I may dispose my self to do you service. For having taken arms for no
other end, I shall hold it a glory to be employed in drawing you out of that
affliction wherein you seem to be at this present. Noble Knight, replied she,
the Gods reward you for this so generous an offer: I am indeed afflicted, and
perhaps you shall never meet with an occasion more worthy of your arms and
valor then this, to which you have presented your self: I belong to the
beautuous Queen of Romeria, one of the compleatest Ladies on the earth; who,
for slighting the affection of the most treacherous man that lives, is falsely
accused to have forfeited her honor: and the King himself more heady then
discreet, has adjudged her to the fire, if some Knight do not undertake her
defense. See here the first and principal cause of my grief, and the next is,
for that I cannot find a Knight whom I have sought these two days; for I am
assured that he would not fail us at our need, and that with your assistance
our enemies would come much short of their reckoning. But if we do not meet
with him we shall not find any in the Court that will undertake the combat for
the Queen: not for that they do not hold her innocent, but because the report
is that three horrible Giants will second the traitor, who is the cause of all
these mischiefs; now if your courage be suitable to the beauty which I see in
your face, you can never have a braver occasion to gain honor in the world, nor
will you let me return without hope of seeing my mistress soon rid of the
trouble. Do not believe, Gentlewoman said he, that the fear of any danger can
make me be wanting to the duty of a good Knight; we never leave our homes, nor
put on arms, but with a solemn oath not to forsake the innocent in their
misery. Wherefore I will not only assist you in this, where the life and honor
of so excellent a Princess is in question, but in whatsoever else you will
employ me: Let us then when you please make for the town, provided that we may
reach it in time, I shall never complain of my labor. I could not, replied she
wiping her eyes, expect an answer less virtuous from so gallant a Knight. Let
us go then, since you are pleased, without any further stay, for in truth I
fear that we shall not get there but with the latest. Away then went they
toward the Town, entertaining one another with pleasing discourses, to make
their journey seem the less tedious. In this mean time Fulgoran was in the
Palace of the rock, amidst the greatest delights that might be; one while being
entertained by the damsels, who recounted to him the admirable deeds of arms of
the Grek Princes, to the end he might thereby be drawn to love them: another
while diverted by the pleasing object of a thousand varieties which he met with
in every part. Love did not then disquiet him, he was free in his thoughts, and
the remembrance of no one thing whatsoever, was of force to bar him from
enjoying a most happy content. Fourteen days being spent amidst so much
sweetness, that fair Lady which did first welcome him at his arrival there,
took him by the hand and said, I could passionately wish, gentle Prince, that
the Fates would permit you a perpetual abode in this house, that I might not
be deprived of your conversation, which is most agreeable to me: but you were
not brought hither for my satisfaction, nor for to pass the rest of your days
in solitarines; your valor is necessary in the world, and I should be guilty
of much mischief if I should retain you here any longer: Wherefore you shall
presently depart, for the preservation of that which your merit has gotten
you, I mean that beautuous Queen who feared not to hazard her life to oblige
you: She is in an extreme danger of death, which she cannot avoid but by your
assistance: Do not fail her then in this necessity, lest you incur the name of
ungrateful. The estate wherein you now are does trouble you, I well perceive,
for to enter a combat in the case you are now in were not agreeable to your
merit. But be not dismayed, for those which brought you hither from amongst the
midst of your enemies, have taken a care of your affairs; behold, here are
arms, that were made for you and worthy of your valor: with that she opened a
little Cabinet and took out of it an azur'd armor, covered all over with
golden stars, and an helmet of the same so rich and of so excellent a temper,
as was hard to be matched. You must, said she continuing her discourse,
instantly a^m your self, whilst I give order to make ready a horse for you;
with that she departed, leaving the Knight Ardant as much amazed as contented:
but remembering that it was no time to loiter, since the business was pressing,
he put on those arms, which he found so light as he could hardly believe that
they were proof enough against the blow of a sword; yet unwilling to show any
mistrust of them which had entertained him with so much courtesy, he made an
end of arming himself, and instantly came down the stairs: but when he thought
to come into the Court, he no longer saw those stately buildings, or the rock,
but a very spacious plain. Good God! said he then all astonished, where am I
now? and how in a moment comes so goodly a house to be lost? Either I sleep, or
all that was done here proceeded from the art of some person that loves me.
Howsoever I am armed now, and therefore fear not the encounter of my enemies:
then looking round about him he saw on of the bravest horses that ever he had
beheld, tied at a tree not far off. This Lady, said he is no liar, for the
horse is not inferior to the arms: with that he drew to him, and finding him
sadled and brideled, got up on him, took a lance that was reared against the
tree, and rode away toward the Town. In this mean time the Giant Grandimores
wounds were healed, and Clairdngia's sorrows increased. For having no news
either of her Knight or of Silesia, she was in utter despair of her life, the
rather in regard that the next day was the very same which was designed her for
the maintenance of her innocence; that her enemies were come, and that no
Knight presented himself to defend her right. Poor distressed Queen, said she
tearing of her hair, into what extremity art thou now reduced? Thou have but
one gasp of life remaining, which also thou must lose ignominiously; and that
which with reason may most torment thee is, that thy misery proceeds from thy
sense of another pains, who now has no feeling of thine. O ungrateful
Knight! I could never have believed that thy love would have been extinguished
by my misfortune, since that was the only cause of it: but thy perfidiousnes
does teach me, that nothing is more unsure then the promises of men. Thou
ought to lose a thousand lives (for so thou have often sworn to me) and run
any danger whatsoever for my service; and thy affection ought to be as lasting
as thy life, yet now thou want either love or courage: the presence of three
men does affright thee, or forgetful of my caresses, thou art now lying at the
foot of some other Lady, whom thou meanest to bring into the like miserable
condition. But what do I say? Fulgoran, Thou art no coward, I have seen too
great proofs of thy valor for to doubt of it: nor can I by any means persuade
my self that thou do not love me still. Thou come not then to relieve me,
because thou art detained by some unlucky fate, and so it is not in thy power:
I am therefore too blame in accusing thee; for I know thou would not shun the
encounter of a thousand armed Knights when my preservation were in question. No
I can accuse none for my ill fortune but my self; I will die then in this
opinion, and will beseech the Gods that they will deliver thee if thou be in
captivity, and always bless thy enterprises. The Princess being thus
resolved for death expected but the next day, which came on with much
contentment to the Count of Clina, who believing that he should not find any
opposite, caused himself to be armed with rich arms, and mounted upon a mighty
horse came into the field with such arrogance, as there was not one of the
assistants that did not curse him in his heart, seeing with what boldness he
marched in the midst of his three Giants: as soon as he was entered the field
the Queen was sent for; but she not expecting any help would have gone straight
to the place of execution and not to the lists: but in that instant the Giant
Grandimore presented himself to her, armd at all pieces to desire her leave
that he might undertake the combat for her. Madam, said he, it is with much
grief that I see your fair eyes drenched in tears, and that the Knights of your
Court are so base as not to assist you in this necessity: I am the Knight
Ardants friend, and will with his quarrel which now is in dispute, maintain
against your enemies, that you are innocent of the crime is imputed unto you:
be pleased then to give me power so to do, and distrust not the mercy of the
Gods who never leave the afflicted in their miseries. These courageous words
giving Clairangia some hope, she replied in this manner: Virtuous Knight, this
good will of yours to me does so oblige me, as I am most willing to put all my
right into your hands; you go alone to fight with fowr redoubted enemies,
nevertheles I hope you will be victorious: For they are traitors, and the God^
will fight on my side, giving you as much courage as they have malice. But let
us know with what conditions this combat is to begin: Then calling for the
Judges, she sent to the King to beseech him that Grandimore might be permitted
to encounter his enemies one by one, and not altogether, since the laws of
Chivalry did not permit a combat upon advantage: whereunto the King answered,
that the business was not in his power to dispose of, but depended wholly upon
the pleasure of his adversaries; howbeit he would no way hinder him from being
seconded by any Knight that should happen to arrive whilst the combat lasted.
Since it is in the choice of our enemies, said Grandimore, incensed with this
answer, let us Madam, go and see if there be more courtesy in them then in the
King: whereupon entering within the lists he set himself just against the Count
of Clina and his Giants; one of whom desired the first course, remonstrating to
his companions that it were a baseness for fowr of them to join in the defeature
of one single Knight. But the Count of Clina would none of that, knowing the
abilities of Grandimore, and the importance of the victory. Those which are
wicked, said he, desiring to cloak his malice with some show of reason, do not
deserve to be entreated like persons of honor; we therefore may lawfully make
use of our fortune that is presented unto us: Saying so, he furiously elapt
spurs to his horse, and the others by his example did the like. But Grandimore
disdaining the Count directed his lance against one of the Giants, and that so
luckily, as he ran him clean through, laying him upon the ground: yet being
unable to sit the shock of fowr lances, which had at one and the same instant
incountred him, he was unhorsed spite of his heart, and fell with a slight
wound in his arm; nevertheles being more active then the greatness of his body
did seem to permit, he very lightly got up, and was remounted on his horse by
that time the others had ended their course: Having then no feeling of his
hurt, he courageously drew out his sword, wherewith he gave the Count such a
blow, as cutting his arm sheer off he sent him without sense to the ground.
That done, he made head to the Giants, who battered him more rudely then he
desired, and began one of the cruellest fights in the world; sometimes
striking, sometimes foining, and then again with an admirable dexterity
avoiding their blows: In brief, he so carried himself that it was not perceived
to whom the victory did incline; when as the first Giant whom he had
overthrown, then having recovered his spirits came to charge him with strange
fury; his coming in making him despair of his life, he graspt his sword fast in
his hand, and determining to sell his skin as dear as he could, he let it fall
with such rage upon him that first came within his distance, as he gave him a
dangerous wound in his head. And not therewith satisfied he was raising his
sword again to dispatch him, but at that very instant he received two such
blows, one on the head and the other on the arm, that letting his sword fall he
remained in his saddle deprived of all sense, his horse carrying him about the
field so as the Giants could not come to fasten the least blow upon him. Things
being at this pass, every one accounted the victory sure; for the Count of
Clina who now began to move, when as a damsel was seen to enter the field
accompanied with a Knight, who understanding the state of the combat, and the
conditions whereunto it was begun, approached to the Giants that pursued
Grandimore, and charged them in such sort, as they were glad to turn head to
defend themselves. Grandimore coming to himself then at the noise of their
blows, was as much astonished to see himself brought to that estate, as pleased
with that assistance, whereof meaning to make use, he took hold of his sword
that hung at his arm, and renewed the combat with so much fury, as every body
wondered at the courage he showed in this fight: which having endured about an
howr without advantage, was ready to end with the death of Grandimore and his
fellow, if in the instant there had not appeared in the field a Knight in
azur'd armor, powdered with little stars of gold, so brave, and carrying
himself so handsomely in his seat, that every body was delighted with the view
of him: his coming in was pleasing to all the spectators; for as soon as he was
entered the lists, and that falling to work, they saw him light upon one of the
Giants with a blow, that divided his helmet and head in two pieces, they all
presently assured themselves that the victory would fall on the Queens side,
who then began to hope well: and attentively beholding him, she believed that
it was her Fulgoran, whom she had so long wished for. The more she eied him,
and considered the force of his blows, the more she settled her self in that
opinion. But he that observed her alteration, immediately imagined that she
knew him: which did so fire his courage, as not enduring that two men alone
should so long dispute with him the honor of a combat, upon the success
whereof depended all his contentment, together with the life of his Mistress,
threw so violent a thrust at him that was opposed to Grandimore, as he ran him
quite through the body, and laid him dead upon the ground. From him then
turning presently to the third, which was hand to hand with the strange Knight,
he let fly at him so furious a blow, as he clove his cask and head down to the
teeth. Then looking upon the Count of Clina, who was not able to rise, he leapt
from his horse, went and disarmed his head, and putting the point of his sword
to his throat, wretch as thou art, said he, confess thy villainy if thou will
hope for any favor. For Gods sake, good Knight, answered he, be not so cruel
as to take away my life: Content your self with my being thus woefully
dismembered; I will freely discover the truth of this affair, so you will but
cause the Judge to come down to me. Heerwith the Duke of Rozolia descending
from his scaffold, the Count declared, that the excellent beauty of the Queen,
having powerfully mastered his reason, he had sought for relief at her hands:
but his suit being rejected by her with indignation, he was so sensible of that
disgrace, as he had plotted this treason in revenge of his despised affection.
That he had never seen the actions of the Knight Ardant without respect, nor
the carriage of the Queen without modesty; and that he most humbly besought the
King to pardon this his offense for his repentance sake. Let the Gods, said
Dardanor, when they reported this confession to him, never be favorable to me,
if once more I give ear to a man so wicked: he shall suffer the punishment that
he had ordained for my Wife, to the end that traitors may by his example learn
to be wise. Having then caused him to be thrown into the fire, he turned to
receive the Queen, unto whom he showed all the kindness that might be, desiring
her utterly to forget the curelty he had exercised toward her. Afterward
addressing himself to the three Knights; I confess, said he, that I am engaged
to you as much as I could have been for the reservation of mine own life: But
Gentlemen, since you already have done so much for me, please you oblige me
further, by letting me know who you are. If my innocence were not apparent,
answered he in the azure arms, and withal unbuckling his helmet, I should not
thus present my self before you, Sir, to entreat you to restore me the honor
of your favor: but the Count of Clina's confession giving me that boldness, I
come to continue my services if they may be acceptable unto you. I am Sir, the
Knight Ardant, who is not a little grieved that he has been at any time the
subject of your displeasure. This great Knight is Grandimore, whom the last day
I purchased my friend in my way to Celibana. This other is a stranger, whom
good fortune has brought hither, and whose name, as yet I know not. Pardon me
then, Sir, if you please, and make it appear, that the malice of my enemies
has not been of power to take away your favor from me. Nor shall it, by the
faith of a Prince, said the King embracing him again, and I am more troubled
for having so lightly given credit to this cal^^^y, then for any thing that
ever I did in all my life: you are most truly welcome, and so are these
Cavaliers, whom one day I will recompense for their p^i^s: but since it is a
time of rejoicing, let us talk no more of our passed misfortunes. See where my
Wife comes to entertain you: you shall from her receive the acknowledgement
that is due to your valor. Whereupon he withdrew, leaving the three Knights
with the Queen, who made infinitely much of them, wondering at the beauty of the
strange Knight, that was so like to Fulgoran, as there was no great difference
between them. Some time being sweetly spent in these complements, the Knights
were conducted to their Chambers, there to be unarmed, to the extreme vexation
of these Lovers; who, for fear of reviving the suspicion that had touched upon
them, passed this interview slightly over, holding no other discourse together,
but with their eyes and thoughts. As soon as they were retired to their
Lodgings, the Physicians and Chyrurgians by order from the King, came to visit
their wounds. But the strange Knight and Fulgoran had not that need of their
aid which the Giant Grandimore had, whom they found hurt in fowr places:
whereat the Knight Ardant was much grieved, in regard he loved him dearly for
his virtue: how beit his displeasure consisted not only in that, but rather for
that he was barred from his Mistress, who suffered no less then he; and that
durst not look familiarly on him, for fear of falling again into the danger
which so lately she had escaped. Living then in this vexing restraint, all
manner of delights were unpleasing to them, and perhaps this sadness of theirs,
might have turned to their ruin, if the Gods, who take care of all things, had
not given them a remedy thereunto, as I will presently show you.

CHAP. XIII. A Damsel comes to the Court of Dardanor, for to obtain a gift of
the Queen, by whose means she carries away the Knight Ardant and the stranger.
Their ensuing adventures.
THE Court of Romeria being full of extraordinary joy, for the declaration of
the Queens innocence, a Damsel of an indifferent beauty entered one way into the
great Hall of the Palace, and falling on her knees before the Queen, she thus
said unto her: Madam, if the misfortunes which oppress me, were of force
enough to make me stoop to weak and base expressions of my sorrow, I would power
a river of tears at your feet to make you pity my mishaps, and stir up a desire
in you to succor me by the multiplicity of my complaints. But knowing that Art
is needles to the engaging of a generous mind, I only come humbly beseeching
you to grant me one boon whereby I hope to get out of those my sighs, wherinto
the treason of certain wicked persons have plunged me. The gentle manner of your
request, said the Queen, does not permit me to refuse you. Say then, sweet
heart, what is it that you desire of me, for I am most ready to grant it? I did
not expect an answer less noble from your Majesty, replied the Damsel, and
therefore will presently begin the acknowledgements that I ow for this favor,
with a protestation of continuing them all my life. That which I desire at your
gracious hands is, that you will command these two Knights (pointing to
Fulgoran and the stranger) to follow me for the freeing of my Father, whom the
most distoiall man in the world holds prisoner, with an intent to deprive him
of the Duchy of Matran, which after his death is to descend upon me. It may be
you will think me uncivil, for craving a thing of you that depends on the will
of another: but, Madam, you will not so much wonder at me, when you shall well
understand the reason I have to make this suit unto you. Worthy Knights are
always obliged to lend succor indifferently to all afflicted persons what
soever; but yet I am assured that they go more willingly to the undertaking of
the most difficile enterprises, when as they are commanded so to do by some
Lady of your merit: I therefore thought it sitter to address my self to you,
then to importune them to quit this Court, where their virtues are held in so
high an esteem. You know, answered Clairangia, extremely sorry for the promise
she had made, that they being no subjects to the King, we have no farther force
over them, then what their courtesy is pleased to afford us; so that I should
think it an abusing of their good will they bear us, if I should lay any
command upon them heerin: but that I may not be wanting to my word, I desire
them to employ their valor in your service, and to follow you for my sake.
Madam, said Fulgoran then, I receive no little content in the leave you give me
to serve this Damsel, to whom in truth both your Majesty and my self are much
obliged: for it was she that furnished me with the arms and horse, which you
saw me use the day of your deliverance. I did not think, said the Damsel
smiling, that so small a service as that which I rendered you then would have
been so long remembered: but now I see by experience that a good turn is never
cast away, since one way or other we always meet with a recompense for it:
your kind acknowledgement pleases me so well, that I am resolved to do more
for you then ever I did, and you shall one day find it: In the mean time, I
pray you prepare your self to go with me to morrow in company of this strange
Knight; for if we tarry here any longer, my labor would be lost, and we shall
not find him alive whom we go to deliver. The departure of these Knights being
thus resolved on, the Queen remained in a strange perplexity: for the absence
of Fulgoran afflicted her extremely before it came; and that which most vexed
her was, that she durst not bring him into her chamber to take her last
farewell of him: which this strange Damsel knowing, said unto her: If I had
not Madam, a particular science for to penetrate into the secretest thoughts of
men, I would not offer to speak with such privacy to you, but understanding
both what they do, and what they resolve to do before they communicate it to
any one: you may not wonder if I tell you that I know the pain you are in at
this instant, for the departure of this Knight whom I am to carry away with me.
I am the cause of your sorrow, but I will now let you see that I have always
desired your contentment: you long, and blush not at it, to enjoy the Knight
Ardants company with the same liberty you have heertofore had; I will procure
it for you, knowing full well that he disires it with no less passion then
you: but do not send for him before night, for otherwise I should not have time
enough for my conjurations, and so you might be surprised: you shall have the
whole night at your dispose, and him to continue safely with you till break of
day. These words mightily troubled the Queen; for women would not have their
counsels known, and are well pleased that people should be blind in their
affairs: but being unable to help it, and on the other side most contented with
the promise was made her, she very much blushing answered: If you were ignorant
of the weakness of women, of the power of that haughty deity which triumphs
over all men, or of the merits of Fulgoran, I would never confess my error, or
would seek excuses to make it seem less distasteful to you; but being assured
that none of these things have escaped your consideration, I will not trouble
my self with studying for reasons to persuade you that I have not done much
amiss: and rendering you thanks for the assistance you proffer me, which indeed
I cannot refuse, since you are so well read in my privatest intention; I will
wholly rest upon your promises, for the execution whereof, I will instantly go
and send Silesia to my Knight to give him advertisement of our resolution. This
enamoured Queen retiring thereupon to her Chamber, with much impatience attended
the evening, which was no sooner come, but she sent for her Knight, whom she
caressed more then ever she had done; conjuring him by the infinity of her love
to shorten his voyage as much as possibly he could, and not to deprive her
longer then of necessity he must, of the pleasure she took in his company; and
the more to oblige him thereunto, she informed him that their embraces at
Celibana had left her with child. The night then being insensibly slipped away
amidst the sweetest delights that two lovers can enjoy, they parted with tears,
and protestations to love one another eternally. Having taken their leaves and
bidden Grandimore farewell, that lay of his wounds, our Knights presently left
the Town, with the strange Damsel, who seeing her self a great way distant
from the Town, made a stand, and said thus to Fulgoran; Valiant Knight, marvel
not if I speak somewhat freely to you; they which love you and desire to have a
share in the glory of your fame, out of the interest that their affection does
challenge therein, have commanded me to tell you, that a worthy and well bred
Knight ought not to be carried away by any disordered love, which never
produces but mischievous effects. Your passion for the Queen of Romeria, would
infallibly have been your ruin, and her imprisonment was no other then a
presage o^ the misfortune that ere long would have befallen you, had not I
retired you in this sort from the Court, not with any purpose to conduct you to
some enterprise, as you have hitherto believed, but only to show you how you
may clear your self of that obligation wherein you stand engaged to your honor:
for without doubt you had not armor put on your back to let it hang rusting on
a pin, while you lie languishing at the feet of a Lady. This which I give you
is the advice of a friend; for you may well imagine, that it is more for your
glory, then for any profit I may reap thereby: And if you remember with what
affection I received you lately in the palace of the enchanted rock, you will
judge that I rather did it to conceal you from them that sought for you, and
who would without doubt have taken away your life without any regard of your
former services, then for any hope of drawing assistance from you. Weigh my
reasons well, I pray you, and do not yield so much to your passion as to forget
what you are. Go seek abroad in the world the renown that your predecessors
have acquired. Imitate your Father and Brother, which qu^stionles are two of
the greatest and valiantest Princes on the earth. And above all take heed you
return not to Romeria, till your fate bring you thither when as you least think
of it; otherwise you will perish there by the jealousy of Dardanor, and will
be the cause of such mischiefs, as will make your memory most odious amongst
men. I am not afraid to speak thus unto you before this Knight, who is your
near kinsman, though you know him not to be so, to the end that if you follow
not my advice, he may with reason blame you for it. Saying so, she vanished
away, leaving them both much amazed, but principally Fulgoran, who was
extremely grieved that he had not first learned the names of his so brave and
eminent kinsmen; but hoping that fortune would one day let him know them, he
turned him to the Knight that accompanied him, and embracing him thus spoke:
Dear Cousin, you may please to pardon me, if till now you have been no better
entertained by me; if I have erred it was out of ignorance, but time shall let
you see that I do highly value your being of kin to me, and the services that I
will render you shall give you cause to think my actions void of malice; with
that they embraced a fresh: which done, Fulgoran did in this manner prosecute
his discourse: Were it reason to stick in so fair a way? I verily believe we
are of kin, but know not which way; Favor me in letting me know who you are:
for by the knowledge thereof, I shall it may be, learn somewhat of my own
descent. Verily, answered he, the more I consider the words of this woman, the
more find I my self in confusion, not being able any way to imagine how you and
I should be of the same blood as she delivers, in regard that my Father and
Mother (who for the present hold the Scepter of Canabea) never had either
brother or sister, but the Queen Florella, who died without children; and yet,
as I remember, I have often heard it spoken, that the same Queen dying with
child by one of the most esteemed Princes of Christendom, who it may be should
have married her, was ripped up by a Magician Giant, that took out the child,
whereof she had not been conceived full eight months, and wrapping it in a
virgin parchment, carried it away no man being able to hinder him: howbeit he
promised the Prince Brazanges my father, that he would one day return him, and
let him see him with all the perfections to be required in a brave Knight. It
now rests that you instruct me where you have bestowed your younger years, that
out of this incertainty we may (if possible) draw a truth for our content.
Doubtless, said Fulgoran, this woman's words are true: The great E^celadus did
bring me up, and though he told me not who were my parents, yet he many times
assured me that he did cut me out of my mothers belly: See now whether I ought
not to be the son of Florella, and consequently your kinsman. At these words
they embraced again with much expression of love, and travailing on entertained
themselves with variety of pleasing discourses: but night coming on sooner
then they de^ired, for there was never a house in sight to retire unto, they
resolved to rest under certain trees there by, and alighting from their horses,
they sat them down near to a little brook, and began to stay their stomachs
with such meat as their Squires had brought with them, when as they heard a
voice that did sweetly suit it self to the music of a Lute: That made them
pause a while, but the distance of the place being too much for them perfectly
to enjoy the pleasure thereof, they presently arose, and following the voice
that drew them to it, they approached to certain trees, under the which by the
help of fowr torches that stood lighted by them they perceived two Ladies with
a Knight in their company, who appeared so lovely, as they much admired him:
Their curiosity to come nearer them had already carried them so f^r as they
easily heard the same voice, after a little pause, begin again to sing.

As soon as the song was ended, she that had sung threw the Lute upon the
grass, took the Knight by the hand and sat down so close to Fulgoran, and his
cousin Florimond, that they could not stir without being perceived. This
approach according with their desire, they stood still in expectation of what
would ensue heerupon, and had not long continued so before they heard the Lady
speak in this manner: I am with much reason afraid that you may slight my
favors because they are freely offered you, and think me shameless forthus
discovering my thoughts unto you. But Sir, when you shall consider the weakness
of women, and your own merit, you will never condemn my boldness, but will love
me so much the more willingly, in that I do not stick to tell you that I will
give my self absolutely unto you without any reservation at all. My beauty is
not so small that you can despise it, without being cruel; and did I want that
perfection, yet can I glory of a greater, which is, that I love you with
passion. The time is seasonable, the darkness favors us, and this place seems
to be made for such an occasion: let it not then slip, I beseech you, and I
will render my caresses so pleasing to you, as you shall account your self
happy in the fruition of them. Let us begin with this kiss, which here I
tender you, and not suffering me to consume in this flame, so requite me that I
never have occasion to say that you are ungrateful, and most unworthy of the
beauty which does so adorn you. With that word she drew near with her lips to
his, and already had put her arm about his neck, when as the Knight modestly
withdrawing himself thus replied: Madam, please you to pardon me if I do not
receive your favors with the same height of affection wherewith they are now
presented to me; you are deceived by my outward appearance, and believing me to
be what I am not, you give me more cause to be sorry in your behalf, then to
smile at your discourse. I am of the same sex that you are, and consequently
incapable of yielding you the contentment you expect: I freely discover this
secret for to testify unto you that I have no will to be ungrateful to your
affection, which I do not entertain because I am unable so to do: you wonder
now at this, I believe, for there are but few women seen in these parts to
follow arms: but yet it is not a thing impossible, and I assure my self that
you are not so ignorant of the world as not to know that the Amazons do pass
up and down every where as Knights errant use to do. Howbeit, if you give not
credit to my words, I will not make dainty to let you see such evidence upon my
breast as shall assure you of this truth, and by this means curing you will be
very glad to let you understand, how it is no little coffeehouse to me that
nature has framed me such as I am. You may say (replide the Lady) what you
please, but upon my faith I shall still take you for a Knight, until I see
some better assurance of the contrary: wherefore you shall oblige me (though
this may seem somewhat uncivil) if you will put off your cuirasse, that so I
may be disabused; and in the mean time tell me your name, for it may be I shall
know you by the fame that goes of you. That is the only way, answered she, not
to know me at all; for my name is not so renowned in the world, as that you
might know me by telling it you: yet to obey you, please you to know that I am
called the great Savagesse, wife to the mighty King of Lidia, who died at the
battle of Aleppo, and am fitter to do you service with my arms in my hand,
then as you have desired. Saying this she unlaced her cuirasse, and took the
Ladies hand to put it into her bosom, when as three Giants and twelve Knights,
who had long dogd them, and now found them by the light of the torches, seized
upon them both, and put them into a Chariot, notwithstanding all the resistance
that the fair Savagesse, who had not leisure to draw her sword, could make. The
Knights much troubled for the want of their helmets at this so unexpected an
encounter, speedily recovered for to make them ready to follow the Giants, who
went away infinitely pleased with their booty. But it was so dark that they knew
not where they were, and therefore it was a good while before they could find
their Squires, who likewise were so drowsy, as it was long before they could
bridle their horses, by means whereof their enemies were gotten a great way
before them, ere they were able to set forth in pursuit of them: nevertheless
desirous to see the end of this adventure, they rode all night with incredible
speed, insomuch that two howrs after Sun rising they came to a valley, in the
bottom whereof they saw the Coach standing still, and the three Giants with
their followers battering a Knight, who defended himself bravely, and had
already laid fowr of their Knights dead at his feet. Oh heavens! said Fulgoran,
madded to see this unequal match, what do I behold? and why do not I assist so
gallant a man? Come Cousin, let us make these base creatures know, that the
justice of the Gods is always armed for the succor of the oppressed. This
said, they fell upon the Giants with such fury, as at the first shock they
tumbled two of them to the earth, so wounded, as one was trodden to death with
the horses feet; the other getting up again a little after with much ado: the
Knight that was first engaged in the ^ight seeing this favorable aid, and
determining to make a profitable use thereof bestird himself so lustily amongst
those rascals, that he laid three more of them dead at his feet, whilst
Fulgoran and his Cousin combatted the other two Giants. The valor of these
three warriors being at the highest, the combat lasted not long; for the first
Knight having made his enemies turn their backs, he discharged so furious a
blow upon the arm of the Giant that fought with Florimond, as he sent it
together with his sword to the ground, just as Fulgoran had made an end of his.
The victory being thus gloriously achieved, the Ladies which were bound with
cords were presently delivered, to the great astonishment of the Knight that
began the fight. For knowing the fair Savagesse, he presently unlaced his
helmet, and embracing her said: Ah Madam! how I detest these inhumane villanes
that have bound you, who are able to bind all the world* A thousand times I
give thanks to heaven that brought me thus seasonably to encounter you, for to
begin your deliverance: nor am I less engaged to these brave warriors, who
have in seconding me showed so much valor: for the which I will go and vow a
perpetual service to them. Be you also pleased to yield them the like regard,
that it may appear you are as courteous as you are beautiful; wherewith he was
turning to them when as the fair Savagesse being free of her bonds, took him in
her arms and kissed him with such affection, as made her something jealous that
was with her: My Lord, said she, it is I that is made happy in this meeting,
and your gene^ous hand does every day engage me in new obligations. I
acknowledge that these Cavaliers have done much for us, and am therefore willing
to render them thanks for their assistance; whereupon she leaped down from the
Chariot to go to Fulgoran and Florimond, who were amazed at her beauty: but
they prevented her with so much respectivenes as rendered her almost ashamed of
it. Madam, said Fulgoran to her, you honor us too much in esteeming us worthy
to serve you; and this poor pains we have taken, is nothing in comparison of
that which we desire to undergo for you. This day is most fortunate, since it
has furnished us with means to see you: but that our contentment may be
complete, tell us, I beseech you, who this young Knight is, the bravest and most
valiant that ever I beheld. It is not without reason, answered the fair
Savagesse, that you commend and desire to know him; for besides the merit of
his valor, whereof your selves are judges, he is descended of the noblest race
in the world, being grandchild to the excellent Emperor Amadis of Greece, who
fills all the earth with astonishment at the recital of his glorious deeds of
arms, and son to the valorous Penthesilea, the most invincible Princess of the
world, and the never conquered Don Silves de la Silva. His name is Silvan,
accomplished with all those rare endowments, that can honor a gentleman; and
so obliged to the assistance you have given him, as he will not fear to engage
his life for your service, nor my self to employ these arms for you which you
see me carry. Fulgoran exceedingly pleased with this encounter, for he had an
extreme desire to prove himself against some of the Greek Princes, answered:
Madam, the praises that you give this Knight, are great, because they come from
you, but too little for the excellency of his valor, whereof there needs no
better testimony then this field covered with dead bodies; wherefore I shall
gladly receive the honor of his affection, together with yours, although I
could have wished that our acquaintance had been begun in another fashion, I
mean by a combat between him and me: For being of a contrary faith to mine, we
could hardly have continued friends but by such an adventure. Silvan who was no
less discreet then valiant, and that would not appear insensible, being so
touched, answered him modestly: Virtuous Knight, I should be very sorry to lift
my sword against a person to whom I am so exceedingly obliged: but if for the
quiet of your conscience you desire the combat I will not refuse you. These
words would without question have embarked them further, if they had not at
that instant spied a maid come riding toward them as fast as she could drive,
who without other ceremony said to Fulgoran: Knight Ardant, take this way
presently, with the Prince of Canabea your Cousin, and by the command of the
Lady of the enchanted rock follow three damsels that are in the hands of an
horrible Giant: and you gentle Silvan, prepare your self for an affair no less
dangerous then that, and let the fair Savagesse accompany you, for she will be
of much use to you therein. These Ladies shall in the mean time withdraw to this
house, which you see here by, and my self will watch for the safety of all. The
earnestnes of this woman having quickly put them in readiness, each one took the
way that was showed him, and so they separated themselves. Being gone a little
way, Silvan heard a noise behind him, which made him turn suddenly about,
thinking he had been among his enemies: but seeing no body save that one woman
whom he had lately left, he staid and said unto her: Gentlewoman, you follow
us, I perceive, whereas I thought you had been otherwhere employed; is it your
pleasure that I take any other way? No, replied she, I only come to salute you
from the wise Vrganda, who sends you word that you should not be troubled, that
you are not in combatting with the Knight Ardant, for that could not have been
done without an irreparable loss. Keep on your way till you arrive in the
Parthian Empire, with this beautuous Queen: your presence will shortly be
necessary there. In the mean time I will advise the other Knight to travel no
further in vain: for the adventure which I told him of* proceeded wholly from
my own invention. Saying so, she turned about her horse without tarrying for
any answer, and went to the Knight Ardant, to whom she made the like discourse,
informing him that her Mistress would not for some reasons, which she would one
day let him know, suffer him to fight with Silvan; and giving him no time to
speak a word, she left him with such speed, as Fulgoran presently lost sight of
her, infinitely grieved for that he had not asked her his fathers name. But
hoping to meet her again some other time, he passed on with Florimond, whilst
the fair Savagesse and Silvan followed their way, intertaining themselves with
an infinity of pleasing discourses.

CHAP. XIV. The adventures that befell Fulgoran, and Florimond of Canabea,
after their departure from Silvan.
LOve is bred by occasions, and a familiar conversation does oftentimes force
our inclinations: Silvan did not believe he could possibly be enthralled again
by the power of any beauty whatsoever, after the loss of his dearest moiety,
and had taken a resolution to pass the rest of his days in the exercise of
arms; but he was soon taught that our designs are ineffectuall when that proud
deity will not authorize them; and that the will of men does always depend on
his power: for being ordinarily in company with the fair Savagesse, who had
charms sufficient to make her be beloved, he could not preserve his liberty,
but was constrained to revive the same flames wherewith he had been so sweetly
consumed before in the love of his Licina: evermore sighing then, and becoming
much sadder then he used to be, he made this Lady wonder at it it: who not
thinking her self to be the cause of this change, one day she spoke thus to
him: My Lord, I am much amazed to see you in this humor, and cannot conceive
how you should be transported with your passions in so weak a manner. What are
these sighs good for, and to what end is this silence? Do you still think of
the loss you have endured? Has not time as yet wrought its due effect in you?
And have you not obeyed the advice of your reason which ought to represent unto
you that tears do no good at all in any misfortune; and that we are not to make
use of them but only to ease nature a little: cast your eye upon me, I pray
you, and you shall see that I have more courage: you have lost a lovely and
beloved wife, it is true; neither shall I any more behold a worthy Husband such
as my Lord the King of Lidia was; I have then as great cause to complain as
you, and in me it would be more pardonable to afflict my self, in regard such
strong resolutions are not expected from my sex as from yours, yet I restrain
my tears, I smother my sighs, and do carry the same countenance which I did in
my prosperity. Imitate then this patience, and give me not occasion to say that
my company displeases you: I speak both for your content and mine own, for
seeing you less disquieted then before I shall be much the merrier. Alas! said
he, casting an amorous eye upon her, now I perceive you have no^ the gift of
Prophecy, or that you rightly understand my grief: fair Queen I do not sigh for
the dead (although my loss be ever present before me) for I know well how we
ought to bear an affliction, and that heaven forbids an excess in our
mourning, but feeling a new grief I cannot forbear venting some part of my
sorrow in sighs, since my discretion forbids me to do it in words: howbeit I
might with reason condemn my self as long as I lived, and ascribe all my misery
to my own cowardice, if the way to my preservation be opened, I should not
pass on for fear of meeting with thorns in it. Madam, I must unlock my bosom
to you, since your self has given me the occasion to do it: I have not been
able to refuse that to your beauty which all the men in the world do render it;
and my grief proceeds from my not daring to hope that you will receive me in to
your service: for knowing that such an ambition becomes none but the prime
Knights of the earth, I have always feared to beg that grace of you. My ill
humor does not please you, it is in your power to change it: my sighs and
tears are troublesome to you; you may quickly stop the current of them: and if
you have no less pity then you have attracting charms you will presently
command me to live at more quiet hereafter, by telling me that I shall not love
ungratefully. This fair Amazon that was not infensible of Loves power,
considering the merits, the perfections, and the birth of this Knight, who had
made no difficulty to expose himself to danger for her succor, that she could
hardly pass the rest of her days in widowhood, and that she knew not where to
find a man more agreeable to her humor, or better suited to her condition,
answered him with much modesty. See, my Lord Silvan, how our opinions do many
times abuse us; I had thought your discourse had been of another quality then
it is, nor did I believe that the little beauty which I have, could have
prevailed so much over you. You love me, and say that you breath not but for
the honor of my favor, I will grant it to your merit; and not to be
ungrateful, do even now receive you not only for my Knight, but for the lord
of my affections, assuring my self that you will not seek the possession of
them but according to the laws of honor. No certainly, said Silvan all
overjoid, for it were a sacrilege to serve you with any hopes of a base alloy:
Madam, I accept of the grace which you now do me, with a true and pefect sense
of the worth thereof, and do here plight you that faith, which another day I
will tender to you with more solemnity in the presence of those upon whom I
depend. Saying so, he disarmed his hand, and giving it to her he pursued his
discourse in this sort: Now Madam, it is in you to render me in effect the
happiest Knight on the earth, as already I am in hope. Dear friend, said she
smiling, time will give us leisure to think of that point: in the mean space
live in this belief, that being perfectly beloved of me, I will not pass by
any occasion that may tend to your content and mine own. Whilst these Lovers
rode on with all the delights that two such persons might enjoy, Fulgoran and
his Cousin on the other side were giving end to a number of brave adventures,
which made their name so glorious, as the whole world was full of their renown.
And indeed there was no other talk but of the Knight Ardant, and him of the
Flowrets: they were sought for every where, and continually employed in diverse
enterprises, whereof they so worthily acquitted themselves, as the most
excellent Knights of the earth were jealous of them.

Traveling up and down thus with a world of praises one morning at the entry
into a forest they met with two damsels, each of which demanded a boon of
them. Those that resemble you, answered Florimond, are not to be refused; say
then what it is that you desire of us. That you presently will follow us,
replied she that spoke to him, you to deliver my brother who is marked out for
death with all the injustice that may be, and this Knight to do the like office
for the beautiful Princess of Clodamira, called Alixenna, that with much
reason fears to be ravished of that which she ought above all things to hold
most dear. Whereupon these two Knights parted with some discontent: Fulgoran
entered into a wood where a while after he met with Balard of Catabatmon, whom
he slew, as I have related in the eighth Chapter, because he carried a red
cros^e upon his shield: which engaged Florisel of Niquea, that found Lidora
weeping over the body of Balard, to pursue him in revenge of the death of so
good a Knight.

CHAP. XV. Florisel of Niquea finding the Knight Ardant in an extreme danger
relieves him, and after fights a cruel combat with him upon the death of
Balard.
FLe^isel of Niquea extremely desiring to meet with the Knight Ardant had
traveled two days without lighting upon any adventure worthy of his
imploiment, when as he saw a damsel coming toward him that grievously
lamented, did not spare the hair of her head, which she tore off with much
violence: His good and sweet nature not permitting him to behold her in that
plight, without offering her his assistance, he presently made to her, and
perceiving she took no heed of him he said unto her: Gentlewoman, do not
afflict your self so excessively, but tell me the cause of so violent a grief,
that I may do you some service if it lie in my power. Yes, said she looking up,
you may divert a great mischief by assisting one of the best Knights in the
world, whom a horrible Giant accompanied with thirty or forty of his men, does
hold invested in that Castle which you see yonder before you, and if your
courage be answerable to your gallant aspect, you will not suffer him to perish
in that manner. At these words Florisel without any further stay in regard the
danger was pressing, set spurs to his horse, and finding the gate open, entered
into a large Court, where he saw a Knight armed with a Cuirasse of the color
of fire, who bestirring himself bravely, did one while lay upon a Giant, and
another while send an arm or a head of a Knight to the earth. His valor
begetting in him no less wonder then it did desire to succor him, (although
he knew him to be the Knight Ardant whom he sought) he instantly couched his
lance, and aiming it at the bever of the Giants helmet, he hit him with such
force as he made him take three or fowr turns on the ground, so that if the
shame to see himself overthrown had not animated him with rage he had lien
there longer: but spite rendering him insensible of all pain, he arose though
with some difficulty, and incountring Don Florisel who in the mean space had
dispatched three of his followers, he charging them with such violence, as much
amazed him; howbeit not failing in courage, and knowing full well how to carry
a business as that was, he avoided half of his blows, and made him feel his so
weighty that he had no cause to brag of his advantage. Hammering upon one
another in this sort, they kept so close together, that the Giant had no
opportunity to assist his people, of whom the Knight Ardant did in the interim
make a strange slaughter; whereat he was so enraged, that he bestowed the most
part of his blows in vain, with horrible menaces to overthrow the altars which
he had erected for the adoration of his Gods, which gave him not power to
vanquish one single Knight. His fury augm^nting with the sight of his blood,
that ran down all along his armor, he resolved either not to live, or to
determine this combat by the death of his enemy; so that taking his curtleax in
both his hands, he let it fall with such force upon Don Florisels shield, as he
made him go staggering three or fowr steps back, and so astonished that he knew
not where he was: from thence flying to the Knight Ardant, who by this time had
not above ten or eleven enemies to deal with, he advanced his arm to have given
him a dangerous and weighty blow, when as Florisel enraged for having been so
rudely entreated, struck him with such fury on the back, as cutting through his
armor he gave him a great wound on the shoulder: this blow, the sorest that
ever he had felt, making him turn head their combat began to be more cruel
then before, whilst Fulgoran having cut all those rascals in pieces, went
speedily up the stairs hearing a great noise above: Florisel seeing this great
execution, was so transported with anger at the resistance his adversary made
him, that he made a stockado at his belly with such violence, as he ran him
through and through, laying him stark dead on the pavement. That done he
instantly returned forth of the Castle, for that he would not be known of the
Knight Ardant, lest the resentment of the succor he had given him, should
oblige him to refuse the combat which he intended to have with him: and
withdrawing himself to the edge of the forest he lighted upon the cottage of a
young shepherd, who receiving him very courteously gave him the best
entertainment he could. But whilst he took a little rest, Fulgoran was in no
great ease: for meeting with an old Giantesse who had a mace in her hand
wherewith she was beating in pieces the door of a chamber where the Princess
Alixenna had locked up her self, he was by that Megera charged with such
violence, that he was somewhat amazed at it. The respect he carried to women
made him endure some blows, and would willingly have freed himself without
striking her; but fearing some mischief from this fury he sustained a mighty
blow that she struck with her mace upon his shield, and closing with her gave
her such a knock with the pommell of his sword under the ear, as he laid her
dead upon the floor. That done, he caused the Princess Alixenna to open the
door, who with tears of joy would have cast her self at his feet to have kissed
his hand. But having prevented her he said: Madam, Knights errant do not
receive such homage, which is not due but to persons of your merit; If I have
done any thing for you, I am sufficiently recompensed in that my endeavors are
acceptable to you. But leaving these complements tell me what I am to do more
for your safety, for I am here to no other end but to obey you? If necessity
did not constrain me, replied she, I should not so far press upon your
goodness: but being left here alone by the death of my people who were all cut
in pieces, when the Giant took me, I may not refuse the honor of your
con^ucting me to Constantinople, if so be your occasions will permit you to
travel thither with me. The Emperor Florisel will give you thanks for me, and
nobly recompense the succor you have given me. I am somewhat of kin to the
fair Queen Sidenia his wife, and came now from Guindaia, to visit and comfort
her after so many losses as she has lately sustained: but tell me, I beseech
you, whether I be not too importunat in this request of mine, or whether I
shall hazard my self in this journey, only with the damsel that brought you
hither in so lucky an howr? Madam, answered Fulgoran, I will go with you most
willingly to Constantinople, not to receive as you propound, any recompense:
for good Knights are to content themselves with the glory of their actions; but
to preserve you from falling again under the mercy of some wicked men, who
without sufficient regard to your beauty might strive to get that of you by
violence, which ought to be given for love. Wherefore we will depart presently,
if you please, unless you had rather stay till to morrow. I should, said she
be uncivil, if I should not allow you some time to refresh your self after the
labor you have this day endured, the rather for that our chiefest enemies are
dead, and that now there is no body here but such as are at your service; we
will then, if you please, tarry till to morrow, and in the mean time I will take
care to have you looked unto by my maid, who knows how to cure a wound, that
you may be dressed if need be. Fulgoran assuring her that he felt no hurt, they
both went down the stairs to give thanks unto the Knight that had so bravely
assisted them, but not finding him they were extremely grieved with his
absence. Howbeit seeing it could not be helped, they went to free certain
Knights, whom the Giant held in prison, to whose care the charge of the Castle
was committed. That done every one retired to his rest, whilst Florisel to
whom the length of the day seemed tedious, in the company of his host that had
not wherwithall to divert his thoughts by his discourse, entered into the
thickest part of the wood, where he walked a great while inter^aining himself
with the little assurance that men ought to place in the things of this world,
which for the most part renders our pleasures but passant, our pains of long
continuance, our good without sweetness, our evils without hope, and our lives
subject to all the accidents of fortune. This contemplation having held him
till it was almost night, he was upon returning to his lodging, when as he saw
a damsel making toward him, followed at the heels by a Giant, armed at all
pieces: He that had no other arms but his sword, would without question have
been amazed at this encounter, had he been capable of fear; but his gallant
heart despising all dangers, he was advancing toward them with his sword in
his hand, when as the maid thus spoke to him: Hold, my Lord Florisel, arms and
valor are of no use, where there are no enemies; we are here rather to do you
service, then to offend you. I confess said he, stretching out his arms to
embrace her, I confess, Gentlewoman, that I was in the wrong, for I did not at
the first sight know you to be our dear friend Alquifa: Tell me, I pray you,
are your parents yet living, and what occasion brings you hither at this time?
I have already told you, answered she, that it is in some sort to oblige you
this I am here: My Father and Mother were never more affectionated to your
service: all their study and care is for the good of you, and those of your
house. They have commanded me to present you with this pack, wherein you shall
find arms very necessary for your design, which doubtless is of greater
consequence then you believe it to be, and withal to advertise you, That

The new Lions shall shortly come with such strong claws, as they shall tear up
the greatest foundations of the earth, discovering the Treasure that has so
long time been hidden, for the glory of those from whom they are extracted. To
give you a clearer understanding of these words is that I may not do. Wherefore
not to trouble you any longer about it, I will only say, that you must always
carry in mind what you ow to your name and glory; with that she went away so
suddenly, as she gave him not the leisure to return her any answer, leaving him
somewhat displeased with so abrupt a parting: howbeit considering that all the
actions of those sages were done for some reason, he was the better satisfied
by viewing those fair arms, which he immediately put on, and so returned to his
cottage. The night being then quietly passed over, he arose very early, and
taking up his station at the edge of the wood, he remained there till such time
as he saw the Knight Ardant come out of the Castle, and then advancing fair and
softly he met him in the midst of the way, and thus spoke to him: Knight, it is
with some grief that I desire to combat with you, for such as resemble you are
to be honored. But I am so sensible of the death of a Gentleman, whom some few
days since you slew, because he carried a red Cross on his shield, that I
cannot suffer you to be at quiet, nor let slip so fair an occasion of revenging
his death: you are provided for the combat, our encounter is without advantage;
Let us see then to whom fortune will be most favorable. Fulgoran that heard
himself defied in such modest terms, much commending in his mind the gallant
demeanor of his adversary, would willingly have declined the fight, but
fearing to leave an ill impression of his courage, he answered him very
discreetly: I assure you, Knight, our discontent is equal, for a discourse so
free from passion as yours is, does inform me that you are no less valiant
then curtuous, and makes me with some doubt apprehend the issue of this our
combat: which no longer defer since you will have it so. Saying thus, they
retired a little to take the field, and turning head they met so bravely, that
their lances were shivered to their very gantlets, neither of them being
unhorsed: This so rude and furious an encounter having but animated their
courages, out of an esteem that each of them had of his enemies courage, they
charged one another with such rage, as their helmets seemed to be all fire. The
Knight Ardant that had never met with so strong a party, displaied all his
force and cunning, and laid so mightily at him, that Florisel was much amazed
at it, holding him worthy of the fame that ran of him: but knowing not how to
be vanquished, he returned him such an exchange, and pressed him so lively, as he
began to doubt of the issue of the combat. O immortal Gods! said he full of
despite, have you then vowed my ruin? and intend you that this combat shall
bereave me of all the glory of my former adventures? I have seen the stoutest
Giants in the world at my feet, and now am reduced to the fear of seeing my
enemy triumphing over me: this is faintnes in me, I confess, but I am resolved
either to overcome or die. Which thought inflaming choler, he redoubled his
blows with such violence, as Florisel had never escaped with life, had it not
been for those good arms given him by Alquif, Fulgorans sword was not able to
pierce, no more then his could that fier^ armor he had on. Hammering thus upon
one another with more passion then judgment, they continued their combat fowr
howrs together without breathing, or being able to discern who had the
advantage, which so enraged them, as letting go their swords, they closed
together and fell to wrestle in that violent manner one with another, that at
length they fell both of them to the ground, where they tumbled a long time up
and down, some while a top, and some while underneath, not knowing who should
prevail: at last, neither of them being able that way to master each other,
they rose both together, and returned to their swords, wherewith they laid on a
fresh with so much fury, that after they had continued two howrs in this second
charge, they were enforced to fall off a little to refresh themselves. Whilst
thus they took breath, each of them had leisure to wonder at the bravery of his
adversary: and willingly would they have left the combat in the estate wherein
it then was, had not honor defended it: but either of them unwilling to give
any advantage to the other, they recommenced their fight more furiously then
before. And so obstinately were they bent upon it, that nothing could be
expected from the end of this fight but the death of them both, if heaven which
reserved them for its glory, had not secured them by the goodness of their arms.
Eight howrs being already spent since the beginning of their combat, each of
them feared to see himself vanquished; so that making no further account of
their lives, they at one instant delivered two such mighty and dangerous blows
at each other, as they both fell to the earth quite deprived of sense. As soon
as they were fallen, so thick a mist arose, that for two howrs space no man was
able to discern any thing; but at the end thereof, the air reassuming its former
light, the combatants were no more to be seen. Florisel finding himself in
Constantinople with Alixena and Lid^^a, extremely vexed for that he knew not
what the end of the fight had been. And Fulgoran with no less discontent in
the Kingdom of Canabea, where he found his Cousin Florimond, who caused him to
be received with all the magnificence that might be, investing him with the
Crown and Scepter of that Kingdom, as he that was the apparent and legitimate
heir thereof.

CHAP. XVI. The Triumphs made in the Parthian Empire, for the births of
Rozalmond of Greece, and a great many other young Princes and Princesses.
THE heavens with providence sends us favors, as well as corrections, and
having afflicted us for a time, do afterward give us such consolations as are
necessary for our sorrows. The general loss of so many Princes, upon whose
valor Christendom had so long depended, having filled every one with
astonishment, their Empires breathed nothing but fears, when as God to cease
the deluge of tears, changed their peoples griefs into acclamations of gladness
and rejoicing. The Empress Richarda was delivered of a son, the most lovely
that ever the Sun had seen, called Rozalmond, by reason of a globe which he had
upon his left pap, wherein appeared three red Roses. And the Infanta Rozaliana,
her sister o^ another, named Rozabel, who was not much behind him in beauty.
The birth of these two Princes did so overjoy the Parthians, that they resolved
to lay aside all mourning, and to demonstrate as it were in emulation one of
another, the contentment of so great a felicity. To this end they were making
preparations, when as the Emperor Spheramond was advertised that the Empress
of Persia was also brought to bed of two sons, the one called Persides and the
other Floridan; the Queen Sidonia of one called Clarisel of Guindaia; The
Infanta Fortuna of one called Florisbel of the star; The Princess Timbria of
one called Agesipolis; The Queen of Clotona, of one called Flamides; The Queen
of Castara of one called Formozel of Sitanquia; The Queen of the fortunate
Island of one called Cilindor; The Queen of Samothracia of one called Agramant;
The Queen of Licaonia of one called Fidamant; The Duchess of Laiazza of one
called Lucian; The Empress of Rome of one called Sclerimond; The Queen of
Dacia of one called Lascaris; The Queen of Fenicia of one called Doristan; and
the Queen of Cathaia of a daughter called Anticlia: which news so increased the
content of Spheramond, as he determined to keep open Court eight days
together, and to hold a joust and tournay for all comers, at the end of these
magnificences. This was indeed a just occasion of rejoicing for the Christians,
but this happiness was yet greater then they were aware of: for at the same time
the fair Clairestoilla, who was enchanted in the Castle of the incomparable
Treasure, with all the delights that might be, had brought into the world a son
of extraordinary beauty, called Lucibel of France; The Empress of Almain one
called Alazian; The Queen of Sibilia one called Sestilian; The Queen of
Trinacria one called Lucidan; The Princess Anaxara one called Hercules of
Niquea; The Queen of Armenia one called Abvaran; and the Queen of Rhodes one
called Onoxander; who were all brought up with great care by Alcander, until
the enchantments of the incomparable Treasure were dissolved by the valor of
those two bright lights of the World, Rozalmond of Greece, and the gentle
Alcidamant. But to return to my discourse: All things being thus in order for
the Triumphs which were to begin within two days, the Emperor one morning was
going out on hunting, when as he perceived fifteen or sixteen Gentlemen entering
the Palace, who coming to him fell on their knees desiring his hand to kiss;
Nay, said he unto them, I shall be more courteous then so, for by your noble
countenances I cannot but judge you to be persons of more then ordinary
quality: Free me, I pray you, of this doubt, and let me know who you are, as
also what design brings you hither. Excellent Prince, answered one, that spoke
for them all, we will most willingly content you heerin, but upon condition
that you will not refuse us a favor which we desire at your hands. I will not
upon the faith of a Prince, said the Emperor; for I am confident you will not
ask me any thing but what is in my power. We could hope for no less, replied
he, and therefore I will presently begin to give you satisfaction, by letling
you know that this young Gentleman is called Perion of Gaul, grandchild to the
Sovereign king of Great Britain: this other is Esquilan of Poland, heir to King
Filadart, with whom you are acquainted: these two are the grandchildren of
Gala^^, the first named Florian of Sobradisa, and the other Eriston: he that
follow them is called Florestan of Sardinia, son to the deceased King thereof:
this here is the heir of Saba bearing his fathers name: this other is Don
Agrian, of Scotland, son to Agriers: these two are called Dardan^, son to
Galdes King of Rhodes, and Florizart of Taproban, whom the valiant Artaxerxes
had by the fair Lardenia: the other is Melfort son to Gadard King of Hungary:
these remaining fowrate, Frisel of Arcadia, A^ies of Ireland, Leonidas of
Mesopotami^, Armond of Bohemia, and he that now speaks to you is a Gentleman
unknown, and called Russian of Media. We altogether met about fowrdaies since,
with (...) and the same design; namely, to be made Knights by your hand, which
is the b^on we crave of your Majesty, and which you have been so graciously
pleased to promise us. My good Lords, said Spheramond, having entertained them
with all courtesy, the pains you have taken in coming to see me so far, does
so oblige me that you shall have no cause to be discontented with me: I grant
you that which you desire, and comm^nd the generous design you have to follow
your predecessors, who have acquired so much glory in the World, as their fames
shall ever last beyond their lives: You shall therefore refresh your selves here
this day; to morrow I will give order for the fitting of you for that Ceremony:
and the next day I will arm you Knights, together with the fair Alteria,
daughter to Calafia, who has already been a suitor to me for the like favor:
to the end you may enter with her into the jousts, that are to be holden for
the celebration of the birth of a son, which the heavens have bestowed on me.
Having thus spoken, he commanded the Duke of L^iazza, to take care that they
might be accommodated in with all things necessary: and so passing on he went
into the forest, where he tarried till night amidst all the pleasures that
hunting can afford. The next day being pa^^ with much impatience by these young
Lords, they were all armed in white after the fashion of new Knights, took
their oaths before the Emperor, and having received their swords from the
beautiful Empress Richarda, and the Infanta Rozaliana, her sister, who were
there present for to do them honor, they went presently to dinner, to be the
sooner ready for the jousts. Now was the feast ended, and the young Knights with
some impatience called for their helmets, when as a Dwarf came into the Hall,
who kneeling down before the Emperor thus spoke: Sovereign Monarch of the
Parthians, the two black Knights, whose names with good reason slies about the
World, desiring to bring some addition to the magnificence of your Triumphs, do
most humbly beseech, that you will be pleased they may maintain with the lance
against all comers, that love gives all the contentments in the world, and
that men cannot propose a more worthy object to themselves, then that of so
powerful a deity. The condition shall be very easy: Those which shall be
unhorsed with the Lance, may not require a further trial with the sword: every
one may win six courses; the conquerors shall have nothing but the glory of the
action; nor the vanquished but the constraint to acknowledge, that to sigh for
the favor of a mistress is not to be inthralled. This is (Sir) the intention of
the black Knights, touching that you may be pleased to let me know your
resolution, to the end that if your Majesty allow of them, they may instantly
appear in the Lists. Their enterprise, said Spheramond, is too generous to be
denied the liberty they desire; If they come they shall obli^^ me to them, and
I will promise the performance of the conditions you have propounded, but you
may advise them not to forget any thing necessary behind them at their lodging,
for here you see new Knights that will not give them leave long to repose
themselves. These young Lords, taking this the Emperors answer for an especial
favor, gave him most humble thanks, for the good opinion he had of them, and
having fitted themselves with all things requisite, they mounted on horsback to
go and encounter the black Knights, who having set themselves at one end of the
Lists, had already laid fowr of the most remarkable Knights of the Parthian
Empire on the ground the address of these Knights extremely contenting them
each one in particular, resolved to encounter them; so that Florian of
Sobradisa, and Trist^r his brother, advancing ran one course, very pleasing to
Spheramond, for they brake their staves bravely, without losing their saddles;
but the second staff sunck them to the earth. Perion of Turkey, and Florestan
had greater honor, but a like disgrace; for having run twice in a gallant
manner, they were at the third course constrained to kiss the ground, however
they had resolved to keep their seats better. Quedragant and Fulurtin succeeded
them in the same misfortune, accompanied with Florizart of Taprobana, and Don
Agrian in their fall. Dardanio and the brave Melfort hoping for better fortune,
put themselves presently in play, determining to revenge their companions, but
their luck being no better, they were unhorsed; and so were at the second
course Frisel of Arcadia, Abies of Ireland, Armond of Bohemia, and Leoni das a
little after. These Knights having been so eafily overthrown, every one began
to give the honor to the black Knights, when as the valiant Esquilan of
Polonia, and the brave Russian of Media, who had reserved themselves till the
last, advanced with a kind of I know not what hope in the spectators, that the
glory of the jousts might yet remain to the Court by the valor of these two
gallant Princes, who taking strong and stiff lances, went and encountered the
black Knights with such fury, as the earth seemed to tremble under them. Their
encounter was remarkable, all fowr of them brake upon their shields with such
equal fortune, as there appeared not more address or less courage and force
in any of them then in the other. Those staves being in shivers, the second
were brought them, which they brake as the first, the Knights not seeming to be
any whit moved with these so furious shocks, howbeit this resistance inflaming
their courages they ran yet three other courses, with as much fury as grace;
but being extremely enraged for doing so little before so great an Emperor,
they charged new staves, wherewith they encountered so violently that all fowr of
them quit their saddles, infinitely grieved at so great a misfortune;
nevertheless suddenly getting up they were going to repair that default with
their swords, when as they that were appointed for the Tournay came in, and
separated them. The young Knights divided themselves, and being placed in the
head of two squadrons of two hundred men a piece, they encountered together so
bravely, that many were unhorsed at the first brant, and every one striving for
the honor of the day, they laid lustily about them: the young Knights performed
wonders, one while they were seen in the midst of the press, another while
in the front, striking furiously and warding gallantly. In brief the party was
so well disputed, that a full howr was past, ere any man could judge who had
the better of it. If the brave Russian of Media, and the generous Esquilan,
cleared all before them, the two black Knights on the other side performed
their parts no less bravely, in such sort that all was in equal balance,
when at the beginning of a combat between the two black Knights and Russian of
Media with Esquilan, who had met together, they saw a Knight armed all in white
armor appear in the Lists, who joining with Person of Turkey, so furiously
bestirred himself, that he made the advantage lean to that side,
notwithstanding any resistance the contrary party could make. The black Knights
foreseeing their loss, redoubled their blows with extreme violence, but they
were opposed by such strong enemies, as they could not promise themselves the
victory: on the other side Russian and his companion fearing that the honor of
the Tourney might rest upon the white Knight whom they knew not, assailed their
adversaries most valiantly, whence it ensued that being resolved either to die,
or vanquish, all fowr discharged at one and the same instant such terrible
blows upon each other, as the swords of Esquilan and Russian brake in eight or
nine pieces, and the black Knights helmets flew from their heads; whereupon
they were presently known by Spheramond, for the gentle Silvan, and the fair
Savagesse, who were about fowr days before arrived in the Empire of the
Parthians, after they had run many fortunes, of which we have not spoken,
because we would not omit those other passages, that more nearly concerned our
design.

CHAP. XVII. The continuation of the Tourney in (...) of the marriage of Silvan
with the fair Savagesse, and the interruption thereof upon the news of the loss
of young Clorisel of Guindaia, son to Florisel of Niquea.
THE arrival of this fair warriouresse and Silvan, was exceedingly pleasing to
the Emperor, who putting an end to the Tourney, received them with all the
love and curtefie that might be, highly commending the valor which those young
Princes had shown in this beginning of their arms; especially Russian and
Esquilan, with the white Knight, who was found to be the fair Amazon Alteria.
Verily, said he, embracing them, you have this day done so much, as you may
well be ranked in the number of the best Knights of this age; and I believe
that when time has rendered you more active and stronger, you will find but few
your matches in the world. Persist, I pray you, and suffer not this brave
courage of yours to grow dull, that the glory of your actions may not be
inferior to that, which your Fathers in their time have obtained: I will
divide the honor of the Tourney amongst you all; and that of the jousts shall
remain only to those that have so valiantly maintained them. Saying thus, he
took the fair Savagesse by the hand, and willing Silvan to go on the other side
of him, he returned to the Palace, where their welcoms were renewed by the
beautiful Empress Richarda, and her sister the Infanta ^^zaliana, who
remembering that this generous Lady was the first that came in to their late
rescue, they did her so much honor as she was almost ashamed of it. Some howrs
being spent amidst these complements, the Knig (...) retired to disarm
themselves, Silvan being extremely grieved to be separated from his Mistress,
but fortune was more favorable to him then he expected; for their Chambers
were so near together, as they might meet without being discovered by any;
which Silvan well observing, he quickly put off his arms, and not enduring the
delay of so much time as to refresh himself, he instantly went to his Mistress,
and thus spoke to her: Madam, if the glory of your favors were not as dear to
me as my life, I should not labor to possess them without suspicion; but
having too much love to dissemble it, and fearing to take the same liberty here
which I had with you abroad, I beseech you be pleased to let me keep you from
slander, and render my delights more pleasing by enjoying them without fear: We
might depend only upon our selves, and legitimate our marriage by a mutual
consent of our wills, but we shall do more discreetly to yield that respect
unto those who have so much obliged us, and seeking their approbation rather
out of good manners, then for necessity, we shall not only make them always
ready to assist us, but also thereby increase their affection toward us. The
Emperor does highly honor you, and esteems of me no less; wherefore I beseech
you be pleased to let me make him my intercessor to you, for your love and
favor: what shall be resolved upon by his advice will, as I suppose, carry the
more weight with it; not in regard of us, for being reciprocally assured of our
affections, the opinion of others should be indifferent to us, but only to have
it said, that we know how to render due honor to such as deserve it. Dearest
friend, answered she, you are assured that my will is yours, and that I wholly
depend on you, having reserved nothing to my self, since I first engaged my
faith unto you; therefore you may dispose of all things at your pleasure: and if
the Emperor shall speak to me in your behalf, my answer shall be so modest, as
it shall neither swarve from the respect I ow unto him, nor from the duty
whereunto your love obliges me. This resolution being taken, not without some
kisses, Silvan went to the Emperor, to whom in the first place he gave an
account of all his adventures which he had passed since he left the great
Castle of the twelve Towrs; that done, he began a speech to him of this tenor:
Sir, you are a competent judge of the powers of Love, nor do I believe that any
man can speak more experimentally thereof, then your Majesty. My parents that
were not long since enclosed in their tombs, nor the late loss of so many
Princes, whom Christendom does to this day lament, have not been able to
divert this passion growing in me by the object of a pleasing beauty, so that I
am enforced to confess unto you, that the merits of that fair Queen whom you
saw not long since fighting with me, are accompanied with such unresistable
charms, as I have been constrained to yield up my liberty unto them: I know you
have a mighty power over her, and that you may freely dispose of her
determination. In which regard, Sir, I most humbly beseech you that you will be
the author of my happiness, that you will contribute to my content, entreat her
graciously to accept of my affection, and in a word engage her to give me with
her self, the scepter of Lidia, which she now enjoieth by the death of her
husband. It is true that I have not deserved this grace, but the favor you
shall do me heerin shall so firmly oblige me, as I shall never have any desire
but for your service. Cousin, answered Spheramond, the laws of Love are so
pleasing, that I do not wonder if men do prefer them before those of
convenience: our parents are dead, for they could not live ever, and what
should lessen our grief for that loss, is, that they have left the world with
so much glory and honor, as their fame shall continue in the mouths of men to
all eternity; so that we are not to afflict our selves excessively for losing
them, nor refuse our good fortune when it is presented, the rather for that
they are not sensible of our actions; wherefore you shall not wrong their memory
if now you take a wife, since heaven has too soon deprived you of her whom
your merits had purchased for you: and to testify unto you that I speak
according to my heart, I will share in the fault which you think to commit. You
shall enjoy what you earnestly desire, or this fair one shall reject my
prayers, for she is well worthy of you, and you of the delights which you hope
for from her. Saying so he left him, and without protracting time, went into
the fair Savagesses chamber, who had that day at the request of her Lover,
attired her self like a woman. See now said he, finding her in that habit, see
now fair Queen, your self in case more likely to force a thousand Knights to
your obedience, then you were of late with your sword in your hand, although
you can well make it redoubtable to your enemies; and in truth I do not now
marvel that Silvan is charmed by so many excellencies, since I my self do
begin to have the like desires, although I am here rather to do him service,
then to suffer my self to be vanquished. I know not how you value his kindred,
or the merits of his person, but I am not ignorant how much he loves you with
passion, and if I did not think I should trench too much upon the sweetness of
your disposition, I would willingly beseech you to do him so much honor as to
receive him for your Husband. Sovereign Prince, replied she with a deep blush,
I did in the beginning of your discourse believe, that you were pleased to
divert your cares with some gentle passage of wit, but these words are past
jesting, so that I am obliged to answer as seriously: you render me a husband
so worthily virtuous, as the greatest Princess on the earth could not refuse
him without imputation of vanity, nor do I mean to leave the election of him to
any other; I do therefore most willingly accept of him, as well in consideration
of the pain your Majesty has taken in speaking to me for him, as for his own
merit and love; and do account all those poor services that I have done to your
Crown, abundantly rewarded in this only favor: which is as much as you may
expect from me, who do humbly beseech you absolutely to dispose of all that
concerns me, being most assured that you shall never see me disobey your
commandments. Spheramond having received an answer to his wishes, and
unwilling to give fortune leisure to interpose any malice for the disturbance
of these Lovers content, he caused them to be contracted the same night, and
the next day to be married with great solemnity. This wedding renewed the former
pleasures, and the new Knights not being weary of well doing, armed themselves
presently after dinner, and divided into two troops, Russian commanded the one,
and the gallant Esquilan the other: all these young Princes behaving themselves
so bravely, as after a long dispute of the honor of the Tourney, it could not
be discerned which of the parties had the better, so as they retired with
equal commendation: the day being then spent in all kind of delight, the two
Lovers were by the Emperor and Empress brought to their Chamber, where they
presently went to bed, for to reap the fruit of their amorous travels. All
things being thus disposed to delight, and the next day inviting every man to
get up for the continuance of the former sports, Fortune, who never gives good
without evil, would needs mingle some bitter amongst this sweetness; a
Gentleman arrived from Greece, which brought the Emperor word, that young
Clarisel of Guindaia, was stolen away by a Sorceresse the very same day wherein
the Tourney was held at Constantinople, in honor of his birth; and that
Florisel and Sidonia were extremely affl^cted with sorrow for this loss. These
displeasing news caused great trouble in the Court, all pastimes ceased,
complaints were renewed, and every one grieved according to the measure of his
love: the new Knights desirous to show their affection to the services of the
house of Greece, immediately armed themselves, and coming altogether before the
Emperor, they besought his permission to go in search both of this young
Prince, and of the adventures of the World; which request being granted them,
they departed the same day with a resolution to run over all Countries, rather
then to fail of their enterprise; but their design was to no purpose, for the
Enchantresse Creonda, in whose hands he was, and that had not taken him away,
but only for that she foresaw by her Art, that of her daughter Grisolita, he
should beget a Prince excelling all of his time, had so enchanted him, as by
the sequel of this Discourse will appear, that none but Alcander could know the
place of his retreat, or be able to contribute to his deliverance. The Court
being in mourning for this bad news, and for the absence of so many Princes,
Spheramond had no contentment left him but in the conversation of Silvan, who
not willing to abandon him so soon, endeavored to make the time more pleasing,
and his loss less sensible unto him. Howbeit forced by the necessity of his
affairs, he was constrained to depart, together with his wife, for to reduce
the people of Lidia to their duties; who seeing neither King nor Queen, rendered
but little obedience to their governors, and began to rise in tumultuous
manner. Their departure made the Court very solitary, but the Emperor knowing
how to live every where with contentment, never troubled himself with the
consideration of so many losses as he had endured, and began to attend the care
of his subjects, when a second advertisement gave him a fresh cause of
discontent.

CHAP. XVIII. The adventures of the new Knights after they had left the Court:
the Emperor Spheramond is advertised that the King of Canabea raised a mighty
army to invade the Empire of Trebisond.
FOrtune is seldom satisfied with one attempt upon us; she redoubles her
assaults to see if she can overthrow us, and never shows her face, if we do not
force her to it by the greatness of our courage. The loss of the little
Clarisel of Guindaia not able to suffice her rage she would needs once again
arm the Pagans for the ruin of those brave Princes, who showed still the same
countenance in their afflictions, as they had carried in their prosperity, and
were not troubled for being crossed, since it did but render their virtues the
more eminent, by ministering to them occasions of glory; the new Knights going
out at several parts to seek adventures in the world, Russian riding along
with Esquilan on a plain, hard by the Sea, perceived a damsel flying from a
tall old man that pursued her with a sword in his hand: As I live said he, at
the view of so discurteous an act, I would never have believed that a man so
near his grave, could have done a thing so unworthy of himself: Let us by no
means leave this maid in this distress; wherefore put on I pray you, that we
may free her from the hands of this barbarous man, which without doubt will
never spare her, being so enraged as he is. Heerwith they set spurs to their
horses, but make what haste they could they were not able to overtake them
before they came to the sea side, where they saw the wench leap in a Bark and
the old man after her, who having taken her by the hair made as though he would
have cut off her head. The Knights much grieved for that they could not aid
her, in regard the Bark was put off a little from land, they approached to them
as near as they could; and thinking to alay his fury with entreaties, began to
conjure him to consider what he himself was, and how little honor he should
gain by dipping his hands in the blood of a woman. I know very well, answered
he, what every man ows to his reputation, but withal I am not ignorant of the
content that revenge affoords: This woman cannot escape death for satisfaction
of the wrong I have received from her, except you grant me one boon: You shall
have it said Esquilan, whatever it be that you desire of us: Come aboard this
Bark then, replied he, and go with me, I shall have time enough to let you know
what I will require of you. Whereupon not staying for further entreaty, they
presently lighted from their horses, and by the advice of the old man leaving
them upon the strand, they entered that little Bark, which without attending any
more lading, began to cut the waves with incredible speed. The Knights much
amazed to see themselves carried away in that sort, looked round about them, and
seeing no Sailers for the steering and conducting this vessel, they desired to
be informed by what means it was done, but they found no body to satisfy them
therein; the old man and the damsel no longer appearing, nor any thing to be
found in the Bark but two little Beds, and a Table furnished with exquisit
meat. Verily, said Esquilan, this is one of the wise Alquifs, or the unknown
Vrganda's devices, but never credit me if for fear of any enchantment, I
forbear now to eat of this meat; wherewith he drew to the Table, and finding a
paper upon it, he opened it and therein read these words:

Excellent Princes, do not wonder at the novelties you have seen this day: all
is done for your glory, and we have with Art disposed you to follow the
influences of the Stars; for which our care of you, you will then give us
thanks, when as you shall with the hazard of your lives, give us that you have
this day promised us. If I had not, said Russian, oftentimes heard of the like
incounters, I should be somewhat mistrustfull, and could not touch this meat
fearing the malice of some enemy, but I entend not to be more cautelous then
your self; with that they sat down, and finding the meat agreeable to their
pal^t, they fell to with a good appetite, and their repast being ended, with
thanks to heaven, which never leaves his without relief in their necessities,
they saw a Dwarf come in to them, who showing a spirit much greater then his
body, thus spoke unto them: My Lords, it is time for you to rowse up your
selves, and worthily to employ these arms you wear. Heerwith they arose, and
looking about them they perceived two ships grapled together; in one of the
which were two Knights, environed with about twenty soldiers, and two horrible
Giants, that charged them with such fury, as they were amazed to see what
resistance they made. Their Bark laying them aboard just as they had laced on
their helmets, they leapt into that ship wherein the two Knights were, and
assailing the two Giants, they laid upon them so lustily, as they quickly made
them despair of the victory. The combat was very hot between these fowr, but no
whit less dangerous on the other side: for the two Knights desirous to make
use of time, charged their enemies with so much fury, as they cut them all in
pieces, except one, that was very richly armed, who unwilling to die with the
rest, though he had behaved himself very bravely before, entreated for life and
liberty. You shall have it, said one of them, provided you let us know both who
you are, and why you caused us to be thus assaulted. It is, said he, the least
that I can do since I am in your power, but I could wish that these fowr
Knights who are fighting together might be separated, for the death of the two
Giants would be very grievous to me; with that he stepped forward to put himself
between them, when as he saw them tumble into the sea, with two fearful blows
which at one instant they had received. See, said he, with tears in his eyes,
that which I feared more then the loss of min^ own life, but the matter being
now past remedy, I must have patience, and remembering the estate wherein I am, I
will give you an account of what you require of me. I am a kinsman to the
mighty King of Canabea, the Christian Princes capital enemy, and am now come
from treating with the great Cariff of Africa, and the King of Coriza, to whom
I was employed, for to invite them to a war against the Princes of Greece; the
cause whereof is, rather for religion then conquest, and my voyage was
successful enough, had I not lighted upon you: for having obtained all that I
desired, namely fifty thousand men to fall upon the Empire of Trebisond,
besides an hundred and thirty thousand more, which are already levied in the
Kingdoms of Canabea, Romeria, and Calican, I returned extremely well
satisfied, in the company of those two Giants, which the King of Coriza had
given me, by whose aid I did not doubt but to see the Crown of Trebisond placed
on my masters head: the rather for that I knew the principal defenders of that
Empire are dead, so as the Christians have been constrained to commit the
government thereof to an Amazonian woman; and that those which survive will not
willingly quit their own provinces, for fear of being invaded by other Pagan
Kings. Behold what you can expect from me in discharge of my promise; it
remains now that you make yours good, and restore me to my former liberty, as
you have preserved my life. The Princes of Greece, answered one of the first
Knights, aretrue of their words, and stand in no doubt of their enemies:
Experience should have made them wiser, and so many battles as they have lost,
should me thinks, be able to break that obstinate desire they have to die in
this quarrel; but since they will not guide themselves by reason, they shall
not be more gently entertained then they have been heertofore. They have reason
to say that the bravest Knights in the world are dead, but there yet remain
enough to trample on the heads of all such as shall dare to provoke them. And
to testify unto you that we do not much regard their menaces, we will give you
leave to proceed on your voyage, and you may tell your kinsman that for a
beginning of the war you have met with Greek Princes as full of courtesy as
courage. This said, he commanded to weigh anchor, and letting them go he turned
to the two Knights, with no little admiration to see them so young and so
excellent. Esquilan having observed them very attentively, desired them not to
be displeased if his curiosity carried him to demand of them who they were, to
the end they might the better know to what persons they were engaged for so
many caresses and praises, wherewith they had rewarded the poor service they had
done them. We are said one of them, too much obliged to you, to refuse to let
you understand who we are: I am Dorigel, King of the fortunat Islands, and this
other is the valiant Amanio d'Astre; at these words they redoubled their
embraces, and continuing their discourse they resolved to take several ways,
Dorigel commanded to steer for the fortunat Island, for to raise some forces in
aid of the Greek Princes; Russian and the Polack reentred their Bark in pursuit
of their fortune; and the gentle Amanio took his way toward the Parthian
Empire, from which he was not then far distant, to advertise Spheramond of the
Pagans design, as he did within a few days after: these news having diverted
that great Emperor from his ordinary passions, made him give order for the
raising of men, for dispatching away speedily of certain Gentlemen unto Greece
and Trebisond, lest they should be surprised by the enemy, and s^ewing an
exceeding affection to the welfare of Christendom, he hastened his levies, and
in person set forward with ten thousand horse and twenty thousand foot. On the
other side Florisel and Rogel were no less careful; and beyond them all
Alastraxarea; for seeing their estates exhausted by so many former wars, they
were much grieved to behold their people thus continually subject to alarums;
but not able to force the destinies, they suddenly gave order for their
affairs, Don Rogel dislodging with thirty thousand men at arms, and Don
Florisel with fifteen thousand horse and twenty thousand foot. In the mean time
the ship wherein Russian was, having ran two days without meeting any
adventure, arrived at the foot of a little mountain which seemed to the Knights
so pleasant, that they presently landed, much admiring to see their horses upon
the shore in the same equipage that they had left them in; but ceasing their
wonder by the remembrance of what they had seen the old man and the damsel do
not long before, they presently mounted upon them, and taking a beaten way that
lead up to the top of the mountain, they spent about an howr or more, at the
end whereof they found a Cave, whose mouth was stopped with certain pieces of
wood, which made them conjecture that there was some secret within it, their
curiosity then not permitting them to go any further, without knowing whether
there were any adventure within it worthy their courages, they alighted; and
tying their horses to a Tree they thrust away the bars, so as with little
difficulty they made that entry free for them, but that not being large enough
for two to pass in front, Russian drew out his sword, and entreating Esquilan
to stay there till his return, he went on a pretty way in that darkness not
without some apprehension of falling into some precipice, out of which he
should never be able to disingage himself, but then presently espying a lamp he
marched with more assurance by the light thereof, till he came into a vault of
about five and twenty or thirty paces broad, in one corner whereof upon some
stones raised in form of an altar was a fire burning, and making a stand to
look about him he discovered two damsels coming, one of the which kneeling
down before him, thus spoke: If it be by the order of that barbarous man, who
now desires to glut himself with my blood, as he has heertofore done with my
embraces, if it be, I say, from Ormand that you come, do not, Sir, make me
languish any longer; my bosom is ready to receive the blow of mercy, and it
will less grieve me to die by your hands, then once more to come in the sight
of so wicked and base a man. Fortune has brought me hither, said Russian,
taking her by the hand to raise her from the ground, not with an intent to
shorten your days, and much less to put you into the power of a man that you
have no cause to love. Be not therefore afraid, but rather be confident in my
company, and be assured, Gentlewoman, that I will have an account of the wrong
that has been done you, if you will make use of my arms; and let me know the
occasion of your retirement to this desolate place, so far remooved from all
conversation of men. Good Knight replied she, my misery is past remedy, and the
aid you proffer me can no otherwise serve but only to oblige me unto you for
your good will; yet will I not be so little sensible of the favor you do me,
as to deny your curiosity the relation of my misfortunes. Let us sit down then
upon this bed of leaves that so you may with the more ease attend to my
discourse. Me thinks, said Russian, we should be much better abroad where the
clear day will more content us then this darkness, the rather for that a
Gentleman my friend, who stays without for guard of the entry of this darksome
lodging may perhaps be discontented with our longer stay. All places are to me
indifferent, said she, and if I desired to stay you in this cave it was because
I thought it a fitter place for the rehearsal of my woes, then any other
whatsoever. But I am well contented to go out with you that the Sun which for
these fowr and twenty days has not troubled my sight, may let you behold in
my face the signs of a most extreme sorrow; whereupon going forth they went and
set them down in the shadow of certain trees, where she began to speak in this
manner: Do not, I beseech you, expect a long discourse, although the history of
my misfortunes be infinite; for I will not Sir, abuse your patience, but
succinctly let you know the cause of my despair; I was not five weeks since
Countess of Haute fleur, rich and beautiful enough, at least as I thought, to
cause my self to be beloved of any, now ugly and more likely to fright people
with my looks, then to beget the least affection in their hearts, and deprived
of all conveniences in the world, but what these trees do yield me for my
sustenance, and that of this maid which keeps me company, who not being
ungrateful for some favors received of me in the time of my prosperity would
needs bear a share in my miseries to comfort me. This is a strange change, and
such as men might well wonder at, if they did not know that fortune disposes
of all things, and that she daily makes greater metamorphosis, but I will not
lay the blame on her, because I must confess that all the fault was wholly in
my self; for if I had not given credit to the words of Ormand a young Prince,
and one of my neighbors, I might still have flourished amidst the delights
which those of my condition daily enjoy. This Knight, valiant of his person,
and fully complete in all those perfections that can render a Gentleman
commendable, if he had been sensible of a lawful affection, happening to be in
a forest where I intended to spend some days in hunting, was assailed by fowr
Knights, who pressed him very hard, and without question would have laid him in
his grave, if I had not chanced to come in during their combat, but unable to
endure the sight of so unequal a party, I went to his enemies, and courteously
desired them for my sake to forbear, and to consider that they much wronged the
order of Knighthood, but they were so obstinatly bent, as they would not give
ear to me, wherwithall being displeased I commanded three Knights of my
followers to take the business in hand, which they did so fortunately as in
less then half an howr these arrogants were cut in pieces. That execution
done, I was going toward Ormand, whom I had never seen before, meaning to
invite him home with me, to have his wounds looked unto, but he prevented me,
and lifting up his cask said unto me: You have Madam, nobly preserved my life,
which doubtless was otherwise in my enemies power, but I desire you will be
pleased to employ it in your service, and not to spare it whenever you shall
think me fit for any design of yours; I am here without all acquaintance, and
find my self constrained to press yet once more upon your goodness,
beseeching you to spare me one of your servants for to guide me where I may
have my blood stanched, which runs out at three or fowr wounds. I should but
half oblige you if I should leave you in the estate you are in; but Sir, I will
make you see that I esteem more of your life then you think for, wherefore go
along with me and you shall find all that is needful for you: whereupon
departing with all speed we got in less then an howr to Heautefleur, where I
put him into the hands of a Physician, that within a month so recovered him, as
he was able to bear arms; during which time I visited him daily, and finding
him to be of a most gentle carriage, I conceived a certain kind of good will
toward him, which converted into a violent love as soon as he had told me who
he was, and that he had sworn to affect me more then all the world beside: I
will not here tell you the pleasure I received in hearing him sigh, nor the
contentment I had in the praises he gave me; for taking all his actions for
testimonies of his love and my merit, I felt such infinite sweetness in his
conversation, as all other delights whatsoever were nothing to me in comparison
thereof. To what end should I spin out this discourse any longer? Opportunities
being fit, and our passions violent, I yielded him up that which I ought to
have held most dear, under the assurance of a thousand oaths that he made me to
marry me publicly, when he had craved the consent and permission of his
Father, whose authority he held not fit to be contemned; which seeming to me
very reasonable, I gave him leave to return into his Country after he had
tarried five months with me, hoping that ere long he would have returned again:
but the traitor never thinking more of his promises, but with sorrow for that
he had made them, and despising my caresses because he had too easily injoied
them, not only refused to write to me, but having done a world of indignity to
a Gentleman whom I sent to press his return and to advertise me of his health,
he signified to me by word of mouth that the beauty of my Country, much more
then that of my person, did make him desire to revisit it, but that it should
be with a powerful army to annex it to those estates that fortune had
conferred upon him; and as for me that I should do better to place my self
amongst those that attend the sacrifices of the Gods, then to think of living
any more to the world: Imagine, I pray you, what an astonishment I was in when
the Gentleman delivered this unto me: Verily, I had much ado to believe him,
for remembering the loving speeches that he had so often entertained me with,
and the innumerable oaths that he had sworn to me, I could not be persuaded
that his affection was entinguished, and that he could be so fearles of the
justice of heaven, but alas! I found to my grief, that the good opinion which I
had of him did abuse me; for adding effects to his words not long after, he
invaded my Country with two and twenty thousand men, seized upon all the places
that depended upon my command, except the Castle of Heautefleur, wherinto a
Cousin of mine has put himself with three thousand foot resolving to die or to
keep it for me: but fearing to fall into the hands of this wicked wretch, who
threatened to abandon me to the lust of his soldiers, I rather chose to make my
retreat to this place then to serve once again for the subject of his scorn.
You are now, brave Knight, fully informed of my infortunat estate, which can
have no end but with the loss of my life. In extreme dangers Madam, said
Russian, we must put on strange resolutions; your miseries I confess are
great, yet do I not hold them past remedy, for you will be at quiet when this
vile man shall be no longer living, and that may be within a few days; the
Heavens are just and always armed for the defense of oppressed innocence, to
whom I render humble thanks for bringing us hither to assist you in so just a
quarrel, for the maintenance whereof, this Knight and my self will either die
or reinvest you in your former greatness. Is your Castle far from hence? But one
days journey replied she. Be then assured, said he, that your enemies shall
shortly see us; in the mean time, keep you close here, that we may know where
to give you an account of our proceedings when time shall serve: with that they
took their leaves of her, and getting to horse made such speed as they were at
the Camp by break of day, and just as the enemies were raising of their ladders
to assault the place; that occasion seeming to favor their approach to the
walls without suspicion, they followed Ormand, and seeing those of the Castle
make a sally at the very same instant even as they desired, they presently
turned head and began the skirmish so lustily as the soldiers on both sides
were amazed at it, Russian advisedly judging that the quiet of the Country
depended upon the life or death of Ormand, perceiving him advance with certain
troops, he discharged so dangerous a blow upon his helmet, that he overthrew
him to the ground amongst the feet of a thousand horses, but not willing to let
him die in that manner, he caused him presently to be taken up, and commanding
two Knights to carry him to the Castle, they pursued their good fortune with
such fury as the enemies being in disorder for want of their General, betook
them to their heels, leaving above three thousand dead upon the place. Those of
the Castle being by the direction of these two Knights, retired, there were
bonefires made for joy of so remarkable a victory, but especially for the
taking of Ormand prisoner; who seeing himself in the hands of a people that had
no cause to love him, could not well brok his misfortune, and did extremely
fear the displeasure of the fair Isolinda, for he could not believe that after
so much scorn as he had put upon her, it was possible for her to continue her
affection still to him, nevertheles resolving patiently to endure the worst of
fate, he expected what his enemies would determine of him. In the mean space
the two Knights not willing to lose time, made all the garrison to arm, leaving
the inhabitants to favor their retreat if they were pursued, and determined to
waken their enemies by the break of day, but assured by their spies, that they
were dis-lodged in the night, Russian departed only with three Knights, not
acquainting any body with his design but his companion, whom he desired to
remain there by his presence to restrain the fury of the people, who out of the
remembrance of the mischiefs he had caused them to suffer, were otherwise like
enough to do some violence to their prisoner; and returning the same way, he
came the night before he arrived at the caves mouth; where the fair Isolinda,
hearing the noise of the horses, had hidden her self, with an extreme
apprehension of falling into the hands of her enemies: and entering into the
vault, he found her all trembling so that to assure her he said thus: Madam,
this is no time for you to be afflicted, Fortune has changed her countenance,
and you now hold Ormand in a stronger prison then that of your eyes, at least
he shall not so easily get out of it: whereupon rendering her account of all
that had past, he so amazed her with the strangeness of this change, as she
could hardly have believed it, had not her Knights, whom she well knew, with
new protestations, given her assurance of the truth thereof. Revived with these
news, she returned a thousand thanks to Russian, and getting on horseback, she
went presently away with him to Haute^^e^r; where, with unspeakable joy, she
was received by her subjects, who besought her to deliver Ormand into their
hands, that they might punish him as he deserved: but thereunto the two Knights
opposed themselves, remonstrating the mischiefs which might result out of such
an execution, she that could not for all that had passed, totally extinguish
her love to him, yielded to their advice with so much felicity, as the two
Knights resolved to endeavor the reuniting of their affections; and indeed
wrought so effectually, as Ormand having solemnly protested to love her ever,
and without dissimulation, she was pleased to pardon him, and he to take her to
wife, which was presently done with the general applause of her people, who
proclaimed the valor of our Knights to be worthy of Altars. An assured peace
th^^ being settled, Russian and his companion, that loved not to be idle, took
their leaves of the new m^^ried couple, and not having forgotten their way to
the Bark, they put to sea again, committing the care of their voyage to those
sages that had been their conductors thither.

CHAP. XIX. The arrival of the Pagan Princes in the Empire of Trebisond: the
fight between the Greek Princes and them at their landing: the assault given to
the town, and the resolution that the Pagans took.
THE Queen Alastraxerea being advertised, as I have related, that Fulgoran
armed the Pagans against the Empire of Trebisond, did all that a warlike and
discreet Lady could do to cross the designs of the enemy; the ports were
fortified, the towns furnished with munition and soldiers, and the fields
covered with a number of gallant Knights. On the other part Fulgoran was not
idle: for upon the return of Gonzaldin, whom Russian and Esquilan had defeated,
when they succored Dorigell, and the gentle Amanio d' Astre, he drew together
the forces of Canabea to the number of thirty thousand men: and those which
King Dardanor had sent him, being about forty thousand more, together with the
troops of the Prince of Calican of thirty thousand; with these forces,
consisting of threescore thousand horse, forty thousand foot, and two and
twenty furious Giants, who alone thought themselves able to co^quer the whole
world, he embarked himself to go meet with those of the great Cariffe of
Africa, and the King of Coriza, amounting to foursoore thousand horse, and
thirty five thousand foot, in whose company they sailed together with so fair a
wind for three weeks space, as they began to make the land of Trebisond. The
valiant Alastra^erea, who looked daily for them, and therefore held in
readiness some forty thousand horse, besides sufficient garrisons for the
towns, being by frigates of advice informed of the approach of this mighty
Fleet, presented her self with her forces at the Port. And determining bravely
to dispute with the enemy his first footing upon her territories, attended
while the wind should bring them to shore. The skirmish then began to grow hot
on both sides: the Christians encouraged by the presence of that valorous
Princess, who like a flash of lightning made her way through as many enemies
as she encountered, bestirred themselves very bravely, and standing very firm
upon the shore, would have made a strange butchery of their adversaries, if
Fulgoran, accompanied with Florimond, Bruzanges, and the fair Arifleura, had
not lea^'d to land in spite of all resistance, and the King Dardanor, the
Cariffe of Africa, with twelve Giants, done the like in another place; these
Knights clearing the place with incredible fury, in a short time made room for
more then twenty thousand men to land, who seconding the Giants, that ruined
all before them, they made the Christians give ground, when as five Knights
armed in white, presenting themselves with their lances in their rests, gave in
upon the enemy with such courage, as they raised the spirits of those who
before trembled with fear; these five joining with Alastraxerea, who seemed a
Fury to the Pagans, maintained the fight a long time; howbeit, the greatest
part of the Army being landed, Alastraxerea thought good to make her retreat;
but still fighting, wherein she was we^l seconded by the arrival of two
Knights in gray armor, who at the same instant flying in among the enemies,
presently laid two horrible Giants dead upon the earth, and rendered themselves
so redoubted to the other Knights, as they durst not come near them: this
retreat, so full both of courage and discretion, bred admiration in their
enemies, which extolling the valor of the Christians, mourned for their own
loss, being but too great for a first encounter: for in the sea, and on the
shore fell about thelve thousand men and four Giants, besides the Kings of
Coriza, and Romeria, dangerously wounded, whereas the Christians got off with
the loss of two thousand men. The army thus landed, the City was presently
invected, the Pagans fortifying their camp with more judgment then ever any of
their forces had done before upon any Christian land; and as one side made
their preparations for an assault, the other disposed themselves to make a
gallant defense, Alastraxerea finding her self assisted by the five Knights,
who were Perion of Turkey, Florizart of Taprobana, Quedragant, Florertan and
Dardani^, as also by these two thunderbolts of war, in the gray armor, which
were quickly known to be Russian of Media, and the brave Esquil^n of Polonia,
thought herself much more assured then before; and therefore was less afraid
to skirmish with the enemy, so as no day passed without the death of some, and
for the most part of the Pagans, who more guided by rage then judgment, did
hazard all to get nothing, which so vexed F^lg^^^, seeing his people diminish,
as much as the honor of the Christians augmented, he resolved to lose all, or
win all: and therefore he disposed his forces for an assault, commanding them
either to die or vanquish, to which end having caused a great number of ladders
to be prepared, he went himself the foremost to the fight, being followed by
his Giants, by Florimond, Bruzanges, Dardanor, the great Cariffe; and the Kings
of Coriza and Calican, when as advertisement was given him, that a great fleet
of Christians was under sail, entering the harbor. These news made him pause
a while: for Captains cannot, without blame, despise any intelligence brought
them; but being no less wise then courageous, he commanded the Kings of Coriza
and Calican, to take six of the Giants, and an hundred thousand men to attacque
the town, whilst with the rest of the army in good order falling out of his
trenches, he marched to the shore; where Florizel, accompanied with the
incomparable Emperor of the Parthians, whom he had a little before met at sea,
was landing with fourscore thousand men. This brave Prince, seeing such a
multitude of enemies, instantly drew his forces into Battaglia, and not
intending to give his opposites leave to discover that the half of his people
were not yet disembarked, he advanced together with Spheramond, and the gallant
Amanio d' Astre, encountering Fulgoran so furiously, that their horses not able
to bear the shock, fell back three or four paces, to come on again afterward
with the greater violence; Spheramond running against one of the Giants, passed
his lance clean through his body, Amanio d' Astre having made Florimond of
Canabea to lose his stirop; on the other side, the Cariffe of Africa,
Bruzanges, and the Giants, finding none but ordinary Knights in their way, made
so great a slaughter of them, that without the assistance of Spheramond, who
came in to their aid with ten thousand men, the Christians had suffered much;
but his arrival stayed the fury of the Pagans in such sort, as they began to
give him ground; which Fulgoran perceiving, who then was combatting Florizel
with so much valor, as he was amazed at it, he delivered such a dangerous blow
upon his helmet, as astonished him, and throwing himself among the Parthians, he
recovered again what his men by their default had lost; whereupon Spharamond
carried with a strange rage to see the massacre of his people, discharged a bow
upon his helmet with such fury, as laid him upon his horses crupper, so far
besides himself, that he had no judgment or memory left him: This blow so
affrighted the enemy, that they had certainly retired to their trenches, if the
Cariffe of Africa, attended by his Giants, had not presently come into their
second: his presence diminished their fear, and terrified the Christians; but
Florizel and the valiant Amanio d' Astre advancing to their succor, so revived
their courages, that the fight was renewed more sharply then before. Whilst
thus they disputed the honor of the landing the other were not at quiet: for
the Kings of Coriza and Calican, made the assault to be maintained with so much
obstinacy, as it seemed they resolved not to live, or be victorious; the dead
which fell in the ditches feared them not, and their loss augmenting their
courage, made them so adventurous, as Alastraxerea avowed afterward, that she
never had seen a wall better assailed; howbeit, their labor was in vain, and
the Christians resistance such, as they were constrained to fall off just at
the time that their fellows, who fought upon the shore, retired into their
trenches. Florizell seeing their retreat, and considering that his soldiers
were as yet not recovered of their travail, by sea, would not press them any
further, but encamping hard by them, commanded necessary instruments to be
made, caused the hurt men to be looked unto, took order for the guard of his
camp, and desirous to see the Princess Alastraxerea, his sister, mounted upon
his horse with Spheramond to go to the City, but but they met her in the mid
way, accompanied with the new Knights, you may well imagine how kindly they
entertained one another; and withal, the content that Spheramond took in
seeing these young Princes, on whom he had lately conferred the order of
Knighthood, discharge themselves so bravely for the honor of the Christian
name. I will not therefore dwell any longer hereupon, but following my
discourse, will tell you what the Pagan Princes resolved to do, being grieved
with the loss of eighteen thousand men, and three Giants, which died in this
encounter, wherein also there fell of the Christians, no less then eight
thousand and five hundred Knights, Fulgoran performing the duty of a right
commander, that will not be frighted for one misfortune, seeing the courage of
his men grow cold, and that the names of the Greek Princes was become redoubted
in his Army, caused the principal Knights of his troops to be called together,
and when they were assembled, with a confident countenance thus spoke unto
them: As it is no little grief to me to see your looks so pale, and that so
slight a loss should any whit amaze you; as yet we have had no cause to
complain; and so many of our enemies slaughtered before these walls, should, me
thinks, oblige us not to fear the encountering of them. Have they any advantage
of us? Do their swords cut better then ours? Have they better courages, or Arms
of better proof?

Verily, we no way yield to them, in re^olution of doing bravely, their
curtelaxes carry no keener edge then our scymeters; and the greatness of our
blows do testify that our arms are as of much weight as theirs; you will
say that they have never been assailed without danger, and that so many armies
as have been routed in these fields, do witness their valor, and may justly
make us apprehend a like success of our enterprise. It is true that they have
ever hitherto showed themselves invincible, and that few kings have affronted
them without their own extreme damage, but shall we from thence infallibly,
conclude, that fortune must therefore perpetually favor them, nothing less,
she delights in inconstancy, and makes her self sport in abasing those whom
she has for a time raised to the highest pitch of eminency; the glory which
they have acquired in the proceeding battles, should make us rather strive
with obstinacy for victory over them, then daunt our courages, for triumphing
over them that stoop under the weight of so many law ^ells shall render our
names, so glorious in the world, that all the sorraine nations will shrink
when they but hea^e us named.

Throw off therefore, I pray you, this fear, which I see in your faces,
re-kindle that generous fire which made you slight your ease to bring your
selves into business of honor, and giving the enemy no leisure to strengthen
himself by the coming in of any fresh supplies, go pull him out of his
trenches, and make it appear to them that you were never afraid to meet them in
the plain field. For my own part I am of opinion to present them battle with
our whole army, and by a trial of all the forces on both sides, see what we
may hope for from our enterprise. This, answered the Cariffe of Africa, this
brave Prince, is the best advice that now can be given, for a long siege, or a
tedious war, cannot be but very dangerous, and if we spend our time in beating
of walls in stead of turning our swords upon our enemies, we shall never avoid
the misfortune of those, which have come hither with the same design that
brought us hither, who left all their honor behind them in our enemies hands;
the Princes of Greece are full of courage, and will never shun the fight, since
the Emperors of Part^ia, and Greece, are arrived to their succor, but if we
be good men we cannot fail of the honor of the day. The number of our
soldiers does far exceed theirs, our hearts are good, we have Giants and
Knights to be redoubted, Why then should we not be conquerours? Either the
victory, Excellent Prince, must be ours, or we must all die in seeking to
atchieve it: As for me, I prize my life at less then naught in this occasion,
and do believe that all these Lords hee^ assembled will be as resolute as my
self; you may therefore, when you please, send to offer them battle, with this
assurance, that we will dispute the honor of it with a great deal of courage.
This opinion being approved by them all, they dispatched presently a Herald to
Don Florizell of Niquea, who received him very courteously, and a little after
returned him with assurance of a general battle, the fourth day following,
for the preparations whereof, a truce was in the mean time concluded on either
side.

CHAP. XX. The joy of the Greek Princes for the arrival of the Excellent
Emperor of Persia, and the success of the battle.
THe two armies disposing themselves equally for victory, prepared all things
necessary for the fight, the Pagans with a certain assurance of triumphing
through the multitude of their men, and the Christians of defeating their
enemies, more by the assistance of heaven, then by the force of their arms, the
day being already passed, they saw the seas covered with ships coming in very
good order; whereupon; both sides were in fear alike, for neither of them knew
to whether part they were in favor inclined; but they dwelt not long in that
doubt, for as soon as the Vantguard approached the Port, the red Cross with
the arms of Persia were discerned in their flags, whereby it was judged to be
the valiant Don Rogel of Greece; his arrival brought no less fear to the
Pagans, then contentment to his friends, who being free to go whether they
pleased, for that the truce was yet on foot, went to meet him in the strand
with a thousand signs of joy; the ceremonies of entertainment being over, the
Princes, not to lose time, met presently in council, for to deliberate on the
courses which was to be held for the future battle, wherein all their
opinions, in a manner, concurring, they resolved to make four equal
battalia's, each of them consisting of five and twenty thousand horse, and
eight thousand foot; the first or which should be commanded by Spheramond,
accompanied with Amanio d' Astre, and Perion of Turkey; the second by the
valiant Prince of Persia his father, with Russian of Media, and Dardanio; the
third by the royal Alastraxerea, with Esquilan, and Quedragant of Sansuega;
and the last by the excellent Florizell of Niquea, with Florestan, and
Florizart; the command and guard of the town was entrusted to the Count of
Argamond, with ten thousand foot, and the Camp to the Duke of Silesia, with
the like number of Infanterie: On the other side, the Pagans were not drowfie,
but knowing that the loss of that day would be the ending of their honors,
and lives, they encouraged their soldiers, one while with promise of rewards,
another while with hope of glory, so as the most cowardly resolved to fight it
out bravely, both for reputation and spoil; their spies having informed them of
the order the Greek Princes determined to hold in imbattelling their army; they
also concluded to frame four battalia's of their forces, each of them composed
of thirty eight thousand horse, and fifteen thousand foot; whereof the first
was to be led by the Prince Bruzanges, Florimond his son, the valourous
Arifleura, and three Giants; the second by the great Cariffe of Africa,
Dardanor King of Romeria, and three Giants; the third and fourth by the King of
Coriza and Fulgoran, with a like number of men; the King of Calican remaining
with twelve thousand foot for the guard of their Camp. These things thus
decreed, every man bestirred himself, some making clean their arms, some
whetting their swords, and others looking to their horses: In brief, none was
idle, and every one passionately wished for the next day, that they might
employ their forces. As Soon then as the morning appeared, Spheramond, who had
the foreward, covered the field with his horse, and not intending to stay
until the trumpets sounded a charge, he espied on his right hand five Knights
armed all in white, present themselves with incredible courage against the
enemy, to the no little joy of the Christians; whereupon, perceiving Florimond
begin his career, he set spurs to his horse, and so strongly incountered him in
the midst of his race, as their lances flew into a thousand shivers, Florimond
still keeping his seat, though he was twice or thrice ready to fall; such was
not Bruzanges fortune with the valiant Amanio d' Astre, for he was laid upon
the earth, so dangerously hurt, that without the succor of his son, he had
been stifled under the horses feet; Perion of Turkey, and the white Knight,
directed their staves against the Giants, whereby two of them were wounded, but
so slightly, as they presently laid hands on their scymiters, and disdaining to
fight with ordinary men, they began a furious combat with three of the white
Knights, whilst Spheramond, in the midst of the preasse, thundered wheresoever
he came, neither was Florimond any way behind him, for as often as he advanced
his sword, the death of some Christians ensued; whence it followed, that his
people in imitation of him, labored exceedingly to make good the place they
fought upon; but they were so press^d by Spheramond, Peri^^, Amanio d' Astre,
and the white Knights, that they began to give ground with extreme discontent
to the Giants, who could not relive them, being too far engaged in their combat
with the new come Knights; nevertheless, enraged to see themselves staid in
that sort, they all at one instant diseharged three such blows on their
adversaries heads, as they laid them on the ground almost void of sense; with
that, taking the opportunity of the time, they went to have made their people
turn head, which they perhaps had done, if they had not been stopped by the brave
Emperor of the Parthians, Amanio d' Astre, and Peri^^, who not giving them
leave to pass any further, charged them so stoutly, as they were constrained
to look to their own defense; then it was, that Florimond re-incouraging his
men, overthrew as many Christians as stood in his way, but the white Knights
being come to themselves again, and infinitely enraged that they had been so
ill entreated, flew into the throng, with their two companions, and made such a
slaughter among them, as the enemies were fain to retreat to avoid their fury,
notwithstanding all that Florimond could do to stay them: The great Cariffe of
Africa, accounted one of the most valourous among the Pagans, seeing the first
troop in disorder, caused those which he led to advance, against whom the
Excellent Emperor of the Persians opposed himself, and with that greatness of
courage, which made him so admired in the world, charged his lance against the
Cariffe, whom he made to lose his stirrups, Russian of Media having run one of
the Giants quite through and through; upon the encounter of these new troops, the
earth was quickly covered with arms, legs, weapons, and the field with horses
that had lost their masters, the air ecchoed with the cries of dying and
wounded men, the ground shook with the noise of drums and trumpets, all was
full of horror and fear, and wheresoever D^^ R^gel and Russian passed, they
left behind them evident marks of their valor* the ranks grew thin before the
great Cariffe and his Giants; in brief, all was in confusion, and the blood
streamed so over all the field, as it filled every one with astonishment: the
King of Calican, and Fulgoran, impatient to see others employed in business of
glory, caused their troops presently to advance, the like did Alastraxerea, and
Don Florizell; then it was, that the earth, and the heavens seemed to be but
one thing, and so many Knights were overthrown at this encounter, as no man
could stir a foot without treading on the dead; the Knight Ardant carried ruin
in his hand, Florizell passed along like lightening, the Giants cut all in
pieces that stood in their way, Alastraxerea, Esquilan, Russian, Rogell,
Spheramond, Quedragant, and P^rion, seemed furies; in sum, nothing appeared
but blood and slaughter. The King of Calican, meeting with Alastraxerea, and
Fulgoran with Florizell, began a furious combat, but it lasted not long, for
they were divided by a troop of Pagans, which invironing this valiant Prince
and his sister, reduced them into very great danger of their lives, had not
Spheramond, and the gallant Amanio d'Astre, come in just at the time, when as
their horses were killed under them; these two Princes knowing Florizell and
his sister, slew in suddenly amidst their enemies, and so wonderfully behaved
themselves, as they gave their friends leave to breathe a while; howbeit, their
succor had little prevailed against so great a multitude, amongst the which
were three Giants; if the brave Russian of Media, together with the five white
Knights, had not put himself in the head of fifty Knights, wherewith he charged
the enemy so furiously, that after they had slain above two hundred of them,
even before Fulgorans face, they re-mounted Florizell, and the valorous
Alastraxerea, who renewing the fight with more rage then before, seemed not be
wearied at all with their former toil. Whilst matters past thus in this part,
Don Rogell, with Esquilan, Florerian, Dardanio, Quedragant, and Florizart,
arrested the fury of the Cariffes Giants, and Florimond, whereby their people
were so heartened, as they were no whit dismayed with the sight of so many
corpse as lay dead before them. The slaughter having continued all the day with
the Combattants incredible pain, the night came on, which parted them without
knowing unto whom fortune was most favorable, the Pagans retired to their
Camp, and the Christians to their tents, not a little glad to see the
principal Knights preserved from the fury of this best debated battle that
ever was fought. The number of the dead being calculated on both sides, it was
found, that the Pagans had lost ninety two thousand men, with seven Giants, and
the Princes Bruzanges, Florimond, and the Cariffe sore wounded; the Christians
for their part having fifty seven thousand men slain, Florizell and
Alastraxerea both hurt, the one in the shoulder, the other in the arm. The
retreat thus made, the Christian Princes, after they had caressed the new
Knights, which were Florian, and Tristor of Sobradiza, Agrian of Scotland,
Fulurtin, and Melfort, met in counsel about their affairs, where every one
agreeing to Don Rogells advice, who persuaded the renewing of the fight by
break of day, to let the enemy see, that neither loss nor labor could
affright them, word was brought, that an Ambassador was come from the Knight
Ardant. Let him, said Don Rogell, come in, his presence will not scare us. The
Ambassador then being admitted, spoke to them all in this manner: Princes of
Greece, the King of Canabea, believing that you have need of rest, as well as
himself, and that you will be as willing to do all fair offices to those which
have lost their lives on your side, as well as he would be to such as died on
his, he has sent me hither to require a tr^ce for eight days, to the end
every man may bestow (...) upon his friends: that time expired, he will let you
understand the design he has resolved on, for to give an end to this war. Don
Rogell, that was chi^^e in the counsel, by reason of the absence of Florizel
of Niquea his father, who was retired into the city, by reason of his hurt,
would have had the advice of the other Princes upon this demand; but they all
protesting to be wholly g^ided by him, he thus answered the Ambassador, We had
resolved before your coming, to have seen to morrow morning what the issue of
our war would have been; and to that end had commanded our men to be ready by
break of day; but now we will let your master know, that the Princes of Greece
will never be wanting in courtesy no more then in courage. The truce then
which in his name you require, we are content to grant you, and will be glad to
understand what his design is, that we may contribute thereunto all that is
necessary on our part. This answer being returned to Fulgoran, very much
contented his army, and the Christians retired into their tents to refresh
themselves at leisure.

CHAP. XXI. Upon the point of a combat between Fulgoran, the Cariffe,
Florimond, and the unknown Knight, with Spheramond, Amanio d'Astre, Russian and
Esquilan, two Damsels interrupting them, carried them away.
THe field being cleared of the dead bodies, Fulgoran, who had no greater
desire then to be victor in that war, incessantly studied how to bring that to
pass; one while he was inclined to put his army once more to the hazard of a
battle, but straight remembering the horrible slaughter which had been made of
his men, he had compassion of so many innocent people, and desired to triumph
with less effusion of blood; but not knowing which way to iattain thereunto,
he passed the most part of his time in these meditations, without drawing any
resolution out of an infinity of thoughts: At the last, returning one day from
the forest, where he often used to walk, with a determination to raise his
siege, and afterward to dispute, by a combat of two to two; not the Empire,
which now he durst not hope for, but the glory of the victory, he heard the
voice of one that complained, wherewith his heart being moved to pity, he
suddenly turned his horse that way, and approaching to certain trees, which
Nature had set very close together, he saw through the branches a Knight laid
upon the grass, armed at all pieces, except his hand^ and head; his eyes were
full of tears, his face pale, yet did not that hinder him from appearing very
handsome. The sadness of this object, not leaving him without resenting the
grief which he saw him endure, moved him to alight for to present his best
assistance unto him, when as he saw him rise from the ground, and take a Lute
that hung upon the boughs of one of the trees, whereunto he sung a very
mournful ditty, which being ended, he returned his Lute to the former place,
and throwing himself upon the grass, he said, Is it possible to find a more
unhappy man then my self in the world? and who can say that I am not the worst
required of any that ever sighed for love? Hope mitigates the torments of
lovers; and if they suffer, it is with a certain opinion that time will change
their misfortune, and that patience will render the end of their desires happy;
but alas! my misery is not of that quality, I languish without possibility of
hope, and the death of Arthemisa deprives me of all the bliss that man can
expect: I love her as much in the grave as when she lived, and foolishly
imagining, that she will one day revive to set me at rest, I cannot resolve to
entertain any affection for another Mistress. Good Gods! is not my destiny
very deplorable herein? Have I not cause to complain of my hard fortune? And is
it not with reason that I hold my self the most wretched creature breathing?
Yes doubtless, I may well blame mine own weakness, and accuse you of
injustice; you ought to force this humor, that renders me repugnant to my
self, work miracles on me, not permit me to be obstinate in mine own ruin,
or restore me that which you unjustly detain from me. But I wrongfully complain
of you, it is Death to whom I should address these reproaches, she has
ravished my treasure, and left me nothing but the remembrance of my Arthemisa;
she, she it is that is capable of my sorrow, of my tears and sighs; It is
through her that fury overcomes my reason; briefly, she alone is the cause of
my u^doing. This speech ending with an alas! he remained a good while silent,
leaving F^g^ran extremely grieved to see a Knight of so brave a presence
reduced to such extremity; howbeit, his silence lasted not long: Fairest
Arthemisa, continued he, what tears have you cost me? you have but one tomb,
one sepulcher, and my grief prepares for me every day an infinity; you partake
of the glory of the Gods, I am amongst the miseries o^ the world; you are happy
in your death, and I unhappy in my life; what inequality do we now suffer, that
have heretofore been so comfortable in all things? You are in pleasure, I am in
pain; I sigh, you are contented: verily I am much amaz^d at this change, and
cannot comprehend how we should live so at this present, whereas our love would
not permit us to do so in times past. It is true, O Arthemisa, that I should be
much amazed at it, if I did not call to mind your merit, which doubtless has
with reason acquired all these advantages: wherefore I ought not to envy your
glory, but contrarily rejoice to see you with the Gods, and to offer the same
sacrifices to you, as we do daily to them, which this Desert place will not
suffer me to do, nevertheless, I will at the least offer something, until
such time as my valor may lay the bravest Knights of the earth upon your tomb.
Saying so, he rose up, brake the branches of the nearest trees, which he piled
one upon another, and falling down on his knees, he was again going to complain
anew, had not Fulgoran, grieving to see him lose himself in that manner,
advanced toward him just at the instant; Knight, said he unto him, I wish that
you could so relish my speech, as it might bring you that consolation which is
necessary for your grief, and then you would see how great a fault you commit
to love an insensible thing, and that complaints are not fit for you, you may
well retain the memory of a beauty that you have so long adored; but to fancy
to your self a returning of it, for your satisfaction is that, which with
reason should never enter into your thoughts; and besides, do not believe that
it is a glory to you to be thus opinionate in your passion* not that it can
purchase to you the reputation of a perfect lover: the way to merit that
commendation lies in those things where our judgment does not err, and you
shall never meet with any that will approve of this course of yours, and that
will not freely tell you how it is a kind of madness. Follow the first
motions of your reason, let it not be lost in your affl^ction, and re-entring
into the exercise of Arms, divert your sorrows by the undertaking of generous
enterprises. Now it may be your passion will not brook the liberty of this
discourse; but if I fail therein, it is out of the compassion which I have of
your sufferings, so that if you have any power yet left over your self, you
will embrace my counsel, and go along with me to refresh you in my tents, where
I shall endeavor to free you from these fancies. Verily, answered he somewhat
coldly, were my sorrow less, I should willingly make use of your offer; but
what should I do in the world, since I am too well assured that I shall never
meet Arthemisa there? Sir, I should see nothing that could please me, all
objects would renew my grief, and the advertisements you speak of would be
torments to me when I should consider that I did not carry arms for the service
of my Mistrisse: you say that I should have a better heart after this loss;
but alas! it too nearly concerns my life, nor may I, without baseness, resolve
to live more contentedly then now you see me: howbeit, were I able to do you
any service in recompense of your courtesy, I would follow you, and let you
one day see that I am not insensible of a benefit. But what can you hope from
the weakness of these arms, which an extreme sorrow has deprived of all
vigor? Truly nothing, and your good will would be unprofitably employed;
wherefore be pleased to leave me here in a continual martyrdom, and go you
away with the glory of having exceedingly obliged me, though I entertain not
your assistance. Fulgoran, that attentively observed him during this discourse*
which seemed not to proceed from a man besides himself, seeing him of a very
goodly presence, was more desiro^^ then before ^o prevent the mischief that
menaced him, so as persisting in his persuasions, he laid so many reasons
before him, that at length he promised not to afflict himself so excessively,
but with patience to attend how the Gods would dispose of his life. This brave
resolution was so pleasing to our Pagan, as embracing him, he protested to love
him eternally; and making him get on horseback, they together ^ode on toward
his tents: but whilst they were upon the way, Fulgoran observed his carriage,
and seeing how gallantly he sat his horse, he could not forbe^re saying thus
unto him; Truly it would be a great loss to see ^ man of your parts pass the
best of his days in Deserts, not do I little oblige the world by restoring so
brave a knight unto it; your behavior contents me much, and makes me desire to
know you better then yet I do; you shall then, if you please, do me the favor,
to tell me more particularly who you are. It is, answered he, that which at
this present I cannot do, without breaking an oath I have made; but not to be
so ungrateful as to refuse you the information of what I may lawfully relate, I
will tell you, that I am every where called, the Unknown, a name indeed that
very well befits me, who have not given men occasion to speak of me, and that
having a long ti^e travel^ed through the world for the execution of enterprises,
that may crown with glory Knights erran^, I arrived some months since in the
land of Mo^cassi^, which was then all covered over with the forces of enemies:
My first encounter was a very lovely maid, who not without confidence presented
her self before me, and that in so graceful a manner, as begat in me an
extreme desire to speak unto her; and as I was opening my lips so to do, after
she had a little viewed me, she prevented me, thus: If you be, Sir, as
courteous as handsome, you will not refuse me a Boon I desire of you. Men use
not, replied I, to send away those of your merit with discontent, you may
therefore freely command of me what you please, and be assured not to be
denied. You shall then follow me presently, said she, to Nicopolis, the
capital city of this kingdom, and there put your self into the hand of
Arthemisa, with protestation to defend her against the King of Nicomena, a
dreadful Giant, and ugly as may be expressed, who now holds her besieged in that
place, because she will not give him the title of her husband: She is a
Princess so fair, and withal so nobly inclined to acknowledge any service
done unto her, as you will never repent any assistance you may give her. To
what end should I spin out my discourse any further, she did so highly extol
the beauties and perfections of this Princess, as I loved her before I saw
her; so that I rode away most desirously to Nicopolis, whereinto I entered with
much facility by the cunning and direction of this wench. I had a little
affection to her before, as I told you, but as soon as I saw so many charms in
the eyes of Arthemisa, I reserved no more power over my self, but well
contented to present her with my liberty, never to redemand it again. The King
of Morcassia her father, was much afflicted to see the enemy so near his walls,
yet did he a little cheer up himself when he saw in a skirmish that fell out
two days after my arrival, that my blows were weightier then those of all his
Knights, and that the King of Nicomena's people did no less redoubt the
incountring with me, then his did that of the Giant; whereupon he made
extremely much of me, all things were directed by my advice, but that which
gave me most satisfaction, was that I saw Arthemisa did love me, and was
delighted to see me sigh at her feet. Leaving them with this tranquillity of
mind, I accounted my self the most fortunate Knight of the earth, especially
when as a little after, I was the cause of all their happiness by the death of
Balistan, so was their capital enemy called, whom I slew in single combat,
routing afterward his whole army with a horrible slaughter. This victory gained
me the hearts of the Morcassians, and absolutely possessed me of the good
graces of Arthemisa, who, to tell you in few words, being no less in love with
me then I was with her, yielded up herself wholly unto me, and so made me
taste the sweetness which is found in the caresses of an amorous woman. Two
months past amidst this felicity, at the end whereof she counsell^d me to
demand her of her father, to the end our secret privacies might not at length
be the cause of our ruin. The assurance that I had of the Kings favor, made
me approve of her opinion, so that I went presently to him, and putting him in
mind of the service I had done him, I besought him to reward me for them by
the possession of Arthemisa. Your virtue, answered he, does oblige me to give
you all contentment; but first for the satisfaction both of my self and my
subjects, I desire to know who you are. This request, replied I, seems so
reasonable, that I cannot refuse it, without wrong to my self. My father is
called ^nomander, Prince -- O ye Gods! said he, stepping back two or three
paces, say no more, that name is no stranger to mine ears; O heavens! have you
suffered me to be obliged for my life to the son of the greatest enemy I have?
Get you gone, continued he unto me, get you gone, Knight, and that instantly:
for Arthemisa shall never be your wife. And were not the memory of your
services a bar to my displeasure, I would make you feel what is due to the hate
of your father. Think now, I beseech you, how I was vexed at the hearing of
these words, so contrary to my hope: In truth, I was ready to die, but my rage
kept me alive to make him this reply.

Ungrateful King, thou have forgot that without my assistance thou had now
been a slave, and not knowing what courtesy means, thou refusest me that which
I have justly purchased; but thou shall one day see what thy heady fury will
avail thee, and that it had been more expedient for thee, to have past by the
enmity which thou carriest to my father, and a thousand times repent the little
esteem thou make of me; for be assured, I know the way to abase what I have
so generously exalted: Thou threatenest me here in thine own Palace, but beware
of coming near me, for I carry the same sword that spilt the blood of thine
enemies, and think not my courage any whit abated by two months rest. Saying
thus, I past into my chamber, armed my self, and mounting on horsback, I
retired into a forest which was not far from thence, with a design to return
the same night, for to know of Arthemisa, how I should bear my self in this
affair: But alas! I found her not alive, for having been acquainted with the
quarrel between her father and me, she fell upon the floor with so violent a
grief, as she was therewith suffocated before she could be succored: From
hence proceeds the excessive sorrow that I have now these three months
endured, and from this so untimely death of hers, are those hourly complaints
derived, which you have heard, and which I would have continued to the end of
my days, had not your persuasions diverted me from them.

This discourse ending with many sighs, Fulgoran began afresh to comfort him,
remonstrating unto him, that a noble courage ought equally to receive the
assaults and caresses of fortune; and thus discoursing, they arrived at the
Army, which the unknown Knight liked very well of, when he knew the occasion
wherefore it was there. Not long after, Fulgoran, perceiving the term of the
truce ready to expire, called the chiefest of his Commanders into his tent, and
with a Majestic countenance, thus spoke unto them: Excellent Princes, did not
the blood of the innocent rather move us to pity, then carry us to cruelty, I
should advise you once again to hazard that remainder of our men, which the
fury of our enemies has left us, and seek in their destruction the honor of
an happy victory; but unable to see them suffer so for the satisfying of our
pleasure, I am of opinion, that it is best our quarrel be determined by a
company of selected persons, and that we should secure our people with the
venture of our lives; I am the author of this proposition, and therefore it is
reason, that I also should be the first in the danger. Our adversaries are
valiant, it is true, and all the world ascribes to them the glory of knowing
how to fight well; howbeit, we have here so many brave spirits, that we need
not fear to meet them with equal number, for otherwise, the good conduct of
their armies will make them always triumphant; let us then arm three or four
of us against so many of the Greek Princes, and let not the rest that are
excluded from the fight be troubled, for it shall be no less glory to be
placed in the government of an Army, then to dispute the honor of acombat; I
desire to be the first, the unknown Knight shall second me, the other two may
be elected: If my advice be good, you may follow it; if not, counsel me, I
will most willingly break off my design, to let you see, that my resolutions
depend upon yours. Valiant Prince, then answered Dardanor, who spoke for them
all; It was only our respect of you that put our swords into our hands, and
without regard of your passion, or to say better of your zeal, since the glory
of our Altars is in question, we would never have entered into any dispute with
the Grecian Princes, we will therefore obey your pleasure, as we have hitherto
your commandments upon all occasions presented: Dispose of the persons and the
number, they which do not accompany you in this action, shall have their share
in whatsoever shall befall you, and all of us together shall suffer with you in
your victory. This is, said Fulgoran, no less then I expected from your
wisdom; my Cousin Florimond, and the great Cariffe of Africa, shall make up the
number of four, the King of Calican shall be our Judge, and you mine Uncle,
said he to Bruzanges of Canabea, shall with the Kings of Coriza, and Romeria,
see our forces embarked, and with them attend us at the at the nearest Country
of the Pagans, in case that fortune shall be favorable unto us. This
resolution being taken, each one departed until the next day that Fulgoran
arose to write these lines unto the Princes of Greece.

The King of Canabea's Challenge to the Princes of Greece.

WE ought to have a care of our people, and to prefer their quiet before our
own preservation, I am grieved for the death of so many brave Knights, that lie
now in these fields, wherefore I will not hazard the rest of my soldiers that
are left me in a second battle, but being loath to retire with so little
satisfaction of the pains I have taken to come and see you, I desire that the
honor of this enterprise may depend on the combat of four of us against a like
number of yours; Consult with your courages, and belie not the opinion which
the world has of your valor: This bearer has power to sign for me
whatsoever you shall require touching the conditions of this fight, whereof you
may dispose, and for your assurance rely on my faith.

Verily, said Don Rogel, it is not without much reason that this Prince is
esteemed to be valiant, and more advised, then his age does feem to permit, for
I cannot remember that ever I saw a defiance more courteous then this he has
sent us; We accept of it, and are very well contented with the number he
propounds. Whereupon, calling for ink and paper (with Florizells consent) he
returned him this answer.

The Greek Princes Answer to the King of Canabea.

WE find your reasons so just, as we cannot refuse that you desire, without
wrong to our honors; you shall therefore have the combat on the third day
after this, with the same assurances you give us; for the conditions, we leave
them to your arbitrament; and desiring to imitate your courtesy, we remit the
election of the arms and field to you, for the security whereof, we do, as
you, engage our faiths.

The Ambassador being returned herewith, Fulgoran drew his army into battalia,
and causing it to march to the sea side, where it was presently embarked, only
the four Knights, that were to fight, remaining in the port, with the King of
Calican for Judge on their part, and the Queen Alastraxerea for the Christians;
which were, Spheramond Emperor of the Parthians, Amani^ d' Astre, Russian of
Media, and the brave Esquilan of Poland. The Grecian Princes seeing the enemies
Army under sail, and understanding that the principal Knights amongst them
were those that staid behind, sent to invite them to lodge in the City till
the day appointed for the Combat, but they refused the offer with thanks, and
chose rather to rest in Fulgorans tent, which was left for them. The third day
being come, with the incredible content of the Combatants, they presented
themselves in the field, armed at all parts, and expected nothing but the sound
of the trumpet to charge their lances, when as they saw two Damsels enter, who
instantly addressing themselves to the Princes of Greece, demanded a boon of
them. We are too courteous, answered Spheramond, to refuse you any thing,
therefore acquaint us with your desire, and we will most willingly grant it. We
are then well satisfied on your part, answered one of them, we must now try
whither we shall obtain as much of your enemies; so turning them about, they
went to Fulgoran, and said unto him: My Lord, we come to crave a boon of you in
the behalf of the Damsel that entertained you in the Castle of the Rock, when
you sought to escape the Count of Clina's surprisall. As I live, said he, you
shall not be denied, for I am too sensible of the favors which I received from
her at that time, speak only, and let me ^now what I may do for her service.
That which I desire, replied she, is, that you will follow me presently,
together with these three Knights that accompany you, to the end you may give
her what then you promised her. Gentlewoman, answered he, somewhat perplexed, I
acknowledge that I am mightily engaged to her, but I am tied by my word to
those Knights that are there, and the estate wherein you see us, will not
suffer us to stir from hence before we know unto whom the Gods will grant the
victory. No, no, replied she straight, they are as much obliged to me by
promise, as you are, and will not make any difficulty to defer the combat to
another time. No indeed, said Spheramond, who was come to them, since we are
engaged thereunto by our oath; howbeit, you shall do us a singular favor, i^
you will at the least permit us to break these staves in our hands together,
and strike three blows with the swords. To use your swords, answered she, is a
thing I will never give way to, but that I may in some sort content you, I will
not be against one career, upon condition that the weaker shall not be offended
with their misfortune, nor hinder my business. The Knights remaining agreed
thereupon, returned to their places, and from thence suddenly dislodged with
such fury, as the earth trembled under them. The encounter of Spheramond and
Fulgoran was equal, their lances being broken to the very gantlets, without so
much as once moved in their saddles; Russian, that ran against the great
Cariffe of Africa, made him lose his stirrups, and had pierced him through and
through had not his staff broke upon his shield; Amanio d' Astre, and the
unknown Knight, were both overthrown to the ground; and the brave Esquilan,
having incountered Florimond on the helmet, made him see the stars in plain
day, and so to stagger, that he was ready to kiss the earth; but his enemies
blow being not effectlesse, he lost one stirrup, which yet he so speedily
recovered, as fewtook notice of it. This course being performed with some
advantage to the Grecian Princes, the P^gans were not well pleased, and would
willingly have proceeded to a further trial by the sword, but perceiving these
two women advance, unto whom they were engaged by their word, they followed
them, though extremely grieved for having been thus diverted from their
enterprise: Nevertheless, des^^ing not to appear discontented, they comforted
themselves with the hope, that time would furnish them with occasions to
satisfy their wills. As Soon as they were gone a league, these Damsels staid at
the meeting of two ways, and one of them turning to Fulgoran, said unto him:
Excellent Prince, you and I, with the unknown Knight, must follow this
address, whilst my companion leads the other Knights this way, to a place
where their presence will be very necessary. I have told you, answered
Fulgoran, that I will never decline your Mistresses commands; let us then
proceed in the way, since you will have it so, and let these Lords take the
other; herewith, embracing with some show of sorrow, they parted, and followed
their guides. She that conducted Fulgoran, observing by his countenance that he
was melancholy, said unto him: Sir, be not troubled for that my Mistress has
not suffered you to fight with the Princes of Greece, it was not done without
good consideration, the day would have been fatal, and your enterprise could
not have been ended without great mischief: when you shall know your self, you
will think that she has done nothing without reason, and you will thank her
for the care she has always had of your content; she loves you, though as yet
you cannot say wherefore, but you shall understand it from her the first day
that you shall see her, which shall be the happiest, and the most dangerous, of
your whole life, and behold new testimonies of her affection. Thereat Fulgoran,
who lent an attentive ear to her discourse, lift up his eyes and saw two
Dwarfs, the one upon the fairest courser in the world, the other much less,
and more deformed, with a great pack on his back: This, said she, taking the
horse by the bridle, and presenting it unto him, is that which now she gives
you; she will not change your arms, because they are excellent, but knowing
that you desire others, for that you would not be known, she has committed a
secret unto me to quench these burning colors; whereupon, pouring a violl of
water upon them, she rendered them quite black; but so polished, as one might
see himself in them. This now, continued she, does represent the grief you are
in, for that you do not know who you are, and remember I tell you that these
arms shall not lose this color till you be known; at which time they shall
reassume their ardent flames to make you burn with a new fire, and be assured
that this change will not let you doubt of your dissent, when you shall call to
mind these my words: Now this is all that you may learn from me at this
present. As for you, brave Knight, speaking to the unknown, you may believe
that she loves you also, and for some instance thereof, she has commanded me
to present you with these arms, which are in this pack, that are far fitter for
the adventures you are to undergo, then those you have on you; you shall do
well to accept of them from her accordingly, and to be confident that they will
be very useful to you; you may not leave this way, because it is not without a
mystery that you are brought into it, and doing that which belongs to the duty
of good Knights, yield more to the glory of your name, then to your passions.
Saying so, she vanished away, together with the Dwarfs, leaving the horse under
Fulgoran, and the arms upon the back of the unknown Knight.

CHAP. XXII. Fulgoran and the unknown Knight arriving at the Castle of Argenea,
sister to the King of the fr^zen Islands, force her guards, destroy her
enchantments, and free many good Knights there imprisoned.
FVlgoran no less astonished with the alteration of his Arms, then contented
to see himself master of so brave an horse, looked a pretty while upon the
unknown Knight, without a word speaking, as if he would have demanded of him
what he thought of the affair; but knowing full well the great power of the
Damsel, whom he had seen in the palace of the rock, which was no other then
Vrganda the unknown, he ceased from further marvel for to think of her words
that lately left him. I am persuaded, said he to himself, that I am the son of
some Christian Prince, and I have reason to think so: for this Lady, that
favors my enterprises, would not now twice have diverted me from fighting with
those famous Knights of Greece, if I might have done it without offense:
Moreover, if I call to mind the speech of that old man whom I met withal the
same day I received the order of Knighthood; and at my coming to the Crown of
Canabea, I cannot doubt of it: for the most part of my Barons do affirm, that
the Queen Florella, my mother, contracted a marriage in private with the
brother of the greatest Prince of Christendom, and for that only
consideration, did they put the Scepter into my hands, as being the lawful
heir of the countries under her obedience. If it be so, I ought to serve them,
and not seek to ruin them by my Arms. But what do I say? Serve them? that were
to be base, and insensible of indignities; They have beguiled the simplicity of
an amorous woman, and made her ardours serve to end her life: wherefore me
thinks it were more reasonable for me to lose my self with her, then leave
this crime unpunished. Howbeit, there is no remedy for that which is past, and
my revenge would but increase my grief and shame: things therefore must be
left as they are, and I must labor to find out the truth of the matter,
rather then run indiscreetly into actions of perpetual repentance. Having been
long entertained with these thoughts, he came to himself, and cheering the
unknown Knight, who was no less transported with his imaginations, they
continued on their way till night, which they passed in a sound sleep under the
trees after they had fed on such cates as their Squires had provided. Rising
the next morning with the Sun, they got to horse, and traveled so long till
they came to the sea side, discovering nothing round about them, save a little
B^rke, whereinto they entered with their horses; immediately whereupon the
unknown Knights Squire going to take an Oar for to row off the vessel, she
suddenly went away with such swiftness, as they were amazed at it. Behold,
said Fulgoran, a new miracle for us, and the Gods seem to authorize our
enterprises, yet I fear our teeth will grow longer, if our fortune do not the
sooner bring us to some land: for I am exceeding hungry already. And so am I,
said the unknown, so that if our Squires have some provision yet in store, we
shall be very much obliged to their providence; whereupon their Squires opening
their males, where they looked for no more then a sittle bread that was lest,
were mightily astonished to find them full of good meat, the sight whereof so
whetted their stom^cks, as they presently fell to it, which was not yet so
delicate, but that the wine of their bottles did every way equal it. Their
appetites being satisfied, they were about to have taken a little rest; but
their Bark staying at an Island, that seemed mavelous beautiful and
pleasant, they went on shore, and mounting their good horses, they entered into
a forest of goodly trees, planted with admirable Art: the music which the
birds made them from the trees, and the diversity of flowers they trampled on,
so entertained their ears and eyes, as they seemed not to consider any other
thing. Having traveled so an howr, with all the content that might be, they
arrived near to a mountain, on the top whereof they saw one of the most stately
Castles in the world; five towers equally distant an hundred and fifty paces
one from the other, framed on the forefront of the building, whose walls were
of white and black Marble, and the covering of a metal so glistering, as one
could not behold it with less pain then the Sun. Between these towers an hall
appeared, so high, as it seemed to surpass the clouds; and the gardens made
all in descent, possessed them with an extreme desire to be in so sweet a
place. The wonder of these rarities inviting them to pass on, they advanced a
flight shoot further, where they met with a great Arch, that gave passage to a
Bridge, before the which stood a pillar, whereon hung a Table of Brass with
these words inscribed therein:

When the two unknown shall arrive at the cruel Castle, all shall be at
liberty. This adventure, said Fulgoran, is questionless reserved for us: for
you are unknown by name, and I by birth: wherefore I am persuaded, the
Destinies have established it for our glory, let us proceed then if you please,
and see what is promised us: So going to the bridge, they perceived a little
stream running under it, that seemed to be swollen with the blood of a great many
murdered persons. O me! said Fulgoran, how much does this object so full of
horror abase the glory of these proud buildings, which doubtless were not
erected but to draw Knights hither, and then to destroy them; nevertheless I
will increase the number of those that are here sacrificed, or overthrow the
power of it. Scarcely had he spoken thus, when as he saw coming in two several
ways, a furious Giant with a mighty club in his hand, and the most dreadful
Serpent that can be imagined; he was covered all over with green scales, that
were proof against the cuttingst steel in the world; his throat, whereinto a
man might easily enter seemed to be a furnace, and the ground was so violently
beaten by his tail, eight foot in length, that it trembled round about him.
Fulgoran, whose courage was incapable of fear, thinking the defeat of this
creature more difficult then that of the Giant, marched against him, leaving
the other combat to his companion, and instantly discharged so mighty a blow on
his head, that he was constrained with it to shut his mouth, which before he
held wide open to devour him. The Knight much vexed for having employed so much
force in vain, struck him again on the body with such violence, that he made
him recoil three or four paces back. Now this blow serving but to incense him
the more, he flew upon him so furiously, as he overthrew him to the earth,
tearing his shield from his arm. Fear does furnish us with wings, and many
times is cause of our preservation: Fulgoran finding himself in that plight,
and without a shield, was in some doubt of his life; but suddenly getting up,
and feeling his strength increase with his choler, he gave the Serpent such a
smart thrust in his eye, as he passed his sword a foot deep into his head. The
beast growing mad with the pain of his wound, made three or four steps back,
and with his huge long tail smote the Knight so terribly on the helmet, that he
was once more compelled to kiss the ground with an opinion that a tower had
fallen upon him; the violence of the blow having somewhat astonished him, he
was not able presently to rise, so that the Serpent seeing him lying along,
leapt to him, and seizing on him with his teeth labored to bite his armor in
pieces; but Fulgoran that had not lost his judgment gave him another thrust
where there were no scales, running his sword up to the hilts in his belly. The
pangs of death making this fierce animal fall off three or four paces from him,
the Knight much troubled to behold himself without a sword, stood in a maze,
when as Fortune presented him with the means, not only to save himself, but
to conquer also: for the Giant, that combated the unknown Knight, being
exceedingly vexed to see his blood trickle out from diverse parts of his body,
came up so close to him, as thinking to discharge a blow on his enemies head,
he bit his arm on his helmet with such force, that it quite stund it, so that
his club fell out of his hand close by Fulgoran, who speedily catching of it
up, gave the Serpent such a deadly stroke with it just between both the eyes,
as his brains flew out. This victory, as glorious as little expected, serving
but to increase his courage, he turned him about, having first plucked his
sword out of the Serpents belly, to go unto the succor of the unknown Knight,
but perceiving his adversaries head at his feet, he went and sat him down on a
great stone to take breath, thinking that so painful a beginning would have a
more difficult ending. The desire he had to see the issue of this adventure,
and the glory which he hoped for from it, not suffering him long to rest, he
arose^ little after, and passing under another Arch which he saw on his left
hand, he was ready to enter into a little wood, when as he perceived ten
hideous Salvages come out of it, whereof five began to assault him terribly
with their massy clubs, the other five giving the unknown Knight the same
welcome; who finding himself amongst such dreadful enemies, was in some doubt
of his life: nevertheless, resolving to sell it dearly, he bestirred himself
with much valor and dexterity. But it much enraged him for that his sword
could not make way through the shaggy hair of these monsters, which crushed his
bones with their heavy clubs. On the other side Fulgoran laid fearfully about
him: for desiring either to dye or to vanquish, he had already overthrown two
of them dead at his feet, defending himself courageously from the rest that
pressed him with incredible fury. The combat being in this dangerous estate,
the unknown Knight enraged for that he could not as yet see any blood drawn
from his enemies, gave one of them such a thrust in the belly, as he ran him
quite through and through, laying him dead on the grass; but he had not time to
rejoice at this his lucky dispatch of that monster, for the rest charged him at
the very same instant with two such cruel blows, as they extended him on the
earth quite void of sense; believing then that he was dead, they yelled forth
such a dreadful cry, as the whole Island resou^ded therewith, whereby Fulgoran
being drawn to look about for to see whence it might proceed, perceived the
misfortune of his companion, whereat he was so exceedingly incensed, that
taking his sword in both hands, he discharged it so forcibly upon one of them,
as the hair not able to withstand the edge thereof, it divided his head in two
pieces; whereupon, not regarding the rest, he ran suddenly to the unknown
Knight, whom his adversaries were a disarming; and carried with the same fury
as before, he struck one of them so terribly on the shoulder, as he cut him
down to the very girdle. The other three beholding this terrible blow,
presently forsook their former man, and joining with them that remained, they
assailed him so furiously, that they gave him no leave to breathe, their
strokes descending so thick upon him, as his shield seemed to be an anvill
whereon 5 or 6 Smiths were a hammering. Seeing himself pressed in this sort,
and fearing that at length he should fall under the weight of these strokes, he
began to retire by little and little toward the Arch, that so he might avoid
fighting with them all at once, when as a big Knight in gray Armor presented
himself, who seeing the inequality of this fray, drew out his sword, and
therewith charged one of the Salvages with such strength, as he sent his club
arm and all unto the ground; not contented therewith, he gave another such a
thrust just in the throat, as the point of his sword came out at the nape of
his neck, laying him dead on the grass. Fulgoran no less amazed then pleased
with the valor of this new commer, took his sword again in both hands, and
fearing lest the glory of this adventure might be ravished from him, he struck
one of them that pursued him very hard, with such violence on the thigh, as cut
it sheere off, placing him in the number of those that live not. The two that
still remained, beholding the horrible butchery of their companions, would have
saved themselves by flight; howbeit they were followed so close by the two
Knights, as their deaths were not deferred but to the third blow they received.
This victory being thus gloriously obtained, Fulgoran going to the gray Knight,
spoke in this manner: Noble sir, I must render that unto your valor which all
the world cannot refuse you, and give you thanks for my deliverance: if I live,
it is through you, but I will gladly spend so much blood for your service as
you have now preserved in my body; pursue the good fortune which brought you
hither, the glory of this adventure is reserved for you, and the beginning that
I have given to it, shall not make me desire to oppose your enterprise. I have
not done any thing, sir, answered he embracing him, for your succor, but what
the Law of Knighthood commanded me. So many enemies as you have extended here
on the earth, and that dreadful serpent which lies dead yonder, are assured
testimonies that you can vanquish without me, and defeat your enemies without
my assistance; wherefore I will never attribute unto my self the honor due to
your courage, which verily is more then humane, but shall be glad to go on with
you, and in all things be governed by your command: Herewith they embraced
again, and were disposing of themselves to proceed in their enterprise, when as
Fulgoran bethinking him of his companion, went presently unto him, to see
whether he were yet in case to receive any service from him. Having then
unlaced his helmet, he found his face all covered with blood, but yet was much
cheered to see him still breathe. Courage, said he unto him, our enemies are
slain, and you revenged for the outrage they did you. This victory, answered he
somewhat faintly, would be a great contentment unto me, were I sure that it had
not cost you too much of your blood. I feel much pain, replied Fulgoran, from
so many blows that I have received; but the Clubs being unable to to pierce my
Arms, I have not lost one drop of blood, the only thing that now troubles me,
is to see you so ill. It is true, answered he, that I am very light headed, but
time will restore me my judgment, with my strength, and if our Squires were
here to tend me, I am persuaded I should be well again in a little time.
Fulgoran, who highly prized him, ran incontinently to the first Arch of the
bridge to call them, and leaving him in their hands, he passed on with the gray
Knight, till they came to the Marble walls, where they parted upon the
encounter of two ways, Fulgoran taking that on the right hand, and the gray
Knight the left; going then on, with wonder to see so strong walls, and
dangerous guards, they came much about the same time unto two gates, the gray
Knight to that on the west side, and Fulgoran to the other that looked toward
the Sun rising, so that the sound of their knocking was heard both at one
instant, whereupon the gates flew open with a most dreadful noise; which
notwithstanding, stayed not from entering in with their shields on their arms,
and their swords in their hands: But they had not made three steps, when as
Fulgoran saw one of the hugest and most deformed Giants that might be, advance
toward him with an Axe of ten foot long, which he discharged at his head, with
a confident belief to cleave him to the middle, notwithstanding the goodness
of his Arms; howbeit he nimbly avoided the blow by leaping aside, so that it
lighted upon the ground, whereinto it entered a great dep^h: Fulgoran laying
hold on that advantage, struck him so furiously on the arm, that he separated
it from his body; and not satisfied therewith, he was going to double his blow
when as the Giant more through rage then judgment, closed with him, and with
his left hand arresting the stroke, lifted him up, mangre all his resistance,
with a purpose to batter him against the ground; but the Knight perceiving
himself in that extremity, drew out a short dagger that he had, and stabbed it
into his belly which was unarmed. This stroke bringing death with it, the Giant
tumbled presently down, but with such ill fortune for Fulgoran, as he fell
under him, being almost stifled with the weight of his body: nevertheless,
collecting all his forces together, he so heaved at his dead enemy, that he
turned him aside, thereby clearing himself of such an heavy burden; howbeit
he was constrained to sit down and rest himself till he was raised again by a
new occasion.

In the mean time, the gray Knight was not idle, for passing in just when
Fulgoran did, he was incountered with a furious Bull, and a most fearful
Dragon, which showing him his teeth, that were a cubit long, and as sharp as a
razor, menaced him with a^ approaching death; yet being as valiant as could be,
he was no whit abashed, but presented the point of his sword to the Dragon,
that thinking to swallow up his arm, received a dangerous wound in the throat:
This hurt inraging the beast, he retired a little, to cast up the blood that
choked him; but the Knight knowing he must lose no time, presently advanced,
and guided by his good fortune, gave such another thrust in his belly, as his
guts came presently forth with his life: That done, he made head to the Bull;
but he was so near him, that he could neither avoid the push of his horns, nor
make use of his sword; so as all that he could do was again to present him with
his shield, but the beast came running at him with so much fury, as the Knight
was enforced to tumble three or four times over upon the sand, with extreme
danger of his life, had not the Bull, leaping and bounding, gone a good way
from him to fetch his course with the more fury at him, gave him leisure to
rise, but in so due a season, as with a light leap he avoided the second
encounter of his horns, upon the point whereof he thought the hazard of his
life did hang: not willing to stick in so fair a way, he made as though he
would stand his return, but stepping aside, he struck him so right upon the
neck, that he cut it half in sunder, letting him run about the court with the
pangs of death, which was not long deferred, for passing by Fulgoran, who then
was up, he received another blow in the very same place, which laid his head
upon the earth. The two Knights, that saw not one another, the house being
between them, having no more employment below, went up by two pair of stairs,
and found themselves, the gray Knight in one of the fairest chambers that ever
he had seen, and Fulgoran in a hall, where the first object that his eyes
lighted on, was the beautiful wife of Dardanor, chained in a corner, half
naked, and almost covered over with blood. Good Gods, said he, stepping a
little back! Where am I? Do I not see Clairangia, the Queen of my desires, as
well as of Romeria, in chains, that are only fit for slaves? Ah Madam! Those
that have thus entreated you, understand not your merit: But do not, I beseech
you, afflict your self any further, See here your Fulgoran, who vows by all the
Deities, that he adores, either to revenge your wrongs, or to die with you.
Alas! said she with a sigh, and no less rapt with astonishment, then delight,
to see this Knight there, whom she loved as much as her life, it is most true,
that the Gods never forsake them that in their afflictions crave their aid:
Dear friend, I always hoped that my freedom would be procured by your hand,
and though the strength of this place was very great, yet I believed that your
virtue could meet with nothing able to resist it: you are come just as it
should be, for I had not long to live, the torments I save suffered have been
so grievous, as I wonder how I could have patience to endure them: You are
doubly bound to a revenge; but because you know not yet this secret, I must
tell you that our private caresses at Celibana, made my belly so to swell, that
you may see good testimony of it ere it be long; howbeit, Dardanor was free
from all suspicion of it, till an old Sorceresse, sister to the King of the
frozen Isles, who died at the great battle of Aleppo, came into the Court the
same day that he returned from the war of Greece, and said to him: Know
thou (King of Romeria) that thy wife is with child of a son, which is none of
thine, and that shall one day, when he comes to know his father, ruin the
Altars of the Gods whom we adore? No, thy knowledge does not extend so far; but
for that I am obliged to preserve the Pagan name, I came to thee to advertise
thee of the affront done unto thee. And the better to clear this point,
remember the Count of China, he spoke but out of suspicion, yet was his
accusation most true, and therefore would advise thee to choke this brat before
it be able to do mischief; but because it would be a dishonor for thee to
defile thy hands in the blood of thy wife, leave thy revenge to me, and give me
permission to punish her my way: you know the violent humor of Dardanor. This
discourse having rekindled the displeasure that he had conceived against me, at
the time when you delivered me, he presently put me into this woman's hand, who
making me go with her into a Chariot drawn by four Griffions, brought me to
this house, chained me by the neck, as now you see me, and ever since has
daily whipped me with rods, threatening to put me and my child to one of the
cruellest deaths that ever was seen, which she would questionless have done
long since, but that she still told me, how the stars did not as yet give way
to her desires, so as I believe our lives are limited by the only pleasure of
the gods. This is a case, answered Fulgoran, whereof we are not now to speak;
let us rather seek out this old witch, to punish her as she deserves: But
pardon me, Madam, if this desire be more pressing with me, then the care of
freeing you now from these chains, for so long as she lives, we shall have
nothing but troubles here, I will therefore pursue that business with all the
speed I may: So making obeisance to his Lady, he went up a little pair of
stairs, which carried him to the top of the house, where at his first coming
he espied this Enchantresse, drawing figures and characters upon the floor. As
I live, said he, old Megara, taking her fast by the hair, which hung about her
ears, your devils shall not now serve your turn, but you shall give an account
of your cruelty to a Lady which you have held so long here in fetters: Dragging
her then down the stairs, he came into the hall, at the end whereof he saw a
Knight, who coming upon the cry of that Sorceresse, said: Ah, Sir Knight, do
not employ your self in fighting with a woman. Fulgoran mad angry, to see his
revenge deferred, gave her such a blow upon the stomach, as he laid her half
dead upon the floor; and not considering, that the Knight which spoke to him,
was the same, who so lately had afflicted him, and that forced by the charms of
this woman was come thither, laid hand on his sword, and began so cruel a
combat with him, that all the hall rang with the noise of their blows, Fulgoran
fought very bravely, for that the preservation of his Mistress was in question,
but his opposite was so stout, as he durst not hope for the victory, which put
him in such a rage, as he redoubled his blows with infinite violence; but he
was no less pressed by his adversary, who charged him so fiercely, that he did
not remember he had ever been so harldly laid to unless it were when he fought
with Florisel about the death of Balard; the combat growing furious, through
their choler, they continued in that manner almost three hours, without
discerning to whom fortune would be most favorable: But as they were in this
dispute, the old woman gat up, all amazed, and thinking to escape into her
Cabinet, where the prime of all her charms remained, cast her self between the
Knights, who having their swords advanced to charge one another, did let them
descend in one instant upon her head, which they divided into three or four
pieces. Whereupon, the earth trembled, and the foundations of that building,
which were laid by Art Magic, were scattered with a thunder clap; the Knights
finding themselves in the field, wondered much at their combat, which they well
remembered, and much more that they saw neither marble nor towers, but only
the bodies of the Savages, of the Giants, and the monsters, which were
natural, and not forged, an infinite number of bones of men, devoured by those
creatures, Clairangia bound to a tree, with thirty or forty Knights in the same
plight hard by her, and the body of the Sorceresse divided, as I have told you;
Fulgoran, who had nothing more pressing, then the misfortune of his Mistress,
ran presently to her, cut the cords that tied her, besought her to accept the
desire he had to do her service, and not be troubled though her habits were not
suitable to her royal greatness.

I am, said she, so contented to see my self free, and so near to you, as I no
more complain of my passed torments; Let us only think of getting out of this
place, and afterward we will consider of the means to be revenged of the
ingratitude of a man, that did not merit the honor of my company, as well as
we are delivered from her whose malice sought our destruction. Whilst these
discourses were re-inkindling the fires of their former loves, the gray Knight
unbound all those prisoners, whom that hag had reserved for a torture far worse
then death; and finding amongst them four very young, and exceeding handsome,
he courteously demanded of them, whence they were: We are, said one of them,
Christian Princes, knighted but a few months since, but so unfortunate in the
beginning of our arms, (being unhappily fallen upon this place, where without
your aid we had certainly found our graves) as we cannot hardly say, that we
have given the least proof of the valor which our fathers demonstrated in an
age far younger then ours; This first is called Leonidas, son to Astibel of
Mesopotamia, the next is Abies of Ireland, son to King Cildadan, the third is
Frizell of Arcadia, son to Giorntes, nephew to the good King Lisard, and my
self am an Amason, daughter to Celafia, of whom perhaps, you have sometimes
heard: We came, drawn by the beauty of the place, into these parts, were made
prisoners by the Giants or the Savages, and are now all disposed to serve you,
since your valor has given us the means so to do. The gray Knight, finding
himself obliged by this offer, very courteously thanked them, and knowing them
to be Christians, left them to the liberty of their actions, departing from
them to Fulgoran, who having not seen him yet without his helmet, spoke thus
unto him: Brave warrior, It is time, me thinks, that I should know him, to whom
I ow so much service; be pleased then to tell me your name, and to let me see
your face. I cannot, answered he, refuse you so small a request; and now you
see me, said he, taking off his helmet, and discovering a face, brown indeed,
but grave and amiable, as might be wished; but if I must proceed farther, and
tell you also who I am, you shall know that I am called Prigmaleon, son to the
great Emperor of Aethiopia, and more pleased with your acquaintance, then with
the possession of the best part of the world; with that they embraced, and
letting the young Knights depart in Prigmaleons Frigot, they went to the
unknown Knight, who was now well recovered, and so all three, with Clairangia,
embarked themselves in Fulgorans vessel, which with its wonted celerity, made
to the main sea, whilst they were furnished with good meat for their repast,
and good beds for their repose.

CHAP. XXIII. Fulgoran and Prigmaleon meet with two Fleets at sea in fight
together, one of the which by their assistance gets the victory.
THE Bark wherein Fulgoran and Prigmaleon were passing on, with incredible
speed, to the great contentment of all the company, had now sailed three days
without any stop; when as about break of the fourth day, Fulgoran, that could
not sleep, being troubled with his amorous fires, which were every minute
increased by the continual sight of his Lady, saw a Bark pass hard by him, in
which was a great Knight, and a very beautiful maid, who seemed to take no
delight in any thing but her tears, nor to find any ease for her grief, but in
her sighs, which so moved him to compassion, that he would presently have
leaped into the Bark for to succor her, out of a persuasion that her sorrows
proceeded from the force which that great Knight intended unto her, had not the
wind, which drove away the vessel, crossed his desire: but seeing her gone,
and not knowing how to tack about for to follow her, he was so enraged to be in
that sort carried away by another pleasure, rather then his own, that a
thousand times in his mind he cursed the power of Magic, though it had so
often given him assistance; wherefore in a great cha^e he was going to steer
himself, and had commanded his Squires, whom he had called up, to bring the
sails about, when as he saw a Dwarf at the helm, that said unto him: Suffer not
your self, Sir, to be so transported with passion; those by whose Art you are
now guided, will not suffer you to slip any occasion that may add to your
glory, but such affairs, as are both of importance, and pressing, must precede
them that may be deferred without danger: having thus spoken, he vanished out
of his sight, leaving the Knight more quieted in his mind then before; and not
a little wondering at the vast knowledge of those, to whose skill it seemed his
fortune was inseparably attracted: Laying himself down then upon his bed, he
quickly fell asleep, but he did not continue so long, for his Squire, waking
them all, showed them afar off a great number of ships, in battle array, ready
to attacque another fleet, which in the like order appeared against them. Their
vessel sailing that way, as they desired, they saw these vessels meet
together, and begin a furious Sea Fight; in which at the first, they meddled
not, being as yet uncertain, in favor of whether side they were to employ
their arms: But discerning white crosses in the flags of those on the right
hand, they resolved to be for the other side, and accordingly had their swords
in their hands, to give a charge, when as they saw a man in the midst of the
waves, who laying hold of their ship, besought them, to take him up, and not to
suffer him to perish in that pitiful element: The Squires having drawn him
aboard, Fulgoran, that guessed him to be a Pagan, came to him, and asked him
whom he served. He answered, that he was a subject to Dardanor, King of
Romeria, who having raised a mighty army, and shipped it in the fleet which
they saw to invade the kingdom of Canabea, in revenge of the affront done him
by the King thereof, through his too much fam^liarity with the Queen his wife,
contrary to the respects of the friendsh^p between them, had met with this
fleet of Christians bound for Trebisond; and being a mortal enemy to that
profession, has charged them in hope to defeat them. As I live, said Fulgoran,
your master is a villain, and though by my religion I an obliged to the ruin
of the Christians, yet for this once will I be their serva^t. Get you then into
the first of your ships that you come to (for I will not out of my bate to your
master make you lose your life after I have saved it) and tell Dardanor that
here is the King of Canabea, who will not put him to the trouble of going so
far, since he has so conveniently met with forces here, so turning to
Prigmalion, he thus spoke unto him: Dear friend, I am extremely grieved that I
must employ my sword for the enemies of our Gods, but the wrong which this
Prince has done his wife, which is she that is here aboard us, and that which
he intended to me, raising this mighty Army to ruin my country, do not permit
me to encounter him without revenge: for we to make use of the times and
occasions that Fortune presents us with: If you will assist me, I shall take it
for a singular favor, if not, at least wise afford it to the affl^ction of a
Lady, unjustly banished her country, which as a Sovereign she possessed, and
as a malefactor basely entreated by a jealous and cruel husband.

How fir? said Prigmaleon, do you think that I will leave you in the fight, and
turn my Arms against a side for which you shall declare your self? Be assured,
never: for I do not consider with whom, but why I fight; Dardanor is your
enemy, therefore I cannot love him; he has raised these forces against you, we
must endeavor to defeat them; and, as you said, m^ke use of time and occasion:
Let us then follow our fortune, which offers it self so fairly unto us: And
since the Christians have diverted the storm which was intended should fall
upon you, let us, if we can, procure them the victory, and overthrow the
malicious design of this ungrateful and barbarous Prince. With these words
they passed into the midst of the two armies, and seeing the fight hottest
between two great ships, which were grapled together, the one bearing the A^mes
of Romeria in their tops; and the other w^it^ Crosses with Eagles, they boorded
the Pagans ship all three together, leaving their Squires in guard of their
ba^k, and of Cl^^rangia, who seemed more dead then alive, and began to make
such a slaughter, as the deck was covered with blood and dead karkasses. The
Christians making use of the advantage which the Knights gave them, followed
them close, and entering with them among their enemies, continued the butchery
with so much fury, that the sea round about them was died all red with blood.
Fulgoran knowing Dardanor by his rich Armor, in despite of all that were about
him could do, got up to him, and letting fly a mighty blow at his head, he cut
it in two pieces, laying him stark dead on the hatches. That done, he entered
another ship of the enemies, which made a strong resistance, and beginning a
like destruction, as in the former, he overthrew so many dead into the sea, as
the water was fu^l of them. This execution having continued above five hours,
and the death of the King of Romeria being known, they presently tacked about,
and the Captains desiring to save that which remained after so furious a
charge, retired to the next p^rt whence they came the same morning. Fulgoran
being no less discreet then brave and able, taking a sudden resolution upon
this retreat of the enemy, turned himself about, and addressing himself to
the General of the Christians, whose valor, during the fight, he had admired,
said unto him: Excellent Prince, I know not whether you will think me bold to
crave any thing of you, not having obliged you by precedent services to grant
it, and being besides a worshipper of other Gods then yours; but virtue is to
be exercised every where, and the duty which we ow to our religion, does no^
prohibit us to be courteous, and to help one another when occasion is offered:
my enemies are defeated as well as yours; for you must know that this Fleet was
intended against my country in revenge of a wrong that King Dardanor said he
had received at my hands; howbeit, that the victory which you have gloriously
gotten, may be well managed, and that I may also make my benefit of it, for the
relief of a distressed Queen, unto whom, as a Knight of worth, you also are
bound not to refuse your assistance, be pleased to put your army again into
battle array, and present it rather to fear, then wholly to destroy them: In
the mean time I will go and visit them with their Queen, whom Fortune not long
since put into my hands, to the end I may (if possibly I can) restore her to
the Crown of Romeria, whereof she was deprived by the jealous humor of her
husband, and bring her subjects to receive her commands, with as much obedience
as heretofore. Brave warrior, answered he, I so approve of your compassion of
an ill entreated Princesses misery, that in stead of denying you, I will my
self accompany you into the country, that if her subjects will be
rebellious, we may with force reduce them to their duties, and leaving my
course for Trebisond, where I believe I might be very necessary, in regard of
the multitude of enemies, which i^ may be do now ravage that country, I shall
think it a glory to oblige you to that end, without sticking at the
consideration of our different religions. As for the victory which you ascribe
to me, I will not receive the honor of it, since you and your friends have the
best part therein: for this army being levied against you, I will believe that
I have only been an assistance to you, without whom I could never have
vanqu^shed it. Let us then advance when you please, only do me the favor I
pray you, to tell me your n^mes. I am, said Fulgoran, so much obliged to you,
as I cannot conceal my self from you; I am the King of Canabea, who not three
months since held your Empire of ^rebis^^d in fear. But the loss of a very
great number of brave men of both sides, in the battle and skirmish between us,
making me desirous to decide our difference by a combat of four with so many of
the Greek Princes, I sent presently to the City, where my offer was accepted.
My men then being all embarked, except those that were of the party, we were in
the field, and within the lists, when expecting nothing but sounding of the
trumpers, we saw two damsels enter, who obtained a Boon both of us and our
adversaries, carried us presently away, not permitting us any other trial then
that of the lance, wherein the honor was equal* and now sailing in this sea,
guided by Fortune and the waves, we discovered you this morning, and were ready
to side with your enemies, your white crosses for bidding us to assist you
against those of our religion; but understanding Dardanors design, I followed
your colors, and have left him in that case, as he shall never attempt again
upon the estates of his neighbors: For these two Knights, said he, pointing
unto Prigmalion and to the unknown Knight, I cannot dispense with the oath
which they have taken not to reveal themselves: be pleased then, to excuse me
though I tell you no more, and that the favor you do me, may be complete,
refuse not the samething you required of me, I mean the knowing of you. Nor
will I, answered he: for your freeness with me, does oblige me to more then
that: I am Dorigel, King of the fortunate Island; and this Amazon, which you
see with her helmet on, is my wife, and called Cilinda, we came out of our
country to carry aid to the Princes of Greece our kinsmen; nevertheless,
since the siege as you say, is raised, we will proceed no further in our
intended voyage, but changing our design, will employ this Army for the
re-establishment of the Queen of Romeria. Commanding then his Fleet to go on,
toward the evening the Army drew into order within a bow shot of them, giving
Fulgoran time for the effecting of his design: whereupon he departed in the
same Bark that brought him thither, only with his two friends, and the fair
Queen of Romeria in his company. And holding up a gantlet in sign of parley, he
went aboard the Admiral, where all the principal commanders were assembled;
and adressing himself in particular to some that he knew, holding Clairangia
by the hand, he so well remonstrated their duty unto them, that they all
submitted to her as their Sovereign Princess, protesting they were never so
much discontented with any thing as her absence. Fulgoran infinitely pleased to
see a new oath of allegiance unto her, and the affection that her subjects did
bear her, besought her to give him leave to return to the Christian Army,
that he might give Dorigel thanks for his assistance, which she could not well
refuse him; yet granted it upon his promise of returning the next morning to
conduct her into Romeria with a troop there to possess him of the crown
thereof, together with her self. But Fortune suffered him not to dispose of
himself: for as he was with Prigmalion and the unknown Knight aboard his Bark,
she put to sea in sight of both the Armies, with such celerity, as immediately
they had lost sight of her. Fulgoran was vexed at this sudden parting: for his
amorous passions left him not in quiet, and gladly would he have returned to
b^the himself in those delights which he had before with so much pleasure
tasted. But calling to mind, that all things were disposed of by the
ordinances of heaven, he grew more patient, seeming less troubled then he was
by the secret conversation of the two Knights that accompanied him. On the
other side, the Queen was more grieved with separation, for fear that she
should not see him again of a long time, she was ready to despair; but
desiring to have the cause of her grief concealed, lest otherwise she might be
condemned for it, she carried her self so discreetly that it was believed she
was not troubled with his absence, but only in regard it much disordered her
affairs. Dorigel seeing this his departure, and well knowing there was in that
Bark no sailer, less wondered at it then others, for that he conceived, as the
truth was, all this was done by the care which some Magician had of him. Being
therefore advertised by a light Frigot which he had sent to the enemy, that
Clairangia's affairs were settled, and she in security, he returned his Army
into the fortunate Island, under the command of his wife Cilinda, and shipping
himself with only one Squire, sailed toward Constantinople, whither he
understood all the Greek Princes were gone.

CHAP. XXIV. Fulgorans and Prigmalions adventure in the fearful Isle.
FVlgora^ being carried away by the wind, so much against his will,
continually bestowed his thoughts in considering how lovers are always crossed
in their affections, from whence drowing an infallible conclusion of the
uncertainty of things, discreetly resolved, never more to hold himself assured
of any, and to receive the disgraces and favors of the world with an equal
mind. Having entertained himself the restof the day with these cogitations,
night drew on, which gave him occasion to lay himself down upon his bed, where
the labor he had endured being more powerful then his fancies, he fell into a
long and sound sleep. No man can doubt but that our imaginations do work
strongly upon our senses, and that whilst our bodies are at rest, our souls do
fix on the objects whereunto waking we were most intentive. This Knight being
fallen asleep in disco^tent for the absence of his mistrisse, dreamed about
break of day, that he found her sleeping on the fairest flowers that ever he
had seen; and that when he drew toward her to enjoy the same privacies with
her he had used to do, a Giant of a most horrid and hideous aspect, caught her
up, and in spite of h^^ carrying her away, threw her and himself into a great
lake, which was at the corner of the goodliest orchard in the world, and that
transported with a furious despair, he ran to cast himself after, that he
might not overlive such a loss; when as o^^ of the la^^ a Nymph of most
exq^^site beauty, with her hair dispread over her neck and shoulders,
appeared, who said to him: Fulgoran, remember, th^^ good men are not born to be
slaves to their passions, and that a worthy Knight should never give himself
over to inconsiderate affections, which oftentimes bring along with them
strange misfortunes. Mark well my beauty, which is by the heavens reserved for
thee. It shall one day extinguish the unchaste flames wherewith thou now art
scorched, and make thee t^ste the sweetness which is found in the embraces of
a chaste and virtuous woman. Saying so, she dived under water, leaving him so
displeased to see her so soon berest him, that his body labored no less them
his mind: so as a waking a little after sun rising, he found himself all in a
sweat, and his eyes full of tears. O ye Gods! said he to himself, recording
what he had seen, are these the effects of my dream? or rather the favor of
the Gods, who desiring to preserve me from ruin, command me to shun all
occasions of offending them by my cri^^s? Spirits have indeed some shadow of
truth, but they use not to appear with so many circumstances, nor for the most
part do we see them for our good. These are without doubt, revelations upon
which I must settle my content. I am advised to shun all foolish love, I will
do it; I am counseled to le^^n more wit by mine own sufferings, it is but
reason; and out of this faithful advertisement I must take a good lesson, to
love for the glory of a love, both more pious and better grounded. Farewell
then all witless passions, which have so often troubled me, I will make my
self no more a slave to your commands, I am now again mine own, or at least I
subject my self to a more pleasing and secure Empire.

Rising then free from all care, unless it were to find out that fair one,
whose image was engraven in his heart, he waked Prigmaleon, and the unknown
Knight, that were still sleeping, and showing them an Island afar off, put them
in some hope that their Bark might bring them thither to meet with some
adventure. Within two hours they came to land, not more wondering at the beauty
of the place, wherein, about a flight shot off, they saw a stately Castle, then
to find a big Knight in the sea up to the knees, courageously defending
himself from two Giants, and forty or fifty vill^ins, armed with murrions and
halberts, who pressing him very sorely, made him despair both of victory and
life. The inequality of this fight persuading them to relieve him, they
instantly leaped on shore, where straight way a Gentlewoman presented her self
at their feet: My Lords, said she, with sighs and tears, have pity upon my
grief, and do not l^ave this good Knight in the hand of these villains: I
brought him hither upon the word of Scarafand, the Master of this place, and
the most perfidious man breathing, with an opinion that he should combat with
none but himself, for the deliverance of a Gentleman, whom I infinitely love;
but the traitor without regard of his protested faith, has engaged him as you
see, after that he had in single combat slain one of his sons, so as I can
expect nothing but his death, if you assist him not. Rise, Gentlewoman, said
Prigmaleon, and be assured that we will not fail to succor him in this
distress. Herewith they drew out their swords, and began to march toward the
enemy: But they met one of the Giants, with five and twenty halbertiers,
coming to stop their passage, which Fulgoran considering, and fearing the big
Knight would not be able longer to endure the violence of so many opposites,
fl^w in amongst them, with the unknown Knight, leaving Prigmaleon to encounter
the Giant, and laid upon them with such fury, that he presently sent five or
six of them dead to the earth; having scattered them in that sort, he passed on
running, till he came to those that fought with the big Knight, where, at his
first coming in, he gave the Giant such a blow upon the head, as he tumbled
him into the water, out of which he never rose again, for the weight of his
arms keeping him down, he was there drowned, receiving in that manner the
punishment of his wickedness. The great Knight seeing himself so opportunely
seconded, quickly got out of the water, and thrusting himself into the midst of
those rascals, in a short time laid seven or eight of them at his feet,
imitating Fulgoran, who to their horror, making them feel both the edge and
point of his sword, cut halberts, shields, cuirasses, murrions, in pieces, so
that in a little while he had strewed the ground with armor that he had hewn
in sunder, and with arms, legs, and heads, that he divided from bodies. Those
which remained, seeing with what rage these Knights did massacre them, fled
with all speed into the Castle, and quickly locked themselves up therein,
expecting what fortune would befall their companions: In the mean time,
Prigmaleon combatted Scarafand (one of the most furious Giants of the earth)
with so much valor, as Fulgoran was amazed at it; for he had made so many
breaches in his arms, as he had scarce any blood left in him; so that he fell
by the violence of a blow that lighted on his helmet, at the same time that
Fulgoran, and the great Knight, beholding the unknown Knight shrewdly pressed
by these rogues, recommenced their butchery, which was such, as there survived
not one, but only the four that had before recovered the Castle: This
execution ended, the great Knight unlaced his helmet, and craved the Knights
hand to kiss, in acknowledgement of their favor in succou^ing him. When as
Fulgoran, who knew him, cast his arms about his neck, crying out: O ye Gods!
said he, What a happy meeting is this? And how am I engaged to these Sages, by
whose direction our ship has been guided to this Island, since by my arrival
here I receive such a benefit? My dear friend, Grandimore, I never thought to
find you in such danger, and I was amazed at the valor which you showed in
your combat with so many mighty enemies; yet, having otherwhere seen greater
proof thereof, I cannot doubt, but in the end, the victory would have been
yours though the number of them were excessive: Nevertheless, I heartily thank
the Gods for bringing me hither, where I might in some sort requite you for
that which you did for me, when you undertook the combat against the Count of
Clina in my behalf. At these words, Grandimore, who till then knew him not,
opened his arms, and embracing him with much affection, remained a good while
unable to speak, through excess of joy, but when his tongue was at liberty, he
said: My content in thus meeting you, is no less then that you testify in
beholding of me: My Lord, I wandered about the world only to seek you, that I
might do you service; and believe me, I am not more glad of the saving of my
life (which is preserved only by your valor, and that of these brave warrio^s
in your company) then that I am to see you now in the estate I have always
wished to find you; but we shall have time enough to confer of these things
hereafter, let us now, if you please, go on with our business, and see what we
have more to do in this Island, for the enlarging of a Knight whom I must
render to this Gentlewoman. All of them agreeing with him in opinion, they
advanced toward the Castle, which they found close shut against them; and not
knowing how to get in, they promised life to as many as were there; when as a
horrible Giantesse, who was come out of a secret postern, came behind
Prigmaleon, and struck him so mighty a blow with a mace, that she laid him
quite astonished in the dust, and redoubling Fulgorans helmet, before he could
ward it with his shield, she left him in the same estate, which put Grandimore
in such a rage, as laying hand on his sword, without remembering her sex, he
discharged a blow at her head with such violence, as he clove her in sunder to
the girdle; whereupon he ran presently to Fu^goran, took him in his arms, and
unlaced his helmet to give him air; whilst the unknown Knight did as much to
Prigmaleon: Time, and the helps which they used to them, having restored the
Knights to their senses, with the infinite content of the other two and the
Gentlewoman. Grandimore being vexed for that they would not open the gate, took
up the Giantesses mace, and therewith began to knock so at it, as all the shore
resounded again; but the unknown Knight, remembering that the Giantesse came
forth by a back way, went about the house, till find^ng the place whence she
issued, he went in without any fear. And having gone a while under ground, he
met with a pair of stairs, which brought him into a great court, where he saw a
young Giant, of eight or ten years old, with three Knights, and the four
villains, that had saved themselves by flight, busily employed in bringing
pieces of wood to rampire up the gate against Grandimores blows; The rattling
that his arms made coming into the Court, caused the Knights to turn unto him,
when as thinking that some other followed him, they presently fell on their
knees, craved their lives; which was freely granted them, upon condition the
prisoners should be opened, and all that were there detained set at liberty.
This promise having assured them, they opened to Grandimore, whose chiefest
care being to satisfy the Gentlewoman, he commanded all the prisoners to be
brought forth, which were about threescore, as well men as women, the most part
of whom had been deflowred by the two Giants, and then cast into the dungeon.
The Knight, which was the occasion of this enterprise, coming out with the
rest, and knowing how much he was obliged to the Gentlewoman, whom he also
loved, besought these Knights that he might marry her before they left the
Castle, which was granted them, to their infinite content. The prisoners being
freed, and the Knights having need of some rest, they went up into the
lodgings, after they had committed the charge of the Castle to Celisdan, (so
was the Gentlewomans sweet heart called) and renewing their caresses, they
related their adventures, with as much satisfaction as wonder to all the
company: In such discourse they passed away the time till supper, after which
every man retired to his rest, till two howrs after midnight, that the
Sentinel came, and awaking them, declared, how he had seen a chariot, drawn
with six great horses, go by, wherein were five or six women, that made the
strangest moan in the world, the fear of two dreadful Giants, and twenty
Knights, that rode by, and threatened them, not being able to make them hold
their peace. These Princes, always forward to succor such as were in
distress, having received this intelligence, instantly arose, and commanding
the grooms to make ready the best horses that the Giants had in the stable,
armed themselves with all speed possible, and guided by a fair and clear
moonlight, followed the way that the Sentinel had showed them; when as they
had ridden hard two howrs and better, about day break they came to a port,
where they found the horses and the chariot, but that empty, and without any to
guide it: This somewhat troubled them, but when they espied not far off a ship,
newly under sail, they presently conjectured, that they whom they sought for
were aboard her, wherewith they were extremely vexed, because they could not
succor those afflicted women: Whilst they looked one at another, without
speaking, as it were lamenting their want of some vessel to carry them;
Fulgoran turning about, descried a Bark afar off, which comforted him a little,
especially when he observed, that it stood right with them: but when it was
come nearer, and that he perceived it to be the same in which he had navigated
so long before, he quickly alighted, and addressing himself to Prigmaleon; See,
Sir, said he, our friends do not leave us without their assistance; behold here
our little Bark which comes so pat for us to pursue these thieves according to
our desire; Let us lose no time then, but make use of the occasion that so
favorably presents it self; whereupon, having all left their horses, they
presently with their Squires got aboard the vessel, which not tarrying for any
other lading, put off straight to sea, following the ship where the Giants
were, to the infinite contentment of the Knights, who entertained the time with
discourses of the admirable knowledge of those Sages, which in this sort were
able to command the winds, and order the inconstancy of that merciless
element, highly commending the care which they showed in directing all their
designs only to the honoring of virtue. The one half of the day being
pleasingly spent in these discourses, they saw the ship which they had in
chase, grapled with another, and hearing a terrible noise, presently
conjectured that it proceeded from the fight of some Knights, who meeting with
the Giants, and not enduring the lamentation of those captive women, had set
upon them, with a resolvtion to revenge their wrongs. That conceit having put
them in a readiness, they immediately came up close to those vessels, in one of
the which they saw only four Knights, two very big, who had taken the Giants
to task, and other two of a lesser proportion, that opposed the fury of twenty
strong Knights. The courage wherewith these four Knights maintained the combat
giving them exceeding satisfaction, they stood a good while looking on them,
admiring the horrible blows of the first four, and the graceful activity which
the other two showed in holding so many play: But doubting their too long stay
might perhaps be prejudicial to these four brave warriors, they leapt into the
Giants ship in despite of their Knights resistance. And at the first boording
of it laid four of them upon the deck, which might have affrighted the rest, if
one of the Giants, seeing that slaughter, had not left his enemy almost
deprived of sense, with a mighty blow that he gave him, come in to their
succor; his presence animating them they began to fly upon our Knight with more
fury then before, whilst their Master combated Grandimore: But being fallen
into the hands of the most valiant Knights in the world, their utmost endeavor
nothing availed them; for within a while, the hatches were covered with their
armor cut in a thousand pieces, and the water, with heads and quarters which
every minute they made fly over board, so as none remained alive save the two
Giants, who beholding their troops defeated, redoubled their blows with such
fury, as the Knights were amazed at it; but straining themselves to discharge
their blows with their utmost force, caused the blood to issue so abundantly
out of the many wounds they had received, that they both fell down dead, almost
at one instant, the one at the feet of Grandimore, and the other into the sea,
by the valor of him with whom he fought. Fulgoran then with Prigmaleon,
advanced toward the Knights to salute them, but hearing a great noise in their
own ship, they suddenly turned about, and seeing the unknown Knights Squire
fallen into the sea, they all made what haste they could to save him: which
when they had done, and taken him up, their ship flew off from the other, with
such celerity, as the Knights had no time either to give them thanks for their
assistance, or to enquire of their names and fortunes. Now whilst their Bark
carried them away in this sort to a Port of Greece, where within two days
after they arrived, to the exceeding contentment of Grandimore, that was sore
wounded, and had none in their vessel who knew how to cure him: The other
Conquerours, having romaged the Giants ship, met with a most beautiful Lady,
accompanied with six maids, so sad and disfigured with the fear they were in,
that there appeared no blood in their faces: Going then to comfort her, and
bringing her forth into the light, one of the Knights kneeling down, and
kissing her hand, said unto her: Madam, put away all fear, for your enemies are
dead, and here are none but such as only breathe for your safety. We will let
you understand who we are, as we well know that you are the peerlesse Princess
Fontanea, daughter to the great Emperor Amadis of Greece, and now Queen of
France, assuring you that there are not any in the world more devoted to your
service then our selves; I am your Nephew Silvan, and this brave warriouresse
is the fair Savagesse, lately become my wife: These two great Knights, are the
Cenophales, whom the Emperor Spheramond, and the valiant Amadis d' Astre made
purchase of in the wars of Pe^sia, and whom I met at sea bound for
Constantinople: If I did not know that Fortune takes delight in crossing those
which are raised to any greatness, I should be amazed to find you a prisoner,
and in danger of suffering violence from the base vilains into whose hands you
were fallen: But, not being ignorant of her malice, I take your misfortune to
be such as may befall to any man, only this is it I wonder at, how these
Giants could take you out of your own Kingdom, and from amongst your subjects,
a valiant people.

Ah, dear Nephew, said she, embracing and kissing him with much affection, this
mishap did not befall me in France, but in an Island of this sea, whether a
storm had driven me, with thirty Gentlemen that attended on me, who gave but
too good proof of their fidelity; for after they had slain one of three Giants,
and twelve Knights, they maintained the fight with the rest to the last gasp: I
was going by the consent of the Prince Lucendus my husband, who intends to
follow me presently, toward Constantinople; but my voyage was at an end, and
my life at the last period, had I not met with you. I commend the election you
have made of this gallant Amazon, whom I will ever love and cherish, as I have
always done your mother: And for these two brave Giants, that accompany you,
let them be assured, I will never forget the pains they have taken to set me
free. Then going to the fair Savagesse, she entertained her with as much
kindness and respect, as her valor, and their alliance meritted: then giving
these two Cenophales her hands to kiss, she received them very graciously.
These complements over, she went into Silvans ship with all her women, who
seemed as if they had been risen from death to life, and commanding the
Mariners to hoise up all their sails, she made directly for Constantinople;
where within two days she landed, to the infinite joy of all those Princes,
who were thither returned from Trebisond, about ten or twelve days before her
arrival there.

CHAP. XXV. Florizell of Niquea proclaims a T^rnament in honor of the French
Queens arrival: the end thereof, with the brave actions of a number of gallant
Knights.
THE arrival of this matchless Queen, with Silvan, and the beautiful
Savagesse his wife, causing a public rej^ycing, Florizell determined to keep
open Court ^or eight days together; during which time a Just was ordained for
the young Knights, and a Tourney for the conclusion thereof, with a safe
conduct for all strangers. Messengers were therefore sent into every quarter,
that these first magnificences, after the death of so many Princes, might be
the more glorious, and that those which survived, might in this sort
demonstrate, that their courages were nothing abated by afflictions. All things
being disposed to pleasure, a multitude of good Kn^ghts flocked thither from
all parts: Artificers were set on work, horses were managed for the Tilt, the
trumpets sounded in every corner: In brief, nothing was spoken of but mirth,
and all men strove to show their gladness for the greater contentment of the
Princes. The first day of the Iusts being come, and Florizell of Niquea set at
Table with all those Kings, a Squire came into the Hall and kneeling down, thus
spoke unto him: Excellent Prince, the two Knights of the Crowns, as valiant
peradventure as any on the e^rth, do by me beseech you to grant them a favor,
in contemplation of the desire they have to do you service. They know that
these three next days are dedicated to exercises of Arms, the two first for
the Iusts, and the third for the Tourney: They therefore humbly crave, that
they may be permitted to maintain with the lance against all that will run with
them during those two days; not that their Ladies are the fairest in the
world, (for they will not offend those unto whom nature has affoorded a like
advantage of beauty) but that their fidel^ty does render them more worthy of
those favors, which lovers may receive in recompense of any remarkable
services, then any other Knights in the world. The conditions shall besuch, as
are usual in the like occasions, that is, none shall require of them the
combat of the sword, so long as they shall have the better at the lance; That
if their fortune be equal in the course, and both they and their adversaries
unhorsed, then they may dispute the honor of the day with the sword; but with
this reservation, that if at the time of their being dismounted, new Knights
shall happen to enter, equal in number to them, the two assailants shall
remount themselves, and siding with the maintainers, shall altogether oppose
the last comers, to the end they may not be deprived of the honor of the
Iusts: The said Knights desiring no other benefit of their victory, then only
the names of those that shall be unhorsed, that it may be known how far the
valor of every one will extend. Verily, said Florizell, this gentile
proceeding does infinitely please me; wherefore not enquiring after the names
of your masters (who cannot be other then gallant Knights) I grant them all
that they desire: Let them come then when they please, they shall find the
lists ready for them; and if the incommodity of their journey have not
permitted them to bring a tent with them, I will see them furnished with what
shall be necessary for their service. The Squire returning with an answer so
gracious, the young Knights prepared themselves for the Iusts, and every one
looked for their coming, to see if their deeds would make good the bravery of
their words. The people having already filled the place, and the Princes being
set at the windows, they saw how the Knights, armed in azure colored Arms,
powdered all over with innumerable golden Crowns, came in, with such a grace,
and so gallantly sitting their horses, as better cannot be imagined. As soon as
they were entered the lists, a Gentlewoman much richer in clothes, then either
in good fashion or beauty, presented her self unto them, and said: Gentlemen,
if you be as sull of courtesy as you seem to be able and brave, you will not
refuse me one request I am to make you. No upon my faith, answered one of them
smiling, provided that it be in our power: for your merit does oblige us to
give you all satisfaction. That which I require of you, replied she, is, that
all the courses which which you shall run this after noone, may be only for my
honor, that I may one day glory, that I have seen a number of good Knights
unhorsed upon the quarrel of my beauty. These words having made all that were
within hearing, ready to burst with laughter, the Knight returned her this
answer: Gentlewoman, we are sorry that it is not in our power to satisfy your
demand: for the conditions which we have propounded for this Just, have already
so bound us, as we cannot be permitted to run a course for your sake, wherefore
you may be pleased to excuse us for this present, and expect some other
occasion wherein we may do you service. See, said she in choler, just the
answer which ill bred Knights, and without judgment, use to make; you refuse
to serve me though you have very much reason for it: but I doubt not to meet
with some others more courteous then you, that punishing this baseness, will
revenge the wrong you do to my beauty. Then going out of the lists, with a
million of reproaches that she gave the Knights, she made all the assembly to
renew their laughter: and so getting to horse departed with speed. In the mean
time, ten Knights, that were newly seen to come out of the forest, entered the
field, two of which taking their place over against the defendants, attended
the sound of the trumpet, which was no sooner heard, but they dislodged with a
very good grace, breaking their staves on their adversaries shields; who,
therewith not moved, although the encounter was strong, laid them in the dust,
giving by this their first course, a very fair demonstration of their valor.
The two adventurers being thus unhorsed, two others took their room, who were
entertained more favorably then their fellows: for at the first course they
fell not, yet the second staff made them quit their saddles, to the extreme
discontent of their companions, who attempting to revenge them, had a share in
their disgrace, and found themselves also extended on the earth. The spectators
admiring the bravery of the Knights of the Crown, expected what the two next
would do that presented themselves; but they were not long in suspense: for
they gained no more then those which preceded them, but were rudely overthrown
after they had made their opposers lose their stirrops. The two last advancing,
with no less gallantry then full of despite, ran their first course with
extreme fury, and meeting all four in the midst thereof, brake their staves
bravely, and so passed on without any advantage on either side. This course
being fairer then any of the former, did highly please all the assistants; when
as new staves being brought them, they came to encounter with the same violence
as before, but with the same good fortune: for the new comers lost their
stirrops, and were fain to catch hold of their horses manes to save themselves
from falling, whereas the challengers only bended a little in their saddles.
The resistance which the one found, and the disadvantage the others had,
serving them but to increase the rage of either party, they took new staves,
both stronger and stiffer then the former, and spurring on furiously, they
incountred with such violence, as their staves being broken to their very
gantlets, they met with their shields and bodies so forcibly, as the strangers
kissed the ground, leaving the others something troubled with so furious an
encounter. The courses ended, the Knights un^aced their helmets, and presented
their names; the two first were Armond of Bohemia, and Florizart of Taprobana,
the next, Melfort and Aegrian; after them Florian and his brother Triston; then
Quedragant and Dardanio; and the last, Florestan of Sardinia, and P^rion of
Turkey, gran-childe to Amadis of Gaul. They going up to the Emperors,
extremely troubled for that they had the foil in their presence, were by them
received with all courtesy, and comforted in their misfortune, as that which
was common to all Knights in the world. The Knights of the Crowns returning to
their places, highly pleased with the praises that the world gave them, were
not long at rest: For within two hours they unhorsed above thirty of the best
Knights, as well of the Empire as of strangers. And now all the company were
persuaded, that the honor of the Iusts would be certainly theirs, when as
there entered into the lists three Knights armed in white, and by another gate
two more in gilt Armor, sitting their horses in such a gallant and sprightly
manner, as all men beheld them with admiration: arriving all at one time, those
in the white came to the other, and fairly entreated their leave for the first
course; which being easily granted them, two of them presented themselves, and
ran with a good grace, but with no better fortune then the other before them:
for at the first encounter they were both unhorsed. Their companion resolving
to sha^e in their misfortune, if such were his hap, put himself forward, and
running with incredible fury, encountered one of the Knights of the Crowns so
bravely, that he brake his staff in a thousand shivers, but was so shaken by
the lance of the adversary, that he staggered as if he would have fallen, yet
he quickly recovered himself, and made an end of his course with the
estimation of a good Knight. Having taken a new staff, he came to him with
whom he had run, and thus said: Knight I am sufficiently satisfied of your
valor: wherefore, if you please, I will now make trial of your companions.
That, answered he, depends on your choice, though I believe your bargain will
be nothing bettered by it. Fortune, replied the Knight, shall determine of
that; wherewith returning to his place, he spurred lustily against the second,
and incountring him with the like fury as before, brake upon his shield, but
the Knight aiming his la^ce at his helmet, hit him with such force, as he brake
the laces of it, and made it fly from his head: whereupon there fell scattered
about his shoulders goodly tresses of hair, which declared that it was no
Knight, but a most beautiful Amazon, whose name the Knight would not receive,
though she twice presented it. Those which accompanied her, seeing her
discovered, made themselves known to the Princes of Greece, the one being
Leonidas of Mesopotamia, the other Abi^s of Ireland; and the Amazon, Altaria,
who was very kindly received by the Emperor, and particularly by the Queens of
Guindaya, France, and Lydia, who placed her amongst them after they had highly
commended her. The two Knights in the gilt armor, upon whom all men eyes were
c^st, seeing Alteri^'s combat thus ended, presently advanced, and setting spurs
to their horses, encountered them of the crown so furiously, as one would have
said, that four towers torn from their foundations, by so many whirlwinds, had
shocked together; Fortune was indifferent to them all, for they remained firm
in their seats, and passed their course with so much bravery as made the whole
assembly admire them; but the desire they had of victory, caused them suddenly
to turn head, and then taking new staves, they settled themselves to run the
second time, when as there was seen come into the place, three Knights and a
Giant, of a gallant and a warlike aspect, in the company of the Gentlewoman,
before mentioned, who addressing her self to the Knights of the Crowns, with a
very furious garb that well demonstrated how much she was displeased, thus
spoke: Discourteous Knights, I have brought these with me here, that are more
ready to do service unto Ladies then you have been, and that will revenge the
disgrace you have put upon me. In good time be it, said one of them, we shall
see what they are able to do, provided these Knights here, our opposi^es, will
give way thereunto. Wit that, not entering into further ^iscourse, they made a
sign to their adversaries to prepare themselves, and dislodged at one instant
with such fury, as not able to stand so violent an encounter, they were
constrained to come all of them together to the ground: Choler, and the shame
to be overthrown, in the presence of so great Princes, having suddenly raised
them up, they courageously laid hands on their swords, to try whose the victory
should be: But the four last, that came with the Gentlewoman, advanced, and
interposing between them, said: That they were not to proceed any further,
since the conditions of the justs did forbid the combat with the sword, so long
as there remain any in the place on horsback: whereupon, the Judges being
called, their reasons were approved of, as very just, in regard it was one of
the principal Articles thereof, expressed in these terms:

That if fortune made the encounter equal, and they were all at one time
unhorsed, they might try it out with the sword; but if at the time of their
being dismounted new comers arrived, in number equal to them, the assailants
should take new lances and siding with the maintainers, should all together
make head against the last attempters, that the first might not be defrauded of
their due honor. And that therefore the number on both sides being equal, the
Knights had reason to hinder the combat with the sword, until they had tried
themselves with the lance; it still remaining in their power, to recommence
their combat, in case the last comers were overthrown, but otherwise not. The
Knights in the gilt arms, not desiring to show themselves refractory, since the
Judges would have it so, ranked themselves with those of the Crowns, who took
fresh horses, conceiving by the countenance of their adversaries, that they had
a hard party to deal withal; and placing themselves over against them,
attended the sound of the trumpet for their dislodging. Whilst the questions
were deciding, Alteria, observing those which came last in, knew them for the
same, that had delivered her out of the power of Argenea (as indeed they were
Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the unknown Knight, and Grandimore, who arriving in
Greece, as I told you in the former Chapter, were drawn to Constantinople upon
the report of the triumphs there proclaimed:) So that turning to Don Rogel, who
sat not far from her, she said to him: Believe it, Sir, you will by and by
receive much contentment in the sight of these eight Knights combat; for if
those two of the Crowns have hitherto rendered themselves remarkable, they in
the gray and black armor are excellent in the supremest degree, and few their
equals are to be found in the world: By their valor the dangerous guards of
the Castle of Argenea were vanquished, and these two younger Princes, with my
self, delivered from a prison, where we certainly believed to find our graves;
but since the trumpets now begin to sound, you will quickly see the proof of my
words. Don Rogell then turning his eye about to the lists, saw them begin their
course at one instant, and meet in the midst of it with such fury, as the earth
seemed to tremble under them; their fortune was equal, for they all lost their
saddles, the unknown Knight remaining wounded by the lance of one of the
Knights of the Crowns, and one of them in the gilt armor by that of the Giant
Grandimore: The shame to see themselves dismounted in the presence of so many
excellent Princes, having suddenly raised them, they began one of the most
furious combats that ever was beheld. Nothing appeared but sparks of fire in
the air, and cantles of armor and shields on the ground. If Fulgoran and
Prigmaleon charged with violence, they felt themselves so closely followed, as
they wondered at the valor of their enemies; nothing was to be heard but
horrible blows, one part laid on load, another was forced to set their knees to
the ground: In brief, this sight might truly be termed the most furious that
ever had been seen between eight persons. Prigmaleon, who had one of those of
the gilt arms to deal with, being mad at the resistance he found from him, let
his sword descend with such rage on his helmet, as he made him recoil two or
three paces with the sight of a million of stars at midday; but he had not time
to glory much of that advantage, for his adversary recovering his spirits, came
and charged him with such force, as his shield being divided in two pieces, the
sword fell so heavy on his shoulder, that he was fain to set one knee to the
ground, to save himself from falling; but quickly getting up again, he rendered
the combat far more cruel then ever it was. In the mean time, Fulgoran and his
adversary entreated one another with the like fury; Grandimor^, and the unknown
Knight, disputed the victory with very much courage; howbeit, they were so
pressed by their opposites, as they had little leisure to think of their
consciences; nevertheless, desiring rather to die then to show any sign of
faintness, they fought two howrs without any advantage to their enemies, who
still resolving to vanquish, redoubled their blows, and so sharply followed
them, that these two Pagan Knights, after another hours combat, fell almost
both at one time to the ground, to the great content of the conquerours, who
having made them confess the victory, helped them up, and delivered them into
the hands of two Chirurgians, which Don Florisell had appointed to be ready,
for the relief of such as should chance to be wounded: The misfortune of these
two Knights, augmented the rage of Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, their blows became
more weighty then before, so as often times their enemies were forced to knock
their chins against their breasts, and to set their kn^es to the ground. But
they had so good a share in those courtesies, that every one was amazed at the
sight of so dangerous a combat, which every one thought could never be ended,
but by the ^eath of them all. And indeed they were so eager as they continued
seven hours without taking of breath, or that any one could discern any the
least sign of weariness or of advantage in them, which so madded them, as
carried by an unusual rage, they all quitted their swords, and grapled
together, hoping by mere strength to get the victory; but little prevailing
that way, they were at length constrained, after they had tumbled on the
ground, sometimes above, and another while below, to rise as by agreement, and
recommence their combat, which lasted till night, no man being able to
attribute the honor of it more to the one then the other. Don Rogell, who
infinitely admired the valor of these Knights, perceiving them obstinately
bent not to give over for all that it grew dark, caused the retreat be sounded.
But their rage not permitting them to hear it, they went on with their
business, and continued battering one another more cruelly then they had done
all the day before: so that Don Rogell was enforced to descend with Spheramond,
and entreat them to part for his sake, showing them, hat the cause of their
contention being so slight, their enmity had no reason to be so bitter; but
they lent a deaf care to all that he could say, so as at last he was
constrained to put himself between them, which so much displeased Prigmaleon,
as turning himself somewhat hastily to Don Rogell, he said in some choler: I
would fain have entreated you to have let Fortune work her will; but seeing
your authority opposes the design of those that combat before you, remember
that it shall not be able to hinder me when I shall visit you with an hundred
thousand men, to require an account of the distaste you now give me. Neither
will I, said Fulgoran, who was as much displeased, promise them better dealing:
for I will once more cover your fields with brave and warlike Soldiers.

Wherefore, Princes of Greece, receive these words for a defiance, and prepare
for a war. But that you may understand who are your enemies, this Knight is
Prigmaleon, the great Emperor of Ethiopia, whom you see in these gray Arms,
and I am the King of Canabea, by which name you cannot choose but know me. Yes,
said Don Rogel, without being any way distempered, we have cause not to be
ignorant of what you are; but it may be time will qualify this heat, and that
little you gained before our walls, perhaps will keep you from pursuing the
second design. But if you be so resolved, we have friends enough not to care
much for your Arms: yet shall not that keep me from entreating you, since it
is now dark night, to take a lodging in our Palace, until you have a little
refreshed your selves after the great toil you have this day endured. That is
ordinary with us, answered Fulgoran, so that your courtesy may well be spared;
wherewith somewhat coldly retiring, they went to their friends, who with more
despite then pain, quickly got to horse: and, notwithstanding they were
shrewdly wounded, traveled till about midnight, that they came to a Gentleman's
house; where, when they had stayed two days, they left Grandimore and the
unknown Knight to be cured of their hurts, and the morrow after they parted
with a promise of meeting at the end of two months, in Natolia, with each of
them an hundred and fifty thousand men, to be in one body transported to
Constantinople. In the mean time Don Rogel and Spheramond, who were not much
troubled with their menaces, addressed themselves to the other Knights, and with
such courtesy entreated them to let themselves be known, as they were content
to satisfy them. Having then unlaced their helmets, they let them see that
those two of the Crowns were Lucendus Prince of France, and D^rigel King of
the fortunate Island. The other in the gilt Arm^ were the valiant Russian of
Media, and the mighty Esquilan of Polonia. You may well imagine the contentment
which the Greek Princes, and especially the Infanta Fortuna, received by the
coming of these Knights, though I do not put my self to the trouble of
relating it. In sum, a thousand caresses were not for born amongst so many
friends, nor any thing forgotten which might serve for the contentment of those
Princes; who, for the present, treading all care of their more important
affairs, under foot, passed two or three days more in tourneys, and all the
delights that could be imagined. At the end whereof that happened, which in the
next Chapter shall be related.

CHAP. XXVI. The adventure of the Pyramide is ended to the honor of the brave
Russian of Media, who is known to be the son of Don Rogel, and the fair
Queen Giranda.
WHilst all things were thus disposed unto pleasure, and Florisell with the
other Princes were sitting in the Palace Hall, there entered four Lions,
carrying a Pyramide of indifferent height, and made after a strange fashion: It
was composed of two several materials, as it was divided into two stories, the
highest being of transparant Crystal, enclosed the body of a young Lady of
most excellent beauty, that seemed to sleep: The lower made of a black Marble,
suffered nothing to be seen that was within it, yet was there a gate to give
passage into it. The beasts being come, with amazement of all that were
present, into the midst of the Hall, by little and little discharged
themselves of their load, and keeping still their places, turned them toward
the company, which so affrighted them, that except the Princes, who could not
be scared, every one was about to shift for himself; when as a Damsel
presenting herself, kneeled down before Florisell, and thus spoke, Excellent
Prince, I do not think that your courage, so often tried with infinite dangers,
can be moved with this wonder which here you see: the Fortunes of men are
various and great, and seldom are they at quiet after an infinity of crosses,
The Gods did seem to promise to the Princess, whom you see enclosed in this
Crystal, unspeakable contentments: for having made her by birth a Princess,
and, as yet you may perceive, beautiful in the highest degree of excellence,
she should, me thought, have been exempted from those misfortunes that attend
our life. But alas! all these attributes of so raised a condition, have served
only to make her miserable; and this ornament of beauty has rendered her in
the estate wherein you now see her, as I will presently inform you. Her father,
a virtuous Prince, being forced to pay that debt unto nature which is due by
all men, left her under the charge of the great Emperor of Guardacia (whose
crown she might one day pretend to, if the Gods should call the 2 daughters
which he now has, and those the fai^est on the earth) and dyi^g charged her
not so much to regard the greatness, as the virtue of a valian^ husband; so
that in a while all the Country knew, that for Agriclea, so is she named, not
a rich but a worthy man is required, that could courageously conserve the
Scepter that should be put into his hands. The ^umour running not only through
the country subject to her crown, but to other kingdoms far removed, came to
the knowledge of a young Giant, an ugly man, and very debauched, who believing
(as many do often flatter themselves) that he had not his match in the world,
presented himself not long since unto her, and offered to maintain, that all
the Knights in the world came short of him in valor: This Princess (who
questionless deserves to be better bestowed) not brooking this his vanity,
somewhat coldly desired him not to tempt his fortune for her occasion. But the
Giant, having too much fancy in his brain, not admitting of that excuse,
presented himself six months together in the lists; where, to speak truth, he
purchased the esteem of a valiant person, howbeit he lost his labor: for
Agriclea, who dyed as often as she saw him triumph over his enemies, and that
could not approve of his cruelty, to the vanquished, one evening when he
troubled her with the discourse of his passions: Fulgosan, said she, for that
was his name, I know not how you can imagine that I should ever love you, since
I cannot find any thing in you that might move me unto it; what likelihood is
there that I should subject my contentment to the kisses of a man so deformed?
or that my delights should depend upon your caresses. The very thought thereof
is distastefull unto me, and if you had had any judgment all, you would have
considered the inequality of our conditions, and persons, before you had
engaged your affection: I here permitted you to combat many times for the
merit of my beauty, I confess, but I have done it rather to win you glory,
then any way to oblige my self unto you: Nor think it an argument of good
will in me toward you, because I was willing to appear courteous, you may
therefore retire your self when you please, and never st^nd on my fathers will
for that which shall always depend on my choice. It is against my mind, that I
pay your service in this sort for persuading my self that you fough not in hope
of reward, I do not present you withany. In sum my own contentment is dearer
to me then yours, nor shall my torment spring from your satisfaction. Brave
Prince, I will not insist upon informing you what rage these discreet and
modest words kindled in the breast of this proud Knight: for you may well
imagine with what impatience he heard them; but going on with my discourse,
will te^l you, that departing with strange menaces, he was seen not long
after to return, accompanied with an Aunt of his, very expert in magic, who
taking this fair Princess by the arm (no body there present being able to
succor her) placed her where at this present you behold her, using these very
words: Thou shall know, Agriclea, that the affection of one that loves, is not
to be despised, and that the difference of condition, dispenses not with the
duty of a well bred soul; thou ought to have loved my Nephew, since thy
beauty was the only sovereign of his thoughts, but having ^eene to
di^acknowledging as to recompense him with injuries, thou shall a long time
suffer that which he now indures: And for that I will not pardon him the fault
he has committed in loving thee with too much fidelity, my pleasure is that he
shall still he follow thee, that shall hear thy lamentations, ^d perpetually
upbraid thee with thy ingratitude. Thus speaking, she made him go in at the
door in the black Marble, which instantly closed of it self; and calling me,
who had always had the government of this Princess in charge: I will not,
said she, deprive you of the office that you have formerly enjoyed, and that
still you deserve, go therefore to the Courts of the greatest Princes in the
world with her, and know that you shall never see an end of your travels, nor
the re-establishment of your Mistrisse into her former estate, until The
bastard Lion be discovered in the blood of this miserable man that I have here
locked up, who shall come out to fig^t as often as any shall knock at the door
with the pummell of his sword. Saying so, she touched the Lions with a rod
which she had in her hand, and made me presently go out with them, willing me
to take no care for the way. Thus have I, excellent Prince, delivered the cause
of my coming into your dominions, where my hope is to see this Princess freed
by the hand of some one of those which render your Court the most glorious, and
the most redoubted in the world. But if it be your pleasure that the trial of
this adventure shall be made in your presence, then I humbly desire that you
will permit that I may obtain a Boon of your Knights, which notwithstanding
shall not oblige any but him that shall undo this enchantment. That shall not
hinder you, said Florisell, from finding that contentment here you desire: and
with all my heart I wish that this fair Princess may in this place meet with
an ease of all her pains; to the furtherance whereof I promise you, in the name
of all mine, that you shall not be denied your request, so as it be in our
power to perform. Hereupon all those Knights, who desired nothing but occasions
of winning honor, were to arm themselves for to begin the trial. The first
that presented himself, was the gentile Perion of Turkey, who knocking at the
Marble gate with his sword, they saw a Knight come forth all armed, not so
great as most Giants, but much exceeding the stature of most men, that setting
hand to a rich sword, advanced his shield against the fury of a blow which
Perion delivered at his head, and at the same instant charging him, made him
perceive, that his valor was extreme, so that the combat began to be both
dangerous and delightful: for if the one showed a rare agility in avoiding his
adversaries blows, the other demonstrated an excessive force. Having battered
one another then above an hour in that fashion, Perion determined to see the
game upon a cast, and with his sword in both hands, to lay upon his enemies
helmet; but he was prevented: for the Giant having discharged an horrible blow
on his head, laid him all along upon the floor, and was going to return into
his prison, when as Florian of Sopradisa advanced; who, to be short, had no
better fortune, no more had Tristor, Florestan, Quedragant, and all these new
Knights, which were all served in the same manner, after they had stood a fight
more or less, according to the proportion of their strengths. The valiant
Esquilon of Polonia would needs succed his companions in their misfortunes, but
not till after two hours fight, and with some hope of the assistants, that he
would carry away the honor of the adventure. His fall having possessed the
gallant Russian with more choler then fear, he drew to Fulgoson with his sword
drawn; whereupon they began to charge one another with such mighty blows, that
the room shook under them, pieces of armor flew about, their shields were
hewn in pieces, and the pavement sprinkled with blood, testified the valor of
the combatants; who bravely disputing for their lives, and the victory, made
all the spectators amazed at it, especially the Greek Princes, who judging
Russians manner of fight both more furious, and more pleasing then any of the
former, exceedingly desired to know him: Three howrs being past away, since the
beginning of the combat Russian grew enraged, and choosing rather to die then
not to overcome in the presence of so many excellent Princes, he delivered a
full blow upon the Giant with such violence, that it divided his body in twain,
to the infinite contentment of the Gentlewoman, and of the fair Infanta
Agriclea, who instantly recovering her spirits, and a great clap of thunder
breaking forth, just as Fulgoson fell, the Pyramid was found in a thousand
pieces, and Agriclea in the arms of her woman, who coming to Russian; Brave
warrior, said she to him, you have this day gained so much honor, as we will
speak eternally of your valor; but you know withal to what your word does
oblige you. I do, said he, ravished with the singular beauty of Agriclea, I
know that I am engaged to you for a boon, and am ready to grant it presently.
The time for it, said she, is not yet come; but you shall, if you please, one
day make good your promise, either at my entreaty, or at the command of this
Princess; with that, a new clap of thunder being heard, they saw Agriclea and
her woman, together with the body of the Giant, and the fragments of the
Pyramid taken away in a cloud, nothing remaining of them in the room, but the
blood that Fulgoson shed, upon the last blow he received; In which, as it had
been in a table of brass or marble, were written these words:

Russian of Media, the son of Rogell of Greece, and of the fair Queen Grianda.
O me! (said Spheramond, who had noted the Gentlewomans discourse, and therefore
was come to look upon that blood, imagining that it was not left there without
some mystery) What a wonder is this? And by what a strange adventure are we
acquainted with a secret of such importance? Come hither brother, said he,
offering to embrace Russian, and give me the first caresses that are due to our
neernesse in blood; you can no longer conceal your self, for your descent is
written here; and my Lord, my Father, has just cause to rejoice to see one of
his race with so much good fortune. Russian, thus suddenly surprised, kneeled
down before his father, and kissing his hands, confessed that he had determined
not to reveal that he was his son, supposing that his valor had not as yet
rendered him worthy of that glory: but since the heavens had thus discovered
him, he thought himself most happy in this adventure, and would endeavor to
honor the name that he carried. I should never have done, if I should go about
to particularize the caresses which Russian received from Florisel, from those
Princes his kinsmen, from the Queens of Guindaya, France, and Lydia, and from
all the Court; wherefore I will not stand upon it, but following my discourse
will tell you, that Russian was not more contented with the honor which he had
gained in this adventure, and with the notice that his kindred had taken of
him, then he was grieved for the departure of Agriclea, whose incomparable
beauty had made a deep impression in his heart: but hoping that time would
furnish him with occasions to see her again, he comforted himself as well as he
might, and labored to find out reasons to quiet his mind.

CHAP. XXVII. The Princes of Greece consult of the war; the mustering of
Fulgorans and Prigmaleons armies; a Damsel carries Russian of Media from
Constantinople.
WIse men forestall the time, and their prudent foresight does often times free
them from dangers. Our Princes more intentive to what concerned them in honor,
then to continue their pleasures, assembled one day together, and calling to
mind Fulgorans and Prigmaleons threats, they consulted of the means they had
to oppose the violence of their forces. Our Empires, said Florisel, as the
principal person in that counsel, are not unfurnished of good soldiers; we
have a number of brave Princes still alive, and our Courts are full of gallant
Knights; wherefore we have no great cause to be troubled with our enemies
coming, so as we take care to hasten our levies in due time; as for our selves,
I am not of opinion that we should stir from hence, since the Governors of our
Provinces, and our subjects, will not be wanting in point of obedience to all
our commands: So that the thing which does most press us for the present, is,
that to dispatch away speedily some Gentlemen, to the Lievtenants of those
countries, which are subject unto us, commanding them to raise as many men as
they may without disfurnishing the places of importance of their necessary
garrisons. This advice being approved of, as the best they might think of,
every one withdrew to expedite the business, and accordingly the same day, the
Emperor Don Rogell sent into Persia, Spheramond to the Empire of the
Parthians, Dorigell to the fortune Island, Lucendus into France, and
Alestraxerea into Tre^isond, Florisel also gave out Commissions for the Empire
of Greece, dispatched Posts to Rome, to great Britain, to Guindaya, to the
Kings of Dardania, Comagenia, India, Samothracia, Cathaya, Poland, Hungary,
Moldavia, and Scotland; and giving order for the fortifying of the Ports and
frontire towns, he rested in expectation of what the heavens would determine in
an affair of such great consequence. Whilst they were thus employed in Greece,
Fulgoran and Prigmaleon were not idle, for having parted with a resolution not
to enter any combat except extreme necessity enforced them to it, they arrived
almost at one instant, the one in the Empire of Aethiopia, and the other in the
Kingdom of Canabea, where the first things they did, was, to send to all their
neighbor Kings, to entreat that they would together with them embrace the
revenge of those outrages, which from time to time all Paganism had received
from the Emperors of Greece: Their request was without any difficulty granted,
for a multitude of Kings and Princes that had not been parties in the former
leagues, determined to join with them, utterly to exterminate the Christian
name for ever. The first that at the motion of Fulgoran arrived in Canabea,
were the great King of Mauritania, with two thousand horse, and three Giants;
the King of Canaria, with the like number of horses and Giants; those of
M^larra, and Tremiscen, with twelve thousand foot, and five Giants; those of
Zaphir, Zambar, and Carthagena, with fifteen thousand horse, and seven Giants;
those of M^loc, ^ramaza, Panonia, Aganazes, and Budomell, with thirty thousand
Archers; the Tamberlen of Moraria, the Kings of Libia, Arcania, Barbary,
Anguly, Argier, Numidia, and Carthage, with four^core thousand horse, and
thirty Giants; those of Bisancia, Marocco, Thunes, Thenery, and and Miramolin,
with fifty thousand foot; and the Kings of T^ll, and Bazana, with fifteen
thousand horse, and thirteen Giants. So that the General muster of these
troops being taken, with those which Fulgoran had rais^d in his own Kingdom,
consisting of ten thousand horse, and eighteen thousand foot, amounted to one
hundred and forty thousand horse, and an hundred and ten thousand foot,
threescore Giants, and thirty Kings, who alone would with confidence have
undertaken the conquest of the whole world with the moity of these troops,
which being embarked with a favorable wind, stood for Natolia, as it was
before agreed with Prigmal^on: who in the mean time took no less care, for
having called his friends together, he put to sea with the Kings of Guine,
Morlavia, B^nazar, Saphotir, Merove, Cyrcia, the Sultan of Cayre, the Princes
of Colidonia, Tergadan, and Ardania, with an hundred and thirty thousand horse,
forty thousand foot, and seven and thirty Giants, whom we will leave to the
conduct of Neptune, that they may have time to arrive, and return to the Greek
Court, which in the mean space had made their preparations for the war, and as
yet had only a body of fifty thousand horse, Florisel having disposed his
inf^ntery in the good towns, as that which was fitter to defend a rampire, then
to fight in field: Whilst all was thus inclining to war, the Christian Princes
sought all kinds of diversions, for the ca^es of those fai^ Queens, who seemed
to have lost the better part of their luster, with the fear of ensuing dangers;
Iusts and Tourneys were not wanting, wherein those young Knights, to their
infinite commendations, appeared as it were in emulation of one another: In
brief, the Court was full of pastimes, and it seemed that the news which was
brought them of the incredible multitude of enemies that were coming to them,
served but to animate them the more. One day when as all the world was
intentive on the Iusts, that Tristor of Sopradisa maintained, in honor of
Alteria, of whom he was passi^nat^ly inamoured, there came in a Damsel, her
hair scattered about her shoulders, her eyes full of tears, and with so sad a
countenance, as she moved as much pity, as desire to know from what mish^p her
sighs and lamentations proceeded. As soon as she drew near these Princes, she
wiped her eyes, and stood a good while viewing them, without speak^ng a word;
But Spheramond, imagining that her grief made ^er so silent: Gentlewoman, said
he, the est^te in which we see you, makes us believe that you are oppressed with
some affliction, and that you desire relief. Speak, and make use of us, for
there is no man-heer, but will gladly contribute to your redress. That only
hope, said she, made me come hither, for knowing that you never refused your
assistance to those that entreated you for it, I am come to crave revenge of a
wrong that has been done me in this countr^y. I traveled by the command of a
Lady, whose principal care does aim at the preservation of a virtuous man, and
in a scarff carried a sword, the fairest that may be found, and at my saddle
bow, an helmet, so rich, that it is not to be valued, hoping erelong to have
met with them for whom these presents were designed: But passing through a
forest, some two days journey from hence, I lighted on a great Knight, who
neither respecting my weakness, nor the little profit that he could reap of
his injurious dealing (for I had told him that neither the sword nor helmet
could serve for any but only those two for whom they were made) seized upon
them, and told me with a harsh voice, that the Destinies had forged these arms
for him, since they were appointed for two of the bravest Knights in the world.
How beir, I besought him to render them back to me, bidding him try and he
should see, that they would be of no use to him; but he r^dely replied, that if
this adventure were not ordained for him, the valor of who so ever it were
could not repair his default; and that therefore I should assure my self, they
should never go out of his hands but upon a strict account; so withdrawing to a
tree that stands by the high ways side, on whose branches he hung the helmet
and the sword, he vowed to tarry there eight whole days, and not suffer any
Knight to pass without trying this adventure: Now you know the loss that I
have endured, and the only cause of my tears, in regard whereof, I demand some
Knight, who by punishing this offense, may make me as joyful, as now you see
me afflicted. Your desire, said Spheramond, appears to me so just, as I will
gladly do you service in it, if you will but give me time to take my arms.
Certainly it seems, my Lord, said Russian then, that you intend to have all the
glory of the world to your self alone; Have you not honor enough already? Or
will a petty adventure add any w^it to the praises that are now given you? Not
at all, your name does sufficiently fli^ abroad i^ every man's mouth, no^ is
there any need that you should labor to purchase more fame: Leave, I beseech
you, the care of this affair to me, and permit me to seek occasions to imitate
your virtue. You shall do as you will, said Spheramond, nor will I ever oppose
so brave an ambition: Go then when you please, but remember to return, I pray
you, and not suffering your self to be carried away with any new fancy, think
that ere long we shall have occasion to employ you. Be assured, said Russian,
extremely glad with the leave he had gotten, I will not, but upon necessity, go
far, and that our enemies shall see me the first in the field; with that, doing
reverence to all those Princes, he leaped on horsback, and left them all much
grieved at his departure: For remembering a number of surprises wherewith they
had been otherwhiles caught themselves, they with reason feared he might be
carried somewhither, where the danger might be greater then to encounter one
Knight alone; Nevertheless, retaining the same greatness of courage which
they ever carried in all their actions, they made no show of any sadness, but
committing the care of his good fortune to heaven, they settled themselves to
behold the justs; where Tristor showed so much valor, as he was commended of
all men. In the mean time, Russian meditating more of his new passion, which he
felt for the fair Agriclea, then of the affair wherein he wa^ employed,
^ravelled with some discontent to the Damsel, who not approving that silence
of his, as if it had testified a kind of faintness in him, she th^^ said: I
will not condemn your humor before I know you better; but I would gladly
understand the occasion of your sadness, to the end I might serve you with as
much freeness, as you have showed courage i^ undertaking the revenge of my
wrong. You must impute it to time, answered he, which does not give us leave to
be always of one temper, and not to any ill disposition of nature. It is a
fault, I confess: for you have enough to divert a troubled mind, but I shall
desire you, not to be offended with it, since I fail not out of malice, and
that I am ready to make aamends for my error. It was not to constrain your
actions, that I set this discourse on foot, replied he, but knowing that the
withdrawing one from melancholy thoughts, does many times oblige a man. I took
the boldness to call you, that you might do better to be merry, then thus to
lose your self in such cogitations. Riding on then in this sort, they past
away the day with many pleasing discourses, and the night in a sound sleep,
though they had no other covering then the trees. But the Sun having waked
them, they pursued their former way, and traveled till noon, when as they came
to the tree where the Damsel hoped to find her gallant, and to make him give
an account of the Arms that he had taken from her: howbeit, she was extremely
amazed when she saw neither the sword nor the helmet hanging on the boughs. I
am most certain, said she, looking Russian in the face, that my grief, as
great as it was, did not take my understanding from me, and that this tree is
the witness of the wrong which the robber did me of whom I now complain, as
well as of the oaths which he swore to tarry eight days for me here. No, I am
not mistaken: for see where the grass is pressed down with the weight of his
body. This is the bough whereon that precious sword hung, and these the same
stones upon which he sat down to try if the helmet would fit his head, yet I
wonder he should be gone, considering how he boasted of his valor;
neverth^lesse, to speak truth, I have no great reason to think it strange: for
could I hope that a thief would stand upon respect of honor, and that he would
prize his faith above his profit; people of that metal use to promise any
thing, and perpetually fail: he is gotten away to hide his booty, and keeping
out of my sight, believes that he shall never be forced to restore it again.
But I am resolved either to lose my self, or to be revenged: wherefore, if you
please, let us go on, and seek him so long till we hear some news of him. I
am ready, said Russian, to do as you shall command me, since your enemy is not
here, let us go and learn what is become of him.

Being about then to depart, they spied a Dwarse so little, that the grass
whereon he lay, covered half of his body. It may be, said the Damsel laughing,
that we may have some notice here of what we seek: let us enquire, sir, of this
little ugly fellow, what is become of the Knight. As I live, said the Dwarf,
rising up in haste, I would not so much as open my mouth to give you the
satisfact^on you desire, did not the worth of this Knight persuade me to it as
much as your injuries dissuade me from it; whereupon turning to Russian, Knight,
said he, will you command me any service? I desire, answered Russian, that you
would be pleased to tell us where we are, and if you have seen any Knight under
this tree. You are, said the Dwars, in the Kingdom of Macedon, this Oak is
called, the tree of adventure; because that ordinarily here falls out one
novelty or other: and the Knight after whom you enquire, is this morning gone
away at the request of a damsel, who has carried him to the guard of the
castle of Love from hence. I am, said Russian, satisfied in few words: but my
friend, you may add one greater obligation yet to that wherein I stand already
indebted unto you by giving me information of the Castle you speak of. I
would, replied he, if it were in my power to satisfy you, but truly, sir, my
curiosity did never stretch so far, only my opinion is, that it is called the
Castle of Love, because there is to be seen in an enchanted room there, that
proud Deity which triumphs over the hearts of lovers, seated upon a throne of
Marble; at the end whereof are two Arches, whereinto no living man could ever
yet enter. Now if you be not contented herewith, and that you ask me why the
entering into that house is forbidden, I will tell you, that as far as I could
gather by the Damsels discourse which carried the Knight away, that it is to
hinder a great happiness to Christendom, predestined to it by the ruin of
this enchantment, which is shortly to come to an end. I could not, said
Russian, be more clearly informed in what I desired to know, so that I will
trouble you no further. Saying so, he passed on with his guide, determining to
go into the Castle, and see the end of that adventure.

CHAP. XXV. Don Rogell by a strange means is brought to the Castle of Love,
and having, with Russian of Media, given an end to the enchantment, they both
remained enchanted under the arches of the (...) of lovers.
DVring the time that Russian was going to the Castle of Love, Don R^gel weary
of the City, had a mind to refresh his spirits on hunting; commanding
therefore the dogs to be brought to the wood, and with some gentlemen getting
to horse, he entered into a Coppice; where, within a while, he saw a St^gge come
out, one of the greatest that ever he had seen. Passion, that often hurries us
after what we desire, made him so run his horse after the Deer, as presently he
had lost his company, and thought they followed him hard; yet none of them knew
what was become of him: for being better mounted then they, he quickly got a
great deal of ground of them, and stopped not, but upon occasion of a new
encounter, as full of danger, as of wonder; he saw coming out of the wood fix
Savages, which carried a great pack upon their shoulders, and two terrible
Giants, that conducted them, with so horrid an aspect, that the only view of
them might have affrighted any heart less courageous then that of this valiant
Prince. But being incapable of fear, he observed them a good while: and at
last was advancing with an extreme desire to know what was in that pack, had he
not withal remembered, that he was without Arms, that therefore reason did
forbid him the committing so rash a part, and that (...) an indiscreet act
would bring him much more blame then commendation. Returning then into the
wood, without any further thought of hunting, but only with a purpose to find
out his people, among whom was (...) Sq^^re, who always carried a complete
armor for him: he made many returns in it with infinite discontent that he was
not then in case to fight: for fearing he should not meet with this adventure
again, he thought himself unfortunate, and carried with an unusual rage, he
determined to turn head, and try his fortune only with his sword; whereas
casting his eye about ^n every side, to see which way he were best to take for
his p^rsuit of the Savages, he spled a green cuirasle at the foot of the tree,
with an helmet and shield of the same color. That fortune, no less expected
then wished for, changing his displeasure into joy, made him instantly alight,
and taking up the cuirasle, with the rest of the Arms that belonged to it, he
armd himself from head to foot. Hereupon being more contented then he had been
of a long time, he speedily remounted his horse; and never thinking of the
discontent his friends would be in for his departure, he traveled so long,
that night came upon him nee^ to the cabbine of a young Shepherd, who received
him with much courtesy, giving him such entertainment as his narrow fortunes
were able to afford. The desire he had to reap the fruit of his labor, not
permitting him to sleep soundly, he gat up by break of day, and proceeded in
his former way, till that about two hours after noon he saw a proud Castle,
before the which two Knights were in fight with very much courage: The nearer
he drew to them, the crueller their combat appeared to be: for the terrible
blows they gave one another, showed an extreme force, and made him think that
the death of them both would perhaps be the end of their combat. Being
delighted with this furious fight, he staid a while to observe the violence,
and adresse, wherewith these Knights struck and avoided the blows of one
another. But hearing a noise on the left hand, he turned suddenly about, and
seeing the Savages and the Giants whom he so^ght for, ready to enter into the
Castle by another gate, far greater then that before which this combat was
begun, he spurred away so hard, that he got into the gate just as the last
Giant entered; who giving him no leisure to inform himself of this adventure,
charged him very furiously with a belief that he should dispatch him at the
first blow. But this Prince, that knew the way to vanquish, lifting up his
shield over his head, b^re off the violence of his sword, that descended
without harming him, and at the same instant made so strange a thrust at him,
that he gave his enemy a deep wound in his side. The other Giant turning about
at the noise of this fight, and seeing his brothers blood, ran immediately at
Don Rogel, who nothing amazed to have two such adversaries upon him, with a
quick change of his ground, avoided a blow which he let fly at his head, and
made another thrust at him, hoping to have as good fortune with it as he had at
the first; but it was without effect: for that meeting with his shield* entered
but a little way. Whilst this combat grew hot, by reason of the Giants rage,
and the government of the Prince, who fought with more judgment then force,
that of the two Knights having endu^ed above three hours, continued still with
all fury that may be imagined between two valiant men, who would rather have
been in their graves, then miss the glory of being conquerours. Their blows
fell alike, heavy and dangerous, the sight of their blood enflamed their
cho^ler, and the resistance which they found from one another, rendered them so
obstinate, as they would not speak of breathing, though they were both in case
to desire it. But me thinks it is time to tell who these two excellent Princes
were, that the reader may no longer be held in suspense; Russian of Media was
one, and the other was Mandajar the proud Pagan, that took the sword and helmet
from the Dam^ell, and afterward was carried to guard the castle of love, as you
have heard in the precedent chapter. Passing therefore from this to the
prosecution of my discourse, you must know, that these Knights ^attering one
another, continued their combat above an hour longer. At the end whereof
Mandajar feeling his enemies sword too often in his flesh, and hoping for no
safety, but in d^sparation took his sword in both his hands, and let drive
with such fury at the Prince of Media his shield, as he forced him to set one
knee to the ground, with an opinion that he would never rise again. But he had
little time to rejoice: for his sword brake in three pieces, and Russian
getting up in an extraordinary rage, made him believe that his death was no
further from him, then till he received the next blow, so that valuing his life
more then his honor, he shamefully turned his back, and not daring to stand
the fury of our Christian, he ran away through the Court of the Castle, at the
very same time when as Don Rogel gave one of the Giants his deaths wound, and
got him into the enchanted Hall, as into a place of refuge, or sanctuary.
Russian following him, and finding one of the Giants in his way, gave him so
terrible a blow upon his head, that he clave him to the very teeth, and
suddenly withal entered the Hall where Mandajar was; who seeing himself
followed so close, went up the stairs, which led to the throne of love: and
taking that copper Idol in his hand, he was going to throw it at Russian, but
was prevented by his sword, which divided his body in two. The Knight was no
sooner fallen with the image in his hand, but a terrible clap of thunder was
heard, which was followed with so thick a smoke, as nothing could be discovered
a good while after: howbeit, an hour being past in that darkness, and the day
recovering its former brightness, the place of the throne was seen to be
strangely changed: for in stead thereof was a fine covered Fountain, of the
same Marble which the two Arches underneath it were framed, which contained a
most clear and transparant water; whereinto Russian looking, beheld the fair
Niece of the Emperor of Guardacia, just as he saw her at Constantinople at
such time as he delivered her from the enchantment, in which she was held for
Fulgoso^^ cause. This object ravished him, and that beauty so pleasing to his
soul, transporting him from the thought of all other contentments, he was
about to discover his love unto her, as if she had indeed been present, when a^
the noise that a man in Arms coming toward him, made, awaked him out of this
pleasing dream, and possessed him with despite and rag^ to be so interrupted.
Rash and presumptu^^^, said he, looking up, and not knowing that it was the
Emperor his father, why come you to trouble my delight, and to divert me from
the greatest pleasure that a (...) may meet with in his life? As I live, I will
chastise you for this insolence, and you shall pay me interest for the content
you have deprived me off. Don Rogel, who knew him by his Arms, could not
forbear laughing* and answered: You have no reason to threaten me: for you
shall never find a Knight more ready to do you pleasure then my self. These
are excuses, said Russian, which will hardly serve your turn, and to think of
satisfying me with words, is to deceive your self, you must therefore provide
for your defense. Nay, said Don Rogel, I had rather yield you the victory
presently: for there is no reason I should take away that life which I have
given you, or that you should bereave me of mine, from whom you hold yours.
Your words, replied Russian, do amaze me: for either you are the Emperor Don
Rogel, and my Lord, or I understand you not. It is true, said Don Rogel,
lifting up his Bever that I am your father, brought hither by the strangest
accident in the world, and infinitely pleased with the honor which you have
gained by the ruin of these enchantments. But pray tell me, what delight was
that from which I hindered you? Your eyes my Lord, said Russian, after he had
modestly excused himself upon his ignorance, will better inform you then my
words. If you please to look into this fountain, which was set here in the time
of the mist, perhaps you will have cause to say with me, that it is one of the
rarest wonders that may be seen: Don Rogel then, more curious then before, went
presently up the steps, and looking into the water, he beheld the fair
Emperesse of Persia his wife, who with a sad countenance declared, that his
absence was not little grievous to her, that loved him so truly; Fair-Mistris,
said he then, it is not without extreme sorrow that I am thus esloigned from
you; But alas! I am compelled to it by the necessity of occasions, that will
not suffer me to enjoy the happiness of your presence, as your felicity seems
to depend on mine: Comfort your self, I beseech you, for a time, the common
Father of all things, will render us that contentment, and our delights will be
the more pleasing after the displeasure of so long an absence; with that
looking down, he espied the sword and helmet, whereof we have heertofore
spoken, hanging over the two marble arches, he had a desire to prove if those
arms were reserved for his glory, but perceiving a Damsel coming in with two
Lions in a lease, he went speedily down to entertain her, and to go the nearest
way, passed under one of the arches, where he presently lost the remembrance of
all things, remaining enchanted, without any will to go out, but for to combat
those which should touch him with their swords. R^ssian, who thought that some
new matter of wonder had made him stay there, straightway entered under the
other, as desiring to participate of his fathers good fortune; but he was also
enchanted in the same sort, and finding a chair there, he sat him down, without
any thought of his Agriclea. As soon as these two Princes were thus arrested,
the Damsel f^stening two iron chains unto two buckles that appeared at the
ends of that frame, and struck the Lions with a rod she had in her hand; which
done, the fountain, seated upon four iron wheels, began to move with the
drawing of the Lions, who were no sooner out of the Castle, but the whole
building sunk into the earth, the Damsel being left in a corniche of the
frame, with the rains in her hand, and the coffer, which the savages had
brought in, between the two arches, but so close shut, that no body could
possibly come to see what was within it.

CHAP. XXIX. That which befell Esquilan of Poland and Perion of Turkey, going
in quest of Den Rogel.
THE Gentlemen, that accompanied Don Rogel on hunting, having made a thousand
turns in the wood without hearing any news of him, determined to return to the
City, believing that they should find him there; but when they came thither,
and found him not, they advertised Don Florisel of his loss, who was very much
grieved thereat, and would certainly have gone himself the same day to seek
him, had he not counted it an unpardonable fault to have left his Empire, and
his people, to the mercy of their enemies, whose coming he every howr
expected, having had intelligence that they were at sea, and might with a fair
wind be quickly there: Determining therefore not to stir, he called Esquilan
and Perion to him, commanded them to get to horse, and to seek Don Rogel four
days, with a charge, that if in that time they heard not of him, they should
not fa^l to return back: These young Princes thinking it an honor for them to
receive this command, went presently to arm themselves, and being well mounted,
traveled till it was late, without meeting any adventure worth the relating;
but toward night they saw a Shepherdess passing by them, who in the midst of
her age, had some lines yet left in her face of a loving beauty, which in her
youth had made her beesteemed: a young Shepherd, handsome, and well
proportioned, followed her, with his eyes drowned in tears: What, said he, fair
Oristea, will you always fly me, and shall my tears never soften that marble
which you have lodged in your breast? Stay, I beseech you, and by my actions
judge of my sufferings, too long indeed for so slight a fault; My sighs do
crave that grace which sometimes you granted me, and which now I have lost,
rather by misfortune, then malice; Do not deny it to this violent affection I
bear you, your quiet, and my contentment depend on your facility in receiving
me at this present, for love having heertofore tied us together with such fast
bonds, I cannot see how ever we should live contentedly in this separation.
That is it, said the Shepherdess, with a disdainful countenance, which
without doubt abuses you; for I am now more capable of hate, then ever I was of
love, neither do you imagine, that my happiness consists in your glory, or my
pain in your misfortune; you are to me me so indifferent, that I will never
have a share in any thing that may be fall you; your excuses therefore, and the
importunities wherewith you thus vex me, are altogether unprofitable: Leave me
then to live with the liberty of my thoughts, and study some artifice with
which you may appease Cloria, who has no less cause to banish you her
presence, and not to love you, then my self. With that she was going away, when
as Peri^^, who was highly delighted with her discourse, and as much desired to
know the occasion of it: Fair Shepherdess, said he, I know not what fault this
young man has committed, but I find his penance very sharp, and your heart a
little to blame, for we do always merit pardon, when we confess our error,
and protest never to offend again. If you have heertofore loved him, you would
doubtless have loved him still, had not some crime of his rendered him
unworthy of your affection; his repentance does blot out his offense, wherefore
you ought to love him as much now, as heertofore you have done, nor think more
of his fault, since his sorrow for it has cancelled it. I should willingly,
answered she, allow of your reasons, if I were less sensible of the grief I am
in, for having been so foully deceived, or could build any assurance on the
oaths of men: but can it be likely I should ever put any trust in the oaths of
a Shepherd, whose humor I too well know to be so inconstant and full of
levity; these tears, which you see in his eyes, are only to reduce me once
more into the captivity wherein his love has for three years detained me; and
his sighs, serve but for charms, to keep my reason from discerning the mischief
which he would bring upon me; I must not therefore regard them, but having paid
for my learning, take my self out a good lesson from his fault, and my
misfortune, to enjoy the happiness of my liberty. It may be you will not
approve (...) discourse, and will say that my humor is too valiant; but I will
let you see, that I have all the reason in the world to handle him in this
sort, and firmly to resolve, either never to love again, or to live no more for
the world, since there is no security to be found in it, so your occasions will
give you leisure to hear me, and that you disdain not a poor cottage for your
lodging this night. Your request is so fair, answered Esquilan, that we are
bound to accept of your curr^sie, wherefore we will wait on you, with a longing
desire to hear the relation of your adventure. Taking then a path on the right
hand, and guided by the Shepherd, who, out of civility, had given over his
sighing and lamentions, they came to a little village, where they were better
entertained by Oriste^, then they could have hoped for from one of that
quality: Their supp^r ended, she caused caused them to sit down under certain
trees, where when her self and Filism^nd had also taken their places, she thus
began: Do not wonder* Knights, to hear me say, that I am nobly descended,
because you see me not in a habit suitable to that condition; Love and Fortune
do often work greater miracles then this; I came into the world, with so
malignant an aspect of the stars, that I cannot with reason say, that ever I
enjoyed any contentment long: My parents losing themselves in that common
blindness of the world, which thinks wealth to be the sovereign good, made me
be called a wife, at the time, when only the title of a child was fit for me;
and at seven years of age married me to a man, whose kindness, in that tender
age, was very unpleasing unto me; but much more when I arrived at years of
discretion, and was able to discern the defects which were in him: Complaining
then, not to those, upon whom my will should in right have depended, (for
hardly should I by my prayers and tears have drawn them to break that which
they had once done) but to them that had the power of justice in their hands;
and demonstrating unto them, that it was but reason to suffer me to enjoy the
rights which heaven bestows on all men that are born into the world, I got
them, after much deb^ting, and with many difficulties, to dissolve this
marriage, and gave me power to choose a husband to my own liking, wherein truly
I chanced very happily, by the possession of a Gentleman, as good and
accomplished a Cavalier as the earth this day bears: But the Fates envying the
felicities which I then began to taste, too suddenly ravished him from me, and
gave me cause to die with him if so I might have done without displeasing the
Gods, who will with absolute power dispose of our days, not permitting us to
shorten them, no more then we are able to prolong them. My tears, and the
continuance of my mourning, sufficiently demonstrated my sorrow, but my
undestanding, and time, the common Physician of our sorrows, having somewhat
eased my grief, I confidered that it was but weakness of spirit so to lose my
self in the anguish of my mind; and finding some ease in my p^tience, resolved
to afflict my self no more so excessively; I lived then with less disquiet
then before: But alas! This happiness was not of long continuance: The proud
tyrant of our souls, Love, would once more triumph over me by the means of this
Cavalier, whom you see here, in this simple habit of a Shepherd, which within
these few days he has assumed, though with a purpose far different from mine:
for I wear it to exempt my self from the c^res of the world, and to seek for
pleasures in these woods; and he without doubt to make me believe that he loved
me in this change of condition, as that of his affection made me hold him
inconstant and perfidious; He was worthy of my love, I do confess, for his
fault shall not keep me from giving him his deserved commendations; but his
light and sickle humor has made him incapable of so good a fortune. He saw
me, and finding (as he pretended) charms in my eyes, came to present his
service to me with so good a grace, that from that time forth it was impossible
for me to approve of the resolution I had taken, never to love again, for fear
of being once more in the danger of the misfortune, which had made me complain
so long; howbeit, good manners obliging me, not to accept him at the first
tender of himself, nor my affection permitting me to reject him with too much
rigor, I made him an ordinary answer, which yet might let him perceive that I
had no inclination to neglect his good will: To what end should I spin out my
discourse, with delivering the particulars of the beginning of our passions?
Our love did so increase, that every body held our marriage for concluded, and
that it would be consummated as soon as the year was expired, which the modesty
of the world allows to the mourning for the dead, and indeed I had resolved
upon it, ^^s I told you but now, had not his inconstancy put him by that
fortune: The faithless man, seeing among the Ladies, which my quality had made
my friends, and that often bestowed visits upon me, a maid called Cloria,
beautiful indeed, and of parts to make the most insensible feel the power of
love, could not refuse to yield her that, which she was able to command from
all those that looked on her; and did in such sort become her sl^ve, as he
scarce remembered that ever he had sighed for me: If he came into my company,
it was with a ceremonious respectivenesse; now he no longer besought me to
quench that fire which I had ^indled in his soul, his lips where unto he was
wont to rivet me, did no more meet with mine; our looks no more incountered
together, I was no more acquainted with his mind, though I did clearly let him
see what was in my heart: In brief, his discourses, being of a strain clean
diffrent from what they had been before, made me suspect* not any ill in him,
(for I was too full of love to think him a villain) but that some mish^p had
caused this change. What ^il you Filismond, said I to him, and why do you
appear so cold? Has any man told you tales to the prejudice of the good
opinion which you had of me? Or do you not think me as beautiful, as for these
three months past you have done? If it be repentance that you have loved me,
which does trouble you, and that you hold me unworthy of your affection, you
are yet in your own power to make a fair retreat, for I will never force your
humor, but rather do my best for your content, nor will I be displeased with
the liberty you shall take to engage you other where, so as the cause thereof
may excuse this mutability in you: Now if you have heard any mis-report in me,
give me leave to clear your mind of any doubts may be in it; and I make no
question, but you shall find me without ^aint, or shame, for any fault I have
committed. I should wrong my judgment, as well as all theirs that know you,
answored he, if I should think you other then discreet; that is not the cause,
Or^stea, of this change in me, no more then my being sorry for that I have
loved you; for you deserve to be served by a more accomplished and eminent man
then my self; but I must accuse mine own weakness, and by confessing my fault,
l^bour to obtain your parcton. I love, but alas! it is not you: (...),
posse^^es me with an absolute power, and that Deity, which disposes of our
affections, is not pleased that I shall have any content in this world, but in
enjoying her: Judge, I beseech you, what my misfortune is, that cannot move,
but by the impulsion of another, and that am constrained to crave favors of
Cloria by your mediation: Verily, I blush for shame, and know well that it were
better for me to seek them in your embraces; but I have not power to dispose of
my self, and can think of nothing, more conducing to my happiness, then your
assistance, which you promise me: But alas! I fear you are not so minded. My
promises are inviolable, answered I, without any show of discontent for his
b^s^n^sse, and it may be, Filismond, Cloria will love you sooner at my
entreaty, then for your services; wherefore, I will go presently to her, to
begin the making good of my word: G^ing out th^n, exceeding full of grief, I
went to Cloria, unto whom I discovered the desires of my waverer, praying her
to have respect to his me^i^, and to the advantage that his affection might
bring her. This discourse of mine, s^emed a fiction to her at first, for she
was not ignorant with what passion Filismond had wooed me; but seeing that I
spoke seriously, and withal found some other pretenses for cause of our
separation; she answered me, that time and my advice should resolve her of this
business, and that in the mean while she would entertain Filismond at my
request. This good news I delivered to my Turn-coat, and though displeas^d with
the office, the next mo^n^ing carried him to his new Mist is; to whom, and in
my presence, he made the same protestation of love, that at other times I had
received of him. O ye Gods! said I, when I heard him, What traitors are men,
and what fools are we to give any credit to their promises? Hark if these be
not the very same speeches that Filismond has used a thousand times to me, all
which the wind has blown away, as without doubt another puff will do these;
he swears only that he may be perjured, whereof I am to make my benefit, grow
wise with my loss, never trust any but my self, and draw my fu^ure content out
of the knowledge of Filismonds treachery. Entertaining my self in this
fashion, whilst these lovers were laying the first foundations of their
affections; the day insensibly slipped away, and night coming on, made me return
home in a strange dist^mper; for, not to dissemble, all my resolutions could
not keep me from wishing, that these new fancies had never come into Filismonds
Head; but being, as then fuller of desp^ght then love, I determined to live no
more in the w^rld, since the lives of those of quality were subject to so many
mutations, and from hence orth only to frequent the woods, where people live
without ambition. This design contenting me best, I took a good sum of
money, and with a wench in my company, who was content to run my fortune, I
came and bought a cottage in this Hamlet; taking care for nothing but to feed
my sheep, and by that employment divert my self from more troublesome thoughts.
Living thus quietly, and pleased with mine own profession, I was at good ease,
till within these fowr days, that Cloria having given Filismond some occasion
of distate, he came to cross my content with his continuali importunities;
thinking that I will change my mind, and consent as easily to his return, as I
did to his departure: But he is deceived, the resenting of my wrong will not
let me endure his sight, and his levity forbids me ever to accept of him again.
You now know, Gentlemen, the cause of his complaint, and my displeasure, which
I think to be just; and that also you will not condemn, when you remember, that
nature and reason both forbid us ever to impose any trust in those which have
once betrayed us. I excuse not my fault, answered Filismond, when he saw that
she had done speaking, and will with you avow, that I do not deserve the grace
that I crave. But, Oris^ea, I must say, that it is yet due to my repentance,
that so you may avoid the name of being cruel: and for that consideration, I
will never cease following you, and perpetually pouring out my tears before
you, in hope that they may one day mollify your heart. And if I cannot obtain
that bliss, I will gladly end my days in the acknowledgement of my error,
and in my desire to do you service. Time, said Oristea, may do that miracle;
but now, because it is the hour of rest, you shall retire your self with these
Knights; who, if you please, may lodge in your cottage. With that, making a
courtsie to the Princes, that were exceedingly delighted with her discourse,
she left them to go with Filismond, who carried them home, where they lay that
night, and the next morning very early getting to horse, proceeded on their
voyage, which they finished without any news of Don Rogel, to the exceeding
grief of Florisel, for that it happened in a time wherein Greece had such need
of his presence.

CHAP. XXIX. The Pagans arrival at Constantinople, with a cruel fight upon
their landing.
THE return of these Princes having brought a general discontent to the whole
Court, and in particular to Don Florisel, who judged the Empire of Greece to be
in bad case, not being supported with those invincible courages which had
rendered it every where redoubtable: but having fortitude enough to endure the
wo^st of fortune, he well resolved not to murmr against God, and to receive
his chastisements as an assured sign of his favor; which was very much
confirmed by the arrival of the forces of great Britain and Rome. The last
commanded by Sclarimond, son to Florenio, and the other by Garm^nt, Ladazan,
of Numidia, Don Sinald^, and G^cilad^r. This succor of twenty five thousand
horse, and ten thousand foot, did somewhat encourage those, which were before
in fear of the multitude of the enemies, and much cheered the Greek Princes.
But their contentment, was complete, when the next day word was brought them,
that the two Empresses of Perfia, and of the Parthians, were in the Port, with
thirty thousand horse, and Fifteen thousand foot. Upon this advertisement,
Florisel, Spheramond, and all the young Princes, quickly madethem ready, and
presently went down to the shore, where no sort of kindest entertainment, or
embraces were pretermitted; Spheramond seemed as if he had been fastened to the
lips of his beautiful wife: But when he saw R^zal^^^^ of Greece, his son,
who with Rozanel d' Astre presented themselves to do their duty to him, he ran
to embrace them with a world of joy to behold them so lovely and well made.
Florisel on the other side* no less kindly entertained the Empress Persea,
wondering at the goodly disposition of Persides and Floridan her sons, whom
she had brought with her. But when he saw that she looked round about, as if
she demanded why her husband was not in the company, he told her, that he was a
few days since gone abroad into the country, with purpose not to make any
long stay. In the mean time Don Lucendus entertained the fair Infanta
Rozaliana: briefly, there was nothing but complements, and still were some
arms stretched out to reiterate their embraces. Those caresses being over,
Spheramond led the Empress Persea, Florisel and Silvan, the fair Ric^arda; and
Lucendus and Dorigel, the Infanta Rozaliana, the young Knights took the charge
of their women, and Rozalmond with the three young Princes his companions,
putting themselves in the head of the troop, marched with an admirable grace,
and were the first that came into the Palace, where the caresses were by those
Queens renewed, with so many expressions of love, that not to be tedious, I
will pass them over in silence. In the mean time Florizel, to whose care all
the affairs were left, made these aids be landed, which he joined to those of
great Britain and Rome. And having given order for the making of strange
trenches to lodge them in, he returned to the City, to continue the pleasures
which the coming of so brave a company had begun. But that lasted not long:
for the next morning they saw the sea covered with ships, and the Princes were
forced to arm, and suddenly to marshall their Soldiers upon the shore, to
impeach the landing of the Pagans. The Emperor Spheramond put himself first
of all in the head of five and twenty thousand horse, accompanied with the
valiant Dorigel, the Duke of Laiazza, Quedragant of Sansueque, and the brave
Florestan of Sardinia. The brave Alastraxerea had the second place assisted by
Silvan, the fair Savagesse his wise, Florian with his brother Tristor, and
Dardanio King of Rhodes. The third Squadron consisting only of twenty thousand
horse, was led by Lucendus, Prince of France, accompanied by the gallant
Esquilan of Poland, Perion of Turkey, Florizart of Taproban, Agrian, Abies of
Ireland, and Frizel of Arcadia. And the last troop of the same number, by the
valorous Florizel of Niquea, who was followed by the two Cenophales, Armond of
Bohemia, Alteria, Malford, Leonida^, and Ladazan of Numidia. The Infantery,
which were only five and twenty thousand men, remained in guard of the town
and camp, under the charge of Garmant, Sinaldo and Gucilador. The shore thus
covered with these Troops in good order, it was presently discovered by the
Pagans, who came on with swelling sails; whereupon Fulgoran and Prigmaleon (who
were joined five days before) gave order to their Fleet to make ready for
fight. Arriving then with incredible fury, in an instant was heard a confusion
of voices, mingled with a dreadful noise of trumpers and drums; and the air
was presently darkened with millions of arrows. The Pagans proud of their
multitude, and thrusting on with courage, under the favor of their Archers,
threw out bridges and ladders to get to the strand. But the Christian Princes,
and those brave Knights, received them upon their lances, made them tumble into
the sea as fast as they left their ships; and not fearing their Archers, who
but very seldom pierced their Arms, put themselves into the water, the better
to make use of the swords. The fight then begun to be very cruel: for the
Giants and the Kings in a rage to see the water died red with the blood of
their men, leaped all at once on land, in spite of all their enemies
resistance, and with them above forty or fifty thousand men. Then was the
encounter very bloody: for as many Pagans as the swords of our Christian
Princes did light upon, found their graves in the sands; and the catholics
had not a much better bargain under the scymiters of the Giants, whereof two
were at this first meeting slain; and with them the Kings of Zambar,
Carthage^^, and Nabagaz^. Prig^^leon and Fulgor^^, who desired to signalize
their valor at their enemies cost, cut in pieces all that they met with; and
followed by a multitude of people which were gotten to land, they had fallen
upon Alastraxerea's Squadron, if Spheramond had not arrested the fury of
Prig^^leon, and Silvan that of the King of Canabea. These four Knights being
thus incountred, began a most furious combat; during the which, Alastraxerea,
the fair Savagesse, Florian, Dorigel, Quedragant, Altaria and Dardanio, were on
the one side gotten together, to take the Giants in hand, while their Knights
made a strange massacre of the Pagans; and on the other side Florizel,
Lucendus, Esquilan, Florestan, Florizart, Leonidas, Melfort, Sclarimond, and
some o^ the most remarkable in the Army, rendered themselves dreadful even to
those proud Knights, who thought that all the men in the world assembled
together, were not able to resist their forces: so that nothing was seen but
dead bodies and horses on the ground. The fight having thus continued above two
hours with horrible slaughter, Florisel perceiving a battallion of three or
fourscore thousand horse, which had landed below the place where they fought,
ready to charge him, caused presently a retreat to be sounded, being unwilling
to engage himself amongst such a multitude of enemies. And falling into the
rear of his Army, with all those brave Knights, he bare off the fury of the
Giants and the Kings, who not enduring the loss they had suffered, charged
themselves like desperate men; but seeing twenty thousand foot advance, which
Don Si^ald^ and Garmant had drawn out to favor the retreat of the Christian
Princes, they made a stand, and rallying themselves together, went in good
order to plant their Army before the town. Florizel having put the greatest
part of his men into the fortifications which he had caused to be made, and the
rest into the town, desired to know what this battle had cost him; and by the
report of the Captains, he found, that seven thousand Christian^ were dead on
the place; but he was advertised by the spies which he had in the ^nemies camp,
that the Pagans had lost two and twenty thousand men, fifteen Giants, and
thirteen Kings; at which they were so enraged, that if it had not been so near
night, they would not have tarried till the next day for giving the assault to
the town; yet necessity enforcing it, they were glad to set a good face on the
matter, for fear of disanimating their Soldiers, promising themselves to do
wonders upon the first occasion, since their Army was now out of feate of the
sea, and that they might fight at large upon firm ground. But they were
beguiled in their hopes: for the Greek Princes, who well knew how to follow
their fortune, and to vanquish as well by industry as courage, gave them a new
occasion of despite, as I will presently deliver.

CHAP. XXXI. The wonderful deeds of Arms that were done both in a sally, and
in the assault given to Constantinople, with the great loss that the Pagans
suffered by an Army newly arrived in favor of the Christians.
THis mighty Fleet of enemies having landed, as has been told you, passed the
night without any rest, being employed in setting up of tents, and making
retrenchments for their security: so that about the break of day the
fortifications being finished, the Soldiers tired with the sea, as well as
with their precedent labor; and besides, pressed with an extreme desire of
sleep, laid themselves down to take a little rest; but they were quickly
rowsed: for the Princes of Greece being infatigable, and ever casting for the
victory, and how to weaken their enemies, having withdrawn to the town for to
cheer up those timorous Princesses, after they had supped, went to counsel;
where the courageous Florisel remonstrating in few words, what benefit would
result from a surprisall of drowsy enemies, determined to get to horse before
Sun rising, and meaning to play his game with as much loss and hazard of the
enemy as he could, he gave order that Spheramond should ^ally forth at the east
port, with ten thousand choice horse, the two Cenophales, the brave Esquilan of
Poland, Perion of Turkey, Florian and Tristor of Sopradisa; that the Prince
Lucendus, with the like number, should fall out of the south port, followed by
Silvan, the fair Savagesse, Quedragant, Florestan, Agrian, Alteria and
Dardani^: and that at the same time he would be in the filled with twelve
thousand horse, in the head of which should be the valiant Dorigel, Florizart,
Frizel Abies, Melfort, Armond, and Leonidas; appointing the Queen Alastraxerea
to be ready with two thousand horse to favor his retreat; as also Parmenian of
Cyprus with the like number to support Spheramond; and Ladazan of Numidia to do
as much for the Prince of France, if the enemies approached to the walls. Things
being in this sort disposed, and direction given to such as were to be of the
party, every one withdrew till the hour appointed, when as they sallied out
with a design to make a strange havoc among the Pagans. The first that began
to stir was the invincible Emperor of the Parthians, who find^ng the enemy
sleeping, and almost disarmed, did such execution on them, as the filled was all
strewed over with dead bodies. Prigmaleon and Fulgoran who were asleep in their
arms, but a great way asunder, hearing this fearful alarm, presently took each
of them ten thousand horse, which they held ready about them for all occasions,
and joining together, went to oppose the violence of these indomptable Greeks,
who bare all down before them, when as a fresh noise on the south side, made
them make a stand, as uncertain which way to bend themselves; but being met
just at that instant, Prigmaleon with fifteen Giants, and twelve Kings, who had
put themselves into his troop, whilst the others took care of drawing the rest
of the forces to Arms, turned to that side where Spheramond acted wonders,
desiring Fulgoran to encounter the enemy which gave in upon the south quarter:
matching then with incredible fury, they began a most cruel bickering: for the
Greeks imitating their Princes, who never let their swords fall without the
death of some one, followed their business so close, that the Pagans wanting
courage to defend themselves, were already wavering and ready to quit their
ground, had not 20000 horse come in presently to their second. But that also
served them to little purpose: for Florisel of Niquea being at that instant
likewise fallen upon their quarters, caused such a confusion, as no (...) knew
which way to turn himself; howbeit, Fulgoran no way losing his judgment, left
the great King of Mauritania in his stead, to make head to the brave Prince of
France, who still got ground upon his enemies, and taking with him two
dreadful Giants, with fifteen thousand horse, went to charge the Squadron
which Florisel led, had not that great Captain, more careful of the
preservation of his men, then of satisfying his own passion, wisely retreated,
after he had bothed the earth with the blood of his enemies. The gallant Pagan
vexed to death with the sight of such a massacre among his men, could not
bridle his rage, but without observing how the Christians retired in a safe
orderly manner, gave in upon them with the Giants, hoping to break them, and to
enter the town pell ^ell with them: But Alastraxerea with her two thousand
horse coming in at the same time, charged him in flank whilst Florisel making
his men turn head, stood his shocke with unspeakable valor, and not only
rendered his design effectlesse, but also forced him to quit the place with
extreme loss. In the mean time Spheramond was but in an ill taking: for
intending to retire to save his men from the terrible blows of Prig^^le^^ and
his Giants, who found nothing able to resist them, was by the obstinate
eagerness of the enemy so engaged, that some misfortune had befallen him, if
the valiant Parmenian of Cyprus, and Don Sinaldo, advancing with strange fury,
had not valiantly freed him out of their hands. Lucendus also having bravely
delivered himself from an incredible multitude that most violently charged
him, the City ports were shut to the great contentment of the Princesses, who
seeing all the principal knights safely come off, received them so lovingly,
that the sweetness of their entertainment made all their labor seem almost
nothing. The loss which the Christians had made, somewhat troubled them, when
as they considered, that one Knight was of greater importance to them, then
three to the enemy; but having learned that seventeen thousand Pagans, three
Kings, and twelve Giants remained slain in the field, and that they wanted of
their men but three thousand and seven hundred, they comforted themselves,
hoping that God would not forsake them, since the question was as much for his
glory as for the preservation of their estates. On the other side, the Pagans
were mad with spite to see the a^dacity of the enemy, and their own loss; but
yet having too much courage to be daunted therewith, they made show of less
grief then inwardly they felt. But not intending to sit down without revenge,
they assembled that day in counsel, and there resolved either to carry the
town, or dye at the assault; whereupon secretly commanding all the Captains to
be ready by break of day, that so they might by a cam^ssado pay the Christians
in their own com, they withdrew till two hours after midnight, when as they
rose according to the order given, armd their Soldiers with the least noise
that might be, and divided their forces in this manner: Prigmaleon, Fulgoran,
and the great Kings of Mauritania, made three battalions, each of an hundred
thousand Soldiers, twenty Giants, and fourteen Kings, to assail the town in
three several parts, and gave the Tamberlan of Moraria in charge to keep them
of the Fort employed with thirty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse,
thereby to impeach them from assisting those that were to defend the walls. Now
they persuaded themselves that they should find the Greeks asleep, but
Florisel being advertised of their design by the spi^s which he had in their
camp, placed Alaslraxerea at the Conduct-gate with twenty thousand men, and
part of the young Knights, charging them not to show themselves till the
ladders were set up, and laden with enemies; Spheramond at the Dragon-gate,
with the like number, and the same direction; and Lucendus at the East-port in
the like sort provided; so commanding Silvan to take four thousand horse, for
to round the tower, he went out of the City with Dorigel, Parmenian of Cyprus,
Ladazan of Numidia, and the brave Esquilon of Poland, and finding twenty
thousand horse, and twelve thousand foot in his fortifications, he presently
put them in arms, to make use of them as time and occasion should require.

The Pagans drawing toward the Town, and hearing no noise in it, thought the
Christians had been sleeping, so that in a moment their ladders were reared,
whereupon, the Giants first mounted, to encourage the soldiers to follow them:
But straightway they saw the enemy show himself, and with a tempest of stones,
boiling oil, sulphur and pitch, overthrew those which thought to lay hold of
the parapet, so that the ditch began to be filled with dead men; then it was
that the assault grew to be furious and cruel, for the Giants enraged to see
their fellows repulsed and slain, not caring for their lives pressed forward,
and diverse times to the sword with the Christian Princes, who, under favor of
the wall, discharged most horrible and mortal blows; especialy Spheramond,
that never lighted on a Giant, without depriving him of life. Nevertheless,
lacking room to lay about him, according to his mind, he took a new
resolution, and leaving the charge of his quarter to Don Sinaldo, as also
Lucendus that of his to Garmant, they both sallied forth with six thousand
horse apiece, and gave upon the enemy with such fury, that finding them in
disorder, the field was infinitely covered with dead carcasses. Then was the
valiant Prince of France seen breaking into that mighty battalion of the
enemies, and charging them with such courage, as made his friends admire, and
his enemies fear him: On the other side, the invincible Emperor of the
Parthians seemed a thunderbolt of war, one while sending arms and heads to the
ground, another while dividing a Giants body in two pieces. In brief, nothing
was to be seen round about them, but dead bodies, nor any thing to be heard,
but a confusion of voices, and the cries of such as lay dying under the horses
feet. The valourous Ethiopian, and the mighty King of Canabea, whom these two
little squadrons attacqued, followed by the Kings and Giants that accompanied
them, did wonders, piercing into the Christians squadrons with a great and
terrible slaughter, and were very glad to see them abroad, in hope to beat them
in, and enter the Town with them: But Florisel, that considered the consequence
of this enterprise, caused eight thousand horse to slip along by the Town,
without being perceived by the Tamberlan of Moraria, put Esquilan in the head
of the one moity, and sending him to second Spheramond, himself with the rest,
charged the enemy, and assisted the Prince of France, who then was fighting
with Fulgoran, with as much courage as force and dexterity: these troops,
having renewed the fight with much cruelty, and so continued it a pretty while,
were about to make their retreat upon advertisement that a great piece of the
wall was fallen down, and that there was great danger in it, by reason of the
enemies obstinate pressing on there; when as on the sudden, a terrible noise
and tumult was heard at the sea side, which put a fear into both sides; the
Christians doubting that it was some new succor against them, and the Pagans
mistrusted as much; but it was soon known what it was; for presently the Pagans
army was seen to be in disorder, and a little while after, a Knight came up to
the trenches, that certified Florisel of the arrival of the brave Amanio d'
Astre, of Ginoldan, the Kings of Dardania and Comagena, the Kings Melinda, and
Olidor his brother, with sixty thousand horse, and forty thousand foot, who
knowing in what estate the fight stood, had landed with a determination to
charge the enemy back. As I live, said Florisel, this is good news; Come, let
us close up our enemies, and keep them from putting themselves in array. Saying
so, he advanced with forty thousand horse, drawn out of the Towns and treaches,
and put himself into the field with a resolution to fight, but Prigmaleon and
Fulgoran, as discreet as valiant, perceiving the disorder their people were in
by reason of this new-come army, which made an incredible flaughter amongst
them, kept their soldiers within their trenches, under the command of the King
of Thenes, and of the Island of Till, and running where the Christian Princes
were arrived, arrested their fury, drawing the rest of their men within their
works. Florisel, commending the discretion of Princes so young, went to receive
his kinsmen with a world of contentment, and causing a quarter to be set out
under the walls for their forces, carried the Kings to the City with him, where
the entertainments were renewed at their meeting with those beautiful
Princesses. That done, they fell to burying the dead, which on the Christian
part, was found to be nine thousand three hundred Knights, and seven hundred
foot; and on the enemies, twenty seven thousand soldiers, fourteen Giants, and
five Kings, which so much the more vexed the Pagans, as our Princes had cause
to rejoice. Nevertheless, concealing their thoughts, they showed but little
ressentment of it, divulging that they were glad of the coming of these
troops, for that thereby the Gre^k Princes would be drawn to a set battle,
whereunto before they had no reason to hearken.

CHAP. XXXII. The Pagans send to present the Christians with battle, which is
accepted, and the success of it.
THE discontent of the Pagans not suffering them to be at quiet, the Princes
assembled together after they had given order for the burial of their dead;
and trusting as much in the greatness of their spirits, as in the multitude of
their people, sent an Herald with a bloody gantlet, to require assignation of
a day for a general battle, which these invincible Princes of Greece would
not refuse them, because they would not leave any bad impression of their
courages: Florisel of Niquea then having accepted it, and appointed next
morning for the same, a truce in the mean time being agreed on, all men were
commanded to prepare themselves for the fight, and the Ladies bestowed
themselves in prayers unto God for his mercy and blessing to be powered down
upon his people. And now all men making ready, when as on the second day, they
descried a Fleet at sea, sailing in good order, no man knowing in whose favor
they were come, both the armies expecting them, equally affected with hope and
fear; these forces landed, and marching in good order, sent to the Pagan
Princes, to let them understand, that they were come to serve them against the
common enemy of their Gods, under the command of the great Cariffe of Africa,
the Kings of Tincifroc and Marocco, and the Princes of Gamall and Aridamia, as
also their dear friends, the Giant Grandimore, and the unknown Knight were with
them; whereupon Fulgoran and Prigmaleon, with great joy, went presently to give
them thanks for their assistance. If this supply, consisting of forty thousand
horse, and thirty thousand foot, pleased the enemy, you may well believe it
gave no content to our Princes; nevertheless, being incapable of fear, they
resolved to submit themselves under the hand of God, and not to murmr at his
providence. Commanding then public prayers to be made, and going to sit in
Council about the approaching battle, word was brought them that a mighty
Fleet was descried at sea, coming thither with full sails. Their desire to
know who they might be, breaking off their former design, they presently
repaired to the walls, where they had not long been before they discerned a
world of colors, and flags, with white and red crosses, which made them
quickly come down to go to the Port, but in the way thither, they met a
Gentleman, who informed them, that in the first ships were the young Prince of
France, Florisbel of the Star, second son to Prince Lucendus, and the Infanta
Fortuna, and Lucibel of France, son to Fortanian, and the beauteous
Chireestoille, with five and twenty thousand choice Knights; That the second
squadron came from Trebisond, with tw^lve thousand foot; The third from Hungary
and Poland, with ten thousand horse, under the conduct of Gadard, and Filadart;
The fourth from the fortunate Island, with six thousand foot, commanded by the
brave Cilinda, who brought with her her little son Cilindor. The fifth from
Cathay, with eight thousand horse, led by Or^thea and her husband. The sixth
from Almayne, with six thousand horse, under the charge of Alozian, eldest
son of Don Argantes and the fair Scharimen^. The seventh of twelve thousand
Spanish horse whose General was Sestilian, son to Don Arlanges of Spain. And
the last from Guindaya with seven thousand foot, commanded by the Duke of
Affarte: these news having given them far more content, then the arrival of
the enemies succor, had brought them sadness; the Princes went to the Port
where these young Cavaliers and the Kings were entertained with a million of
welcomes; and from thence conveyed to the City, to the infinite joy of the
Ladies, who received them with a world of caresses. The welcomes once at an
end, all these Christian Kings and Knights assembled together to consult of
these affairs; because the day of battle drew near: but they all referring
themselves to the prudence of Don Florizel, he ordered things in this manner:
Their whole forces consisting of an hundred and threescore thousand horse, and
an hundred and sixteen thousand foot; having first drawn out sixteen thousand
of the foot for the guard of the town, he divided into five battalions, each of
them containing thirty thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot; of which he
committed the first to the Emperor Spheramond, accompanied with the two
Cenophales the King of Numidia his wife Cassinna, Olidor of Siranquea, Armond
of Bohemia, and Florizart of Taprobana. Don Lucendu^ had the second, with the
brave Alastraxerea, Peri^^ of Turkey, Florian and Tristor of Sopradisa,
Quedragant and Leonida^ of Mesopotamia. Dorig^l had the third, with his wife
the fair Cilinda, Florestan of Sardinia, Agrian of Scotland, Alteria and
Dardani^. The fourth was led by the Kings of Hungary and Poland, accompanied
with their sons Melfort and Esqui^^^, Parnenian the Duke of Laiazza, and
Abies of Ireland. The last he reserved for himself with the King of Cathay,
and his wife, the Princes of Dardania and Comagena, and Frizel of Arcadia. Then
ordering that Silvan and the fair Savagesse his wife, should command ten
thousand horse upon the wings, to releeve such as they saw overpressed: he
commanded every man to look well to his horse and arms, and to be in a
readiness by the break of the next day. In the mean time the Pagans were
busied with the same care: for knowing of what importance this battle would
be, they endeavored to fit themselves in every particular for it, and to omit
nothing through negligence.

Being then informed of the order that the Christians intended to hold, they
thought it best to observe the same, and not to make any superfluous bodies;
for they considered, that united forces were harder to be broken then when they
were dispersed: so that finding their Army to be three hundred thousand horse,
and an hundred and sixty thousand foot: they made five Squadrons of it, each
consisting of sixty thousand horse, and twenty five thousand foot. The first
led by the great Cariffe of Africa, with whom were the Kings of Tingefort, of
Morque, Calisan, N^zamo^, Argosana, Merou^e, and of the Tragonites, as also
twelve dreadful Giants. The great King of Mauritania commanded the second, and
with him the Kings of Zizima, Dragon, Ceziphala, Barnazar, Saphotir, of the
Island of Till, Bazana, and twelve other Giants, no less huge and terrible
then the former. The Tamberlan of Moraria brought on the third, with the Kings
of Libia, Bisaura, Argier, Numidia, Thunes, Mira^^^in, and twelve Giants.
Fulgoran and Prigmaleon led the fourth and fifth, with the like number of
Giants, Kings and Knights. The Kings of Budomel and Arcania had the guard of
the camp, with thirty five thousand foot. All things thus settled on either
part, they expected the day of battle; which being come, to the general
content of both the Armies, the Pagans began to draw into the field, not a
little wondering to see their enemies there before them, who already had had
their troops there embattaild with admirable judgment: The first that showed
himself of the Pagans party was the great Cariffe of Africa, who marching
gloriously under a number of colors, wherein appeared two Lions slain by one
man, intimating his valor, that had made him twice to triumph over those
beasts, caused a charge to be sounded as soon as he saw the Emperor Spheramond
with a brave Cavallerys set forth against him. The encounter of these two
leaders was very gallant: for the African was brave and daring but having the
prime Knight of the world in hand, was wounded in the shoulder, and ready to
lose his saddle, had he not been sustained by one of his Giants that followed
him; nevertheless his wound being such as would not permit him to keep the
field, he was constrained to retire, leaving his men very ill handled at the
first shock: for the Cenophales, the King Melinda, Cassiana, and Olidor, laid
five of the Giants dead upon the earth, Armond of Bohemia, and Florizart,
having been as fortunate against the Kings of Tincefort and Calisan, who were
overthrown at the first encounter with a multitude of Pagans beside, who were
not comparable to the Greeks that had been inured to the war so many years
together, wherein their enemies had forced them to bear Arms. This fight
growing furious on the one part by the terrible blows of Spheramond, and the
Princes that accompanied him, and on the other by those of the Giants their
adversaries, there was nothing to be seen but karkasses strewed on the ground,
and the cries of dying men filled the air with groans and lamentations.
Wheresoever the Princes went, death attended on their swords; and on the other
side, the Giants made such a massacre, that it was hard to pass over the heaps
of sl^in men. But the numbers of the enemy giving way to the valor of our
Princes, they were already wavering, and ready to turn their backs, had not
Prigmaleon caused the second battalion to advance, commanded by the great King
of Mauritania: to encounter whom the excellent Prince of France drew forward
his; and with that greatness of courage wherewith his younger years was
endued, at the very first course he ran his lance clean through his enemies
body, depriving this second Squadron both of an head and hope; yet being
maintained by so many Kings and Giants, the battle began to be very bloody:
the valiant Alastraxerea, Ginoldan, Perion, Florian, Tristor and Quedragant,
laid about them so terribly, that for all their multitude of Kings, and the
bravery of their Giants, of whom five were at this second charge killed in the
place, the Pagans were about to retire with shame, had not the Tamberlan of
Moraria presently set forth with incredible fury. To oppose whom Dorigel of the
fortunate Island came on, with a confident hope of victory, since his friends
had begun so luckily: for this King resolving not to degenerate from the valor
of the excellent emperor of Persia his brother, performed such wonders as he
was much redoubted by his enemies; who, notwithstanding their loss, so
disputed the victory, as no man knew to which side it would incline, when as
the brave King of Lidia followed by his wife, the fair Savagesse, and his six
thousand horse, gave in upon them with such violence, as having disordered this
third Squadron with an unspeakeable slaughter, both that and the two former had
all passed by the edge of the sword, if the invincible King of Canabea had not
come into play, with so much valor, and acting such mavelous deeds, as
notwithstanding all the resistance the King of Hungary and Poland could make,
who advanced at the very same time, he maintained the battle in an equal
balance: his presence cleared the ranks, and the soldiers shunned his sword,
as they would have done a thunderbolt from heaven; close by him marched
Florimond, Grandimore, and the brave unknown Knight, making such a havoc, as
was most lamentable to behold. Then were above twenty thousand Knights seen lie
dead on the ground, and such was the confusion in every part, as it cannot be
expressed. The valiant Esquilan of Poland did miracles, and not parting from his
father, who gave strange proof of his courage, ran to oppose the Giants that
ruined all before them, but the valor of the Prince of Canabea, and of the
Giants that accompanied him, held the battle longer in suspense then could
have been hoped for from the weakness of the former troops; howbeit, in the
end he was constrained to give way to force, by the coming in of Silvan, who
that cay rendered good proof of a wondrous virtue: and carrying ruin along
with him whithersoever he went, he made the victory incline to the Christians,
when as the mighty Emperor of Aethiopia entered the field, and like a torrent
rushing on our troops, quickly changed the face of all things; but he was soon
incountered by Florisel of Niquea, with his last battalia: These two Princes,
as valiant as possibly might be, encountering in the midst of their course,
bare one another to the earth; but fearing to be trodden under the horses feet,
they instantly got up again; the fall of these two great captains, having drawn
all the bravest Knights of their squadrons to that place, there began a most
dangerous fight; for the Kings of Cathay, Dardania, and Com^gena, labored all
they could to remount Florisel, but they were so pressed by the Giants, and the
Pagan Kings, who were very excellent warriors, that their valor little availed
them: For having thrown themselves into the midst of so many enemies, they were
unhorsed as well as Florisel, and constrained to defend themselves on foot with
him a long time; howbeit, tired at length with the killing of men round about
them, whose bodies served them for a rampire, they expected nothing but a
glorious death to crown their future renown; when as the valiant Silvan,
conducted by the Queen Orothea, (who could not get her soldiers, that stood in
fear of the Giants, to follow her) came in with such fury, to see Florisel in
that danger, as at the first blow he laid a Giants head at his feet, redoubling
another terrible one on Prigmaleons helmet, he made him see the stars at
midday. Perion, Orothea, and the fair Savagesse, acting things no less
wonderful, this squadron was presently seen in disorder, and the Princes
remounted upon good horses, revenging the trouble they had been put to with
their enemies lives. Whilst the victory hung in this incertainty, the Emperor
Spheramond, Lucendus, Dorigell, Ginoldan, Amanio d'Astre, and the brave
Alastraxerea, made such a slaughter, having killed the greatest part of the
Giants, that infallibly the Christians had gotten the day, if advertisement had
not been brought to both the Armies, that the sea was covered with ships, and
the shore with men; who embattelling themselves, declared, that they meant to
have a share in the business: This news caused either side to give over, and
draw to their colors; the Pagans retired to their trenches, and the Christian
Princes toward the town, just at that time when as they saw these troops
composed of about sixty thousand horse, move to charge them in the flank,
whereby it appeared that their coming was against the Christians, to the great
rejocing of the enemy; whereupon, Fulgoran and Prigmale^n advanced toward
them, and understanding that it was the Emperor of Melly, accompanied with
fifteen Kings, they gave him the kindest welcome in the world, offered him the
absolute command of all their forces, and related unto him the success of the
late battle, which had been very bloody; for the number of the slain being
taken, it was found that they had lost an hundred and forty thousand horse,
thirty seven thousand foot, seven and twenty Giants, and fourteen Kings: The
Christians having got off for seventy two thousand horse, and two and twenty
thousand of their infantery.

CHAP. XXXIII. During a truce agreed upon between the two Armies, the Emperor
of Melly sends to demand a combat of five to five, which is accepted, and the
issue of it.
THE grief of our Christian Princes was no less, for paying so dear for the
victory, then it was for the arrival of such a multitude of new enemies: But
having placed all their hope on God, who never leaves the afflicted in their
miseries, so as their patience re^dered them worthy of his aid, they busied
themselves more, with refreshing their surviving soldiers, then in mourning
for those which were dead; for doubting a second assault from these troops,
that yet had not fought, they sought to encourage their men by the care they
took of their health, and by that means prevent the inconveniences which might
arise by their negligence: On the other side, the Pagans were not very well
pleased, for knowing full well that the end of the battle would have been
unfortunate unto them, in regard of the loss they had made; notwithstanding,
the great advantage which they had in the beginning, they gnawed their fingers
for very spite, and if their wounds had not kept them in their beds, they
would questionless either have renewed the assault, or presented a new battle
the next morning: But being able to do no more then they could, they resolved
to expect time, and in the mean space give their hurt men leisure to be cured;
for which purpose, sending to the Christian Princes, they obtained a truce for
fifteen days. But the Emperor of Melly, as able, and valiant, as any of the
Pagans, and that could not endure to continue idle so long, desired Fulgoran,
and Prigmaleon, whom the Army acknowledged for their General, that they would
permit him, during the truce, to fight a particular combat of five on his fide,
against as many of the Greek Princes, of whom there ran such a glorious fame.
Your determinations depend only upon your selves, answered Prigmaleon, and
therefore you may (mighty Prince) dispose of this affair as you shall think
good; Fulgoran and my self would willingly have waited upon you in it, if our
wounds would have suffered us; howbeit, if you please to tarry but eight days,
we will double the number, and add some conditions to our combat which may be
for the benefit of either Army. There were no reason, replied he, that a
General should tie himself to the passions of a private man, you shall have
time enough for that, and this first combat will be no impediment to a second,
wherefore since you do not disapprove of it, I will go and waken the Princes
our enemies a little; whereupon, calling for paper, he wrote this cartell to
them, and sent it the same day.

The Emperor of Melly to the Princes of Greece.

The honor of the world, and the glory of our Altars, obliging me from losing
of time, makes me desire to see you in the field with the ordinary arms of a
Cavalier; but without comprising any thing in thi^ combat, which concerns your
differences with the mighty Princes of Aethiopia, and Canabea, I will be
tomorrow under your walls, accompanied with four Gentlemen, so as you will meet
me there with the like number, and with the assurances usual in such cases.

This Ticket being delivered to Don Florisel, that kept his bed of two hurts he
received, the young Knights, which desired nothing more, then to win honor and
glory, pressed forward to be of the number of the combatants, persuading
themselves that Florisel would not refuse this offer; but he, that by the
relation of his spies, was assured, how the Emperor had the estimation of a
very valiant Prince, and that his seconds were of the most redoubted Giants in
the world, made some difficulty at first of accepting it; for he thought that
this combat would be of great importance to the Pagans, if they went away with
the honor of it; howbeit, withal considering, that to put it off with an
excuse, would blemish the reputation which in so many occasions he had
purchased; he promised the messenger, that he would give his Master all
possible satisfaction, and that he would command the field to be chained in;
and that for assurance, he could give him no greater assurance then his faith,
and the continu^tion of the truce. The messenger being thus dispatched, and
highly pleased with this answer, and the brave gallant demeanor of the
Princes, which he exceedingly commended to the Emperor, as most worthy of the
fame that ran of them. Florisel desiring his friends not to be displeased if
they were not comprised in the number, named for the first of the combatants,
Silvan, with Amanio d' ^stre, Esquilan, Ginoldan, Perion: These five Princes,
more pleased with this election, then the possession of a Kingdom, went
presently to view their arms, and preparing themselves like good Christians,
they attended the next day with much impatience, which no sooner appeared to
the infinite contentment of both parties; but the Emperor of Melly came into
the field, in the midst of four dreadful Giants, matching in so grave and
majesticall a fashion, as his carriage did well denote his greatness; and on
the otherside, the Christian Princes so gallantly presented themselves, that
every one took pleasure in beholding them: The Judges, who were the valiant
Alastraxerea, and the beauteous Ar^^eura, Aunt to F^lgo^an, having divided the
Sun between them, Silvan charged his lance against the Emperor, and the rest
in like sort doing the same, at the third sound of the trumpets, they suriously
set spurs to their horses, meeting in the midst of their course so bravely,
that they were all overthrown to the earth, without any other hurt, then only
the astonishment of their falls, but they lay not long there, for getting up,
with ex^ream rage to be so disgraced ^^ the of presence such great Princes,
they began to charge one another, with such mighty blows, that all the shore
resounded with the terrible n^ise thereof. The Princesses of Greece, who stood
upon the walls to encourage the Christians, seeing the fury of the lances past,
were not a little glad, for that the enemy had nothing to boast of in that
encounter, and began to observe with what dexterity those brave Knig^t, avoided
the horrible blows of the Giants, who suffering themselves to be transported
with choler, which moved but heavily by that time the combat had lasted an
hour; when our Knights seemed to have drawn fresh forces out of their labor.
Silvan, calling to mind that he was before the flower of all the Knights in
the world, laid such furious blows on the great Emperor of Melly, and he again
charged him with so much force and valor, as all men were amazed at the
cruelty of their fight: On the other side, the va^iant Amanio d' Astre,
Ginoldan, and their fellows, acted wonders against their adversaries: and now
was their armor on both sides died red with their own blood, when as the Gian^
Fulmander, with whom Perion fought, delivered so terrible a blow on his enemies
shield, that being unable to resist the violence thereof, it was divided into
two pieces, and the point of the sword falling on his helmet, laid him quite
astonished in the dust; Silvan beholding that terrible blow, discharged so
sound a one on the Emp^rour of Melly, that with a great wound in the head he
deprived him of sense, and suddenly running t^ Fulmander, who was driving at
Ginoldan behind, he struck him so courageously on the arm, that both it and
his sword flew together to the ground: In the mean time, Perion having leisure
to rise, approached to his enemy, who was taking his scymiter in his left hand,
and smote him with such violence, as he laid his head at his feet. This combat
thus ended, he set himself to observe Ginoldan, Amanio d' Astre, and Esquilan,
who fought wi^h admirable dexterity, and every minute drawing from the Giants
blood, and enf^ebling them, as he concluded their victory to be infallible: but
he was wonderfully amazed at the fury of Silvan, and the Emperor of Melly, who
not regarding their wounds, continued battering one another with unspeakable
cruelty: The fight having lasted two howrs and more in this outrageous manner,
Silvan, that could not endure to have the victory disputed with him so long,
took his sword in both his hands, and discharged it with such fury on his
enemies helmet, as he laid him on the earth, where when he had him, he
presently put the point of his sword to his throat, making him confess that he
was overcome: And just at the same time, Amanio, Ginoldan, and Esquilan, had
their enemies heads in their hands; whereupon, the Christian Conquerers were
conducted to the town, with a world of triumph, and the Emperor of Melly, with
the bodies of the four Giants, carried to his tent; to the extreme discontent
of the Pagans, who then vowed, either to die, or totally to ruin the Princes
of Greece. Nevertheless, within a little while a strange mutation of things
happened, as I will presently tell you.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Fountain of Lovers comes to Constantinople, and what Knights
began the trial of it.
BOth the Armies taking breath, under the favor of the truce, and every one
keeping within their trenches, that they might not give any cause of jealousy
to their enemies, one morning two Lions were seen to pass through the Pagans
Army, which drew a little edifice of marble; from the top whereof there fell a
pure and clear water into a Fountain, cut into five angles; two arches were at
the ends of it, upon one of the which there hung a most excellent fair sword,
and on the other one of the richest helmets that ever was seen; under them, two
Knights appeared, of a warlike aspect, and in the midst was a corniche of
indifferent greatness, where sat a Damsel that in her left hand held the
rains, with which she governed the beasts; and in her right a little golden
wand, wherewith sometimes she touched them to make them go. This object
arrested the eyes of those foreign Kings with wonder, to behold so rare a
thing, and gladly they would have seen the Lions take their way into their
teeth, that they might have had the content to have considered it nearer: But
seeing them go toward the City they forbear, and would not follow them: Some
of the Greek Princes, being without the walls, to clear the ditches, and gave
order for the repairing of the breaches which the enemy had made, presently
conceived that it was some brave adventure: and therefore commanded the gates
to be opened: which done, the Lions entered, and passing the streets with
mavelous speed, they came into the court of the Palace, where they stood
still. The noise that the people made having caused the Princes, and the most
part of those great Lays, to look out of the windows, they saw the Damsel, of
whom we spoke before, descend from her seat, and go straight to Florisel, unto
whom, with such reverence as belonged to his greatness, she said: Excellent
Prince, may it please you, not to be offended at my repair hither without your
leave; for being conducted by the power of certain Magicians, I can neither
dispose of my desires, nor of the course these Lions take, only they have set
me here to tell such as will attempt this adventure, wherein the labor lies
that they must undergo, to gain both the satisfaction, which they desire, and
the reward proposed to them that shall have the fortune to end it: You shall
find here strange secrets, the chiefest whereof shall not be revealed, till
the fairest light in the world comes to discover the excellency of the
treasure which is hidden in this Coffer: The second is in this enchanted
Fountain, wherein is represented unto you, not only your thoughts, but also
those of the Lady whom you best Love. The honor is to vanquish these two
Knights, whom you see under the arches, and the reward of the Conquerours, that
sword, and the enchanted helmet, which you see there above, the Fountain
remaining free to all men that have a mind to see it: It rests now, brave
Prince, that you let me know, whether it be your pleasure to give way to the
tri^ll of it, for if you shall not like so to do, I shall presently return to
my seat and be gone; whereas otherwise we cannot stir from hence, so long as
there is any Knight worthy to draw his sword against mine. I would to God,
answered Florisel, that the end of this adventure depended only on my word;
for then, sweet heart, I would soon ease you of the pains you take in
traveling over so many strange Countries, and would give this company the
content of never doubting hereafter of their actions, by the view of this
admirable Fountain; but since so great a happiness cannot be attained without
danger, I am willing my Knights shall hazard their lives, for the glory of
this adventure, neither will I my self be exempted, if some of these young
Princes have not the fortune to conclude it. Herewith, every one got him to his
arms, whilst Florisel, and those, who were by age conjoined to more
reservednesse, bestowed themselves in viewing this little edifice nearer at
hand. The impatience of these young Lords being alike, they returned almost at
one time; but Florisel, foreseeing the confusion which might arise out of their
generous emulation, ordered, that Triston, and Florian, should be the first in
the trial; they then advanced, and having touched the two Knights, who sat as
if they had been sleeping under the arches, gave them leisure to rise and come
out; which they presently did in so brave a manner, as made all the Greek
Princes wonder at them; who observing in how graceful a fashion they began
their fight, commended them for the ablest Knights that ever they had seen: The
two brothers performed their parts very gallantly, and nothing amazed at the
valor of their adversaries, continued their combat with an extreme desire of
victory; but having to do with so strong a party, they were both at one instant
overthrown to the ground quite deprived of sense, so as they were fain to be
carried away to their chambers. Their misfortune not affrighting such as were
to succeed them, Florizart and Dardanio stepped forward, and began a brave fight,
giving those, which were able to judge, occasion to render them in the number
of good Knights; but having maintained it almost an hour, they were overthrown
as the two brothers had been. And after them, Armond, and Frizel of Arcadia;
Abies and Leonid^^; Florestan and Quedragant; Agrian and Melfort, to the great
discontent of the King of Hungary his father, who desiring to revenge his
disgrace, advanced with Perion of Turkey, and charged the two Knights so
stoutly, that their combat lasted above an hour; yet in the end they were laid
along, with extreme grie^ of mind, for that they had by their own defeat
augmented the glory of the enchanted Knights. Filadard of Poland, who with his
son Esquilan, was in readiness, took the next turn, and began as brave a fight
as might be seen; their blows were more weighty then those of the Knights that
were vanquished before, and if their adversaries showed an admirable dexterity,
they appeared no less able and active, laying on so lustily both with edge and
point, and maintaining the combat in such a fashion, as the spectatours were
all of opinion they would have a share in the triumph; but two hours being thus
spent, the enchanted Knights were seen to redouble their blows, with such
violence, as within a while the Polonians were sent to the earth as well as the
rest; to the great wonder of Florisel, who held Esquilan for one of the best
Knights in the world; and because night was hard at hand, he put off all
further trial till the next morning. Now whilst things thus past in the City,
Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were mightily troubled; for having heard talk of this
adventure, he exceedingly desired to have the honor of it, believing it was
due to them, if valor might have any share in it: But how to carry the
business they knew not, for on the one side, they were unwilling to go into
the City, lest thereby they should put themselves into their enemies hands; and
contrarily, they were in doubt never to meet with the like opportunity again.
It is, said Fulgoran to himself, a sure means for me to learn how I am
descended, nor need I doubt of seeing in that water what I wish to know, since
it presents both the face and the thoughts of the woman one is to have; and to
fear that I should be known of the Princes of Greece, I have little reason,
for they are so generous, that if fortune should deny me the victory, they
would never retain me a prisoner, since I was not made so fairly. I must then
pass by all these poor considerations, and at any rate see what the fates
promise me. I will change my arms and horse, and pretending that I come from
far, require the gates may be opened for me, only for so long time as I may
make trial of the valor of these enchanted Knights. Meeting then with
Prigmaleon who was laboring of the same disease, he discovered his intention
freely to him, and so well they agreed together that an hour before day they
went out of their trenches, not acquainting any man with their purpose.
Fulgoran in his black, which he had not put on since the war began, and
Prigmaleon in azure arms. Then taking a way some three leagues about, they
came to the North gate, where all the Christian forces were entrenched, and
sent to let the Greek Princes know, that two stranger Knights having heard
talk of the fountain of Lovers, did entreat they might be permitted to try
their fortune. Their desire, said Florizel, seems so just, that I cannot refuse
them, were I sure they were our enemies: Let them enter then when they please.
The Pagan Princes having received this answer, went on to the Palace Court,
where seeing two Knights ready to begin the trial, they staid to behold the
issue of it, and tying their horses to the railes they made themselves ready to
second those Knights, that were going to fight, if they sped not well. And
turning toward the fountain, they perceived the two enchanted Knights arm from
underneath the arches, who began one of the most furious combats that ever had
been seen; for they charged one another with such violence, as all the
assistants were amazed at it, and extremely wondered to see with what activity
all four of them avoided their adversaries blows; the longer they sought the
lustier, and more able they seemed to be, and all the Grecian Princes said they
had never seen a braver combat: having then continued in that sort, above two
hours and a half, the two assailants resolving either to conquer, or die, took
their swords in both their hands; but their enemies no less enraged at the
refistance they found in them, and transported with the same fury, delivered
two such terrible blows on their heads, as they laid them on the pavement, to
the extreme grief of all the spectatours, that thought they were dead,
especially the Kings of Lidia, and the Fortunate Island, who when their heads
were disarmed, saw that they were their dear wives, the fair Savagesse, and the
King of Nyeger^ his valiant sister; who desiring to be concealed, had taken
unknown ^rms, hoping to carry the honor of the business; yet was their sorrow
somewhat mitigated, when they perceived them to breathe, and by and by heard
them say, that they ailed nothing; but only that their heads were somewhat
dizz^e: howbeit, not satisfied therewith, they presently went to arm
themselves, resolving to be revenged for their wives, or serve likewise for a
triumph to the enchanted Knights; but Fulgoran and Prigmaleon being in a
readiness, as I told you, straightway advanced, and saved them that labor, as
you shall see in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXXV. The end of the adventure, and Fulgoran known.
THE grief, which was conceived for the misfortune of these two warlike
Queens, being as soon past, as their harm, the Kings and those beauteous
Princesses, returned to the windows, being informed that the strange Knights
advanced, against whom they presently saw the enchanted Knights come forth, in
the same gallant manner as before, and begin one of the terriblest combats that
ever the world had beheld, being maintained with so much courage and judgment,
as Florizel who had never seen a braver fight, went down into the Court, that
he might better observe all that past. Their blows were delivered with a
wonderful force, and joining grace and skill to their strength, they ^ad the
eyes of all the beholders fastened unto them. Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, who saw
themselves before the Princes of Greece, so glorious for an infinity of brave
deeds, which they had performed, forgot nothing of what they were able to do:
but they were opposed by such mighty enemies, as they durst not so much as
hope, which so set them on fire, that in stead of growing weary, their swords
fell still with more violence then at the first. The enchanted Knights, behaved
themselves so bravely, and delivered their blows with such fury, that every
one expected no other end of that fight, but by the death of them all. Fowr
howrs being spent in this sort without any show made by these Knights of taking
any breath, the place was strewed with their arms, the blood ran down their
sides, millions of sparkles flew about their ears, and their swords descended
always with such violence, as their lives seemd to depend on every stroke.
Entreating one another thus, sometimes in hope of victory, and then again in
fear of death or infamy, two howrs more being past away, and yet no advantage
to be discerned between them, which putting them into an excess of impatience
and rage, they all fowr quitted their swords, and closing with one another,
they began a very dangerous wrestling: but skill no more availing then force,
by a common general consent they let go their hold, and renewed their combat,
wherein they bestowed yet two hours more, which rendered Fulgoran so mad, that
desiring rather to die then not to vanquish, he clasped his sword fast in his
hand, and laid it with such rage on his enemies helmet, as having made it to
fly from his head, the blade brake in seven or eight pieces. The enchanted
Knight being thus discovered, and withal known to be the excellent Emperor of
Persia, Don Rogel, was so exceedingly vexed to see himself made so to stagger
two or three steps back (by the violence of that blow) that he discharged on
his adversary with such fury, as he forced him to set one foot to the ground;
and going to redouble upon him, Fulgoran suddenly getting up, nimbly avoided
that mortal stroke: and finding himself disfurnisht of a sword, he instantly
laid hold on that which hung upon the Arch, and drew it out with ease at the
same time as Don Rogel finding his head also disarmed, and his enemy provided
of new Arms, took the helmet which was fastened to the other Arch, and
quickly covered his head with it: Thereupon both of them going to renew their
combat, a mighty clap of thunder was presently heard, wherewith all the four
Knights fell to the ground, and were straight way covered with a thick m^st.
Out of which a little after, came a reverend old man, with a beard reaching
down to his girdle, marching between two women, with such a majesty, as amazed
all the standers by. Florisel who observed him, and knew the two women to be
Vrganda the unknown, and the fair Cassandra her daughter, arose from his
chair, seeing they drew toward him, and opened his Arms to embrace them; but
the old man bending himself to the ground: said, Most excellent Prince, you
should have some reason to show that you are pleased with my coming, if you
knew how far my desire extends to do you service, but not having hitherto given
you much notice of it, I will acknowledge the favors you now do me, do proceed
merely from your courtesy, not having any way deserved them. And if I present
my self before you thus, without command, it is only to assure you, that
without me you would lose very much to day. You see this mist, it does enfold
some great matter, and is that which a fair Sun must dissipate; wherefore be
pleased that Polixena may come hither, and then we will make an end of our
work. Reverend sir, said Florisel, your services are the more recommendable,
in that they are without obligation; and this inclination you have to do
something for my content, so much obliges me, that not to be ungrateful, I
must tender you all that lies in my power. If my daughter may be useful for
any great design of yours, she shall presently be here: But in the mean time,
suffer me, I pray you, to complain a little of these Ladies that accompany you,
for leaving me so long without hearing any news of them. It is true, answered
Vrganda, after some usual complements, that we have not been here, but it was
because the welfare of Christendom would not permit us to desert our studies,
whereof you shall hereafter reap the benefit, and for the present you shall see
that we have done more for you then you think. Polixena then being come down
with all those Princesses, the old man took her by the hand, and led her into
the mist, whilst Vrganda saluted the Princess, and spoke these words to
Florisel:

Believe it, my Lord, that you are not a little obliged to this wise man, who
is called Alcander, and is the most knowing personage that ever bestowed time
on good books, and that will do more for you in two days, then we have been
able to do in so many years. I think no less, said Florisel: But you must
also be assured, that he shall want no recompense, if he will receive it from
our hand: For I find my self so engaged to his knowledge, whereby the bodies
of our fathers are interred with so much honor, as I will be master of nothing
in the world, that shall not be at his disposing. But, Madam, what means this
youth, which I see in your face, and in the rest of your person? whereat I
cannot but wonder, if it be not done by Art. That is a secret, said she
laughing, which you shall know in due time. In the mean while, let us, if you
please, go to Alcander, since we see the darkness is gone; with that they drew
toward the four Knights, and saw, that Polixena having powered a vial of
water, which she had in her hand, upon Fulgoran his arms, they immediately were
turned to their former color of fire, even at the very same instant. When as
the other three Knights aarose, much abashed to see themselves without helmets,
and not knowing how their combat was determined, Don Rogel and the brave
bastard of Media, who were the two enchanted Knights, looked about on Florisel,
and all their kinsmen, without a word speaking, as if they still had been
restrained by some charm. And on the other side, Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were
no less astonished, believing that they were in prison. But Alcander, not to
keep them longer in suspense, addressed himself to Fulgoran, said, Sir, have
you ever seen me in any other place? Yea, replied he, you are the same that I
met with the very day that I first put on these Arms, and that then gave me an
advice, of which I have at times made good use. And I, Vrganda, taking him by
the hand, what place do I hold in your memory? Such, Madam, answered he, as I
owe to the assistance which I have a thousand times received from you in my
occasions: for I am not ignorant, that you are the Lady of the enchanted Rock,
and by the means of whose Art, all my enterprises have succeeded happily. But,
Madam, I believe, that it is not without some mystery, that you now are here.
No certainly, answered she: for I am come to make you understand certain
words, which a damsel whom I sent to you, spoke when she changed the color of
your arms. She told you, if you well remember, that when your arms should
reassume the former color of fire, you should know what you were; and that the
first day of our enterview, should be the happiest, and yet the most dangerous
of your whole life: you see now the experience of it; your armor is now no
longer black, and I believe you will freely confess, that you were never in
more danger of death, then when you fought with this Knight, pointing to Don
Rogel, who is your Father; and all these Princes which you see here, are your
kinsmen: but that you may have no occasion to doubt, give me that sword which
you have in your hand, that I may show you more certain evidence of the truth
hereof. Taking it then from him, she showed him graven upon the blade:

Fulgoran, Son of Don Rogel of Greece, and of Florella of Canabea. And if you
desire yet more certain proof, added she, go up these stairs, and look into the
water of this fountain, it will show you the truth. That would show, answered
he, but too much obstinacy, to distrust such powerful witnesses: I will never
make a doubt, Madam, of that you shall tell me; nor do I desire more assurance
of this verity, then the sorrow that I feel for having lifted up my arms
against him, for whose preservation the Gods and Nature, command me to die a
thousand times, if I were capable of so many lives. But my Lord, said he
kneeling down to Don Rogel, you will impute the fault to my ignorance, and be
pleased to pardon me, if hitherto I have sought the ruin of your Empire, for
the glory of the Gods, whom my education made me adore; which henceforward I
shall be ready to preserve, and repair the damages which my arms have brought
them. My son, said Don Rogel, most lovingly embracing him, I am so pleased with
this accident, that setting a part all care of the wars, I will not think of
any thing, but of rejoicing with you, and for you. See here, my Lord and
Father, Prince Florisel, the second is your Brother the Emperor of the
Parthians, and all these other are your so near kinsmen, as you are bound to
respect them equally with my self. Fulgoran then going toward Don Florisel to
kiss his hands, he held him a long while infolded in his arms, showing the
infinite content he took in knowing of him. Spheramond caressed him with no
less affection. Dorigel, Lucendus, Silvan, and the rest in general let him
see the incomparable pleasure they received by this adventure. During these
complements, Prigm^leon was transported from himself: one while he observed the
Princes of Greece with wonder, and then again beholding so great a change, he
was much amazed at the vicissitude of things: but that which most arrested him,
was the excellent beauty of Polixena, that working powerfully on his soul,
made him wish for the amity of the Grecian Princes, that he might not be
esloigned from that sun, whose light he already so adored. His new desires then
not permitting him to think of his return, he expected the issue of the
business; when as Fulgoran, who amidst his excess of joy, could not forget
him, turning most, kindly to him thus spoke: My worthy Lord, and Companion, I
am extremely afraid, that the knowledge of my parents, obliging me to be
baptized, will make me lose the honor of your love, and cause you to hate me as
much as ever you affected me. That is a thing, answered Prigmaleon, which you
are not to doubt; for your virtue only having given birth to our friendship, I
cannot believe it can be so easily broken by any difference of religion; on the
contrary, I think it good reason that you imitate your parents, and that it is
just in you to testify the content you take in knowing them; for these being
the prime Princes in the world, no man can descend from them without glory; we
have troubled them very much, and our arms have caused great disorder in their
States, but we may amend that fault; you shall serve them out of duty, as I
will out of affection; for from henceforth I vow to hold a firm peace with them
if they be pleased with it; and am very willing to be their friend, provided
they judge me worthy of that favor.

Now on my soul, said Fulgoran, embracing him again, this is that which most I
could wish for in the world, and your freeness so obliges me, that, not to be
ungrateful, I most heartily offer you all that lies in my power: but come and
let us go to these my Lords, who for that they know you not, have not rendered
you that which your birth and valor deserve. Repairing to Don Florisel, he
briefly acquainted him with the quality of Prigmaleon, whereupon, Florisel,
excusing himself on his ignorance, caressed him in such manner, as he held
himself much indebted to his c^^tesie. These ceremonies having lasted a good
while, the Princes would needs look into the enchanted Fountain, and wondered
at the secrets which it revealed to them; but he that seemed to receive most
satisfaction from it, was Prigmaleon; for seeing in it the fair Polixena, with
a smiling and cheerfulness countenance, he conceived that his affection would
not be paid with ingratitude, and that this fair one had already harbored a
good opinion of him; which so delighted him, that going with Florisel (who
would needs give him the upper hand) to the palace, where he was magnificently
entertained, he continued in all the contentment that might be desired, till it
was bed time; when as he was, by the greatest part of the young Knights,
conducted to a chamber that was prepared for him.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Pagan Kings understanding that Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were
become friends to the Greek Princes, conspire to massacre their troops; they
are prevented, and their Army defeated.
FVlgoran and Prigmaleon not suffering themselves to be so transported with
pleasure, the one by seeing his kindred of a quality so eminent, and the other
with those delights, which his new fancies begat in him, as not to think of
that so much concerned them, they arose early in the morning, and with the
approbation of the Greek Princes, returned to their quarter, where when they
had called together all the principal Commanders of the Army; Fulgoran began
this discourse to them: There is not, My Lords, any one here so little
experienced in affairs, as, by the revolution of things in the world, has not
learned, that often times our wills, and our desires, do not depend upon our
selves; and that the heavens, and fortune, have reserved a power to dispose of
them, either for our good, or for a chastisement of our offenses: It is not
long since, that intending to arm, for the glory of our Altars, and to gain my
self a reputation in the world, I labored to procure your assistance, with a
purpose that you should share with me in the honor, as well as in the labor
of my enterprise; but now you see me here with other inclinations, my speech no
longer demands blood and revenge, nor my heart wishes for the ruin of this
Empire, and less for the destruction of the Princes of Greece; this makes you
wonder, and by your faces I see, that you would willingly know from whence this
change does proceed: My Lords, it is most reasonable that I reveal it to you,
and that I now deliver you the cause of my amity, as well as heertofore I did
that of my hate. Yesterday, the Prince of Aethiopia, and my self, carried with
a strong desire to see the rarities of a Fountain, which the day before passed
through our Army, required that we might be admitted to the trial thereof,
which our enemies, who are full of curtefie, and truly generous, freely
granted, not desiring to know us, or otherwise to be informed of our condition,
so that we entered into Constantinople, where, in few words, to come to the
point, we began a very dangerous combat with the Knight of the Fountain, which
having lasted eight howrs was ended by the greatest wonder in the world: My
sword flying in pieces by the violence of a blow which I gave my adversary on
the helmet, which also therewith fell from his head, leaving him discovered, I
presently laid hold on a sword that hung upon the Arch; and my enemy seeing
himself without a headpeece, took one that was fastened to the other Arch; so
being furnished with new arms, we were about to renew our fight with more fury
then before, when as a clap of thunder laid us both on the ground, deprived of
all sense; and with us the other two, that then were still ^ighting together,
whereof one was the valiant Prince of Aethiopia here present, a thick mist so
covering us for a while, as none that were present could discern us; but ere
long we were seen all four without our helmets; and these arms, which I now
have on me, did in an instant reassume their former color, whereat, I
confess, I was exceedingly amazed; for not knowing how our combat ended, I
believed I was a prisoner; but beholding certain Magicians, whom I have long
time known, come toward me, I was somewhat better assured; and saluting them,
entreated them to tell me, at what rate I should be quit for the folly I had
committed, in so rashly abandoning our trenches. Oh how happy a fault, said an
old Wiseman to me, is this you have done! for you shall presently see the
benefit that will arise to you out of it: Requiring me then to deliver him this
sword, that you see here (laying his hand upon the hilt) he showed me these
words, which you also, if you please, may read upon the blade.

Fulgoran son of Regel of Greece, and of Florella Queen of Canabea. Seeing such
good evidence of my extraction, which may also be confirmed by the Prince
Bruzinges here, my uncle, and having consulted with the water of the Fountain,
that fains not, remembering withal the words that a great Magician, and my
friend, had spoken to me, how my arms should never recover this burning hue,
that first it had, till my kindred were known; I did my duty to the Emperor
Don R^gel, my Lord, with whom it was that I had fought, and besought him that
he would not refuse me the name of Father; protesting, that I would endeavor
to render my self worthy of that grace: To what end should I particularize all
that then passed amongst us? The Prince of Aethiopia, and my self, were
received with so much kindness, as that I, in regard of the obligation of
blood and nature, wherein I am tied to them, and he for the ^^^ity which he
means to contract with them, are come out of Constantinople, with a purpose to
beseech you, as humbly we do, that for our sakes you will raise the siege, as
you came hither at our entreaties; in recompense whereof, time I hope will
furnish us with occasions to serve you, and one day return you the favor which
now you shall do us. This said, Prigmaleon, and he, stood up, expecting when
one would speak for the rest: But perceiving them to be all silent, they
modestly retired, and with them Bruz^nges, Florimond, Grandimore, and the
unknown Knight; believing that their presence hindered them from taking some
resolution in an affair of that consequence: They being come then out of the
room, the other Princes were a great while in dispute; some advised that every
man should repair to his home, remonstrating, that to persist any longer in
that siege would be their manifest ruin, since they had lost those two
Princes, who joining their forces with the Christians, they could hope for
nothing but a total destruction of their Army: Howbeit, this opinion nothing
approved of, the rest persuaded the prosecution of their enterprise; affirming,
that now to give over after so much labor and charge, would prove the greatest
baseness that might be; yet considering the importance of those two Armies,
which might much offend them, in case they should turn to the enemy, they
resolved to cut them in pieces the next night, and afterward to do as occasion
should invite them. This concluded upon, all those Kings rose from Counsel,
and one of them went to Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, to tell them, that the votes
being equal, they had put off the resolution to the day following You may do
therein as you think good, said they: But if you would well consider the event
of things, and the means you have to oblige us by it, you would be carried more
readily ^o it then you are; whereupon, going away, with Florimond, and the
unknown Knight, who would needs accompany them to them to the City, they took
leave of Bruzanges and Grandimore, and returned to the Greek Princes, who made
it appear, that they cared not much whether the enemy continued still before
their walls, or was on the sea returning homeward, since they had drawn from
them the best part of their strength. Renewing then their feasting and sports,
they passed away the day with all delight, till toward evening, when as word
was brought, that there was a Knight at the gate, who desired to speak with
Prigmaleon. Let him come in, said Florisel, it may be he comes to be merry with
us, as being weary of lying so long in his tent, and seeing nothing but arms.
Upon this command, the Knight was brought into the room, where kissing a paper
which he had in his hand, he presented it to Prigmaleon, from the King of
Zizinia; who having opened and read it, said to him, Knight, your master tells
me, that, the business being of importance, he has committed it only to your
fidelity; let us know then, I pray you, what the matter is: More, I assure you,
answered he, then you imagine; and by the care my Master takes of you, you may
perceive how much he loves you. He was this day present at the Counsel,
wherein it was concluded, to cut your troops and those of Canabea in pieces;
but he not intending to be a traitor to you, nor able to endure such
wickedness, has advertised you of their design, to the end that with the
assistance of your new friends, you may turn that hurt upon them, which they
intend to you: He will favor your enterprise, nor shall his men draw a sword
against you; and when the alarm is given, he will draw to the sea side and
embark his soldiers: It rests now, that you make good use of the advertisement
that he givees you, and carry the matter with such discretion, as it may not be
known that your enemies counsel is revealed by his means. Assure him, said
Prigmaleon, much amazed at the soul design of those Pagan Kings, that I will
die rather then prejudice him for the favor he does me; he does indeed oblige
me as you see, but I will never be ungrateful, and hope one day to require
him: in the mean time, I will prevent this mischief if I can, and believe it,
the traitors shall have no great cause to brag of their villainy. Having then
acquainted the Greek Princes with the business, he sent the unknown Knight to
his quarter, to give private directions to his Commanders, and intelligence of
the enemies design; Florimond having received the like Commission for the
Canabeans, with order to put on white shirts upon their arms, that they might
know their own men in the dark. This Knight being returned to the Pagans Camp,
Don Florisel of Niquea, desiring to let Prigmaleon know how much he esteemed
his friendship, seeing the night reasonable dark, put thirty thousand horse out
of the North-gate, and divided them into two squadrons, in one of which he
commanded himself, with Prigmaleon, the two Cenaphales, Lucendus, Filadard,
Esquilan, Gadard, Dorigel, Melfort, Abies, Armond, Leonidas, Florizart, and
Dardanio: The other he left to the leading of Don Rogel, Spheramond, Melinda,
Olidor, Ginoldan, Amanio, Silvan, Anaxander, Floradin, Perion, Florian,
Tristor, Quedragant, Agrian, and Florestan, having all of them white linen
upon their arms, now with his squadron he advanced toward Prigmaleons quarter,
and Rogel with the other, toward Fulgorans: But thinking it fit to stay till
the fight began, they made a stand about a mile off, tarrying for nothing but
the noise to make them give in upon them. On the other side, the Pagan Kings
did not slumber, for having made two battalia's of their men, each of them of
seventy two thousand horse, and fourteen thousand foot, they fell to march very
quietly, and thinking to find the Aethiopians and Canabeans sleeping in their
beds, they charged furiously upon them; but they were better entertained then
they expected; for the unknown Knight, and Grandimore, on the one party, and
Brazanges, with his son Florimond, Arfleura and Lar^ella on the other, who had
kept their men in arms, and in good order to fight, gave them so rude a
welcome, that they presently knew that they were out of their reckoning. The
battle then growing sharp, and the noise every moment increasing, the Princes
of Greece flew in among the enemies with such fury, as above ten thousand
Pagans lost their lives at that first encounter; for thinking of nothing less
then this surprise, they were extremely amazed to see their enemy on every side
them: Florisel, Prigmaleon, Rogel, Spheramond, Fulgoran, the Cenophales,
Russian, Lucendus, and the rest of these invincible Princes, like lightning
shattered as many soldiers as they lighted upon, and grew so terrible, that
within an howr the Pagans betook them to flight, where the slaughter grew so
great, all being in disorder, that a little after Sunrising, the fields of
Greece were strewed with the bodies of an hundred and eight thousand men
fallen under the edge of the sword; the rest having luckily recovered their
ships, to receive and shelter them from that tempest: The Christian Princes
then retiring to the town, with much joy for so happy a victory, which had not
cost them above fifteen thousand men, return to the City with great triumph.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Baptism of Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, together with the
enchanting of the most part of the Princes and Ladies of Greece.
THE Court being full of rejoicing, and our Princes seeking daily new
diversions to pass away the time, all their forces were dismissed, the Citizens
of Constantinople took the liberty to go into the Country, to repair the
ruins which the enemy had made in their lands about the City; and the Peasa^^s
seeing no more soldiers a forraging, carried their cattle, as they were wont,
into the fields to feed. Thus all things being at quiet and peace, Fulgoran,
who was desirous that the content of his being known should not be imperfect,
resolved to be washed in that Fountain of salvation by water whereof man was
regenerated into grace, and no longer to think of his idols, who till then had
misled him, but to begin to adore one true and Almighty God; which
determination of his, infinitely pleased Don Rogel, and generally all the rest
of the Princes, who desiring to celebrate that Sacrament with all kind of
magnificence, gave order accordingly for the Ceremonies thereof. And now every
thing being in a readiness, the streets and windows full of people, and the
Patriarch of Constantinople attending their coming in the Church, Prigmaleon
entreated the Princes of Greece to give him a little audience, and thus spoke
on to them: Excellent Princes, I do not think you will imagine that any
weakness or fear does carry me to that I am about to do, seeing I am here
entreated amongst you with so much kindness and honor, whereas I might in
reason have expected a resenting of the wrongs that you have received from me;
but that you will rather say, it proceeds from the providence of that God whom
you adore, who desiring my salvation, has made me with patience to hearken
unto the reasons which you used to my comp^nion, for to draw him out of the
error wherein he has lived so long; I have profited by them as he has done,
and am determined to receive the same character which you intend to confer on
him this morning. And as we have been fellows together in many dangers: so
will we be also in this action wherein the grace of heaven is to be
communicated unto us.

This is, said Florisel embracing him; this is, brave Prince, indeed so great a
grace, that you may draw more glory from this holy motion, then fromall the
brave exploits that your courage has hitherto performed. God which has raised
you above such multitudes of people, and endowed you with all the rare
perfections that are able to render a man of your quality worthy of all
commendations, has not left you in your blindness, but determining to make
use of your service for the glory of his religion, the ruin whereof you have
heretofore sought, has knit this bond of friendship between you and my soon,
that you might share with him in the happiness, which by his being known for
what he is, was to befall him; wherewith we are infinitely contented: And as we
had determined freely to employ our selves for your service, merely out of the
consideration of your virtue and greatness, we will now do it the more
willingly, for that you shall become our brother in b^ptisme, whereunto let us
go then presently, and be pleased that I may conduct you to the Church, as your
Godfather, and that the beautiful Empress of the Persians may be my partner.
I will not spend time, answered he, in protractations of doing you service,
because I will not delay so good a work. But I believe, sir, that Fulgoran and
I shall not be the sole parties in it, Bruzanges, Arfle^ra, Florimond,
Larmella, Grandimore, and the unknown K^ight will also partake of it. All the
better, said Florisel, God shall have so much the more glory; howsoever, let us
proceed to this holy action: with that they went toward the Church, Prigmaleon
between Florisel and the Empress of Persia; Fulgoran between the Prince of
France, and the fair Queen Sidonia; Bruzanges led by Rogel and the beauteous
Queen of France; Arfleura by Spheramond and the fair Savagesse; the unknown
Knight by Silvan and the fair Cilinda; Grandimore by Dorigel and the Empress
of the Parthians; and Larmella by Filadard, and the beauteous Polixena, who
went with some content to see Prigmaleon figh for her. For being exceeding
lovely, valiant, and a very mighty Prince, she could not despise his
affection; and in her heart counted it a glory to her beauty to be honored with
so great a triumph. The ceremonics ended, all the Princes returned to the
Palace, where they were magnificently feasted. And intending to defer the
exercise of Arms till some other day, they were speaking of going to dance,
when as Alcander rising up with Vrganda, and addressi^g himself to Florisel,
thus spoke: It is true, great Prince, that I let you see the desire I have to
do somewhat for your good, and that you should know how the studies both of my
self and these Ladies (pointing to Vrganda and young Cassandra) have not been
fruitless: wherefore follow us, and if you love your lives, give us leave to
dispose of you as we think fit. I have resolved, answered he with a cheerful
countenance, never to swerve from your directions, being most assured, by the
many testimonies you have given us of your love, that you desire our
happiness; you may command then when you please, and I will be in a
readiness, as soon as you have spoken. Stay then here, said Alcander, till I
have given order for every thing: then taking Sid^nia by the hand, he placed
her by her husband, made Don Rogel and the Empress of the Persians follow
them; after them L^cend^^, and the fair Infanta Fortnna; Spheramond and the
Princess Richarda his wife; Alastraxarea and Roz^lian^, the two Cenophales,
Gadard and Filadard, and putting himself with Vrganda, in the head of them
all, he marched to the fountain of lovers, made all those Princesses go with
Vrganda, under one of the Arches, whilst himself with the Princes, were under
the other; which done, he spoke before them all in this fashion: My Lords, you
have lived many years, and the defects that use to accompany a life subject to
crosses, would ere long bereave you of that heroical vigor which has made you
triumphant in so many enterprises, if out of my love I had not found out
certain secrets able to restore you to the flower of your age, to preserve in
you that admirable force you have, and to keep you from decaying with age, till
threescore years be past; see here bathes prepared for that purpose, go into
them, I pray you, and come not out of them till the herbs, which were gathered
in their due seasons, have perfected their operation on you; Vrganda is under
the other Arch, with the Princesses that accompanied you hither, they shall
enjoy the same prerogative with you, and that wise Lady shall render them the
same beauty which they enjoyed when they were twenty years old, as I will
restore you to the estate that you were in at your five and twentieth year of
your age. At these words they stripped themselves without replying, and went
into the bathes, whilst all the young Princes that followed them, wondered to
see the fountain and the place about it, covered with a thick mist: whereupon
they looked one upon another without speaking a word, and would have gone into
it, to know what was become of that troop, if Cassandra had not told them that
all was done for the glory of the Grecian family, and that the time to require
the freeing of those great personages, was not yet come. And whether it be so
or no, read I pray you, in this writing. They then looking a little forward,
saw a column of Jasper, upon which hung a table of Brass, with these words
engraven it it,

Death is threatened to all those that are so a^dacio^^ as to approach thee cloud
of secrets, Nor shall this cloud be dispelled, till the young Lion comes out of
his den: then shall the hidden treasures be discovered, and the old creatures
having changed their skins, shall behold the Sun again to the glory of their
young ones. Now on my life, said Dorigel, addressing himself to Cassandra, if
the faithful services you have done us, did not well secure me, I would either
die presently, or my fortune should be the same with these Princes. But since
it were a crime to be jealous of you, I will have patience, expecting the time
wherein the heavens will restore us what we this day have lost. This loss,
gently replied Cassandra, shall not hinder your pleasures, nor shall you so
much as ressent it for the present, as you shall ere long find it the more
comfortable to you: Wherefore let us return unto the palace, and continuing
our former triumphs and feasting, make it appear, that if need be, we can
master even Fortune her self. The freeness of these words, and the grace of
her pronouncing them, having somewhat quieted those Knights, they returned unto
the Palace determining not to stir from th^nce in ten days space, and in the
mean time to employ themselves in some virtuous exercises.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Prigmaleon transported by the violence of his desires,
discovers his affection to Polixena: Her answer.
WHilst Russian meditates on means to see Agriclea, whose absence very much
troubled him, and that Dorigel with the rest, sought to divert their cares by
noble exercises, Prigmaleon entertaining himself with his private thoughts,
and delighting only in solitary places, told the trees, that the occasion of
his disquiet was an extreme apprehension, that Polixena, who held all his
desires engaged, would refuse to accept of his affection, as being most
unworthy of her merit; bestowing his thoughts then in this manner, and not
daring to reveal his sufferings to the Princess, he expected till love should
take pity of his grief, and that good fortune should send him some help:
howbeit, better considering that confidence was to bring him content, and that
where fear was there could be no hope, he resolved to open his heart upon the
first occasion that should present it self, and to seek a remedy for his grief
some more speedy way then by silence: Believing then that this was his best
course, he began to frame a speech in his mind to that purpose; when as a
confused sound of voices, talking together, put him out of his imaginations;
whereupon, he rose up presently from under the trees, where he was laid, and
looking round about he spied Polixena, with seven or eight young Ladies, that
were going to take the air of the garden. O me! said he, How luckily does this
fall out? It seems that love does favor my design, now is the time wherein my
courage must appear; if Polixena rejects me, a resolute death shall free me
from so many pains, which will be far more honorable for me then a languishing
life. This ardour carrying him on, he came to his Mistress, thinking that he
should have his tongue as free as his thought; but after a Good-even, he stuck
fast, and leaving his eyes to discover his passion, he was not able to utter a
word. Polixena, who took this timorousness for a sign of his love, seeing him
in that case, took him by the hand, and said: My Lord, I believe we have
surprised you, for the amaze you are in makes me imagine so much.

Do not wonder, Madam, answered he, at seeing me disordered in this encountering
you, the weakness of my sight is not able to endure the glittering of so many
beauties as I behold. This excuse, said Polixena, is none of the best: for if I
had the power that you speak of, I should indifferently trouble as many as look
on me: but none complains of me save you, and your palenesse declares that it
is some secret malady which you will not have not known. It is true, replied
he all trembling, that a secret grief does consume me. But, Madam, I should
have just reason to blame my want of courage, and to impute all my vexation to
my cowardice, if I should not seek for a remedy when it is in my power to do
it. I have suffered infinitely since I saw you, and the powerful charms of
your eyes have left me nothing that is mine, but my desire to do you service.
You may say, I am too bold, that a greater respect belongs to your greatness,
and that I ought to have endured my suffering without declaring it. But alas! I
do not speak but by the impulsion of a passion that forces me to it. Love has
untied my tongue, which you saw was dumb when you came hither: and that is it
which now constraines me to beseech you, that you will be as sensible of pity
as I am of affection. If I had not given you occasion to speak, coldly replied
Polixena, I should be displeased with this your discourse. Maidens in these
days, and especially those of my quality, do not take a liberty of engaging
themselves without the consent of their fathers; neither willingly permit any
to talk to them of love, for fear of being deceived, and unfortunate by
trusting the oaths of a lover of three days standing. If I receive a command
to look on you with these conditions, you have merit enough in you of power
to make me willing to obey it; otherwise do not expect any kinder language
from me. In the mean time live with less disquiet, and out of this my answer
extract reasons to procure your ease. Therewith she passed on, leaving him much
perplexed; for he found both bitter and sweet equally mixed in her words, and
durst not hope without fear. Nevertheless, being somewhat pleased that he had
revealed his thoughts, he retired quietly to his chamber, and remembering that
towns do ordinarily endure the first assault, that yet will afterward yield
to a persisting beleager, he took paper, and in it wrote these lines.

Prigmaleons Letter to Polixena.
THink it not strange if I show more love then obedience: I am brought to that
extremity that all considerations in the world must give way to the violence of
my suffering. I write this because you have forbidden me to speak to you, and
do crave the same pity of you which you would wish for if you were in the pain
you have seen me; If you judge rightly of my passion, you will not be offended
at this request. Honor does guide it, nor do I desire any felicity, but
according to the ordinance of heaven that may legitimate it: Let not your
refusal then make me desperate, but permitting me from hence forward to call
my self your Knight, give me leave to expect the return of those upon whom you
so absolutely depend.


This Letter, written and sealed, he committed to the fidelity of a Dwarf, who
certainly had a greater spirit then a body, and that could so well choose his
time, as the next morning he found Polixena in her chamber, unto whom kneeling
down, he said: If it were fit for me, Madam, to relate to you what one of the
most completest Princes of the earth does suffer for you, I would recount to
you his sighs, his griefs, his transports, and his disquiets, and letting you
know the miserable estate whereinto despair has reduced him, since you forbad
him to complain to you, I should perhaps possess you with as much pity, as he
has love; but persuading my self that his passion has found reasons enough to
let you see it, I will content my self with presenting this paper to you from
him: Be pleased, Madam, to view it with a gentle eye, and return him so
favorable an answer as may cause him to live contented; you shall tie the
world to you in no mean obligation, by preserving in it so brave a Knight; who,
I assure you, desires nothing so much as the honor of doing you service. I
will not, answered she, be so far an enemy to his content, as not to be
willing to read what occasion he takes to complain of me: wherefore give me the
paper; with that she took and opened it, and having well considered it, said to
the Dwarf: My friend, the answer that I must return to thy master, consists
of so few words, as I need not take a pen in hand to let him know my mind,
only bid him hope, that time bring him content, and that fidelity alone can
procure him that which with so much impatience he wishes? for. It is enough,
answered the Dwarf, I will go tell him that he is happy, and that he is not to
complain any more. So going out with a curtsie that made the Princess laugh,
he went to Prigmaleon who expected his return with a panting heart, and
returning him that answer, he rendered him so contented, that not remembering
himself to be Emperor of Aethiopia, he imbr^ced him three or four times,
ever and anon enquiring of him, if he had observed any coldness in her
actions, or rather love in her words. What, said the Dwarf, coldness? Believe
it, you may be happy if you will, if you be not happy already, me thinks I see
you in the midst of those delights which will bring you to a very paradise. For
having seen that fair hand which touched mine when she took the letter from
me, and imagining that her clothes concealed wonders, I was almost transported
with her. And if the respect of your passions had not staid me, I had assuredly
besought her with some favor to quench that flame which already began to
scorch my heart. But not intending to be a traitor, nor to seek my contentment
with the loss of your quiet, I surmounted those unruly passions, and quickly
withdrew my self for fear that the violence of my desires should make us
commit some error. See, said Prigmaleon, laughing heartily at the grace
wherewith this little thing vented his fooleries. See my Mussardin, assured
proofs of thy fidelity, which I have also observed in other things. But be
confident, that thou obligest not an ungrateful man, and that I will one day
recompense the labor thou tookest in mastering thine own appetite for my sake.
I know well, said the Dwarf, that my affection does highly oblige you; howbeit
withal, I extremely fear that you will not give me the reward for it that I
desire. But I will upon the faith of a Knight, said Prigmaleon, so that I may
do it without prejudice to my love, and that it be in my power. Nay, I will
quickly ease you of that fear, said the Darfe, nor shall you find any friend
more faithful to endeavor the bringing of your wishes to their desired part,
then my self, if you will assist me: for as for Polixena, I will wholly quit
her to you; but I would fain have a place in the good grace of Castibella,
daughter to that peerlesse Diana, who once filled the world with such wonders
of her beauty. It is a rising Sun, that promises great things in her course;
and that to be brief, has struck me dead in the eye. Persuade her to love me,
and settling a good impression on her of my courage (for you know I would rather
dye then be wanting to my occasion of honor) tell her, that my alliance with
her will be for her glory, and that she shall find herself most happy in my
services. So will I never complain of my pains in furthering your
satisfaction, and you shall see how faithfully I will serve you. This is, said
Prigmaleon, almost burst with laughter, the happ^est passage that may be, for
now I shall not be jealous of thee; do thou but labor secretly to purchase the
favor of Polixena for me, and I will do the like to thee to Castibella, who
truly would accommodate thee excellent well if she were not a little too young.
Make not that your excuse, said the Dwarf, true love never stands upon time, I
will stay till years have better ripened her judgment, and in the mean space
will find a thousand ways to make my intentions not unpleasing to her. This
discourse finishing, with certain frisks that the Dwarf made to show his
agility, Prigmaleon returned to his thoughts, where we will leave him to follow
the course of our History.

CHAP. XXXIX. A Damsel arrives at Constantinople with the head of the great
Marand^r, slain by the Knight of the Savage.
EVery one seeking diversions from their cares, the Court seemed not to ressent
the absence of the Princes that were enchanted, because they hoped to see them
delivered ere it were long. When as there came into the Hall a Damsel
reasonably handsome, carrying in her hand the head of a Giant, who beholding
the company a good while, with wonder to see Knights of so brave a presence,
and Ladies of such beauty, enquired very modestly which was the Emperor of the
Parthians. Gentlewoman, answered Russian, to whom she then spoke, he has been
absent from hence some few days, but if your affairs cannot permit you to
attend his return, and that you stand in need of his aid, I will willingly
supply his place, and with a free heart do you service. I am said she, much
bound to your courtesy, but God be thanked, I have here in my hand an occasion
of rejoicing, rather then of complaining; nor am I come hither to crave the
help of any whatsoever, but to present to that Excellent Emperor the head of
the greatest enemy he had, brought to this pass by the incomparable valor of
a Knight, that bears a wild man in his shield, whom I may justly vaunt to be
one of the valiantest men upon the earth, and the Phoenix of those that this
day bear arms. This Knight, meeting with me in the confines of Macedon, could
not pass by me, without enquiring after the cause of some tears which he saw
me shed: I freely told him, that the villainy of a Giant, who had ravished me,
did wring them from me, and that I was going to Constantinople to crave
reparation of that wrong; knowing well that the Princes of Greece did never
refuse their assistance to Ladies in distress, and that particularly I
intended to address my self to the Emperor Spheramond, both for that he holds
the reputation of surpassing all Knights of this age, and that the Giant had
told me, how all the villainies which he then committed, were done by him, in
some sort to revenge the death of another Giant, whom the Emperor had slain,
when as a Knight errant he followed adventures abroad in the world. Without
doubt, then answered this court^ous Knight, you could not make your revenge
more certain, then by referring it to the hands of that brave Prince, who has
with all reason acquired those praises which the wo^ld does give him. But if
you be pleased to make use of me, I shall most willingly employ my self in your
service; It is a long journey from hence to Constantinople, your enemy may
find occasion to get him further off, you will take a great deal of pains in
vain, and not be satisfied in your desire: On the other side, I do passionately
long to demonstrate unto that valorous Prince, how I do love his virtue as much
as other men do honor his birth, and that I will labor so long as I live to
ruin his enemies. To what end should I trouble you with our discourse? This
gentleness of his so wrought upon me, that after I had thoroughly considered
him, and judged him fit for any great attempt, I carri^d him straight to the
Giants Castle, where, to be short, he did wonders: For not satisfied with
laying that foul mass of flesh on the earth, in a very dangerous combat, he
defeated thirty or forty Knights, who were seldom out of that Robbers company;
it was to me an unspeakable delight, to see some arms fly to the ground, some
men cut asunder in the midst, others cloven to the girdle, the boldest of them
stoutly scattered; and the gallantry of this Knight did so please me, that if I
had not acquainted him with the misfortune that by the Giant had befallen me, I
had endeavored to make him love me; but feating to be slighted, I passed from
love to the resentment of his good will; vowing to serve him upon all
occasions, and to that end entreated him to lay some command upon me. I would
not have you, said he, give me so many thanks for a thing whereunto I was bound
by the laws of Chivalrie; but since you will needs oblige me, take the head of
your enemy, and for a further satisfaction of your mind, carry it to
Constantinople, present it to that warlike Prince, and render your grief the
less, by publishing the revenge you have had for it. I shall with a good will,
replied I, undertake that journey, but then Sir, will you be pleased to tell me
who you are, to the end I may know to whom I am so infinitely indebted. See
here, my name in my shield, said he, showing a Savage pourtrayed thereupon, for
a more perfect knowledge of me, at this present, I may not give: Follow on your
way, whilst I go some other where to seek occasion of employing my arms; with
that, not thinking it convenient to be troublesome, I took the head of
Marandor, (for so was the Giant named) and began my journey to this place,
where I am arrived with grief, for that I find not the Emperor of the
Parthians to give him an account of this brave Knight; but, if you please, I
will leave it in your charge to do it, upon condition that I shall at any time
be ready to deserve it of you in all possibly I may. Whereupon, she laid the
head of Marandor on the floor, and making a very humble reverence, immediately
departed, leaving all the Princes extremely desirous to know this so valiant
and brave new Knight: Whilst they were all commending the valor of the Knight
of the Savage, Russian, who still had Agriclea in his memory, could not be at
rest, and would certainly have been gone, had it not been for the desire he had
to see his father and his kinsfolks at liberty: but that respect prevailing
with him, he passed the most part of his days unquietly enough; contrarily
Prigmaleon, who interpreting Polixena's answer to his advantage, felt so many
delights amidst his pain, that he blessed love every minute, being pleased with
the change of his condition, as the cause of all his felicity. If he walked in
the woods or gardens, it was not with any purpose to complain, but to
entertain himself with the contemplation of his good for^une, and to grave the
names of Polixena and himself on the barks of trees: his actions were
altogether amorous. And if he suffered any thing at all, her sole impatience
was the cause thereof; howbeit hoping that time would bring him remedy, he
gently supported the violence of his desires.

Pleasing himself then in this fashion, with the entertainmen of his own
thoughts, and sometimes in the remembrance of his Lady, the time slipped so
sweetly away, that they were insensibly come to the Eve of these Princes
enfranchisement, whereof I will relate you the wonder, when I have informed you
of some occurrents that did precede it.

CHAP. XL. A Damsel coming to Constantinople, carries away Prigmaleon to
combat with Griolani^, surnamed the fa^e Knight: The success thereof.
ALL these Princes being assembled together to consult of the order that was to
be kept for the reception of these enchanted Princes; who, as Cassandra assured
them, were to be freed within two days, they saw a strange D^msell come in;
who, pausing upon the view of so many brave Knights, considered them a while
without speaking a word. But observing that they all had their eyes fixed on
her, and that they were silent, as it were, to give her leave to speak, she
said: Now on my faith, I never saw so gallant, nor fo well shaped men in all my
life; nor do I wonder that this Court is so e^told through the world. But I
would gladly know which is the most amorous amongst you. There is not any here,
said Prigmaleon, to whom the Damsel seemed especially to address her self,
that would not appear to be a lover, and that in regard thereof would not
willingly draw his sword against his companion, if it were to be justified by
Arms. But unable to tell assuredly how far another man's suff^ring extends, I
may confidently affirm, that I am he, who perhaps endures most, that loves
with most passion, as he that has devoted himself to one, who kindles no
ordinary ^^ames, and that to save a thousand lives, would not let any thing
pass to the prejudice of my Lady, the most beautiful that treads upon the
earth. Follow me then, answered the Damsel, to do her service. For yesterday
passing by a cross way, some three leagues from hence, I saw two pavillions
set up, a number of shields hanging upon the next trees, and lances enough to
maintain a passage for three months space, which made me draw nearer to hear
what all this preparation intended; and seeing a Squire issue forth of one of
the pavillions, I made a sign to him that he should come and speak with me,
which in a very civil fashion he did, and told me, that his Mistress, whom he
would by no means name, though I diverse times entreated him unto it, being
passionately in love with one that was called the fair Knight, had engaged him
to maintain a Just in her favor; to which end she was come near unto
Constantinople, in hope that the Greek Princes hearing of it, would come to a
tri^ll with her Knight, whom she held to be the most valorous in the world, as
without question he is the most lovely of all that this day lives: whereby this
warrior should gain immortal praise, and that she should have a sh^re in the
glory which he acquired by his valor, as being the principal cause thereof.
These words begetting a desire in me to see this Knight, I freely went into his
tent, where seeing him with his head unarmed, I indeed observed in him so
pleasing an eye, a beauty so lovely, and so goodly a presence, as I may with
truth aver, that I had never beheld any thing more ami^ble. But that which
exeedingly vexed me, was, to see, that the Lady, in whose favor he had taken
up arms, had not any one of those perfections. Her face was pale and lean, no
charms were in her eyes, no grace in her actions: her stature was defect^ve,
her smiles unbecoming, and her voice harsh and unpleasant. In brief, observing
all this in her, I could not forbear laughing, and withal told that gallant
Knight, how his valor was ill employed, how he should never gain much glory by
his labor, having undertaken it upon an occasion that could not deserve it,
and that being sensible of the injury which he did to all the fair ones that
passed by, rendering them subject to acknowledge the pre-eminence of a creature
so little advantaged by nature, I would go to the Court of Greece, to require
reason for this injustice. And indeed I am now here for no other cause, but
only to carry you with me to revenge the wrong of those that have merits in
them, and particularly of the fair one whom you adore with so much respect and
love. I was never more willing to put on Arms, said Prigmaleon, then now, that
my Ladies beauty is in question. Let us go then, Gentlewoman, and we shall know
ere it be long, if this Knight be as valiant and strong as you think him
lovely. Whereupon having called for a horse, he mounted on him, departed with
the Damsel, and traveled till night, which constrained him to rest under
certain trees, and to sup with the provision which his squire had brought.

When it grew dark, the damsel whom the good grace and convers^tion of the
Knight had made very much in love with him, seeing him withdraw apart from her
to sleep, and not approving that reservednesse which in her heart she called
simplicity, she followed him, and lying down by him said: In faith, I must
complain of your neglect of me, and not forbear telling you that you want
judgment in not making use of time, occasion, and of the good will of a w^nch,
that loves you with p^ssion; what sense were it to pass the night in
languishing, when we may make it full of content? Entertain the good fortune
that presents it self to you, and do not foolishly imagine as the most part of
our Greek Princes do (who are more gloriously proud of their loialty in love,
then of all the great things which they have done in arms) that to afford any
part of your affection to more then one, is in any kind of fault. It is an
error, at which those of little judgment do stumble, and which the more
discreet do laugh at. I will mingle so much sweetness with my kisses, and
such dalliance with my caresses, as you shall with reason think your self happy
in so favorable an encounter. Suffer then our lips to meet, receive my
embraces, and do not disdain a love because it is freely proffered you. Do not
believe, answered Prigmaleon, extremely amazed to see himself thus assaulted;
Do not I say, believe, if I answer not your desire, that it is out of the
consideration of the liberty which you take in discovering your passions: I
know how weak men are when love has resolved to master them, and that it is
not in their power to govern their passions, if once they have submitted them
to the tyranny of so great a power; and yet less then that would I have you
believe, that I entend to follow any man for a pattern of my actions, for they
shall ever depend only upon my own humor: but to tell you freely what is in
my heart, I cannot make use of your good will, because I do infinitely love a
Lady, that permits me not so to dispose of my will, as you, without doubt,
neither could now love the first that should present himself to you. Let this
reason serve for my excuse, and do not, I pray you, call me ungrateful. The
service that I will do you with my arms, shall make amends for this default; in
the mean time if you have a mind to tarry here, I will remove further, that I
may not trouble your repose. Thus it is, said she in choler, that poor
spirits use to excuse themselves. Sleep, since you care more for a nap, then
you do for my life. The Gods who are always just, will one time or other
revenge your despising of me, and make you thoroughly feel the pain that I suffer
by your ingratitude. Saying so, she withdrew under another tree with extreme
discontent, leaving Prigmaleon in no less disquiet of mind: for remembering his
Polixena, from whom he durst not assure himself a better entertainment then
now he had given that amorous damsel, he never could shut his eyes; and in
that trouble he continued, till the sun being risen made him get to horse,
where entering into a forest, that befell him, which shall be deliverd to you
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XLI. Prigmaleon meets with Melina; she gives him an account of Griolanis
his fortunes, with the issue of the combat between him and the Knight of the
Savage.
PRigmaleon traveling in the forest, under the shadow of the trees,
entertained himself with his ordinary fancies, and thought of nothing less
then the damsel, which still followed him, though it were with much
discontent; and ashamed for having been so refused, when as on the sudden he
heard the voice of a person, who seemed to be much afflicted. Those laments
coming to his ear, put him out of his musing, and made him presently go to a
bush, from whence the noise did come; where at the foot of it he saw a Lady,
that holding a poniard in her hand, spoke these words: Melina it is time for
thee to die, since thy Knight is lost; for thy days would be but anguish, and
every thought of him an insupportable torture, when thou shall remember that
thou were the cause of his death, by putting him upon a business, which could no
way conduce to thy content. It had been much better done to have kept him
still in thy house, amidst a thousand pleasures, then to carry him abroad to
the hazard of his life. But since this mischief is not to be remedied, thy
desire to accompany him, must be without fear; neither must thou shrink from
death to follow him. Lifting up then her hands, she was ready to strike the
dagger into her bosom, if Prigmaleon, who perceived her intent, and therefore
was lighted from his horse, had not suddenly laid hold of her; and remonstrated
that despair was a greater offense, then that for which she so much sorrowed.
Stay Madam, said he, stay your hand, I beseech you, and do not in this sort run
headlong to perdition. The shortest follies are the best; and when you have
well considered that the shedding of your blood, will not restore him to life,
whose death you lament, you will, without doubt preserve it; and believe that
it were better to appease his ghost with some other kind of duty, then to
incense the Gods with a new murder. Alas! answered she, looking upon him, if
you knew the occasion I have to desire to die, you would not now divert me from
this design. I do not doubt, said he, but the cause of your grief is very
important, but yet I say that it ought not to transport you from your reason;
and if you could give your self some relaxation in imparting it to me, you
should do much for my satisfaction, and perhaps not a little for the ease of
your mind. I am content to do it, answered she, letting the poniard go, but it
shall be upon condition, that you shall leave me at liberty to do what I
please, if you find the occasions that I have to be just. Prigmaleon having
promised her not to cross her will, provided he might do it with reason, she
sat down upon the grass, and thus began her discourse. Walking one evening in
a wood near the house, in which I am ordinarily resident, I met a Knight, who
being strayed out of his way, did so courteously entreat me to grant him lodging
for that night, as beside the law of charity, which does bind us not to refuse
our help to those that do need it: I felt my self also forced by the fair
language, and by the grace that he used in his request, to give him my hand,
and to lead him to my house, assuring him that there he should receive the best
entertainmen^ that I could possibly give him. As soon as we were come there,
and that by the light of the torches I had seen his face, I found him so
lovely, and all h^^ actions so pleased me, that not to dissemble, I could not
keep my self from falling in love with him. I then made him to be served at the
Table, and sometimes serving him my self with the strength of my affection, I
so obliged him to my courtesy, that assuredly he did bear me some good will,
which infinitely rejoiced me; but fearing to lose him, as soon as I had gotten
him, my contentment was thereby much weakened: To remedy that doubt, I resolved
to arrest him with my caresses, I mean, to give my self wholly to him without
any reservation at all. Taking him then by the hand, after he had supped, I
went and fate down with him upon the beds feet, besought him to tell me his
name, his quality, and passing from those ordinary terms to those of love, I
made an ostentation, not of my bounty, for of that his eyes could be judge, but
of my birth and quality, eminent enough for the ambition of any Knight, that
were not a Prince; the conveniences that I was Mistrisse of, my estate, my
humor not unpleasing: and briefly, all that came in my head, and which I
believed might serve to make him to affect me; but fearing all these charms
would not be able to stay him, I entreated him to grant me one favor, which I
intended to desire of him.

The entertainment, said he, which I have here received from you, does not
permit me to be ungrateful in refusing you; Madam, you shall have of me all
that you please to command. As for the first point of your desire, I will tell
you freely, that I am called Griolanis, born in Macedon, of parents unto whom
fortune truly has done wrong in not conferring scepters on them for a
recompense of their virtue; I travel through the world to purchase glory, and
raise my ambition beyond the limits of my birth, and should reckon my self most
happy, if I might deserve the greatness of your fortune in possessing of you;
but not thinking it fit to aim so high, before my valor has made me worthy of
so great a favor, I will put off the further treating thereof till some other
time, and in the mean while beseech you to let me freely know what you desire
of me. To have you maintain a justs in favor of me, answered I, exceedingly
satisfied with his discourse, which confirmed my hope, not in this Castle, but
near Constantinople, that the glory of my beauty may flee about, together with
the praise which you will acquire by your noble deeds. Your request, said he,
is so much to my advantage, as I will not fear to entreat you that we may be
gone about it in the morning. This answer having quieted my mind, I brought
him to his chamber, where I left him to take his rest, and having given order
for some affairs of mine, after Sunrising I departed with him, and came to a
cross way not far from hence, where this fair Knight, for three weeks space,
acted wonders, and won such glory, that round about there was no talk save of
him; but the Destinies, envying my content, brought a Knight to us yesterday,
that bare a Savage in his shield, who defied my lover upon the injustice of his
enterprise. Griolanis always accustomed to be conqueror, judging by the
aspect of his adversary, that he was like to be very valiant, to^k the
strongest lance that he had, and set himself over against this his able enemy,
who seeing him dislodge, set spurs to his horse, and incountered him with such
fury, as he laid him on the ground; but Griolanis his blows, being not easily
born, he of the Savage also lost his saddle, and all amazed lay in the dust.
Choler then having quickly raised these two brave warriors, they prepresently
drew their swords, and so stoutly charged one another, that all the wood
resounded with it; I saw their heads continually covered with fire, pieces of
their armor fell to the ground; if one struck with force, the other with
dexterity rebated it; blows followed thrusts, their shields were so hewed, that
but a little of them was left upon their arms, their helmets were all battered,
their cuirasses pierced, and the grass was stained with their blood; as often
as the Knight of the Savage advanced his sword, I grew pale, and lifting mine
eyes to heaven implored the aid of the Gods for my Knight; I was many times
rising to part them, and instantly fell down again with fear and weakness;
briefly, I beheld this combat more dead then alive. Six howrs now being spent
between them in this fashion, and yet no advantage to be discerned on either
side, both quitted their swords, and taking one another about the middle, they
fell to wrestling together with extreme fury; sometimes one was above,
sometimes another; so that having toiled thus a while with incredible despite
to see their victory no more advanced, they by a mutual consent arose, and
taking their swords again, renewed the combat in a crueller and more fearful
manner then before: Griolanis did his part to the height, and well declared
that he was one of the prime Knights in the world: but the Savage was nothing
behind him. So that having continued the fight in this sort, three or four
hours longer, they advanced both their swords, and at one and the same instant
discharged them with such violence on each other, as Griolanis not able to
support the weight of the blow, fell to the ground quite deprived of sense,
just as his enemy staggering did the like. The fall of these two Knights so
amazed me, as I was not able to go presently to Griolanis* but love prevailing
over fear, I at last arose, and being about to unlace his helmet, I saw two
women come riding in a Caroch, who taking them both up, put them into it, and
then immediately going in themselves, without speaking a word to me, went their
ways with such speed, as that, and the astonishment wherein I was, made me
that I could not observe what way they took. But having within a while
recovered my spirits, I made a horse be brought me, and getting up, I put my
self into the wood, and sought them all the night, without hearing any news
of them. From hence proceeds my resolution to dye: for since Griolanis lives
not, what should I do in the world? So holding her peace, she went to seeking
of her poniard; but Prigmaleon fell again to comfort her, and so powerfully
prevailed with her, as in the end she promised him to do no violence upon
herself: whereupon bidding the Damsel that followed him farewell, since the
occasion of his journey was removed, he returned to Constantinople, where we
will give him leisure to relate what he had learned from the Gentlewoman, to
speak of these two incomparable warriors.

CHAP. XLII. What became of Griolanis and him of the wild man after their
combat.
THE combat between these two valiant Knights being ended, as I have told you,
Alcander, in whose power they were, and that desired their preservation, as
much importing the good of Christendom, placed them separately in a palace,
which (by the power of his charms) he made appear in a large plain; and having
rubbed them with an excellent Balsamum, he let them sleep all the night; at the
end whereof, and about the time when the Sun began to gild the earth, Grian
awaking, was strangely amazed to see himself laid in a very rich bed, and not
to feel any pain of his wounds, received in the combat the day before, which he
had not forgotten. O me! said he, casting his eye on every side, and perceiving
nothing but gold and azure, parting a number of excellent pictures that filled
the room where he was. What do I see? Where am I, or who could bring me into a
place of such delicacie? I remember very well, that I fought with one of the
valiantest Knights of the world, and that his sword had pierced my flesh in a
number of places, yet now I feel not a wound, nor can I imagine how we were
pa^ted, nor who could bring me hither: Certainly this is very mavelous! But I
may quickly free my self of all doubt: This stately Palace, is not without
inhabitants, and I shall surely find some body in it, that will inform me how
things have past: Leaping then out of his bed, he took certain clothes that lay
upon a table, and having put them on, he went down into a dainty garden, where
all the excellent flowers of the earth were set in a most strange and
artificial order; he beheld with admiration a multitude of trees, laden with
all manner of fruit, heard with pleasure the music of a million of birds, who
seemed to strive for to render that place most delectable; and viewed with
wonder, a many of fountains, which made a fair lake, wherein a world of swans
did sport themselves: but that which he thought the greatest wonder, was that,
among all these rarities, he found not any one person of whom he might be
satisfied in what he desire^d: In the end, having visited all the allies, he
saw come forth from the other side of the house a Gentleman, so handsome; of so
sweet a countenance, and of so brave a presence, as he believed that nature was
not able to frame such another piece; his carriage exceedingly pleasing him, he
went to salute him, and not knowing him for that incomparable warrior, that had
made him so sweat in his armor the day before, he said to him: Sir, you shall
much oblige me if you will be pleased to tell me where I am, and who is the
Master of this place. Verily, answered the fair Knight, I am in the same
trouble that you are, and being here without knowing how I came hither, was
seeking some body that might satisfy me in what you enquire after. As far as I
perceive, said Grien, our case is much one, and since a like fortune has made
us (not expecting it) to encounter thus, a like means, it may be, will make us
find the cause of it: Yet me thinks I see a man under those trees; let us, I
pray you, go to him, he may perhaps satisfy our desire: The Knight then, who
was no other then Griolanis, looking behind him, spied an old man coming
toward them, of a tall stature, in whose face appeared a Majesty not common
with other men, who when heapproached to them, said: Sir Knights, your meeting
does yield me matchless contentment, for seeing you so kind friends after so
great an animosity, I may with reason esteem my self happy, that I have
entertained you in my house. For my part, said Griolanis, who by those words
knew that this Knight whom he beheld, was the redoubted Knight of the Savage,
that had so late made him despair of his life, I can bear no ill will to this
brave warrior, out of the consideration of our late combat; but if he please to
love me, I shall gladly do him all service. Love you, said Grian, yes without
question I will love you, for it were a crime to hate your virtue; believe it
then that I am wholly yours: Whereupon, they embraced one another with as much
affection as could be desired, which so contented Alcander, that carrying them
into a Cabinet, after he had royally feasted them, with abundance of delicate
meats, he thus spoke to them: Brave warriors, be not amazed at what you have
lately seen; the heavens, that would have you preserved for their glory, made
me yesterday seek to save you in a time when you had little reason to hope for
it; your choler brought you even to deaths door, my care has returned you back
from it, seek not any occasion of difference hereafter; but rather employ those
mighty abilities which God has endowed you with, to the ruin of those that
would overthrow his religion, he will reward your zeal, and you shall see a
happy end of all your enterprises. At these words he vanished out of their
fight, those stately buildings were now no more to be seen, those delicious
gardens changed their form, the Knights found themselves mounted upon their
horses, and armed at all pieces, exceedingly astonished at that which had
befallen them: But not forgetting the counsel that had been given them, they
again protested to love one another eternally; and taking the first way that
came to hand, they went directly to Constantinople, as you shall see in the
Chapter ensuing.

CHAP. XLIII. The Princes of Greece are disinchanted: Rozalmond of Greece
departs with Alcander: the brave deeds of Arms at the Tourney that was made
upon the Knighting of the young Princes.
TEN days being insensibly past away since the enchantment of the Princes and
Ladies of Greece, Cassandra, who knew the time fit for their deliverance,
called together all the rest that were not there enclosed, took Rozalmond of
Greece in one hand, and the fair Polixena by the other, and leading them very
near the Arches, made them cast certain vials upon them, full of a mavelous
water; which donethey heard a multitude of sweet voices, that ravished the
ears of all that were present: whilst all the Court expected the issue of so
many wonders, whilst the cloud was dispersing, and that they began to behold
that admirable fountain, Rozalmond, by the advice of Cassandra, laid hold of a
rich sword, which was found planted between the Arches, and having easily pulled
it out, with the pommell of it struck such a blow upon the enchanted coffer, as
he brake it in a thousand pieces; which were no sooner on the ground, but he
was seen covered with the richest Armor, and of the strongest fashion that was
ever seen: It was made of the bones of a fish that is found in the Atlantike
sea, white as snow, and harder then a Diamond: the joints thereof were overlaid
with precious stones of a strange workmanship; and that which most showed it
self, was the gold, curiously inlaid, and parting a thousand delicate figures.
This being done in view of all that were in the great Court of the Palace,
every one with impatience attended what would be the end of this adventure;
when as they saw four fearful Dragons appear in the air, that drawing after
them a great Chariot, went and took their stand before the Arches, with such
an aff^ighting of the people, that every one for his ^afety was about to run
away, had they not beheld the venerable Alcander on the one side, coming out
in the head of all those Princes; and on the other side Vrganda, a little
before those excellent Q^eens. That object assured all the world, but a new
occasion of astonishment and displeasure, troubled them anew: Alcander,
Vrganda, the young Cassandra and Rozalmond, entered into the chair, and in few
words bidding all those Princes farewell, were carried into the clouds, with
such speed, as no man could make them any answer. Sosudden a departure would
certainly have very much discontented all the Court, if that young Prince had
been in the power of anyother. But every one being assured that those Sages had
not carried him away in that sort, but for his honor, they showed but little
grief for his absence, especially Florisel and the rest of those Princes, who
seeing themselves without wrinkles, and with the same beauty and abilities
which they had when they were five and twenty years old, did view themselves
with wonder, and could not tell how to comprehend such prodigious things. All
men cast their eyes upon the fair Queen of France, who having the same charms
about her, that she had when she was called the Basiliske of mankind, struck
every eye with infinite amazement: they also admired the renewed beauty of the
excellent Queen of Guindaya, of the matchless Alastraxarea, which had for so
long a time kept the Prince of Colchos her idolatrizer, of the fair Empress
of Persia, the peerlesse Empress of the Parthians, and the Infanta Rozaliana
her sister: and in brief, of them all, who had as well as they experienced how
far the power of Alcander* extended. Dorigel and the rest were no less
transported with beholding so great a change in those Princes: they did nothing
but caresse them every minute, they redoubled their kisses and embraces; and
not knowing how to put an end to their complements, spoke the same thing a
thousand times over. All being thus set upon pleasure, the young Princes who as
yet were not knighted, desiring to demonstrate that they were no less joyful
then the rest, presented themselves upon their knees together, all armed in
white armor, before Florisel of Niquea, and by Persides, whom they had made
their spokesman, thus delivered their request. Excellent Prince, it is time
that we should appear in the world as you have done, and by a trial in sport,
give an essay of our Arms, and testify how much we rejoice to see you in that
estate you are in. Be pleased to make us Knights, we are in case to receive
that sacred Order, and determined to fight so well, that you shall not grieve
to acknowledge we are descended of your race. My good children, (said Florisel,
who was highly pleased to see them in that sort) this generous disposition does
so content us, as notwithstanding your youth* I will not delay the giving you
satisfaction. Swear then all of you, with one accord, that you will not at any
time fail to succor the weak, such as are oppressed, but principally women.
When they had all promised rather to dye then be wanting to the duty of a good
Knight, he gave them his benediction, knighted them, and left it to their
choice to receive the sword from the hand of any of the Princesses they best
liked. That done, he turned himself afresh, to make much of his friends, who
seemed to be transported beyond all joy. These new Knights rising from their
knees, with incredible satisfaction, for that they had met with so little
difficulty in their design, went to take a slight repast with the Emperors;
and having fitted themselves with all that was necessary, entered the list,
where Prigmaleon being chosen for the Captain of two hundred Greek Knights* in
the head of whom were Russian, Fulgoran, Esquilan, Florizart, Abies, Frizel,
Leonidas, Armond and Melfort; and Persides with the like number of French and
Persians, assisted by his brother Floridan, Rozanel d'Astre, Lucibel,
Sestilian, Perion, Florian, Tristor, Quedragant, Dardanio and the gentle
Florestan of Sardinia. Upon the third sound of the trumpet they began the
bravest course in the world, Persides, Floridan, Rozanel and the young Prince
of France, brake very gallantly upon the Emperor of Aethiopia, Fulgoran,
Russian of Media, and the stout Polonian. And passing forwards without once
bending in the faddle, for all the encounter of four such famous warriors,
they bravely set hand to their swords, wherewith they began to clear the
ranks, in such sort, as already men fore-judged that with time they would
prove equal with the prime Knights of the world: Every blow that they gave,
laid a man upon the ground, and nothing could have stood before them, if the
same four with whom they ran their courses, had not opposed themselves, and
arrested their fury. The brave bastard of Media having Persides in hand,
charged him with very much force and grace; but his enemy behaved himself so
well, as he was esteemed no less valiant then himself. Prigmaleon, being
opposed to Rozanel, confessed, that he had never seen a man more active, or
more able. And the valiant Princes of Canabea, and Poland, had enough to do to
ward the blows which Lucibel and Floridan laid incessantly upon them.

The honor of the victory being generally disputed by these young Lords,
everyone was highly delighted with their behavior, and more then all the rest,
the Princes of Greece, who observing them with wonder, and infinitely admiring
such ability in tender years, did heartily wish that the honor of the tourney
might be theirs, which undoubtedly had befallen them, notwithstanding all that
Melfort and the rest could do, who by little and little yielded to the blows of
Sestilian, which that day gave great proof of an admirable valor, when as they
saw two Knights enter the field in watchet arms, so gentile, and so gallantly
seated in their saddles, that all men had a good opinion of them; their
graceful carriage drawing the most part of the assistants to observe them, it
was quickly known, by a Savage appearing in a shield of one of them, that they
were the famous Grian, and the fair Knight, of whom such miracles had been
reported. These two warriors seeing that every body observed them with
expectation of what they would do, couched their lances, and taking part with
the weaker side, at the first course laid Perion of Turkey, and Florestan in the
dust; and drawing forth their swords, in a moment overthrew Florian, Trist^r,
and Dardanio, which so encouraged the side that saw themselves so well
assisted, as they had made their enemies to give ground, if Persides and
Rozanel, enraged at it, had not astonished Russian and Prigmaleon with each of
them a blow; these two young warriors, seeing the disorder which these new
comers caused in their troops, charged them with strange fury; but the two
invincible Knights received them so bravely, as every one began to behold them
with admiration: Persides, who remembered the glory that his father had gained
in the hardest enterprises, charged him with such mighty blows, as a man of
less abilities could never have sustained them: But Grian, whom he had to deal
with, that was not to be moved with a little, held him so short, as he made him
despair of the victory. On the other side, Rozanel and Griolanis entreated one
another with a like fury; their swords were perpetually in motion, their
shields fell in pieces, and a thousand flames flew continually about their
heads: If fear of being overcome rendered the Greek Princes strong and hardy,
the desire which the others had of acquiring glory in the presence of the most
gallant warriors of the world, did so inflame their courages, as their blows
seemed lightening which falls from heaven upon the highest tow^^. At length the
combat having lasted above an howr, Grian madded that he met with so strong
resistance, delivered so weighty a blow upon Don Persides his helmet, that he
made his head touch the crupper of his horse; then flying into the midst of the
troops, he met with the valiant Esquilan, upon whose shield he discharged so
^uriously, as he laid him in the dust; and not satisfied therewith, he ran in
among the rest, intending to have used them in the like sort, but that he met
with Griolanis, who having overthrown his adversary, deprived Florizart and
Leo^id^^ of sense, went out of the field with him upon hearing of the trumpet,
which sounded a re^reat: Spurring then together out of the lists, they took the
way to the forest, leaving a wonderful admiration in the Greek Princes of
their valor, and mighty displeasure in the mind of those young Princes, who
had been so roughly handled by them. Four of which, that is to say, Lucibel,
Persides, Prigmaleon, and Russian, presently followed them, with a resolution
to die, or revenge the disgrace they had received.

The end of the first Part.
THE LOVE AND ARMS OF THE GREEK PRINCES.

OR, THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS.

Written in French by Monsieur Verdere, And Translated for the Right
Honorable, Philip, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain to his
Majesty.

Tome II.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the sign of the flying Horse, near York House, 1640*

CHAP. I. Rozalmond of Greece being carried by Alcanders Griffons, arrives in
the Empire of Gardacia, receives the order of Knighthood from the Emperor, and
is entertained by the beautiful Armazia, for her Knight.
ROzalmond of Greece being carried by Alcanders Griffons (as I have delivered
in the last Chapter of our first Part) divided the air with an incredible
content to behold the disposing of the earth and the seas, together with the
order which nature observed in their situation; If the waters seemed pleasing
unto him in their calm, and under the shadow of a multitude of sails which the
winds drove sundry ways; the earth separated by mountains covered with trees,
by valleies which amiable streams peopled with flowrs, and by plains delectable
in the division of towns and fruits wherwithall they were charged, gave him no
less delight, and left him in a deep astonishment to view over all the
marveilous effects of the powerful hand of God. Two days being sweetly spent
in this manner, Alcander (who disposed of his leisure according to the event of
things which he fore saw by an admirable knowledge) caused his Griffons to stay
in the unknown Island of the sage Vrganda, and alighting with her and leaving
Rozalmond in the Chariot, accompanied with the fair Cassandra, he said unto
him: Excellent Prince, it is time to give a beginning to the wonders which your
valor is to bring into the world, your labors shall be great, but as great
shall be your reward, and the glory you shall reap by them will make them so
acceptable unto you that in stead of being danted with the pains you will every
day seek new occasions to employ your self and render your name more famous. I
will not speak here of the care you are to have of the service of God, knowing
full well that your good education has not been without that instruction, and
less will I recommend those parts unto your memory which a good Knight ought
to be endued withal, the greatness of your birth having naturally given you a
powerful impression of virtue; but I earnestly beseech you not to abandon the
counsel which this damsel your follower shall give you, until such time as
your destiny shall call you to the place where her presence can no longer serve
you: Her parents have always watched for the safety of your predecessors, she
shall continue the same care, and her succor shall be no less importing your
enterprises, then that of her mothers was to the designs of Amadis the Great.
At these words the Griffons extending forth their wings, rose up so suddenly,
that Rozalmond had not time to render the thanks which he thought was due to
the affection of this man: wherwithall undoubtedly he had been much
discontented if Cassandra had not advertised him that so sudden a departure was
not without some secret mystery. Comforting himself then with his
entertainment, three days past away with the same delight as before, at the
end whereof he saw the Griffons, which drew him gently to stay their flight,
and alight down near to a city, the stateliest and most delectable that ever he
had beheld; it being composed of beautiful buildings, framed after another
fashion then at Constantinople, or in the Empire of the Parthians, where he had
been brought up. This ^ovelty pleasing him, his eyes were diversely carried
according to the variety of the objects, which ravished him in such sort, that
he never thought of alighting out of his chariot; but Cassandra taking him by
the hand to divert him from so profound a thought, said unto him; It is no
time, brave Prince, it is no time to wonder at such petty matters, by and by
you will see far greater marvells: only let us enter into the city, and be
mindful to reserve so much power over your self, that you fail in nothing when
you come before an Emperor that is to make you Knight, and are to appear
before the fairest Princess of the world, who will this day triumph as much
over you, as you in time to come shall triumph over the greatest Knights of the
earth. I should fear the encounter of these persons (answered he) if I did not
march under your conduct; but Madam, what appearance is there that I can fail in
your presence, or that my passion should transport me so far as to forget my
duty? I know how to carry my self toward persons of the quality of this
Emperor, and how a Princess of her merit, whom you so highly commend, is to
be admired; so that if I must learn to love, time and my fidelity shall one day
make me expert: in the mean season, I will never be troubled to see her sigh
for another, and reject my services; for if her heart be other ways engaged,
you have charms of power to alter her mind, and to subject her unto me in
despite of her ablest resistance. Your merits can do more (said Cassandra)
then my Art: But not to loose time, give me your sword and helmet, and let us
go on. Then advancing toward the city, they went unto the Palace, before which
they found four hundred Knights all armed, and mounted in such sort, as if they
had been ready to charge some enemy. This encounter amazed them, and they could
willingly have stayed to demand what occasion had assembled them in that
manner; but fearing to offend by this curiosity, they past on, and mounting up
the stairs, came into the hall, where the first object they met withal, was
an old man, high seated in a throne of gold, wearing an Imperial diadem on his
head, having by his side a wife of his own age, and a little below a daughter
so fair, that nature seemed to have employed all the power she had left for to
make her accomplished. Rozalmond who had propounded a world of assurance in his
actions unto himself, beholding a beauty so rare and excellent, made a stand in
the midst of the hall, as if he would have taken time to admire her; but
instantly remembering Cassandra's advice, he continued his pace with a sweet
modesty; and seeing himself at the foot of the throne, he kneeled down, where
with an admirable grace craving the Emperors hand to kiss, he besought him
not to refuse him one boon he would demand of him. You shall have it (said the
Emperor, rising out of his seat for to embrace him, with astonishment at his
so extraordinary feature) and I will never refuse a gentleman of so goodly a
presence as yours, albeit my scepter and my crown were at stake for it. I am
not here to ask riches of you (said Rozalmond) Fortune does give them to us
when we have deserved them, and a man ought to be contented when he is
virtuous, but I am now at your Majesty's feet to obtain the power to employ
these arms upon my back; first, for the service of God, and then for the
succor of those which shall be any ways afflicted: In a word, Sir, I desire
you, if you please to make me Knight, to the end I may in some sort imitate my
Ancestors, who by their worthy acts have acquired immortal glory in the
world. Your demand seems so just (answered the Emperor) that I should hold it
a very great error to deny you; but it grives me not a little, noble Sir, that
I cannot give you so sacred an order with those ceremonies I desire, for having
so just an occasion to be afflicted, by reason of the importunity of an
accident, that now lies heavy upon me, I cannot any way show that joy which
otherwise I would. The silence I every where observe (said Rozalmond) and that
array wherein I beheld some of your people, made me think that you had some
great affair in hand, but I could not imagine, Sir, that your Majesty being so
puissant in friends, in means, in men, could fear any disaster whatsoever:
howbeit, now I learn that the highest are most subject to mishap, and your
affliction makes me say, that the condition of men is miserable, seeing it
depends only upon fortune: the most violent diseases find their remedies, so
shall your grief ere it be long, and time shall restore you to your former
peace. The Gods (said the Emperor, shedding some tears) shall if it be their
pleasures authorize your words and my wishes, and take pity of my suffering,
whilst I comfort my self in that hope. And that you may not complain of me, I
will make you Knight yet before dinner, since you desire it so much. Then
taking him by the hand, he led him to the Temple, where his Gods were
worshipped, and giving him the Oath, he made him Knight after his fashion. All
the while the Ceremonies were in doing, Rozalmond had his eyes firmly fixed on
this beauteous Princess, whom his soul already adored; and perceiving her
looks in like manner to be fastened on him, as amazed at the goodlinesse of his
person, he kneeled down before her, and said; Madam, there is but one thing now
wanting to make me completely happy, namely, that I may receive the sword from
you, who are, in my judgment, the fairest Lady in the world, as I have
received the Order from the greatest Emperor of the earth; this favor will so
encourage me in the midst of dangers, that I shall draw glory out of the most
difficile enterprises. Would to the Gods (said she, amorously sighing) that
this were able to add any thing to your valor; be assured then, Sir Knight,
that your good fortune should begin with mine own preservation, and that I
would give you forces sufficient to draw us out of the perplexity wherein we
are now so miserably plunged; but knowing mine own weakness, and the little
power I have in the world, I can hope for nothing that way: nevertheles, not to
be so far ungrateful, as to refuse you any thing which may become me to grant
you, I will willingly gird you with the sword, and withal humbly beseech the
Gods, that you may worthily employ it, for the glory of their Altars, and the
succor of the afflicted; saying so, she took it from the sage Cassandra, hung
it at his girdle, and presently would have retired; but the love of this new
Knight was more, then to leave her with any distaste for want of an answer: so
that bowing himself, and kissing her hand, he said unto her; Excellent Lady, I
may truly say, that the bravest Knights of the earth never received favors
equal to those you have been graciously pleased to confer on me this day, but
render my content perfect, I beseech you, and permit me to importune you so
far, as to demand why you told me that my good fortune should begin with your
preservation, if you could add any thing to my forces; for it is just, that I
serve you at this time with the sword wherewithal you have armed me, and I
should find supreme glory in the commandment which you should be pleased to
lay upon me, for to undertake some combat, with the title of your Knight. If I
did not value your life (replied she with a delicate blush, and a little
withdrawing her self aside) I should make no difficulty to expose you to the
fury of a man, the most redoubted of the earth; who lately encountering the
Emperor my father in a forest, whither for his pleasure he was gone to hunt,
cut an hundred Knights, which accompanied him, in pieces; and having struck him
down with a blow of his sword, made him promise that I should be the price of
his life and liberty, and that he should marry me within fifteen days; but
desiring to reserve you for an affair less dangerous, if I cannot avoid this,
I will never permit you to engage your self so rashly, and I shall be very well
contented that you will leave this controversy to be decided by all those
Cavaliers, whom you saw before the Court gate when you entered in. I do not
think (answered Rozalmond) that the promise of all the Empires in the world
would be half so dear to me, as the assurance which you have now given of your
fair respect to me. But, Madam, could I merit this grace, or could you ever
regard me, if I should be so base as to leave the glory of your service to
another? That shall never be, and well might you repute me most unworthy of
your esteem, if this occasion should pass over so. My virtue must give me this
treasure, and my valor must make me the lawful master of it; your enemy is a
man, and consequently subject to the same accidents which thwart others; I will
see him, not with those armed troops, but alone; to the end that the reputation
of his defeat may not be divided with others; I most humbly beseech you
therefore not to respect my life, which cannot be more generously employed, and
be confident, that marching for your interest, you will receive satisfaction
from my enterprise. These words pronounced with more then an ordinary grace of
spirit, gave much content to the Princess, who took them for powerful
testimonies of love; but her affection making her apprehensive of his loss,
she was about to have commanded him not to undertake this combat, when as the
Emperor sent for him to sit down at the table, who not enduring to hear the
sighs of the afflicted people amidst his own joy, seeing the meat come in, he
went and kneeling down before the Emperor, said unto him: Mighty Prince, the
honor that you have done me this day, obliges me to take part of your
distress, nor will it permit me to quit these arms until I have employed
them against this barbarous stranger, who thus disquiets you. He is before the
walls of the Town, and it is said, that he has made a vow never to depart
thence till you have performed your promise; let us make good his words, and
permit me to send him to a grave, rather then into the arms of a creature so
divine, from whom he does not merit so much as a look: I am in case to fight,
there is yet day enough, if he have much strength, I do not want courage; make
use, Sir, of a stranger, who has not the honor to be known of you, nor so
much as can tell where he is: If fortune prove mine enemy, you will be the
less sensible of my loss, in regard you know me not; and if the dice chance
to turn, from how much care will you be delivered. The knowledge which I have
(said the Emperor) of the incomparable forces of this warrior, will not suffer
me to permit you the combat with him, and the reasons you bring to persuade me
thereunto, are proper to disswademe from it; for if you undertake a business
out of the only pity which you have of my affliction, have not I much cause to
lament you, if for my sake you should die? Yea, I should bewail the loss of
you more then of a thousand other men, who it may be could attempt the danger
out of the hope of recompense, whereas you propound nothing to your self, but
the glory you expect from your travel: put your self in head of those armed
troops, that they may take assurance from this courage; this way you will much
more endear me unto you then any other. Sir (answered Rozalmond) the Knights of
our country never fight with advantage, at leastwise those who hope for honor
from their actions: your enemy is accompanied but with one Squire, and with
your favor I will carry none along with me but this damsel, who has always
followed me; only in regard I am on foot, permit me to choose an horse in your
stable. Seeing you will have it so (said the Emperor) I will no longer oppose
you, and the Gods I humbly beseech to favor your valor, and return you with
as much glory, as you have justice in this quarrel. This resolution of
Rozalmond, having astonished all the Knights of the Court, who beheld him as a
wonder, seeing with what confidence he went to affront a man, that scorned to
draw his sword against whole troops, greatly troubled the Princess, who
discontented with her fathers consent, would fain have drawn the Knight aside,
absolutely to forbid him the fight, but seeing she could not possibly do it
without discovering her affection, she was constrained to retire, and have
recourse unto tears for the easing of her grief.

CHAP. II. Rozalmond combats and defeats the dreadful Fulmigadan, who would
have married Armazia against her fathers will.
Whilst the Princess bewailed the loss of her Knight, which she held to be
inevitable, he went to find out his rival, with an incredible content for
that he had so suddenly met with an occasion to employ his sword for the
service of a beauty which his soul adored; but he was vexed with himself, for
that he had not been so curious as to demand her, and her fathers name.
Intertaining himself in this manner, the thought of his Mistress, from whose
fight he was not absented, made him fetch some sighs; whereupon, Cassandra
took occasion to say unto him; Ah Sir, did not I assure you that you should see
strange things to day, and you should not come out of the city again with the
same power you had of your self in the morning? You have been but too true
(answered he) for acknowledging my captivity, I may say to you, that now I have
seen the fairest thing in the world: But Madam, Why do you not tell me in what
country we are, the name of this courteous Prince who has made me Knight, and
that of this incomparable beauty, which has left me nothing free, but the will
to serve her? Why what important affair had you (answered Cassandra, smiling)
that hindered you from informing your self thereof? My passion, replied he, may
serve to excuse me for that: and I, said she, was restrained by the respect I
had, not to withdraw you out of the rapture, wherein the object of this
Princess had cast you: but to satisfy your desire, Know that you are now in
the mighty Empire of Gardacia, which is so far distant from the Kingdoms of
Christendom, that they have never heard so much as speak of it: the Sovereign
thereof is this Prince, by whom you were Knighted, valiant in his younger
years, and so redoubted by all his neighbors, that never any one durst offer
to trouble the quiet of his state, but Fulmigadan, the same against whom you
now go to fight: who not being able to look upon Armazia, so is your Mistress
named, without rendering unto her that which is due to her from all men in the
world, found means to surprise her father, and oblige him, by the restitution
of his liberty, to make him master of the felicities, which he imagines to
himself in the possession of a thing so rare: But it is time to leave off this
discourse for another, which touches you somewhat nearer; you are approaching
an enemy so p^issant and hardy, that the Emperor has, with a great deal of
reason, made difficulty to let you go single to so dangerous an enterprise:
howbeit, doubt not but this combat will bring you very much glory, so as you
call to mind the renown which your fathers have acquired in the world, and
that this affair does mainly import you, in regard it so much concerns Armazia,
who if she were in place where she might behold the fight, would questionless
much advantage you; for her presence would exceedingly augment your forces, and
give you far greater courage; wherefore I am minded to request so much of her
in your behalf. Then will you oblige me much more then you think for, said
Rozalmond, but I fear she will not willingly take so much pains. Leave me the
care of that, said Cassandra, and I am persuaded she will make no difficulty at
all of it. Whereupon returning presently to the Court, she went to Armazia in
her chamber, and perceiving some tears upon her cheeks, she said unto her;
Beauteous Princess, I imagine that the pity which you have of our Knight,
makes you lament his loss as inevitable, being to encounter Fulmigadan; but it
lies in you to hinder that mishap, and to make him this day triumph over so
brave an enemy. Would you know how? By not disdaining to appear upon the city
walls; your presence will animate his forces, redouble his courage, and I am
persuaded render him invincible; upon this favor, your own good and his life
depend: wherefore, Madam, seek assurance in his victory, as he will find
glory in your service; you shall not repent any pains you can take to go and
see him fight for you, for I am confident that you will return with more
content then you have grief at this present. I were not worthy to live, if I
would not contribute to mine own safety, answered she; Will my presence avail
this Knight, say you? It is most just that I give him this small satisfaction,
seeing he contemns his own life to save mine; let us go then when you please,
but with this assurance, that for everv drop of blood his enemies sword shall
draw from him, so many tears shall I shed: so being attended by certain Ladies,
she appeared upon the walls just at the time, when Rozalmond, being come to
Fulmigadan, said unto him. Knight, it is time for you to say, that Armazia is
too fair to fall into the power of a man so ill made as your self; she has
sent me hither to free you of the error you are in, that she may one day affect
you, howsoever her father has been constrained by fear to promise the
contrary; but thinking that these words would not be very pleasing unto you, I
am come provided to answer you other ways. What do I hear, said Fulmigadan in
wonderful fury, does Armazia disdain the honor of my favor, and do I see my
self defied by one man alone? O ye Gods! How will I be revenged on her and you
for this affront; but thou, insolent Knight, shall begin the dance for bringing
me so harsh a message. Saying so, he unsheathed a long and heavy Scimiter,
wherewithal he struck at Rozalmonds head, but he observing his action, threw
away his lance, and laying his hand suddenly on his sword, opposed his left arm
to the fury of the blow, which was so great, that it made him bow to the
crupper of his horse with extreme pain; but he presently settled himself again,
and desiring to be revenged, he struck him with such fury, that the Pagan
receiving the blow upon his shield, thought he had been under the ruins of a
tower overthrown by lightning, and indeed he so astonished him, that had it not
been for his horse that carried him away, Rozalmond, who had his sword aloft,
might easily have vanquished and slain him. This first blow amazing Armazia,
inflamed her with the love of this Knight, and m^de her wish that his enemy
might never come to himself again; but seeing him re-settle himself in his
saddle, and with a world of madness make head against his adversary, that
pursued him, her blood congealed in her vains, with the apprehension of so
mortal a blow as the in^initenesse of his choler did threaten, and in truth
the rage of the Pagan was such, that Rozalmonda arms, though the best of the
world, could not have resisted the fury of the blow; but lightly avoiding it,
and making use of the opportunity, he charged full upon the body of Fulmigadan,
which he opened, and gave passage to his blood to issue forth in great
abundance: Thus the battle waxing every minute hotter and hotter, the ground
was strewed with pieces of their armor, the grass was died with their blood,
and the sky enlightened with the fire which sparkled from their helmets, and
the encounter of their swords. If the force of Fulmlgadan seemed monstrous, no
less admirable appeared the address of his adversary, both in abating, and
shifting his blows; briefly, this combat brought a general astonishment, and
every one expected the end of it by some dreadful blow. In the mean time, the
two combatants charged one another with extreme fury, and taking no time to
breathe, so quick were their strokes, that their swords were neverseen but in
the air, or on their armor. Fulmigadan, far more enraged then can be expressed,
and striking with passion, and not with judgment, railed against heaven and
earth for producing a man so puissant and courageous, as to be able to
withstand his force, that made the whole world to shake; and seeing that four
hours were already spent since the combat first began, and yet had gotten no
advantage of his enemy, he gave such desperate blows that made Rozalmond amazed
at his fury; but being no less incensed to see that in the beginning of his
arms, the victory was so long disputed in the presence, and for the
preservation of Armazia, to whom his soul was so far engaged, he resolved
either to die, or suddenly to vanquish; clasping his sword then fast in his
hand, he began to press the Pagan with such terrible blows, that his forces
seemed to increase with his travel, whereat Fulmigadan was so transported with
rage, that he took his Scimiter in both his hands, and discharged it so
furiously upon Rozalmonds helmet, as it made him fall backward upon the crupper
of his horse, casting out great quantity of blood at his mouth, and nose;
whereupon every one thought him to be dead, and the Emperor commanded his
Knights to assail his enemy, who seemed to be all covered over with blood and
dust; but even as the troops were about to march, they beheld Rozalmond raise
himself up, and make toward Fulmigadan with such horrible fury, that he, who
contemned the dreadful thunder of the Gods, began to fear, seeing him arrive
with so much rage, and indeed the blow which he discharged on his head was
such, that it cleaved him down to the very shoulders, overthrowing him stark
dead to the ground. This victory thus generously obtained, brought a world of
contentment to the Emperor, but much more to the beautiful Armazia, who not
able to contain her joy, so published the praises of this Knight, as if she had
neither voice nor speech but for his glory; howbeit, every one thinking that
she did it in regard of the interest which she had in the death of Fulmigadan,
it was not supposed that her love made her speak in that manner, but she could
not possibly contain her self in the excess of her passion; for seeing
Rozalmond come with some wounds upon him, she made it appear that she would be
partaker of his pain, and not enduring to stay till the Emperor had
entertained and caressed him, she went, and with an amorous countenance asked
of him whether his wounds were dangerous. Madam, answered he, I am not so ill,
but that if I were to begin another combat for your service, I would most
gladly undertake it. The Gods, said she, forbid such another accident; you have
done so much this day that your name shall never die in this Empire, so long as
the world does last; but I fear I shall abuse your patience, if I do not permit
your wounds to be visited; wherefore I will leave you, having first entreated
you to make use of all things here, as if you were in your own house: the
obligation wherein we stand engaged unto you gives you this power, and commands
me to seek out the means to show my self acknowleding in particular, which
assure your self I will do; in the mean time have regard to your health; so
with most amourous looks she departed, leaving him more contented with the care
she had of him, then with a Monarchy. The Emperors Chyrurgeons being arrived,
would have dressed his wounds, but Cassandra desiring them to leave that unto
her, she caused him presently to be laid into a bed, and making use of a
precious balm, which she ordinarily carried about her, she willed him to rest
until such time as the medicine had wrought its operation.

CHAP. III. The discourse between Armazia and Rozalmond, the recipr^call
assurances of their loves: his departure from Cardacia, with the extreme
discontent of the Princess, and what were his adventures.
CAssandra leaving Rozalmond to his rest, walked into the orchard, where the
trees diversely ranged, yielded an incredible delight, and devising with her
self what means she might use to get from this Court without giving too much
discontent to these new lovers; she espied Armazia, who being carried with
clean contrary thoughts, was entertaining her self with the pleasure she
conceived to be in the possessing of a man, on whom the heavens seemed to have
conferred all the beauty, comeliness, and valor of the world. Should I not be
happy indeed (said she to her self) if this Knight were born for me, and should
I not have cause to praise my good fortune, if his condition should prove
equal to mine, that so my parents might one day grant me unto him in
recompense of his services? Yes no doubt, and I should think that my content
would surpass all the pleasures of the earth, nor would I envy the very glory
of the Gods: But alas, I am afraid, considering the misery derived unto us from
the fault of the first man, that Fortune has not given Scepters to his being,
and that in regard thereof he will be less acceptable to my father, who erring
with others, will more esteem greatness then virtue, and will make me wretched
in his avarice: Howbeit, I cannot think, that a valor so great, a countenance
so promising, a presence so amiable, and actions so majesticall, may possibly
be encountered in a vile and base person: Virtue delights in the highest places,
and does not communicate her self to such as know not how to acknowledge her;
it cannot be but that his birth does equal his merits, and sure I commit no
fault in loving him: nevertheless, it were not amiss to clear this point
instantly, and so free my self of this unquietness that thus afflicts me;
which may easily be done, for this damsel that follows him will not refuse, I
hope, to give me this satisfaction: I will send for her then, and under color
of informing my self of the fashions of his country, draw her to acquaint me
with that which I so much desire to know; whereupon, turning about to command
some of her women to fetch her unto her, she perceived her declining that walk,
as it were for fear to interrupt her in her meditations; wherewithal being
very glad, she called her unto her, and taking her by the hand, said thus;
Sweet heart, you shall do me a singular favor, if during our walk amongst
these trees, you will first recount unto me who this young Knight is, being the
valiantest that ever bare arms, and unto whose courage we are bound in so
powerful an obligation; and afterward falling upon the fashions of your
Country you will faithfully deliver how the Knights live there with their
mistrisses. Madam (answered Cassandra) I will content you in a few words; Our
lands are happy, because they produce excellent Knights, and most beautiful
women (though I must confess I never saw any that might compare with your
Highness) but that which adds unto our happiness, is the freedom wherein we
live, we know not what suspicion means; the Gallants frequent the Ladies, and
the Ladies converse with them, and are ordinarily seen in company together,
either in the woods, or fields, free from any conjecture that may any way
redound to the prejudice of their honor. It is certain that virtue is not
always found in all kind of persons: if any undiscreet Knight shall offend
any Gentlewoman whom he shall meet alone, she shall be presently righted by the
next that passes by, and so is the insolence of a dishonorable fellow
revenged: concerning the situation of the country, I will speak briefly, only
saying, that it is very goodly, fertile in fruits, replenished with beautiful
and strong towns, pleasant rivers and woods: Now the merit of this Knight, the
knowledge of whom you desire; Madam, he is come of the noblest race in the
world, and his parents are at this day so great, that the earth trembles at the
only report of their arms; for his valor, you have had the first proofs of
it; you are judge of his person, but in regard you are as yet ignorant of his
disposition, I will assure you that imagination is not able to conceive a
sweeter, or more pleasing; more I may not say, a precedent Oath forbids me, and
without breach of my faith, I may not name him, until such time as he has
finished some warlike adventures, for the execution whereof I conduct him; and
therefore, Madam, I humbly desire you that you will be pleased that he may
depart to morrow. How, to morrow? (said Armazia) he is not in case to go so
soon, but say he were, you could not in any reason carry him away before the
Emperor my father have bethought him of the recompenses which are due to his
valor. Madam (answered Cassandra) men of this Knights condition undertake
nothing for gain, honor directs their enterprises, and all the riches of the
world could not make him step one foot; you are the treasure he desires, and
the glory of your service will be far more dear to him, then all the kingdoms
of the earth: This makes you blush, but Madam (please you to pardon me if I go
farther) it is no time now to disguise your thoughts; I know them as well as
your self, and can tell that the perfections of this Knight have gotten him
good place in your favor, as your beauty has not left him without passion.
You love him, but it is not fit that your affection should deprive the world of
the fruit of his virtue, him of the honor that he is to reap thereby, you of
the content you are to hope from it, and his friends of the satisfaction which
they shall find in the praises every where published of him: the Ordinances of
the Destinies, Madam, must be pursued, wherefore let your patience make your
pleasures, which you are to enjoy by his alliance, more sweet: I will return
him unto you, within a certain time, so full of glory, that you shall think you
had been very unhappy, if you had hindered his designs; Weigh these reasons,
Madam, and never stand upon the consideration of his wounds, they are healed by
this time; and let me obtain that favor from you, as to trust your secrets in
my hands, I may do you more service therein then you are aware of, and without
me you will hardly see your desires fulfilled. It is true indeed (said Armazia)
that I did not think you had had such knowledge, and that being surprised in
this manner, my color rose in my face; but since nothing can be concealed from
you, I will deal freely with you, and confess that the merits of this Knight
have wounded me with love, and desire you to be very mindful of the promise
you have made me, to take care of our affections, and of his return, in the
hope whereof, not opposing my self to the decrees of heaven which govern all
things with an admirable prudence, I will permit him to depart when you will,
provided that I have to morrow for to see him here after dinner, and draw from
him the vows which I desire for my assurance, at which time you shall bring him
hither if you please, and you shall oblige me not to let him know that it is
with my privity, to the end he may not take advantage of my weakness. Madam,
answered Cassandra, he has too much love and judgment to make so vain a use
of that favor, and my self too much devotion unto your service to disobey the
commandment you have laid upon me; we will be here presently after dinner, and
in the mean time I wish that may be always propitious to your desires* Saying
so, night being come, she withdrew, and getting to bed, betook her to her rest.
This while Rozalmond, having slept six hours, awaked; and feeling no pain from
his wounds, was much abashed at the first; but conceiving that this powerful
operation proceeded from Cassandra's salves, he fell to think of his Lady, and
his imagination representing unto him the charms of her eyes, the lovely
feature of her face, and the delicacie of her complexion, he said; Mighty Love,
that disposest the hearts of men as thou please, leave me not now without
succor, and make this fair one as sensible of my passion, as my soul is of her
beauty, then will I proclaim thy praises amidst my content, and acknowledge no
power to be greater then thine; I will publish to every one that thou art
justly styled the Master of the Gods. Entertaining himself thus with such
pleasing fancies, he never observed that it was far day, and had continued
longer in his bed, if Cassandra had not come in, but her arrival took him from
his thoughts, for to tell her that all his wounds were cured, save only that
of his heart. I do believe it (said she unto him) but think you that I cannot
cure that of your heart as well as those of your body? I conceive that you are
persuaded so, and that my power does not extend so far; but I will make it good
to your experience in the presence of Armazia, who assuring you anon that she
loves you, will make it appear that I have power over all things: then setting
her self down at his beds feet, she declared unto him the encounter which she
had had with his Mistress, the discourse that past between them, and briefly the
commandment she had received to bring him into the orchard, which gave him such
content, that all his speech seemed too little to give her thanks for her
assistance; he embraced her, protested that he would never forget this favor,
and not being able to contain himself in the excess of his joy, he called for
his clothes, in all haste to run unto the place which should be the witness of
his glory: but Cassandra wisely delivering, that he ought not to be so
transported by his passion, which might overthrow all his future happiness,
stayed him and said: Consider better of your own good, go not on so
precipitiously, and remember that honorable loves are preserved and made
perfect by direction. Armazia affects you, it is true, but she would not have
it known, and she might justly be offended if your passion should discover her
secret, wherefore you see how you are to carry your self with more judgment. I
hold your counsel to be very good, answered he, but alas! I cannot command my
self; and my joy is such, that thereby my reason is lost: howbeit, I will be
more advised since it concerns me so much, and by my government hereafter you
shall known the greatness of my affection. Entertaining themselves thus with a
world of pleasing discourses, they past away the time with much content, till
Rozalmond went into the great Hall, where the Emperor received him with so
much demonstration of kindness, that he was even ashamed of his favors.
Behold (said he, kissing him on the forehead) one of my chiefest wishes are
accomplished, for seeing you in good health after I had doubted of your life,
me thinks I have nothing else to desire, but the means how to recompense you
worthily: But whilst the Gods shall be pleased to grant it me, make use, Sir,
freely of the authority which I enjoy in my Empire; I give you the same power
over it which I my self have, and be assured I hold you every way as dear as I
do my Armazia: I will not ask you who you are, time and my fair respect will
persuade you to acquaint me with it. Yes Sir (answered Rozalmond) and at this
instant I would give you that satisfaction, if I could do it without the breach
of the vow, which I have made not to discover my self, until I return from a
voyage I had undertaken for the damsel whom you see accompanying me: at which
time, Sir, I promise you, not only to tell you who I am, but to serve you as
long as I live, if you will be pleased to do me so much honor, as to admit me
into the number of your Knights. How (said the Emperor) will you leave me so
soon? My word obliges me (answered Rozalmond) and I beseech you be pleased
that I depart to morrow, about an affair of consequence, and if Fortune favor
my arms, it shall not be long before I return again to wait on your Majesty. I
should have been very glad, said the Emperor, to have kept you longer here;
howbeit, I will not interrupt your designs, but will rest contented with your
promise: howsoever, will you not take leave of the Ladies? My duty binds me to
that, said Rozalmond, and the rather because you are pleased to permit me: So
making a very low reverence unto him, he went unto the Emperesses chamber, who
received him no less graciously, and would likewise have persuaded his longer
stay; but making the same excuses which he had used to the Emperor, he walked
forth, attending the time that he was to see Armazia; who having withdrawn her
self presently after dinner, entered into the orchard, with the attendance only
of one woman, and came to Rozalnond, who with impatience expected her; and
seeing her approach kneeled down for to kiss her hand. I will not permit you
to use such humility, said she, for desiring to live freely and plainly with
you, I hold these ceremonies unfit; arise then, and tell me whether you desire
any thing of me? I desire (answered he, with a trembling that thoroughly
witnessed his love) Madam, I desire that, passing by the excellency of your
merits, you will be pleased to make me your Knight, and receive all the glory
which shall arrive to me by my enterprises. I have found you so valourous
(answered she) that your request redounds to my advantage; wherefore I receive
you very willingly, and not only your arms shall be employed by my
commandment, but if your loialty renders you worthy of more, I shall be glad to
let you know that I love you: speaking to you in this manner, you see, Sir
Knight, how much I oblige you to behave your self in like sort toward me:
Engage not your self elsewhere, nor sigh for the favors of another Mistress, you
shall for ever find me firm in that which I have told you, and that I may
rely upon your word, tell me, What are your designs? Rather a thousand times
to die (answered he) then to make my self unworthy the favor you have done me;
Madam, I will serve you so faithfully, that you shall never repent your
affection to me. That is all which I desire, said she; in the mean time, I
beseech the Gods to bless the success of your enterprises, and quickly to let
me see my content in your return; so amourously kissing him, she went away with
tears in her eyes; and Rozalmond, being no less discontented, got him to his
chamber, from whence he stirred not till the next morning about the break of
day, when with Cassandra he set forward on his way.

CHAP. IV. How Rozalmond and Cassandra put themselves to sea in the goodly
vessel of the Sun, and of the marvells which they saw therein.
ROzalmond very sorrowfully abandoning Gardacia, ever and anon looked back, and
sometimes fixing his eyes on the Palace, he said; O Gods! How happy is it being
there, and what would not I give to continue there for ever, if I might do it
without wrong to mine honor? But the world will not permit me to have more
passion for love, then ambition for glory; and spite of my teeth I must leave
Armazia, who only can render me contented, and give my soul her full desire.
Howb^it, I should suffer more willingly, if I durst assure my self that she
will love ^^ne but me, and that no rival shall ever possess her by her
fathers authority; so she has promised: But alas! Who can rely upon the
protestation of a woman, which has not memory for a day, when a fair offer
presents it self, and that many times is carried with the first wind: The
object makes her love, her passion draws a thousand promises from her, and the
presence of a lover encourages her to the resolution of suffering any torment
whatsoever, rather then be disloiall; but time and absence do easily deface
these determinations, and her purposes hold no longer, but till she meet with a
subject to make her perjured. Then sighing, as if he conceived such a like
misfortune could never cross his affections, he lift up his eyes to heaven,
and instantly changing his opinion, he pursued his discourse thus: It is true
indeed that the most part of women are possessed with such weakness, but I
should offend infinitely against Armazia, to believe she can ever be of that
disposition. I trouble my self too much, beget occasions of mine own
discontent, and foolishly destroy that which she has built for my glory: I
have observed so much freedom in her speech, so much love in her actions, and
so much sweetness in her charms, that I cannot with any reason suspect her of
any falsehood; I must chase away then those thoughts which so disquiet me,
believe that she will never engage her self unto two, and from thence derive a
resolution to serve her faithfully as she well deserves. Cassan^^a, who
perceived how he was transp^^^ed with these fancies, would not interrupt him in
regard of the content, she imagined, he took therein; but seeing half the day
spent, and no talk of meat, she took him by the arm, and said unto him: My
Lord, What do you get by these thoughts, which carry you so away? Both pleasure
and pain (answered he) for if I be well satisfied with the remembrance of the
beauties of Armazia, I am as much vexed at my esloignment from her, not having
bestowed that time in her service which my affection desired. This should not
trouble you (said she) for Fortune prepares you so much pain for that occasion,
that you will one day wish you had less; I do not speak this to terrify you,
knowing well that you will never fear, come what danger can, but to allay the
grief you are in for your departure from the Court of Gardacia, having
acquired no more renown. Howbeit, if I shall proceed, and say something for
your comfort, be sure that you afflict your self to no purpose, whenever you
doubt the power of a rival, Armazia being born to love you with as much
fidelity as you profess constancy unto her. But it is time to leave off this
discourse, the sea appears, and now we must roll according to Fortunes
pleasure, that so you may give a beginning to the wonders which your actions
shall produce. Approaching then to the sea shore, they beheld the waters begin
upon an instant, out of a settled calm, to swell with mighty billows, which
violently encountering one with another, made a dreadful noise. So sudden a
tempest amazed Rozalmond, who turning to Cassandra for to ask of her from
whence it should proceed, he saw a ship of the strangest fashion that ever eye
beheld; it was round, and carved all over, at each window stood a strong and
furious savage with an oar in his hand, the outside was azure filled with
characters of gold, and roses of the same metal, and in the midst of it was a
mast, on whose top appeared a little Sun, shining so bright, that it was not
possible for one to look upon it. He was strangely ravished with this marvel,
and his eyes were so fastened to the beauty of the vessel, that he seemed
immovable; which Cassandra considering, and desiring not to loose time, she
alighted, and said unto him: Sir, do not you think now that the wise Alcander
loves you well, having sent you so goodly a ship for the execution of your
enterprises? I never doubted of his good affection to me (said he) nor of the
devotion you have to the advancement of our house (for I am persuaded that you
have a hand in the fashion of this work) but in truth, I must acknowledge that
this care is none of the least favors, which I may hope both from you and him,
seeing it is a mean to open me the way of glory: let us go into it then, if it
be made for us, and let us begin to seek our Fortune. Saying thus, he saw six
savages open a port, and present him a plank; whereupon, going in he became
more astonished then before, finding himself immediately in a room, the richest
that ever he had seen; he looked all about, wondering at a thousand rarities
which he beheld there; but that which most delighted him, was six pictures
hanging together on a row; whereupon fixing his eye, in the first he observed
the very same feature, love had powerfully graven in his heart, which so
transported him, that kneeling down, he said aloud; Beauteous Armazia, now am I
happy indeed, and there is nothing wanting to my felicity, but that you will be
pleased once more to tell me that you live for my content: But alas! You do not
speak? From whence does this silence proceed? From your passion (said
Cassandra, who followed him) that does not permit you to consider how you speak
to the picture of Armazia, more proper to feed your eyes, then to give you a
more fensible satisfaction. It is true (said he, rising up) that the excess of
my joy made me believe that this was Armazia indeed, but you are not to marvel
at it; for if lovers be blind, how would you have me to see the fault which I
committed, in adoring the shadow for the substance? Madam, I am not blameable
for this action, which testifies the violence of my affection, and if I have
any way failed, it is in that I have done it before you, unto whom, me thinks,
I should ow more respect. Your greatness (answered she) gives you far more
power then you speak of; for being here but to serve you, there were no reason
that my presence should bring any constraint to your actions, neither was it
the occasion that drew me to put you out of those fancies, but what I did was
only to show you these other pictures, and to ask your opinion of them; tell
me then, I pray you, what you think of the Princess which is next to Armazia?
That Nature (answered he) never framed a more beautiful piece, and if my
Mistress were not in the world, no doubt, this fame which equals her, would
bear away the prize from all the beauties of the earth; and that which makes me
more to wonder, is, how all the rest may justly boast of the like advantage:
What could be desired more in the face of this third, who seems to carry charms
in her eyes, powerful enough for the captivity of all men? Questionless
nothing, and I hold that Knight most happy, which is one day to enjoy her: but
come let us view this Shepherdess a little, and tell me whether ever you saw
ever so much grace and majesty under such a rude and unhandsome habit? I am
persuaded that the heavens have taken exceeding pleasure in making her so fair,
thereby to inform us, that their treasures are not always imparted to the
greatest. How contented will the fields be whither she shall drive her flocks,
how how happy the trees under whose shadow she shall rest; but far more
fortunate shall the Shepherd be, whose lips shall be pressed with so delicate a
mouth! Without dissembling, I envy him, and were Nature wise, she would
furnish her with matches worthy such an excellence. For the fifth, truth shall
save me the labor of commending her, modesty not permitting me to say that
Penamond of Greece, my si^^er, is worthy to be of their number, which are the
wonder of the world. And as for the last, he has not eyes that will say, her
beauty deserves not praises equal to the rest. But Madam, will not you tell me
who those four be which I know not? Most willingly, answered she; The first is
Trasiclea, the excellent Princess of Tramazond, who has none to be compared
with her but your Armazia, and which may be said to be the most valiant Lady
that this day bears arms, being promised by the Destinies to him, who alone
may also be paralelled to you in feats of chivalrie. The next is Palmirenna,
the heir of Martaria. This Shepherdess so beautiful, is called Miralinda,
whom France brought forth, and which shall hereafter fill the world with
astonishment. And she that appears with so sweet an aspect, is the stately
Queen Corolandaya, worthy of the place where you see her ranked. But, Sir, me
thinks, it is time to take a little repast. In good faith, said he, I could
willingly content my self with beholding my Armazia, but seeing it is your
pleasure I shall eat, let us do so; whereupon, going to a table set full with
exquisite meat, they sat them down, whilst their vessel swiftly cut the waves,
being carried, as it seemed, moreby the dexterity of the savages, who rowed
with a wonderful strength, then by the wind that filled the sails: after their
repast, they fell to discourse upon a world of pleasing subjects, which past
away the day in such sort, that might came upon them far sooner then they were
aware of; so that Cassandra withdrawing to a chamber, and Rozalmond to another,
no less rich then the room where he had been all the day, they got them to bed
for to take their rest.

CHAP. V. Rozalmond and Cassandra arrive at the secret Island, where Clarisel of
Guindaya was retained by enchantment in the embraces of Crisolita the
Inchantresse.
EIght days being sweetly spent in this manner, their vessel stayed near to
an Island, wherein they beheld a stately Castle on a little hill, the foot
whereof was planted with a thousand sorts of beautiful trees, which made the
place so delightful, that they presently landed, being resolved to view it at
leisure; leaving then their horses behind them, they went on fair and softly,
very much marvelling to see a number of walks, of almost an incredible length,
into which the Sun never so much as looked: but they not gone far, when turning
on the left hand, they met with an arbor, whereinto as Rozalmond would have
entered, he perceived a young man asleep, so accomplished, that he stood a good
while earnestly gazing on him without uttering a word; he was of a large
making, uniform in the disposition of his members; and though his eyes were
shut, his face showed a warlike countenance. Upon my soul (said Rozalmond,
speaking softly to Cassandra) here is one of the handsomest Gentlemen on the
earth, his shape very much contents me, and me thinks I cannot choose but love
him. No doubt you have reason for it (said Cassandra) for he touches you so
near, that you should deny nature, if you had not some affection to him; in a
word he is your kinsman, and is named Clarisel of Guindaya, son to the famous
Florisel of Niquea, carried away (as you have heard) when he was in his
swaddling clothes, and now kept here by the charms of an Inchantresse, who loves
him no less then Ginolda did in times past the valiant Prince of France; but
it is high time to free him from so long a captivity, to the end his virtue may
be manifest to the world; and for that regard, I caused the ship to stay here,
knowing that your valor was necessary for his deliverance. Me thinks (said he)
there needs no great labor to bear away a man that sleeps, and that is without
arms to defend himself, if he had power to do it; shall I carry him aboard the
vessel? No (said she) let us stay and hear what this damsel will say to him
that is coming; it is Crisolita, she that captivateth him as much by the charms
of her beauty, as he is otherwise held by those of her mother Creonda; then
softly retiring, and hiding themselves behind the trees they let this Nymph
pass, who seeing Clarisel asleep, put her mouth presently to his, and finding
that this touch did not awake him, she said somewhat aloud with a sigh. Alas!
It seems your cares are not like unto mine; you take your rest, whilst I am
disquieted; your eyes are closed, whereas mine are covered with tears; sleep
no longer, dear Clarisel, but come and take part of my pain, and let us seek
the means to divert the storm wherewithal we are threatened. At these words
Clarisel arose, and seeing Crisolita's cheeks all bedewed with tears, he said
unto her: Whence comes this change? What cause have you to look so sad, and why
do you thus complain? Because the end of our content is come (said she) for my
mother told me in the morning that your Dest^nies will not permit you any
longer abode here, and that a Knight will arrive very suddenly, who shall carry
you from hence; judge then whether I have not reason to weep, and just occasion
to wish my self out of my life; for what pleasure can I take in the world, if I
may not see you, my dear heart; all delights will be trouble some to me, my
grief will make those joys, that would even ravish others, distasteful unto
me, and the memory of our embraces will torment me, when I am deprived of the
hope any more to enjoy such happiness. I do not think (said Clarisel) that any
man can take me from hence against my will; wherefore do not you afflict your
self in this sort, for be assured my love is too much for me to forsake you so:
but I wonder that your mother, who can stay the Sun in his course, force even
the devils themselves, and do what else she please against the law of nature,
does not show her self more careful of our good, by impeaching the arrival of
this Knight. The Ordinances of heaven are inviolable (answered Crisolita) for
you may be confident that she has employed the utmost of her skill, and yet
cannot come to know how, or by whom you are to be carried from hence; which
makes me conjecture that a Magician, more cunning then her self, has
undertaken the care of this affair: wherefore I must resolve to lose you, and
so I will; but first I desire to obtain this promise from you, which will be
infinite comfort to me in your absence, that you will always love me, and
return hither sometimes unto me. Let the Gods, who are judges of our thoughts
(said Clarisel) refuse me in my greatest occasions, if ever I forget the
favors you have done me; Madam, they are of too much esteem with me, and I am
more sensible of benefits then to affect the name of ungrateful; but since the
Destinies will separate us, let us make use of the time we yet enjoy, and by a
thousand new delights, assure our love against the common weakness of an
absence. Then beginning their caresse^ with a million of kisses, I doubt they
would have proceeded farther, had not Rozalmond, whose mouth peradventure began
to water, broken the bough of a tree, to give them a tacit notice, that they
were seen. The lovers surprised with this noise, arose straightway from the
ground where they lay, and running toward the Castle, got immediately out of
sight; whereat Cassandra, laughing, turned to the Prince, and said; Behold,
Sir, a testimony of that power called Love, which oftentimes carries us into
extreamities, not permitting us to consider of things, but let that pass; you
are now to employ your sword for the rendering of a man to the world, who
questionless will prove very necessary in it. Let us go, Madam (said
Rozalmond) for I shall most willingly undertake this enterprise, and receive
infinite content to serve mine uncle upon so worthy an occasion: using some
speed then, they arrived near to the Castle, where under the first gate they
encountered a man of a goodly stature, who seeing Rozalmond advance, said unto
him; Knight, you cannot enter here, unless you overcome me; wherefore let us
try unto whom Fortune will be most favorable. I will not commit such an error
(said Rozalmond) as to trifle out the time unprofitably in talk; so that using
no farther speech, they presently charged one another with two such mighty
blows, that thereby either of them knew the force of his enemy; the Knight of
the Bridge, as valiant and courageous as could be, offended his adversary, and
defended himself with mavelous dexterity; but he was exceedingly vexed for
that his sword could not fasten on Rozalmonds armor, who giving him sometimes
a thrust at the breast, then a down right blow on the shield, cut all his arms
in pieces, and drew the blood from diverse parts of his body, which put him in
such a rage, that not regarding his life, he struck such blows, as oftentimes
made Rozalmond see Stars, though the Sun were but in the midst of his course.
The combat continued in this manner very cruel and dangerous, each employing
his uttermost force, especially the Knight of the Bridge; who being mad for
that he saw no blood on his enemies armor, and resolved either to vanquish or
to die; he set both his hands to his sword, and struck his enemy so rudely on
the helmet, that he made him stoop with one knee to the earth, whereat he was
so mightily incensed, that rising in fury, he discharged such a terrible blow
on the Knight of the Bridges shield, that having divided it in two, he made him
to stagger, and put both his hands to the ground, whereon questionless he had
fallen, had not the shame of being overcome, and the apprehension of death
caused him quickly to get up again. Renewing the fight then with more cruelty
then before, they held out three long hours without any show of taking breath;
but Rozalmond, who began to enter into fury; and mad at the resistance which he
found in his enemy, gave him so dangerous a blow upon the helmet, that had not
his sword turned in his hand, his head had been cloven in pieces; howbeit, not
being able to support the violence of such a stroke, he tumbled to the ground
as if he had been dead. This fall without doubt had brought a great deal of
contentment to the victour, if he had not pitied the misfortune of so strong
and valiant a Knight; but desiring much to save him, he stepped instantly unto
him, and unl^^ed his helmet to see whether he were in case to receive any
assistance, which at the first he greatly doubted, perceiving his face to be
covered all over with blood; howbeit, not to omit any thing that might serve
for his preservation, he entreated Cassandra to wipe him, and to employ her
utmost skill in Chyrurgerie for to recover him if there were any hope of it;
and so not stopping at this first victory, he went on with his sword in his
hand, resolved either to see the end of the adventure, or to die in the
attempt; approaching then to the second gate, he was about to have knocked,
when he perceived Crisolita coming forth, followed by the old Creonda (leading
a furious serpent, of the strangest form that ever was beheld, in a chain) who
modestly making toward him, said: Excellent Prince, it is not fit that we
should longer oppose your desire, or hazard your life in the claws of this
serpent, which is so enchanted, that you could not triumph over it without a
world of pain; for knowing now who you are, I cannot, me thinks, endure to see
you in any extremity, my love to your kinsman wills me to serve you in stead of
seeking to hurt you; sheath your sword then, and be assured here is none but
th^se that will gladly receive the honor of your co^mandments. Madam (answered
Rozalmond, who little expected such gentle language) without dissembling, I did
not think to find so facile an entrance, considering the dangerousnesse of the
guards; but since you will free me from that labor, and do also say that you
love me, not having any way obliged you thereunto, I receive this favor with
all respect, and do protest to serve you, so far forth as not to demand your
lover of you, for whose deliverance I come hither: your meekness makes me
ready to leave him to your caresses, until such time as some other Knight less
courteous and sensible of obligations, shall come and pluck him from you. No my
Lord (said Crisolita) I have more love then passion, and will never prefer mine
own satisfaction before Clarisels glory, it is time for him to see the world,
and pursue his fathers steps, that so the Oracles, which publish wonders of
him, may be made good. Madam (said Rozalmond) you are as generous as fair, and
my uncle is most happy in your acquaintance; but you shall very much oblige me,
to let me rid the world of so dangerous a creature as is that same your mother
holds there. My Lord (answered Creonda) we have easier ways, for having kept
him hitherto but only to oppose him to the violence of such as sought after
your kinsman, it is in our power to famish him now that he is no longer fit for
that purpose; wherefore, I pray you, be not offended if I deprive you of this
glory, which you would add to the triumphs which are due to you, all your
actions being so many miracles; you must not be displeased then if we hinder
this combat, since our weakness, and the good will we bear you, will not permit
us to behold you in any danger whatsoever. Madam (answered Rozalmond) your fair
respect to me obliges me so much, that I am contented with what you please;
and seeing you hold it not fit for me to employ my sword upon this serpent, let
us go in; but see, here comes my uncle, unto whom I must by any means tender my
service. Clarisel then arriving, they entertained one another with all the
demonstrations of kindness that might be, each of them admiring the goodly
presence of the other: and as they were thus complementing, the fair Cassandra
approached, who assured them that the valiant Silveri^ of the Desert (so was
the good Knight named, whom Rozalmond had combatted at the first gate) was out
of all danger, whereat they were not a little joyful; and so they continued
caressing one another, till it was time to go to supper; where they were
roially entertained, and from thence conducted to their chambers to take their
rest after their painful travells.

CHAP. VI. Clarisel of Guindaya, being made Knight, departed with Rozalmond,
Silverin of the Desert, and Cassandra; he becomes i^amoured of the fair
Miralinda the French Shepherdess; the furiou^ combat that he had against four
dreadful Giants and twenty Knights.
THe night being sweetly past away by every one, but by Carisel and Crisolita,
who interrupted their usual pleasures with an infinity of fighs and tears,
drawn from them by the grief to see themselves so soon to be separated; each
one arose with the day: Clarisel put on a white armor, which Creonda with her
conjurations had made sufficient proof against any stroke whatsoever, and
withdrawing himself into a place where Creonda kept her Idols, he fell to
praying unto God (whom he began now to know by the means of his Nephew, which
most part of the evening had instructed him thereabout) that he would be
pleased to bless his arms for the glory of his service, and the honor of his
house. In the mean time Crisolita, well resolved for his absence (since the
heavens would have it so) went into Rozalmonds chamber, and perceiving he was
not asleep, approached to his beds side, and kneeling down, said unto him:
Excellent Prince, I am come to importune you for a thing, which I must desire
to obtain of you, and which I entreat you not to refuse me upon the condition
that I will never alter the resolution I made yesterday. Provided Madam (said
Rozalmond) that you arise from the place where you are, I will with all my
heart grant whatsoever you can demand of me, but this humility of yours
displeases me (pardon me for speaking so) I being of no such recommendation in
the world as to be complemented with so much submission. I cannot (answered
Crisolita) yield you so much honor, but that you yet deserve far more;
howbeit, since you command me to carry my self otherwise toward you, I hope I
shall not err in obeying you. That which I desire of you, my Lord, (said she,
being risen up) is, that you will pleased to give Clarisel the Order, to the
end that the memory of being made Knight by so excellent a hand, may render him
worthy the renown which his father has acquired in the world; for if he must
go along with you, I shall think my self happy that he may take courage from
your presence to combat bravely whenever fortune shall offer him the occasion
in your voyage. Madam (answered Rozalmond) the merit of your beauty obliged me
to respect you before, but I never esteemed you as I do now, nor was persuaded
that it was possible any woman could love so generously as you have done, which
makes me once more to say that mine uncle is happy in your affection, seeing
you prefer glory before your own satisfaction, and his honor before the
contentment you might have in him; you desire to have him Knighted, if he be
ready, your pleasure shall be presently fulfilled. You shall find him all
armed (answered she) and when your leisure will permit, my mother shall wait
upon you to conduct you to the Temple of our Gods (whom for his sake I utterly
renounce) whither I will go with Cassandra, that my prayers, being conjoined
with hers, may the better obtain from heaven those graces, which are requisite
to so sacred an Order. Departing then with a very low obeisance, she went to
seek out Clarisel, who observing as much love in her patience, as he had found
in her caresses, he could not contain himself from kissing her;
notwithstanding, the presence of Cassandra, who seeming not to see them,
kneeled down after she had wished him all good fortune; having spent an hour in
prayers, Rozalmond arrived, who finding Clarisel on his knees, demanded of him
whether he would be Knighted? That is it (answered he) which I most desire in
the world: Swear then (replied Rozalmond) that the fear of no danger
whatsoever, shall at any time make you decline the duty of a good Knight, which
ow^th his assistance to all kind of persons, and chiefly to women, without any
regard to their condition. I promise so much (answered Clarisel:) Be a Knight
then said Rozalmond (embracing him with the usual Ceremonies, and making the
sign of the Cross on his forehead:) Let you arms always tend to the glory of
God, the service of the feeble, and be your enterprises as successful as you
can wish. Whereupon having kissed him on the cheek, he asked of him from what
hands he would receive the sword, and the rest of his arms: from these twins
(said Crisolita) the only cause of his first carrying away, and the pledges of
our love: At these words, Rozalmond turning him about, perceived a little girl
about five or six years old, the fairest that ever he had seen of that age,
whom a page followed with an excellent sword, which she took, after she had
made obeisance to the company, and with an admirable grace hanging it on Don
Clarisels girdle, she retired to give place to a little boy of the same
bigness, and so accomplished, that Rozalmond wondered to see him take the
helmet with a kind of brave confidence, and put it on the head of the new
Knight, who having received the gantlets from Cassandra and Crisolita, he rose
up to give thanks unto Rozalmond for this favor; but he was so transported
with the sweet entertainment of these pretty children, whose beauty he justly
admired, that he marked not the half of his complements. All the Ceremonies
being finished, Crisolita obtained of Rozalmond that he would stay there eight
days longer, which past away very pleasingly, sometimes in the company of the
valiant Silverin of the Desert, whom Rozalmond much affected, and that was now
thoroughly cured of his wounds, and sometimes with the entertainment which
Cassandra and Creonda gave him by some ingenious trick of their Art: But the
day of departure being come, Crisolita's resolution began to faint under the
grief she had to see that her lover was to be divided from her. Ever and anon
she sighed, and not able to stop the course of her tears, it appeared how
insensible she was of the reasons Clorisel gave for to comfort her; howbeit,
yielding unto her judgment that represented unto her the necessity of this
departure, she made some truce with her sorrow, and accompanying him to the
ship, she received the kisses of a farewell, which made her return home
extremely sad, for that she should no longer behold the Sun there, from whence
the life of her soul was derived. Whilst she bestowed the time in lamenting,
Rozalmond, Clarisel, Silverin of the Desert, and Cassandra, made way through the
waves in the great vessel of the Sun, with the beauty whereof Clarisel was so
taken, that observing the r^rities of it, by fortune he cast his eye on the
delicate Shepherdess of France, whose charms were so pleasing to him, that by
little and little forgetting Crisolita's caresses, he suffered himself to be
altogether captived, giving the glory of his freedom to the innocent features
of this country in beauty. Good God (said he to himself) how defective is
Nature in the dividing of her treasures, and how little providence seem the
heavens to have in the distribution of their graces? Why should a beauty so
excellent be born with so much misery, and what reason is there that she should
one day serve for the contentment of a Shepherd, who shall not have the
judgment to know the value of so inestimable a jewel? Questionless it is
unjust, and it were unworthy in me to suffer it; if Nature have made a fault, I
will repair it; I am born a Prince, it is in my power to raise a base
condition, and to place her in the rank where she ought to be: I must then,
without any regard at all to the opinion of men, who more respect greatness
then virtue, riches then merit, and gold then contentment; make no difficulty
to love her, provided her ingratitude do not render her incapable of that
fortune; now if any man will condemn me for this action, my fathers example
shall serve to excuse me, who was no less inamoured of Silvia, then I am now
of this same; and without doubt he had married her, never sticking at her
poverty, if the providence of Vrganda, who knew she was his aunt, had not
hindered him. This young Prince entertaining himself with these new fancies,
took infinite delight in the object of this picture, whereupon his eyes were
incessantly fixed; but that which most troubled him, was that he durst not ask
of Cassandra the place of her abode, lest he should seem inconstant, and little
sensible of Crisolita's love: nevertheless, showing more curiosity then
affection, he learned the names of Armazia and Trasicle^, and discovered that
his Mistress was French, which gave him some satisfaction, hoping to see her one
day, and rather then fail, to traverse all the fields of that great kingdom for
to find her out: comforting himself then upon this assurance, and in the sweet
conversation of Rozalmond, Cassandra, and Silverin, eight days were insensibly
spent; at the end whereof, they saw a ship arrive, manned with fifty Knights,
and four terrible Giants, who laying hands on their swords, commanded our
Knights to quit their arms, and willingly suffer themselves to be chained. By
heaven (said Rozalmond) you are unlike to have us at so easy a rate, nor shall
your audaciousnesse carry away the victory without some pain: so quickly lacing
on their helmets, they opposed the Giants with their swords drawn, and charged
them so fiercely, that it amazed them at first; but thinking that all the
forces of the world united together could not withstand them, they began to
shower so many blows upon them, that without the goodness of their arms, which
resisted the sharpness of their blades, they had been in very great danger,
howbeit, fighting without fear, they sent many an arm into the sea, cut Knights
in sunder, and many times drew blood from the Giants, who railing on the
Destinies, and their Gods, struck most of their blows on the ship side (being
hindered by a thick smoke, which issued out of their visers, from smiting where
they would:) Silverin fought with a great deal of valor, Clarisel did wonders
in the commencement of his arms, and Rozalmond amazed every one; his blows were
so many thunderbolts, and his sword never lighted without the blood of his
enemies. Whilst the fight was at the hottest, one of the Giants perceiving
Cassandra where she sat in the vessel of the Sun, leaped suddenly in, and
laying fast hold on her, carried her into his ship, when one of the savages
discharged his oar so strongly on his head, that he struck him into the sea,
whereinto Cassandra had tumbled with him, if she had not been succored by
Clarisel, who marking the Giants entrance into their vessel, at the very
instant ran his enemy clean through the body, who therewith fell down dead in
the place: this young Knight having caught her by the gown, and placed her
again in the ship, returned suddenly to the fight; exceedingly amazed to behold
with what grace Rozalmond employed his sword, and in what manner, having eleft
the Giants head with whom he had to do, he bestirred himself amongst the
fouldiers; following him then with the like courage, he performed such wonders,
that Rozalmond stood a while to consider him amongst those Knights, who fell
before him as the grass before the mower; so as not being able to hold out any
longer, they were quickly cut into a thousand pieces: In the mean time
Silverin, who was in fight with a Giant, seeing his friends glorious by the
defeature of all the rest, became so furious, that making no account of his
life, he put both his hands to his sword, and therewith smote his enemy so
dangerously on the body, that he opened him even to the very back, tumbling him
into the sea with his companions. This so glorious a victory having given them
incredible content, they would have gone down into the hold of the ship for to
have delivered such prisoners as they should have found there, but that they
were staid by a noise they heard; and as they were about to learn the cause
thereof, they saw a window open in the side of the ship, out of the which a
Giantesse threw her self headlong into the sea, holding in her arms a damsel
reasonable handsome, who seeing her self in such danger, cried out alowd for
help: At her cry all the Knights suddenly reached forth their hands for to
have saved her, but their pity was to no purpose; for the Giantesse sinking to
the bottom, she was drowned with her, whereat the Princes were exceedingly
greeved; nevertheless being comforted by the little knowledge they had of her,
they reentred into their own ship, which running her first course had quickly
left that coast, and sooner far then Cassandra could visit those Princes, who
were all unhurt except Silverin of the desert, that had received a cut on his
left arm, but the wound not being great he made little reckoning of it, and sat
down at the Table with the rest, where we will leave them, and take a little
breath.

CHAP. VII. Clarisel of Guinday a incountring by night with a strong adventure,
forsakes the ship of the Sun, and departs for to go into France to the
succor of the brave Alcidas.
THE ship of the Sun cutting the waves wonderful swiftly, Rozalmond and the
Knight of the desert past away the time with much content, whilst Clarisel not
without unquietnes entertained his thoughts with the perfections o^ his fair
shepherdess, and the extreme desire that he had to see her, made him to wake
when others took their rest; so that one night not being able to sleep, he
forsook his bed, and getting up to the deck, he began to speak unto the waves
(as if he would have demanded their assistance against the flames which
consumed him) when a voice brought to him by the wind from a far, drew him out
of his thoughts to give ear unto that which she said; the nearer he
approached, the better he understood the accents of the voice, which
interrupted by an infinity of sighs, made him conclude that they proceeded from
a person very much afflicted: wherwithall he was so moved to pity, that he
presently descended into his chamber, took his arms without speaking a word to
his companions, instantly remounted up, and seeing a bark pass by wherein was a
woman lamenting, he said unto her: Gentlewoman, if you will let your vessel
come nearer, and take me in, I willingly offer you my sword, if you can make
any use of it for your content. Alas! (said she fighing) the complaint which I
make now proceeds from my not meeting with any one that is sensible of my
sorrow, and that will undertake the deliverance of a Lover, the faithfullest
that ever sighed at the feet of a beautiful mistress; wherefore I will not
refuse your noble offer. Saying so, she drew near with her bark, received
Clarisel in very courteously; and commanding the mariners to hoise up sails, and
run on their former course, she thus proceeded: I imagine that the only
compassion of my pain, and the glory which is to be expected from a generous
enterprise have given you the desire to succor me; but believe me, Sir Knight,
you will be carried thereunto with more affection when you understand the occasion
of it. The time was that I lived very contentedly, and free from the cares of
the world, believing that fortune was not able to cross this my happiness: but
that powerful divinity which always triumphs over men, made me feel that our
good or harm depend on his favor and frown. I walked forth one day into a wood
adjoining to one of the fairest houses of France (whither I am now conducting
you) and little thinking of love, I went admiring the providence of nature,
that produces all things either for the profit or pleasure of man, when
through the trees I perceived a Knightlying upon the grass: I was about to
have turned back (and would to God I had, for then you had not seen me at this
present so sigh and complain) but being a little too curious, and having my
woman with me, I ventured to go close unto him; as soon as I had seen his face
which seemed mavelous beautiful, it was impossible for me (O Gods! can I say
it without shame? yes, since my fortune will have it so) it was impossible for
me, Knight, any longer to maintain my liberty, but even then I received the
hurt which time has made incurable. I had taken exceeding delight in beholding
of him, if some tears that trickled down his cheeks had not troubled me, but
there by apprehending the misery which now I am in, I found pain in this
pleasure; howbeit having more love then fear, and foolishly imagining that I
had beauty sufficient to alter him, in case he were in passion for another, I
went to awake him with a kiss, when I perceived him to open his lips, and
complain in this manner: O Gods! must our love yield to the fury of a barbarous
mother, and shall our desires depend upon her avarice? Fair Clitia, I cannot
believe but that the memory of our delights are dearer to you then her
commandments, and that you prefer your vows before her menaces. But your
silence does much amaze me, and I am not able to say whether I am to fear a
change in you, or some mischance in your person. Mighty Love, divert both the
one and the other of these accidents, and suffer not humanity to be of more
power then thy self. These complaints infinitely displeased me, and I would
fain have retired, if my new passion would have permitted me; but being no
longer Mistress of my will, I came inconsiderately to mine own ruin,
nevertheless knowing that modesty is a powerful charm to win men's affections,
I would not seem impudent, but withdrew my self under some trees fast by, and
began to sing, hoping that he would repair to the voice as he did; for not
giving me so much leisure as to sing out fowr verses, he arose, and creeping
from oak to oak he came very near unto me. I marked him well, but making as
though I did not, I continued my song, at the end whereof he showed himself,
and saluting me with an excellent grace, demanded of me whether I would accept
of his company. Another would have been afraid at the sudden approach of a man
unknown, but not desiring to make use of any such cunning, I answered him with
a smile (which might very well have testified my thoghts) that it were
simplicity to refuse a Knight of so fair a presence as his. To what end should
I relate the discourse we had then, and how I applied all my allurements and
charms for to render our disease common? Without doubt it would but add unto
my misery; wherefore I will only let you know, that taking occasion to discover
unto him what I thought of certain sighs he had fetched, I told him that his
good parts had possessed me with a great desire to love him, and that I entreated
him to consider what good he had gotten without any labor at all. My speech
ending with a mighty blush, he looked upon me, and answering me with a sigh.
Alas! Madam, said he unto me, what a world of cause have I now to complain of
my ill fortune, which having engaged my affection in another place, will not
suffer me to receive the favors you would confer upon me. These eyes wherein
you yet see tears do witness but too well, that my heart is not at quiet, and
that a woman possesses it: be pleased then not to accuse me, if I do not
dispose of it according to your desire, seeing I have not the power so to do;
but if in any other thing you can think me fit for your service, Madam command,
I will recompense the honor of your love, with my blood, and will gladly die
to assure you that I am much obliged by your favor. Imagine, I pray you,
whether I took any pleasure in this answer, whereby the death of all my hopes
was concluded. No questionles, for I was almost ready to swound with grief at
it, but my anger preserved my judgment, for to complain of him, and I began to
term him cruel, when I saw a woman appear, who knowing him alighted at that
very instant, and presenting him a letter said, that Clitia, (so was my rival
called) remembered her service unto him. At these words I perceived him grow
pale, and his legs became so feeble, that he had fallen down had not that woman
upheld him. I was almost as sensible of his indisposition as himself, but
desiring to make use of the opportunity it gave me, I took the letter out of
his hand, and knew by the contents thereof, that Clitia being ready to be
delivered of a child, derived from their stolen pleasures, desired him to
return in all haste both for to legitimate the birth of it, as also by that way
to deserve the favor which her mother had always denied them, protesting in
case he were disloiall, not to survive her delivery, but to poison her self. I
was violently in love with him, I must confess, but when I considered the
reason that he had to affect this woman, who upon his faith had made no
difficulty to give him that, which ought of all things to be most dear unto us,
I set by mine own interest, and showing more pity then love, I counseled him
to depart instantly away, since it so much concerned his Mistress life and
honor. This is to love nobly, said he being come to himself again, but Madam,
my misfortune will not suffer me to expedite my journey, my horse being slain
in a combat which I had yesterday just without this wood. That shall not hinder
you, replied I, for I that would give you my self, cannot refuse you an horse.
Then bringing him to my stable, I bestowed one of the best Coursers of the
Kingdom on him, and so letting him go, I returned to my chamber for to
complain of my destiny, that had made me to love a man, who had not the power
to recompense my affection, and for to seek out reasons to divert me from these
fancies, in the continuance whereof I saw my assured ruin, but to speak truth
I could not resolve so much as to say that I would never love him: proceeding
then in my former passion, I presently dispatched away a Squire, and charged
him expressly to enquire what became of Alcidas (so is that worthy Knight named)
which he performed with so much care, that about six days after he reported
unto me the death of Clitia, who had poisoned her self, thinking that the
retardment of her lover was a sign of his disloialty; and further, which much
perplexed me, he delivered that the mother of this Lady had caused Alcidas to
be apprehended (as he was shedding an ocean of tears on his Mistrisses tomb)
and imprisoning him, had condemned him shamefully to lose his head, if within
three months he did not find a Knight that would combat Farnabazan, a
terrible and mighty Giant, who came not long since to inhabit upon this woman's
lands, no man knowing wherefore. If the death of Clitia was pleasing to me,
because it opened a door to my hopes, you may as well believe that the
captivity of Alcidas afflicted me; howbeit, loving him too much only to bestow
tears on him, I put my self to sea two days after, with a purpose to go unto
Constantinople, to demand the assistance of some one of those brave Princes,
which seek the like occasions of glory; but I am sufficiently satisfied for all
my travel, having incountred you in the strangest manner that ever was, and
applauding my good fortune, I will hope that ere long you will restore me to
the supremest degree of my felicity, seeing justice accompanies your arms.
Madam, assure your self (answered Clarisel) that I will gladly fight for his
preservation, and your contentment; but if you would oblige me, make truce with
your complaints, and restrain these tears a little, that so our voyage may seem
the less tedious. It is fit (said she) that having found a remedy for my
grief, I should show a merrier countenance; I will no longer complain then, but
apply my self to make the time, if I can more pleasing unto you. Whilst they
discoursed in this manner, Rozalmond and the Knight of the Desert, being risen
with the Sun, marvelled very much that they could not see Clarisel, and
purposed to go and wake him, thinking that he was yet in his bed; but Cassandra
arriving thereupon, told them, that he had embarked himself with a strange
Gentlewoman, for to assist her in an important affair; whereat doubtless
Rozalmond had been discontented, but that he considered, it was not without
great cause he was carried away by so extraordinary an adventure, so tha
showing himself not much sensible of it, he fell into talk with Cassandra and
Silverin till it was dinner time, which was no sooner done, but they landed
hard by Constantinople with no small content.

CHAP. VIII. Rozalmond and Silverin being in the Empire of Greece, combat with
the valiant Knight of the Savage, and Griolanis: they are parted by ^our
Princes of Greece, the quarrel that grew between them by the cunning of a
Damsel, and the end of the dangerous fight which was betwixt these eight
incomparable warriors.
ROzalmond, who sought not the praise of men, and that ascribed all the glory
of his actions only to virtue, perceiving that he was in the Empire of Greece,
turned him to Cassandra, and said unto her: Madam, I much desire not to be
discovered here, until my valor have rendered me worthy of my birth; but how
is that likely to be, seeing the arms I wear, which are the best in the world,
will presently be known by all that saw me depart with them from the Court; I
would therefore entreat you, as an addition to your other favors, to go and
buy me some others where you think they may be had, otherwise I am resolved to
seek my fortune elsewhere, because I will not be constrained by the importunity
and entreaties of my friends, to make any longer abode here. I knew very well
(answered she) that you would request this of me, which made me to take order
for it aforehand; and I marvel how all the while that you were aboard, you
never observed an armor which the wise Alcander has provided for you:
whereupon, returning with him into the ship, she showed him certain arms
hanging on a pin, the fairest and the richest that ever he had seen; they were
^zure, all covered over with white roses, raised up with small strings of gold,
whose ends made an A. and an R. so neatly interlaced, that he stood a good
while admiring the workmanship of them; imagining, and that rightly, that those
were the first letters of his fair Armazia's and his own names; but having an
extreme desire to see them on, he doft those which first belonged to Meridian,
and afterward to the Knight of the Sun, and immediately put on them, greatly
marvelling to find them so exceeding light, and fit for him, as if he had but
a dublet on. I should never hazard my self in any combat with these arms (said
he to Cassandra) if any other saving your self had given them to me; but wholly
relying upon your judgment, I will make no scruple to use them, and will
believe that the temper will supply the defect of the matter. Your safety (said
she) is dearer to me then that I should be any way careless of it, and if
these arms be light, it is to accommodate you the better in fight, you shall
know the goodness of them ere it be long; in the mean while, you must remember
that a valiant man is to apply himself to the time, not to yield to any labor,
and to take all things in good part: I speak this to you, because we are to
part one from another immediately, for I am to bestow my self in an affair that
tends very much to the good of your house; but before I go, I will advise you
by no means to be afflicted for your absence from the beautiful Armazia, time
and your loialty will give you those felicities which is expected by a virtuous
love. At these words Rozalmond found himself close by Silverin, who attended
him on the shore, very much marvelling that he could neither see the ship of
the Sun, nor any body living, but two dwarfs, that held a couple of brave
strong horses, upon which Silverin and he presently mounted, taking the first
way they met withal, which brought them in less then an hour into a goodly
forest, where on the fudden they met with a Damsel and two Knights; one of
them carried a Savage on his shield, and the other a Moore in chains; whereby
you may easily guess them to be the renowned Knight of the Savage, and Don
Griolanis, called the fair Knight, who came from the justs at Constantinople,
as you heard in the last Chapter of the precedent Book, and had by chance
incountered a Damsel, unto whom Griolanis spoke thus: It grieves me not a
little that I cannot satisfy your desire, but Gentlewoman you must blame your
self for it, who require a thing which is not in my power. Your excuses are to
no purpose (answered she) and all the reasons of the world shall not release
you from your promises: follow me then to perform my pleasure, otherwise I will
endeavor to deprive you of your life, and will request your head of these
Knights that are coming here. By heaven (answered he) they are not able to give
it you; and if it were as easy for me to content you, as to defend my self
from them, I should soon be delivered from a great importunity. You are a
little rash (said the good Knight of the Roses, so we will call Rozalmond
hereafter) for it seems that after you have failed in your promise to this
Damsel, you will also defy us upon that quarrel, I do not willingly
undertake a combat without knowing whether it be just or no, but if this
Gentlewoman entreats me, you shall see it had been better for you to have used
gentler language, for you shall either die for it, or satisfy her in what she
desires of you. Who are you (said Grian the Savage then in scornful manner?)
Who are you that kills men so fast? I am (answered Rozalmond, netled with this
disdainful speech of his:) I am a Knight can do more then I say. That will I
know by experience, said Grian: when as turning their horses about, they
encountered one another so bravely, that each of them thought he had run
against a rock, finding themselves both with great amazement on the ground: for
Rozalmond and Grian, not being used to such falls, could hardly be persuaded
they were unhorsed; howbeit, seeing themselves lie all along, they instantly
arose, and carried with an unaccustomed fury, they discharged two such blows
with their swords each on the other, that both of them b^nded their knees, even
ready to tumble down, had they not been supported by shame; but presently
recovering themselves, they began to assail one another so fiercely, that
either of them wondered at his enemies force; their blades being always in
continual motion, and guided still by a like rage: This while Silverin and
Griolanis combatted with no less courage and address, sometimes one made two
or three steps back, sometime the other was astonished, their armor was all over
hacked, and if the blood ran down on one of their arms, the other presently
beheld his on the ground. Having thus continued fighting three hours together,
and no advantage perceived on either side, when the Damsel, who had so engaged
them, seeing four very gallant Knights arrive, ran suddenly unto them, and
bedewing her cheeks with tears, besought them to grant her one thing she would
request of them. We will not deny you (said one of them, who spoke for the
rest) provided your request be just, and that it be in our power. I should be
unworthy of your favor (answered she) if I should require an impossibility of
you; my desire then is, that you will tell me your names, and that you will
speedily part these Knights, who outrage one another, as you see, for my
occasion. You would have made us beholding unto you (said the Knight) if you
had not desired our names, but not to fail in our promise, know that this great
Knight is Prigmaleon, Sovereign of the Empire of Aethiopia; the second is
Persides, son to the excellent Emperor of Persia, Don Rogel; the third is the
valiant Lucibel, Prince of France; and for my self, I am called Russian, of
Media: touching the quarrel of these Knights, we will labor to pacify it, or
die in the attempt. Whereupon, advancing toward them, who were still in fight,
they wondered to see with what fury and address they managed their combat, and
especially with what grace he of the Roses bestowed his blows, which seemed far
more terrible then those of Grian, who had gotten him such glory at
Constantinople, and gently declaring unto them, that she that was the cause of
their difference desired their atonement, they entreated them to become
friends, and to part with equal reputation. I am content (said Griolanis) so
as this woman will quit me of the boon which she has cunningly obtained from
me. How, answered the damsel, would not my love suffer me to see you in
danger, have I sought the means to draw you out of it, and are you so
ungrateful not to acknowledge such favor? Knight it shall cost you your life,
since I can hope for nothing else from you. Then having desired the new comers
to do her right, one might presently see the case altered.

Rozalmond, Grian, Griolanis, and Silverin, forgetting their former quarrel,
made head against these fowr Princes of Greece, who abandoning their lances had
betaken them to their swords, and began a most dangerous bickering; if
Rozalmond admired the dexterity of Persides, Persides redoubted his fury, the
force of the Savage astonished the bastard of Media, and no less was he
apprehensive of his address; if Griolanis blows seemed weighty to Prigmaleon,
his had no less violence; and if the Knight of the Desert struck with courage,
Lucibel could answer him as readily; their helmets were all fire, the ground
was strewed with pieces of their arms, the woods resounded with the
impetuousnes of their blows; briefly, it was the dreadfullest combat that ever
was seen in Greece, for indeed such strong and valiant champions never appeared
there before; the more they fought, the more terrible they seemed, and their
fury increasing with their travail, it might well be concluded that the end of
this fray would determine the most part, or it may be all their lives. Rozalmond
vexed to find so much resistance in his enemy, employed all his might, but
Persides fought so well that he perceived he had met with his match, and durst
not assure himself the victory, which so enraged him, that he seemed to be
even desperate; wherefore resolving either to die or quickly to vanquish, he
gave his enemy so dangerous a blow on his shield, that being not able to
sustain the fury of it, he was constrained to fall backward on his saddle bow,
deprived of sense; but he was not long in that posture, for raising himself up
far more incensed then ever he was in his life, he gave Rozalmond so strong a
thrust, that his horse recoiled a step back: this while Russian and the Knight
of the Savage assailed one another very furiously, now the one bowed down to
the crupper of his horse, by and by the other hit his chin against his breast;
if Griolanis astonished the valiant Ethiopian, he was oftentimes compelled to
lose his stirrups, and stagger under the weight of his blows; and if Lucibel
drew blood from Silverin, he saw his own at the same instant upon his arms:
thus was the combat so equal, so cruel, and full of fury, that no other but
some unlucky end of it could have been expected, if at the end of six howrs the
night had not arrived, which growing very dark made them retire, with some
content to the Greek Princes, who thought their enemies a little too strong,
and that this battle could not have been concluded with their honor. Being
parted then the one from the other, howbeit resolved to attend the next morning
for to see unto whom fortune would give the victory, the fowr first combatants
went to lie down together under certain trees, when they saw a Giant pass
along by them, who carrying a torch in the one hand, held a very fair damsel
by the other, that wept bitterly, crying out for help unto the Gods, and it
seemed to Rozalmond that it was his beauteous Armazia, which put him into such
a rage, that instantly he got him to horse again, galloping after the Giant,
whom he had threatened with a million of deaths, if he had been able to suffer
so many, but the business being carried by enchantment, and by the sole wisdom
of Alcander, who labored in this manner to divert the mischief which might have
ensued if these Princes had fought again together, Rozalmond could by no means
meet with this Giant, and finding himself not long after in the Cote of a young
shepherd, who received him very courteously, he forgot this affair, and betook
him to his rest, whilst the others which had had clean contrary visions,
straied one from another several ways.

CHAP. IX. The marvels which Griolanis encounters, pursuing the fantosmes of
Alcander.
THE valiant Knight of the Savage and Griolanis having an extreme desire to
overtake two Centaurs, which seemed to carry away certain damsels, rode so hard
that by break of day they found themselves close to a great and spacious
forest, at the entrance whereof, perceiving two ways alike beaten, they
separated themselves though somewhat unwillingly; Grian taking the right hand,
and Griolanis the left, pursuing their course with the same desire to succor
these afflicted women, which they thought were in the hands of those monsters.
Griolanis having been two howrs in the wood, sometimes standing still to
hearken if the cries of the damsels could bring him to the retreat of these
Centaurs, sometimes to mark the tract on the ground that might make him guess
the way he was to hold, he espied three Knights riding a front before a litter
crowned with crimson velvet, on the one side thereof a big Knight richly armed,
and of a haughty look, on the other a reasonable handsome damsel, and fowr
Knights behind. This equipage having made him turn aside the better to observe
it, begot such an earnest desire in him to know what was in the litter, that
approaching it and addressing himself unto him, who appeared to be of so good a
presence, he said unto him: Knight, be pleased to tell me what it is you
conduct in this Litter. It is that which you may not know (answered he in an
arrogant manner) unles first you vanquish me, and afterward these seven Knights
together, and that also you grant a boon to this damsel. Now think whether
your forces are capable of so great a charge, or whether you have sufficient
courage to undertake it; if not, depart, for all the prayers in the world shall
get you no other satisfaction. You are so discurteous (answered Don Griolanis)
that if I had not a desire to undertake this adventure, your arrogance would
make me fight with you, therefore I will know by experience what is in you, and
look into this Litter spite of your teeth: whereupon placing themselves in the
middle of the way just one against the other, they charged their lances and
incountered so strongly that the stranger flew to the ground; Griolanis having
lost both his stirrups, was so astonished with the violence of the shock, that
his course was finished before he could come to himself; howbeit considering
that it was no time to complain, he quickly recovered his spirits, alighted
from his horse, drew his sword, and seeing his enemy that was risen, come
toward him with an extreme desire to revenge his disgrace, he met him, and
withal gave him two such terrible blows, that he was compelled to knock his
chin against his breast, which so incensed him that clasping his sword fast in
his hand he smote him so furiously that he smote his shield in two. Griolanis
strokes were dreadful, no less impetuous were those of the Knight of the
Litter; if the one struck, the other gave a thrust, they cunningly avoided
blows, their dexterity was admirable, their force extreme, their rage so great
that to see them hew one another in that manner, nothing else could be expected
thence but death: two howrs being spent since the beginning of the combat,
Griolanis enraged with this protraction, redoubled his blows most furiously,
and perceiving his enemy grow weary, he gave him such a cruel cut three
fingers deep on the shoulder, that he staggered with it, and not permitting him
to come to himself again, he struck him with such a mighty force upon the head,
that he laid him stark dead in the place. Behold, said he, the reward of pride,
and the punishment which attends the unadvised: it may be lawful for me now, I
hope, to see what I have so much desired. Our deaths, answered one of the
Knights, must first accompany our conductor. Truly, said Griolanis, it is much
against my will if I sight at this present, but since you constrain me, you
shall suffer for it. Saying so, he quickly leapt into his saddle, and taking a
lance from his Squire, he ran against the seven Knights, who incountred him
furiously all at once, and brake all their spears upon him without moving him
any more then if they had resisted against some rock; but it fell out otherwise
with him, at whom he aimed his lance, for he was run quite through and through,
and overthrown dead to the earth. Having ended his course he returned with his
sword aloft, and seeing himself environed by six men, who seemed to be fearles
of death, he began to lay about him; now he foind at one, then he cut another
on the head, here fell a leg, there flew off an arm, and briefly he quartered
them with such fury, that in less then half an howr three of them were laid
dead on the ground; the rest notwithstanding grew more obstinate, and drawing
strength from their grief for the loss of their friends, they seemed to fight
with the more rage and fury, but being in the hands of one of the prime Knights
of the world, all that they could do was to no purpose; for they were soon cut
in pieces, and there remained none but the damsel, who being much amazed at
the incomparable valor of this Knight, beheld him with wonder. Gentlewoman,
said he approaching to her, may I now be permitted to see that which I have so
deerly bought with the death of these discurteous Knights? Yes Sir, answered
she, so as you promise me one boon. Most willingly, said Griolanis, for I was
born for the service of Ladies. You may approach then when you please, said
she. Griolanis having lift up the covering beheld in the bottom of the Litter
the pourtrait of a Queen so mavelous fair, that he was almost beside himself
considering her with so much perfection. Good God, cried he, what a world of
beauties are here assembled together? and how happy is the Knight that can hope
for the possession of so invaluable a treasure? Gentlewoman, be pleased I pray
you, to let me understand the name of this excellent Princess, and why you
carry her picture about in this fashion. It is fit, said she, that I give you
this satisfaction, seeing you have nobly promised to grant me what I shall
desire of you: You see the face and features, but not all the beauties and
graces of the mighty Queen of Corolandaya; for her actions are so winning, that
they render her accomplishments far greater and more commendable: As for that
which concerns our voyage, I will deliver you the cause of it. The Kingdom of
this Princess consisting of one of the most spacious and fertile Islands in
the world, accommodated with safe harbors, strong places, valiant warriors, and
exceeding lovely dames, gave her a number of excellent Knights for servants,
some carried by the consideration of this crown, and others to enjoy a thing so
rare, whereupon depended the former. The fame of the beauties and graces of
this Queen every day bringing one Knight or other to present his service unto
her, it happened that at one time there were two and thirty which carried with a
like desire to show their valor before her, made a turnament, where, in few
words, jealousy incensing their fury, they hewed one another so cruelly, that
notwithstanding all the prayers of Adelazia (so is my Mistress named) who wept
and took on pitiously, there was but one remained alive, all the rest having
past by the edge of the sword: the Queen was so sensible of this massacre, that
she swore never to admit of any man more, and to that end she caused thirty
soldiers to be placed at each port of her Kingdom, with express commandment
not to suffer any Knight whatsoever to land; and conceiving that one valiant
person might vanquish them, she made a law whereby she ordained, that not any
one of those which should be so fortunate as to pass in despite of her guards,
should see her before they had submitted unto one commandment of three, the
choice whereof she left unto them (assuring her self that the least of the
three was impossible for any man whatsoever to perform) or that they had
overcome an hundred armed men, which should be always ready waiting at the
gates of the town where she pleased to make her residence. Since that time many
have presented themselves at the port, some of purpose, others driven in by
fowl weather, but being vanquished by the guards, they retired with disgrace;
only this miserable man whom you have slain, the Prince of Argilles named
Silvion, subdued the thirty Knights, and entered into the Island, where the
Queen causing three most difficile things to be propounded unto him, namely,
either to give her the scepter of Greece by the death of all the Princes which
possess it, or present her with the goodliest Knight, and the most exquisit
beauty of the earth, or conduct her portrait through all the Provinces of the
Orient, in the manner that you have seen, maintain in all the Courts of Kings,
that she was the fairest Lady in the World, and at the end of six years return
unconquered, which done she promised he should see her, and that with her self
she would give him the Crown of Corolandaya. This unfortunate Prince finding an
extreme favor in this last commandment, most willingly undertook that charge
(albeit that the term of six years was grievous unto him) and therefore desired
that she would be pleased to appoint some one to accompany him who might be
judge of his actions, and give her account thereof; which she granted, sending
me along with him, and expressly commanding me to write all the names of such as
should be vanquished upon this quarrel, and present her with a list of all the
Princesses for whose service they undertook the combat: the which accordingly I
have performed, having already the names of threescore and twelve daughters to
Sovereign Potentates, and of two hundred Knights bravely fought withal and
overcome, but the end of my commission arriving by the death of this Knight, I
am constrained instantly to return, and carry back this Litter to Corolandaya,
whither you shall accompany me if you please, suffering no man to see the
portrait of my Lady, whereunto you are obliged by the boon you have promised me.
Gentlewoman, said Griolanis, there needed no promise to make me undertake this
voyage with you, for I feel my self already so much the servant of this
Princess, that if it like you, I will either continue the enterpriz^ of this
Knight I have slain, or otherwise fulfill your pleasure, protesting according
to your desire, that no man shall have the content to behold so delicate a
face, without he buy it at the same rate it cost me. The damsel then
commanding a little dwarf to drive on the horses, put her self behind the
Litter with the Knight, who having doft his helmet for to refresh himself, made
this Gentlewoman so amazed that she could not contain from crying out. O Gods!
what an encounter is this? I beheld even now in the combat of this Knight all
the valor that may be wished for in a man; now I see all the charms and all the
graces that can be desired in the sweetest face of the World. Ah Sir! if the
Prince of Argilles had beheld you without an helmet, and that he could have
prevailed more by his prayers, then he has done by his sword, doubtless he
had showed my Mistress that which she most desires, and placing you by her, he
had assembled the goodliest Knight, and the beautifullest Lady in the earth;
but it much rejoices me that she shall not be deprived of this contentment,
seeing I am conducting you unto her. Griolanis laughing at this speech, began
to entertain her with other discourse, and so sweetly passing away the time,
they arrived at the Sea side, where they imbarqued themselves, sailing toward
the Island of Corolandaya, whither we will leave them going, for to overtake
Grian the Savage.

CHAP. X. The Adventures which happened to Grian the Savage, after he was
separated from Griolanis: the Loves of Arliana and Zelandion, and the beginning
of his own with the fair Brandimanda Queen of the Amaz^ns.
THE Knight of the Savage being separated from Griolanis as you saw in the
precedent Chapter, traveled all the day not meeting with any adventure, and
perceiving himself when it began to wax dark at the foot of a rock, upon the
which he discerned a little house; he took a path that he thought would lead
him to it, and went about so long till he came to the door of it, where at the
first knock two young Hermites appeared, who having received him very courteously
brought him to a chamber, and helped him to unarm himself, whilst his Squire
set up his horses in a little hovell there by. Grian finding more meat then he
could hope for that barren place, fell to with a good stomach, howbeit he was
not so attentive to his pallat, but that he observed how the actions, speech,
and countenance of these Religious persons did not show to be of men able to
endure the austerity of a solitary life; having then a very great desire to
know what he was ignorant of, he said unto them: Excuse me, I pray you, if I
suspect that you are not such as you seem to be, your voices and youth persuade
me that you are some women, abused, and reduced by despair, to so desert a
place; let me obtain of you not to conceal any thing from me, declare your
misfortunes, and I vow by the Order of Knighthood, which I have received, to
assist you in all that shall be necessary to your content. Your judgment does
not deceive you (answered one of them, with her eyes full of tears) we are the
unhappiest creatures in the world, she by pertaking my misery, and I by giving
too light belief unto the words of a man, the most disloiall that ever
breathed, he is called Zelandion, Count of Ma^tage, and I am named Arliana, no
less rich, and as well derived as he, but it may be not so fair as was
requisite to settle his fickle humor; it was my ill fortune to see him at a
turnament made in honor of the nuptials of a kinswoman of mine, where most
unluckily he chose me out from all the rest to combat under my favor; I
accepted him for my Knight, believing that his merits and civility commanded me
to do him that grace, and then I began to love him so extremely, that from
thence does the occasion of all my complaints proceed. He was adjudged the best
man at arms, and I the fair^st woman of the assembly, which was the reason that
we willingly grew acquainted together, finding a certain kind of, I know not
what, sweetness in our conversation, which reciprocally informing our
knowledge with the perfections of the mind, as the eye had done by those of
the body, it begot so great an amity betwixt us, that we were never quiet when
we were absent one from another, either by some accident, or modesty; the
trees carried a thousand marks of our loves, every day he received my letters
in answer of his, our parents authorized our affections, all things seemed
disposed to our desire, and in my heart I named my self already his wife; as
without doubt I had been, if he had well remembered the oaths which he had
sworn to me a million of times: But this traitor having drawn from me all that
he had desired, upon promise of marriage, left me with child; and under color
of some affairs he got him to his friends, whither having sent letter upon
letter to certify him of the case I was in, the disgrace I was like to run,
how much he owed to my affection and his own faith, the desperate estate
whereunto I should be reduced in the end, not daring to appear before my
friends with a bastard in my belly; and briefly, all that might be said upon
the like occasion, I received no other return but contempt, and an
advertisement to show my self wiser when I would have an husband.

I will not deliver the sorrow which this cruel answer brought me, you will
imagine it well enough, but it wrought so powerfully upon me, that I was
delivered of a son, which born before his time, died the same day, redoubling
my grief and lamentation, (for I hoped he might one day serve to make this
wretch acknowledge his fault) who understanding this accident, and thinking
that I would never let him be quiet, departed one morning from his fathers, and
went to seek adventures, as Knights errant use to do; which coming to my
knowledge, I resolved to leave the world, not able to endure the menaces and
hatred of my parents, who never looking upon me, but with an eye of contempt
and scorn, made me wish for death a thousand times a day: wherefore taking all
the money I could make, I got out one night, and in two days traveled so far,
that I arrived at this house, where, finding it empty, I stayed; and because I
would not be known, I changed my habit, resolving to spend the rest of my days
in continual tears. And thus, good Sir, have you had the sad, but true story
of my misfortune, which me thinks, deserves as much pity, as I have misery.
Certainly, answered Grian, Zelandions treachery is greater then your
weakness, for ordinarily we have not considerations strong enough to keep us
from erring when we love, wherefore I protest unto you, that if I can meet and
know him, either to be the death of him, or he shall make good his promise to
you of marriage; live then with his hope, and suffer me to take a little rest,
for this is the third night that I have not so much as closed an eye. Then
Arliana bidding him good night, withdrew into another chamber with her
companion, and left Grian to sleep till the next day, when he took the first
way that presented it self after he had courteously taken leave of his
disguised hostesses. His horse carrying him according to chance, rather then by
his own direction, he traveled till noon, when he discovered a stately Castle,
unto the which addressing himself, he incountered a damsel making most
pitiful moan. Gentlewoman, said he unto her, this great sorrow of yours argues
some extraordinary affliction, but if your relief may lie in the power of a
Knight, let me quickly know what troubles you, and be assured of present
succor. Alas, said she, I will not relate the occasion of my laments, because
I will not stay you to no purpose; enter into this unluckie house, and preserve
one from death, who it may be will render you the like another time. Herewith
Grian setting spurs to his horse, gallopped into the base court of the Castle,
where at one side he saw seven soldiers and a giant lie dead, and fast by, a
Knight of goodly presence, in the midst of three giants, who discharging three
terrible blows upon his head, felled him to the ground; whereat Grian being
exceedingly discontented, suddenly advanced, for fear they should make an end
of dispatching him, and couching his lance, very luckilieran one of them clean
through; the other two with horrible cries, which were able to have feared some
Knight less confident then this Champion, charged him presently; but he no
more daunted then a bird of prey would be at the sight of a silly partridge,
drew out his sword, and combating with no less judgment then fury, made them
not only despair of the victory, but so dreadful were his strokes, that
whenever they saw his arm elevated, they straight began to apprehend the end
of their lives: the combat waxed fiercer and fiercer, the place was strowed
with the pieces of their armor, the giants blood died the pavement, and Gria^
so held them to it, that they tasted oftener of the edge of his blade, then
willingly they would; howbeit, ashamed to see themselves reduced under the
power of one man alone, they recovered new forces, and assailed him in such
sort, that they gave him two dangerous wounds, the one in the thigh, the other
on the arm; which so enraged him, that taking his sword in both his hands, he
let fall so mighty a blow upon the head of one of them, that he divided it in
two; and instantly advancing his arm with the like fury, he had paid the third
in the same coin, had he not been prevented by his flight; nevertheless, it
little availed him, for Grian following him close, with one dreadful blow,
almost cut his body in sunder: this done, he looked about him to see if he had
any more enemies to fight withal, but perceiving no body to appear, he
presently sheathed up his sword, and approaching the Knight, whose fall he had
beheld, he disarmed his head, remaining even ravished with the extreme beauty
of his face, which being at that instant overspread with golden hair, made him
think that he held not a Knight, but a woman fair, beyond all excellency; he
called the damsel at whose request he entered, and was about to ask her for
some water to fetch her again, but seeing her open her eyes, he took her under
the arm, and holding her up a little, he said unto her; Madam, take courage,
your enemies are not in case now to offend you. Where are they, said she,
rising with fury, where are these wicked wretches, that would upon such extreme
odds have taken away my life? Madam, answered Grian, I have used them as you
see, with more contentment then can be imagined, in that I have diverted the
destruction which they meant you. What powerful obligations are these, said
she, with a gentler countenance? and questionless you are a most valiant
Knight, that could prevail over three such monsters as these. I have done
nothing, answered he, but what I would most desirously recommence for your
service, and to deserve the honor of your commandments; wherefore if you be
any whit sensible of so little, Madam, furnish me with means to do more, and
favor me so much, as now to name me your Knight, you shall I hope no more
recent that choice, then I shall complain of my captivity; in the mean time let
us look, whether there be any thing else for us to do here. It is very well
advised, said she, lacing on her helmet, let us go then, as for your request,
time shall resolve me; so mounting up a pair os stairs, they visited all the
chambers, and finding no body, but only one woman with a bunch of keys, they
made her immediately descend into the dungeon, from whence she brought up one
and thirty Knights, whereof one seeming to Grian of a better presence then the
rest, made him desirous to know him. Gentleman, said he unto him, I pray you
tell me your name, and how you fell into the hands of these Giants. I should be
very ungrateful, answered he, if I should refuse you so small a matter,
receiving so much good from you; I am called Zelandion. How (said Grian, laying
hold of him at that word) are you then that disloial man, which betrayed the
affections of Arliana, after you had had your pleasure of her? By my best
hopes, if you were armed, as you are not, you should either die, or confess
that you have dealt lewdly. My Lord, said Zelandion, very much troubled with
this menace, it is not likely I should offer to fight with him that saves my
life, if I were in case so to do; it is true, that the bad counsel of some
pernicious persons, drew me to abuse the love of Arliana, but chastised by a
long captivity, I fully purpose quickly to repair that fault if I may find her
alive. Your repentance, said Grian, persuades me to pardon your weakness; but
do not think to deceive heaven once more, for if you do not keep your word
which you have given me now, be assured that I will not stick to ride a
thousand miles to inflict a just punishment upon you: And to let you know that
I have a special care of this business, go instantly and take the best horse
you can find here, following my Squire into a desert place, whether despair
has reduced Arliana, and marry her, whereby you shall give me occasion to
serve you. Now here is, said he, the happiest commandment that ever I could
have received: My Lord, you shall be obeyed, saying so, he caused a horse to be
sadled, got up, and following Grians Squire, arrived in four hours at his
Mistresses hermitage, whom he married after a world of protestations to love
her eternally.

Whilst he made this voyage, the gentle Knight of the Savage caused his wounds
to be looked unto, learned the quality of his Lady, knew that she was named
Brandimanda, a Princess among the Amazons, and representing the beginning of
his love unto her with such a grace, that considering the obligations wherein
she was tied to his assistance, she received him for her Knight, being content
to seek adventures with him, upon condition, that their familiarity should not
pass the limits of respect, and that he should not take the liberty at any
time to importune her, that she might not be obliged to do any thing repugnant
to the duty of a wise and modest virgin; which being most freely promised by
him, as soon as Grian was recovered of his hurts they departed, and began to
travel the world doing wonders in emulation one of another, and nourishing
their loves in this manner, until such time as the brave acts of this great
warrior advanced him to his Mistrisses Crown, as you may perceive by the
sequel of this discourse, which I will continue with the adventures of Clarisel
of Guindaya, seeing he is one of the prime subjects of our discourse.

CHAP. XI. Clarisel of Guindaya being arrived in France, succors Alcidas: his
combat with the Giant Farnabazan: he has news of Miralinda, at the nuptials
of Alcidas with Orizenna.
WE left Clarisel at sea going to succor Alcidas in favor of a French Lady,
whom he had incountred in the night, we are now to conduct him unto a good
port, and prosecute the history with his fortunes. This brave Prince seeing
himself a shore, after a tedious voyage at sea, and knowing that the term
prefixed for the safety of this Knight approached, he used very great
expedition, declining all occasions that might divert him from the execution of
his enterprise. Having traveled then eight days with his guide, who was named
Orixenna, at length he saw himself in the town where Alcidas was prisoner: but
Orixenna exceedingly dismayed to behold all the people assembled in the market
place, waxed pale, and so weak, that if Clarisel had not held her, without
doubt she had fallen from her horse. What ails you, said he, and what can
trouble you now when you have such cause to rejoice? Alas! said she with a
sigh, the concourse of this people gives me occasion to fear that Alcidas is
not alive. That were an extreme mischief, said Clarisel, but do not thus
afflict your self before you be more certain of the truth: I will go and
inquire of some body, in the mean time do you stay here and be comforted.
Saying so he was riding away, but perceiving diverse persons running on the
other side of the street, he made a stop, and immediately after he discovered a
young Gentleman in the midst between two hangmen, and guarded by twenty
archers, he marched with so confident a countenance, that his innocence
evidently appeared by the contempt of an infamous death. Madam, said Clarisel,
do you know this prisoner? Yes, said she exceedingly troubled, it is Alcidas;
wherefore good Knight, be pleased to remember your promise. At these words
Clarisel advancing toward the officers of justice, modestly demanded, whether
he might be admitted to combat for the justification of Alcidas. You cannot be
denied that, answered one, so as he will commit it to your arms. With all my
heart, said Alcides little expecting this good hap, and I protest before
heaven, which always takes in hand the defense of innocents, that I am no way
guilty of the crime wherewithal I am charged. I am satisfied, said Clarisel,
and therefore all that I require now is, that I may encounter your enemy; with
that he passed on to the place where proud Farnabazan was walking, with the
opinion that no man durst affront him; but seeing this Knight appear so bravely
disposed, and of so gallant a presence, he said unto him: Come thou,
unadvised Knight, to defend Alcidas? I do, answered Clarisel; and I am here to
make thee die like a traitor, replied the Giant, wherefore let us not spend the
time any longer idly. Then taking the field and charging their lances they met
so furiously that the earth seemed to tremble under them: their encounters had
different effects; Farnabazans spear rested in the Princes shield, who lost his
stirrups, but Clarisels entered into his body above fowr fingers deep,
overthrowing him to the ground with a noise like to the ruins of a mighty
building, which amazed all the assistants, who shouting for joy testified their
unspeakable content to behold this insolent man overthrown. These acclamations
augmented Don Clarisels courage, and the Giants shame, who blaspheming against
heaven, rose up to receive his enemy, that scorning advantage, was alighted,
and making toward him with his sword in his hand. Farnabazan confidently
persuading himself to repair the default of his lance with the first stroke he
should strike, thought to discharge his great fauchion on Clarisels head, and
cleave it in two, but the Prince wisely letting it slip by, declined this
storm, and taking hold of the occasion gave him a great wound on the left arm,
which dying the ground with his blood so incensed the Giant, that he advanced
his sword again with more fury then before; and followed Clarisel so close that
he could not eschew the blow which was so violent, that it made him recoil two
or three steps back, and showed him a thousand stars more then there are in the
element. Those which beheld him stagger in this manner were extremely grieved,
being verily persuaded that a second stroke would make an end of him, but they
rejoiced when they saw him recollect himself, and charge his enemy so
furiously, that his helmet being cut in many places, the blood ran down upon
his eyes and blinded him in such sort as he struck his blows in vain, which Don
Clarisel perceiving, who would not give him leisure to recover, pressed him so
far that in less then an howr he drew out all the rest of the blood of his
body, and overthrew him stark dead in the place, to the infinite contentment of
the people, and principally of Orizenna and Alcidas, who seeing himself free
from his chains, and without fear of any further suffering, he approached unto
Don Clarisel, and thanked him for his assistance, with all the humility he
could possibly express. But Clarisel knowing Orizenna's mind, said unto him:
The glory of your deliverance is to be ascribed to God, who never forsakes the
innocent in their distress, howbeit next to him you are indebted to the care
of this Lady, which has traveled above five hundred leagues to find out some
Knight that might combat Farnabazan, and deliver you; wherefore you shall do
wisely to show your self grateful for so much favor, Alcidas then turning
about to Orizenna, and having well observed her, remembered that it was she whom
he had incountered in the wood, and which surmounting her own desires, had
nobly assisted him with an horse, that he might not be wanting in his
engagement unto Clitia; wherewithal considering the new and powerful
obligation wherein he was bound to her affection, he resolved to let her see
how sensible he was of a benefit. Madam, said he unto her, my happiness would
be complete, if you will be pleased now to pass by the little satisfaction I
gave you, when you honored me so much, as to say that you loved me; then I was
a captive, now I ^m free, and can repair that fault, if you be as well inclined
to me as you were; for, me thinks, it is more then reason I should be liberal
unto you of that, which you have gotten with so much pains: command then what
you please, and drawing me out of the abisme of wretchedness, wherein I was
plunged, raise me to the supremest degree of felicity that love can give us. If
I had more regarded your virtue then mine own passion, answered Orizenna,
without doubt my spite had been added to the malice of your enemies, and I had
not labored so much to find you an assured succor; but not able to blame
your fidelity, I desired you should know that I was not offended with your
refusal, since you had not the power to give your self twice: As for your
resentment of the good offices I have done you, I approve of it, and shall be
very well satisfied, to see you sigh for me with the same sincerity as you have
heretofore done for Clitia; but now is no time to speak of this matter, let us
go to my house, and seek to restore you a little, after the enduring of so much
incommoditie as imprisonment brings along with it, and then we will consider of
the rest. This amorous discourse being very pleasing to Clarisel (whose valor
Alcidas commended to the skies) they all left the town, and for that Orizenna's
house was but four leagues from thence, they got thither by that time it was
night, which was no sooner past, but Alcidas, who could not endure the violence
of his new desires, fell upon the point of his marriage with Orizenna, which
was celebrated the third day after, with a world of magnificence, and brave
entertainment; howbeit, that which most contented Clarisel, was to behold six
strong lusty shepherds enter into the hall, whereof one advancing before the
rest, desired he might be admitted to maintain at wrestling, that Miralinda was
the fairest maid in the world. I know very well; replied Alcidas, that this
Shepherdess is incomparably fair, but my friend you are too weak to undergo
such a business; nevertheless, I will not hinder you from showing your
strength here, and to witness that I am pleased with your design, I promise a
scarf to the victor. At those words of Shepherdess, and Miralinda, Clarisel,
who was then in talk with Orizenna, changed color three or four times, which
very much troubled her at first, and going to prevent what she feared,
Clarisel, that suspected her meaning, took her by the hand, and leading her to
a window, said thus: Madam, I make no question but you have discerned some
alteration in me, and that the goodness of your disposition has made you
partaker of my suffering; but the way to relieve me, is other then you imagine,
and if I fail now of your assistance, there is no hope of remedy for me, but in
death; I assure my self you marvel at this language, and that you will demand
an explication of it from me; but if you had not known what it is to love, you
may think I would never acquaint you with my thoughts, for fear you should
laugh at me. In a word, I am in love, and the perfections of this Shepherdess,
for whose sake these men dispose themselves to wrestle, have ever since I saw
her picture, which was about some three weeks ago given me so much passion,
that it is impossible for me to hear her spoken of but that I am troubled
because I cannot come to the sight of her: it may be you will condemn this
affection of mine, and say with the most part of persons, that I am but poorly
spirited not to consider her birth and my condition, howbeit I will reply that
it is the fault of fortune, which does not impart her favors as she ought, and
that finding in her all that may be desired in the rarest Princess of the
earth, she is alike to be regarded. Howsoever it is no question with me whether
I do well or ill, but I freely communicate my heart to you, to the end you may
assist me with your counsel, acquaint me with her abode, give me a safe
retreat in your house, and so recompense that which you think is due to my
desert. In good faith, said she laughing, I will confess my weakness to you;
when I saw you change color, I believed you had not been well, but altering
this opinion upon the beginning of your discourse, I lightly imagined that you
had been in love with me, and was bethinking my self whether I should yield
more to your merit, then to the faith I ow to my Alcidas, but now being freed
from this care, it is easy for me to tell you that you love with reason; for
the beauty of this shepherdess may excuse the affection of any Knight
whatsoever; she dwells not above three leagues hence, and lives with such
contempt of the shepherds that adore her, as she seems to be born to triumph
over all and love none. Now if you will follow my counsel herein, you shall
not present your self before her in the estate you are; your habit would beget
suspicion, and your presence mistrust, but accommodating your self to her life,
take upon you as she does the care of some flocks, that so you may have the
more occasion to see her, and less impediment to your content. Truly, said he,
I hold this to be the best course I can take; but Madam, it were fit me thinks
that she should once see me first as a Knight, to the end that beholding me
change my condition for her sake, she might be the more obliged to love me.
That will not be amiss, answered she, and if you can find the opportunity to
meet with her alone when you go in that fashion, your design no doubt will
speed the better; but we will think of that at more leisure, in the mean time
let us take our part, if you please, of this wrestling sport. Then turning
about to the shepherds, whereof two were a wrestling together, they took
mavelous delight to see what falls they gave one another, tumbling together
on the grass, and afterward dispute with their fists who should be the
victor. This pastime having lasted two howrs, the night according to these
Lovers wishes arrived, which gave every one occasion to betake them to their
rest.

CHAP. XII. Clarisel sees his fair Mistress: their first discourse.
THE night too short unto these Lovers was very tedious to Don Clarisel, who
troubled with an amorous impatience slept not, and would have departed before
day to have given some quiet to his mind by the sight of his fair shepherdess,
but fearing to go without a guide left he should miss his way, he stayed till
Alcidas (whom Orizenna had acquainted with his resolution) came to bid him good
morrow. The contentment which he showed in his countenance made Clarisel sigh,
and say unto him: O God! how happy were I if I could boast the caresses of
Miralinda as you do in your thoughts the kisses of your Orizenna. Your love
does make you hope for the like success, answered Alcidas, and time will give
it you, let us make use of it then, and beginning to try our fortune let us
see whether you shall be as happy a lover, as you are a valiant Knight. Heerwith
they got to horse, and rode straight to Bellombre where Miralinda lived;
Alcidas endeavored to make the way seem short unto him with a deal of pleasing
discourse, but it gave him no gust at all, his mind was so taken up with
expectation of the content which he was to have ere long in beholding the
beauties of his Mistress: two howrsbeing spent in this manner, they past out of
the wood, and began to discover one of the delicatest places of the world: On
the one side a champion full of corn, on the other a dainty rising hill planted
with fruit trees, below a river, which gently winding watered two meadows
wherwithall his banks were bounded, upon the decline of the hill a number of
houses appeared, which made a pretty village, and at one side a little wood of
fur trees reaching almost to the clouds. Well Sir, said Alcidas, what say to
this place? That it is worthy of Miralinda, answered Clarisel, and that nature
seems to have made it for to render my abode here less irksome, albeit the
only presence of my shepherdess is able to make it most delightful unto me
were it not composed as it is, but I very much fear we shall not easily meet
with that we seek for. Let us follow our fortune, said Alcidas, Love is never
wanting to them that adore him. Then having past the river they came to certain
sallows, which gave a very pleasant shade, at the end of one of those meadows
where Alcidas alighting, said unto Don Clarisel: Sir, I hold it fit that we
should stay here a while for to see if Miralinda will pass by; for commonly
she goes this way, and grazes her flock upon this fresh pasture. Do as you
think good, answered Clarisel, for I am so little my self, that I am not able
to say any thing to purpose; whereupon he alighted, took his horse by the
bridle, as Alcidas had done, and letting him feed amongst the trees, he
returned close to the high way, where he espied a young shepherd who folding his
arms acrosse, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, said: O heavens! how long will
you suffer me to be the object of the scorn of this shepherdess, and when will
you render her more sensible of my affection? I have willingly forsaken that
which ambition might make men desire, I have put on an habit unworthy of my
estate that so I might enjoy the sight of her with less suspicion, and I serve
her with the same respects which should be used to a person more eminent, yet
she forbids me her presence, shuns me, and will not permit me so much as to say
that I die for her. This is extreme ingratitude, and if I complain thus it is
not without a great deal of reason. As I live, said Clarisel, I shall never be
jealous of this shepherd, and if all that suffer for her find no better
entertainment, I have cause already to complain. You are to hope better, said
Alcidas, for all those that she has seen have not that worth in them which you
have; but let us speak softer, I pray you, for questionles I see her coming.
At these words Clarisel grew pale, and perceiving her not far off, he trembled
like a leaf shaken by the wind, nevertheles thinking how much it conduced to
his future happiness to be bold in this first encounter, he courageously
resolved to board ^er without fear, and was going to meet her had he not been
retained by Alcidas, who seeing him offer to set forward, drew him back whilst
Miralinda approached, and sitting down upon the grass untied her golden hair
for to make it up again with the more grace. Clarisel that beheld her through
the trees, was ravished in the contemplation of such wonderful beauty, but
apprehending a greater content in her conversation, he went toward her,
leaving Alcidas behind. The noise which he made treading upon some leaves, drew
Miralinda suddenly to divide her hair, that so she might with the less
impediment look about her, she was somewhat amazed seeing a Knight so goodly,
and of so gallant a grace to appear, but accompanying her actions with an
extraordinary discretion, she presently rose up, and making him a low reverence
demanded what chance had conducted him to that place. My passion brought me
hither, answered he, for to tell you fair shepherdess, that you are not to
marvel hearing me truly to sigh for you, though our conditions seem to be so
different; Love does greater miracles, and the wonders which I see in your eyes
shall always excuse me before the severest Judge that can be. Look, said she
no whit abashed, how a silly shepherdess may be jeered: no doubt, Sir, I have
cause to complain of fortune for giving me no better a being; but withal I
must praise her for sending me into the world with so much judgment as to know
how to put the difference that is requisite between your greatness and my
poverty, which forbids me to be persuaded that ever I can merit the honor you
would do me. I am without name, without parents, and have nothing else to rely
upon this day in the world then the only goodness of an old shepherdess, who
does bring me up, upon condition that I shall feed her flocks, in regard
whereof I will never believe that you love me but to undo me, which I will
avoid if I can, and will wisely conserve that which can make me live happily in
my unhappines. Now if you fondly suppose with them who think that promotion may
one day persuade me to accept of the advantages they propound unto me, without
doubt you will be deceived, and lose your labor, for at length you shall know
that the desire of greatness shall never prevail with me.

If you take feigning for truth, answered Clarisel, without doubt you will
entreat me as you have done all those which have hitherto presented themselves
before you; but if you please to make use of your reason, you will discern the
difference that is to be made between my affection and their passions. I love
you without desiring any thing of you but what honor will permit you to confer
on me, and that which I most wish for at this present is, that you will suffer
me to live by you with the liberty to keep a flock in another habit then this I
have on; and that you will not refuse to see both in my respect and in my
actions, the integrity of this love. Provided, answered she, that your quality
be not known here, which at last might make me unhappy; and that you will live
modestly according to your promise, I will never oppose your desire: for I will
give my self the glory of your captivity, and believe that your intentions are
as sincere, as I am innocent. Beauteous shepherdess, answered Clarisel,
kissing her hand whether she would or no, I receive this grace from you with
more satisfaction, then if you had made me Monarch of the whole earth: You
command discretion in my actions, you will have my affection to be unfeigned,
and my vows inviolable; such is my desire to, and I wish that thunderbolts from
heaven may strike me, if ever, you see me sigh otherwise then you would have
me; and from henceforward I will approve of your anger and my banishment, if I
give you any occasion to abridge these favors which I hold so dear. Well, said
Miralinda, our accord is half made, but can you counterfeit the shepherd well?
The best in the world, answered he, and if I had the habit now, I verily think
you would take me for one, at leastwise I should accommodate my self far better
to the carriage of a swain, then one of your Lovers does, who came this way a
little before you, and mightily complained of your rigor. It is the son of
Count Moligny, named Cesander, answered she, who questionles wishes me well,
but his humor is intolerable; he is jealous when he beholds me cast an eye upon
any shepherd, he importunes me continually, and is always chanting unto me the
greatness of his race, as if I were obliged to love him, for that only
consideration, rather then for the merit of his person, and renders himself so
odious in his ways, that I cannot endure to look upon him, which is the reason
I fly him as I would do a wolf. But let us leave off this discourse, I pray
you, and tell me how you lighted on this place. The destinies conducted me
hither, said he, and from their providence is this good fortune of mine
derived. Then making a brief relation of his adventures, of his condition, of
the beginning of his love, and of the violent passions he had undergone since
that time, he much amazed her, and put her almost out of hope of ever enjoying
him; but setting up her rest upon a contrary opinion, she sweetly replied thus:
Verily I am of the same faith with you, that there is a kind of fare in our
affections: for if you were stricken in love by my picture, I was no less
wounded therewith by yours, which I saw not many days past in this very place,
it being showed to me by a damsel, who told me that within a while I should no
longer be mine own; wherefore I do not marvel now, that I have not been more
difficult to receive you, seeing the heavens governed my thoughts, and disposed
of my will: I acquaint you with this secret, not to give you more boldness, and
less respect, but to let you know that we are not to falsify the effect of so
many promises, if we will live contented, since it is the only mean to assure
you those felicities which you hope for in me, and to render me the
satisfaction that I expect from your thraldom. Fear not, fairest shepherdess,
answered he, wonderfully contented with these assurances, fear not that I will
ever pass the bounds of your commandments, I feel such infinite joy in being
yours, that I am resolved to die a thousand deaths before I will give you the
least occasion to complain of me, and to testify how far I am from abusing
your favor, I will depart, if you please, with promise to be here again in two
days for to continue my services unto you. Go my shepherd, said she, (for so
will I call you hereafter) and let Love, whom we begin to adore, favor our
designs. Heerewith Clarisel kissing her hand again, went to find out Alcidas,
who seeing him return with so merry a countenance, asked him if he should be
happy. Yes, said he, if heaven do not oppose mine enterprise: Miralinda wishes
me well, and trusting in my promises makes me hope for that which I most desire
in the world; let us get to horse, we shall have leisure enough to talk of this
matter. Then returning to their way they began to discourse of the means
Clarisel was to use for to fall in with some shepherd, and left the beautiful
Miralinda to a million of new thoughts, which giving her occasion to consider
of all things, made her sometimes apprehend the misery of a deceit, and by and
by confirm her anew against the assaults of that weakness.

CHAP. XIII. Clarisel turns shepherd: his contentment, and the jealousy of
Cesander.
IN the mean time Clarisel being returned home published his good fortune
before Orizenna, who seeing him in so pleasing a humor, gave order to make him
up instantly a caslock and hole of white fustian tied together with cornation
ribands; provided the next day a flock of sheep for him, put a very curious
sheephook in his hand, a scrip at his side, and giving him a boy of fifteen
years of age to tend his sheep, whilst he entertained his shepherdess, she
sent him to a Farmer (unto whom she had communicated the secret with a charge
not to disclose it to any body living) beseeching love to render his intentions
prosperous. As soon as he was in the field, he reflected on himself, and
considering the habit he was in, it seemed to accuse him of imprudence and
weakness, wherefore he said: O God! How great is the imbecility of man, and how
justly are Lovers condemned, who renounce their own wills, for to give
themselves over to their passions? Doubtless I am now subject to the mockeries
of the wise, and though I may find some excuse in the example of an infinity of
great personages, who have erred like my self, yet can I not hinder the jeering
of those which are more advised, and that will say with reason too, how I
should rather draw instruction from the misery of others, then imitate them in
their faults: Howbeit if I consider the recompense which I am to attend from my
design, I cannot be charged with folly, nor guilty of blame; but I may maintain
before all the world, that the beauties of so accomplished a shepherdess, may
extenuate this act of mine. I must pursue my course then, not stand upon such
weak considerations, and yield more to mine own satisfaction, then to the
opinion of those that are fools, and think themselves wise. Thus intertaining
himself with a world of thoughts, he arrived at the pleasant meadows of
Bellombre, where extremely desirous to find his shepherdess, he looked round
about, and not seeing her appear, he was strangely troubled, not knowing
whither to go, when he heard a rebeck, the sound whereof came from out certain
E^ms which he perceived on the left hand, whence he conjectured that Miralinda
might be there, and that some amorous shepherd courted her in that manner.
Driving on his flock then within a little while he came to those trees, at the
foot whereof he saw his shepherdess with another, nothing near so fair, and two
shepherds upon their knees, who seemed to implore her pity. His goodly
presence, and the grace wherewithal he saluted this company, fastened every
ones eyes upon him; but Miralinda knowing him, arose contrary to her custom,
and giving him an amorous look, asked him what occasion brought him thither.
That is not to be questioned, answered he, since it is most sure that I come as
others do to sigh out my passions, and to tell you that you never saw shepherd
before that adores you with more respect then my self. She has more cause to
recompense my services, answered one, then to hear you make these
protestations; but I believe you will reap no more benefit by them then I have
done by my complaints. If the defect of your merit and the judgment of this
shepherdess, answered Clarisel, have given you no part in her favor, you must
not think, shepherd, that others are as unhappy as your self; the condition of
our service obliges a woman, and when our actions are disposed to please her,
we are to expect an acknowledgement of them. If I cannot constrain her to love
me, I will be contented with the sight of her; and if my presence offend her,
you shall see me continually upon these banks singing my misfortune, and her
beauty: behold, shepherd, how I will accommodate my desires to hers, accusing
my self without rendering her culpable: and if I receive any thing from so great
an obedience, I will believe it proceeds rather from her goodness, then mine
own merit, otherwise I will say that I am justly punished for having been too
daring. How now, shepherd, said Miralinda, is any man so light as you are, thus
freely to discover his thoughts? I never saw you till now, and will you already
have every one to know that you love me? Yes without doubt, answered Clarisel,
and if I should use less freedom, I should not have so much affection. Is it
likely that I should be here for your service, and it not be known? my designs
would then be without honor, and my ambition without glory; I can no more
forbear, beauteous shepherdess, to publish my captivity, then to suffer; and
if you be displeased with it, I will hold my peace, and think to profit more by
my silence, then by my speech. Shepherd, answered Miralinda, reaching him her
hand for to make him sit down by her, I do not purpose to forbid you to speak,
and what I said was but to let you know that I love a man that is discreet,
howbeit let us leave this discourse, and tell me from whence you are come,
whither you go, and what accident brought you to this place. Your beauty which
is so famed over all, answered he, has made me to forsake the banks of Seine,
with a resolution never to aband^n this Country without you, or at the least
till I see you engaged under the power of some shepherd, which is the reason
why I crave your leave to deliver my passions as love shall make me feel them.
I will not refuse to speak unto you, answered she, but never be importunate, if
you hope for any part in my favor. O God! said the shepherd who had not spoken
yet, what cause have I to complain? I have served you these two years with all
the fidelity that can be imagined, and yet you have never done me the grace
which now you have showed unto this shepherd, who is but newly arrived: for
advising him to live according to your humor, you seem to take care of his
content. Ah! that I were permitted to let him see, even at this instant, how
unworthy he is of so great a bl^sse, I would throw him at the first bout, and
by his fall conserve unto my self that good which I think is belonging unto me.
Miralinda not being able to forbear laughing at this shepherds anger, that
seemed to be extremely jealous, cast her eye upon Clarisel, who conceiving he
was bound to answer him, said unto him rising up: Foolish shepherd, I would it
were as easy for me to obtain some part in the good grace of Miralinda, as to
throw thee; nevertheles I will not wrestle with thee but upon condition, that
the weakest shall yield his pretensions to the victor. I am content, said
Celidon, so was this shepherd named, and I wish that the meads may want pasture
for my ^^ocks, if I do not make these fair sh^pherdesses laugh at thy cost.
Then seazing on Clarisel he gave him two or three rough twitches, which made
him give back a step, but Clarisel taking good hold on the wings of his dublet,
flung him all along on the ground, and gave him such a cruel fall, that every
one thought he had been dead; whereupon the other shepherd, of whom we have
spoken before, ran instantly to succor him, howbeit Celidon being risen with
pain, told him that he felt no hurt, and that in regard he was not fallen but
by accident, he was not resolved to quit Miralinda, whom he would make judge of
their difference; but she laughed so heartily that she could not utter a word;
at length seeing her self constrained to speak, she agreed them so, that each
of them should remain in his hopes. After that time Clarisel was ordinarily
present in the places where Miralinda fed her flock; sometimes alone, sometimes
with a number of shepherds, who oftentimes accorded their rebocks and hoboys
together, for to make the length of the days seem less tedious to this
shepherdess, who loving none but the handsome shepherd (so Clarisel was
called) cared only for his conversation, and avoided as much as she could the
rest; to the end she might not be importuned by their usual complaints; so
that if she were obliged by the way of civility to see them, it was very
coldly, being unwilling to give her Clarisel any cause of suspicion, who in the
mean while graved upon the bark of all the trees (under whose shadows they met)
the name of his beautiful shepherdess, little regarding the solicitations of
his rivals, as unworthy of his jealousy. Having past some time in this manner,
always accompanying Miralinda at the fountains, at the rivers side, in the
woods and in the meadows, oftentimes taking the care of grazing her flocks,
every one perceived that Clarisel was beloved of this cruel one, before
inexorable to any shepherd whatsoever; so that jealousy putting them often
into choler, some new match at wrestling was every day seen, wherein Clarisel
showed himself so accomplished, that all the Country gave way unto him, each
one judging him worthy of the fortune he enjoied, Cesander only excepted, who
openly declared himself his enemy, sought all manner of occasions to annoy him,
and delivered a thousand lies to Miralinda, thinking to divert her from loving
him; but she very well knowing whereunto it tended, and the fidelity of
Clarisel would give no ear to him, and daily made demonstration of some new
passion for her shepherd, which so vexed Cesander that he resolved to run into
the uttermost of extremes, as you shall see by and by.

CHAP. XIV. The fair Miralinda is carried away forcibly: the admirable deeds of
Arms done by Clarisel for her rescue.
THese two Lovers conversing with a great deal of freedom and love, lead a
most happy life, their pleasures were without care, and they never troubled
themselves with any thing more, then to let both God and man be witnesses of
the sincerity of their thoughts, only the violence of our shepherds desires,
who would willingly in a more sovereign manner have possessed his shepherdess,
interposed some unquietnes amidst his content, but the hope to see himself one
day in the port of so much felicity made him suffer with patience; complaining
then but lightly all his discourse was of new assurances of his love, or of
prayers, that God would divert from his shepherdess the misfortunes which
ordinarily follow men; and verily I am persuaded that these vows so often sent
to heaven, were the means to make him foresee in a dream the storm which
threatened both his love, and his life, that so he might prevent the effect
thereof in despite of fortune, which never gives sweets without some sour. This
amorous shepherd driving his ^^ock one morning to their pasture, went with a
sadder look then he was wont, and was so carried away by certain visions which
he had had the night before, as he never perceived Miralinda, who stayed for
him under the Elms for to do him all the noble favors their fair affection
would permit her; but perceiving him walk very melancholy, his hat over his
eyes, and using some action with his hands as if he had been transported with
anger, she was at first much troubled, in that she could not imagine the cause
of his discontent, and began to fear lest some misreport of her had displeased
him; nevertheles being confident of her own innocence, and not able any longer
to suffer him in this posture, she presently made toward him, and taking him
by the hand, said unto him: What mean these fancies, my shepherd, whence comes
this indisposition, and why do you pass by without bidding me good morrow?
have you less love then you had yesterday, am I less fair, more unpleasing
then I was used to be, or have you observed any thing in my carriage that is
distasteful to you? No, my dearest shepherdess, answered he, I have no cause
for to complain of you; alike is your beauty, and the sense of my passions,
which are no whit less to day then they were before; but you know that time
and accidents do not always leave us in case to laugh or complain. You will
say that our content should not be subject thereunto, and that our love may
exempt us from a million of miseries, as an assured port from the surges of a
troubled sea, my sweetest shepherdess it is true, but can we triumph without
labors? Questionles we cannot, and the best affections are most subject to
crosses: That which afflicts me (I will not conceal it from you) is a dream
which I had the last night, very ominous in my judgement^, and that has
reduced me to the pass wherein you have seen me; although I know very well
that no regard is to be had to such frivolous things, which oftentimes arise
from the weakness of our brain, yet I will not slight it, but take it as an
advice from heaven, that it may be lets me foresee a mischief, to decline it. I
dreamt then an howr before day that I saw six Lions come into these plains who
tearing your cloths in a thousand pieces, dragd you up and down the wood,
without any fear of the noise and cries the shepherds of this Country made,
that they were gotten into a den for to have fed on your body* but that a great
Bear defended you, and that I coming in to his aid, drew you out of their
paws; judge now whether I have not reason to fear some mishap in your person,
and whether I can live contented after these menaces. No doubtless, nor shall I
ever be in quiet, till I have put my self in case to serve you, if by chance
any thing should arrive unto you beyond expectation. But what can you do
heerin, said Miralinda, a little troubled? Keep my self ready upon all
occasions, answered he, and have my horse and my arms in my lodging; for I
never told you yet, my fairest shepherdess, that I am a Knight, and son to the
great Emperor of Greece Florisel of Niquea, a thousand times more satisfied in
being yours, then in the possession of all the Kingdoms of the World. O God!
said Miralinda, what tears will these words one day cost me, and what sorrow
will this great inequality make me endure? I would your condition, my Clarisel,
were lower, or mine more eminent, I might then expect that which my judgment
does now prohibit me to hope for. No, no, said he, do not imagine, my excellent
shepherdess, that ever this difference shall alter my resolution, or that it
shall one day cause me to despise that, which you see me so adore at this
present. I do not love you for the consideration of any means that you may
have, but for the sole merit of your beauty, by which I swear in the sight of
heaven, whom I call to witness, that I will always hold you as dear as mine own
life; and that I will never have other wife then your self, if so be you will be
contented with my fortune. Rely upon these assurances, I beseech you, and do
not kill me with greeving at your doubt of my faith. I will give, said she with
a cheerfuller countenance, my Lord, I will give more to your oath, then to my
fear; for you would not take pleasure to beguile the simplicity of a maid that
loves you with passion, howsoever you shall permit me, if you please, to carry
my self with much more respect to you then formerly I have done, to the end
that my humility may render me worthy of your affection. It would be the utter
undoing of all our pleasures, answered he, if you take away the liberty of our
actions, wherefore we will live, if you please, as hitherto we have done. But
my shepherdess, shall we not seal these promises of marriage with some kisses?
It is reason, said she, that I should grant you this little, since you have
reserved nothing but to give me all. And my Lord, added she after she had
amorously joined her lips to his, I would I might give you sweeter and greater
contentments, verily you should then perceive that I am most sensible of your
passions, but mine honor does forbid me the granting of any thing more, and
wills me humbly to entreat you to be contented with this, until such time as
the destinies have resolved to make us happy. You shall never see me swerve
from the respect which you require in my actions, said Clarisel; but my
shepherdess, seeing this article is concluded according to our desire, let us
return to our former talk. Have you not observed the absence of Cesander? He
has not appeared these three days, and I am confident he has some dangerous
plot upon you, induced thereunto by the favorable intertainment you have given
me, and by the neglect of the services which he has so often tendered unto
you. Assure you, Sir, said Miralinda, that loving none but you, I never thought
of others, and not to lie to you Cesander was quite out of my head; but now I
call to mind that I have not seen him a good while, which makes me approve of
your suspicion, wherefore we shall do well to stand upon our guard. For my
self, said Clarisel, I resolve to go presently to Alcidas house, where all my
furniture is ready; but in regard I may not absent my self without your leave,
I desire you to grant it me. Go, said she weeping, and all the Protectors of
our woods be propitious to your designs; as for me, I will pass away the rest
of this day by entertaining my thoughts with the favors which the heavens have
conferred on me in your affection. Clarisel then departing, arrived within a
few howrs after at Alcidas Castle, who by chance was gone the very same day
upon a certain enterprise, and conferring a long time with Orizenna, recounted
unto her the pleasantnes of his life, the contentment which he had in the
continual beholding of so lovely a shepherdess, and commending her
disposition that was far from all kind of rudenes, he swore that he had never
seen any thing so worthy the affection of the greatest Prince; insomuch that he
made Orizenna in love with Miralinda, and extremely desirous to see her. This
discourse having continued till the evening, he caused his horse and arms to be
brought him, and taking leave of Orizenna, unto whom he had declared his dream,
he returned to Bellombre, wherein desiring to enter in by dark, because he
would not be discovered in that equipage, he got him to bed hoping to sleep
better then he had done the night before, howbeit the exceeding desire he had
to see his shepherdess again, not suffering him to take much rest, made him
rise by break of day to wait for her at the Elms; but she that had no less
unquietnes was there first, so that incountring in this manner, they renewed
their salutes a thousand times, and sitting down on the grass gave account of
their thoughts in such amorous words, that they were able no doubt to make them
live contented in the midst of infinite crosses; having sat then a long time
thus sweetly entertaining one another, they rose up for to gather their sheep
together which were scattered, but they were eased of that labor, and remained
somewhat amazed to behold two young unknown shepherds do them that office; and
that advancing themselves both at one instant fell upon their knees before
Miralinda, and said unto her: Fair shepherdess, the fame of you which fills
our hamlets with wonder and astonishment, having stricken this shepherds heart
and mine both at a time, we revealed our passions one to the other at one
instant, but with so much ill fortune, that a mavelous great friendship which
tied us together like brothers, was suddenly converted into hatred, jealousy
not suffering either of us to endure a rival; so that in brief after we had
reciprocally and in vain entreated each other to yield up his pretensions, we
came three or fowr times to blows, always giving over with a like advantage;
and questionles, we had seen the end of one another, if our parents grieved
with this enmity had not labored to accord us; but the prize of our quarrel
being great, each one stood firm in his purpose, so as the assistance of our
friends had been without effect had they not had recourse to the oracle, which
told them that our remedy lay in your hands; we are come therefore, fair
shepherdess, that you may pronounce in favor of the one or the other of us:
Our conditions are alike, our states equal, there rests nothing but the
consideration of our persons, whereof you may be judge. So finishing this
discourse they both kneeled down before Miralinda, who kindly turning to Don
Clarisel, smiled and said unto him: Shepherd, I will not make the Oracle a
liar, I will presently heal these sick Lovers, but know you how my friends? By
commanding you both never to appear again before me, nor hope that ever I will
love you. O cruel! said he that had not yet spoken, you heal us indeed: but
alas! it is with extreme remedies; for our love not permitting us to disobey
you, we will retire our selves for to die instantly: Saying thus they rose up,
and taking several paths went away, and were never seen more at Bellombre.
These shepherds being dispatched in this manner, Miralinda sat down again in
the shadow, and began to talk with Celidon, that was come to the Elms to seek
her out for to complain of her rigor, when she perceived two armed men making
directly to her: the sight of them much amazing her, she cast her eyes upon Don
Clarisel, who remembering his dream presently laid hold of a great bat that lay
on the bank of the river, and approaching to his shepherdess told her, that it
was expedient for her to turn back to Bellombre. Miralinda very much troubled
was running away, but the two Knights coming in, the one intercepted her
passage, whilst the other taking her by the arm, would have set her upon his
horse; nevertheles she resisted and cried out for help, which put Clarisel into
such a rage, that advancing his bat he discharged it so strongly on him which
held his shepherdess, that he overthrew him dead to the ground. This greatly
animating him he instantly seized on the dead Knights sword, ran after the
other, cut off one of his arms, and with the second blow cleaving his head in
twain, he thought that he had freed his shepherdess, when he discerned six
other Knights come galloping toward him, from whom he could expect nothing but
death. I must, said he then, make use of new counsel upon new occasions; if I
expose my self to the fury of these traitors which are coming, Miralinda would
be lost, and my death would but add to her sorrow; I will therefore preserve my
self if I can, for to succor her to some purpose, and not rashly. Whereupon
taking his course toward Bellombre, he entered speedily into his lodging,
suddenly armed himself, mounted upon his horse which he found ready, and
getting out of the back gate he galloped after these villains, who this while
had forcibly conveied away Miralinda, and were ^led as fast as their horses
could run. Clarisel sollowed them close, and carried with extreme rage, thought
of nothing, save how to catch them; but his ill fortune making him take
somewhat a different way, he was six howrs before he could overtake them; and
questionles he had never met with them if being in the midst of the wood, he
had not resolved to stand still a little for to listen if he could hear any
noise they might make, letting his horse then take a little breath, though it
were with much impatience, he remained a pretty while with very great
attention, but hearing the wood resound with the violence of some blows which
seemed to be stricken upon armor, he spurred away through the trees, and came
into a great way, in the midst whereof he saw a Knight that was valiantly
combatting with fowr of those whom he sought. By heaven, said he, you rakehels,
ye shall pay deerly for it now I have met with you; so drawing his sword he
smot one of them with such fury on the helmet, that he clove him to the very
shoulders; and instantly redoubling a back blow on another he cut his armor as
if it had been single paper, and divided his body in twain, therewith giving
another a thrust in the belly, he ran him quite through the guts sending him
dead to the other two. Not satified with this execution, he raised his sword
again to have dispatched the fourth, when as the Knight entreated him to leave
him that small part of the glory, and follow a shepherdess which three other
thieves had carried away. At this word of shepherdess, he turned about, and
keeping the same way as fast as his horse could carry him, within half an howr
he perceived his fair mistress in the arms of a Knight who seemed invincible
amidst two others, which so enraged him, that with the first blow he sent the
sword and arm of one of them to the ground; and fearing to strike the other,
because he held Miralinda, he discharged upon the crupper of his horse, which
he cut in two pieces, by that means staying him: the third seeing so sudden an
execution slunk presently into the wood to avoid pursuing; but Clarisel who
thought of nothing but his shepherdess, alighted instantly, and approaching to
the Knight that having left Miralinda had drawn his sword for to defend
himself, he discharged so terrible a blow upon his head, that his brains flying
about, he tumbled dead in the place. This done he looked round about to see if
there were any more enemies to fight withal, but no body appearing before him
save Miralinda, who seemed more dead then alive, he went presently unto her,
and lifting up his bever, that she might know him, he said unto her: What s^y
you now, my beauteous shepherdess, to dreams? Without doubt we had been lost,
if I had not thought upon my arms, but thanks be to God we are now out of
danger. I my Lord said she, embracing him as it were the better to assure her
self, I have no cause to fear now that I am so near you, and that you know so
well how to chastise those that offend you: but alas! you are to fight yet, for
the half of our enemies are behind. I think, said Clarisel, they will never
trouble you more; for they have beaten the way to their Captain; and having
encountered them first, I cut them first in pieces; one thing only grieves me
that I do not know the author of this villainy. The author, said she was
Cesander, he that held me, and that was the last which past by the edge of your
sword: This wretch made me suffer strangely, for all his discourse was nothing
but reproaches of my ingratitude, and thre^^ning to be revenged at leisure of
my neglect of him, and giving you the better part of my heart. As I live, said
Clarisel, I am wonderful glad that he is in the case I behold him; more for to
see you freed from his importunities, then for any fear I had that he could
ever have obtained place in your favor, for you have too much judgment to
love a man so ill disposed; but let us leave of this discourse, and think of
getting out of this wood that we be not nighted in it, at leastwise we will go
and render the thanks which we ow to the assistance of a good Knight whom we
shall find hard by, and that peradventure is still in fight with one of these
raskals. Saying so, he led his horse with one hand, and held Miralinda by the
other, when they perceived the Knight of whom they spoke, come toward them as
fast as he could drive; but as soon as he discerned them, he presently stopped;
and alighting embraced Don Clarisel, to whom he said: My Lord, I was making all
the haste I could to your succor, but I see you had no need of my sword. Truly
said Clarisel* not knowing him, I am more obliged to you then you think for,
and you shall do me a singular pleasure to make use of me, and freely to tell
me your name. Do you not know Alcidas then, said the Knight? O me! said
Clarisel, how forgetful am I? These arms I saw at your house, but I was before
in such a rage, and am now so full of joy, that I had then no desire but to be
revenged, nor at this present have any will but to render thanks unto God for
my good success, which was the reason why I knew you no sooner. I but I did
your Miralinda, said Alcidas, for seeing her in the power of these Knights, and
hearing her cry out, I fell in amongst them to rescue her, being assured that
I should oblige you in her assistance, but without your arrival, we had both
been lost. Let us speak no more of this misfortune, since we have avoided it,
said Clarisel, and tell me whether we may find any lodging heerabout; night is
at hand, and I am sensible already of the incommodity this shepherdess would
receive, should she lie abroad. I am not able to assure you any, said Alcidas,
only let us keep this way, perchance it will bring us ere long to some village:
then Clarisel having taken up Miralinda behind him, Alcidas rode along with
them, and was musing on this treacherous plot, when as a Knight came against
him as hard as he could run, and incountred him so furiously that he cast him
out of his saddle to the ground, passing on as if he had been carried by
lightning. By my life, said Alcidas, being much abashed to see himself
overthrown in that manner, you have taken me at unawares, but if I live I Will cry
quittance with you; whereupon having desired Clarisel not to be displeased with
his departure, he rode after this discurteous Knight, and left the Lovers in
the midst of the wood, who unable to find any way by reason of the darkness of
the night, they went aside, and alighting under a tree, they resolved to rest
there till day.

CHAP. XV. The passions of Clarisel finding himself alone with his
shepherdess: Alcidamant is made Knight.
CLarisel seeing himself alone with his shepherdess, was so contented that he
never felt the discommodity of hunger and his hard lodging, but men are never
void of crosses, his desires made war with him, and laboring to have as much
respect as love, he found his pain to be every way equal unto the pleasure
which he had to find himself beloved: his words were so many assurances of his
affection; his thoughts so many wishes that Love would afford him some
assistance, and all his actions assured proofs of a violent passion, he took
the delicate hands of his shepherdess, carried them often to his lips,
sometimes bathed them with tears, sighed incessantly, and then by a deep
silence testified that his soul was oppressed with great unquietnes: fain he
would have complained, but he durst not, fear contained his tongue, and when he
would have opened his heart he was restrained by the consideration that he was
not to be importunate: Miralinda whose affection was innocent, guessing by his
carriage that he suffered much, was persuaded that he had received some wound,
which he would not discover for grieving her, insomuch that she was afraid, and
desiring to know the truth, she said unto him: Why do you weep, my Shepherd,
whence grow these sighs, and what means this silence? are you hurt, and do your
wounds pain you? Alas! said he, beauteous Shepherdess, now you enforce me, I
was resolved to have suffered silently; but since you will understand the cause
of my grief, I will not refuse you the knowledge of it, to the end I may not
accuse my cowardice for my suffering. I consider the misery whereunto I am
reduced, in that I dare not tell you, how it is time that you should recompense
my services; the place favors my thoughts, but my fear to offend you, will
not permit me to reveal them: I love passionately, you doubt not of it I assure
my self, your beauty gives me violent passions, I am in continual torment, I
feel a million of flames which consume me, yet I endure and do not so much as
open my mouth; and hitherto I never gave you any cause to complain of my
actions: But it is time, I, my Shepherdess, it is time to be more hardy, and I
should think my self miserable, if I should overslip this opportunity, without
knowing how far your love extends. We are in a wood, barred from all eyes that
may disclose our secrets, this darkness will warrant our delights, my faith
will make them lawful, you will free me from a perpetual fear, that another
more happy then my self may one day possess you, you will oblige me to live
contented, and this way I shall assure you the greatness which is due to your
merit; do not suffer me, my dearest Shepherdess, to languish any longer, and
keep me from dying with grief, at your being insensible of my endurings; give
your self wholly to me, as I protest again, before God, to be only yours, and
never to have other wife; let us take hold of occasion, that is bald, and which
seldom offers it self twice; give not your self time to accuse your fear, nor
me cause to complain of you; and now calling to mind the integrity of all my
passed actions, draw from thence an infallible conclusion, that I love you
sincerely, and that you shall not be deceived; this is the way to assure our
happiness, all your future content depends on your discretion, which ought to
accomodate you to the time: think on it, my Shepherdess, and lose not yourself
with light considerations, which are never well accepted of amongst lovers: I
am now in a state to receive grace, said he kneeling down, con^er it on me, I
beleech you, and be persuaded that my death is tied to your denial. Miralinda,
observing him thus disposed, was exceedingly troubled, her affection made her
think his impatience just, would have her consent to his embraces, and
counseled her to give up her self to him upon assurance of these promises; but
then, her honor represented unto her, how she was to love otherwise, if she
meant not to give this Prince just cause to despise her another day, when he
should find her so facile; resting then on this resolution, she answered him:
Ah Sir, do you make more account of your pleasure then my reputation, and do
not you consider that I should be most unworthy of your love, if my affection
were not innocent and pure? What could you wish for more, if you had once the
spoil of me, and how could you love me, if there were nothing left for you to
hope from me? I will never believe that you love me for to be my ruin, or that
you have weighed that well which you have said; your desires, and opportunity,
that tempts men, have made you speak in that manner I know, but recollect your
self, I pray you, judge whether I may give you that with reason, which you
demand with passion; I love you infinitely, I confess it; howbeit, nature
teaches me, that I ought to love my self better, and that we are not to seck
the satisfaction of another, with our own overthrow; moreover fortune has
bestowed nothing on me but mine honor for to releeve the miseries of my birth,
and will you deprive me of that? Ah Clarisel! you will make me believe that
your love was always feigned, that so many oaths were not sworn but to deceive
me, and that you would now triumph over me, for to make me the object of
reproach, as I am of ill fortune. If you have spoken to that end, proceed
shepherd, I put my self into your hands, and my undoing shall testify that I
was not insensible of the honor you have done me, and that I have not refused
you a satisfaction, but for to make it one day a thousand times more acceptable
unto you, by giving it you without sorrow or shame, howbeit that I may not have
occasion to complain of my weakness, be assured that this night you shall have
all that ever you can hope for from me. Then shedding some tears, which she
accompanied with so many sighs, she put Clarisel into such a confusion, that he
would have given the best part of his blood he had never been so unadvised;
nevertheles thinking that his repentance might deface his offense, he replied
unto her in this sort. I am extremely grieved at the discontent you have
received from my speeches, which were de^ived from my passion, and not from the
end you spoke of; for I should hold my ^el^ the most disloiall Knight of the
earth, if I had so much as entertained a thought to draw favors from you for
to make you the scorn of the world, as now you are the wonder of it, you will
have me wait upon time, and leave the recompense of my services to the pleasure
of the destinies; it is most just that I obey their ordinances and your
commandments, be confident then, my shepherdess, that you shall never have
cause to fear a like discourse, and that amidst all kind of occasions you may
live secure by me, so as you will now promise me never to remember my fault. I
were void of love, said she, if I should not excuse your passion. No my
shepherd, I will never think on it, but love you the more, for this obedience
does so please me, that now I think my self far happier in possessing of you,
then I did at the first; and that you may see I will not be sparing of the
favors, which a pure affection may permit me to give you, I will recompense
the victory you have gotten over your desires, with a kiss. Saying so, she
drew nearer to him, and joined her lips so sweetly to his that the excess of
so infinite a content transported him beyond all that could be desired of
pleasure in the world, wherein doubtless he had continued a long time if
Miralinda, plucking him by the arm had not put him in mind that the night was
more then half spent, and that it was time to betake them to their rest,
thought the place was not very proper for it. Sitting down then one close by
another they fell asleep upon the assurance that Cl^risels horse would make a
noise to awake them if any beast chanced to approach them. Having endured so
much the day before, they had rested longer, but that the sun piercing through
the branches shined upon their faces, wherefore awaking both at one time they
arose, and were ready to proceed in their former way, when they perceived two
young Squires coming along, and that staying near the tree under which they
were, seemed as if they would confer of some important f^air. As I live said
one, I can no longer endure these delais, and to be thus hindered so troubles
me, that I am resolved to go far enough till I find some valiant and courteous
Knight, who will confer that on me which I shall not receive God knows when, if
I attend the Kings return, who cannot so easily part with Greece, from so many
friends as he has there to come hither. But I doubt (...) you mean to forsake
me, and that the fear of my mothers displeas^^^ will more prevail with you then
the consideration of the promises which I have made you. You judge not well of
my affection, answered he, let us go when you please, Sir, you shall find me
more ready to travel abroad, then to keep at home; howbeit I see no great
likelihood of effecting your purpose; for having neither money, horses, nor
arms, how will you be fitted to receive the order which you so much desire?
Fortune will assist us, said he, only let us get away, and then put our selves
upon the care of heaven; whereupon turning about they espied Miralinda, and Don
Clarisel, who during their discourse were admired: this gentleman being
wonderful handsome, of a great deal less stature then Clarisel, but squarer
set, demonstrating in his look an alacrity of spirit, a sweetness in his speech,
an admirable grace in his carriage, a resolute courage in his countenance, and
briefly a majesty not ordinary amongst ordinary Knights. Espying, I say, this
Knight so well proportioned, and his shepherd^sse so fair, they stood still as
it were ravished with the sight of so rare an object, but Clarisel that would
not leave them in that amaze approached to them, and addressing himself unto
him that seemed so hopeful, he said thus: Gentleman, whither are you going at
this present? To seek out some bo^y, said he, that will make me Knight; for it
is time to fall upon actions that may bring forth glory, but I will go no
further, if you will do me that favor, and I should hold my self much honored
to receive the order from your hand, for your aspect does show you to be strong
and valiant. I am very sorry, said Clarisel, that we have (...) arms here to
put upon you, but if you will go three or fowr miles with me I will promise to
accommodate you worthily to morrow. I had rather follow you tendaies said he,
then fail in this business, do but lead the way, and I will wait upon you most
willingly. Give me leave then said Clarisel, to fit my horse for the ease of
this shepherdess, in the mean time I pray tell me who you are: Very gladly,
answered he; my name is Alcid^^^^, son to the Marquess of M^nteclare, a man of
consideration in France, which is obliged unto him for many great services, but
that you may not marvel to seem at this present so ill accommodated, be it
known to you that not able to contain my mothers permission for to be made a
Knight until the return of my father, who has been a good while with the king
(...) at Constantinople, I was going to seek out some one that would give me an
horse and arms, it seeming undecent to me to spend the best part of my days in
idleness, but thanks be to God I have encountered that I wished for when I least
expected it. By the faith of a Knight, answered Clarisel, if you be as valiant
as you are handsome, I shall not repent the pains which I purpose to take in
accompanying you on foot. My Lord, said then a damsel which appeared on a
sudden, you shall never trouble your self in that manner; for some that honor
you, and respect this Gentleman with whom you talk, have taken the care upon
them of this affair; these brave arms which the destinies have reserved for his
valor, and that have hung upon this tree above these hundred years, shall serve
his occasion, and these horses which you see here before you shall keep you
from being lackies. The presence of this woman had amazed them, but the horses
and the arm^ which were the fairest in the world, made them no less to wonder,
so that they beh^ld one another without speaking a word, when as the damsel
pursuing her discourse, said unto Don Clarisel: My Lord, the learned Nerea, who
loves this Gentleman, because he is to be one of the prime Knights of the
world, desires you to give him the order. I do not know the Lady, said
Clarisel, but I will honor her merit, depend wholly on her power, and serve
her in some better occasion then this, although I think I shall do much, by
giving to the world a Knight of so extraordinary an esteem as he is of whose
great worth ye foretell, wherefore I will defer the effect of it no longer.
Alcidamant being armed the^ with his rich arms, whereof the shield was shadowed
with three palms, from whence his surname was afterward derived, kneeled down
before Clarisel, took his oath never to be wanting to the duty of a good
Knight, received the benediction from him, which being done, Clarisel called
Miralinda, desiring her to gird the sword unto him: This request made her
blush, for she had never been present at such a Ceremony; but the damsel
approaching to her, said: Fair Shepherdess, make no difficulty to do this
honor unto this Knight, he touches you nearer then you think for, and the time
will come, that you will hold your self most happy to know him as I do; so that
you shall do wisely, to place this day, and this action in your memory, the
better to remember it all your life. I do not understand your language, said
Miralinda, taking the sword; but I beseech God that all may redound to his
glory, and that he will be pleased to make this Knight as virtuous, as he is
handsome; herewith she hung his sword at his side, and having gently kissed
him, she retired toward Clarisel, unto whom Alcidamant protested a world of
service, desiring his permission that he might begin to travel, as his good
fortune should direct him. Go, said Clarisel, embracing him again, and heaven
grant you to prove as I hope you will. Alcidamant then valting into the saddle,
sat his horse with such a grace, that Clarisel admired him, and thought he had
never seen a Knight so comely in his arms; but he spurring into the thickest of
the wood, left Clarisel very much satisfied with his gallant demeanor, and
with the encounter of an ambling nag which the damsel had left, upon the which
he set Miralinda, returning very covertly to Bellombre, with an opinion that it
would not be known he was a Knight, and that the honor of the deliverance of
this Shepherdess, would be ascribed to some other rather then to him; but the
truth cannot be hid, for it was presently divulged thorowout all France, that
the village of Bellombre was honored with the fairest maid, and with the
valiantest knight of the world; so that all the talk thereabout, was of the
excellency of these lovers, every body commending as well the valor of the
one, as the incomparable beauty of the other.

CHAP. XVI. The sweet life which Clarisel leads with his Shepherdess; the
encounter of Mascarin the Dwarf, his buffoonries upon occasion of his love to
Miralinda.
CLarisel and his fair Shepherdess, living with incredible pleasure, past away
the time insensibly, and feeling no other distaste, but what they found in the
violence of their desires, that forced them to wish for a greater content, they
attended with patience the felicity, which they hoped either time or fortune
would one day bring them. They were ordinarily together at the river side under
the willows, or in a little wood of fir trees, whose tops were wrapped within the
clouds, and which seemed to be disposed for the contentment of the beholder,
where their usual discourse was of new assurances of their loves. One day as
their flocks were laid in the long and spacious alleys, which separated these
fir trees, making them appear sometimes in triangle, and many times in little
ovalls, Miralinda was arising for to catch a pretty ew that she loved, and
which commonly wore her colors; but seeing a little ill-favored and misshapen
man upon a great and mighty horse, she cast her self suddenly into her
Shepherds arms, as if fear had made her seek a place of refuge. Clarisel rising
up, laid hold on his sheephook, and looked round about him, as it were doubting
a second misfortune; howbeit, perceiving no body but a little piece of a man,
he fell a laughing at his Sh^pherdesses fear, and approaching to him, said:
Friend, what would ye have, or why do you stay here? To admire, said he, the
excellency of this Shepherdess, who seems to me so fair, and has such a
d^licate grace, that I am already no longer mine own. By my faith, said
Clarisel, she shows a mavelous power in this encounter, and your captivity
gives her no little glory; but do you think it is wisely done of you to come
and trench upon my rights, and are you not afraid that I will be revenged on
you, for daring thus boldly to trespass me? Afraid said he? I would not fear a
thousand deaths, if I were to suffer them for her service, and the
consideration of you, does not hinder me from telling her, that I love her more
then all the men of the earth; it is for her to choose whom she shall like best,
and I assure my self, she will soon forsake you, when she shall know who I am,
and that her judgment shall make her apprehend the advantages which she may
have in the election of me. Make your self known then, said Clarisel, and do
not so undervalue me before I know wherefore. I am, said he, Mascarin the
amorous (that surname will I assume for the love of this Shepherdess)
otherwise called the little Favorite; because my Master, the Count d' Aglas,
respecting me above all his other servants, imparts his secrets to me, and
imploies me in matters of consequence; will you have a testimony of it? Why I
come now by his commandment, from a very fair Gentlewoman, whom he loves
passionately, having thought none worthy of this charge but my self. By my
faith, said Clarisel, these are qualities very eminent indeed, but yet my
friend, you must seek out greater, if you mean to enjoy this Shepherdess, her
beauty renders her glorious, and raises her thoughts to desire a Knight, that
is excellent in arms, for to match with her; I am one my self, howbeit without
hope, and my want of merit obliges her to deny me that which she ows to my
affection. Are you a Knight said Mas^arin? Never take me for an honest manif I
be not so ere long; wherefore prepare your self to just with me, for I like not
a rival of so handsome a presence as yours, and your death shall free my suit
of all competition. Saying so, he bowed himself below the pommell of his
saddle, for his chin was but a little above it, in that manner doing obey sance
to Miralinda, and leaving them almost burst with laughter, he past on with more
love, then body, or good grace. Being stricken then to the heart, he made
incredible haste, and the same day came to his Master, before whom he kneeled
down, and in stead of giving him an account of his journey, he said unto him:
My Lord, if the consideration of my services, have begotten a will in you to
give me some recompense, do not refuse me one boon which I will demand of you,
for the good news I bring you. His Master, that saw him so earnest, was
somewhat amazed at his speech, but desirous to know the business, he promised
him all that he would require. You shall make me Knight, then said he, within
these four or five days, and bestowing arms on me answerable to the proportion
of my body, leave me power to obtain a Mistress, I will not say the fairest she
pherdesse, but the rarest woman on the earth; I have already placed her in my
heart, and there is nothing wanting to the absolute possession of her, but the
courage to defeat an audacious Shepherd that follows her, and brags he is a
Knight; for my part, the overthrow of most horrible G^ants were possible for
me, out of the new power infused into me, by the virtue of this beauty; so that
I am most assured very easily to vanquish this rival, and to see my self
shortly the happiest man of the world. The Count not being able to forbear
laughing at his Favorites p^ssion, said unto him: Thou have talked enough of
thine own love, Mascarin; but thou say nothing to me of my Lady: Marvel
not at that, answered he, I am so taken with this Shepherdess, that I can
think of nothing else; yet it is fit that I should satisfy you touching your
demand: Your Mistress is wholly yours, and as I may conclude by her carriage
toward me, there wants nothing but your presence to render you contented;
Would you have better news then this? No, said the Count, for I am happy indeed
if it be true. Why, do you doubt of my fidel^ty, said Mascarin? That I do not,
answered the Count, for I find that thy new passion does not transport thee
so, as to make thee speak otherwise then thou should. You may build upon it,
said the Dwarf; and do but take order that I may be furnished with arms, upon
my life I Will lodge you in your Mistrisses bed as soon as you have made me Knight.
This discourse being past, not without a world of laughter, the Dwarf retired
himself, in expectation of the next morning, which was no sooner come, but he
so pressed his Lord, that he sent him to the next town, caused light arms to be
made fit for him, who having put them on with such Ceremonies as his Master had
devised, for to make himself sport, stood upon such puntillioes, as if he would
have made all the world to fall by the edge of his sword. I will see now, said
he, taking a lance greater then himself, whether this Shepherd dare affront me,
or be my rival; and let me not live, if I do not overthrow him at the first
encounter; wherefore my good Lord, said he to his Master, give me leave to
commence my knighthood with the most glorious conquest of the earth. I will not
hinder thee, said the Count, who took wonderful delight in his humor, but I
foresee that thou will catch a fall. No, no, said he, courageously getting up
on his horse, the prize will animate my forces: therewith setting spurs to an
old jade, upon the which he was mounted, away he went to Bellombre with all the
speed he could, and came thither just at such time, as Miralinda and Clarisel,
sitting under the shadow of those lofty firretrees, were singing an air upon
the happy encounter of their loves. By heaven, said he, addressing his speech
to Don Clarisel, and shaking a lance, which might be of the length of an ell,
in stead of singing, thou had need begin the lamentations of thy death, or
else resolve never to love my Shepherdess more. O me, said Clarisel, laughing
in good earnest with Miralinda, to behold the equipage of this piece of man:
what new Knight have we here, and with what a grace does he manage a lance?
Shepherd, answered he, in a mighty rage, it is no time to jeer, I mean to be
the death of thee, wherefore betake thee to thy arms, and then thou shall see,
that though my body be less, my courage is greater then thine. Why, do thou
think that I shall need arms to vanquish thee, said Clarisel? I arms, said
Mascarin, for I would be loath to fight with thee upon advantage; but if thou will make thy self unworthy of the favor which I offer, I Will soon rid the world
of thee. Wherewithal he charged his lance, set spurs to his horse, and ran
against Clarisel, who taking wonderful delight in this sport, stepped aside, and
with a little rap of his sheephook tumbled him so prettily out of his saddle,
that Miralinda thought she should have killed her self with laughing. Now art
thou my prisoner, said Clarisel, taking him by the collar, and therefore yield
me up the Shepherdess, or resolve to die. That were against reason, answered
the Dwarf, for thou came behind me, and did not vanquish me fairly. Well,
said Clarisel, will thou run once morethen, and quit thy pretensions if thou
art overthrown? I* by my knighthood, said he, and will never cross thee more,
if I chance to be so unhappy as to tumble once again, So mounting on his horse,
he charged his little lance, and ran very courageously against Clarisel; but
receiving another rap on his head with the sheephook, he fell to the ground, so
astonished, that if Miralinda had not opened his helmet to give him air, he had
been deprived of his senses. How do you feel your self, my Knight, said she,
after your fall? Too well, said he, for the content of this Shepherd,
whosetreachery to me begins to be punished, for acknowledging me to be your
Knight, his hopes are utterly undone, so that he may go seek him another
Mistress elsewhere.

How, said Clarisel, ready to burst with laughing, do you threaten me after I
have given you your life? Come, come, said Miralinda, I will make a peace
between you: Friend Mascarin I will be always glad to see you, and receiving
your vows with affection, I will call you my favorite, as you are already to
the Count d' Aglas; but I desire that this shepherd should be my Knight, for he
can defend me better than you, and so I entreat you to live friends. By my
life, fair shepherdess said Mascarin, I will never appeal from your sentence,
for it were not fit you should discard this shepherd for me, at leastwise
before you know how far my services may extend, so that if he will render you
as much obedience as I do, our quarrel is at an end. I am very well pleased
with this accord, said Clarisel, for I should never have slept quietly having
so dangerous an enemy as thy self; let us drink then together for a
confirmation of this agreement. In good faith said Mascarin, thou shall do me a
singular courtesy to bestow a little wine on me, if thou have any in thy
bottle, this armor has put me into such a heat, and the choler I was in, made
me so dry, that I am ready to die for thirst. Therewith Clarisel reaching him a
leather bottle which he had ordinarily in his scrip, so tempered him, that he
talked of nothing but of combatting all the shepherds of the Province to
maintain that he was more amiable then they. Living in this manner with
Miralinda, he gave her incredible content, pleasantly interrupted Don Clarisels
cares, and serving for sport to all the shepherds of Bellombre, went up and
down along the rivers side extolling the incomparable beauty of his
sh^pherdesse, sometimes graving her name on the barks of trees, and sometimes
at her feet demanding one grace or other for the mitigation of his suffering.
But it is time to leave this shepherd amidst such infinite delights, for to
give a beginning unto the report of the mavelous acts done by the excellent
Knight of the Palms.

CHAP. XVII. The adventures of Alcidamant, called the Knight of the Palms,
after he parted from Clarisel: his first combat against Narsander the Inchanter
in the behalf of Melania.
ALcidamant departing, as you have heard, wonderful well satisfied at his
being made Knight, traveled with an extreme desire to meet some accident
worthy his courage, and the commencement of his arms, but because the absence
of the King made adventures little frequent in France, it was two days ere he
could light on any, at the end whereof he encountered a young Squire, who
bitterly weeping complained very much of the injustice of the destinies: the
sight of his tears moved him to pity, and imagining that so grievous a
complaint proceeded from some great occasion, courteously asked of him if he
could do any thing for him. Yes Sir, said he wiping his eyes, it lies in you to
oblige me unto you for ever, if you please to employ your sword for the service
of one of the fairest Ladies of this Kingdom, unjustly disinherited, and
likely to be most miserable all her life time, if the succor of strangers do
not render her that of which her friends have deprived her. She is the sole
heir of the Count of Maran, excellently fair, as I told you, and for a long
time adored by most of the young gallants of the Court, now neglected by all
through the practice of one of the wickedest men of the world. Narsander (so is
this wretch called) Uncle to Melania, (which is the poor affl^cted creatures
name) having an extreme desire to possess the lands of Maran, which had been
managed by him about some fowr years (for so long it is since the decease of
the father and mother of Melania) has laid as damnable a plot to be^eave his
niece of them, as has been heard of: for he has accused her not only for
offending against the duty of a maid well born, but for being culpable of the
death of a child, which he produced, and affirmed to be hers, and to confirm
his speeches he has so enchanted Melania (for he is very skillful in
Negromancy) that she her self avouches how she has murdered that child,
although it is most certain that she had never seen it, but at that time when
the Judges commanded her to be brought to look upon it. This confession of
hers, the accusation of an Uncle, who seems to be carried thereunto by a just
resentment of her dishonor, and the testimony of a servant that he has, more
wicked then himself, has caused this maid to be condemned to death, and the
Earldom of Maran to be confiscated unto this Inchanter, if some friends of hers
by the mothers side had not opposed this sentence; showing that there was no
regard to be had to the saying of the maid, who questionles spoke by the power
of witchcraft which Narsander had used, neither to the false accusation of this
man whom avarice had provoked thereunto, as was easily to be judged by the
demand he had made of the lands of Maran, and less to the testimony of that
servant who was known to be a most lewd rascal, and that had said nothing but
upon promise of recompense. These reasons were favorably heard, and all means
have been used to discover the truth of this affair; but the Judges not finding
anything to prove the innocence of Melania, as they have witness of her offense,
have confirmed their first sentence of death; howbeit desiring to give
something to the birth of this maid, and to the request of her friends, who
still maintain that she is bewitched, they have added these conditions, that
within three months she shall bring a Knight for to combat Narsander, in whose
victory or overthrow her life or death consists, which has been accepted both
by her friends, and Narsander, who questionles is very valiant and courageous,
and that with reason believes how she will meet with none in all the Country
that either dares affront him or that will not fall under his sword, which very
much troubles Melania's friends, who unwilling to hazard her honor and life
upon the weakness of their arms, have sent me to seek some adventurous Knight
for to undertake this combat; and had commanded me to find out the handsome
shepherd, who is much spoken of alate; but I will go no further having thus
luckily incountred you, only now it rests that you will thoroughly examine your
forces, and consider whether you are able to give an end to so great a business.
The honor of combats, said Alcidamant, depends on the grace of heaven, rather
then on the vanity of men, which is the reason why I will not rashly promise
thee the victory; but I will confidently assure thee to undertake this quarrel
with courage, and not to be diverted from it by the commendation thou have
given this inchanter. Let us away then if you please, said the Squire, for to
morrow is the last day of the term prefixed, but my comfort is, we may get
thither to night if we use a little speed; whereupon setting spurs to their
horses, they rode discoursing of the many mischiefs occasioned in the world by
the treachery of men, when they met a young damsel, who saluting Alcidamant
said unto him: Brave warrior, I am commanded to present you with this Ring; it
is a mean to discover the innocence of Melania: you may put it on her finger,
and then make her speak to the Judges before you combat for her; howbeit leave
it not with her, but conserve it carefully, for it will stand you in stead
other where. She that sends me so rare a present very much obliges me, said
Alcidamant, and assure her that she shall dispose of me whenever, or
howsoever she pleases, and so shall you for your pains in bringing it to me.
Saying thus, he past on, as it were fearing that the least stay might interrupt
his enterprise, but his Squire seeing him post away so suddenly, said unto him:
Do you not know this damsel that spoke to you but now? No, said Alcidamant,
for I never saw her to my remembrance before. That is very strange, said
Armidas, for it is even she which gave you these arms, and me thinks you gave
her but cold intertainment, for such powerful obligations. By my hopes said
Alcidamant, I am very sorry for it, I would she were here again, thou should
see then I would soon repair this fault; but since it is now too late, I must
expect some other opportunity to show my self more acknowledging unto her.
Talking thus in this manner, sometimes of one thing, sometimes of another, they
arrived at a house where Melania's friends were assembled with a purpose to
choose out some one amongst themselves for to hazard the combat with Narsander,
but the Squire alighting and telling them of the encounter he had made of
Alcidamant, they all came forth to receive him, wondering very much to behold
one so young to follow arms, and they could not be persuaded that he was of
force sufficient to resist the fury of a man, who had made himself redoubted
every where; howbeit observing him very ex^ctly, and seeing him to be of so
goodly a stature, well made, and of a confident look, they hoped for something
extraordinary from him, so as they honored him exceedingly; and having given
him mavelous noble entertainment, they conducted him to a chamber for to
repose himself; but so great was his desire to combat, that he slept not long.
Rising then very early in the morning, he disposed of himself, as a good
Christian ought to do that means to hazard his life; and afterward being armed
at all points, he went straight to the field, which the Judges had caused to be
prepared, in whose presence he approached to Melania, who was set upon a
scaffold, and said unto her: Madam, assure me of your innocence, that so I may
have the assistance of heaven fighting for your preservation. Why do you speak
of my innocence, answered she, have not I said a thousand times at least that I
have murdered my child, what would you of me more? that were too much, replied
Alcidamant, if what you say were true: But my Lords, said he, addressing his
speech to the Judges, I will let you see what cunning this wicked man, to whom
you have granted the honor of the field, has used to undo this maid:
whereupon, taking the Ring which Nerea had sent him, he put it upon Melania's
finger, and then said unto her: Madam, Is it true that you have murdered a
child? That I have murdered a child, answered she, with a settled judgment; O
God, never suffer me, I beseech thee, to be charged with such a crime; but,
Sir, what child is this that you speak to me of? Of one that you brought into
the world, and murdered instantly, answered the Judges. Alas! said she, lifting
up her eyes: may heaven, that never suffers such a crime to go unpunished,
strike me dead with thunder, if this whereof I am accused be true: Are all this
people then assembled for that, and must this ax do vengeance on me for a sin
which I have not committed? My Lords, do not precipitate my days in this
manner, at leastwise let me know the author of so great a wickedness.
Narsander, said Alcidamant, is he that would ruin you, that charges you with
this fact, that by the power of his charms has made you say, that you are
culpable of it, and that labors to have you put to death; but we will chastise
him if you will remit your right unto my arms. I would never permit you to
fight upon this occasion, answered she, if I were not confident of his
assistance that never forsakes the innocent, but assuring my self both of his
justice and your valor, you may proceed to the combat when you please.
Whereupon Alcidamant taking the Ring from her as he was advised by Nerea,
Melania required afresh to be put to death as she that was guilty; whereby the
assistants plainly perceived how Narsander had bewitched her, in such sort that
all the people were so incensed against him as they had torn him in pieces, had
it not been for Alcidamant, who desiring a little silence, advanced toward
him; and finding him full of rage and despite to see his secrets discovered
said unto him: I have laid open thy villainy, not to exempt my self from the
combat with thee; for I will oblige the world by thy death, and free all honest
persons hereafter from thy deceits, but to clear Melania from all imputation
whereunto she might be subject in the opinion of those that neither could
discover nor believe thy wickedness, wherefore defend thy self from me.
Therewithal taking the field, he charged his lance, and setting spurs to his
horse, he met him so strongly in the midst of the course, that he cast him out
of his saddle, though not without some staggering by the encounter he had
received. Narsander finding himself on the ground suddenly rose up, and drawing
out his sword he let fall a blow with such fury on his enemies shield, that
thoroughly made him to feel the force of his arm; but not to fail in the first
combat that ever he had undertaken, he began to charge Narsander so fiercely,
that every one admired to see him fight with such grace and courage against a
man so redoubted, and that was scarcely to be matched again in France: if his
enemy struck at him, he either warded it with his sword, or opposed with his
shield to it, and for the most part avoided it with such agility, as he gave
most of his blows in vain, whereas his never fell but to purpose; so that having
cut Narsanders shield in an hundred pieces, he drew blood from him in I know
not how many places. Having then a quick eye, a confident judgment, a strong
arm, and a resolute courage, his address gave mavelous contentment to the
people, who beholding his youth prophesied, that in time he would prove one of
the most accomplished Knights of the world. Narsander almost in despair to see
himself reduced into so ill a plight, and cursing his spirits, for neglecting
to advertise him of the force of this Knight, verily believed that the justice
of heaven was armed for to punish his wickedness; nevertheles hoping yet to
prevail, he took his sword in both his hands, and therewith struck Alcidamant so
dangerously on the helmet, that he made him knock his chin against his breast,
almost despairing of his senses, and without doubt if he had quickly redoubled
upon him he had been in peril, but the Knight having time to resettle and come
again to himself, grew so furious that Narsander was exceedingly troubled with
the apprehension of a most horrible blow, which lighting on his head overthrew
him in the place without moving either hand or foot, wherewithal the Knight
not being satisfied was going to disarm him, for to take his head from his
shoulders, when as the Judges declaring Melania to be innocent, desired him to
save his life. So wicked a creature as this is, answered he, deserves no
favor, howbeit deliver this gentlewoman into the hands of her friends with the
ceremonies requisite in such a case, and then at your request I will spare him.
Hereupon they caused Melania to be conducted to the house where her friends
were assembled, into the which she was no sooner entered, but she was presently
restored to her former understanding, free from the charms of her Uncle, who
being come to himself would not suffer his wounds, though very dangerous, to be
looked unto; the grief to see himself vanquished making him desire rather to
die then to live.

CHAP. XVIII. The loves of Alcidamant and Melania.
Whilst the people talked of the exceeding valor of Alcidamant, and that
Narsander infinitely enraged vowed to revenge his disgrace, Melania suffered
her self to be carried with the perfections which she found in her Knight, his
person was a wonder to her eye, she admired such unmatchable force in an age so
tender, a matute and settled judgment in this youth, an extraordinary prudence
in his actions, and briefly observing nothing in him that was not capable of
love, she felt the violence of certain desires that touched her to the quick,
and that seemed even to enform her to discover her thoughts unto him,
nevertheles retained by shame she resolved to suffer with silence, and in the
mean time to let him see that she loved him; Employed then whatsoever she had
of charm and attraction in her, and all the art that maidens use for the
captivity of men, she indevoured to gain and possess him, but there needed no
great labor to bring her designs to pass; for Alcidamant being naturally
amorous, seeing so beautiful a creature, and occasion so favorable, said unto
her one day as they were walking alone under the trees of a fair and pleasant
orchyard: Madam, I did not think that my ruin should have been drawn out of
your preservation, and that your deliverance should have been the cause of my
thraldom; but now I perceive to my grief, that I have not freed you, but to
suffer the more my self, unles you be as sensible of my pain as I was of your
misfortune. I do not know answered she, exceedingly contented to hear him upon
those terms which she so much desired, what cause you have to complain of me,
for I have labored to serve you, and by all ways sought to give you that,
which your assistance has deserved; but if what I have done does not suffice,
Sir, you may dispose of all that is mine, and there is nothing in my power,
that I do not most willingly make you the Master of, that so at least I may not
rest unthankful. And if so be this house be distasteful to you, as indeed it
is not very pleasing, I am to be excused, in regard I have not staid you here,
but only to show you how desirous I am to give you some entertainment befitting
your merit. Alas! said he, that is not the cause of my complaint; for these
pleasant walks, these delicate gardens, curious water works, stately buildings,
and even this very orchard wherein we are, set with a multitude of excellent
trees, might give content to the saddest disposition that could be, much more
to me that can never be enough satisfied of them, but I will explane my self,
seeing it is your pleasure. I said that I did not think my ruin would have
been drawn out of your preservation. Ah Madam! will you not soon understand the
meaning of these words, when I shall tell you that your beauty has left me
nothing free, but the will to do you service, and a desire to enjoy you? Yes,
and will think I have reason to complain, if you should leave me in distress,
from whence I have delivered you. I did not know my power till now, answered
she with a smile, nor could ever imagine that my eyes had been of more force
then the fury of the bravest Knights of the earth, neither did I think of
bringing any remedy to your disease, because I was not acquainted with the
cause; but now that I am assured of it, I will take time to resolve my self,
and let you see that I cannot be ungrateful. You shall never meet with better
opportunity to make me happy, said Alcidamant; and this place, free, as I
conceive, from all danger of discovery, may invite you not to let me langu^sh
any longer. Look now, replied Melania, how your impatience would wrong us;
would you have the Sun be a witness of my dishonor, or would you have me
epsy some one peeping on us in the midst of our pleasures, which could never
taste well, accompanied with such fear? We will find a more seasonable time,
and safer place, till when, I shall entreat you to rest contented; with this
assurance, that I am won to your desire: and withal, that you will give me the
satisfaction, to look more merrily upon me. Why this, said he, kissing her
hand, is as much as I can wish, whereof I were most unworthy, if my looks
hereafter do not give you the content you require; only be mindful of me, and
make the way to my felicity, as short as possibly may be.

You shall not complain of me, answered she, and I shall hold my self most
happy in your affection, provided you be constant, and do not forsake me to
sigh for another. Sigh for another, said he? Ah, Madam, never fear that, for I
have not the power so to do though I would, and if my honor would permit me to
leave following of arms, I would not stir from you whilst I have a day to l^ve;
howsoever, you shall never see me mount on horsback but by your commandment. I
mistrusted, said she, that I should find the defect in you, which ordinarily
accompanies the weakness of men, who oftentimes suffer themselves to be
carried away with new objects; but your vow has relieved that doubt, and
persuaded me to believe, that you will be as perfect in love, as you are in
arms; which makes me resolve to care more for your contentment, then my own
reputation. This discourse having lasted somewhat long, they walked in, where a
sumptuous supper waited ready for them on the table; that done, they had
entertained themselves with some pleasing discourse, had not Melania, desirous
to loose no time, feigned some little indisposition, thereby to send her family
to bed: Being then alone with a chambermaid, whom she had made the Secretary of
her thoughts, and perceiving a general silence over all the house, she
accomodated her hair in a delicate manner, perfumed it with a most exquisite
odor, and putting on a cloak of white satin over her smock, she went forth
without any light, but that of her eyes, and slipped secretly into Alcidamants
chamber, who seeing her come with such a grace, lept suddenly out of his bed,
and giving her a kiss, whereby she might easily discern the gre^tnesse of his
passion; he laid her immediately between the sheets, where their embraces began
with all the delight, that may be imagined by any one that has had the
happiness to be at such a banquet. Their first fires being extinguished, they
instantly re-kindled them with a million of kisses, and with all the dalliance
that can be used in such actions, they rendered their pleasure so full, that
the length of the night, was but a moment to their desires; insomuch, that they
parted less satisfied, and with much more will to meet again then before, so
the next night being come, as they had wished for a thousand times, they
renewed their sport with such pleasure, that Melania became with child of a
most beautiful daughter, which was named Lucilea, and afterward married to
Sonabel of Fenuz^, as more at large shall be related in the prosecution of this
history: but to come where we left. These Lovers drowned in delight, thought of
nothing, but how to please one another; Alcidamant talked no more of horses and
arms, Melania had forgotten her passed miseries, and finding her self in the
suprem^st degree of worldly felicity, had no other desire, but every day to
add some grace to her actions for the contentment of her Knight: Howbeit,
Fortune, that never gives a sweet without some sour, not enduring to see them
triumph over her inconstancy, resolved to interrupt the course of so much
happiness, and send Alcidamant away when least they expected it.

CHAP. XIX. The Knight of the Palms arrives at the dangerous Bridge, forces the
guards there, and bravely delivers Florimond of Canabea with a multitude of
prisoners.
ONE month being sweetly past away in these sweet delights, Alcidamant, who
desired to join the pleasure of hunting with his content in love, getting to
horse one morning, rode into the woods of Maran, attended by five or six
huntsmen; but wandering from his company, and thinking to take a way which he
saw on his left hand, he perceived a little Dwarf, who laying hold on his
bridle, said with a surly countenance: Thou will make the Destinies liars if
thou continuest long in this manner, and the exercises which thou have used of
late, will not give thee that glory they have promised thee. Shall the bosom of
a woman, limit thy ambition, and in stead of nobly sweating under the weight of
an armor, will thou die inglorious in her embraces? Remember, Knight, that
fame is not acquired with unmanly courses, and that God has not given thee
such incomparable force to employ it ill. With these words he vanished, leaving
Alcidamant in a strange confusion; for reflecting on his life, and judging it
indeed most unbeseeming a man that desired to be in esteem with persons of
worth, he resolved to quit Melania, and follow the voice of the Destinies:
howbeit, finding no little difficulty therein, and fearing this wenches extreme
love would oppose his design; he knew not whether he should depart without
leave, or whether it were better for him to persuade her with reasons to allow
of his going. This last opinion, seeming fairest unto him, in regard that this
way, he avoided all occasion she might have to reproach him for deceiving her,
as also any misfortune that otherwise peradventure might arise from such his
neglect of her; he concluded to proceed ingenuously with her, and to undertake
nothing but with permission; being persuaded he ought that respect unto so many
favors which he had received from her. Pursuing then the cry of the hounds,
and finding as full a grown Boar as ever he had seen, he presently advanced
toward him, and not giving him time to enter into the toils, he struck him to
the heart with his Boar spear; whereupon, commanding the huntsmen to bring him
away, he returned home, where at first he discovered not his intent to Melania;
but night being come, and they together in bed, he began his discourse with a
sigh, and said unto her: Madam, it is with extreme grief, that I desire you to
consider the reasons I bring for to induce you no longer to keep me here. We
are not born for our selves, much less for pleasure and idleness, nor is a
man to put on arms for once, and ever after to let them hang ignobly rusting:
The greatest Knights that are, have loved like my self, but their love never
kept them from seeking adventures in the world; contrarily, they have rendered
themselves famous by an infinity of enterprises achieved by the sole
remembrance of their Mistrisses; sweet Madam give me this power, permit me to
raise my name with your praises, and that I may make the world say, how France
produces excellent warriors, and incomparable beauties; you shall have a share
in my triumphs, and when you shall hear the greatness of my acts reported, you
will receive a thousand times more contentment, then that you can expect from
my stay. I speak not thus, because I am weary of your caresses, they have too
much charm and delight in them; but truly mine honor will not suffer me to
give the best part of my days to rest and ease; for so should I renmy self the
fable of the world, whereas I should desire to be the wonder of it. You love me
in regard you hold me to be virtuous, should I not then be most unworthy of
your favors, if I should be basly effeminate* Verily, Madam, you might justly
despise me: wherefore, I beseech you, to leave me the liberty to merit them,
and generously testify, that you prefer my honor before own satisfaction:
This way you shall oblige me, never to forget your noble carriage to me, and
furnishing me with occasion to commend you, you will make me desire to return
to serve you, after I have crowned my self with a million of laurells. Alas!
said Melania, I feared nothing in the world so much as this discourse, the
doubt whereof, has many times interrupted the pleasure I took in you. What do
you think will become of me, for can I live without a soul? Ah no, dear heart,
I cannot, your departure will procure my death, as your coming prevented it:
Nevertheless, I cannot blame you, your reasons appear most just unto me, and
though my love cannot allow of them, yet I must needs confess, that you ought
to live for glory, and not for pleasure. Why will not you then, said
Alcidamant, suffer a little, since it is for my good? My weakness, answered
she, will not permit me so to do; howbeit, seeing reason commands, I will
resolve my self for it: Go then when you please, I will seek for consolation in
my patience, in the praises which I shall hear published of you, and most of
all, in the promise you have made me to return hither again another day. But
alas, I fear, and with reason, that your merits, which make you so lovely, will
furnish you with as many Mistrisses, as you shall meet with fair women, and
that you will utterly forget me. Madam, said Alcidamant, kissing her very
amorously, you are then troubled to no purpose, your beauty may well assure you
against this fear, and the knowledge of my disposition will keep you from
believing that ever I can be so far ungrateful: If I am much indebted to the
favor you have done me, I must add to that account as none of the least, this
last resolution of yours, wherein I find as much love as courage, and from
thence draw upon my self most powerful obligations to make me despise all kind
of objects for your sake.

Accompanying these words then with a world of kindness, he somewhat pacified
the grief of this poor afflicted creature, but her sorrows renewed when she saw
her self alone in bed, and that she considered how her Lover was arming himself
to be gone, whereupon not enduring the place, and desiring to enjoy the sight
of him as long as possible might be, she presently got forth, covered only with
a little cloak, and went to the chamber where our Knight was, and would once
again have bid him adieu, howbeit not able to speak but with sighs, she let him
go to horse, somewhat pleased, yet in her displeasure to have seen a few tears
on his cheeks as assured testimonies of his grief so to leave her, and returned
to her bed, where the memory of the pleasures she had there formerly enjoied
refreshing her torment, she continued a long time weeping, whilst Alcidamant
followed his good fortune.

This generous warrior being alone was no doubt very sensible of the sorrow he
had left at Maran, but on the other side it gladded him as much, that he was at
liberty, and bethinking him of the time which he had unprofitably spent, it
vexed him to see how little he had done in the commencement of his chivalry,
nevertheless he comforted himself with the resolution to do such deeds of arms
as should deface this fault, and give occasion to all the world to talk of him.
Traveling then with this intention, he bestowed all the rest of the day
without meeting of any adventure, and at night took up his lodging in a
village, where being at supper a young Squire came in, and with a very sad
countenance desired entertainment. As God help me, seid he moved with pity to
behold him, your affliction displeases me, and if you will acquaint me with the
cause of it, I will gladly endeavor to assist you if you have need of my
succor. Sir, said the Squire, your good will does much oblige me, but alas! it
brings me not the satisfaction I desire, and which I cannot hope for but from
heaven: If I be greeved it is with a great deal of reason; for having to day
lost my master, one of the best Knights in the world, I can never look for any
contentment hereafter. By what misfortune did you lose him, said Alcidamant?
Through the treason of a wicked villain, answered the Squire, who causes a
bridge to be guarded some three leaves hence, for to surprise a Knight, from
whom it seems he has received some displeasure, but others that come there are
not exempted from his treachery; for as soon as ever any one is advanced upon the
bridge, he makes the barrier by which he entered, to be shut upon him, and
straightway he is opposed by fowr strong Knights, who stop him from passing on,
till such time as another, that I assure you is very valiant and courageous,
comes and joins with them to combat him if he will not render up his arms. My
Master unluckily arriving there, went in boldly never dreaming of any such
matter; but he had not made twenty steps when the Knight of whom I last
mentioned, came against him, and threatened him with present death if he would
not yield himself to prison. What do you talk of death and prison to me,
answered my Master? By my life you shall not triumph so easily of me, and as
long as I am able to weild a sword, no man living shall command my liberty.
Saying so, my Master having given me his lance, because the Knight was without
one, courageously drew his sword, and not to use many words he began a fierce
combat with him, who behaved himself, mavelous well, both in defending and
charging my Master, that surpassing him in valor, had brought him to an ill
pass having already drawn blood from diverse parts of his body, when as those
that guarded the barrier advanced, and having charged him altogether, overthrew
him from his horse, manacled his hands, and cast him into a dungeon, with a
resolution to plague him thoroughly for the pain he had put them unto: now
because their meaning is not to take any but Knights, they presently turned me
out, and told me that I was set at liberty in hope I would find our some
valiant man or other for to deliver my Master out of their hands; but they
shall miss of their purpose, for I will never make the misfortune great^r, by
conducting any Knight thither, unles it be the valorous Fulgoran of Canabea, my
Masters near kinsman, or in his absence the brave bastard of Media: now judge,
Sir, whither I have not great cause to complain. That you have in good faith,
said Alcidamant, and I much commend the affection which you carry to the
service of that good Knight; but me thinks you should not so afflict your self
by despairing of his recovery, seeing it may happen that he may be delivered;
and to oblige you thereunto, I promise you so as you will conduct me to that
bridge, to try my fortune there to morrow, and save you the labor of going so
far to seek relief. Now God defend, said the Squire I would rather co^s^ll you
to forbear; for I should undo you, be guilty of the mischief that should betide
you, and your death would augment my grief and displeasure. It were an honor
for Knights chiefly of your ag^ (pardon me for speaking to you in this manner,
and telling you that your youth does not permit you to have much experience in
arms) it were an honor, I say, for Knights to undertuke adventures, whereof
the power of a man is capable, but they are held to be rash and unadvised when
they venture upon such as are above their forces, they are to leave those great
executions unto such, as by little and little have given end to difficult
enterprises, and to remember that nature has taught young birds not to soar
high till their wings be strong and able. If we venture nothing, said
Alcidamant, what can we do worthy of commendation, and if glory be not to be
acquired by common adventures, we are without fear to attempt such as are
dangerous? wherefore, honest youth, never trouble your self for me, nor enquire
whether I can, or cannot; the order I have received obliges me to this design,
which I will execute without you, conducted thither by some other, howbeit if
you love your Master, I know you cannot stir a foot till you have made this
journey. My pity of you, said the Squire, drew me to give you this advice, but
seeing you have so much courage as to contemn it, I will not fail to be your
guide. Whereupon bidding him good night, he retired, leaving Alcidamant with an
extreme desire to break so pernicious a custom. Having slept then b^t a
little, he arose very early, and conducted by the Squire, he arrived at the
Bridge, upon which he entered boldly without any fear, although he saw the
barrier shut after him, and advancing forwards he incountred a great Knight,
who perceiving those three palms upon his shield, cried out: Come, come, my
Masters, here is the bird for which we laid our nets. At these words,
Alcidamant was assured, that this custom was established for to take away his
life; and observing the Knight well, he perceived that it was Narsander the
inchanter, which having made him draw his sword, he advanced to him with this
speech: By heaven, traitor, thou shall not escape me now, neither shall the
power of thy friends avail thee, for it is more then time to make thee give an
account of all the wickedness that thou have committed. Wherewithal, he
discharged his sword so furiously upon his shield, that he divided it in two,
the point thereof lighting with such v^olence on his head-peece, that it
overthrew him quite astonished to the ground, where doubtless he had trod him
in pieces under his horses feet, if the Knights of the Bridge had not arrived
to his succor. Those four Knights exceedingly vexed to behold their Master in
that case, charged Alcidamant all at once, making no question to subdue him
with ease; but he despising their assauits, which made not so much as any print
upon his arms, began a most dangerous bickering with them; now he gave a down
right blow on the head of one, by and by he ran another clean through the body;
howbeit, not having room enough to lay about him, his blows fell not half so
strongly as otherwise they would have done, insomuch, that the combat endured
longer then he defired; nevertheless, growing into choler to see Narsander
come again to himself, and offer to arise, he bestirred himself so terribly
amongst his enemies, that with the first blow he discharged he cut one of them
in twain, and presently sent the arm of another to the earth. This expedition
had amazed them, and they were even upon the point of betaking themselves to
flight, when as Narsander joined with them, charging Alcidamant very fiercely;
who becoming more furious by the resistance he found, struck one of them with
such force, that he clave him down to the very teeth, thereby so terrifying
those which remained, that Narsander began to fly one way, whilst the Knight
labored to save himself by another. Alcidamant, who cared for nothing but to
dispatch this inchanter, followed him close, and cried to him: Turn about,
traitor, and add not cowatdise to so many thy other vices; nevertheless, he
ran away still, striving to get the Castle on his head, for to shelter him from
that furious tempest; but the Knight held him so to it, that entering in at the
first gate, he discharged such a terrible blow on him behind, as having made
him a wound on his shoulder half a foot deep, he laid him once more on the
earth, where instantly going with a resolution to take off his head, and about
to unlace his helmet, he beheld a reasonable handsome gentlewoman, and of a
gracious presence, make hastily toward him, who falling upon her knees, said
unto him: Excellent Knight, have pity, I beseech you, on me, and for her sake
whom you love best in the world, grant me the head of this Knight whom I see in
your power. As I live, said he, Madam, he does not deserve such grace, but you
so straightly conjure me, that I may not refuse you: howbeit, I must have the
naughty custom that is kept here abrogated, and you shall presently deliver the
prisoners which are in your custody. My Lord, answered the gentlewoman, I
confess with you, that Narsander is be to blamed for many of his actions, and
you may be sure, that it is a grief unto me to see him live in this manner: But
alas! my condition does not permit me to dispose of it otherwise, and my love
to him makes me desire his welfare. You are pleased that the custom of the
Bridge shall be broken, and the passage left free hereafter, assure your self,
that shall be the first request I will make unto him; and as for the prisoners,
it is reasonable that they should be set at liberty, seeing it is your
pleasure, unto whom all obedience is more then due here. Commanding then some
of her servants to open the dungeons, they brought forth above forty Knights,
who presently departing, went publishing the valor of this Knight of the
Palms, in so many places, that all France resounded again with the report of
his famous deeds; only the Squires Master remained behind, in regard that
Alcidamant, observing his gallant disposition, had entreated him to make
himself known to him. That will I most gladly, answered he; My name is
Florimond, son to Bruzanges of Canabea, and Cousin to the burning Knight, of
whom it may be you have heard talk, as of one of the valiantest Gentlemen of
the earth, and who not long since was acknowledged to be the son of the
Excellent Emperor of Persia, Don Rogel; I went forth of Constantinople a good
while since, for the execution of a difficult enterprise, and made account to
return again instantly, but the ordinary adventures, which befall Knights
errant, having carried me from one Country to another, I arrived in this
goodly Kingdom, where the first incounte^ I met withal, was a very beautiful
Gentlewoman, who understanding by my speech that I was a stranger, invited me
very courteously to repose some time in her house, to the which I consented in
a most unluckie time, (well may I say so, for my torments will not suffer me to
speak better;) I was conducted then to my chamber, where being disarmed, I
presently saw Claristea enter (so is this cruel f^ir named) who seemed to be
curious after novelties, asked me a thousand questions, whereunto I answered,
as I conceived, very fully. Whilst she talked thus with me, I marked her very
heedfully, and observing powerful charms in hereies, a mavelous delicate
face, a winning grace in her carriage, and a certain kind of Majesty in her
countenance, I could not choose but love her. To what end should I hold you
longer with discou^sing my p^ssions? I discovered my thoughts unto her (Alas!
Love would needs force me to it, for to make me suffer afterward a torment
worse then death) by a million of sighs I made her understand the power she had
over me, and a thousand times besought her to take some compassion of my
endurings; but she was so far from believing my protestations, or regarding my
pain, that she would at no hand grant me the honor to be her Knight. If ever
you have loved, you may easily conjecture how great my sorrow was, seeing all
my hopes so frustrate; truly it was such, that no whit respecting my life,
since I was not pleasing to whom I adored, I resolved to appear no more before
her; and so one morning I departed, with a purpose to undergo things impossible
for a man to perform, to the end I might free my self from farther languishing;
and indeed, I never complained of the rigor of my imprisonment, from which you
have delivered me, in hope that death would give an end to all my troubles.
Behold, S^r, this is that which you have desired of me, and if there be any
other thing wherein I may serve you, I would desire you to command me before I
get me to some desert, where I may with more liberty bewail my misfortune. This
is a resolution, said Alcidamant, very unbefitting the honor of a good Knight,
wherefore you shall never put it in practice if you will be ruled by me, rather
hope for something from your merit, and compel this insensible creature to
blame her ingratitude, and acknowledge your services; a small matter pleases a
woman, a far less displeases her, and oftentimes she loves us in our neglect
of her, as she despises us when we adore her beauty. My grief, replied
Florimond, made me wish for death, but your discourse makes me desire life, for
to employ it in your service. This is as it should be, said Alcidamant, now it
were not amiss, we began to think of dislodging from hence, where so little
good is meant us. Truly, answered Florimond, I was about to advise you unto it,
for the less while we stay here, the easier will it be for us: Whereupon,
Florimond having himself caused the barrier to be opened, and followed
Alcidamant to a village not far off, where they met with the adventures, which
shall be recounted in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XX. The strange adventure which happened to the Knight of the Palms and
Florimond, with the de^iverance of Claristea, and her love to Alcidamant.
THE Knight of the Palms having endu^ed so much the day before, fell asleep
as soon as he was a bed; but Florimond, more oppest with care and sorrow, could
take no rest; his ill fortune presented it self continually before him, and
Claristea's rigor so tormented him, that he found no ease save in his
complaints: arising then, he walked about the chamber, but that being too
strait for the liberty of his thoughts, he went unto certain trees that
bordered on the high way which led unto the village, and there was so engaged
in his passions, as he thought on nothing else. What a weak^esse is this in me,
said he, to sigh for an ungrateful creature, that takes pleasure in my
sufferings; her cruelty should make me despise her as much, as her beauty has
made me love her, and my just disdain should give me that content, which her
neglect and my fidelity deny me. Ah Claristea! my anger should make me happy,
it should make me forget you, so to deliver my self out of the pain wherein I
am, or at leastwise not to think of you, but to hate you, seeing you take the
course to undo me: But alas! it is not in my power, my desires are tied to my
misfortune; I love my misery because you are the occasion of it, and shall
never resolve for hate, as I do for patience: Live then, as you please, either
ungrateful, or inclined to favor me; alter your mind, or persevere in your
purpose to destroy me; I will never breathe, but for you, nor shall my desires
be bestowed any other where. So, concluding to die, rather then to be wanting
in loialty, he was devising some way how he might come to see Claristea again;
when as a great noise made him give ear to certain voices he heard; but
suddenly remembering, that the Moon shone clear enough to let him see what he
desired, he abandoned the shadow of those trees, and got him into the midst of
the high way, where he perceived three Giants coming on, which seemed three
towers, leading five or six damsels bound, who crying to heaven for help,
filled the air with their complaints.

This object amazed him, and if he had been armed without doubt he had set upon
these Giants, although he had been sure to die for it, but having not so much
as his sword about him, he returned instantly unto the trees with a resolution
to follow and succor those afflicted women as soon as ever he was armed.
Concealing himself then under a walnut tree he patiently suffered them to pass
by, but he was marvellously astonished, when as they were just against him, to
hear the voice of his fair Mistress amongst the confusion of their lamentations,
and observe the very garments, as he thought, which she wore the day he parted
from her. Either I am enchanted said he to himself, or I see Claristea a
captive. Ah beauteous mistress! My death shall testify the greatness of my
passion, for I will free you from those chains which are nothing so hard as
they that bind my heart, or I will die courageously, that I may not survive my
misfortune. Whereupon he was about to have plucked away a branch from the t^ee
under which he stood, and begun the fight therwi^h, but knowing he should lose
himself so to no purpose he forbore, and stealing softly from one tree to
another, he got to the house where his horse and arms stood, before the door
whereof these women staid, as if some good spirit had told them that they should
find succor there; howbeit they were constrained to set forwards instantly out
of the fear they had of one of those Giants, who switching them ever and anon
with a wand said unto them with a terrible voice: On, on, ye baggages or I will
cut you in a thousand pieces. These words and this action put Florimond into
such a rage that immediately he got into his lodging, and finding his Squire by
good fortune awake, commanded him to saddle his horse with all expedition,
armed himself, and never minding the Knight of the Palms, who was fast asleep
in an inner chamber, mounted on his steed, and straightway galloped after the
Giants. In the mean time Arnides having heard the noise was got forth to know
the cause thereof, where seeing Florimond depart in such haste, and
understanding part of this adventure by his Squire, he suddenly returned in to
Altidamant^ chamber, and pulling him by the arm for to awake him he said unto
him: Do you sleep, Sir, whilst others are upon brave emploiment? For Gods sake
arise, and ride after Florimond, who to succor certain damsels that are led
away captive by three Giants, has put himself into a danger out of which he
cannot escape unless he be generously assisted. At these words Alcidamant
leapt out of his bed, and whilst Arnides was making ready his horses, hastily
armed himself, vaulted into his saddle, and spurred as hard as he could drive
after Florimond, who having made wonderful speed had overtaken the Giants,
just as the Sun began to appear. These three Colosses seeing themselves pursued
but by one Knight alone, fell a laughing outright, and continued on their way
as it were disdaining to draw their swords; but one of them not able to endure
this presumption turned him about, and said unto the others: This Woodcock will
needs be taken in the net which we have not pitched for him; go you on, I Will soon
give him his p^sport, and be with you presently. Whereupon drawing out his
curtelax he attended Florimonds approach, and seeing him come running at him
with his lance in his rest, he thought to have slipped aside and cut it in two,
howbeit he was not so quick but that he was surprised and encountered with such
force, as he was fain to recoil two or three steps back for to save himself
from falling, which put him into so great a fury, that cursing his Gods, he
advanced to cleave him in twain. But Florimond resolving to fight with
judgment and not with passion, lightly avoided the blow and letting it fall to
no purpose, gave his enemy so home a thrust under the left arm, that it entered
three fingers deep into his body. When as the Giant beheld his armor all
besmeared with blood he was ready to burst with choler and rage; and lifting up
his heavy curtelax, he labored to let it descend on Florimond, who knowing
that death attended on that weapon, sometimes leapt aside, and sometimes slipped
under his enemies arm, so making it still to fall in vain. This combat growing
more cruel and furious, through the force and dexterity of these warriors, it
continued so long till the incomparable Alcidamant came galloping to them, who
staying to behold the fight Florimonds Squire said unto him: Alas Sir! you see
not the worst of the adventure in this combat, two monsters like to this here,
have carried away certain Ladies who are sure to be ravished by them, without
your assistance. I will die, said Alcidamant, before that shall be, and if their
safety may depend on me, no man else shall run the hazard of their deliverance
but my self. Heerwith he posted away, and rode almost an howr without
discovering that which he sought for, whereupon beginning to fear lest he should
fail of his enterprise, in regard he was entering into a great and spacious
forest, he heard the cries of a woman that sounded very brief amidst the
silence of those woods: turning then to that part whither the voice seemed to
call him, he approached to certain oaks, under the which he saw a Giant that
held five damsels bound with a cord, and another more dreadful then he, who
strove to violate a maid fair beyond excellence, and which made those outcri^s
he had heard. By heaven said he, aiming the point of his lance at this Giants
throat, I will be as good as thou art wicked; this steell shall be the death of
thee, that art so base as to go about to ravish a woman that infinitely
deserves to be served. How now, said this proud Giant, dare thou offer to
disturb me from enjoying a pleasure, wherein I placed a sovereign happiness. By
all my Gods I Will teach thee better manners, and respit thy death no longer then
to the first blow I shall give thee: whereupon drawing out his curtelax he
thought to divide the Knight of the Palms in two pieces, but he was turned
aside to receive the encounter of the other, who having tied those damsels to
the foot of a tree, ran furiously at him with his lance charged. Their
encounter was dangerous, Alcidamant somewhat astonished had much ado to keep his
saddle, but he more fortunat past his lance quite through the body of his
enemy, who was overthrown dead in the place, and that in good time; for the
first Giant arriving the mean while, gave him so terrible a blow, that it made
his head bow to his saddle bow: great was the pain that he felt thereby, but
raising up himself more furious then ever he had been in all his life, he gave
his enemy so dangerous a stroke on his shield, that his arm being too weak to
sustain the brunt of it, carried it to his head with such violence, that it
made him knock his chin against his breast, and see a thousand stars more then
ever he had beheld. The Giant am^zed therewith, advanced his heavy curtelax
again, but the Knight of the Palms not intending to abide the fury of it, slipped
aside, and seeing that his choler made him to neglect the guarding of himself,
he discharged so mighty a blow on his left arm, that it made way to the quick,
and gave him a great wound a little under the elbow. Whereupon the Giant entering
into extreme rage, would have closed with his enemy, but the point of
Alcidamants sword made another deep entrance into his body, so that not able to
get within him as he desired, he had recourse again to his cimiter, wherewith
he laid about him more dangerously then before. This while the damsel who had
seen her self so near to be ravished was got up, and having unbound her
companions, was fallen on her knees, heartily praying unto heaven to assist
their Knight; and beginning to be in some hope by the death of the first Giant,
and the bad estate whereinto the other was reduced, she observed this valiant
Knight of the Palms, admired his address and force, and comparing him to God
Mars, it begot a well willing in her toward him, which by little and little
converting into love, made her wish him the victory, that so she might be
liable to a recompense. Have you ever, said she to those that accompanied her,
have you ever seen a Knight fight with more grace? and who could imagine that a
Giant so dreadful should pass by the sword of one man alone? It amazes me,
and the danger I was so lately in keeps me not from considering this combat
with pleasure; see you not his strange force, and that he never gives blow in
vain; but especially mark his address, he diverts his enemies strokes, wisely
avoids the edge of his curtelax, and when he is surprised he seems a towr that
contemns all assaults, no travel wearies him, he appears stronger then he was
but now; briefly I observe in this Knight all that is most commendable and rare
in others. This beauty speaking thus in the behalf of this warrior, fell
insensibly in love with him, rendered the fear of her companions much less, and
made them hope for speedy safety: The mean while Alcidamant and the Giant hewd
one another, and each of them desiring the victory entreated his adversary as
hardly as he could; howbeit our champion seemed to have the better; for the
Giant grew more unweldy, and the great quantity of blood that issued from his
wounds made him so weak that his blows were not discharged with that fury as at
the beginning of the fight, whereas Alcidamants courage augmented every minute,
which put the Giant into such an excess of rage, that resolving either to die
or presently to vanquish, he took his curtelax in both his hands thinking
therewith to cleave the Knight to the very teeth, but Alcidamant making his
horse to leap aside the weapon did only whistle in the air; and because the
Giant had employed all his strength on this blow, he bowed forward even to his
horses mane, at which very instant of time Alcidamant having his sword aloft
let it fall with such fury just on his neck, as he divided his head from his
body, to the infinite contentment of these damsels, who fell on their knees
before him. Valiant Knight, said the fair damsel, you have done miracles for
our deliverance; but you shall not lose the glory of it, for we will publish
over all France that you are the bravest gentleman that this day bears arms.
Lady, answered he having caused her and the rest to rise, you may do and say
what you please, but the recompense already exceeds the pains. I have freed
you, I ought to do it, and I do not think I have any way obliged you; wherefore
your acknowledgement me thinks is to no purpose, let us therefore leave
speaking of that, and go to see the end of a combat wherein a Knight is
engaged, with whom I was lodged when you past by the village, and that
discovering you before me generously began the fight. On my faith, said Arnidas
thereupon, I doubt of some ill news from him, for his Squire comes galloping
here, and I fear he is slain. Now God defend, said Alcidamant, howsoever we
must resolve for patience: then meeting the Squire, he learned that Florimond
was the victor, but had lost so much blood that he was not able to sit his
horse, nor likely to live if he were not quickly assisted. Take my Squire with
you, and get him to be carried to the village where we lay, said Alcidamant,
and send with all speed for the best Chyrurgians of the Country; as soon as I
have placed these Ladies in safety, I will come and look to him my self, for
his valor deserves this care. He entreats you, said the Squire, to have as
much pity of his sufferings, as of his life, and to endeavor to make his
Mistress more tractable. His Mistress, said Alcidamant, is she one of these
Ladies? It is that fair one which sp^ke to you but now, said the Squire. I am
very glad of it, said Alcidamant, assure him that he is happy if my reasons may
prevail with her.

Whereupon, having dispatched away Arnides with Florimonds Squire, he returned
to Claristea (so was that Lady named whom the Giant would have forced) and
having secured her against all fear which she might have conceived, he walked
along fair and softly with her toward a house which she had some two leagues
from thence. She was beautiful, he was amorous, she had good experience of his
valor, his opinion was no less of her merit; beholding then powerful charms
in her eyes, and being carried with the remembrance of those two alablaster
thighs which he had seen bare under the Giant, as she likewise was transported
with the memory of what she had seen him perform, their love was reciprocal,
and their actions declared their thoughts sufficiently without speech; she
looked amorously upon him, expecting to be sued unto; he beheld her with the
like affection, and design; but their silence seeming to accuse them of too
little love, and too much respect they began to speak both at an instant, and
presently stopped, each of them desiring to give that advantage to the other. At
length, Claristea thinking she was obliged to speak first, said unto him: What
shall we give you, Sir, for a recompense of so much pain? I would willingly
ask, answered he, having quite forgotten Melania, and holding change no crime;
I would willingly ask, I say, that which you could have conserved without me;
but, Madam, I fear the same punishment, which you gave to the temerity of a
Knight, who adores none in the wo^ld but you; you speak of Florimond, said she,
for I observed that that was his Squire which lately parted from you; but let
us enter no farther upon that discourse, I pray you, I know how to put a
difference between your valor and his, and your merit will not suffer my
favors to be shared equally betwixt you: Say then, What is it you desire of
me? That you will love me, said he, and that taking pity of my pain, you will
not make me languish in the expectation of that I so infinitely desire. You
would deserve that grace, answered she, provided that you had love enough. Love
enough, replied he instantly; Ah Madam! Do not make that your excuse, I beseech
you, your beau^y makes no small wounds, neither does my heart receive light
impressions, I can love more in a moment, then another in a whole year. I, said
she, but such violence will not last. No, if I die quickly, answered he: I do
not mean so, said Claristea, nor have I spoken in that manner, but as fearing a
change in you. Never think of that, Madam, said Alcidamant, when you know my
disposition, you will not accuse me thus. Time will clear this point, said she,
in the mean time, hope well, and believe I este^^ highly of you. Discoursing in
this manner, they arrived at Claristea's house, where a many of Knights were
assembled, consulting in what sort they might recover their kinswoman out of
the Giants hands, but infinitely contented to see her delivered; and
understanding that it was the valor of the Knight of the Palms, they honored
him with exceeding much respect, wondering to behold him so young, so fair, and
endued with such extraordinary forces; in so much, that every day one or other
arrived for to visit him: the fame of this warlike act running from Province to
Province with such infinite applause, that nothing was talked of, but the
mavelous valor of this Knight.

CHAP. XXI. Alcidamant visits Claristea in the night, obtains his desire, and
by a strange adventure is constrained to depart from her.
CErtain days being but sadly past away for these lovers, who in regard of the
multitude of those which every minute came in and out, had not the leisure to
discourse of their passions, much less the liberty to be so private together,
as they extremely desired: Alcidamant, very much discontented, finding
Claristea busy one night in entertaining certain companies, went forth into
the garden to take the air, and walking along the alleys, he was a devising,
how he might avoid those which continually importuned him with their
visitations, and so get some time to content himself with his Mistress; but
fortune, that seemed to watch more for his good then he expected, made him
encounter Claristea's chambermaid, who espying him, went softly to him, and
taking him by the arm, said unto him: Knight, you are surprised, and you can
hardly deny, but that you are now thinking of love. In good faith, said he, I
should wrong my self if I did, for my carriage then would give me the lie, and
much more to disguise my self to you, upon whose assistance I resolve to place
all my hope. Melita (so was she called) you believe that I am infinitely in
love, it is true: But alas! it may be I am so unhappy, that I am not beloved
again; for I fear left the excellency of my Lady, and my little merit, should
restrain her from giving remedy to my sufferings: Dear friend, it lies in you
to oblige me as much as my life comes unto. And how, said this wench, who
seemed to understand him? By being my advocate to Claristea, answered he, and
desiring that favor for me, which may mitigate my pain, and render my love
everlasting. I did not think, said Mileta, that my Mistrisles beauty had
wounded you, and that you had sighed for her; but I will no longer doubt it,
now that I have such testimony of it from your self. You crave my assistance,
you shall have it, and I promise to contribute as much to your satisfaction as
possibly I may, being persuaded that I am obliged thereunto, by the good office
I received from your valor, when as you delivered me, with my Mistress, out of
the power of these dreadful Giants, where we were sure to have lost both
honor and life: But what shall I demand for you? That she will do me the
favor to receive me into her chamber, said he, at such time as all the world
is at rest, that I may represent the greatness of my affection unto her,
seeing that the arrival of so many persons that continually come to visit her,
will not permit me to talk freely with her. You demand very much, said Melita,
for the knowledge of this action, could not but redound to the prejudice of her
honor; nevertheless, I will labor to satisfy you, and showing her how she
owes all that she has to your succor, I will oblige her, if I can, not to
refuse you such a grace; live then in this hope, and in the mean time be
patient. Believe me, Melita, said he, kissing her more affectionately then she
expected, your services shall not be without recompense; go and make good your
promise, whilst I comfort my self with my thoughts. Saying so, he entered into
an arbor of Iasemines, ravished with the apprehension of a happiness, which
he hoped to enjoy ere long; and Melita went directly to Claristea's chamber,
who withdrawing thither, a little after made her unready to go to bed;
whereupon, Melita said unto her, being assured that she should please her
extremely in talking to her of her Knight; Madam, the honor you have done me,
by freely imparting your secrets unto me, obliges me not to conceal my thoughts
from you: walking but now in the garden, I found your Lover in a case that made
me exceedingly to pity him; his arms acrosse, his hat over his eyes, wherein I
espied some tears to stand, his pace full of stops, which, with a thousand
sighs, testified a mavelous distemper of mind; I approached to him,
guessing well enough what might be the cause of this his behavior, but making
as though I understood it not, I demanded from whence it was derived; from my
fear not to be loved as I love, answered he; and if I do not the sooner find
relief in my passions, my life will quickly be at an end. Then he declared unto
me, that his grief proceeded from the want of liberty, to discover unto you
what lay upon his heart, as he wonderfully desired; and finishing his discourse
with a sigh, he conjured me to be a suitor for him, that you would be pleased
to let him come and see you this evening, to the end he may have the felicity
of contemplating your beauty at the full, as likewise be free from all
interruption in his talk: now it is for you to resolve, whether you have love
enough to grant him this favor. Melita, answered she, a little troubled, thou
know too well that I love him infinitely; but how can we bring him hither,
without fear of incountering some body that might discover our secrets; I see
no likelihood thereof, and less yet, when I consider, that he has not bought
so much grace with the price it ought to be rated at; me thinks, it were ^itter
that difficulties should make it more precious to him. Here be reasons indeed,
said Melita, a little moved with choler; Madam, these fond humors which would
make things seem otherwise then they be, are seldom approved of; you love him
passionately, you would have him in your arms, and if he sued not to you, it
may be you would do that office for him; notwithstanding, you will defer him
this happiness, out of such weak considerations that I am ashamed of; it is no
time to dissemble, when our purposes are discovered, and those Artificers serve
for nothing, but to make us oftentimes to be otherwise judged of then we ought;
let him be fetched hither, the opportunity fits, for all the house are at rest,
and if your love obliges you, refuse him not the recompense which is due to his
valor. I am contented he shall come and see me, said she; wherefore thou
m^yest go for him when thou will; but believe that I will not be carried so
easily as thou say, and that I am resolved to vanquish my self, for to
triumph over him. In good faith, said Melita, if I were in his room, I would
not return with empty hands, but would well consider the time, the places, and
the persons. Whereupon, going out, she left Claristea strangely troubled;
sometimes resolving to conserve her self, and then by and by, not to lose so
favorable an occasion, which is not to be recovered, when it is once past.
This while Melita entertained Alcidamant, and leading him by the hand, she said
unto him: Sir, I am carrying you to Claristea, but rem^mber that modesty is a
reproach to lovers, that it renders them unworthy of any favor whatsoever, and
that to be happy one must be somewhat bold; this speech ended at the door, she
entered first, and approaching to Claristea's bed, she said unto her: This
prisoner demands grace, Madam, please you to grant it him, whilst I go and draw
up his pardon; saying so, she got her into the ward robe, it may be with some
grief for that she had not also a second, and left our Knight upon his knees,
who holding one of his Mistrisses hands, kissed it, not being able to speak a
word; on the other side, she was no less moved; for seeing him so handsome
with humility by the beds side, and calling to mind how much she was obliged
to him, she felt her self provoked with mighty desire, and was even upon the
point to have joined her lips to his, for to let him know her mind; but
desiring to appear more contained, she forbear; howbeit, having too much love
to leave him in that posture, she said unto him: Knight, I pray arise, for I am
resolved not to hear you till you be at ease. That shall I never be, answered
he, but by the fruition of so many beauties as I behold: Ah Madam, take pity of
my suffering, opportunity speaks for me, and seems to say that you are not to
deny me this favor; whereupon, laying his mouth to hers, he was fastened there
for a while, with such extreme delight, that he could not forbear putting his
hand on her delicate breast, with the exceeding smooth whiteness whereof, he
was marvellously taken; and finding himself in case not to stay there, he slipped
off a nightgown that he had on, and getting into bed, he made her feel
incredible pleasures in loosing the name of maid. The first course being
finished, she began to sigh, and said: Alas! I was resolved to defend my self
better, but, Sir, accuse your merits for this weakness, and take not occasion
thereupon, to make the less esteem of me; I have given you that which was most
dear to me, preserve it, I beseech you, with as much love as discretion. Assure
your self, Madam, said he, redoubling his courses, that you shall never see me
disobey so sweet a commandment, and that I will never lose the memory of so
powerful an obligation; but in the mean time, permit me, I pray you, to visit
you thus every night. You shall always have as much power of this chamber as
my self, answered she, nor shall it be at any time shut against you, only
remember to carry your self advisedly. Continuing their kisses thus, they
perceived the day to appear, whereat they were grieved; but hoping to meet
again ere long, Alcidamant returned to his chamber, and left Claristea, who
finding her self weary, slept till dinner time; when as she was wakened by her
chamber maid, who bidding her good morrow, fell a laughing, and said: Madam, is
this Knight as courageous with women, as he is valiant amongst Giants? Come,
you are jeering now, said she, whereas you are guilty of that fault, for if you
had staid here, I should have had no cause to complain of his boldness. That
is no answer to my question, replied Melita, for you desired to be forced I
know, but do you hold him worthy of your favors? Never seek to be so curiously
informed, I pray, said she, but give me my cloths, since it is so late, another
time we will talk of that at ^easure. Thereupon having quickly made her self
ready she appeared in the dining room, where her Knight was alone; she blushed
at first, but seeing that the matter was past remedy she fell into discourse
with him whilst meat was serving to the table, which being taken away they
withdrew into a cabinet where their kisses and caresses were renewed with a
world of content. Living thus in all the pleasure which can be enjoied by
Lovers nineteen or twenty days past sweetly away, at the end whereof, fortune
that delights in change, would needs separate them; for being one evening at
supper together, and thinking of nothing less then any cross that might
arrive to their desires, a lacky came in and told them, that the Marchioness
of Monteclare was at the gate, desiring access to Claristea. At these wo^ds
Alcidamant changed color, which she perceiving, asked him whether he were not
well. Yes, said he, but Madam, this news displeases me, for it concerns us
much; and if you will oblige me, charge all your house that a word be not
spoken of my being here, in the mean time, so please it you, I will re^i^e and
shut my self up in my chamber. You will be bet^e^ in my Cabinet, said she, for
I will know the cause of such fear in you, and believe me I should be jealous
did not the age of the Marchioness whose near kinswoman I am, retain me from
imagining that you can have any affection for her. Whereupon Alcidamant being
past into his Ladies Cabinet, and Arnides into his masters chamber, Claristea
went to receive her kinswoman, giving her a thousand thanks for the pains she
had taken to come and visit her, and commanding the table to be covered again,
she gave her all the best entertainment she could. Whilst she was at supper
Claristea calling to mind her Lovers behavior, very attentively observed the
Marchioness, and seeing some remains of beauty yet abiding in her, she was not
without some unquietnes, insensibly suffering her self to be persuaded that she
had some interest in her Knight, and that the only cause of her journey thither
was to see him, so she wished her far enough off, and was vexed in her mind to
hear her say that she would stay nine or ten days in that pl^ce: but not to
appear incivill, she made no show of it, hoping to learn the truth from her
Lovers own mouth: desiring then to free her self of so weighty a care, she
conducted the Marchioness to the chamber which she had caused to be made ready
for her, and telling her that the consideration of her health invited her to
bid her good night, she left her, and went to find out her Knight, whom she
presently kift, but in such a manner as testified some discontent, which very
much troubled Alcidamant, who not enduring to see her melancholy, demanded of
her why she was so sad. Because I cannot wholly enjoy you, answered she, for
the fear you are in to appear before the Marchioness of Monteclare, who makes
show of visiting me, that she may the better without suspicion see you, has,
to speak the truth, much distasted me. I love you too well, for to let any
other share with me; I love you too well, dear heart, to possess you by halfs,
seeing I am entirely yours. If you will remember my caresses, and call to mind
with what a heart I have received you, how I have contemned all men to love you
only, doubtless you cannot sigh for any other, since I live not but for your
content. Alas Madam! said he holding her in his arms, permit me to tell you,
that your complaints are without cause, and consider what wrong may be done one
out of a suspicion not rightly grounded. You imagine that I love the
Marchioness of Monteclare, I confess I do, but in such sort as a son should
love his mother, she has brought me into the world, and I ow her as much
affection as is due by nature to parents. And if I do not appear before her, it
is because I will not be constrained to absent my self from you, and quit the
desire I have to follow arms; nevertheles since she has resolved, as I am
informed, to abide here with you some time, I think it fit for me to depart
before day, and bestow my self elsewhere whilst she continues here, that I may
not be hindered in my designs. You make me wonder, said Claristea, to hear you
say that the Marchioness of Monteclare is your mother, and I should hardly
believe it, but that I am confident you would not take pleasure in deceiving a
maid that loves you so much. Madam, said Alcidamant, give credit to my words,
for I honor you too much to tell you an untruth; but if you would be further
satisfied therein, talk with my Squire about it, to whom I have not spoken since
supper. I desire no better assurance, said Claristea, then your protestation,
but pardon me, sweet heart, I pray you, for love is ever accompanied with fear,
and my distrust was rather a sign of passion, then weakness. I am not offended
with it, said Alcidamant, and though I receive great contentment in knowing my
self to be your kinsman, yet is it much more satisfaction to me that I enjoy
your favor, which I will always preserve with the uttermost hazard of my
life. If my love could augment, said Claristea, this new tie of kindred would
add unto the glory of it, but it is at the height of its perfection, and
cannot possibly be greater. Whereupon getting to bed they renewed their
delights with such amorous dalliance, that the day surprised them before they
were aware, which made Alcidamant take leave of his Mistress, so that retiring
into his chamber, he armed himself, and mounting his horse, he left both her
and his mother, who was afterward wonderfully joifull when she understood by
Claristea, that the Knight of whom so much was spoken of thorowout France, was
her son.

CHAP. XXII. The Knight of the Palms is by a wile conducted to the Castle of
Towers, and by the means of a damsel he the second time avoids the plot which
Narsander had laid to take away his life.
ALcidamant mixing the grief of his esloignment with the content he had to see
himself in the flate of acquiring glory, rode till noon and never thought of
eating, but Arnides that neither approved of this silence or austerity, said
unto him: Sir, I know not what pleasure you take in your fancies, but sure I am
my stomach complains of this abstinence, and the hunger that oppresses me,
makes me think that you likewise suffer that way; wherefore, I beseech you, let
us get up to this mountain, where I epsy a little hermitage, and there I hope
we shall meet with some holy personage that will give us to eat. If thou
feel any incommodity, said Alcidamant, thank thy self, for it should be thy
care to make provision. That is good indeed, answered Arnides, for how could I
make provision upon so sudden a departure as yours was? Do but call to mind,
Sir, that you could scarce give me time to saddle our horses, and then you will
not accuse me in this sort. Thou art in the right, said Alcidamant, but I am
not resolved to quit my way for such poor entertainment as we are like to find
there; therefore let us go on, it may be we shall meet with some house or
other, where we may stay our stomachs. I am afraid, said Arnides, that this
good fortune will fail us, or that it will be too long ere we shall attain to
it; but since it is your pleasure to have it so, I must be contented to obey.
Thus rendering their travel less tedious, they continued two howrs on
horsback, which seemed two ages to the famished Squire, but then they met a
damsel followed by a little Dwarf, who casting her eye upon Alcidamant, and
viewing that famous ensign of the Palms, leapt presently from her palfrey, and
falling on her knees, said unto him: Worthy Knight, if I be not deceived you
are he that I have so long sought for. It may be so, said Alcidamant, but
Gentlewoman by what token would you know me better, and what it is you desire
of me? If you be the Knight, said she, that lately freed the prisoners which
Narsander the Inchanter detained at the dangerous bridge, I shall be^eech you
not to refuse me one boon I will ask of you. I grant it you, said Alcidamant,
for I am he that restored them to their liberty, which they had lost for my
sake. You shall follow me then instantly, said she, to a kinswomans house of
mine, which is not above two leagues from hence, where you shall be well
entertained, and to morrow morning we will go to draw a Knight, whom I
infinitely affect, out of this Inchanters prison. I am most ready, said
Alcidamant, to do all that I may for your service; and so am I, said Arnides,
to entreat you gentlewoman, to show us the nearest way, for my belly will make
these two leagues seem longer then six. This made Alcidamant and the damsel to
laugh, who speedily remounting on her horse galloped away amain, so that within
a little time they arrived before a Castle, flanked with fowr great towrs,
which answered to fowr high ways, and encompassed with broad deep trenches,
very proper to defend the master of it from the fury of his enemies. Where
alighting, certain grooms took their horses for to carry them to the stable,
and the damsel going over a little wooden bride, which gave a passage to the
Castle, lead the Knight into a hall, where he met a very fair gentlewoman, who
having courteously entertained him, caused him to unarm himself, and to put on a
watchet satin gown, which became him so excellently well, that she beheld him
with astonishment; the more she confidered him, the more handsome and
accomplished she found him; his language contented her infinitely, his carriage
seemed most amiable to her, and the grace of his countenance pleased her in
such sort that she resolved to love him, and to divert the mischief which was
hanging over his head: wherefore after supper taking him aside, as if she would
confer with him about the business which he had undertaken for her kinswoman,
she said unto him: Sir, your youth makes me to pity you, and the perfections
which I observe in you induce me to do you a singular pleasure, and to save you
from a dangerous storm that threatens you, provided you promise me one boon.
Madam, answered he, your discourse would amaze me, did not the noble freedom
wherewithal you have received me to day, make me confident; but I can fear no
malice, where I see so much grace and beauty, promising then to grant you
whatsoever you can desire of me, be pleased, I pray you to expound your self,
and let me see my danger that I may avoid it. It is greater then you think for,
replied she, and you cannot possibly decline it without my assistance; for you
are in the hands of a man that hates you to the death, and that being out of
hope to be revenged on you by arms, having found you too able that way, has
used policy to en^rap you. You are, I say, in the power of Narsander; I am his
sister, she that drew you hither is his cousin, and the intention of us all was
to take you unarmed, seeing you are otherwise invincible; judge now whether you
could escape death being without arms in the hands of thi^ty Knights, which are
shut up in these towrs, that they may the more easily, and without suspicion
surprise you. Without doubt your courage could not avail you, and your
resistance would be to no purpose; let us carry things wisely, and let us
without more words go into your chamber, where you shall give me that you
promised me, which is your love; then arm your self against all accidents that
may happen, and command you^ ^^quire to be ready with your horses, whilst I
take care to have the wicket kept open for you. But by my best hopes, Madam,
said Alcidamant, very much astonished to see himself in so dangerous a place,
this is even the notablest piece of treachery that can be imagined; and never
did damsel carry a business more dexterously then this little cunning thing
has done, to bring me to my end. Your pity infinitely obliges me, and this
life of mine whereof you have such care, shall be preserved but only to be
employed for your service; and whereas you are pleased to oblige me with the
honor of your favor, let us go Madam, and I will ever labor to cherish the
possession of i^: whereupon p^ssing into a chamber which joined unto the hall,
Alcidamant made the doors sure after him to avoid all surprisall, and finding
himself safe with this gentlewoman, he let her feel that the apprehension of
death had not power to deprive him of the use of his courage. This Lady
wonderful well satisfied with two courses lustily performed, suffered him to
arm himself, and having advertised him that Narsander was not yet returned
home, she counseled him to get forth into the court as soon as he heard a
noise, and not to let himself be assaulted in the chamber. This done, she went
unto the towrs, and caused only fifteen Knights to advance, which heard by
Alcidamant, he drew out his sword, and covering himself with his shield, he got
him into the Court, cleaving the head of the first in two pieces. At this blow
the rest which were scattered before, closed instantly together, but this
incomparable warrior flying amongst them, cut off the arm of one, sent the head
of another to the ground, and kept them in such aw that the hardiest man
amongst them durst not approach him; the rumor of this fight ran over all the
Castle, whereat the rest descended, and encompassed Alcidamant with incredible
fury, but he that grew every moment more courageous and stronger cut them in
pieces, and made so great a slaughter of them, that some of their bodies served
him for a bulwark against the violence of the rest. Night arriving thereupon,
the servants of the place came running in with a number of torches, by the
light whereof the battle renewed so dangerously, that above twenty men were in
less then an howr laid dead on the earth, whereby the rest were terrified in
such sort, that they betook them to their heels for to eschew the mortal blows
of this invincible Knight; who finding no enemy to oppose him, went out for to
go directly to the stable, howbeit meeting a great Knight upon the bridge that
would not suffer him to pass, he discharged so furious a blow on his helmet,
that he overturned him into the water, where questionles he had been drowned,
if some of the servants that knew him to be Narsander, had not suddenly helped
him. Alcidamant then finding no impediment went to his Squire, mounted on his
horse, and taking the first way he met withal, traveled all night as his good
fortune led him.

CHAP. XXIII. The Knight of the Palms at the solicitation of two damsels
embarques himself for Greece: his dangerous combat with Ariston: he slaies a
Giant in the defense of a Frenchwoman, and sends his head to Constantinople.
THis right valiant warrior, having in this manner avoided the snares which
Narsander had laid for him, resolved to quit France, and see the rest of the
world, for to make the whole earth a witness of his valor. Having traveled
then certain days without the encounter of any adventure, worthy of his
courage or my relation, he saw himself at the sea side, much grieved in that he
could not find a vessel to imbarque himself in, nevertheless hoping that the
winds would drive some one or other upon that coast, which seemed to be much
frequented, he rode along by the shore till the evening, when as he met with
two damsels, whereof one of them bowed her self even to the pommell of her
saddle, out of an extraordinary respect in saluting him, and said: Noble Sir,
what do you here? I hoped to have found a barque, answered he, and was resolved
to pass the seas for to have searched in foreign Countries such adventures, as
of late are not to be encountered in this Kingdom; but my ill fortune will keep
me here for want of accommodation that way, so that I am constrained to go even
as my horse pleases to carry me. If you will promise this damsel a boon, and
me another, said she, we will soon furnish you with a ship, that shall carry
you safely whithersoever you will go. In good faith, said he, that is the
greatest pleasure can be done me, wherefore I will promise you any thing you
shall desire of me. Let us descend then to the foot of the rock, said the
damsel, that we may lose no time. I believe, answered he, you do not consider
well what you say; for what shall we do at the foot of the rock, seeing I can
discern nothing proper for our voyage. Do not you trouble your self for that,
said she, you shall not lose your labor. Whereupon leading the way, she was
followed by the other, Arnides and Alcidamant, who when he came down, was
marvellously abashed to see a great Dragon upon the waves, whose wings were
extended, as it were to receive the assistance of the winds. Behold, said the
damsel, a vessel fit for your purpose. God refuse me, said Arnides, if ever I
come near it; I Will rather return again into my mothers womb, then bury my self
in the intrails of this creature. How now, said the damsel, laughing at the
fear he was in, will you be more faint hearted then I, and fear a danger which
I will pass through? Not more faint hearted, said he, but wiser, and more
advised then to cast my self away after your example; do or say what you
please, you shall never persuade me to be so desperate; and if my master will be
ruled by me, we will soon take a safer course. Alcidamant who took exceeding
delight to hear him talk thus, and that was well assured this vessel was made
by enchantment, said unto him; Will thou forsake me then Arnides? That I will,
said he, rather then die in this fashion; for I pray you tell me, what glory is
there to be gotten by putting our selves in the claws of this Dragon? Let us go
away, Sir, and leave these women here, which are always more ready to deceive
Knights, then to succor them in their enterprises.

Thou art in the wrong, said Alcidamant, for women have no malice in them. No
have, answered Arnides in choler, what say you to her that put you the other day
in the hands of your enemy; trust them not too much, I beseech you, for if we
are to beware by other men's harms, we are to make use of our own not to fall
into the mischief we have once avoided. It is true indeed, said Alcidamant,
that a woman brought me into the danger whereof thou speak, but a woman also
was the cause of my deliverance: you are rather to thank your own handsomnes
for that, which charmed her, answered the Squire, then her good nature; for if
you had wanted that perfection, by my faith I know how it had gone with you.
What, said the damsel, shall the fault of one naughty one, make all others
guilty? It is no consequent, said Arnides, but always note this, gentlewoman,
that we usually mistrust a naughty generation; and talk as much as you will, I
resolve never to lodge my self there. And for my part, said Alcidamant, I
purpose to question the entering into it no longer, for I will not give that
offense unto these Ladies, as to doubt either their goodness, or good will;
whereupon taking her unto whom he had spoken, by the hand, he past along upon
the neck of the Dragon, who held it stretched out upon the strand; and finding
himself presently in one of the richest chambers that ever he had seen, he
stood a good while observing a thousand rarities, which presented themselves to
his view; but missing Arnides, he mounted upon the wings of this dragon for to
call him, where he saw him stamp with his foot on the ground and listening to
what he spoke, he heard him say, Well it is all one, if I do cast my self away
now, I shall not need to fear another time: whereupon crossing himself three or
fowr times, he was about to have thrown himself into this Dragons throat, when
as he saw him plunge his head into the water, and so vanish away in an instant.
Oh God! said he tearing his hair for grief thinking his master was drowned: Oh
God! what a loss have I made, and wh^t comfort is there now left me in the
world? Oh! that so great a Knight should be thus cast away by the instigation
of a woman, after he had proved the malice of so many. Accursed sex! that
bring forth nothing but mischief, I utterly detest you all, and I protest
never to look upon you more but with hatred: well did my fear presage this
unlucky accident, and how much wiser was I then my infortunat master, that has
lost himself by contemning dangers? But what say I wiser? No, I am far more
unhappy then he; I remain in the miseries of the world with just occasion to
lament all the days of my life: he is now in the Elizian walks, where souls
enjoy a sweet and pleasing rest: I must follow him into the same tomb, and
partake the felicities which he finds in his new life, as I was ready to suffer
with him all the pains and miseries of this. With these words he was casting
himself into the sea, when as he beheld a burning rock come out of the calm
waters, the top whereof served Love for a throne, who leaning upon an armed man
seemed to draw his power and glory from him. Three maids of mavelous beauty
appeared sitting at his feet, one bearing his bow, the second his arrows, and
the third a multitude of hearts in her lap. Twelve Sirens, guided by Neptune
drew him, a little esloigned from the rock; behind the which were two Tritons,
who seemed to publish the greatness of this mighty God. This wonder arrested his
fury, and suffered him not to put his purpose in execution; but that which most
troubled him was to see his master in the middle of the flames of the rock, and
to hear him call him. The same weakness which made him fear the teeth of the
Dragon, not permitting him to enter into the fire, he was ready to run away
when as he fel^ himself taken up by a wind that set him at the feet of his
Master, who having been much astonished at these mavelous things, could not
choose notwithstanding but laugh to behold his Squire so pale and trembling.
Arnides said he unto him, i^ thou confessest the truth, sure thou will not die
at this time without fear. How without fear, answered he being grown somewhat
more hardy by the presence of his master: I know no body in the world but would
be afraid; for who could be confident in such apparent danger? my countenance
does suffi^iently witness that the best part of my blood is congealed, and I
doubt we shall meet with no wine here, to restore it unto its former heat
again. Heerat all fell a laughing, especially the damsel, who perceiving it to
wax dark, furnished the table with exquisit meat, and having satisfied their
stomachs therewith, she and her company retired, leaving the Knight to take his
rest. Certain days being sweetly past in this manner, the rock staid in a port
of Greece, to the infinite content of Alcidamant, who resolved to leave glorious
marks behind him there of his incomparable valor. Landing then, and seeing
their horses, which came as it were out of the dragons breast, they presently
mounted upon them, crossed over a large plain, and came near to a great
forest, at the entrance whereinto they espied two pavilions pitched, a great
many lances reared up, and a number of shields hanging on the trees all about.
We shall not pass here without combat, said Alcidamant. No doubtless, said one
of the damsels that followed him; for to that end only we brought you hither,
and the boon which you promised me, is to deliver my mistress out of the power
of the great Ariston, one of the most ^edoubted men of the earth, who retains
her against her will, with a purpose to marry her after he has defended this
passage six months together. My mistress does not love him, because he is very
ill favored, and of an insupportable humor, but in regard she could not be
rid of him, she made him undertake this enterprise for the glory of her beauty,
hoping that the Princes of Greece, who are not far off, would deliver her
as soon as they heard of the violence that is offered to her will; and indeed she
was sending me to seek the gallant bastard of Media, or the good Knight Ardant,
but a woman that very much loves her, and that may justly vaunt to have
excellent skill in Art Magic, counseled her to send me into France, to find
out the Knight of the Palms, and to obtain a promise of whatsoever I should
demand of him; and now behold, the enemy is before you, nor is it so near
night, but that you may well have time to exchange some blows with him; do not
then I beseech you, defer the effect of your promise, and make it appear that
we have not made choice of you but out of a confidence of your valor. I am
very glad, said Alcidamant, that I may acquit my self by obliging you; and if
the safety of your Mistress does depend on me, be assured that I will soon
restore her into her own power. Heerwith taking his lance he approached his
enemy, who ready to meet him encountered him so furiously in the midst of the
course, that he made him lose his stirrups, but his fortune was worse, for he
was thrown from his horse, making two or three turns on the grass, that was
bedewed with his blood, which issued out of a great wound given him by
Alcidamants lance on the right side; howbeit nothing amazed for this hurt, he
arose more incensed then ever he was in all his life, went to his adversary
whom he found alighted, because he would not combat with advantage, and gave
him so terrible a blow upon his shield, that his arm unable to support the fury
of it was fain to yield, whereby it fell with such violence on his helmet that
he was somewhat astonished therewith, which put him into such a rage that clasping
his sword fast in his hand, he discharged it so mightily on his head that he
opened his helmet, razing both the hair and skin. This so dangerous a blow made
the great Ariston to stagger, but being as courageous as possibly might be, he
renewed the fight with so much valor, that he made it continue two howrs to
the great amazement of Alcidamant, who confessed that he never met with so
strong a man before. The time and the desire to vanquish rendered their blows
still more redoubtable. The ground was strewed with pieces of their arms, and
if the blood issued from Alcidamants left arm, Ariston lost his out of five or
six places, whence it proceeded that being much weaker then at the beginning of
the combat, he could not support the fury of a blow which his enemy gave him on
the head, but tumbled down dead cloven to the very teeth. This victory gave no
less contentment to Cilina, the damsels mistress, then glory to the Knight of
the Palms. They saluted one another, he satisfied with her beauty, she with his
exceeding valor. But as they passed through the forest to seek out some
village, that they might lodge more commodiously then in the wood, Alcidamant
heard the voice of a person complaining, which carried him presently into the
thicket, where he beheld a furious Giant whipping of a damsel that was tied to
a tree, so cruelly, as the blood trickled down from all the parts of her body.
This object provoking him to no less rage then pity, he drew out his sword,
and discharged it with such force on the Giant, that he made him set one knee
to the ground; howbeit suddenly rising up he began a dangerous combat, which
nevertheless lasted not long; for Alcidamant being in a rage cut his arms into
a thousand pieces, and finally gave him his dispatch with a blow that opened
him from the shoulder to the very stomach, and taking off his head he gave it
to the Lady for whose sake he had made the first combat, desiring her carry it
to Constantinople, and present it from him to the Prince of France, with the
relation of all that had happened upon occasion of that quarrel, which she
very willingly undertook. Departing then from the Knight she used such speed,
that she arrived within two days after at Constantinople, and went unto the
great Hall of the Palace, where finding a number of gallant Knights, she
demanded which was the Prince of France. I am he, said Lucendus, most ready to
serve you if you have occasion to use me. Excellent Prince, answered she, the
necessity of no misfortune has brought me hither to desire your assistance,
but I come with a present to you from the Knight of the Palms, one of the best
without doubt now living in the world. Whereupon turning about to a Squire that
followed her, she took the head of a dead man, and setting it on the floor
pursued her discourse in this manner: The Knight, of whom I spoke, coming some
three days since to enter into a combat for my sake, where his glory was not
small, having easily triumphed over the great Ariston, who was feared of all the
world, followed on his way to find out some lodging, when the voice of one
complaining carried him into the thickest of a forest, where he encountered a
great and dreadful Giant, as you may perceive by his head, whipping of a
dams^ll whom he had tied to a tree, in despite of you, having understood that
she was of your Kingdom, and that she was coming hither to give you
intelligence of some matters which had past in France to the prejudice of that
sidelity subjects ow to a gracious Prince; and to give some color to this act
of his, he said, that having left his home to revenge the death of his father
upon you, whom you had surprised without arms, and wretchedly murdered, he
might with good reason kill all that appertained unto you. This good Knight not
able to endure such wickedness, assailed the Giant, who for that his revenge was
diverted, grew insolent and mad, threatening to cut him in a thousand pieces,
and struck him so furiously on the head, that he astonished him with this first
blow, and I my self believed that the battle had been at an end, seeing him to
reel as if he would have pitched his nose into the ground; nevertheles
instantly reassuming courage, and giving most horrible and heavy blows, he had
rendered the business very doubtful, had not the good Knight avoided the most
part of them by his agility, and abated the fury of the rest with incredible
force. Maintaining himself then in this sort, and bestowing not a blow in vain,
I soon saw this great mass of flesh opened in five or six places, and the
grass all died with his blood, which made me admire the valor of this Knight,
who fought with an admirable grace, and seemed to recover new forces with time,
nothing moved with the fury of his enemy, who despairing of safety took his
huge curtel^x in both his hands, and let it descend with such violence upon the
Knights shield, that he made him recoil two or three steps back, upon which
advantage he approached to the damsel, whom this brave warriors Squire had
untied, and who was then recounting unto me how she fell into that misfortune,
and at one stroke divided her head and body in two pieces; the like he had done
to me, for to that end he had advanced his curtelax, had I not by switching my
Nag avoided the blow, which light upon the buttocks of my horse, who presently
fell down dead. Imagine I pray you, what extremity I was in seeing my self on
the ground; truly, I thought I should die no other death: but the Knight of the
Palms arriving thereupon, delivered me instantly from that fear; for having
taken his sword in both his hands, he discharged it so furiously upon the
Giants shoulder, that he cleft him to the very wast. This victory giving me no
less content then it did him glory, we rode on, I being mounted on the damsels
horse, because mine was slain; howbeit this valiant Knight having understood
from me what I told you but now, returned presently to the place of the combat,
caused that French damsel to be interred, and committing the Giants head unto
me, desired me in recompense of the service he had done me, by freeing me from
the captivity of Ariston, to come and present this head unto you, and assure
you that you shall never m^et with a Knight that is more at your commandment
then himself: I am discharged of my promise, and now Sir, there rests nothing
but to know of you whether I may be able to serve you according to your
greatness, and the respect which I bear to that good Knight, to whom I am tied
in such powerful obligations. Your pains much oblige me, answered Lucendus,
and no less am I indebted to the affection of that worthy Knight, who has
delivered me from the danger of such an eaemy; wherefore I wish he were here,
that I might know him, and render him that honor which is due to his virtue:
in the mean time, if you see him, let him know, that whenever I shall have
the happiness to encounter with him, it shall well appear that I am sensible
of courtesies: And for your own particular, think whether I am able to do any
thing for you, be confident that you shall not be denied. What I most desire,
said the Damsel, is the honor of your favor, with the assurance whereof, I
humbly kiss your hands. Saying so, she made a low obeisance to all the Princes
there present, and departed; leaving the Emperor with an extreme desire to see
this valiant Knight of the Palms, and to know whether the effect did answer so
many praises which this Damsel gave him.

CHAP. XXIV. The mavelous acts done by the Knight of the Palms at his
entrance into the Castle of Serpents, from whence he delivers four young
Princes of Greece, with the excellent Amadis of Prebisond, son to Amadis of
Greece and Niquea, enchanted in the monstrous Island, ever since he was four
months old.
WHilst Cilena was traveling on in her journey, Alcidaman^, having lost his
way in a forest, rode extremely discontented for that he had not followed the
Damsel inchantresse; but thinking that she knew well enough how to find him
out upon any occasion, it did somewhat mitigate his displeasure. Having then
passed through the Empire of Greece, he incountred upon a day with two Squires,
who with their tears, giving testimony of much sorrow, made him to draw near
unto them for to comfort them. Questionless, said he unto them, you are not
afflicted thus without some just cause, but when you shall consider that your
weeping is to no purpose, you will then be appeased, for to think on the
remedies which shall be necessary for your misfortune. Noble Sir, said one of
them, you may judge our tears to be immoderate; But alas! We shall never be
able to shed so many as may serve worthily to bewail, both our own loss, and
that which the whole world has received, by being this day d^prived of four
Knights, which undoubtedly might boast themselves to be of the best on the face
of the earth. How came they by their ends, said Alcidamant. By the greatest
treason that can be imagined, answered the Squire, and no man breathing could
possibly avoid such a like mischance, unless he had warning of it. They went
out all four out of Constantinople, some three days since, with a purpose to
seek such adventures, as may give reputation unto men, and had the same day a
dangerous combat with four other excellent Knights, the honor whereof was so
generously disputed, that the night surprising them, they retired with equal
advantage into a wood, resolving to finish their battle the next morning
as soon as they could see; but having strange visions, they arose all at one
instant, and taking their horses, they followed the first way that they met
withal, which led them at length to a house about six miles hence; where, as
they were going in, at the entreaty of a wicked damsel, who pretended to do
them honor and service, they fell into certain fosses, from whence they cannot
hope to be redeemed, but by death. Truly, said Alcidamant, though I hold the
mishap of these Knights to be so great, as to oblige you to bewail them; yet
you must labor their deliverance, and not stand vainly complaining in this
manner: Go back, I pray you, and guide me, for I will either die, or succor
them. Now God vouchsafe to prosper so great a design, answered they, falling
on their knees before him, and reward the good you intend to these Knights:
Come, Sir, we will most willingly conduct you, but beware of those false
bridges, which overturn as soon as one sets a foot upon them, lest you be
overtaken, as our Masters were. I Will take as good heed as I can, said
Alcidamant, but in the mean time let us make haste, lest the night prevent us
in our enterprise: Whereupon, setting spurs to their horses, they rode so fast,
that in an hour they discovered the Castle; whereinto as the Knight was about
to enter, he heard one call to him; looking therefore all about to see who it
might be, he perceived in the way that he came, the damsel inchantresse, who
had brought him out of France; whereof he was exceeding glad, and turning about
to meet her, he said: In good faith, sweet heart, your absence has much
troubled me, but now I am well satisfied in this your return. It is in good
time for you, said she, for you are undertaking, a most dangerous adventure,
which you cannot easily accomplish without my help; shun the great gate of the
house, as these Squires have advised you, for otherwise all the world shall not
be able to deliver you out of captivity; enter in at a little wicket you see on
the left hand, leave the shield you bear, and make use of this at my saddle
bow; be sure you part not from the same Ring which was given you, when you
fought the first combat for Melania; yield not to the entreaty, tears, nor
sighs of any woman whatsoever; and above all things, make much of the new
sword, which shall come to your hand, for it is the best on the earth, and
without it you should never see an end to the adventures which are to befall
you. This said, Alcidamant, having courteously thanked the damsel, took the
shield which she gave him, whereupon there was no figure presented; and
alighting from his horse, with his sword in his hand, he drew toward the
wicket, which he saw stood open; when as a damsel issuing out of the Castle,
said unto him: Knight, whether run you so, and why do you use your arms, where
you shall be gladly entertained with all respect? Sheath up your sword, for
here is none that means to oppose you; and not to disaccommodate your self with
stooping at the wicket, take the way that leads to the great gate, where you
may enter at pleasure. Yes, no doubt, said Alcidamant, if I would make you
sport with a leap; I am too well informed of your villainy, and if you get you
not packing the sooner, I will quicly take your head from your shoulders, to
revenge an infinite number of good Knights, which you have betrayed under
color of giving them fair entertainment. What, said she, stepping in again, do
you threaten me in mine own house? Come, come, my masters, cut me this rascal
in pieces, and revenge me of his insolence: Herewith, Alcidamant, being in the
Castle yard, heard a great noise, and saw thirty armed men come forth, who
suddenly encompassed him about, and endeavored to smite him to the ground; but
this incomparable warrior, nothing amazed, set upon them so furiously, that at
three strokes he laid three of them stretched along upon the earth, and
pressing in amongst the rest, he cut off the arm of one, and the leg of
another, cleft the third to the teeth, divided the body of the fourth in two
pieces, and made so great a slaughter, that his very enemies wondered at it,
and came no more near him but in fear; which so incensed the Mistress of the
house, that opening an iron door, she let forth two Serpents, of twenty foot in
length, and twelve in height, and of such an horrible shape, that they would
have daunted the most assured courage of the world: These Monsters being at
liberty, began to run up and down the Court, and meeting with those Knights,
crushed some of them between their teeth, and tore the rest with their claws;
In the mean time the Knight of the Palms, who could hope for no better usage,
making toward one of them, whilst the other was sucking the blood of those he
had slain, by good fortune gave him such a thrust in the flank, that he
sheathed half of his sword within his body; which made him so mad, that lifting
up his tail of ten foot in length, he let it fly at the Knight with such
violence, that he laid him on the ground three strices off, and opening his
fearful jaws, was like to have swallowed him; if, retaining his judgment
amidst the danger, he had not thrust his sword into his throat, wherewith he
gave him a wound as great as the former, and overthrew him dead in the place.
This blow coming in season, the Knight got suddenly up, and taking his good
sword in hand again, which the Serpent, in the pangs of death, had made him let
go, he ran presently toward the other, and discharged so weighty a blow upon
his head, that he made him sink to the ground; but the scales being hard, the
blade rebounded in the air, as if he had struck upon an anvill; with this, the
Serpent showing his bloody teeth, came fiercely upon him, and put him in such
distress, that he was about half an hour, shifting sometimes on the one side,
and then on the other, to shun the fury of the beast; but thinking that he must
either die, or instantly vanquish, and remembering that he had not found the
belly of the other so hard as the scales of this, he thrust him into the flank
with such fury, that his guts came forth with the sword, which put him into
such a rage, that making a number of horrible leaps, he filled the air with a
most dreadful noise.

The Knight judging this to be the stroke of death, withdrew aside to prevent
further inconvenience, and wiping his sword in the grass, thought to have
rested himself, when it came into his mind that glory is not to be acquired but
in the finishing of an enterprise; wherefore seeing a great pair of stairs he
ran courageously up, and finding a door open entered into a great H^ll, where
six furious Savages, who seemed to uphold the building on their shoulders,
assaulted him, with each of them a massy club in his hand: It was then that he
was most amazed, not imagining that ever he should be able to overcome so many
monsters at once, but assuming new courage he opposed his left arm and his
shield against the fury of some blows of the clubs, which they discharged at
his head, and clasping his sword fast in his hand, he gave the first so
dangerous a stroke, that he opened him even to the very wast. This happy blow
reviving his forces, he began to lay about him on all sides, and bare himself
so generously, that in three howrs he put them all to the sword, howbeit so
wearied, that if the night had not come to give him leave to breath a little,
he could not have passed on to undertake any further combat. Remaining then
somewhat amazed in the dark, he stood leaning a while upon the pomell of his
sword, but hearing no stir in the Hall, he sat him down upon the pavement,
where the pains he had taken would have invited him to sleep, but thinking it
not safe to rest in so dangerous a place, he continued as a man that looks
every minute to be assailed by his enemy. Having been three howrs and more in
this estate, he beheld five or six damsels come in, with each of them a torch
in her hand, whereof one, which seemed to be Claristea, said unto him: How now
dear heart, can you be so near me, and never desire to see me? truly I have
great cause to complain of you, and to say that all my caresses have been very
ill imploid. Pardon me, Madam said he rising up, Ignorance must excuse my
fault, for to tell you true, I thought you to be rather in France then here. We
have been taken, said she, by a Magician, and are so restrained, that we shall
never get hence, if you do not give us the Ring, wherewith you undid the
enchantments of Narsander. Be assured, Madam said he, then remembering the
damsels advertisement, that I will deliver you if I can, but it may not be this
way; for if the Ring were once off from my finger we were in danger to abide
here till Doomsday. Out upon thee, base fellow, said she, do thou refuse me
so small a matter, having given thee all, thy death shall revenge this
ingratitude? With that those damsels seemed to be so many fantosms, who with
their torches laid such heavy blows upon Alcidamant, that he was much troubled;
but that which troubled him and vexed him was, that he felt his armor as hot as
if it had newly come out of the forge: not knowing then what to do, he whirled
about his sword, and defended himself the best he could, but all his address
was in vain, his force served to no purpose, and he had no hope but in his
courage, which carried him skirmishing all the length of the Hall to the door,
where those damsels went out, before the which as he was taking new counsel, a
great Giant presented himself, who striking him on the shoulder with his club,
made him fall on his hands to the ground, but he quickly got up again, and with
his sword discharged so furious a blow on the Giants shield, that he parted it
in two, giving him a great gash in the arm. The combat growing very fierce, all
the Castle rang with the violence of their strokes, Alcidamant made use of his
skill with judgment, the Giant employed his strength. If the one struck, the
other had his answer ready, each of them redoubted the blows of his enemy, and
though the torches of the fantosms, who had ranged themselves round about the
Hall had given no light, yet the fire which flew out of their helmets, was able
to make them see where to place their blows. This terrible combat having
endured above two howrs, Alciadmant who was displeased with so long a delay,
took his sword in both his hands, and let it descend with such fury, that he
had cleft him to the shoulders, if it had fallen according to the Knights
intention, but turning in his hand, and striking but with the flat, it broke in
five or six pecces to the extreme coffeehouse of Alcidamant; nevertheless
the stroke was so violent, that it overthrew the Giant to the ground in a
swown: The Knight, who desired to make use of occasion, seeing his enemy
senceles, went to disarm his head, and with his own sword to separate it from
the body, when as those fantosms came about him with much more noise and din
then before. The Knight stood amazed at this charge, and thought himself now
lost, having not wherewithal to defend him, howbeit casting his eye all about,
as if he would seek for some place of refuge, he espied a tomb raised in the
midst of a chamber, which showed it self on the left hand, whereupon there lay a
young gentleman thrust through with a sword, therichest one of them in the world;
now finding himself oppressed by those furies, which would not let him rest, he
went courageously in, and laying hold on that fair sword, he drew it forth
without any difficulty at all, which gave him such content, that immediately he
returned into the Hall, and would have run in again amongst those fantosms, but
they presently vanished, as fearing the keenesse of that rich steel; which
Alcidamant seeing, turned to the Giant being yet in a trance, disarm^d his
head, and was going to dispatch him, when as the gentleman whom he had left
lying upon the tomb, approaching to him took hold of his arm, and entreated him
to spare him for his sake. Truly, said Alcidamant, wondering much at his beauty,
I am sorry that he is not, as I fear, capable of so small a grace, your merit
being worthy of a far greater. I humbly thank you, said the gentleman, for I am
confident he is not dead, and that shortly we shall see him thoroughly recovered.
But Sir, since you have granted me one boon, I beseech you refuse me not
another. That will I not, said Alcidamant, for there is nothing in my power
which is not at your command. These Sir, said he, are powerful obligations:
now what my further request unto you is, I will let you understand, when you
have rested your self a little in my chamber, whilst I give order for the
recovery of this Knight, who kept me not here, but with an intent to oblige me,
although his first resolution was to take away my life. Do what you please,
said Alcidamant, and I shall gladly second you in so charitable an office. Then
giving the Giant air, he revived presently, and rising up humbly excused
himself to the Knight of the Palms, whom he advised to unarm, the better to
refresh himself, but he would not by any means yield to it till the arrival of
the damsel, which accompanied him, and that she should authorize him
thereunto, by assuring him there was nothing further to be feared. Having at
length then unarmed himself, but not willing to go to bed, because it was yet
fair day light, the Giant was entreated to set at liberty all such as were
imprisoned in the Castle, which being done, there came forth above fowrscore
Knights, who wondering at the horrible slaughter they beheld in the Court, as
well of the men, as of the serpents, whose deformity they admired, presented
themselves before the Knight of the Palms, no less taken with his goodly
presence, then with his unmatchable valor in so tender years, and besought him
since they had their liberty by his means, that he would be pleased to command
them something. I will not dispose of you otherwise, answered he, but if you
will take the pains to pass by Constantinople, when you go hence, and present
your selves on my part to the fair Queen of France, you shall do me a singular
pleasure. Heerwith fowr young Knights stepped forth, one of the which said unto
him: Valiant Sir, I do not know what acquaintance you have with that Princess,
but you have this day more obliged her then you think for, having delivered her
nephew there, called Persides, son to the excellent Emperor of the Persians
Don R^gell, these two Princes Russian of Media, and Prigmale^n Emperor of the
Aethiopians, and in particular my self, who am her grandchild. Truly gentlemen,
said Aleidamant, bowing himself down for to kiss their hands, and wondering to
see them so bravely accomplished, I am more glad of your safety, then of the
glory I have acquired by this adventure, and should be very sorry to injoin you
so long a voyage, knowing well that your designs are all warlike, and that you
would not willingly return to your friends, because you would not be diverted
from your enterprises: I will lay this charge upon some other, and do earnestly
entreat you to command me something, out of this assurance, that I am a Knight
wholly devoted to your service. These ceremonies are to no purpose, said the
damsel that conducted Alcidamant, you must defer them till another time, and
rejoice now at a secret you are ignorant of. Do you know that gentleman,
pointing to him that Alcidamant had found lying on the tomb; no surely,
answered Persides. I doubt not of it, said the damsel, for he knows not
himself, nor has not known hitherto, that he is son to the puissant Amadis of
Greece, and the beautiful Empress Niquea; but it is time to acquaint him with
it, that the glory of his predecessors may render him desirous to be such as
they have been, and greater too, if it may be. He was taken away, as you have
heard, when he was in his cradle, and the intent of his ravisher (who is this
Giant here, named Dorion) was to prevent the destruction of the altars of his
Gods, which must be overthrown by the valor of this gentleman, how beit they
that have taken upon them the protection of the house of Greece, have not only
preserved him in the midst of his enemies, but have changed their minds, and
have purposely brought hither this famous Knight (casting her ^i^ on
Alcidamant) for whom this adventure was reserved, and have given me in charge
to declare unto him, that his name is Amadis of Trebisond; that he must now
acknowledge one only God, denying them whom his foster father has made him to
worship until now, and be presently made Knight, to give a happy beginning to
the wonders which shall be performed by him. Heerwith those fowr Knights went
and saluted Amadis, who exceedingly well satisfied with the knowledge of his
estate, very kindly returned their complements with the like. Whereupon Amadis,
who would lose no time, leaving all the rest of the company, went and kneeled
before Alcidamant, and desired him to remember the boon which he had promised
him. Ask, said Alcidamant, and you shall not be denied. Make me then instantly
Knight, said Amadis, and give me leave to depart to morrow for to begin to
imitate you. Most willingly, said Alcidamant, and believe it I may boast then,
that I have made one of the best Knights in the world. But how will you do for
arms? We shall find some in the tomb, said the Giant, which are worthy of so
generous a Knight, and though I give them somewhat unwillingly at this present,
yet I am persuaded that one day they will much avail me: howbeit Sir, we shall
have need of your assistance for to get them out. Whereupon Alcidamant breaking
the crystal of the tomb with the pomell of his rich sword, Amadis drew forth
of it certain blew arms, covered all over with ciphers of gold, in the midst
whereof appeared a P. where withal he presently armed himself, and kneeling
down at the feet of Alcidamant, who gave him his oath, and afterward blessed
and embraced him, he then received the sword from Persides his Uncle, the
helmet from Lucibel of France, and the rest of his arms from Prigmaleon and
Russian; which being done they saw a charior descend from the clouds, drawn by
fowr furious Griffons, whereinto the damsel Inchantresse having taken leave of
Alcid^mant and the Princes of Greece, caused Amadis to enter with her, and
immediately they were carled out of sight, to the great amazement of those
Knights, who forth with separated themselves: Alcidamant went his way attended
only by Arnides; Persides and Lucibel took a clean contrary way; Prigmaleon
and Russian another, and all the strange Knights directed their courle toward
Co^st^n^inople with the skins of the Serpents, which they had caused to be
stuffed with straw, to acquit themselves of the promise wherein they were
engaged to Alcidamant, whom here we will leave for to speak again of the Knight
of the Roses.

CHAP. XXV. Rozalmond following after the fantesms of Alcander, arrives at an
Hermitage, understands the loves of Argenia with Meliander and Clidor, and
departs for to combat Orfuron.
THE Knight of the Roses having all night followed the fantosms which
represented Armazia unto him in the arms of a horrible and cruel Giant, as you
have formerly read, found himself at break of day upon a wild vast plain, where
being much troubled for that he had no hope in so desert a place to meet with
any body that might tell him any news of that he sought for, he was much
amazed, perceiving his horse upon a sudden to make a stand, when looking all
about he esp^ed a dwarf holding him by the bridle, and saying thus: Knight,
coorse not up and down in this manner, for thou art in an error to think that
Armazia is in the power of an enemy; that which thou have seen is but an
illusion, and they which have practiced it upon thee, did it but to prevent a
mischief, which would have given thee cause to repent all the days of thy
life. Keep the way thou art in, since fortune has presented it unto thee, and
hereafter be better armed against the crosses of the world. Heerwith the dwarf
vanished, leaving the Knight more contented then amazed, who giving his horse a
little breath, rode on fair and softly till about two of the clock in the
afternoon he discovered an Hermitage, toward the which he directed his course,
with a purpose to refresh himself there, if he found any body in it. Alighting
then, and knocking at the door, it was opened unto him by one in a gray gown,
who seemed by his countenance and spe^ch to be a man that had not been long
exercised in prayer and austerity. Father, said the Knight, pardon me, I pray
you, if constrained by necessity I do thus interrupt your devotions; it is now
full two days since I have eaten, wherefore let me entreat you to supply me
with a bit of something. God does not give us that which we have, only for our
selves, answered the Hermit, but to impart it to such as want, in regard
whereof you may be assured to command whatsoever this desert place does furnish
me withal, which it is li^ely, that at this time you will find more favoury,
then the delicate meats you are every day cloied withal. Saying so, he laid a
clean napkin by a fountains side, and setting him bread and apples upon it, he
went and tied his steed unto a bush. Rozalmond observing something in this man
more then ordinary in Hermits, could not forbear saying unto him: Father, I
must beseech you not to be offended with the desire I have to know somewhat of
you: your youth, and fair demeanor will not suffer me to believe, that devotion
has brought you into this desert; now if it be otherwise, do me the favor to
discover the cause which has made you to change your life, and what have been
your fortunes whilst you were in the world? Your judgment is not amiss,
answered the Hermit, for indeed I never was inclined to this solitude; and he
that would have told me two or three months since, that I should have lived as
now I do, and clad with this gown, I should have laughed at him; but now I
know, that heaven, whose secrets fall not within the reach of man's
understanding, opens us several ways, the better to conduct us to his glory;
by affl^ctions he makes the wicked to acknowledge him; he inspires the good
with heavenly motions, and gently withdrawing them from the miseries of the
world, leaves them his greatness for object, and makes them live with a happy
tr^nquility of spirit. The fortunes of some serve for examples to those, which
neither decline altogether vice, nor yet arrive to the perfection of others:
briefly, he makes use of a thousand means, and many times entreats us according
to our own humors. The estate wherein I have been, and wherein I am at this
present, teaches me this holy Philosophy; for being not born, as I thought, to
be tied to the care of that, which is due from us to God, despair has drawn me
to it, and from an abism, wherein the most part of men are lost, I have mounted
by degrees to that blessed rest, where felicities never die, where our joy is
without grief, our days without fear, and our hope without crosses, which thus
came to pass:

That powerful Demon of our souls, Love; desiring an acknowledgement from me,
as from all other men, made me cast mine eye, some two years since upon a
damsel, questionless poor (if that which Fortune gives may be called
treasure) but extremely rich, if grace and beauty ought to take place of such
perishable things: I loved her, finding her worthy of my affection, and
resolved, without sticking at the considerations of those that are too much
carried away with avarice, to marry her; howbeit, desirous to know whether her
disposition would well accommodate with mine; meeting her upon a time with some
Gentlewomen of my acquaintance, I gently told her, that Fortune had done her
much wrong, but withal, that her merits were of power to win upon some, who
were able to right her, provided she could be contented to embrace a fair
offer. Her answer was very modest, and such as I could wish for, letting me
know, that she had so much understanding, as not to refuse the honor would be
done her, nor be in sensible of a benefit, I soon made an end of giving her all
the rest which I had of power over my self: after that time I went to see her
at her fathers house by his permission, but my visits were not frequent, to
take away all suspicion from my mother, whose covetous disposition would have
had more wealth, and less merit; nevertheles provoked by my desires, I made
often use of the night to conceal my designs. Every day added some grace or
other to so many beauties; for unwilling to see her in a habit unworthy of my
love, and knowing that her fathers ability would not extend to bestow on her
all that I thought necessary to adorn her, I liberally imparted of mine own
unto her, insomuch that my affection seemed to augment with time, and indeed I
had no felicity but in the sight of her. Feeling then my flame continually to
increase, I would fain have obtained some further grace of her, and authorized
it with the faith which ties men in marriage, but she wisely represented unto
me, how that was the way to run insensibly to her undoing, and utterly to ruin
her under color of her good. My love was violent, I confess, and my passion
possessed me with desires that wonderfully provoked me, but this government of
hers so pleased me, that I blamed mine own impatience, in stead of accusing her
of having too little resentment. Wherefore being infinitely satisfied with this
modesty, I resolved to wait upon time, so that whenever I saw her it was with
such respect, that if she had had judgment enough to have discerned her own
good, she was obliged to prefer my affection before any Princes whatsoever: but
alas! this virtue is rarely incountred amongst women, and seldom do they make
the best choice, she receives the visits of another, fairer indeed then I, if
the features of the face be more to be regarded then the virtues, and good
presence of a man, but much less accomplished and rich, if I may say so
without vanity. I observed the actions of this maid in regard of the interest
which I pretended to have had in her, and all the speeches which she used to
this new commer I considered in my mind, from thence to draw infallible
conjectures of my fear or hope, so that within five or six days, I found that
the beauty of this minion, called Cli^^^ had wrought more powerfully with this
ungrateful creature, then all my precedent services; whereupon my jealousy
became far greater then ever was my love: howbeit desiring to divert this
growing mischief, I took her one day aside, and lovingly showing her the
obligations wherein she stood engaged to my affection, and the disposition of
this young gallant, who would be weary of her as soon as he had but once injoied
her: I complained of the liberty that she used in her carriage, and yielding
her infinite reasons, which not to abuse your patience, I will omit for the
present, I had no question obliged her to some remorse, but that being
desperately settled in her resolution, she past it over lightly, and never
thought of it an (...) after, howbeit holding it not fit to leave me with an
ill conceit, she labored to color her ends, protesting never to love any but
me, and that she entertained Clidor only to conceal my visits, promising
utterly to discard him whenever I pleased. Briefly, she so charmed me with a
few tears and some kisses, that I was almost persuaded she did not love him,
and casting away all jealousy, I imagined that she could not choose but be very
sensible of my dear esteem of her ever since I was her servant. I was a long
time in this error, because she would never let Clidor come home to her after,
to take away all suspicion from me; but Oh God! who is able to guard himself
from the deceits of inconstant women? she went oftentimes out of the town under
color of giving order for some affairs, and feigning strange care touching the
managing of her fa^hers estate, she retired with Clidor into a grot, which is
not above six miles from hence, and called the Lovers grot, but more justly the
sacrifice of the wicked, where the most part of the day was spent in kisses,
and more secret caresses. Passion, which mabes Lovers blind, not suffering them
to betray me with discretion, I perceived their tricks, and in brief I took
them in the macer; whereupon I was about to have killed them both, but better
considering the foulness of the fact, I left them after I had wonderfully
reviled her, and wished that Heaven in justice would severely punish such
horrible perfidiousnes. My desires therein were accomplished, for their
pleasures carrying them to a neglect of all care of their reput^tion, they met
openly almost every day in this grot, so that Argenia (which was the name of
this ungrateful) was surprised there by a dreadful Giant, who espying her
going thither followed her, and finding her to his mind would have enjoied her;
howbeit she, that wanted no wit, knowing that menaces would serve to no
pu^pose, gently showed him, that he was not to use force unto a woman that
might be won by love, and in so sweet a manner entreated a day or two of him,
the better to acquaint her self with his humors, that hoping to perfect his
delight with a voluntary fruition, he promised her to attend that time, during
the which he would accompany her withersoever she went. And indeed he followed
her to a little country house of her Fathers, where this gallant left him;
having used means to make him drunk, and so got away. I am not able to declare
the havoc which this Giant made when he awaked, and saw himself cousened in
this sort, but going in a rage to an old Inchantresse of his acquaintance, unto
whom he discoursed the whole business, she came some fowr months since into this
country, and finding Clidor and this false Argenia in the grot together, she
enchanted them after a very strange manner: She made them strip themselves stark
naked, and putting great whips into their hands, left them with an extreme
desire to scourge one another therewith, which they put in execution most
cruelly. Eight howrs at a time they abide in this exercise; at the end whereof
they give over, and fall a railing for the cruelty they use upon each other.
This is the punishment inflicted on them, wherewithal the Giant not being
satisfied, has sworn not to spare a woman he can find; and accordingly he
remains here in this Country with two other Giants, no less great and
formidable them himself, and as soon as he catches any he carries them to the
grot, deflowrs them before Argenia's face, and then takes off their heads from
their shoulders, in revenge of the deceit which this false one practiced on
him. Hence I have taken occasion not to be curell, though I were abused as he
was, but to forsake the world, where is nothing certain but grief and misery;
and making a good use of my dotage of this ungrateful fair, I have set up a
blessed rest for my future days. Without doubt, said the Knight well satisfied
with this discourse, they which can turn all things to their profit, as you
have done, are worthy of great commendation; and I much approve of your
resolution to make Heaven your only object, since the earth is perishable, and
produces nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit; live happy in this mind,
and never alter it. I hope I shall not, said the Hermit; but Sir, the travel
you have endured requirs some repose; go and lie down upon a bed which you
shall find in my chamber, and there rest you for an howr or two, and I will
endeavor to make you better cheer at supper. I can not refuse so good an offer,
said Rozalmond, though I have an extreme desire to go presently to the Lovers
grot. To morrow, said the Hermit, you may take this journey more commodiously
then to day; and if the habit which I wear would permit me to accompany you, I
would willingly go along to be an ocular witness of the punishment inflicted on
this perfidious creature, though the estate wherein now I am forbids me so much
as to speak of revenge. You may do as you please, said the Knight; in the mean
time I will follow your counsel, and as secure in this little lodging as in
the palace of a King, I will go and take my rest. Saying so he unsadled his
horse, and then unarming himself, he fell into so profound a sleep, that he
never awaked till the next morning.

CHAP. XXVI. The Knight of the Roses combats Orfuron and his brothers: ends the
adventure of the Lovers gr^t, and sends them to Constantinople.
THE Knight of the Roses rising with some amazement for that he had slept so
long, speedily armed himself, and finding that ready which the Hermit had
provided for his supper, he fell too with a good appetite; but the desire he
had to see the Lovers grot, not suffering him to sit long at table, he gave his
host a thousand thanks, and getting to horse took the way which was presented
un^o him; wherein intertaining himself with the remembrance of his fairest
Armazia, at length he arrived near to that famous rock, which he presently
knew, both by the two Lions, who by enchantment were made to keep the gate, not
permitting any one whatsoever to enter, except the Giants, as also by a number
of women's heads, set all about upon the neighboring trees. These objects full
of horror made him resolve to deliver those two afflicted persons, and to cut
off the course of such inhumane cruelty; whereupon he alighted, and
courageously advancing with his sword in his hand, he approached unto two great
pillars, which supported an arch, where hung a Table, on the which was written
these words:

Knight, Enter not here, if thou be not the chief of the World. Truly, said he,
I should be very vain, if I should be persuaded that there were not a better
Knight on the earth then my self; but come what can come, I will not stop now
for any regard of these menaces, and if I may, I will give an end to the long
pains of these Lovers. So he would have past along under the arch, but he felt
himself charged all at one instant with so many blows, that he was forced to
set one knee to the ground, being unable to support the fury of them; howbeit
no whit amazed he quickly rose again, and covering himself with his shield, he
swung his sword about his head, for he could see no body whereon he might
fasten a blow; and perceiving that he felt resistance, as if he struck upon
armor, he flew up and down with his sword; here he discharged a down right
blow, there he gave a thrust, and so bestird himself, that he seemed to make
some great defeat; howbeit the more he advanced, the more opposition he met
withal, and the blows of his invincible enemies became more heavy, laying upon
him in such manner, as if he had been assaulted by a thousand armed men. His
courage which always augmented in the greatest difficulties, not able to
endure so much resistance, put him into such a rage, that he redoubled his
blows, and advancing three or fowrpaces forward, in despite of those he saw
not, he arrived at the entry of the grot, where all this fury ceased, but he
had not leisure to take breath after so painful an encounter; for at that very
instant the Lions set upon him, and seizing the one upon his shield, the other
upon his body, labored to pull him down, howbeit being as strong and lusty as
any Knight in the world, he sustained the violence of him that held his shield,
and with a blow full upon the mane of the other, laid his head in the dust.
Animated with this lucky stroke, he suddenly turned the point of his sword
against the first that had hold of his shield, and thrust it so strongly into
his belly, that he sent him dead to the ground, with exceeding content to see
himself so soon delivered from two such mighty enemies. Seeing the grot then
open and free, he would willingly have entered in without further delay, for to
have seen Argenia and Clidor, but fearing he should meet there with some new
occasion to employ his sword, he sat him down upon a stone to take a little
breath, howbeit the cries of these Lovers, which he heard, not permitting him
to stay long, he rose up for to go in and deliver them, when as he beheld three
dreadful Giants, who held seven damsels tied with cords: calling to mind then
that these were those cruel men which made so great a massacre of all the
women that fell into their hands, he came presently to his horse, got up, took
his lance, and approaching to Orfuron (so was the great lover of Argenia
called) he said unto him: Wicked monster, whither leadest thou these damsels?
Set them instantly at liberty or defend thy self. O Gods! said the Giant, what
do I hear? One man alone dares threaten me, and will have me give him an
account of my actions. Come vile creature, and receive the reward of thy
temerity: with that he charged his lance, and encountered Rozalmond so furiously
in the midst of the course, that he made him bow to the crupper of his horse,
tumbling on the ground himself with a great wound in his side. The other two,
seeing their brother in this plight presently advanced, and surprising the
Knight before he could finish his course discharged two such dangerous blows
upon him, that with the amazement he was in by the encounter of the lance he
was like to have quit his saddle; nevertheless coming speedily to himself
again, he re-setled him in his seat far more furious then a Tiger that has
lost her whelps, and drawing out his sword, he struck the first that presented
himself before him, so cruel a blow, that he cut off above half his left arm,
and being about to redouble upon the other, he was charged by Orfur^n in so
dangerous a manner with a great and heavy mace, that he was constrained to knock
his chin against his breast; heerupon his horse as if he had been able to
conceive, that such another blow would have ranked him amongst the number of
the dead, carrying him away saved him from the fury of a merciles sword, which
was falling upon him, and having esloigned him from his enemies gave him time
to come to himself, being well recollected then, and trembling with choler and
rage, he set spurs to his horse, and coming to Orfur^n he discharged with such
violence upon his head, that he divided him to the waste, sending him dead to
the ground, with no less noise then if a towr had been overthrown by lightning
to the very foundation. This dreadful blow amazed the other Giants, but fury
succeeding instantly to fear, they approached him being carried by despair, and
began to press him harder then ever he had been in all his life. He was
wonderfully troubled in receiving the blows of the one upon his shield, and
warding himself from the others curtelax, managing occasions and time with such
judgment, that the bravest Knights of the earth would no doubt have admired
his fight, but thinking that the length of the combat might prove dangerous,
although he saw his enemies blood appearing on every part of their bodies, he
resolved to put all in hazard: wherefore taking his sword in both his hands, he
struck one of them in such a terrible manner, that he cut his body just in
twain, the one half tumbling down on the grass, and the other remaining in the
saddle. This horrible stroke possessing him that had no longer use of his left
arm, with extreme fear, he would have saved himself in the grot; but Rozalmond
alighting, gave his horse unto the damsels to hold, who all this while had been
upon their knees invoking heaven for his good success, and got in as soon as
he, where he was much amazed to behold Argenia and Clidor giving over scourging
one another, and with their whips laying upon the Giant, who appeared then to
be naked without arms or cloths, and never offering to resist. He stood still a
while taking pleasure in this sight, but not to lose time, and fearing to be
overtaken with the night in that place, he went to the Lovers, plucked the whips
out of their hands, and threw them out at the mouth of the cav^ which was no
sooner done, but a great clap of thunder and lightning fell upon the grot, beat
the Giant in pieces, broke asunder the enchantment, and made the poor wretches
understand how ill they had used one another by the power of charms. Their love
nevertheles continuing in the same state it (...) in before, Argenia desired
Clidor to forgive her the wrong she had done him; Clidor besought his Love to
forget his cruelty toward her; and both kneeling down before Rozalmond made
those acknowledgements which were due to his assistance. I should not endure
you, said he to the fairest Argenia, in regard of your ingratitude to
Meleander, (so was the Hermit named that had entertained him) did I not
consider the power of Love, who absolutely disposes of our hearts; but since
it was his pleasure you should commit this fault, I will pardon you upon
condition, that Clidor shall render those favors legitimate, which he shall
receive from you hereafter. It is that which I most desire in the world,
answered Clidor, and even now I plight her my faith, referring the consummation
thereof till such time as we shall be healed of our hurts; in the mean space if
you please to command us any thing, my Lord, we will most gladly obey you, in
some sort to acquit us of the obligation wherein we stand so deeply engaged to
your valor. I should be very well contented, said he, that you would take the
pains to go unto Constantinople, with certain damsels which are without, and
present your selves on my behalf to the Empress Richarda, recounting the
success of your adventures, together with that which has past in this grot
since my arrival. These Lovers finding honor in this request, promised not to
fail therein, and going forth after they had put on their clothes, were very
much abashed at the slaughter which they saw without the grot. The greatness of
the Lions, the two horrible blows wherewithal the Giants were slain, and above
threescore heads, a number of arms and legs cut off from Knights, that no man
living had seen, no not Rozalmond himself, who had made this massacre, upon the
resistance he had met with at the pillars, as you have heard before, made them
admire the rare valor of so incomparable a Knight, who addressing himself to
the damsels, desired them to accompany these Lovers to Constantinople, which
they willingly undertook, as they that were bound to publish unto all the world
the grace they had received in his succor. Taking the way then which would
bring them thither, they lef Rozalmond, who returned to Mel^anders H^rinitage,
and related unto him all that past concerning the adventure of the grot, for
the which he could never commend him enough, though he were somewhat
discontented to hear that Argenia and Clidor were to live happily in the sweet
fruition of one another.

CHAP. XXVII. Clidor and Argenia arrive at Constantinople, just at the same
time when as the Knights sen^ by Alc^damant from the Castle of the Serpents,
came th^ther. The m^rvellous contentment which those messages brought to the
Princes of Greece.
CLidor and Argenia exceedingly desirous to see themselves in the liberty of
their caresses, used incredible speed to get to Constantinople, and even then
the steepls and towrs of that stately City appeared unto them, when as they
encountered th^ee Knights riding along with two covered chariots, who beholding
so many damsels with one unarmed man, approached unto them, and having saluted
them with respect courteously entreated them to let them know whither they were
bound. To seek out the Princes of Greece, answered one, and acquaint them with
the wonders which a Knight has performed in the deliverance of these Lovers,
(pointing to Clidor and Argenia) whom ill fortune detained enchanted in a Cave,
which for that cause is to this day called, The Lovers grot. Will you be
pleased, said the Knight, to render the way l^sse tedious by the recit^ll of
this adventure. Truly I am sorry, answere^ she, that I am not able to sat^sfi^
your desire; for having in charge to address my self only unto the beautiful
Princess of the Parthians, I should think I did gre^tly amiss, if I should
communicate it unto any other; but if you be so desirous to hear it, as you
seem to be, go with us to Constantinople, and there you shall be fully
satisfied. Most willingly, said he, will I accompany you thither; for indeed I
have likewise in charge to wait upon, not the E^presse of the Parthians, but
the excellent Queen of France, from a Knight, who not long since has done such
mavelous acts, as are of power to make him live for ever. Why this is as it
should be, said the damsel, for I shall have part in the content which you
will bring to these Princes, and you shall have your desire in the knowledge of
those memorable things which the Knight, of whom I spoke to you of, has lately
act^d: come then, let us make a little more haste, that we may present our
selves unto them before they rise from the Table. Whereupon putting their horses
to it, they arrived not long after at the City, went unto the pal^ce, and
entered into the Hall, where the presence of so many Princes, and beautiful
Ladies amazed them at the first but desiring to acquit themselves worthily of
their charge, they advanced forward, and kneeling all down, demanded at one
instant for the fair Empress of the Parthians, and the beauteous Queen of
France. We cannot hear you all together, said Florisel, seeing you come upon
several occasions. Speak damsel said he, looking upon Argenia, relate unto
the Empress of the Parthians the cause of your coming* and then we will give
the like audience unto these Knights. Sovereign Princess, said Argenia then,
kissing Richarda's delicate hands, the Knight of the Roses, then whom I do not
think there is a more valiant under heaven, has commanded me to wait upon you
for to acquaint you with his glory, and my fortunes, which truly rather deserve
pity, then that you should inflict any new punishment upon me; for that I did
not acknowledge, as I ought, the affection of a Lord, to whom I was greatly
obliged. Beginning then the discourse of her love with Meleander, she delivered
at large the good offices which she had received from his assistance, protested
that she had a full intention to recompense him with what was most dear unto
her, had she not been constrained by a sovereing power to love Clidor, whose
passions were no less violent then Meleanders, spoke of her encounter with
Orfuron, of the subtlety which she used to get out of his hands, of the revenge
which he took of his disdain, and falling upon her deliverance, concluded with
the praises of Rozalmond, whom she placed in the highest degree of glory,
particularizing his combats against the invisible Knights, the Lions, and the
Giants, not forgetting the horrible blows which she had seen, and discoursed in
such sort for the advantage of this warrior, that she made the Princes of
Greece amazed, and possessed them with an extreme desire to know him better. I
should blame your ingratitude, and bemone Meleander, said the Empress
Richarda, if I did not think him wise enough to lay this fault upon Love, but
knowing well, that none can dispose of their will, when that proud tirant of
our minds holds them engaged; I will not ordain you any further penance then
that which you suffered in the grot, and for this Knights sake, whom I know
not, and to whom I am much obliged without any desert at all, I remit you to
the rights of your freedom, and do counsel you to follow the advice which he
has given you, for the consummation of your marriage. Madam, answered Clidor,
That is it we desire, and to effect the which we humbly receive that liberty
your Majesty has been so graciously pleased to grant us, with a protestation
to publish unto every one both your virtues, and the acts of that most renowned
Knight of the Roses. Saying thus, he bowed himself even to the ground for to
kiss her hands, and so gave place to the Knights that were to speak unto the
Infanta Fortuna, whereof one began for the rest, and said; Mighty Queen of
France, I acknowledge that Argenia's discourse has given great content to this
excellent presence, and that the valor of that famous Knight whose praises she
has worthily published, does deserve one of the chiefest ranks amongst the
best Knights of the world; but I am addressed unto you by the commandment of
another, no less generous and valiant, and that a few days since has done
miracles able to astonish the whole earth, and to fill this Court with all the
joy that can be expected from good news. He come lately to the Castle of
Serpents, whereof it may be you have heard: Yes, answered Lucendus, we
understand that it is one of the most dangerous houses in the World.
Questionles, there was reason to say so three weeks since, said the Knight; but
the custom is well changed since that unmatchable Knight came thither. Being
near to that Castle, as I said before, he met with two Squires, that lamented
the loss of fowr excellent Knights, whom they had seen fall into certain
fosses made of purpose to entrap such as came that way. He was sensible of
their complaints, and their tears moved him to such pity, that immediately he
alighted, and with his sword in his hand entered into the Castle, not by the
gate of the fosses, for he had been made acquainted with the deceit, but by a
wicket which was on the left hand; his arrival was encountered with thirty
armed men, who prepared to assault him altogether, but he quickly made them
know that he was incapable of fear, for he courageously prevents them, and
beginning the bickering himself, he lais fowr of them at his feet with the fowr
first blows he gave, which had terrified the rest, had they not been restrained
by shame in regard of their number. They charged him then with more fury then
before, but he fought with so much force and courage, that to make short, seven
and twenty of them past by the edge of his sword, and the other three were in
case not to survive their companions long, when as a damsel let loose two
furious and very dreadful Serpents, whereof if you please you shall see both
the greatness and the form, having brought hither the skins of them stuffed with
straw. These monsters being at liberty ran up and down the court, and finding
these rascals flying from their enemies sword, tore them presently in pieces,
freeing the Knight from all further care of them; but he had little time to
breath, for one of these horrible beasts set upon him, whilst the other was
devouring those he had killed, and was ready to have swallowed him alive, had
he not shifted his encounter, slipping then aside he let him pass by, and upon
his turning about, thrust his sword into his flank, which put him into such a
rage, that with a blow of his tail, ten foot long, the Knight was overthrown to
the ground, from whence quickly arising, he sheathed his sword again in his
belly, and laid him stark dead on the earth. This lucky blow having augmented
his courage, he entreated the other in such sort, that within an howr he left
him in the like case. His desire to see the end of this adventure not
permitting him to rest long, he went up a pair of stairs, entered into a Hall,
where seven furious Savages presented themselves, and charged him so strongly,
that he was somewhat amazed with the violence of the blows, which with their
clubs they laid upon him; nevertheles he was quit with them, and at length with
incredible pain he killed them all: night arriving thereupon gave him good cause
to fear had he been capable of it, but confident in dangers, he leaned upon his
sword, until such time as he beheld six damsels appear, who turning suddenly
into so many hideous fantosms, charged him with torches, which they held in
their hands, making him suffer exceedingly with extremity of heat in his
armor: being much troubled in defending himself from these spirits, he espied
a very dreadful Giant come out of the next chamber, with whom he had a
dangerous combat, wherein his sword breaking through the violence of a blow
which had laid the Giant on the floor, he entered the chamber, and beholding a
sword, the best and richest that ever was, in the breast of a young gentleman
enchanted on a tomb, lais presently hold of it, draws it out very easily, and
returning to his enemy, was about to have taken his head from his shoulders,
when as the gentleman, of whom I spoke but now, being freed from his
enchantment, came and with entreaty obtained his life, upon condition that all
the prisoners should be set liberty, we were then brought out of the dungeons
to the number of threescore, all destined for food to those serpents, and as we
had leave given us to dispose of our selves at our pleasure, we saw fowr brave
Knights brought forth of another prison; the first of which, was your
grandchilde, Lucibel of France, the second Persides nephew to the renowned
Emperor of the Persians, the third Russian of Media, and the last, Prigmaleon
Prince of Aethiopia, who the same day were entrapped by means of the fosses*
whereof I spoke before.

These are the good news, which I said but now, would bring so much joy to this
Court, but this is not all the fruit of the labors of the most valiant Knight
of the Palms (so is that great warrior named, who was the author of our
preservation) for it was known by the means of a damsel enchantresse, that the
young enchanted Gentleman, was called Amadis of Trebisond, son to the famous
Amadis of Greece and Niquea, and your brother, excellent Queen, in which regard
your son and his companions made wonderful much of him, and accompanied him in
the ceremonies that were performed in conferring the order of Knighthood upon
him, which he received from the invincible Knight of the Palms, Persides gave
him his sword, Lucibel his helmet, and Russian and Prigmaleon the rest of his
arms. Being knighted in this sort, and all rejoicing with him, and talking of
the happy success of this adventure, they saw a chariot descend out of the
clouds, drawn by four Griffons, whereinto the damsel enchantresse entered with
Amadis, and mounting into the air, said that his acts should begin in the
Empire of Martaria, a Country unknown, it seems, to all that live here. His
departure having altered the resolution of these young Princes, they armed
themselves, mounted on horsback, and went away two and two together, leaving
the Knight of the Palms; who following shortly after, only accompanied with his
Squire, commanded us to come hither for to acquaint you with these accidents,
and to present you with the Serpents from him. Truly, said the beauteous
Infanta, both your news and you are very welcome, and I would give the best
town of my kingdom, that the Knight you speak of were now here; we should then
endeavor to acknowledge so great a favor, as also give him hearty thanks for
the head of an insolent Giant, that spoke ill of my Lord the King, which he
sent me the other day; if ever it be our good fortune to meet with him, we
shall show our selves solvent for such powerful obligations: in the mean time,
you may assure him, if you chance to see him, that the Princes of Greece find
themselves indebted to his valor. Whereunto add this, said Rogel, that all of
us will gladly serve him, and will seek out all occasions so to do. Hereupon,
the Knights taking their leave, went away, bountifully rewarded with rich
presents, and all the Princes descended into the Palace Court for to behold the
figure of those serpents, which appeared wonderful strange; and causing them
to be set on the gates of the City, they admired the valor of this Knight,
whom they knew not, and which in the mean while spread his valor in so many
places, that there was no other talk all abroad, but of him, of the Knight of
the Roses, of the Knight of the Savage, and of the fair Knight, as the only
prime men in the world. Florisel having well observed the Serpents, was going
up again, when as he espied a Knight to arrive; who alighting, made himself
known to be the Prince of Aethiopia; that unable to endure so long an absence
from his Polixena, was returned for to see her, and demand some ease for his
sufferings. His coming rejoiced the whole company, and the praises of the
Knight of the Palms, renewed in his discourse, for publishing the marvells
which had been acted at the Castle of the Serpents, he left so good an odor of
this warrior, that every one extremely desired to see him.

CHAP. XXVIII. Prigmaleons sufferings for Polixena, their meeting in the
garden, their discourse, with the conclusion of their marriage.
THE whole Court being full of joy for these good news, each one seemed to be
content, but the Prince of the Moors; who tormented with the violence of his
desires, and knowing that remedy of his disease depended on the assurance of
Polixena's favor, he resolves to sue unto her for it. Walking then up and down
in his chamber, to devise some discourse proper for his purpose, he was above
three hours before he could settle on any thing that he liked; sometimes he
thought it best to suffer with so much respect, as to let his silence speak for
him, and not he himself; then again, he was minded to write unto her, and so
commit his secrets into her hand, fearing his tongue would never express them
according to his desire. At last, approving neither of these resolutions, he
got him forth, to seek out some diversions from these thoughts; when as Love,
who seemed to be satisfied with his endurings, advanced his felicity at such
time as he least expected it. For going down from his chamber into a delicious
garden, and falling upon his former imaginations, he perceived his Mistress in
one of the alleys, who it may be was entertaining her self with the glory of
his captivity; the first sight of her made him to tremble, but presently
conceiving that his good fortune had not made him to meet her so opportunely in
that place without some mystery, he grew more confident, and said to himself:
How happily does occasion offer it self unto me, and what an error should I
commit to overslip it: I was troubled how to come to speak to Polixena, and
see, Love furnishes me with the means, and presents her to me alone, according
to my desire; she must be spoken to then, and acquainted with my thoughts.
Whereupon, going to her with this resolution, he modestly kneeled down, and
with a charming voice, said unto her: How long, Madam, is it your pleasure that
I shall suffer? Is my pleasure that you should suffer, said she? Am I the cause
of your pain? Have I done you any displeasure? Have you found any thing in the
innocence of my actions that has given you offense? No, Madam, answered he,
but it is your grace that I am so humble a suitor for. I must know wherein you
have offended me, said she smiling, before I can grant you any grace, for I do
not mean to pardon you, if you have committed any thing that is heinous. Alas!
Madam, said he, make not a jest of misery, all the quiet of my soul rests in
your hands, and if I beg for grace of you, I do not presuppose any forgiving
offense, but I desire you should take pity of the pain I endure for your sake:
Excellent Mistress, permit me, I beseech you, to say that I love you, that my
desires are violent, that they will never suffer me to be at rest, and that my
grief must needs be more, except your favors to me be greater, then heertofore
they have been. You are too much transported with passion, answered she, for
whereas you speak of favors, do you think I can do you any further, without
wrong to that modesty which is to accompany all my actions; and if you loved
me, as truly you affirm, you would not use any spee^^ unto me, which my
greatness may not bear. Why do you endure su^^ tyranny? Why do you not
repress the insolency of these passions which molest you so, or why do you
not make you strong enough to vanquish your self, which all the Knights that
have presented themselves to the fury of your sword, could never yet do? Your
desires must be confined with discretion, and governed by reason; but if you
suffer in such sort, and are so much in love with me, Why do you not seek for
ease and satisfaction by the ways which honor allows you? My will my Lord, is
subject to a fathers, who, I am persuaded, would not refuse your alliance; if
you require my consent, I willingly give it you, and do assure you, that the
glory to possess you, shall be dearer to me then your Empire. Beauteous
Mistress, answered he, setting one knee to the ground, I could not wish for more
in this world then you have promised me, and the grace which I sued unto you
for, was no other but this which you have granted me. I loved you as much as it
was possible for one to love a Lady, yet I should never have discovered my
thoughts, had not you authorized me to do it; I complained, but your noble
bounty has relieved me; and if I have cause to do so again, I will never
accuse you for it, neither shall any neglect in me be any occasion of it
hereafter; for I will presently go seek the means of my content: but first, let
me obtain of my fairest Mistress, that she will be pleased to give me a
testimony of her love in a kiss. The hope which I have, said she, to give you
a more ample power over me ere it be long, shall so far dispense with me, as
not to deny you this favor, which is of no little esteem with me. Whereupon,
she joined her lips to his, with such infinite content to this Prince, that his
soul was ready to part from him with this kiss. Polixena seeing him thus
transported, was exceedingly satisfied, knowing that this rapture was merely an
excess of love; but fearing lest she should not be able to resist her lovers
entreaties, if he should beg any further matter, considering withal, how
favorable the place was to such a liberty, she departed from him, and went to
her chamber, leaving the Prince in the garden, calling the trees to be witness
of the happiness he had incountered contrary to his expectation. Her absence
somewhat displeased him, but remembering the speech she had used, he began to
think of that which touched him more nearly: Wherefore considering how the iron
is to beaten, whilst it is hot, he went directly unto Florisel, unto whom he
first remonstrated his birth, the change of his religion, and passing on to his
affection unto Polixena, besought him not to refuse him his alliance. Valorous
Prince, answered Florisel, if your fortune had not given you so transcendent a
greatness to your birth, your virtue would have deserved more then my
daughter; wherefore since you think her worthy of you, she shall most willingly
be yours; only permit me to be so good a father, as to know how she is
inclined toward you; for though nature has given me an absolute power over
her, yet she will not have me to be a tyrant to her, forcing her affection in
so important a matter, and whereon the good of all her future life depends.
This answer being mavelous acceptable to Prigmaleon, he gave him a thousand
thanks for the facility he brought to his request, and protesting to hold the
same obedience unto him, which he could attend from his daughter, he departed
the most contented man in the world. In the mean time Florisel, who held this
fortune to be advantageous for Polixena, considering the valor and merit of
the Prince, called unto him Don Rogel, Lucendus, Spheramond, Dorigel, Silvan,
and some others, communicated this affair with them, and desired them to
deliver their advice therein; they all approved of the match, and Polixena
being present, declared, that after the consent of so many of her friends, she
was well pleased to lead her life with this Prince; insomuch, that he being
sent for, they were affianced presently; the celebration of the nuptials being
deferred till the fifteenth day after; against which time, Florisel caused a
turnament to be proclaimed, gave safe conduct to all manner of Knights that
would come thither, and promised one of the richest tents on the earth for a
prize, to him that should be victour. This fortnight seemed short to prepare
all that was necessary for the magnificence of a marriage so profitable to all
Christendom; but too long to these lovers, who conversing more familiarly
together then before, it rendered their desires insupportable; but submitting to
necessity, they resolved to attend with patience that so much wished for howr;
and in the mean while, they prepared to appear in their highest luster on their
wedding day, wherein those wonders happened, which shall be recounted to you in
the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXIX. The wonders which happened at the justs held in Constantinople for
the celebration of the nuptials between Prigmaleon and the fair Infanta of
Greece.
THE report of the turnament and justs, which were to honor the nuptials of
the Infanta of Greece, and the brave Ethiopian, running through all the
Countries adjoining, the ways were all full of Knights and Ladies traveling
to Constantinople, some in discharge of their duty to their Prince, and others
to receive the content of beholding some memorable combat; so that the City was
replenished every where with strangers, and a thousand pavillions pitched in
the fields, made it seem as though Constantinople were besieged. This while all
was in preparation, Prigmaleons suffering passed away insensibly; the Knights
that meant to combat, fitted their arms; the Ladies studied how to make
themselves more beautiful with ornaments, and every thing conduced to
inexpressable delight. The day, which was to make up the lovers happiness,
being arrived, Prigmaleon came forth, aparelled in a dublet of cloth of silver,
and his hose of black velvet laid over with gold lace, a cloak of the same, the
cape set with great diamonds which sparkled in a mavelous manner. He went in
the midst between the great King of France, and Florisel of Niquea, being
followed by all the other Princes of Greece: In like sort Polixena clothed in a
gown of cloth of gold, whose ground was white, was seen led to Church amongst
all the rest of the excellent Princesses, where the Patriarch of Constantinople
married them with all such ceremonies as are used in the like cases.

That done, as they were returning to the Palace again in the same order, an
unknown Squire presented himself on his knee before Prigmaleon, and said unto
him. Great Prince, the three Knights of the Serpents desirous to bring some
thing to the solemnity of your nuptials, do humbly beseech, that you will be
pleased they may be chosen out of so many Knights, as are here assembled, for
to maintain with the lance, that the world does not produce fairer Ladies, then
are now to be found in Greece. They shall have their desire, said Prigmaleon,
since they undertake this in favor of the Ladies of Greece; and drawing an
assured judgment of their virtue from so great a design, tell them that they
may dispose of the conditions of the justs. I have in charge, answered the
Squire, to let you understand, that they desire but two; the first, that they
which shall be unhorsed, may not demand the combat with the sword, if so be
they be not likewise unhorsed; the other, that if they three be overthrown by
so many strangers, the victors shall be obliged to finish the enterprise for the
glory of the Ladies of this court; to the end that their weakness shall be no
cause to make them love that which nature has bestowed on them. This is as it
should be, said Prigmaleon, and this request seems so just unto me, that they
have power to enter into the Lists whenever they please. The Squire having
this favorable answer carried it presently to his masters, who caused a great
Pavilion to be pitched in the field, whilst the Princes of Greece were at
dinner, where all the delicacies of the earth were abundantly served in. The
feast ending with a world of instruments and voices, which resounded all about,
the trumpers called all the Princes and Ladies to the windows, to be hold that
which should be acted by the three Knights of the Serpents, who presenting
themselves in azure arms, upon great and furious Coursers, gave extraordinary
satisfaction to the beholders with their goodly presence, and possessed the
Princes of Greece with a mavelous de^^^e to see whether the effect was
answerable to so brave a carriage. The Ladies being then placed, the Lists were
opened to twelve Knights, who promising very much entered, but not one of them
endured the second (...), being so easily unhorsed that every one wondered,
either at their weakness, or the great prowess of the challengers, who in less
then two howrs had laid fifty Knights in the dust, to the much amazement of the
assistants, which were giving them the honor of the day, when as three Knights
were seen to appear in the Lists, whose gallant demeanor carried away the eyes
of all there present. The first bore a Savage in his shield, whereby he was
judged to be the valiant Grian, who had done wonders in Constantinople at the
last Tournament. The second showed a Dragon, whom a beautiful maid held in a
chain, and the third carried a swelling sea, in which regard he was called the
Knight of the waves. These three warriors, who were no other then Grian the
Savage, his fairest Brandimanda, and the gentle Silverin of the desert,
presenting themselves with an admirable grace, all the people with great
attention expected what would become of this course, and every ones eye was
fixed on these six, when as they were seen to set forth with fury, and
encounter in the midst of the Lists with no less noise then is made by a
violent concourse of raging waters. The lances brake in a thousand pieces, and
each Knight thought his enemy on the ground, howbeit not one of them so much as
moved, and all of them past bravely on, without show of any the least
amazement, for so dangerous a shock. This encounter having possessed them with
as much anger, as the assistants with wonder, they took new staves, and met one
another again with the same desire to vanquish, but there was no advantage
again perceived on either side; and their fortune proving to be equal amongst
them all, they were constrained to have recourse unto the third lances, which
being stronger then the former, and managed with more fury then before, they
were all six overthrown from their horses in such a dangerous manner, that many
doubted they had been slain: nevertheless, they were seen quickly to rise
again with no less rage then shame, and drawing out their swords they were
about to charge one another, when as eight Giants arrived in the place, who
seeming to be so many Colosses put the people in a mavelous fright. The
insolence of these monsters, that with great cudgels overthrew all in their way
to make themselves a free passage, incensing the Knights, with one accord they
sheathed up their swords, and choosing out the greatest lances they could find,
they opposed themselves to the fury of these barbarous men, just at such time
as they saw a big Knight appear in the place, that carried three Roses in the
midst of his shield; by this device so famous in the Empire of Greece, and by
his gallant carriage, he was instantly known to be the valiant Knight of the
Roses, of whom every one spoke as of the prime man of the earth. Florisel and
the Princes of Greece were infinitely glad at the arrival of so braves
warrior, as well for the desire which they had to see him, as for to know
whether his valor did equal his renown. This noble Knight having noted the
outrageous demeanor of these Giants, ranged himself presently on Grians side;
and to lose no time ran with such incredible fury against him hapt to be his
opposite, as he past his lance quite through his body, sending him stark dead to
the ground. Now believe me, said Spheramond, this encounter does not belie the
report which runs of this Knight; and if his companions second him, these
insole^^ that come to trouble our sports will quickly be brought to reason.
Thi^ being spoken somewhat loud, it was overheard by Grian, who at that very
(...) setting forth with the rest, incountred the Giants, upon whom they brake
their spears, without so much as once moving them; whereat they were so
incensed, that drawing out their swords, they began one of the rudest combats
that ever had been seen in Constantinople. As often as the Giants lifted up
their swords, it was like so many thunderbolts that should fall; and if the
Knights had not been agil and quick the fight had not long endured, but their
address made them subsist, and rendered them dreadful to their enemies. Grian
the Savage bestirred himself with strange fury. Brandimanda by little and
little triumphed over her enemy; Silverin of the desert, made good his party;
the brave Knights of the Serpents fought with an admirable grace, and gave
certain hope of victory; but the most part of the assistants had their eyes
fixed on the combat of the valiant Knight of the Roses, whose sword seemed more
heavy to his adversary, then the fall of a towr overthrown by the violence of
the winds. Every one admired his blows; if he struck upon his shield, the
moiety of it went to the ground; if upon his armor, the blood straight gushed
out; if fury made him bestow any otherwise, the Giant seemed to be astonished
with so fearful a charge; briefly, every time that he advanced his sword, they
were sure to see some abridgement of his days. Florisel wondered at his
fighting with such force, the other Princes did the like; and all the people
stood amazed at it. At length the combat having endured two howrs, his enemy
was laid along with the violence of a blow, which divided his head in two.
Grian the Savage desiring to appear no less valiant, ran his quite through;
Brandimanda dispatched hers with a dangerous blow in the thigh, and another
full in the breast; the three Knights of the Serpents took off the heads of
their enemies from their shoulders; and Silverin of the desert most generously
ranked his in the number of the dead, with a stroke that cleft him even to the
shoulders. This done the three Knights of the Serpents were returning to their
first place for to renew the combat with Grian, Brandimanda, and Silverin, when
as Don Rogel having caused some of the Giants servants to be arrested, desired
them to stay till he had discovered the intent of these insolent men. At this
request sheathing up their swords, they went to a young Squire, who seeing
himself among so many persons spoke fearlesly in this manner. The victory which
you have gottea to day should not make you rejoice as you do; for of thirteen
Brothers, which peaceably govern the redoubted Islands of Barrocand, the five
strongest are yet living, whereof you shall find two so puissant, that they
will make you give an account of the lives of these whom you behold there laid
on the earth. Sirrah, said Don Rogel, your threats shall not trouble us a whit
and if your masters come, we shall receive them otherwise then they think for:
whereupon turning him to the three Knights of the Serpents, and their
adversaries, he said unto them: Gentlemen, I know you purpose to end your
difference with the sword, but the night is at hand, and me thinks, if you hold
it sit, it were more expedient that you should share the honor of the justs
betwixt you (which questionlesis equal to you both as yet) then to dispute it
longer; your valor is too well known, for any further proof to be made of it,
and the advantage which you should seek to get of one another, would rather be
a point of vanity, then a mark of glory. We are wholly at your commandment,
answered one of the Knights of the Serpents, wherefore if our enemies be of our
mind, we will separate our selves with equal fortune; but I desire that the
conditions of the justs may be observed, and that the Ladies of Greece may
carry away the content, to be esteemed the fairest of the World. Sir, answered
Grian, we ow as much respect to this great Emperor, and are no less servants
to the Ladies then you, so that we shall not be very scrupulous to sign this
accord, considering how fairly it is concluded: whereupon he turned about for to
go and entertain the Knight of the Roses, but finding him departed he was
extremely discontented, because he had not honored him according to the merit
of his virtue; nevertheless hoping to meet him again the next day at the
turnament, he returned to the Palace, where every body was talking of the
incomparable valor of the Knight of the Roses, of the three companions of the
Serpents, and their adversaries, whom they ranked in the number of the best on
the earth. The Tables having been more sumptuously served, then in the morning,
the dancing began in the Hall, whilst the fair Polixena being stolen away by
the Empress Richarda, and the Infanta Rosaliana, was laid into a rich bed with
the valiant Ethiopian; where we will leave them to enjoy the content which is
incountred in the first embraces of two persons that unfeignedly love one
another, for to prepare our selves to describe the wonderful feats of arms
which were performed the next day.

CHAP. XXX. The admirable feats of arms performed at the Turnament in
Constantinople by the most excellent warriors of the World: The dreadful
combat between the Knight of the Roses, and him of the Palms, with the strange
end thereof.
THE day appearing fair and bright, the Trumpets raised the Knights, the place
was in a moment covered with arms and horses, the barriers surrounded with a
multitude of people, the scaffolds which had been prepared for the Ladies, were
almost full, and every thing seemed ready for the justs, when as the Princesses
of Greece went to see the beautiful Empress of Aethiopia, who testified in
the serenity of her look, though her color was somewhat altered, that she had
received content in losing the name of a maid; howbeit seeming ashamed to be
found in the arms of a husband, she got her quickly out of bed, and past into
another chamber, where whilst she was putting on new garments, far richer then
those she wore the day before, the Ladies asked her a world of questions, which
renewing the memory of the pleasure she had enjoied, made her accuse the Sun
for having been too hasty to enlighten the World. At length being quite ready,
she was conducted to Church with wonderful magnificence, and from thence led
back to the Palace, where dinner was short, in regard of the turnament, which
in every man's opinion was like to prove a brave one; for Don Rogel to avoid the
confusion which might arise from such a multitude of combattants, caused five
hundred Greek Knights to enter the camp at one gate, before whom the Knights of
the Serpents placed themselves, together with the gentle Esquilan of Poland,
who by chance was then at Constantinople; and at another a like number of
strangers under the conduct of Grian and his companions.

These two troops equal in number, and almost in valor, being ordered
according to the direction of their Commanders, and attending nothing but the
sound of the trumpets; a Knight was seen to enter the Camp, whose very presence
gave a good opinion of his valor. He was mounted upon a great and furious
Courser, whom he sat with such a grace, and in so warlike a manner, that one
would have thought it had been the God of battles, appearing in this sort for
to be admired of men. Every one casting their eyes upon so accomplished a
Knight, who had placed himself amidst the two troops, as though he had had no
intention to fight; it was observed that his shield carried those redoubted
Palms; whereupon, Prigmaleon turning him to Don Florisel, said: Verily, I think
that most of the bravest Knights of the world are assembled here at this time,
and believe it you shall see wonders to day if this new commer takes a side.
This is he that freed us out of the Castle of Serpents, and that delivered your
brother Amadis with such extraordinary chivalrie. I vow, said Don Rogel, that
I would not for the best town of this Empire miss the content of seeing him
here now, whore, if it be possible, I will requite the good office he has done
us; but I would very fain see him fight, though, by siding with nei^^^^ party,
it seems he does not purpose it. We shall soon be resolved of (...), said
Prigmaleon, for this is the last sound of the trumpets, and these ^oops are
even upon settting forth to meet one another. Heerwith, the ^wo squadrons
dislodged with a dreadful noise, the place was covered with a number of
Knights, who were not able to support the fury of the first course; the air was
darkened with the splinters of the spears, which the violence of the incounters
sent up, and the earth trembled under the horses feet. The Knight of the Roses,
and he of the Savage having run one against another, brake their staves even to
the very gan^lets, without so much as once moved for it. Brandimanda, Silverin,
and two of the Knights of the Serpents, encountered in the midst of the course
with equal advantage, but they which justed against the third, and the brave
Esquilan of Poland, were unhorsed very easily. All then was in confusion, they
were mingled one amongst another, Grian cleared the ranks on the one side, the
Knight of the Roses thundered every where on the other side, his companions
seconded him with the like courage. The fairest Brandimanda and Silverin,
overthrew all that stood in their way, briefly the combat was equally
maintained, and it seemed that the sole valor of the Chiestains, made it
subsist in this manner. The strangers being all choice men, that purposely
appeared there to obtain glory, seemed at the beginning to have some little
advantage of the Greeks; but the extreme valor of the Knight of the Roses, of
the Serpents, and of the brave Esquilan of Poland relieved their fainting* and
made them show themselves every was as strong, in such sort, that all went in
equal balance; when as the Knight of the Savage, who judged that the honor of
the turnament depended on the Knight of the Roses, went to encounter him; and
with his sword charged him so hotly, that he was constrained to turn head, and
defend himself in stead of overthrowing his enemies, which put him into such
choler, that clasping his sword fast in his hand, he discharged it very
dangerously on Grians shield, who nothing amazed with that blow, advanced his
blade, and let it descend so roughly on his enemies casque, that he made him
see stars in stead of the Sun; howbeit, he boasted not long of it, for the
Knight of the Roses being much incensed, gave him another blow on his shield,
with such strength, that he made him bow with his head to the pommell of his
saddle. This combat continued in a gallant manner, if one struck, the other
knew how to ward, and many times their swords advanced now both at one instant,
and descended on each others helmet with equal fury. Whilst they entreated one
another thus bravely, the Knights of the Serpents, seconded by Esquilan of
Poland, performed wonders; they overthrew m^n and horses, and became dreadful
every where: But the valiant Brandimanda and Silverin, seeing themselves
opposed to these adventures, who fought with infinite courage, pressed them so
close, that notwithstanding their extraordinary valor, the Greeks by little
and little were fain to give ground, which so incensed the Knight of the Roses,
that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it with such fury on the
Knight of the Savages his head, that he overturned him on the crupper of his
horse, so far from himself, as it was a quarter of an hour before he could
recover his senses; from thence, putting himself in the front of the Greeks, he
overthrew all that he met withal; in such sort, that with the aid of the
valiant Knights of ^^e Serpents, the strangers began to recoil, and then did
every one expect to (...) them chased out of the field; when as the
incomparable Knight (...) Palms, set spurs to his horse, and came against
Esquilan of Poland, (...) he cast out of his saddle, do what he could to keep
in it. The Princ^ (...) Greece, who were much distasted to behold him stand
still, whilst the (...) were in action, were exceeding glad to see him enter
into the combat; and of his valor by the first encounter, having so easily
overthrown a Knight, whom they lightly esteemed, they all bent their eyes upon
him, and perceived how having drawn forth his sword, he seemed a thunderbolt
that drives all into ruin. This glorious warrior, conceiving that the honor
of the turnament consisted not in the multitude of men, but in the courage of
the Chieftains, made head against the Knights of the Serpents, whose valor he
had admired, and knowing that great trees are not overturned with a little
wind, or with one silly blow of an a^, he displayed the force of his arm, and
gave one of them such a violent blow, that he laid him in the dust sensl^sse,
and instantly with the like fury redoubling another, he overthrew the second on
the cruppet of his horse, casting blood out of his eyes and ears. Hereupon, the
stranger^ reassumed new courage, and labored to imitate so valiant a leader,
who in the mean time pursuing his victory, made such open way wheresoever he
went, that the Princes of Greece were constrained to acknowledge they had never
beheld the like. The Knight of the Roses, who was then in fight with
Brandimanda, that had set upon him for to revenge her lover, perceiving the
disorder whereinto this Knight had brought his troops, became wonderfully
en^aged, and gnashing his teeth for anger, to see himself now in dispute for
the honor of the turnament, which all men's opinion had given him before; he
left Brandimanda, astonished with a blow, and calling for a strong lance to be
brought him, he cried to the Knight of the Palms to defend himself; whereat,
^urning him about, he sheathed up his sword, and withal, took the staff which
his Squire carried after him, infinitely contented to hear himself called upon
by a man, whom he held to be one of the bravest and valiantest Knights of the
earth, and whose gallant demeanor had filled him with wonder: settling himself
then sure in his saddle, and desiring to display all the valor and address
that he had, he set sp^rs to his horse, perceiving his enemy coming on, and
met him in the midst of the course, with such mavelous fury, that their
lances shivering into a thousand pieces, their horses recoiled three or four
paces back, unable to support so terrible a shock, the Knights remaining firm
in their saddles, without any show of amazement upon so violent a carriere. O
me, said Florisel then, what an encounter was this! If two towers had met with
such force together, we should have seen the^ ^o^h ruined, and yet these
Champions appear no more moved, then if they had carried glasses in their
hands. It is mavelous indeed, said Spheramond, but let us see unto which of
them Fortune will give the honor of the combat, for they are going to it with
their swords. Whereupon, these valorous Knights began to charge one another,
not as in a turnament, but as two, whose hatred would be the death of each
other. The Knight of the Roses considering that he fought before his friends,
who had always showed themselves insensible, did wonders, employed his sword
with fury, and used all the sleights that are practiced in combats; but his
adversary was so cunning, that if he reached him one blow, he was sure to
receive another, as dangerous and weighty ^^^^antly; if the one showed himself
ready and nimble, the other expressed (...)esse agility; their blows were
dreadful, they joined anger to force, ^^d time so kindled their courage, that
in stead of being weary, their swords were seen to descend with more violence,
then at the beginning of the fight, that every minute began more terrible, to
the great astonishment of the two troops, which had withdrawn themselves apart,
the better to judge of this combat. The valiant Prince of Greece, who had never
seen a fight maintained with like fury, held th^se two warriors for the most
redoubted, that either their times or antiquity had produced. Fowr hours being
spent, without any show of desiring to rest themselves, the ground was strewed
with their armor, the blood flowed from diverse parts of their bodies, millions
of sparkles flew about their ears, and as every one conceived, their forces to
be alike, nothing could be expected from their rage, but dangerous and mortal
blows. The Knight of the Roses mad, to find such resistance in one man, set
both his hands to his sword, and stretching himself forth upon his stirrups,
discharged it so manly on his shield, that he divided it in two, the point
thereof falling with such fury on his casque, that he was constrained to strike
his head against the crupper of his horse, so far from himself, that the most
part of the assistants believed he was dead; nevertheless, he was seen quickly
to re-settle himself up, and clasping his sword fast in his ha^nd, he gave his
enemy such a terrible blow, that it struck the Princes of Greece into
admiration, making the Knight to bow with his head to the pommell of the
saddle; so astonished, that the blood gushed out of his mouth and eyes, every one
thought him to be near dead. By my life, said Spheramond, this is one of the
dreadfullest blows that ever I saw given; and if the Knight of the Roses
receives many such, without all doubt he is not far from his end. I do not
know, said Rogel, what will become of this combat, I see no cause the one has
to brag more then the other, for if the Knight of the Palms shows strength, he
of the Roses manifests but little weakness. As he thus spoke, Rozalmond,
tra^sported with rage to see himself in the state he was in, flew at his enemy,
whereupon, they charged one another more furiously then before, insomuch that
six hours was past, and they never spoke of resting themselves; the more they
fought, the more courage and force they showed: Nevertheless, seeing the night
approach, they redoubled their blows, and little regarding the trumpets, that
sounded a retreat, they continued laboring to kill one another. Don Rogel,
perceiving them to be so wilfully bent, descended with Lucendus and Spheramond,
desiring them to part, and become friends for his sake; but their rage being
incapable of reason, they made as though they did not hear him, entreating one
another more cruelly then before; howbeit, considering that at length they
should be obliged to yield unto him, they stood up in their stirrups, and
taking their swords in both their hands, they discharged them both at one time,
with such wonderful fury, that they overthrew one another to the ground at the
same instant, giving great appearance of death in their fall. This accident
infinitely displeased the Princes of Greece, who held the loss of those
Knights to be irrepairable, and therefore went in all haste to succor them;
Spheramond to the Knight of the Roses, unto whom he bore a particular
inclination, not knowing wherefore, and Lucendus to him of the Palms, unto whom
he thought he was obliged, when as a damsel appeared amongst them, that
addressing her self unto Spheramond, said thus unto him:

Excellent Prince, you do well to seek the safety of this Knight, for ^^deed he
is your son, cause him presently to be carried in, and use all mea^^ necessary
to bring him to himself again; I Will take care for the other, and will render him
ere it be long, in as good case to fight as ever he was. Gentlewoman, said
Spheramond, much amazed to hear that he held his son Rozalmond in his arms,
give us, I beseech you, the same remedy which you have promised to that Knight.
His virtue deserves it, said she, and therefore I may not deny you: anoint his
face and wounds with that which you shall find here, said she, giving him a
little glass vial, and then let time work. Saying thus, she caused Alcidamant
to be laid upon a blanket, which two Dwarfs carried between them, who retiring
out of the prease went with him toward the wood, and entered into a shepherds
cottage, where she looked so carefully to him, that within two howrs he came to
himself again; but so infinitely grieved in that he had not vanquished his
enemy (for he did not know that he was in as bad a state as himself) that it is
likely he would have advanced his own death, had not the damsel assured him of
the truth. Suffering himself then to be dressed he s^ept till the next day, when
he found himself perfectly healed, and as able to ride as ever he was; which so
amazed him, that if he had not certainly remembered his former actions, he might
well have been persuaded that all had been but a dream. This while some of the
Princes of Greece were employed in caressing the brave Knights of the Serpents,
which were Persides, Lucibel, and Russian; and the rest labored to bring
Rozalmond to himself again; who within two howrs being some what recovered, and
finding himself between a pair of sheets, and not knowing how he came there, he
began to detest his wicked fortune that had not permitted him to triumph over
his enemy. Shall I live, said he, with the shame of one vanquished? and that
which is more, shall I dare to appear before Princes, which never learnt so
base a lesson? No, I will never survive the loss of mine honor, and the glory
of the combat, which mine adversary has carried from me. Adi^u, my fairest
Armazia, thou have as just cause to abhor such a recreant, as he has reason
never to present himself more before thee. Whereupon throwing off the cloths,
he leapt furiously out of bed, took his sword which he found lying upon the
table, and having drawn it forth, continued on his speech in this manner: It is
fit that this blade should deprive me of life, which could not take it away
from a better Knight then my self; howsoever my friends shall know that I did
not want courage. There with he was running himself upon it, when as he
perceived his Father coming in, unto whom his Squire had discovered this fury.
His presence staid him, and falling on his knees, he said: Ah Sir! Come you to
see a wretch that does not merit the honor to be called your son; you have
always triumphed over all the enemies that ever have presented themselves
before you, whereas I could not vanquish one single Knight, in the presence of
so many Princes that command the Empire of Arms. Oh! what a hell and vexation
is this to me, and that I might be permitted to revenge upon my self, the wrong
I do you? Son, said Spheramond, I know not what cause you have to complain, but
you have this day got more honor by combatting the Knight of the Palms, then
ever I did by all my past adventures; you have not prevailed over your
adversary, I conf^sse, but he has no advantage of you, and the estate into
which you have put him is no less pitiful then that wherein you are; you were
overthrown both at one instant, and the Judges have pronounced your honor to
be equal, as your forces are alike; comfort your self then, and without
passion, which much abates of your judgment, consider that the destinies have
not promised to let all things succeed according to our desire. Rozalmond
weighing his fathers reasons, understanding that he was not overcome, as he
imagined, was somewhat pacified, and returning to his bed promised to afflict
himself no further; but calling to mind that this Knight had deprived him of
the honor of the turnament, he conceived such hatred against him, that it was
a long time before it could be rooted out of his mind, so that laying himself
to rest with a resolution to be revenged on him, and rather to travel over all
the World, then not to meet with him once again, he fell into so sound a sleep
that he waked not till eight of the clock the next morning; at which time he
arose without any pains at all of his wounds, that were so well healed as the
scars of them were hardly to be discerned, whereat all the company exceedingly
rejoiced, and were resolved to renew their sports in testimony of the content
they received at the return of this Prince, so valorous in arms, if his
departure had not prevented them, as shall be related by and by.

CHAP. XXXI. Rozalmond departs secretly out of Constantinople, to pursue and
on^e more to combat the Knight of the Palms, and the strange adventure that he
incountred.
ROzalmonds displeasure continuing still amidst the caresses which he received
all that day from an infinity of Lords and Ladies, he withdrew himself somewhat
betimes to his chamber, where he called to him a young gentleman, the son of the
Duke of Arbamont, whose carriage and disposition he liked well, and said unto
him: Artander, so was he named, have thou any mind to my service? Yes more,
answered the young gentleman, then to any others in the world; wherefore my
Lord, you may absolutely command of me. Be secret then, said Rozalmond, and be
sure that I will largely recompense thy services; the night favors the
resolution I have taken to be gone from hence, for to revenge the injury I have
received from the Knight of the Palms, and I want nothing at this present but
my own horse, and another for thee: Go therefore to the Stables, and find out
some device to bring me out two unto the well gate, that we may travel abroad
to see the world a little. Now verily, answered the Squire, this is as I
desired, and all the favors that possibly might be done me, could not be
comparable to so sweet a commandment as this. Arm your self, my Lord, and
believe it you shall not want horses. Whereupon going to the Stables, he took
two extraordinary horses, and went presently with them to the place appointed,
where Rozalmond straightway met him wonderfully well satisfied to see himself
at liberty. Getting to horse then he rode all night, and made such haste that
he was ten leagues from Constantinople, when as every body thought him to be
still asleep. I will not stand here to declare the grief the Princes of Greece
were in, when he was missing in his chamber, much less speak of the adventures
which befell Persides, Lucibel of France, Russian of Media, Esquilan of Poland,
and others that put themselves in quest of him; but referring this discourse to
some other time, I will assure you that having taken a little rest in a
shepherds cottage whilst his horses grased, he traveled on, choosing the most
unusual ways, because he would not be sound, if pe^ adventure he was followed
and sought after. Where fore being gotten into a forest the way which he took,
brought him by that time it was night into a place so obscured by the thicknes
of the trees, that he could not see a whit, whereby he was constrained for fear
of falling into some precipice to alight, to unbridle his horses, and to lay
him down upon the grass in expectation of the next day. Armazia coming then
into his mind, his passion carried him to complain in this manner: Unhappy
Knight, why do thou absent thee from so fair a sun, to live thus in darkness?
The desire of glory deprives thee of a sovereign felicity; in the mean time
thou do nothing that can excuse thy absence; one Knight arrests thy ambition,
opposes thy conquests, and takes the laurel from thy head to appropriate it to
his valor. It is true indeed that the grief heerof ought to kill thee, but
thou must live to be revenged, and thou art to undertake nothing till that be
decided to thy contentment, since so to do thou have abandoned all thy friends.
Whereupon his anger increasing with the hatred that he bore to the Knight of
the Palms, he wished for day, that he might go seek him out; howbeit as he
turned him on the other side the better to rest himself, he perceived a little
glimps of light to shoot through the trees; at first he was somewhat amazed, as
unable to imagine from whence it should proceed, nevertheles, he presently start
up, and listened attentively, but meeting with nothing but silence, he went very
softly toward certain trees, which Nature had planted in manner of a round, so
near together that they even touched one another, except one place which seemed
to be reserved for to give an entrance to this cabinet, and saw by the light of
a torch two damsels, the one laid upon the grass leaning with her cheek on her
left hand, which was bedewed with the tears that trickled from her eyes, and
the other reading of a letter; the noise which he made treading on some leaves,
having easily been overheard by her that was reading, she suddenly demanded,
who goes there? Gentlewoman, answered Rozalmond, It is a Knight arrested in
this wood by the night, and that would willingly do you service if it lay in
his power. Come in, says she no whit abashed, and let us see what you are.
Rozalmond advancing then saluted her very courteously, receiving the like
entertainment from the damsel, who seeing him carry so brave a presence said
unto him: Sir, let me entreat you to fit ^eer down by me on the grass with as
little noise as you may, for fear of waking this gentlewoman, whose grief does
seldom permit her to ^^ke such good rest. Your fair demeanor does oblige me
to render the tediousnes of the night less irksom to you by some pleasing
discourse, the occasion I will draw from this paper in my hand, sent to this
Gentlewoman by the most ungrateful man of the world; you shall hear the
contents, and then I will acquaint you with the particulars, whereupon she read
thus:

Clerastes Letter to Carinda.
I Held it no little glory to be beloved of you, nor did I think any delight on
the earth comparable to that which I found in your caresses, but since you
deride them, and that the ambition triumph ^ver a King, has made you false to
my affection, I must tell you Carinda, that I will sigh no longer for you, but
will for ever quit you, and live for some other that will be more faithful.


Men often seek excuses for their malice, and they will take hold of the least
occasions to serve their turns, as you may perceive by this traitor, called
Clerastes, who seigning some jealousy, has made this Gentlewoman, whom you
behold here, the miserablest creature in the World. He is the King of
Florertans favorite, and in his grace has found more wealth and dignity then
he has deserved; she was near unto the Queen, cherished by her out of the
consideration of her merits, and was likely to have (...) with some good
fortune, had not this man undone her. Her beauty, whereof you may judge still,
though it be much (...) by her affliction, having made a deep impression in the
heart of this gallant, she was adored by him for a time with exceeding respect,
his actions were full of love, his wo^^s assured his captivity, his sighs
testifi^d a violent passion; nor was there any day seen to pass without some
proof rendered of his affection: these devoirs joined to the place he held in
Court, at length forced Carinda, so is she named, to entertain some liking to
him, which by little and little converting into Love left her no po^er over her
self. If Cleraster heart were all ^ire, hers was notices i^ he suffered, she
was not at rest; if ^e adore her, she idolat^ized him; if he gave her kisses*
she was not back ward to render him the like. What should I say more ^^ nothing
was wanting to their desires, but oppor^^nity, whereupon she ha^h ^ecourse to
that affection which I have ^lwaies born her, opens her heart (...) me, and
^^lling me that Clerastes wou^^ marry her, pr^^^s me to ^acili^a^^ the means
that they might meet without suspicion. (...) nothing more then her good, I
^^rreated her to consider well what she did, and not lightly to cast her self
away: I put her in mind of (...) inconstancy, of the dissimulation they
commonly use to bring their desires to pass; but seeing her resolved, I
suffered Clerastes to come, who cleared (...) of all doubt by the solemn
promise which he made her (...) my presence, for to marry her so soon as he
could obtain license of the King; leaving them together then to the liberty of
their actions, I absented my self for two or three ho^rs; at the end whereof
causing them to part, I promised to give them the same accommodation whenever
Carinda could meet. Fowr months past in this manner, with all the content that
two lovers could enjoy, nothing wanting but the day wherein a happy marriage
might render their i^braces legitimate. But (...)! I saw allthings in disorder,
when I thought them most sure; for Carinda being every way very amiable, the
King fell in love with her, who taking pleasure in his passion one day
discovered himself unto her, desiring she would give him some case to his pain.
She was much amazed with the discourse of this Prince, and her affection to
Clerastes commanded her to return him but a sharp answer; nevertheless
considering what respect she ought to use both in her speech and carriage
toward him, she modestly replied, that she could not be so vain as to believe,
that she was able to triumph over a Prince, who knew well how to vanquish his
enemies, and not to yield to any body, so that this demand being but to prove
her discretion she hoped to make it always appear to him, that she would never
be failing therein. Some would have been driven away with this answer, and for
spite would have despised a cruel ungrateful woman, but it wrought a contrary
effect in this Prince, who finding more glory in the difficulty, never left
praying and importuning; every day she had a Page, letters were continually
walking, there was no spare of presents, but firm in her affection she made no
reckoning of all these things, because she would not offend against her Lover.
Only one fault she committed, which was that she made him not acquainted with
this pursuit; for if she had, without doubt he had proceeded in another
fashion, and never been so wickedly transported with jealousy. Clerastes then
having upon a time found his Mistress Cabinet open, chanced to fall upon certain
papers, amongst the which by ill fortune were the two last letters which the
King had sent to Carinda, wherewith he was wonderfully astonished. Has Carinda
said he, being gone out to walk in the garden, has Carinda intelligence with
the King, and does she thus forget the vows she has so often made me? Ah I
will never endure it, I Will change as she does, and ceasing to love her, I will
not be a rival to him, to whom I am indebted for all my fortunes. And this she
shall know, that she may not say I have left her without reason, or that I am
ungrateful. In the heat heerof going to his chamber, without any further
deliberation, he wrote these lines, which coming to the hands of this poor
gentlewoman, it so afflicted her that she fell into a swown, out of the which
with much ado being brought, she brake out into all those lamentations which a
deceived maid might justly make. I had been the secretary of her pleasures, and
so I was of her complaints, and misfortune; she came to me, and shedding a
river of tears she obliged me to talk with this faithles man, and fully inform
him of the truth of the business, but he rejected all that I could say, showed
me the Kings letters, and swearing he would not be persuaded that ever it was
done without some affection on her part, he willed me to tell Carinda that she
should seek her another husband, an answer that reduced this poor creature to
such despair, as abandoning the Court under pretense of going to visit her
friends, she departed out of the Kingdom with me in her company, who could not
find in my heart to let her go alone; and she is resolved to travel every day
a little until she has found out some desert to her mind, where she purposes
to spend the rest of her life in complaining against the ingratitude of her
Lover. Behold Sir, the occasion both of the tears which you see standing on her
cheeks, and of our voyage; so that if you had as much pity of her case, as you
have promised me assistance, you will counsel her to change her determination.
That I will indeed, said Rozalmond, I will advise her unto it, and if she
please to make use of me to be revenged of this disloiall man, that upon a
simple supposition forsakes her after such powerful obligations, I will
promise her his head. I do not think she will consent to that, said the
damsel, but of these extremities we will choose that which shall be most
expedient. Herewith Carinda, awaking, was much amazed to see so goodly a Knight
talking with Darimella (so was the secretary of her love named) but growing
somewhat more confident, with a pleasing voice she said unto him: Sir, how came
you thus to arrive in a place so full of horror, here to behold the
wretchedest maid now living? Fortune, that conducts such as make the same
profession I do, answered he, has brought me hither, it may be for your good,
for having understood what cause you have to complain of the ingratitude of a
man which has deceived you, I am most ready to right you upon him, with his
destruction. My resentment, replied she, is not so strong, but that it yields
to the love which still I bear to this disloiall, and will not permit me to
desire his death; my absence peradventure has made him acknowledge his fault,
and therefore I purpose so far to embrace your noble courtesy, as to return
with you to the Kingdom of Florertan, where we may govern our selves according
as occurrences shall fall out; in the mean season, please you to take your rest
until the morning, at which time, my companion and I will be ready to wait
upon you. I am desirous in all things to obey you, said Rozalmond, so bidding
them good night, he retired to his Squire, and laid him down upon the grass to
sleep.

CHAP. XXXII. Rozalmond arrives in the Kingdom of Florertan with Carinda,
finds out Clerastes, and marries them together.
THE singing of a multitude of birds declaring the day, rather then the Sun,
whose beams were not able to pierce through the thickness of those trees,
Rozalmond arose, and repairing to the damsels, they mounted all on horsback,
and traveled together for the space of fowr days without meeting any
adventure, at the end whereof, coming to the sea side, they embarked
themselves for the kingdom of Florertan: Fifteen days being sweetly spent in
this navigation, during the which Rozalmond had generously slain two Giants,
which would have made themselves Masters of their ship, they arrived at the
desired Port; and causing their horses to be landed, they entered upon their
journey, having first changed their habits, to be unknown, that so they might
without suspicion learn what was said at Court of the flight of these two
damsels. Having rode all day long, then they turned aside unto certain houses
which they espied on the left hand, with a purpose to lodge there; when as they
met a Squire, who staying to observe them, because their apparel and arms were
strange, Rozalmond said unto him: Sweet heart, I could wish you would do me the
courtesy to tell me some news of this country, the name whereof I do not know,
as also, whither you go, and from whence you came to day. Your fair demeanor,
answered the Squire; obliges me to satisfy you in few words; you are in the
kingdom of Florertan, near to the Capital city thereof, called Valderic; there
is no great news stirring, for the King by his wisdom maintains all in peace;
as for the occasion of my journey, I think I shall not give you much
satisfaction in relating it, I am going to seek a Gentlewoman of this Country,
who has not been heard of these two months. What is her name, said Rozalmond?
Carinda, answered the Squire; as fair as any in this Kingdom, but unhappy, in
loving a man, that now dies with grief, for building her despair upon a false
opinion. Explain your self a little, I pray you, said Rozalmond, and discover
this matter more clearly unto me. That can I easily do, answered the Squire,
Clerastes and (so is he called of whom I speak) loved Carinda, Carinda no less
affected him, each joyed in the other, and now both expecting the hour that
should fully make up their happiness, when as fortune would needs divide two
united hearts; the King of Florertan became enamored of Carinda, solicites her
a thousand ways, by speech, by letters, and by the charms of presents:
Nevertheless, this maid firm in affection to her lover, never yields to his
desires, but wisely defends her self; howbeit, she kept some letters written
unto her by the King, rather out of vanity, I am persuaded, then any
inclination she had to cherish any thing that came from him; which falling
afterward into Clerastes hands, rendered him so jealous, that without further
informing himself of the business, he sent Carinda word that he would love her
no longer; whereat the poor maid fell into such despair, as she quite abandoned
this Country, at leastwise must think so; for Clerastes having caused her to
be sought in vain, even to the uttermost parts of Florertan, it is presumed
that she is not in it. Why does he seek for her now, said Rozalmond, since he
does not care for her? Excuse me, Sir, said the Squire, he loves her more then
ever he did, and her absence has made him see that he was jealous without a
cause; for having been surprised by the King in his complaints against the
inconstancy of women, his Majesty assured him, that she had always with an
untainted modesty refused his affection; howbeit, desiring to be further
cleared, presuming that the King out of his discretion, and to preserve her
reputation, might be drawn to make these protestations, he sent for an old
inchantresse, who for a sum of money, made him behold in a glass, all the
actions which Carinda had done in her life; amidst the which, observing nothing
but respect in the Kings suit to her, he condemned his rash humor, and blaming
himself for having been so credulous and cruel, he wrote a letter full of
amorous lines, tending all to asking of pardon; caused forty or fifty copies to
be made, and giving them to several messengers, he sent them to all parts of
the Kingdom; but hearing no news of her, he had recourse unto the said
inchantresse, who told him that he shall meet with her at a time when he least
hopes for it, and counseled him in the mean space, to have some still watching
at the sea ports; which is the reason, that amongst others, I am now going by
his commandment to wait there in expectation of some good fortune for him that
way. This said, he spurred on, leaving Carinda as much contented, as she had
been troubled all the time of his discourse. What say you to this, Madam, said
Rozalmond? Do not you believe now, that after a tempest follows a calm, and
that there is no bitterness but is accompanied with some sweet? Yes,
ananswered she, with a smiling countenance, I confess, that the Gods do give
us blessings after crosses, and that they recompense our miseries with
contentments; but I feel a new care arising, and know not how I should present
my self at Court; for to write to Clerastes, I do not hold it fit, and still to
conceal my self is not the way to my happiness: What shall I do in this case?
Madam, answered Rozalmond, leave this to me, I beseech you, I will so carry
things, that you shall have as great cause to commend me, and when Clerastes
understands of your return, it shall be for your glory. By this time, being
come to a village, they were kindly entertained by a rich shepherd, who having
given them a good supper, prepared two chambers for them to lie in; but
Rozalmond having another design in his head, desired the shepherd to ride
along with him, and leaving Artander behind him, caused him to conduct him to
Valderic; where arriving very early in the morning, he went to the Court, and
there enquired for Clerastes, who being awake, was informed by his Squire, that
a man armed at all points required to speak with him. Let him come in, said he,
for he comes not so early but upon some important occasion. Whereupon,
Rozalmond entering the chamber, and finding Clerastes out of his bed in his
nightgown, he said unto him: Sir, get on your clothes, and, as I am, arm your
self, that I may receive satisfaction for the wrong you have done Carinda, in
refusing to acknowledge her for your wife, after you have obtained all your
desires of her under a promise of marriage. Alas, Sir! answered he, I would to
God she were here, and then we should enter into no quarrel upon this
occasion; for there is nothing grieves me so much, as that I cannot discharge
my duty in that regard. Are you resolved to give her all content, said
Rozalmond? Yes verily, answered he, and if you knew what I suffered since I
fell into that fault, you would rather pity then destroy me. Follow me then
without more delay, said Rozalmond, and I shall quickly make you happy, since
you will become an honest man, as I was ready to have spoiled you, if you had
persisted in your malice, for Carinda is hard by. Is my Carinda hard by said
Clerastes? Ah Sir, how am I obliged to you! Come, bring me my clothes, and let
one saddle an horse for me. Whereupon, having suddenly made himself ready, he
rode away with Rozalmond, unto whom he gave a million of thanks by the way, and
they made such speed, that within five or six hours they arrived at the
shepherds house; where at the first approach, Clerastes fell on his knees
before Carinda, and made demonstration of his true repentan^, with a world of
sighs and tears, whereof Carinda was so sensible, that with the love besides
which she loved him, it was impossible for her to complain any further; a
thousand kisses signed their accord, and their return^ to the City was
instantly concluded; where their nuptials were celebrated, to the great
content of all the Court, especially of the King, who admiring the goodly
person of Rozalmond, received him very graciously, and honored him as if he
had been well acquainted with his worth.

CHAP. XXXIII. Rozalmond maintaining the Iusts in the Kingdom of Florertan,
combats and vanquishes a Giant with much honor and glory.
CArinda's return brought exceeding content to the whole Court, where her
virtue had rendered her of such esteem, that the young Knights presented
themselves before the King, and besought him he would be pleased to permit some
of them to maintain with the lance that they deserved the favor of their
Ladies, and that the next day a turnament might be held, the prize whereof
should be a crown of laurel to be given by the Queen unto the Conqueror, with
some other present befitting his courage and worth. By the faith of a Prince,
answered the King, your enterprise seems so noble unto me, that I could find in
my heart to be one of the party, but that I purpose to be the Judge thereof,
and observe who shall behave him self best; wherefore I authorize you to order
it as you shall think good. The Knights having obtained their desire, withdrew
themselves, caused Lists to be prepared with all expedition, and giving
direction for fitting of their arms, enriching their helmets, furnishing their
horses, and the rest of their equipage; they went into their Mistresses, and
craved some favors of them whereby they might be obliged to combat with the
more courage and better success. Each one was well pleased, and all in
general wished that the Knight of the Roses, by every one so esteemed, would
make one. The Queen who could not behold him without affection, desired it much
more then all the rest, and therefore could willingly had entreated him
thereunto, but not knowing well how to acquaint him with her mind, she was much
troubled; nevertheles enforced by her desire, she called Carinda unto her, and
making show of entreating her with some discourse, she fell to speak of the
justs which were to be made the next day in honor of her nuptials; and
demanded of her, as it were by chance, whether the Knight of the Roses would
combat in favor of the Ladies of the Court, or of the strangers. Madam,
answered Carinda, I do not think he means to be on any side, either in the
justs, or turnament, which are devised only by your Courtiers for to show their
courage; but if your Majesty desire to see what he can do, upon notice of your
pleasure, without doubt he will soon give your Majesty that satisfaction; and
think himself happy that he may receive your commands. I would be loath to show
my self uncivil, said the Queen, not knowing what quality this Knight is of,
but truly I very much long to see whether the effect be answerable to the
bravery of his presence and demeanor. Madam, said Carinda, leave this care to
me, I Will oblige him thereunto without more ado; looking about then, and
perceiving him not far from her, she winked to him, whereupon he approaching
with a great deal of respect unto the Queen, she said unto him: Sir, will you
be one of them that runs to morrow? Alas Madam! answered he, I am not so
fortunate to be beloved, and therefore have no purpose to be of this amorous
troop; howbeit if you please to command me, I shall soon alter my resolution,
and obey you. Why then, said the Queen with a little blush, I am contented to
be your Mistress to morrow, and to behold you there as my Knight. Madam,
answered he, bowing himself very low for to kiss her hands, I shall never
merit such glory; but seeing you are pleased to make me capable of it, I will
not refuse this honor; wherefore you shall see me there amongst the foremost,
and if I perform any thing worthy of regard, believe Madam, it will proceed
merely from your favor. I am quite of another opinion, answered she, for if
fortune proves contrary unto you, I shall attribute it to the defects which
every one acknowledges to be in me. He would have replied, but the King
coming out of his cabinet called him unto him, and not dreaming of his wives
desire, asked him whether he would be of the number of the Combattants. Sir,
answered he, I might justly be condemned if I should sit still whilst others
were at so noble an exercise. I am very glad of it, said the King, and if you
want any thing, you have the power to command it. Rozalmond having given him
very humble thanks withdrew himself, leaving the Courtiers wonderfully well
contented with this resolution of his. The next day appearing, the Trumpets
awaked the Knights, the town was full of arms and horses, the place was covered
with people, and the chalengers (two of the chiefest of the Realm) attended
nothing but the presence of the King, who having made a slight dinner, placed
himself at the window, and saw that the first course was much for the advantage
of the undertakers, who continuing their victory laid two and twenty Knights on
the ground, without so much as being once moved, acquiring such glory that most
part of the assistants cried them up already for conquerours. Whilst they had
just occasion to rejoice in their valor, the Knight of the Roses arrived in
the place, with so gallant and martial a countenance, that the people began to
clap their hands, as it were congratulating the victory, which he had not yet
obtained. The Count Folsue, one of the chalengers, took a fresh horse, and
choosing out a great and strong lance he ran with such a grace that he brake it
very bravely in pieces, finding as much resistance as if he had met with a
tower, but not able to support the fury of his adversaries lance, he was
overthrown so rudely, that he made two or three turns in the dust, so much
astonished as he was fain to be taken up. His companion having beheld this
rough encounter, would gladly have been exempted from his course, but not to
lose the honor, which he had generously gained through cowardice, he spurd on
against him, breaking as the former had done, and as unfortunate as he, was
thrown three or fowr paces beyond the crupper of his horse. Whereupon Rozalmond
put himself in their place, and opposing all such as presented themselves, he
laid eight and fifty on the earth, with such wonder to the King, so infinite
content to the Queen, and great amazement of all the people, that every one
strived who might most magnify him. The King then having declared him
conqueror, in regard no man appeared against him, the most part of those whom
he had overthrown ranged themselves on his fide for to conduct him in triumph
to the Palace, when as a damsel presented her self, accompanied with one of
the greatest and most formidable Giants of the world, who making his way as he
came, said with an horrible voice: Let no man think to part from hence with the
glory of Conqueror, unles he will confess this Lady to be fairer then his
mistress, for otherwise I Will put you all to the sword. Proud Knight, answered
Rozalmond, on whom all men's eyes were fixed, do thou think to perform what
thou so vainly boastest to do? There is not the meanest Knight here, but can
take thy head from thy shoulders, whereas thou presumest to defeat them all, as
if they were a company of fearful women, thou deceivest thy self insolent
creature; and to testify that we make no rekoning of thee, take the field, and
let us see thy valor, otherwise then in bravadoes. O ye Gods! said then the
Giant, do you permit one only Knight to be so daring as to outrage me with
injuries? I vow I will be revenged on you, and all the assistance you can give
him shall not keep him from being cut in a thousand pieces. Saying so, he
turned about to take the field, leaving all the assistants more amazed at
Rozalmonds confidence, then to behold so dreadful a monster. His Course was
very dangerous; for the girths not being strong enough to endure so rude an
encounter, Rozalmond saw himself upon the ground, with his saddle betwixt his
legs; but the Giant found himself laid in the dust with a deep wound in his
side; which possessing him with more anger then fear, made him rise much
enraged, and charged the Knight so terribly, that every minute his death was
expected; nevertheles, when they beheld how he displaid his force, and that he
drew blood of his enemy, they were of another opinion. His blows were delivered
with such infinite fury, that the place was strewed with pieces of the Giants
armor, and the fire flying out of his helmet and cuirace, made men judge that
the Knight would carry away the victory. At length three quarters of an howr
being spent, Rozalmond vexed at such resistance, raised himself in his stirrups,
and advancing his sword, he let it fall with such strength that he cleft him to
the very teeth, sending him stark dead to the earth with no less noise then if
it had been a Towr overthrown by Lightning. Whereupon the people with a world of
acclamations extolled him to the heavens, conducted him to the Palace with as
much magnificence as if one of their Gods had been descended unto them; and
leaving him at the feet of their King, who received him with unspeakable
content, they went to make bonefires for joy of the death of this Giant, the
scourge of the Realm, and the terror of the neighboring Provinces.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Queen of Florertan offers her self to Rozalmond, the answer
which he makes.
ALl things were disposed to pleasure, the King of Florertan to the
acknowledgement of the obligations wherein he stood engaged to the valor of
Rozalmond, and the Queen to the affection whereunto she was constrained by the
rare perfection which she found in him; nothing was spoken of, but of the
beauty, virtue, goodly personage, and gallant grace of this brave stranger, who
was beheld with wonder and astonishment. Whilst the most amorous were
entertaining their mistrisses, those that were free from that passion thought
fit to desire the Knight of the Roses, that he would not enter into the
turnament, which was to begin the next morning; addressing themselves then unto
him, one in the behalf of the rest said: Noble Sir, you have this day given
such powerful proof of your valor, that your name shall ever live in the
memory of men, especially of those of this Kingdom, where Altars are justly to
be reared unto you; so that having no need to signalize your self any further
for to make you more renowned amongst us, we humbly beseech you that you will
not arm your self for to combat in the turnament; for we yield you the glory of
it before hand, well knowing that we are not able to acquire any honor but in
imitating of you. By the faith of a Prince, said the King, laying his hand on
Rozalmonds shoulder, they have reason to make this request unto you; and if you
will oblige me, you shall to morrow be judge of the blows. Sir, answered
Rozalmond, I did not run but by your commandment, neither will I combat, since
it is your pleasure I shall not. Heerupon all the Knights dividing themselves
made an equal party of an hundred against an hundred, and so going to order
their affairs, they left Rozalmond with the King, who finding himself somewhat
indisposed, bad the Knight good night, and got him to bed, where he entertained
the Queen with extolling the excellencies of this stranger. This Princess
hearing him so highly commended, received the character which Love had
imprinted in her heart, and unable to resist her desires she said: Why should
not I affect a man, whom even men themselves seem passionately to love? and who
would condemn me if my thoughts should chance to be known? My weakness would
easily find excuses in the merits of this Knight; he shall understand then that
I love him, and seeking mine own satisfaction, amidst the content which he is
to attend from my caresses, I will recompense the travel he has undergone for
me, entering into the justs as my Knight; and to give a beginning to this
design, I will oblige him by a present that shall be far greater and rarer then
I would have bestowed on any other which had remained victorious. This
resolution seeming to quiet her thoughts, she slept till morning, when she
caused a crown of laurel to be made, wreathed about with a chain of pearl, of
very great price, the end whereof was closed up with a diamond of inestimable
value, and giving it to a damsel whom she had chosen for the secretary of her
desires, to the end she should present it from her to the Knight she commanded
her carefully to observe with what countenance he received it. This wench too
well instructed with her Ladies will, went and found out the Knight before he
was fully ready, and making a very low obeisance unto him, she said: Brave
Warrior, my Mistress meeting with no recompense worthy of your invincible
courage, has commanded me to present you this laurel, with a certain
assurance of more if you be willing to deserve it. This present proceeding from
the hand of so fair a Queen, answered he, much exceeds my expectation; but I
will strive to render her greater services, that she may not repent her of her
liberality: please you then to return her my humble thanks, and to tell her,
that I will most charily keep this laurel for her sake, and that she shall
never be willing to employ me, but that she shall find me very readily disposed
to obey her commandments. The damsel returning with this so favorable an
answer, gave the Queen unspeakable content, who finding it according to her
desire, trickt up her self with all the art she possibly could use to make her
appear more beautiful; and indeed she went forth so curiously dressed, that she
seemed not to be the same she was the day before. The sacrifices done, the King
after a short dinner was placed at a window with Rozalmond, and the Queen hard
by at another; but unable to endure the esloignment of her Knight, she turned
to the King, and with a grace that could give no suspicion, she said unto him:
Sir, this Knight was not born for you alone, lend him me a little that he may
inform me which are the valiantest Knights amongst our Courtiers. In good faith
little one, answered the King, your request is so reasonable, that I am willing
to quit his company, though I very much desire it, for to give you
satisfaction. Wherefore go, said he, deer friend, and content the curiosity of
this woman. Whereupon Rozalmond making a very low obeisance unto him, went to
the Queens window, who seeing him so near her, could not choose but change
color, being much perplexed in that she knew not how to discover her thoughts
unto him, at length vanquished by her passion, she said pointing to the
comabttants: Perceive you not, Sir, how our Courtiers blows are not delivered
with so good a grace as they parted from your hand; I considered yesterday your
address, the admirable strength of your arm, and I wondered how the Gods could
impart so much force to a mortal wight, but I was no lesle displeased, when I
saw that insolent Giant arrive, my blood congealed in my veins, and the fear I
had of your danger, left me neither color nor motion, beholding you resolved
for the combat. Madam, answered he, these were the effects of the goodness of
your sweet disposition, which made you doubt the loss of that which is yours.
Mine, said she, O Gods! that this speech were true, I should then think my self
far happier then I am. Madam, said he, I cannot believe that ever you had any
just cause hitherto to charge me with disobeing your commands. I do not accuse
you, my Knight answered she, but we will talk of this another time, for this is
not a place proper for it; well, what is your opinion of these Knights? That
they combat bravely, said he, but those that questionles will carry away the
honor of the turnament, are they which maintained the justs yesterday; for see
you not how their enemies are in disorder, and that they had got on the better
part of the field. Their blows are stronger then the others, their address
greater, and their fight more lively. Heerwith Count Folsuc having overthrown
the adverse chief, the rest were chased out of the field, and the turnament
ended with exceeding content to the King, who approaching the Queen, said unto
her: Now Madam, will you render me this Knight again? It is equal, said she,
that you should have him in your turn; but let me not live, I had taken no
great pleasure in the sight if he had not let me understand the valor of these
Knights, more by discourse, then by that which I observed. The King laughing
heerat took the Knight by the hand, and led him to walk in a gallery, where he
entertained him till supper, which was not long; for the King feeling his old
indisposition, withdrew suddenly, to the extreme grief of some Courtiers, and
infinite content to the Queen, who not to lose this opportunity, sent Rozalmond
word, that she would speak with him.

This Knight knowing but too well by her former speeches whereto her purpose
tended, would not willingly have been present with her in a place, which might
favor her design; howbeit, not daring to refuse, he followed the damsel, and
beholding the Queen alone sitting on her beds feet, he advanced very modestly,
and with a grace able to strike any heart in love, he wished her a good night.
It will be the sweetest, answered she, so as you will correspond to my desire:
Knight, I love you, and all the resistance I could make was not able to
preserve me from the charms of your so excellent parts, I am compelled to
blush, but I find so much excuse for my fault, that I can speak this without
shame; you see an effect of your merit, and not of my weakness, as
peradventure you may conceive. Think of the favor is presented to you, and be
not precipitious in your answer; but first consider, that it is a Queen which
entreats you, a woman fair enough to enamour a God, and one that it may be
loves you more then all the world besides. Madam, said he, with a confident
countenance, pardon me, I beseech you, if I answer otherwise then you desire, I
should commit many irreproveable faults in this action, I should be a traitor,
and unworthy the favors which the King has conferred on me, I should incur
assured death if ever it were known, as well it might be by any the least
accident, I should wrong you in stead of honoring and serving you, I should
incense the Gods, who are grievous punishers of adulteries, and should lose
that good opinion which your people have of me, who cannot believe that I am
capable of so great a wickedness. Madam, make some other use of me, and do not
ruin me under color of loving me; the pleasure you desire, is so soon past,
that we are not to offend for so momentany a delight; let us show our
government then, in commanding over our selves therein; Madam, I beseech you,
said he, falling on his knees, force your self so far, as to desire the
contrary of that which you demand, and do not think that it is out of
ingratitude that I give you this good counsel, I had too much understanding
not to acknowledge the honor you do me, but you are also to consider, that I
have more respect and fidelity to your service, then to undo you in stead of
giving you content. Your reasons, said she, with a countenance that testified
her displeasure, are so weak, that not taking them in good payment, I will
study how I may clear my self otherwise out of these toiles, wherefore get you
gone, and remember how much you have neglected me to day. Whereupon, Rozalmond
with a most humble obeisance departing, retired to his chamber, extremely vexed
at that which had past; and resolving not to stay long in that Court, he got
him to bed, where after he had made a thousand turns, with strange
unquietness, he slept till the next day; when as he had such a good morrow, as
shall be related in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXXV. The Queen of Florertan incensed with Rozalmonds refusal, would
have caused him to be murdered, the mavelous slaughter which he makes of his
enemies, and his departure from Court.
WHat will not the neglect of a woman's affections do? It ordinarily fills her
heart with anger, her mind with rage, and disposes all her actions to murder,
whereof we have a world of examples in antiquity; and not to go so far, we see
our own times full of accidents, which the madness of women in that kind has
rendered most tragical. This incensed Queen seeing her Knight gone, at first
had recourse unto her tears, but thinking that unprofitable, and unfit for the
resentment of an offense so great, she wiped her eyes, and walking up and down
very fast in her chamber, she said: Shall I be so simple as to afflict my self
thus for one that is ungrateful? Nay rather let me remember that his refusal
obliges me to greater matters? I must seek his death with more passion then
ever I have done his caresses; show that it is not a Queen entreating, but
revenging; a Lover languishing in expectation of her desire, but a woman that
receives not an affront without a home resentment of it; and that will make it
appear that dispite has more power in her soul, then all the flames of a
childish God. Whereupon causing one to be sent for, whose wicked disposition
she very well knew, she gave him a round sum of money, and enjoined him to
surprise and stab the Knight of the Roses the next day, wheresoever he could
meet with him. Madam, said this cursed wretch, I do not desire to know what
cause of displeasure you have against him; suffices it that I go upon your
commandment; his last howr is at hand, and I assure your Majesty that you shall
have the satisfaction you require, I the glory of serving you faithfully, and
he the punishment which he has deserved; for I have those that will help to do
the feat. Heerwith he departed the chamber, leaving the Queen ready to go to
bed, wherein she was no sooner laid, but the Secretary of her affections, who
more advisedly considered the event of things, went directly to Rozalmonds
chamber, where finding his Squire at the door, she advertised him of the
mischief was preparing for his Master. Gentlewoman, answered Artander softly,
my master is very much indebted to your pity, and his condition is not so poor,
but that you may expect more good from him in a day, then your mistress can do
you in all your life; but believe it, if any man dare attempt him upon this
occasion, he shall not so easily escape, as he imagins. I shall acquaint him
with the business, and take my word it shall never be known that you discovered
it. Saying so, he went into his chamber after he had made the outter door sure,
and arising by break of day he laid his masters arms upon the table, which
observed by Rozalmond that slept not, he asked him what he did. Why preparing,
answered he, for your departure, because you cannot stay longer here, without
apparent danger of your life. Then he declared, how the Queen would have him
killed, and that the Captain of her Guard had undertaken to do it. Now by my
life, said Rozalmond, I could never have believed that a woman could have been
so ^urious, and that neglect could have carried her to such tragical actions;
but since it is so, I must prevent it as I may: Come help me up, and then go
and see my horses be ready against such time as I have taken my leave of the
King. Whereupon, being wholly armed, and descending into the Palace Courtyard,
for to bid Clerastes and his beautiful Carinda farewell, he met with him that
sought for him, and seconded by threescore men, assailed our Knight; who having
drawn his sword, discharged his first blow upon the Captain, knowing him to be
the author of the disorder, and he struck him so dangerously, that he divided
his head in twain; and from thence, putting himself amongst the rest, he
scattered them in a strange manner. The noise increasing, the whole Court was
in an uproar, and every man rose to see what the matter was; Clerastes, whose
lodging was not far off, looked also out of his window, and perceiving his
friend in such danger, he presently armed himself, and went forth with
diligence to his succor, where finding this troop to be the Queens Guard, he
cried to them: Rogues, how dare you assault this Knight? By my life, I Will have
you all hanged; but they neither regarding him, nor his words, he joined
himself to the valiant Knight of the Roses, that seemed a thunderbolt amongst
these rascals; whereof, he laid twenty three dead on the ground: and seconding
him with a mavelous courage, three parts of this multitude was diminished;
when as the King, being advertised of this hurly burly, descended in his
nightgown, and commanded a surcease. At his presence every one withdrew, and
he going to the Knight of the Roses, demanded of him the cause of this
quarrel. Sir, said he, you may well imagine that I could not be the author of
it, being a stranger, who durst not be so hardy, as foolishly to fight with
your subjects, had it not been to defend my life; but the Law permitting us,
without any respect, to kill such as endeavor to murder us, I hope your
majesty will not be offended at their deaths: I never saw them before to my
knowledge, so that having done them no displeasure, I wonder what should move
them to go about to take away my life. I remembered the last night that I had
engaged my self for the execution of an adventure, to the performance whereof,
being resolved to go, and making account to depart as soon as your Majesty had
been stirring, and that I had received the honor of your commandments, as I
was to take my leave of Clerastes, all these folks environed me with their
swords drawn, charged me most furiously, without saying wherefore, Sir, we bear
arms for our own preservation, and am sorry that I have made use of them
against such as appertain unto you; but your Highness knows, as I said even
now, that it is lawful to repel force with force; in which regard, I hope
your Majesty will not take it ill, that I have saved my self by their loss.
Not I, said the King, but by the faith of a Prince am well pleased with that
you have done; and to make this good to you, I will hang up all those which
your fury has left alive, for I will have your person as much respected here
as mine own, nor has Clerastes ever done me such service as now, in succouring
you, though you had no great no need of it. Sir, said Clerastes, being so
infinitely obliged to this Knight, and knowing that your Majesty loves him, I
armed my self in this sort, for to run his fortune: wherein, if I have done any
thing against the respect which I ow to your service, by laying hands on such
as belong to the Queen, I humbly beseech your pardon. No, no, said the King,
you have done me a singular pleasure in it; but come, let us go to my chamber,
in the mean time let these gallants be carried to prison, for to teach them not
to undertake any thing, but by order. Sir, said Rozalmond, I am ready to
depart, please it your Majesty to do me the honor that I may receive your
commandments. Now on my faith, answered the King, this sudden departure of
yours troubles me; howbeit, I will not oppose your designs, but whenever you
think good to come and see us, you shall always have an absolute power here.
Your Majesty's most humble servant, said Rozalmond, has never deserved this
grace; so kissing his hand, he waited on him to his chamber door, where making
another low obeisance, he returned with Claristes, for go and take his leave of
Carinda, never speaking so much as a word of the cause of his desloignment,
though he were much entreated to it. These lovers shed tears at the departure
of this Knight, but it was nothing in regard of the Queen, who bursting with
spite to see things fall out otherwise then she desired, lamented, railed on
Rozalmond, and was even mad with rage; nevertheles, being advised by her
Secretary, to make no show at all of any displeasure for the departure of this
brave warrior, lest thereby her love, together with her malice, might be
discovered, she forbear weeping, and setting a modest countenance on the
matter, and showing little alteration, she wisely covered that which was
observed, with a seeming disposition; so letting this Knight go, of whom she
was much more fond then before, sending every where to seek him, with excuses
of all that was past, and comforting her self, with the hope, that upon the
receipt of her letters, his mind would alter, and and that one day she should
enjoy him, she remained better contented then this accident seemed to permit.

CHAP. XXXVI. Rozalmond delivers Basiliana from the power of Dramant, leaves
her in despair, for that he would not yield unto her desires: incounters
Alcidamant, with whom he has again a dangerous combat, with with the end
thereof.
THis while our Knight thinking on the mischief which the fury of an incensed
woman produces, esloigned himself by little and little from the City, and
traveled till noon without the encountering of any thing worthy his
undertaking; but espying a Castle somewhat far off, he took his way to it, with
a resolution to refresh himself there, if he found the Master thereof so
courteous as to entertain him: riding then an easy pace, and being within a
slight shoot of it, he perceived two peasants running from thence, that would
by no entreaty of his, be persuaded to stay and tell him the occasion of that
their hasty slight: This behavior of theirs made him judge, that there was
something more then ordinary to do there within, and indeed being entered into
the base court, he found the great gate of the place shut, over the which was a
reasonable handsome Gentlewoman, who having descried him, said to him with
abundance of tears: Sir, if there be any valor in you succor me, and suffer
not a wicked Knight, that has surprised me here, to obtain that by violence,
which by love he has never deserved. Gentlewoman, answered Rozalmond, cause
but this gate to be opened, and I will chastise him in such sort, that he shall
never attempt to force a woman again. Alas! said she, the gate is in the power
of mine enemies, and they guard it. If they will not open it at my request,
said Rozalmond, I Will set fire on it, and punish them rigorously for their
treason. Who you, said a big Knight, that instantly came forth, thinking to
destroy him easily being alone, who are you that so audaciously menaceth folks
whom you do not know? You have but ill luck to fall into the snares which were
not laid for you, and the pity which you seem to have of this woman, is like to
cost you your life; wherefore you may enter, if you have such a mind to it.
Rozalmond, that desired nothing else, presently alighting, past in, never
fearing the fury of five or six men, whom he beheld attending him with their
swords drawn, and placed himself in the midst of the Court, where these Knights
straightway invironing him, charged him on all sides: Five blows descended at
one instant upon him, three on his shield, and two on his head; but contemning
these attempts, as too weak to move him, he gave one of them, that would seem
to be more valiant then the rest, so rude a blow on his helmet, that he divided
his head in twain, the second he opened from the shoulder to the waste, and ran
the third quite through the body. This so sudden an execution astonished the rest
of his enemies, which would gladly have saved themselves by slight, had they
not been restrained by shame, and the presence of the big Knight, who enraged
at the defeat of the others, was newly advanced to second these; and with his
first stroke, which lighted on Rozalmonds head, he made his eyes to sparkle;
but he boasted not long of this advantage, for Rozalmond quickly recollecting
himself, discharged his sword with such violence on his shield, that not
resting there, it almost cut off half his left arm; whereat he grew so furious,
as he ran upon him thinking to get within him, and overthrow him that way; but
Rozalmond that fought with judgment, and that held it not safe to be seized
upon by his adversary, gave him such a thrust in the belly, that he fell down
stark dead in the place: The other three, to avoid these horrible blows, betook
them to flight, trusting more to their heels then totheir weapons; but it would
not serve their turns, for Rozalmond following them close, made two pieces of
the body of the first he overtook, and having cut off the seconds head, was
constrained to let the third escape, for to give ear unto the shrikes of a
woman that cried out for help: Hearing then a great noise above, he presently
got up the stairs, and found a man of a wild and terrible aspect, his color
swart, his eyes deep sunk into his head, the motions whereof were full of
horror and fear, his stature tall, but wonderfully misshapen, his countenance
furious, and his voice most dreadful; in his hands he bare a club,
wherewithal he had broken up one door, and was beginning to deal so with the
second, for to get into the chamber whither the Gentlewoman was fled; when as
Rozalmond approached, who wishing him to arm himself, was saluted by him with
so dangerous a blow, that he was comp^lled to set one knee to the ground, for
to save himself from falling. God refuse me, said he, arising in rage, if I use
any courtesy to thee that so ill deserves it: Whereupon, advancing his arm for
to make an end of him, another blow made him discharge his sword in vain;
whereat he was so transported, that getting within him, he struck him in that
horrible manner, with the pomell of his sword, on the forehead, as his brains
flew out, sending his soul to the devil. Worthy Sir, said the Gentlewoman,
having beheld the blow, you have freed the world even of the wickedst man that
was in all this Country, which is infinitely obliged to you for his death, and
my self more particularly, who had by this time lost my honor or my life, if
you had been less strong and valiant. I am exceeding glad, said Rozalmond,
that I have diverted so great a mischief; But how fell you into it? By my
disdain of this traitors affections, answered she, whom I would never suffer to
visit me, being persuaded that so il-favoured, loath some, and vicious a man
was uncap^ble of love, and most unworthy the affection of a woman of my
quality. He was indeed, said Rozalmond, too ugly, and you too fair, to have any
part in your good grace. Wherefore I was resolved to die, said she, and would
h^ve c^st my self out of the window headlong, before he should have satisfied
his beastly appetite upon me; for having been advertised that he had surprised
my house, I suddenly fled into these chambers upon the confidence of three
doors fast locked and barred upon me, with a purpose nevertheless, if it came
to the worft, to break mine own neck, and by an honorable death, prevent the
grief of enduring the approaches and violence of so misshapen a monster, who
has met with the justice of the Gods in his crime, and his defeat having
rendered me mistress again of my house, I assure you, Sir, that you may
absolutely command it. Whereupon, taking him by the hand, she led him into a
goodly chamber, where Artander having unarmed him, she caused him to put on a
rich cloak, which became him so well, that this Gentlewoman, named Basiliana,
could not behold him, without the feeling of a secret fire that began to
consume her heart. Good Gods, said she to her self, how happy were I if this
gallant Knight would love me as much as Dramant did, I should soon change my
mind, and would not forbid him to represent his passions unto me; I must
encourage him unto it then, and by my carriage let him know, that I will be
more facile to his desires, then I was to his whom he has slain, which I may
do without shame; for covering my boldness with the resentment I ow to his
assistance, I may make him believe, that my caresses are without artifice, and
so carry him insensibly to crave some more particular favors. This resolution
seeming proper to her for her contentment, and having presented him with
confects, she drew him to walk in the garden, whilst preparation was made for
supper, and burial for the dead bodies. Seeing her self alone with him, and in
the liberty to speak, she would fain have begun, and discovered her thoughts,
but bashfulnesse stopped her wouth as often as she opened it for that purpose;
ever and anon she changed color, and remaining silent, she left her eyes to
perform that office, whereby Rozalmond judged easily of her pain; but
remembering his Armazia, and not permitting his heart to conceive a thought to
the prejudice of his love, he made as though he understood not the mystery of
so great a silence, and entertained her with ordinary discourse; wherewithal
not being contented, it made her at last resolve to break the ice, and begin
this language to him, with a sigh: I have reason to rejoice at your arrival in
these parts, whereby your valor has preserved me; but withal, I am much
afraid, Sir, that it has drawn me out of one danger, to plunge me into another
far greater; for loving you more passionately then the small time of my
acquaintance with you will seem to permit, and doubting to find your
affections engaged to some happier beauty, I can expect no other then a
wretched death from the refusal you will make me of corresponding to my
desires: I have discovered this secret unto you, being unable to conceal it,
not with an opinion that you will despise what is so freely offered you, but to
o^lige you to be acknowledging for it: Weigh this well, Sir, for my life and
death is in your hands, and upon your answer depends all that I can hope for,
or fear in this world: This discourse ending with tears, whereby she thought to
move him unto pity, she would have fallen on her knees before him, but
Rozalmond not permitting it, s^id unto her.

Madam, the truth is your speech does not only amaze but much perplexe me, for
knowing how far the power of love does extend, I would gladly both give you
some relief, and yet not offend against mine own duty, but considering to what
I am obliged, I may not for many reasons satisfy your desire. The first is,
that I am forbidden by the religion which I hold to love any other woman but
her whom heaven has lawfully legitimated me, especially Idolaters as you are:
the second is, that I am not permitted as a Knight to spoil a woman of her
honor after I have nobly preserved it, since our order is chiefly instituted
for the preservation of Ladies; the third and most important of all is, that my
heart being engaged under the power of another that loves me, I may not to
please you deceive her, unless I will become a disloyal traitor; thus have I
dealt as freely with you as you have done with me, and letting you see what
cause I have to deny you, it must oblige you to clear me from all ingratitude:
the meekness of men I confess is great, but we are to do all things with
reason: and never so to subject our selves as not to be our own masters still.
What glory should I gain by the succor I have given you, if I should now undo
you, and what were you the better for escaping Dramants violence, if under the
color of my services I should do you the like wrong? Not a whit (Madam) nor
could your beauty that might seem to excuse me before the world leave me
without blame before heaven; I must be then more constant and you more
generous, to the end that the victory obtained over our own desires may settle
a quiet peace in our consciences. You have given me reasons, answered she with
a sad countenance, which are but so many shifts, for to excuse your self upon
the difference of our religions is nothing; men are generally borne for the
satisfaction of one another, and a single opinion ought not to be denied them
in that point; to say also that it were a dishonor for you to cast me away
after you have saved me from shipwreck is but a poor obligation: for it is not
to ruin but to preserve what is freely given you; that only and that alone
which you may insist upon is that you will not betray a Lady that truly loves
you, but thereunto likewise I answer, how you shall do her no wrong in loving
me at at this time, since my intention is not to deprive her absolutely of the
power which her merit has assuredly given her over you; nevertheless I will
not press you further, but leaving you to the liberty, either of contenting
me, or making me to dye, I will only beseech you to read in my eyes that which
I shall suffer in your denial. Whereupon going out of the garden she lead him
into a Parlor where the best of the meat was the delight she took in beholding
him, still observing some one perfection or other that rendered her love far
greater. Rozalmond, who feared that opportunity and the tears of this maid
might overcome him at length, withdrew to bed, being resolved to get him a way
the next morning by break of day, as he did, notwithstanding all the
lamentation and prayers of Basiliana to the contrary. Being departed thence he
rode three howrs in a great thick forest, out of which he was no sooner past
but he espied a Knight of so goodly a representation, that he stayed to observe
him, being marvellously well pleased with the grace wherewithal he sat his
horse; marking then attentively all the parts of his arms he perceived three
Palms amidst his shield, which gave him assurance that this was the Knight whom
he sought, and that he so much desired to be revenged of, as indeed it was
Alcidamant, who having been healed by the damsel that had carried him out of
Constantinople, and conducted by his adventures, was partly by land, and partly
by sea, arrived in the kingdom of Florertan; the sight of him renewed
Rozalmonds hatred, and incensed him in such sort, that not seeking for any
pretext of ataquing him, he cried to him to defend himself. In good faith, said
he, touching his lance, you have challenged me without cause, but I hope you
will be the first that shall repent it, so setting spurs to his horse, they met
in the middle of the course with such fury, that tumbling down both together,
they made two or three turns upon the grass, with so much displeasure, for
that they had never done the like before, that rising extremely transported
with choler, they drew their swords, and charged one another so cruelly, as
the meeting of two raging seas could not have made a more dreadful noise. Hate
animated Rozalmond, Alcidamant combated for glory, and employed his arm with so
much force, that the weight of his blows, equalled the violence of his enemies;
their shields fell away in pieces, lightening flew from their helmets, and as
often as their swords descended, the blood colored their armor; one gave a
downright blow, the other a thrust; briefly, they were so set upon one
another destruction, that their lives seemed to depend upon every stroke they
gave. Good God, said Rozalmond to himself, is this warrior come into the world
to bear away the honor of all the brave deeds of arms that are to be performed
in his time? Yes verily, for his match is not to be met withal; and
questionless he will carry the glory of being the best combatant in the world;
his blows do not only make me despair of the victory, but every minute
possesses me with a fear of death: What speak I of the fear of death, I am
resolved to vanquish, or to die? Charging then with more fury then before, he
left Alcidamant in the same mind, and the same discourse, very much afraid of
the end of this battle. Having entertained themselves five howrs together in
this manner, sometimes setting a knee, sometimes an hand to the ground,
knocking their chins against their breast, recoiling two or three steps back,
they forsook their swords, fell to grapsing with one another, and began a most
dangerous wrestling. Rozalmond seemed to have an advantage in his stature, but
Alcidamants forces being contracted in a more well set body, rendered their
encounter ^quall, they labored with all the strength and slight they had to
overthrow each other, but as towers they never wagged, unless it were to get
better footing. Some time being spent without any advantage to be disce^ned on
either part, they set to it so hard that they both fell together on the ground;
there they rouled up and down for a good space, sometimes above, and sometimes
beneath; but seeing that neither of them could prevail, they consented to part,
b^took them to their swords, and renewed their combat with more cruelty then
before; being equally wounded, and weary, they would fain have taken breath,
but to decline all advantage, neither of them would demand of the other to do
it; so that they continued charging, and hewing one another, when as they
perceived a damsel come gallopping in, who suddenly thrusting her self between
them, said: Knights, let me entreat one boon o^ you. I will never refuse you,
said Rozalmond, who knew her to be Cassandra. No more will I, said Alcidamant,
for I hold my self infinitely ind^bted to your assistance, at my entering into
the Castle of Serpents. Separate your selves then presently, said she, and each
one follow his adventures, till such time as heaven shall otherwise dispose of
your encounter again. Truly, said Rozalmond, although I was resolved to have
died, or have been revenged of the wrong that this Knight did me at
Constantinople, sharing the honor of the turnament, which before I had
obtained, yet at your request I will be gone. Therewith setting spurs to his
horse, as if he had been much vexed for that he had not given an end to this
combat, he rode away: And Alcidamant entered into the wood, after he had
received a box of salve from the damsel, who followed Rozalmond.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Knight of the Palms is conducted to the Island of Merodiana:
The memorable feats of arms that he performs for to enter into the city of
Alfart^, besieged by Fangomadan King of Licagena.
THese two incomparable warriors being separated in the manner before related,
Cassanara followed Rozalmond, who was in a mighty rage for that he could not
vanquish his enemy; and our Frenchman, crossing through the wood, entered into a
gentleman's house whom he met very opportunely, where being unarmed, his wounds
were visited by Arnides, who dressed them with a precious balm which Cassandra
had given him, and left him to his rest, till the next morning, when he arose
fresher, and better disposed then ever he was in all his life. Arming himself
then, and taking leave of his host, he mounted on his horse, which carried him
at random, until about noon he incountered a damsel, who having saluted him,
said unto him with a mavelous good grace: Sir Knight, what seek you for in
these parts? Such adventures as may give a man-glory, replied Alcidamant. If
that be the end of your travel, said she, you have met with a favorable
occasion to acquire honor, employing your arms for the service of a young
Princess, worthy no doubt of your succor, besieged within Alfarta, the
capital city of her Country, by the great King of Licagena, named Fangomadan,
who is like ere it be long to reduce her under his power, if the Gods do not in
the mean time assist her. She is fair beyond all excellence, of a most lovely
and sweet disposition, and this Giant is as ugly, and deformed, as can be
imagined; his bristled hair stares on his monstrous head, his eyes are hollow
and sunk into his very head, his nose is flat and a span long, his lips wan and
very huge, his beard ugly, and his whole shape dreadful; briefly, he is so
hideous, that the most confident even tremble to behold him, and yet he
persuades himself that he is amiable, and for such he presented himself before
this young Princess, in hope to make her inamoured of him: imagine, I pray,
whether there were not reason for it, since I cannot believe that the poorest
damsel in the world would subject her self to such a man for an Empire. It is
true that Crowns and Scepters have powerful charms in them, and that ambition
makes greatness to be far more regarded then content; but this incomparable
beauty, who more esteems her own satisfaction then all the Kingdoms of the
earth, refuses the Sovereignty of Licagena, and not to buy that honor with
the price of her liberty, she dismissed certain Ambassadors whom this Giant
had deputed for the marriage of him and her, which so enraged her, that he
vowed to be revenged of her neglect, add her State to his Crown, have that by
force which he sought for in love, and afterward put her to the horriblest
torments that can be devised by the wit of man. And indeed, he has but too
well began his revenge, for he has brought forty thousand men into the field,
the moity whereof are before Alf^r^^ with him, the rest under the conduct of a
Cousin of his, as wicked as himself, have already taken in the best places of
the Island of Merodiana (so is that Country called, whereof my Mistress bears
the name) and it is every howr expected that Arfarta will be taken with a
strange and bloody sl^ughter; for all the soldiers, consisting of four or five
thousand, and the inhabitants of the City are resolved to die for the
conservation of their liberty and Princess, that they would never accept of
the offers made unto them by Fangomadan, for the saving of their lives and
goods. So that if you have as much courage as your person does promise, you
will generously embrace the defense of her, and not suffer her to fall into the
hands of so beastly a creature. If her remedy lie in my power, said Alcidamant,
be assured, sweet heart, that this Giant shall not long boast of the cruelties
which he commits in her Country, for I am ready to go along with you, and
would to God we were now in the city. We may be there to morrow, said the
damsel, if we will but put our horses a little to it. So riding on, they
traveled till it was toward evening, when as they espied a big Knight a
little before them, who admiring the gallantry of Alcidamant, stayed for to
observe him more exactly. The damsel judging him by his demeanor to be
valiant, went and besought him to grant her one boon. I should be very sorry,
said he, to deny one of your merit, wherefore you may be confident to obtain
your desire. You shall accompany me then, said she, in an enterprise, whereunto
I am conducting this Knight, and joining your forces with his, you may make
them dreadful to the enemies of a young Princess likely to be disinherited.
Let us set forward when you please, said he, I will serve her most willingly,
and will not spare the little valor I may have for to deliver out of the
troubles she is in.

Whereupon the two Knights having saluted one another very court ously, the
new commer would feign have discoursed, but Alcidamant perceiving that he could
not well express himself, said unto him, Sir, I see you are a stranger, and
that in another language you might be better understood; wherefore be pleased
not to force your self, but speak as they do in your own country. I doubt,
said he, you will understand me worse: for the kingdom of France, whereof I am
native, is so remote from this place, that no man here is acquainted with the
language. Why? are you a Frenchman, said Alcidamant? Yes, answered he, and I
was never abroad, till that about some four or five months since, I put my
self to sea, with a purpose to travel through the world for to raise my glory
above my fortune, which is so mean, that it has furnished me with nothing but
the order of Knighthood, and the power to become great by my Arms. My name is
Troilus: Of the house whereof I am descended, I will not speak; having no other
eminent title, than that I am nobly born, my resolution is to cast my self into
the most difficile enterprises, and to atchieve honor by my valor. You cannot
choose, replied Alcidamant, but become great, and of estimation, being possessed
with so worthy a desire of doing bravely; and no doubt Fortune will be
constrained to look with a favorable eye upon you one day: therefore let
nothing discourage you, but persevere in your noble design. I have taken leave
to speak thus freely unto you, because I am a Frenchman as you are, and one
that infinitely desires to see you raised according to your merit. Worthy Sir,
said Troilus, then being extremely contented to understand that they were both
of one country, how much am I satisfied with this encounter of you, and what
an obligation has this Damsel laid upon me, for bringing us thus luckily
together. The acknowledgement is equal, said Alcidamant: for I so esteem of
your company, that I must needs share with you in the joy you take to meet with
me. These two warriors entertaining themselves in this manner with a great
deal of pleasing discourse, sometimes talking of the affairs of France,
sometimes of the adventures which they had encountered, passed away the night
before they were aware, and never alighted till about dinner time; when
desiring to refresh themselves a little in the house of a Forrester which they
found in the midst of a wood, they let their horses repose themselves whilst
they slept a matter of three or four hours; at the end whereof understanding
that they were not above five leagues from Alfarta, they took horse again, and
used such expedition, that they discovered both the City and the enemies Camp:
Whereupon the Damsel which conducted them, making a stand, said, that to
avoid the encounter of the enemies troops, they were to take a by way, which
she showed them, that would bring them, without danger, to the very walls
thereof: But Alcidamant desiring to signalize his coming with some memorable
act of valor, told her, that his reputation obliged him to enter honorably
into the town, that he was resolved to pass through the midst of so many
enemies; and that therefore she might go before, and desire the fair Merodiana
to cause four hundred horse to sally forth for to favor their retreat. This
maid by no means approving these Knights enterprise, debated very strongly with
them for to conduct them more safely; bu^ seeing her self importuned by
Alcidamant, she went away very covertly to the gates of the City; which as
soon as she was known, were instantly opened unto her: from whence she took her
way directly to the Court, where finding Merodiana in her chamber she fell on
her knees before her, and beseeching her to be of good cheer, desired her hands
to kiss for the good news she brought her. Alas Cistenia, said she with a
sorrowful countenance, I know not what thou will say; but the state whereunto
I am reduced, will not permit me to hope for much, howsoever, tell me, I
prithee, wherein consist these good news? In the arrival of two Knights,
answered Cistenia, the bravest and most valiant, in my opinion, upon the earth:
and that taking pity of the wrong which this tyrant does you, are come with a
resolution to suc^our you. How know thou that they are valiant, said
Merodiana, since thou never sawst them fight? I judge so by their brave
carriage, answered she; and I may well say, that you never beheld Knights of so
gallant a disposition, especially one of them that bears three Palms on his
Shield: He has a marvelous good face, an excellent shape, and a brave warlicke
countenance. These are parts indeed common to many men, said Merodiana, and if
the effect be answerable to the commendations thou give him, it may be I
shall find some consolation in his presence. But where have thou left them
Cistenia? Fast by the enemies Camp, answered she, resolved to make way through
it with their swords, and give you some proof of their valor before they enter
the town; and therefore do desire you to favor their retreat, by sending
forth four hundred Knights when the alarm shall begin, among the the enemies.
Good gods, said she, make way through the enemies camp! why thou amazest me,
Cistenia, either they are mad men, or valiant beyond expression. Do not think,
answered she, that this resolution of theirs proceeds from any rashness: among
all the qualities which recommend the Knight of the Palms, I have always
found him to be very discreet and advised, wherefore I imagine that he has
undertaken this only out of greatness of courage, which makes him despise all
common and inglorious designs. I know not what will become of this enterprise,
said Merodiana, but I will be most careful to secure their retreat; wherefore
cause some of my Commanders to come hither. Whereupon five or six of the chief
of her Court presenting themselves before her, she related unto them how two
stranger Knights purposed to assail the enemies camp: and therefore having
commanded them to sally forth with the number they had required, and to charge
the enemy at such time as they should perceive any uprore in their camp, she
retired into her cabinet, where she began to think of the speech which Cistenia
had used concerning the Knight of the Palms: Sometimes she figured unto
herself the beauty of his person; and then again presently imagined that she
saw him thundering amidst a squadron of armed forces, and found herself
possessed with I know not what kind of good will toward him, which converting
into love, made her infinitely desire the presence of this gallant Knight. If
he be worthy of me, said she, I am ready resolved to love him, and his services
are to attend their recompense in my favors. But what if the eminence of his
race should be responsible to my condition? without doubt I would marry him:
and say he should be poor of means, his virtue would supply that great default
of fortune. Well, he must be seen, and then time shall advise. Saying thus,
she called Cistenia to help her to bed, when as news was brought her, that the
enemies camp was all in a tumult; She trembled at this report: for she feared
that her Knight would not bring his enterprises to pass; howbeit taking better
heart, she commanded her C^ptains to fally forth, and put her head out of the
window, to see whether the Moon would discover her lover amongst a world of
fighting men. The noise increased, the camp was up in Arms, the soldiers ran
confusedly up and down: Some asked what quarter it was that the enemy had
assailed, and with what numbers, but no man could return any answer, they knew
not from whence their destruction came, and their terror was no less then if
twenty thousand men had fallen upon their trenches. The most part
notwithstanding being advertised that two Knights only were the cause of this
hurly-burly, they returned into their tents, laughing at their own fear, and
thinking themselves dishonored for having been frighted by the temerity of two
men. In the mean time the two invincible Knights bestowed their blows with such
fury, that all passed under the edge of their blades; they overthrew as many
enemies as presented themselves before them, cut off the arms of some, divided
the heads of others in pieces, made so great a havoc amongst them, that every
one feared their swords as if they had been thunderbolts, the ways were free,
none opposed their rage; and if any one durst stand before them, he was sure to
be slain but with one blow. Alcidamant many times observed that great Knight of
the Lions, (so was Troilus named) and seeing with what grace he massacred his
enemies, put the most confident to flight, commended him as one of the
valiant^st Gentlemen on the earth: but the other wondered at Alcidamants
dreadful blows, and thinking no mortal man was capable of so much force,
beheld him as a prodigy, and worthy of all marvel. The slaughter having
endured above two howrs, Merodiana's Knights appeared, and gave so furiously on
the enemy, that with the fear they were in, they laid above three hundred on
the earth. But the Giant who would not stir forth upon the first bruit,
arriving thereupon, Alcidamant and the Knight of the Lions put themselves in
the Rear, and causing a retreat to be sounded, sustained the brunt of his
troops, until such time as they had gotten to the walls, from whence, a
thousand Crosse-bows discharged such a multitude of shot upon the enemy, that
he was constrained to retire, extremely vexed to have been so beaten by two
Knights, who seeing themselves within the gates, demanded whether Merodiana
were withdrawn to bed. No answered Cistenia, that came forth to receive them
amidst the troops, she attends you in her chamber, for to begin the thanks
which she owes to your valor. So taking them by the hand, she conducted them
to the Court, where Alcidamant finding Merodiana much fairer then Cistenia had
described her, would have saluted her upon his knees; but she that through this
warlicke countenance was stricken with the flashes of an unresistable beauty,
stayed him from doing so, and said, Valiant Knight, in all right I ow that
respect unto you, if you would receive it from me: for being come to the
succor of an Orphan maid, which expected nothing but death to avoid the
violence of a wicked man, I cannot use too much submission for to honor you:
but being fully resolved to show my self more sensible of benefits, then
officious in my complements, I will leave it to another time, and in the mean
while do desire you to repose your self at leisure, after such painful
tratravell. Madam, said Alcidamant, I could dispute a long time with you upon
that point, where you would seem to be obliged when as you are not, and could
tell you, that having done nothing, whereunto I was not tied by the law of
Knighthood, I could not expect any thank for it, no more then this good Knight,
that accompanies me; but referring my reasons to such time as you shall be
pleased to take for to speak unto us, we humbly beseech you to accept of the
little service which we shall do you. You will every way remain invincible;
but, Sir, you must suffer me to say thus much in your presence, that I am
exceedingly indebted to your pity, and so be pleased, I pray you, to let me
show you the lodging where you shall lie: Then, taking him by the hand, she led
them to a very fair and rich chamber (notwithstanding all the entreaty the
Knights made her to the contrary) where having bid them good rest, she retired,
so much besides her self, that she walked up and down a long time without
speaking a word. Cistenia beholding her lost in this sort, and guessing from
whence it proceeded, said unto her: W^ll, Madam, what think you of these
Knights? More a thousand times then thou have reported of them, said she, and I
cannot but confess with grief, that the beauty and goodly presence of him
which carries the Palms, has made me in love. O Madam! said Cistenia, I swear
to you on my faith, that I divined as much before, and was confident that his
sight would beget a desire in you to enjoy him. I do not wonder at your
captivity, but it is to be well thought upon how you shall carry your self in
this case; for if you appear too facile, you will give him cause to despise
you; if too harsh, you will drive him away; so that your actions must test^fie
as much discretion as love. O you philosophize daintily! said Merodiana, but we
are not to speak of these matters now, for time and occasions are to dispose of
this business, come and let it alone, and help me to make me unready. Hereupon
she laid her down, hoping to take some rest, but her bed grew irksome to her,
and a world of thoughts entertained her till morning; when wearied with a
thousand turnings that she had made in the night, she fell fast asleep.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Knight of the Palms desires favors of Merodiana, she
promises to admit him into her bed he sets upon the enemies camp, and
returning victorious is received by her with a world of joy.
THE morning being far spent, Merodiana got up, and putting on far richer
apparel then she usually wore, for to appear with the more luster and grace in
the eyes of her lover, she entered into the presence, where the Knights
attended for her, and showed her self with such a majesticall beauty, that it
made Alcidamant wonder at her, which had never seen her bebefore. Alcidamant
beheld her with some apprehension of love, and advancing toward her, with
Troilus, he would have kissed her hand again; but seeing him so lovely, and
observing a most extraordinary sweetness in all his actions, she suddenly
withdrew her hand, and courteously returning his salute, she asked him how he
did. Exceeding well, Madam, answered he, and am ready with this Knight to go
and visit your enemies again, for to let them know that you no longer stand in
fear of them: I have caused the most part of your Captains to meet here, be
pleased to take their advice with ours, and permit us begin to serve you. The
time of their punishment is not yet come, replied she, and I shall desire you
not to stir from hence, until the succors which I expect from the Island of
Silvana be arrived; for if the chance of war should fall amiss on you, I am
sure that there would be no more hope left for me in the world; wherefore
refresh your selves a little after your travells past, and if you will be but
patient a while, we will find out entertainments to pass away the time
withal. Madam, answered Troilus, we are here to obey your commandments, and
you may as freely dispose of us as of the simplest soldier in the town;
howbeit, you would have done us a great deal of favor, if you would have
suffered us to have freed you instantly from the tyranny of your enemies, and
to have employed our arms for that effect. You shall have your desire, said
she, but we must take time for it. Discoursing in this manner, there entered a
soldier, that came from the enemies Camp, who recounting the slaughter which
the two Knights had made of four hundred seventy and two Knights, cut in pieces
by them as they past along, those excepted which fell upon the arrival of the
troops sent forth by Merodiana, amounting to the number of three hundred; as
also the rage Fangomadan was in, not so much for the loss, whereof he made no
great account, as for shame, that he was not able to arrest the fury of two men
alone, rejoiced all the Court, which admired the exceeding valor of these
Knights, whom every one beheld as a wonder. This talk continued until dinner
time; when having sumptuously feasted them, Merodiana fell into discourse of
the war, renewing the praises given unto these strangers; but desiring
extremely to talk in private with him of the Palms, she took him by the hand,
and leaning with him at a window which looked toward the enemies Camp, she
entertained him with such a grace, that she soon triumphed over his liberty,
giving him no less passion then she had affection. Fixing his eyes many times
upon hers, he observed most powerful charms in them, found wonders in the rest
of her face, and already feeling the violence of certain desires, he would fain
have discovered his disease to have gotten remedy for it; but thinking that
respect would advantage him more then boldness, he contained himself within
the bounds of modesty, and was contented to speak with his eyes;
nevertheless, desiring to make use of opportunity, and lay some foundation for
his hopes, he took occasion when this Princess pointing to the enemies Camp,
said unto him, that those fields would be witnesses of his valor to the end of
the world; to answer her in this sort: If this small service does please you,
Madam, furnish me with means to do you greater, and make me the happiest man
living, by permitting me to fight with your enemies under the savor of your
commandments, and as your Knight. It were a crime to refuse you, said she,
smiling; wherefore I most willingly receive you: but think now what you oblige
your self unto, for you are no longer in your own power, all your desires being
hereafter to depend wholly upon mine. If I would have reserved any thing unto
my self, said he, Madam, I had not given you all; my obedience shall render you
as much content, as my self glory; and be assured, that I will never give you
cause to complain of me. Neither will I give you any, answered she, for to deny
me your services. Whereupon, Alcidamant taking her hands, kissed them a
thousand times with incredible delight, and had suffered himself to be
transported with the excess of his joy, if she had not on a sudden retired for
to take away all occasion of suspect. After that they met often, sometimes
publicly, sometimes in the walks, where our Frenchman discovering his passion
by his looks and sighs, begot an exceeding desire in her to relieve him, had
she not been retained by that bashfulnesse which ordinarily accomp^nies
maidens. Madam, said he ever and anon, I languish away, my heart is compassed
with a fire that consumes it, strange ^ancies intercept my sleep, my grief
grows greater and greater, and I die a thousand times a day, yet you are not
sensible of my sufferings, and harder then the rock you leave me in my torment,
not affording me the remedy I so much want. Could you be content to see me
lost, or to hear it said another day, that your rigor was the cause of my
death? No, Madam, it would be a grief to you, and when you should call to
mind, that the world could not give you a servant more faithfully yours, you
would lament to no purpose; attend not this repentance, I beseech you, let me
receive your grace before time or sorrow make me incapable of it, and
conferring more particular favors on me then hitherto you have done, make ^e
s^y that I am the happiest Knight living. Sweet heart, answered she, with a
smile, it troubles me exceedingly to hear you complain thus of me without a
cause, and would it were fitting for me to let you know, that I love you no
less then my self: But what can I do for you, and what would you hope for from
me? Do I refuse to hear the assurances which continually you give me of your
affections? Do I entreat you neglectfully, or can you think that my actions are
governed more by cruelty then honor? Questionless, if you be not blinded with
passion, you cannot choose but see that I ^o not want love, and you shall never
find my disposition guilty of ingratitu^e; be pacified then, I pray you, live
better satisfied for my sake, and ^^te^rupt not my content with your
unquietness. I desire, said he, to appear before you more contained; But alas!
Madam, my grief will not permit it, and spite of my teeth my looks must show
you what is in my heart. You say I have no cause to complain; have I not, think
you, when I may not see you, but in fear? You are always in the midst of your
Captains, how can I tell you then before them that my soul is all of a flame?
Your mind is continually carried away with the care of affairs that every
minute are presented unto you, what place can there be left then for a thought
of me? No, Madam, you scarce think of me at any time, and that is it which
makes me despair of all remedy. I acknowledge with you, that I never deserved
the grace which I demand, but you are the only cause of it, and the little
power which you have left me, has not permitted me to have cut your enemies
Camp already in pieces: if that be it you look for, Madam, keep me no longer
here, I will soon rid them away, and deliver you, though every soldier were
converted into a Giant.

What a misery is this, answered she, I thought I had obliged you to live wi^^
more content, by the assurance I have given you of my affection; but it ^^^ms
your impatience is thereby the more increased, and that the care which I take
to have you always in my sight, proves a trouble unto you. You say that it is
always in the presence of my Commanders: Do you hold it fit that I should deny
them access when they come to speak with me about my affairs? For my part I do
not, but am persuaded, that giving them occasion to talk to my disadvantage, I
should ruin that which I am raising for your glory; we are to carry our selves
more advisedly, and with better discretion, nevertheless I am resolved to
commit an error rather then discontent you. What is it you require of me? That
you would be pleased, said he, to grant me admittance into your chamber when
all the house is at rest, to the end I may discover my sufferings with that
liberty which a lover ought to have. That were too much, answered she, if I
loved you less; but relying on your virtue, I will be contented to grant it
you, so as you will presently swear unto me to attempt nothing but with leave.
That respect you always bear about you, said Alcidamant, wherefore, Madam, I
protest unto you, by the faith of a Knight, no way to offend you. Be ready then
for to morrow night, said Merodiana, and follow Cistenia when she comes for
you. Madam, said Alcidamant, kissing her hands, this is the happiest promise
that ever was made; howbeit I must beseech you to add yet something more to my
felicity. That I will, said she, provided that it do no way contravenne the
protestation you have made to be contained. No Madam, answered he: for my
request is, that you will render me worthy of this grace by the defeat of some
of your enemies; and that you will not hinder me from waking them to morrow
morning. I speak not this without reason, we came hither for your service, we
have enterprised nothing these three weeks that we have been here, your people
begin to lose the good opinion which they had of us, and some stick not to say,
that this course of ours is not correspondent to our great words. Moreover, I
should not find so much pleasure in the favor you purpose to do me, if I
should not appear before you like a generous and valiant Knight: Sweet Madam,
be carried by these considerations, to yield unto this entreaty of mine,
whereby you shall infinitely oblige me, and testify that you repose confidence
in me. I will not hinder you, said she, seeing my word is past; howbeit tempt
not Fortune, nor hazard your self too far, if you love me, but carefully
preserve your life, whereupon depends all the happiness of my days. This
discourse finishing with our Frenchmans infinite content, he assembled the
Captains, communicated to them his design; and finding them well disposed to
his mind, he chose out two thousand of the most resolute men, and commanded
them to be ready an howr before day, and so retiring with Troilus, he went to
take a little rest. This design running in his mind, he slept not long, but
arose, armed himself, put Troilus in the head of a thousand horse, caused him
to sally forth at one gate, and making a shorter cut, went and charged the
enemies with such fury, that being surprised, he made an horrible slaughter of
them before they had the leisure to put themselves in array. The first that he
encountered being dispatched, all the Camp was in an uprore, every place rang
with crying, Arm, arm: Here ran the soldiers to their Colors, there the
Knights called out for their horses; briefly, all was in confusion. In the mean
time Alcidamant gained ground, killed, massacred, cut off legs and arms, and
making large way to his Knights, overthrew tents and pavilions, putting the
whole Camp in such fear, that it was thought all had been lost. Time and
necessity having quickly ranged the enemy into order, the most part of the
army conducted by Fangomadan, went to fall upon Alcidamant, when a new uprore
began on the north side, the troops felt themselves charged in flank, and the
slaughter grew so great, that the foremost squadrons betook them to flight.
Fangomadan amazed with this surprisall, know not which way to turn himself,
finding the danger to be no less on the one side, then on the other: But being
a man of courage and experience, he presently drew out eight thousand men, and
sending them away under the leading of some of his most expert Commanders,
against the last comers, he marched with the rest to arrest the fury of our
Knight; when as he, being every way as wise as valiant, caused the retreat to
be sounded, thinking it not fit to attend the shock of this Squadron, and
retired into the town, maugre all that Fangomadan could do, who cursing Heaven
and Nature, carried himself so furiously, that not one of his favorites durst
come near him. He would have turned head for to be revenged of the others, whom
he saw yet in the field; but word being brought him, that they also were
retired, he entered into his tent with a protestation to overthrow all his Gods,
and never to suffer his enemies to be at rest; causing all things to be
prepared then that seemed necessary for an assault, he called his Captains
before him, and commanded them to die or take the Town, vowing with strange
menaces, to cut them in pieces which should recoile but a step back, and to
give extraordinary recompenses to such as should be valiant and courageous;
whereupon every man put himself in readiness to fight. But the Giant thinking
it fit to surprise his adversaries, as he had been surprised by them, forbore
all preparations till night, to the end the enemies should not be advertised of
his design: who in the mean time, little regarding his rage, made Bonfires for
joy of so glorious a victory, which having cost them but threescore and five
Knights, had laid two thousand and six hundred of the contrary part dead in the
place, with infinite contentment to the beautiful Merodiana, who received
these gallants with so much kindness, that they were almost ashamed of it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Alcidamant, amidst Merodiana's embraces, is drawn away by
Fangomadan, who assaulted the City: He sallies forth, and with Troilus his
assistance, puts all the enemies Camp into disorder.
THE day being spent in feasting and bonfires, to the general satisfaction of
all but Alcidamant, who thought every minute to be a tedious year, Merodiana
retired herself, and remembering the promise she had made her lover, dismissed
all her Ladies save only Cistenia, on whose fidelity she altogether relied,
and seeing herself alone, said unto her, Cistenia, being confident of thy
faith, I will discover a secret unto thee, which very much concerns me: The
Knight of the Palms importuned me yesterday with such a grace, that he made me
promise to receive him this night into my chamber, that so he might have the
liberty to deliver his passions more freely: wherefore I would have thee go and
see whether every body be at rest, that thou may fetch him hither. It were
fit then, said Cistenia, that you went to bed. That were a seemly thing indeed,
replied Merodiana, for me to entertain his discourse in bed; I Will but give him
the hearing for an howr, or two at the most: for a man may say enough in that
time, neither shall thou stir out of the chamber the while. O Madam, said
Cistenia, how you deceive your self, to think that a lover will be satisfied
with words, and let slip a favorable opportunity: you must make your account
otherwise, and resolve upon some free^ course. I think him to be virtuous, but
would I might not live, if he should be such a dastard, as to proceed no
further then you speak of, I would never look upon him with a good eye again.
Let me not be t^usted, for any thing I shall say, answered Merodiana, if my
promise be not limited with the condition, that he shall not attempt any thing
upon me without leave. I ve^^ly think so, said Cistenia, nevertheless I will
not believe that ^ver he will observe that respect unto you; which if he should,
you would not be very well pleased with it. Never blush for the matter, I pray
you, nor ^issemble to no purpose, place and occasion will be favorable to you,
make use of them as love shall advise you, and think that once lost, they are
not so easily recovered again, as also that neglect makes m^n oftentimes
repent. Go, go, said Merodiana laughing, I shall find him so modest, that it
will never come to that pass. By my faith, answered Cistenia, ^^ would be then
to your grief: howsoever let us leave off this discou^se, and get you to bed,
that I may go about my business. I think, said Merodiana* it will be best for
me to do so: for being at case, I shall not be so trouble^ with a pain that I
feel in my head already. Here is the beginning of my proph^si^, ^^^d Cistenia,
let me not live if the rest do not follow: Whereupon u^dressing her Mistress,
she put her hand upon her bre^sts, and in a wagg^sh manner said, O fortunate
Knight of the Palms, how should I envy thy happiness, were I a man? What a
content to feel these two delitious worlds? What bliss to kiss so delicate a
mouth? And what infinite felicity to be united to this body, the abstract of
all the beauties of the earth? The delights, Madam, which are prepared for him,
are preferrable to Empires; and were it in my power to change sex, I would
never do it, but only to enjoy for one day, such incomparable pleasures.
Merodiana not being able to forbear laughing, many times held her hand before
(...), as if she were ashamed to hear her talk so; but Cistenia knowing her
mind well enough, left her in her bed, and went to Alcidamant; who e^bracing
her, promised never to be ungrateful for so many services. Their chambers not
being far asunder, he was instantly in that of Merodiana; who seeing him come
with such a grace, was so moved, that one might easily perceive by her face
what her heart desired. Mine honor, said she unto him, forbad me to see you at
this time of night thus alone; but your virtue has prevailed with me:
wherefore sit down in this chair, and then we will talk with you at leisure.
Madam, answered he, kneeling down by her beds side, and beholding her with an
amorous eye, your command may always dispose of me, and I shall think my self
most happy to see you in any sort whatsoever: But, O God! if you would be
pleased to vouchsafe me a better place more near unto you, I should esteem my
glory to be far greater then the felicities of a Paradise. Do you remember your
promise, Knight, said she unto him? Yes, Madam, said he, I have sworn to
attempt nothing upon you; but you have not forbidden me from entreating you:
Consider me, I beseech you, in torment, near my happiness, and cannot enjoy
it, between hope and fear, and expecting either life or death from your answer.
Rise, Knight, said she, you have no less grace in delivering your passions,
then valor in vanquishing them that encounter you; and your parts have no
less power over me, then your arm has over mine enemies. I was resolved to
have conserved my self, but you have won me, and I am constrained to tell you,
that you may dispose of my bed as you please, I will not complain of the loss
of that which I hold most dear, so as your disloyalty give me no cause to do.
Never fear, said he, casting his doublet on the table, with an excess of
content: No, Madam, never fear that you shall see me sigh for another: you have
too many charms in your eyes for to leave me that liberty, and I too much sense
of the favor you do me. Saying so, he got in to bed to her, where their
embraces began with unspeakable delight; kisses succeeded words, feeling
followed kisses, and a thousand amorous wantonizing, to stir up their
spirits, that every minute furnished fresh pleasures. Five howrs being spent in
these delights, they were about to have given themselves new testimonies of
their loves, when Fortune desiring to cross their happiness a little, a great
noise was heard all over the City, and the confusion of certain voices, that
cried, Arm, arm, amazed them. Never believe me, said Alcid^mant, if our enemies
be not upon some enterprise, for to be quit with us: But I swear by your love,
(the most religious o^th I can make) that I will so chastise their insolence,
and make them pay interest for the wrong they do me, by ravishing me thus from
out of your arms. Whereupon having k^st her with a world of affection, he went
instantly out of her chamber with his clothes under his arm* and entering into
his own, he met Cistenia in her smock, coming out of her closet. Whence
come thou Cistenia, said he, marvelling to see her in that fashion? From
seeking a second, answered she: for your Squires gentle carriage having made me
as far in love with him as you are with my Lady, I thought it not amiss to
keep Sentinel with him. In good faith, said he laughing, I like this humor
well in thee; but go in presently to thy Mistr^sse, and desire her not to be
moved at this noise. Then being ready, he armed himself, and causing three or
four torches to be born before him, in regard the night was very dark, he
marched to the Market place, whither all the Knights repaired unto him; and
understanding the enemy was preparing to give an assault, he manned the walls
with good Soldiers, exhorting them to fear nothing, and commanding a thousand
horse to be ready upon all occasions, he presented himself the first upon the
Battlements; where perceiving that the enemy labored to fill up the ditch, the
more commodiously to plant their ladders, he caused the Archers to shoot:
wherewithal in a little time they slew so many, that the earth was covered
with them; nevertheless the Pioners doing their uttermost, filled up the
ditches, and gave their Companies means to advance: Whereupon a world of
ladders were instantly reared against the walls, and the Soldiers encouraged
by the threatenings and promises of the Giant, strived who could soonest mount
up, beginning a most dangerous fight.

Fangomadan not able to accuse his men, was almost distracted to see how fast
they tumbled down one in the neck of another; but desiring to bring them on
again by his example, he took a ladder, mounted on it, and presenting himself
on the battlements, grew dreadful to the defendants, who fearing his getting
into the City, gave present notice thereof to the valiant Knight of the Palms;
he forthwith making to the place, where the Giant slew all that he met withal,
discharged so mighty a blow on his head, that not able to abide the fury of it,
he was overthrown to the ground, and there no doubt he had been killed, had he
not fallen upon five or six of his Captains, who were getting up on the ladder
after him, and that were s^^fl^d under the weight of his body. This fall of his
might have discouraged him, had he had less rage, but rising up with a million
of execrations against his Gods, he re-mounted on the ladder, resolving to die,
or enter into the City: But Alcidamant leaving the Knight of the Lions to
oppose him, whilst Mar^diana's Captains defended other places, put himself in
the head of the thousand horse, which he had reserved for that purpose, sallied
forth at a back gate, and giving furiously on the enemies back, so disordered
them, that they began to betake themselves to flight with an horrible
slaughter, all the ladders being in the power of those of the City, with such
grief to Fangomadan, that he would have held himself happy to have been rid of
his life. The assault ceasing, then by this retreat Alcidamant returned
glorious, and was received with such applause, that the people seemed to have
no tongues but for to publish his valor and renown, which gave infinite
content to Mer^diana, who thought her self most fortunate in poss^ssing so
brave and valiant a Knight; and never blushing at her fault, received him, when
he came to the Court, with most extraordinary testimonies of love, which every
one ascribed to the acknowledgement wherein she stood engaged to his
assistance, and the valor he had shown in the fight, wherein there fell three
thousand and three hundred Knights, to the incredible terror of the adverse
troops, (who believed he was some God come down in favor of this Princess
right) so that the brandishing of his sword was more dreadful, then the
lightning which ordinarily precedes thunder. She could have found in her heart
to have kissed him before all the Commanders that environed him, and would
willingly have discharged him of his arms; but referring that office to the
night, she contained her self till every body was gone to rest, when as she
received him into her bed, where their pleasures were renewed with such
delight, that not able to express the thousandths part of it, I must leave it
to be imagined by those who at any time have enjoyed so much happiness.

CHAP. XL. Alcidamant comb^ts the King of Licagena, kills him, and seconded by
the succors of the Island of Silvana, gives so furiously on the enemy, that he
obtains the victory with incredible slaughter.
THE fury of Fangomadan giving no further fear to Merodiana, by reason of the
assurance which she took in the arms of her lover, her content was without
care, and he^ joy without any doubt. On the other side, Alcidamant mingling a
generous fire with the fl^mes of love, desired nothing more then occasion to
fight, that so he might equal his glory with the pleasures which he found in
the embraces of his Mistress: Disple^sed then that Fangomad^n reigned so long,
and that his arms should imbroil the affairs of a people, whom he could not
choose but love for his Ladies sake, he resolved to co^bat him hand to hand; and
to that end, going one day unto Merodiana for to undertake that business by
her permission, he was told that an H^rauld was come to p^^ley with the
Princess from Fangomadan. Let him be admitted, s^id Alcidamant, it may he
brings us good news. Whereupon, the H^^a^l^ entering into the hall, where
Merodiana sat, attended by the most part of her Captains, without whose advice
she would conclude nothing, he said unto her: Madam, the mighty King of
Licagena, my Lord, desiring to end this war, which depends either on his life,
or on the lives of two strange Knights that are here, he defies them both
toget^e^, and will make trial of his person against them, alleging that they
are traitors, that cunning is more familiar with them then force o^ valor,
and that they fight not like good Knights; further he desires, that this combat
may be performed under the walls of the City, to the end you may judge whether
he be not worthy of your love; he permits them to make choice of the arms, and
protests that he will reti^e with his army if he be vanquished, looking for no
harder condition from you, if he defeats them (as he makes no doubt) then that
you are to expect from the sense which he says he has of your neglect, or
rather of the violence of his passion. This speech wrought a strange confusion
in the mind of Merod^ana, who was not ignorant of Fangomadans forces, and that
for any thing in the world would not have exposed her lover to such danger, so
that she knew not what to answer; when as Alcidamant kneeling down, said unto
her: Madam, if my services be of any consideration with you, refuse me not, I
beseech you, one boon, the first that ever I have asked. Knight, said she,
exceedingly troubled, and guessing at his design, I grant it you whatsoever it
be; howbeit, think, I pray you, not only of your own, but of my peoples, and
particularly of my preservation. That is the only care I take, answered he,
and there is nothing so dear to me as your safety. Wherefore (addressing his
speech to the Herald) you may tell your Master, that I was resolved to free
this Country from his tyranny, and that I am infinitely glad he has furnished
me with the means to do it. I will encounter him to morrow under these walls,
with the arms common among good Knights; namely, the Lance and Sword, not with
a companion: for generous and valiant men never fight with advantage, but
single, and with courage enough to make him pay for the spoil which he has
made of this Princess territories. These words bravely pronounced, no less
amazed the enemy then the assistants, who knowing how prodigious the strength
of Fangomadan was, could hardly believe that any one man durst threaten him,
much less present himself before him; howbeit, seeing with what assurance
this valiant Knight spoke, and calling to mind what he had done in the passed
encounters, they beheld him as a wonder, the most part with pity, as if his
death had been fastened to the first blow he should receive from his enemy, and
others with some hope of good success. Merodiana being here with extremely
afflicted in her mind, stood a good while beholding him with an eye that
sufficiently testified the trouble she was in; but doubting that thus she might
offend him, she set a good face on the matter, and speaking to the Herault,
said unto him, Friend, this Knight has given you your answer, which I avow;
and to show the confidence I have in him, I am contented (making no more
account of my estate then his life) that it be comprised within the hazard of
the combat, and that this Island be united to your Masters crown, if he prove
the victor; reserving nothing but the power to dispose of my self according to
mine own fancy, if my Knight be flain. The Herald departing herewith,
Alcidamant kneeled down again, and rendering a thousand thanks to Merodiana for
her good opinion of him, he promised her, by Gods assistance, not to deceive
her hope. Going then to his chamber for to visit his arms, he ^aw a Damsel
enter with a Dwarf, carrying a trunk on his shoulder, who making him a very
low reverence, said, Brave warrior, the learned Nerea, who loves you well,
knowing what is to betide you in your enterprises, has commanded me to give
you this armor, and to tell you, that you should not be troubled for the loss
of the Arms which she caused to be brought in to you in the wood where you were
made Knight, your former combats have made them in case to do you but small
service in the business you have now in hand, which has induced her to
furnish you with these new ones. This is not the first favor she has done me,
said Alcidamant, having no way obliged her thereunto: but you may assure her,
she may dispose of me when or however she pleases. Whereupon, having received
from the Dwarf a green cuirasse, set all over with double hearts, wherein
appeared an A and a T, an helmet of the same, the richest that could be, and a
shield whereon were three Palms, as in the other, he was better pleased then if
he had obtained a Kingdom; howbeit, he marvelled to see them so thin and
light: whereat the Damsel smiling, said unto him, Sir, never wonder at that:
for my Mistress has caused them to be made so of purpose, that you may fight
with the less pain and more ease. But if you dare not credit my words, make
trial of them your self, and see if the strength of your arm and the goodness
of your sword can open them. Here with she vanished away leaving Merodiana no
less amazed then contented; who finding herself at night with her Knight,
could not forbear shedding of some tears at the remembrance of the danger
wherein he was to be the next day: Whereupon our Frenchman taking occasion to
carresse her, told her, that she was not to afflict her self so, nor consider
the disproportion of his body, and that of his enemy, that virtue consisting in
courage rather then in the largeness of limbs, she was not to doubt, but that
love would furnish him with new forces, seeing her life and welfare were in
question. Comforting her thus with sufficient strong reasons, he rendered her
fearlesse, and her hope greater. The time which he could stay with her, being
sweetly past away, he retired to his chamber, and slept two howrs; at the end
whereof the Sun growing somewhat high, he arose, armed himself with his rich
armor, wherein he seemed a Mars: and going to take horse, he was told, that
the forces of the Island of Silvana, amounting to six thousand choice Knights,
were arrived. New occasions, said he, then speaking to the Captains that
followed him, must have new resolutions: this supply comes very opportunely,
and not to let them cool, put them presently in battle array with four thousand
of ours, the rest shall serve to guard the walls, with the inhabitants; but be
sure to commence no fight till the combat between Fangomadan and me be ended;
my companion will take care to dispose of you as you should be. Herewith the
Knight of the Lions being particularly advertised of his design, gave his
Lance that he carried in honor to his Squire, and letting him go, instantly
ordained that which was to be done, and put ten thousand men in order after he
had given notice thereof to Merodiana, who being richly attired, was already on
the walls, for to encourage her lover, and be judge of his valor. I am
resolved, said she, when she was acquainted with the business, in all things to
follow the counsel of the valiant Knight of the Palms; therefore let his
command be executed. The Knight of the Lions seeing his men disposed, and being
very well satisfied with this answer, went out to behold the combat of his
companion; who finding the Giant in the Lists, met him so roughly with his
Lance, that he made him ^lie to the ground, himself remaining somewhat
astonished with the encounter. The Giant seeing himself overthrown, contrary to
his expectation, rose sooner then could be imagined of so huge a mass of
flesh, and drawing out a great and weighty courtelax, struck such furious blows
at his enemy, that the least of them had been able to have cut him asunder, if
he had received it; but having avoided them with an admirable dexterity, he
charged him so bravely both with point and edge, that he amazed both the Armies.

The Giant stormed exceedingly for that he could not fasten one stroke on his
adversary; and casting a thick smoke out of the visor of his helmet, he hindered
himself from seeing where to place his blows: whereas Alcidamant, that fought
with judgment, spent not a minute unprofitably. The first fury of these
warriors having endured above two howrs, the place was covered with the Giants
Arms, which went to pieces whenever the rich sword of his enemy fell upon
them: the blood trickled down from three or four parts of his body; and that
which carried his choler to the highest degree of rage, was, that his
adversaries armor appeared entire. Merodiana beheld this combat with strange
motions; if the Giants courtelax were aloft, she feared the violence of it, and
she rejoiced when she saw it light without effect; she considered the valor of
her Knight, admired his agility in saving himself from his enemies sword,
wondered at the force of the blows which he gave; and above all, took extreme
pleasure in the grace of his fight. Am I not very happy, said she to her self,
to enjoy a Knight the bravest of all that live; and is it not exceeding glory
for me to triumph over him, under whom the strongest Giants of the earth are
constrained to bow? Yes, without doubt, and I do not repent the giving of him
that which he has nobly gotten: would to God Fangomadan were dispatched out of
the way, that my content might be perfect, I would then embrace this gallant
warrior, and in despite of detraction declare before all, that I love him
infinitely. Entertaining her self with these thoughts, she fixed her eyes upon
him, and perceiving the Giant to be more unweldy, and her lover far abler, as
she conceived, then at the beginning of the combat, she was transported with
excess of joy. This while Alcidamant pursued his advantage, charged his enemy
more furiously then before; and observing that Merodiana beheld him, accused
himself for being so long defeating a man in the presence of her, whose favors
had made him most happy. Vexed then then to see the victory so long disputed, he
took his sword in both his hands, and letting it fall terribly on his enemies
shield, he so astonished him, that he made him reel three or four steps
backward: whereupon taking his advantage, he redoubled such a dangerous blow on
his head, that he cleft it in twain, to the unspeakable contentment of
Merodiana and her subjects, who seeing the good Knight of the Lions in the head
of their troops, set forth in good array, and following the Conqueror of the
Giant, who made them way with his sword, they fell so furiously upon the
enemies, amazed with the death of their master, that they slew above two
thousand at the first bout, the rest betook themselves instantly to flight;
where the slaughter was so great, that of seventeen thousand, there escaped not
fully two hundred, who got to the Army of Fangomadans cousin, relating unto
him the absolute defeature of the other forces, with the death of the King;
which put him into such a rage, that drawing all the garrisons out of the
strong places which he held, into one body of an Army, he resolved to affront
the Conquerours, and in their overthrow, revenge the loss of his companions.
Advancing then whilst the two strangers refreshed themselves with the Army,
which commended them to the skies, and especially him of the Palms, whom they
would fain have adored, if he would have permitted it; he presented himself
three days after before Alfarta, where the fight commencing by light
skirmishes, grew so hot upon the arrival of the two invincible warriors, who
were accompanied with eight hundred horse, that they came to a general
battle; in the which the army of these new enemies, greater by the half then
the former, were all cut in pieces by the exceeding valor of Alcidamant and
his companion, who thundering wheresoever they went, assured their soldiers,
made them fight without fear, and so terrified their adversaries, that they
were dead before the swords of these lightnings of war fell upon them. The
enemies being in this manner utterly defeated, the whole Island reverted to the
obedience of the fairest Merodiana; who daily found out new entertainments for
her lover: and having no other care but to please him, held her self the
happiest Princess of the world.

CHAP. XLI. The Infanta Silvana falls in love with Alcidamant, goes from her
Island to Merodiana for to see him, and having found him a hunting, she enjoyes
him by a notable trick.
THE people breathing now in peace after so many troubles, the Companies were
discharged, and especially those of the Island of Silvana, who giving account to
their Mistress of the success of the war, so published the praises of the
Knight of the Palms, and raised his valor to so high a pitch, that the f^ir
Silvana, sister to Merodiana, admiring him, began to seek the same effects
which they endure which are in love. She made them describe unto her his
stature, the proportion of his body, his countenance, the color of his hair,
and the beauty of his face; and considering that Nature had made him every way
complete, she her self kindled the fire which by little and little consumed
her; but passing to the desire for to know what marvells he had done for her
sister, she caused them to recount unto her the manner of his fight, his
courage, his skill, his blows, how he had most valiantly slain the King of
Licagena, and put his armies to flight at the only sight of his arms, which
fully imprinted the character of love in her heart, and made her care for
nothing so much as to find out some occasion to see him, and render him
enamoured of her. O Gods, said she, how accomplished is this knight, if he have
all those parts which report confers upon him! Have I not reason to wish I may
enjoy him? No question I have, he is worthy of my favors, and deserves to be
made partaker of my bed, if he will accept of it. But alas! I very much fear my
sister has already prevented me of that fortune, and unable to resist what I
suffer, that she has given her self to him, bereaving me of the means so to
do. Yes, yes, I doubt it is but too true, for this Knight being every way so
complete, who could forbear loving him? Questionless my sister does enjoy him,
and I am out of hope to see the end of my desires successful; howbeit, the
dice are cast, I am no longer mine own, and this consideration must not stay my
designs; if my sister love him, I may love him too, enjoy him as she does, and
cover my desires with a pretended ignorance of their affections. This amorous
and jealous Princess, entertaining her self after this manner, in the
beginning of her passion, lived with strange unquietness, sometimes she
resolved to send a damsel unto him to desire him not refuse her his succor,
for the delivering of her Island from a dreadful monster, that rendered it
almost inhabitable; and then imagining that her sister would never permit him
to undertake that voyage, because she would not let him go out of her sight,
she was of another mind, and purposed to have him by some other wile; but not
meeting with any, that was not either too long for the impatience of her
desires, or too difficult for any good success she could hope from it, or too
hazardous for to endanger all, she could not draw any resolution out of such
contrariety of thoughts. At length having more affection then to undertake
nothing, she concluded to quit her Island, and to see him at her sisters, under
color of going to congratulate with her for the happy issue of so dangerous a
war, hoping there to find out some invention or other for to bring her design
to pass. Taking along with her then twelve Knights and six damsels, for she
had but an arm of the sea to cross over, she embarked her self, and within
four days after landed in her sisters Island, whom she would not acquaint with
her coming; but mounting upon a delicate nag, she rode along till she came to
a forest, near unto the which, causing certain pavillions to be pitched, she
resolved to pass away the night there. Walking then alone by her self in the
evening, and continually thinking on the means she might use for to bring her
business wisely about, she perceived a huntsman pass by, of whom she demanded
what news there was at Merodiana's Court. I can deliver you no better, answered
he, then that which is reported of the excellency of the Knight of the Palms,
whom it seems has a purpose to become Lord of this Country, whereunto our
Princess will not be much averse, as every one probably conjectures, for there
is nothing at this instant in the world which she regards so much, as the
content of this Knight, with whose conversation she is infinitely taken, she
leads him forth into the gardens and walks, where most of the trees carry marks
of their loves, in a million of characters, graven on their barks; and when the
heat of the day will not suffer them to walk, they withdraw into her chamber,
where the time is insensibly spent in the assurances which they interchangably
give of loving one another eternally. These words were so many mortal wounds
that renewed the grief and jealousy of Silvana, who saw apparent proofs of
that which she had always feared; she scratched her head, changed her color
every minute, many times bit her fingers for anger, and testified (if the
huntsman had well observed her actions) that this news touched her to the
quick; but he whose mind was altogether upon his discourse, went on thus:
Briefly, these so great familiarites induce us to believe that they are
resolved to make a marriage, in consideration whereof, we honor him already as
if he were our Master, carrying no less respect to his commandments, then to
those which come from Merodiana: And to witness the truth of that I say,
assure your self I would not walk thus with a purpose to lie all night in the
wood, if it were not to lodge him Deer which to morrow he means to hunt in this
Forest very early in the morning. But, Madam, time calls me away, wherefore
you must excuse me, if I break off thus abruptly. Silvana being better
satisfied with the conclusion of this discourse, then with the beginning, would
not stay him any longer, but returned to her pavillion; where being arrived,
she called one of her Damsels whom she favored most, unto her, and said,
Falerina (so was she named) out of the confidence which I repose in thee, I
come to impart a secret unto thee; wherein, without any confideration of the
importance of the matter, I would have thee to serve me, not according to thy
opinion, or as reason shall counsel thee, but according to my desire and
fancy. I am desperately in love with that brave Knight of the Palms, of whom
such wonders are reported of late: and whereas I have undertaken this voyage,
it was not as I gave out, to congratulate with my sister for her good success,
but to see him, and to dispose him to love me: to effect the which, a
favorable occasion presents it self, whereby it lies in thee to make me happy
if thou will. To morrow he is to hunt a Stag in this wood; but let us make him
take another way, and find out some invention to draw him hither, where, I
doubt not, but I shall with little diffieultie, obtain what I desire: for I
have beauty enough to make the most invincible man in the world to affect me.
And this may easily be done: for thou shall encounter him at his beginning to
hunt, thou shall humbly demand a boon of him, and withdrawing him from his
company, thou shall conduct him hither, where thou shall find me alone,
accompanied with none but Elania, whom I can dispose well enough to my
pleasure. For I will command my train to set forth by break of day, and attend
for me three leagues hence, and not to stir from that place, till they hear
further from me. Falerina amazed with this speech (for she had always observed
a great deal of modesty in her Mistresses actions) would willingly have replied
for to have reduced her to a better regard of her honor; but perceiving that
the venom had wrought its effect, and that her remedies would be to no
purpose, she promised her no less fidelity then diligence. Sleeping then but a
little, she arose with the day, and getting to horse, placed her self in the
way which the hunters were to take; where she had not continued half an howr,
but she discovered a troop of Gentlemen, before whom she presented her self,
and easily discerning the Knight of the Palms from the rest, she acosted him
with a very good grace, and said unto him, Noble Sir, I know not whether you be
as courteous as you are gallant. Gentlewoman, answered he with a smile, you
shall understand that better if you think good to make use of me. Follow me
then, replied she, and be pleased to exchange the pleasure of your hunting for
a greater adventure, this enterprise will take you up but for one day: and if
these Gentlemen be troubled with your departure, let this promise comfort them,
that they shall see you again to night, or to morrow at the furthest within
Alfarta. Knights cannot limit their return, said he, because they are ignorant
of what will betide them in their adventures; howbeit seeing you assure them of
my return by to morrow, I will not bid them farewell but till then: Whereupon
the Damsel leading the way, he followed her with a mavelous desire to know
whither he was conducted; nevertheless she would reveal nothing till she came
within sight of her Mistress pavillion. Here it is, said she, where you are to
enter for to make satisfaction concerning a wrong that you have done. At these
words the Knight alighting, and thinking that he was to fight, advanced with
his sword drawn, and his shield on his arm; but beholding in stead of enemies,
a most beautiful Lady, who carried a million of charms in her eyes, made a
stand, and being amazed, said unto her, Madam, I am conducted hither for your
service. Yes, said she, reaching him her hand, but not with an intent to make
you enter into combat with any: The commendations which the world gives you,
have begot an extreme desire in me to see you; and to that end I have left my
country, thoroughly satisfied in finding many more perfections in you, then
report delivered. Madam, answered he, you may commend me as you please; but
there is nothing in me which is not wholly at your service: And be assured,
that if I had known your mind, I would have gone to the utmost part of the
earth for to have found you out, rather then you should have taken the pains to
come hither. I shall think it well bestowed, replied she, so as you do not
prove ungrateful, and be not offended with my saying so, till you are
acquainted with my meaning. Sir, I love you, and all the considerations I could
bring for to contain me within the limits of modesty and my duty, have been too
weak against the force of your merits, which having deprived me of all power
over my self, have constrained me to come out of my State, to seek relief in
your pity,. It may be you will despise me, because I present my self thus unto
you; and you may make an ill construction of my carriage toward you: but if
you understand your self well, you will excuse my weakness. Say that I have
reason to love you, and not holding me immodest, will recompense my affection
with the like, as also give me just cause to publish, that you are the most
accomplished Knight that this day bears Arms. Alcidamant, to whom the like
encounters were sovereign favors, seeing such amiable beauty in his power,
did not so much as stand on the considerations which she brought, to render her
action the more allowable; but protesting in what great obligations he was
engaged to her favor, the more powerful in regard he had so little deserved
it, he disarmed himself with all the haste he could; and beginning his caresses
with a kiss, made her a woman to both their incredible contents. After a world
of dalliance, she declared unto him, how she was sister to Merodiana, and
expressing the fear she had, lest his long conversation with her sister, and
their privacie together, might keep him from affecting her, it had somewhat
troubled him, but that he remembered how an understanding lover seldom wants
cunning devices to palliate his designs. Assuring her then, with a thousand
oaths and promises, never to lose the memory of her favors, and to hold her
as dear, or dearer, then her sister, he past away the rest of that day, and the
night following with her, not so much as thinking how Merodiana would take his
absence, and found this content so pleasing, that it grieved him to be deprived
of it. Nevertheless, being constrained to consider what might follow of so
long a stay, he took his Arms, went a little beyond the village where Silvana
had commanded her train to abide, and placing himself under certain trees,
waited till he saw her appear: then advancing into the midst of the high way,
and desiring to give this his new Mistress some entertainment, he sent his
Squire to her Knights, for to tell them, that he would not permit them to pass
without breaking a Lance for their sakes whom they best loved in the world.
This message made the Knights to laugh: for they could not imagine that one man
alone could subdue them, and each of them strove for the first course, when as
one of Silvana's Damsels being got before the rest, returned suddenly to
acquaint them, that this Champion was the Knight of the Palms, so much
redoubted over all the country. By my faith, said then the forwardest of them,
we will not encounter him: for so should we be more foolhardy then he is
valiant. What, said Silvana, that much desired to see how far the valor of
this Knight extended, will none of you run against him? Yes that we will,
answered one, if you would take pleasure in our defeat. Your misfortune would
no way please me, said Silvana, but it would much content me to see whether
that be true which is so published of this Knight; and if you desire to oblige
me, run one course with him. I will obey you Madam, said he, though I am sure
before hand of a fall; howsoever it will be glory to me, that I have run
against the best Knight living: whereupon putting down his Bever, he advanced
toward Alcidamant, who encountered him so bravely, that he made him quit his
saddle, and cast him four or five paces of. I knew well enough, said he, rising
less hurt then was imagined, that I should give my fellows occasion to laugh;
and that I should not resist that incomparable force which is dreadful to the
stronggest Giants upon the earth; but I will be more charitable then they: for
I will let you know, that this Princess which you see, is sister to the
beautiful Merodiana, to the end you may not employ your Lance against her
Knights. You have reason, said Alcidamant, to believe that I will not run
against them, and if I had known you, I had not justed with you; and that you
may not complain of your fall, I am ready to repair that fault when you please.
Whereupon advancing toward the fair Silvana, he saluted her as though he had
never seen her before: and riding along by her, they took the way to Alfarta,
where the fairest Merodiana received them at the first very heartily, never
doubting of the prank which was played to her prejudice; but who can blind the
eyes of a lover? This Lady calling to mind the absence of her Knight, led away,
as she was informed, by a Damsel which was showed to her a little after,
presently suspected, not the matter as it was, but something near unto it,
insomuch that she observed their actions, and therein finding but too much
proof of their love, she grew so jealous, that she could not rest. On the other
side, Silvana was in the like perplexity: for seeing how coldly her Knight
spoke to her in the presence of Merodiana, and marking the amorous looks they
gave one another, it madded her; nevertheless, they concealed their thoughts,
and watched for more pregnant testimonies, to complain upon a sure ground; but
Alcidamant was so discreet, that he deceived them both. My dearest Knight, said
Merodiana sighing when she had him in bed, take it not ill, I pray you, if the
extremity of my passion constrains me to be a little jealous of you, you look
upon my sister with too affectionate an eye; and the care which you seem to
have of her service appears to me more then good will, she is amiable, you
deserve to be sought unto, what may I then think of your familiarity? Too much
I fear for my content; but if you will consider what you owe to so many
carresses which you have received from me, how I undo my self to oblige you,
that regard no slanderous tongue to give you satisfaction, and how I have
freely bestowed on you what was most dear unto me for to please you, I hope you
will not be my ruin, nor impart your embraces to another, seeing no man
partakes of my kisses, but will be pleased to let me only enjoy you, that
seeks for nothing save occasion how to delight you. These words finishing with
tears, made our Frenchman somewhat to repent, who seeking to excuse his fault,
covered it with the name of respect, represented that in regard she was her
sister, he was to carry himself fairly toward her, protesting that he had
never so much as a thought of that which she imagined, he somewhat pacified
her, and interrupted the course of her complaints; after which he was sure to
have the like of the fair Silvana. Dearest love, said she when she could speak
particularly to him. I have great cause to complain, my sister has all your
caresses, she has days to enjoy your company, whereas I have not minutes;
your eyes are always fixed on her, and I but a few glances; if you speak to
me, it is with too much respect, and too little love: what have I done to
deserve so cold an entertainment? or what have I not done to be more kindly
entreated? I have freely given my self to you, but alas! it may be your neglect
proceeds from thence. I have left my country for to see you, and yet I cannot
enjoy that, but another caresses makes you find no delight in my embraces. Now
I would fain know what is the cause of it, she has no advantage of me, we are
sisters, her beauty exceeds not mine (at leastwise I think so) I accompany my
kisses with as much Art as a woman can use, to render them more pleasing; love
you as much, or rather more then she does (for I know that all the affections
of the earth do not equal the violence of my flames) yet I must suffer whilst
another lives contented, and reaps the reward of my travels. Ah, this is great
injustice, carry less respect to persons, and be more equal. If you think
your self obliged by the consideration of your being here with her, shall not I
give you in the Island o^ Silvana the same pleasures which you find here? Yes,
my dearest, I will find out, if it be possible, far greater delights, and so
behave my self that you shall not repent your abandoning her for to follow me.
He that beholds a rock between two seas, sometimes beaten with the one, and
then again with the other, may figure out this Knight between these two
sisters, equally importuned with either of their complaints. He loved Merodiana
very much; Silvana's kisses were of no less power with him, her reasons moved
him, the others sighs found him not insensible, his heart was divided betwixt
them, and taking pleasure in Merodiana's caresses, he met with as much content
in those of her beautiful sister. At length this last speech which Silvana
made, had prevailed with him, had he not called to mind the resolution he had
taken to carry himself in such manner, as he would lose neither the one nor the
other of them. Returning then the same reasons, the same excuses, the same
dissembling, the same oaths, and the same caresses which he had used to
Merodiana, he somewhat appeased her displeasure; nevertheless he could not so
^emean himself, but that there remained so powerful a suspicion in the minds
of these sisters, as converting into jealousy, it made them odious one to
another, though they labored wisely ^o disguise their thoughts. If Merodiana
was alone, she presently imagined that her Knight was in her sisters arms. If
Silvana saw him not, she believed he was in private with her sister, they went
to one another chamber, and met oftentimes in the midway: they were sisters,
love made them secretly rivals. Merodiana observed all Silvanas actions,
Silvana had a continual desire to understand what her sister did; briefly, all
their motions were suspicions, their suspicions strong jealousies, and their
jealousies insupportable griefs. It is not a care of my honor, said Merodiana,
that induces my sister to watch me in this fashion, much less any excess of
affection to me: for I know her thoughts but too well, it must be then the
spite she bears me for crossing her desire; but why should I give entertainment
to a controller of my actions? she is amorous of my Knight, she loves him
passionatly, and would fain deprive me of him, but I will not endure her
boldness; and quietly desiring her to return unto her Island, I shall appear
rather an angered sister then an ill lover; howbeit I will wait a fit
opportunity, and in the mean time use some speeches to her that may make her
acknowledge her fault; but if she prove obstinate, we will part never to see
one another again as sisters; and love, who admits of no consideration, that
will have one regardlesse of times, persons, places, and conditions shall
authorize my resentment. Whilst she entertained her self in this manner,
Silvana did the like. I perceive well enough, said she to her self, that my
sister looks not upon me but with disdain, that she forbids this Knight to talk
with me, and that I expect nothing save displeasure: wherefore I resolve to
return home, howbeit if be possible, I will be accompanied with him, so shall I
be no longer crossed in my desires. He is courteous, he is obliged to me, he will
deny me nothing I shall demand of him: wherefore covering my design with the
pity I take of my people and countries, which every day fall to ruin by the
cruelty of a monster that continually destroys them, I will beseech him to
succor me, like a valiant and generous Knight; and if I can get him once out
of my sisters hands, I will never permit him to undertake so dangerous an
enterprise, but preserve him for my future contentment. Insisting then on this
resolution, as the best she could desire, she said unto him one day in the
presence of Merediana, who commended to every one the assistance which she had
received from him, Sir, you see how your benefits are acknowledged, that
praises are always in the mouths of such as are obliged, and generous Knights
do ordinarily find some recompense in the glory is given to their virtues: If
you had done any thing for me, I should speak of you as others do, and would
raise your name to heaven, holding the world unworthy to retain the greatness
of it. Madam, answered he, interrupting her there, the fault shall not be mine
if you have not the satisfaction to see me combat for your service; do but
furnish me with occasion, and you shall find me ready whenever you please. My
people, said she, afflicted by a cruel monster, reach out their hands unto
you; now advise with your self whether you will oblige me by succouring them.
Most willingly, Madam, answered he, and shall think my self most happy to serve
you in this occasion. We will depart then to morrow, replied she, in the mean
time take order for your journey. Merodiana hearing this discourse, and seeing
a departure resolved so soon, knew not what to say, she would have accused her
lover, but having very great testimonies of his affection, she laid all the
fault upon her sisters malice, whom she blamed in very plain terms, saying
that she ought not to precipitate the days of so brave a Knight, who could not
enter into that combat without apparent loss of his life; but Silvana resolved
the contrary, and caring for nothing but how to draw him from thence, made no
reckoning of her anger. All this night was bestowed in sighs and tears, and
Merodiana a thousand times cursed her sisters coming to see her. I will not let
you go to imminent death, said she, and notwithstanding any promise you have
made my sister, you shall not stir from hence, she is too impudent to be
obeyed, and I knew her coming too well for to leave her the liberty to put it
in practice: but if you be resolved to go with her, be confident that I will
follow you, and cross the pleasures which she expects, as much as she has
done my content. O God, Madam, said he, kissing her most amorously, do you make
doubt of my faith? now truly you do me infinite wrong, for so many oaths and
protestations as I have made to you, should, me thinks, remove this false
opinion out of your imagination, I must go, because I am obliged thereunto by my
promise; but Madam, be assured it shall be to return incontinently again, if I
happen to live after the combat which I purpose to enter into against the
Serpent; and to persuade you to believe what I say, behold your self in your
glass, then think upon Silvana, and you shall find that your beauties being
unlike, that she having less charms then you, less love, and less merit, I
shall never abandon you to follow her: Live contented in the expectation of my
return, and in the mean time permit me to embrace occasions that may acquire my
glory; so shall you testify a true affection to me, and oblige me to esteem my
self happy in your love. These so powerful reasons having mitigated, but not
defaced Merodiana's grief, she slept till morning, when giving him a farewell
kiss, he retired to arm himself, leaving her in tears and sorrow.

CHAP. XLII. The grief which the fairest Merodiana took at the departure of her
Knight, who went with her sister for to combat the monster, that ravagod the
the Island of Silvana, the loves of this Princess and the Knight, and the
danger wherein he found himself in the combat.
SIlvana departing with as much glory, as she left discontent in her sisters
Court, traveled a while between the Knight of the Palms, and him of the Lions,
entertaining him with a world of pleasing talk, howbeit, her passion making her
desire no other ear but her lovers, she many times went and spoke softly to
him, as if she were willing none else should hear her, which the gentle T^oilu^
perceiving, modestly withdrew himself, and left them to the liberty of their
actions and discourse. Then this amorous Lady, more openly showing the joy she
conceived for being freed from a concurrent in her love, rendered the length of
the way so short by a million of oaths to love him eternally, and by as many
complaints against her sisters jealousy, that he found himself almost out of
the wood, before he thought of being in it. The place representing to his
memory the pleasure which he had received at his first acquaintance with
Silvana, he would fain have stepped aside with her for to alight under some bush;
but conceiving that they could not blind the eyes of so many persons which
followed them, they traveled to the sea side, where a ship attended to
transport them over; howbeit, Silvana would not imbark this night, because she
knew she should not have the liberty aboard as in her tents; nevertheless, to
avoid all fear of discovery, she caused her train to be shipped, reserving no
body about her, but Falerina, Alderia, her Knight, and him of the Lions, who
having good intelligence with Falerina, made but one bed with her and the fair
Alderia, which was not more squemish then the other, whilst his companion took
up a place by Silvana's side. The night being spent with many more caresses and
kisses then I am able to deliver, the Knights armed themselves at break of day,
and seeing that a favorable gale solicited their departure, they took their
Ladies by the arm, and conveyed them aboard; whereupon, commanding the Master
to hoist sail, they began to cut the waves, which on a sudden swelling very
high, had exceedingly frighted the women, but that they were cheared with the
presence and speech of the Knights. Howbeit, the storm increasing, the noise of
the waters growing every minute more dreadful, and the night, which rendered
every thing full of horror, arriving thereupon, gave them new fears of
shipwreck; insomuch, that Silvana cast her self into Alcidamants arms, who
desiring to make use of the darkness, without any apprehension at all of the
tempest, he fell a kissing of her, laid his hand on her breasts, and finding
his spirit raised, he caressed her so sweetly, that she vowed afterward, she
never felt so much pleasure in so little time. Whilst they drew their delight
out of a subject dreadful, and full of danger, Troilus entreated Falerina in
the same manner, and making her lose her self in his embraces, kept her so,
till the day and calm weather arriving together, caused them to retire
wonderfully satisfied with the love of each other. The Master, finding himself
near to the Island of Silvana, yet far enough from the place where he meant to
have put in, advertised his Lady thereof, who understanding that it was on that
coast which the monster had ruined, she would with all haste have made from it,
but that she was retained by the Knight of the Palms. How Madam, said he, will
you oppose my glory, and make more esteem of my life, then of mine honor? What
would all the world say, and particularly your sister, whom I left only to
defeat this creature, if I should part hence without seeing it? Not to lie, I
should in a moment lose all the honor I have acquired by so many labors; let
us land a Gods name, or if for your own part you be afraid, permit me to do
that which becomes a good Knight, who will not be wanting to his promise, nor
fail in his duty. Ah, my Knight, said she, with her eyes full of tears, will
you yield more to your own desires then to mine? Have you forgotten how you
have told me a thousand times that you would never disobey any commandment I
should lay upon you? And yet you will now do a thing which infinitely
displeases me, and more cruel then can be expressed, you seek my destruction, in
running headlong to your own. Do but consider beforehand what danger there is
in affronting this monster, the most horrible and dre^dfull that ever was;
whole squadrons of armed men fly at the very sight of him, will you then
undertake this enterprise? I make a dear account (as I ought) of my people, and
country; but you are not of that consideration, as to prefer common men and
lands before your safety; Let them perish, I beseech you, and tempt not the
power of the Gods, to go to meet dangers, which without blame, and wisely, you
may avoid. The glory you aspire unto, is to be found in actions that one man
may bring to pass, not in desparation. But if you will not be retained by the
care of your self, yet at leastwise be moved with my tears, with my sighs, with
the regard of my very life it self, which shall not be long if you persist in
your wilfulness. Madam, said Alcidamant, pardon me, I beseech you, if I say
that your request is unjust, and that you wrongfully complain of me for not
rendering that obedience to your commandments which I ought. You brought me
hither for the good of your people, and now you are offended that I endeavor
to relieve them. I know not what to say to this humor, and although the pity
which you seem to have of me obliges me; nevertheless, it is so repugnant to
my reputation, that I cannot allow of it without infinite blame. You affirm,
that we are to seek adventures which are easy; such will never give us glory,
and therefore we present our selves to those which seem impossible; you think
to divert me from this design, by figuring forth unto me a monster, dreadful
beyond all that ever was; that, Madam, works in me a contrary effect: If an
ordinary Knight could overcome it, I would not vouchsafe to land here for to
fight with it, the difficulty which I meet with in this enterprise, gives me a
mavelous desire to undertake it to day rather then to morrow. Cease then, I
beseech you, from afflicting your self, and restraining these tears, which more
reproach your weakness, then testify your love, command me to march on
courageously, that I may triumph over this terrible enemy under the favor of
your beauty.

Your reasons seem so just, answered she, that I am not able to withold you
any longer from this adventure; but ah! my Knight, when I think how I behold
you crash: between the teeth of this horrible Serpent, or torn in pieces by his
merciless claws, I cannot forbear weeping, when I call to mind how I was the
cause of this your death; howbeit, seeing you are resolved to attempt this
combat, go under the protection of the Gods, my Knights shall assist you. By no
means, Madam, said he: for I will be accompanied with none but my friend here,
and my Squire, that shall only go to know what will become of me. Whereupon
causing himself to be landed with Troilus and Arnides, after he had desired the
beauteous Silvana to stay for him in the same part, they got to horse, and rode
along exceedingly astonished to see all the country round about disinhabited,
a multitude of houses ruined, and trees every where overthrown by the
wonderful force of this formidable Monster. Having traveled certain howrs,
they approached to a forest, entertaining themselves with ordinary discourse,
when as their horses began to snore, prick up their cars, and recoil back,
maugre all the spurring they could use, for to make them advance into the wood.
Never credit me, said Alcidamant, if this beast be not amongst these trees;
whereupon listening attentively, they heard a dreadful noise, with some
horrible hissing, and seeing two or three little trees overturn, they perceived
the monster whom they sought, coming forth with a strange fury: he had the
body of a Dragon, as big as an Elephant, covered with scales of diverse colors;
he had two heads, the one of a Serpent with a three forked tongue, the other of
a furious Lion: his legs were different the one from the other; one of the
foremost had the claws of a Serpent, two foot and a half long, and so sharp,
that they would pierce even steel; the other was armed with the paws of a
Lion, able to crush Iron, and tear armor in pieces; behind he was supported
with two legs of an horse, wonderful great; after which he trailed a tail so
long and strong, that therewith he easily overthrew all the trees which stood
in his way. Alcidamants courage was new put to the test: for beholding a
creature so deformed and monstrous, he marvelled how Nature could produce it in
such a form, and could not choose but fear to fall into the danger of his paws
or teeth, which were in each head a cubit long and more; but assuming
confidence from the glory which he should acquire by defeating this monster, he
desired his companion to retire, and recommending himself to God, he set spurs
to his horse, who staring up with his mane, ran clean away with him, do what he
could to retain him: but at length having stayed him, he quickly alighted, took
his Lance, and making head to the Monster, which followed him with incredible
celerity, he ran it so furiously into one of his chops that stood wide gaping,
as it past into his throat, where it brake, after it had made a very deep
wound; but not able to withstand the violence of the encounter, he was
overthrown to the ground, with such pain, that he thought his body had been all
crushed: nevertheless rising up suddenly, for the Monster was gone on, he drew
out his rich sword, and with a resolute courage waited to charge him as he
should pass by; but considering that his legerity would more advantage him
then his force, he concluded to combat him with judgment, stepping lightly
aside, then when he saw him return with rage, he gave him so mighty a blow full
upon the body, that it was able to have cleft a rock; howbeit in vain: for he
found his scales so hard, as the Sword left no mark behind of the stroke. O
God! said he then astonished, what can I expect from this combat, but the death
which Silvana so many times foretold me to day, Lord assist me, and punish me
not according to the greatness of my sins? Whilst he made this short prayer,
the dangerous Monster spared him not: for presently turning about, he laid hold
on his shield with his Serpents claws, and having torn it from his arm,
labored to bite it in pieces with his teeth, offering at the same instant to
seize on the Knights armor with his Lions paw; but he that with reason feared
these approaches, leapt wonderfully quick a tone side, and grieved to see
himself thus destitute of a shield, he took his sword in both his hands, and
therewith cut his paw sheer off at one blow; whereat he gave so loud a cry,
that it was heard 3 leagues off. Alas! said then the beauteous Silvana, here is
a sign^ of my Knights death; wretch that I was to propound so dangerous an
enterprise unto him, for other wise he had lived, and I might still have
continued happy in the world. Alcidamant seeing this good effect of the stroke
which he had given, was in hope of better, and ^esiring to make use of the
astonishment the Monster was in, gave him another blow on the Lions mane,
thinking to have no worse success then before, but the thickness of his
clotted hair withstanding the pass of the steel, it made him only bow with
his head a little, and so provoked his fury, that making a skip of ten foot
high into the air, the Knight found himself overthrown on the ground; where
this dreadful creature perceiving him to lie, got him between his teeth for to
devour him; and indeed he had already entered them in his live flesh, when as
the Knight being out of all hope of life, advanced his good sword, and thrust
it with such violence into his flank, that he past it quite through his bowels.
The Monster feeling so dangerous a wound, mounted once again into the air,
with such an incredible force, that he lighted ten paces off when he came to
ground, which gave our Frenchman leisure to rise, so bruised with his fall, and
suffering such pain from the hurts the Monster had made with his teeth, that he
could hardly stand; howbeit forcing himself, and drawing new strength out of
his generous courage, he approached the Monster again, who made a most horrible
noise, and by good fortune giving him a thrust just in the eye, ran him to the
very brain, but being surprised before he could retire him, the Monster caught
him with his Serpents claws, and in the pangs of death that tormented him,
dragged him up and down a good while: then taking him between his teeth, as if
he would make a sepulcher for him of his throat, he made way for his blood to
issue out at sundry places, and had without doubt killed him in this sort, had
not the wound which he had received in the belly, caused him to tumble down,
breathing out his last. Alcidamant who had not lost his understanding in this
danger, seeing this monster fallen, had courage enough to rise, and withdraw
aside; but the venom which came forth of the body of this creature, and his
own loss of blood, had not left him long alive, if Troilus and his Squire, who
were not far off, had not come suddenly to his aid. Arnides remembering then the
box which Cassandra had given him when he laft fought with Rozalmond, took it
out of his pocket, and quickly disarming him, anointed him with that balm,
which working a marv^llous effect, brought him instantly to himself again.
Whereupon, the good Troilus gathered a great heap of leaves together, laid him
upon it, and charging Arnides not to stir from him, galloped amain toward the
port.

Silvana, whom love kept always in care, seeing him arrive in that manner, and
believing that he fled from the jaws of the Serpent, was ready to tumble into
the sea, imagining that her lover was in the belly of the monster, and the
words and complaints of a despairing woman were even at her mouth, when Troilus
boording her with a cheerful countenance, said: Madam, be of good cheer, the
Knight of the Palms is alive, and more glorious by the death of the monster,
then ever Knight was by the most dangerous adventure that has been; but you
must know that this victory is bought at a dear rate, for the Knight has lost
most of his blood, and was very near his end; howbeit, he is far better then he
was, by means of an ointment wherewith his Squire has dressed his wounds, so
that now he wants nothing but your assistance, that he may be carried to some
house, where he may be more commodiously looked unto then in your ships.
Silvana, at first, distracted between hope and fear, and that expected nothing
less then so happy a success, hearing that her lover was alive after the
death of so horrible a monster, fell into such an ecstasy of joy, that she
could neither speak nor move: she beheld Troilus, as if she would have said
that she did not believe his report; but observing him to be in good earnest,
she instantly recollected her spirits, and causing her self to be forthwith set
on shore, she commanded some quilts to be made ready; and not able to attend so
long while her train was landed, away she went with the Knight of the Lions;
and being winged by her affection, she alighted within a little after where the
Knight reposed himself; howb^it, understanding that he was asleep, she would by
no means disturb him, but fell to considering of this dreadful creature, which
made her afraid being dead, and admiring the courage of her Knight, who had
made no difficulty to undertake him. Hereupon her people arrived, who thinking
it almost incredible, that one man could kill so great, so furious, and so
formidable a monster, published his praises in such manner, as if they had no
tongues but to proclaim him for the most excellent Knight of the earth. Whilst
every one was thus commending, he awaked, and finding himself better then he
was, he would have risen, seeing Silvana coming toward him, but she, not able
to forbear kissing of him before all the company, forbad him with such a grace,
that he suffered himself to be laid upon the quilts, for to be carried to a
Castle about two leagues from thence, where Silvana purposing to abide some
time, sent her Knights over all the country, to assure the death of that
dangerous Serpent; whereupon, a world of men and women came in ^locks, who
wondering at the valor and features of this Knight, would willingly have
prostrated themselves before him, as the chief of all their Gods, if he would
have permitted such idolatry; but rendering the glory unto God, to whom it was
due, he modestly dismissed them, and was contented that the monster should be
flayed, and that his skin, stuffed with straw, should be set over the principal
gate of the Capital City of the Island of Silvana, whither a little after he
went to the unspeakable satisfaction of the people, who strewing sweet herbs
and flowers in his way, as he passed through the streets, cried him up to heaven
with their acclamations, naming him the Savior of their country, and their
Tutelar God.

CHAP. XLIII. Trasiclea the valourous Princess of Tramazond, hearing the world
talk of the valor of the Knight of the Palms, sends to seek him, the messenger
finds him out, shows him the picture of this Princess, he parts with her from
the Island of Silvana, and goes to meet with her.
WHilst these lovers lived thus without cross or fear, whilst the trees and
gardens were witnesses of their pleasures, whilst they bathed themselves in
their delights, and every day incountered some new way or other to render them
more pleasing, all foreign parts were filled with admiration, and the name of
the Knight of the Palms became so famous, that there was no other talk but of
his valor; the pictures of the monster ran from country to country, his
figure was wondered at, his greatness and force was considered, and every one
held it for a miracle, that one man alone had the courage to affront him,
forces sufficient to combat him, and so much valor as to kill him. Merodiana
having sent Cistenia to observe the carriage of her Knight, was advertised of
this victory, which made her resolve to pass into the Island of Silvana, for
to draw her lover out of her sisters arms; but she lost her labor, for the
Destinies, that meant to dispose otherwise of the exploits and fortunes of this
Knight, would not permit her to see him, for to hinder his happiness, and thus
it was: The fame of the glorious victory, which he had obtained, running from
country to country with pictures thereof, as I have related before, came to
the cars of Trasiclea, the fairest and most valourous, but withal the proudest
Princess of the world. She was daughter to the Emperor of Tramazond, a mighty
Potentate, and that deriving his original from the Sun, found the antiquity of
his house in the race of the Gods, an opinion that rendered this beauty so
glorious, that she esteemed no mortal wight capable of her alliance, nor
worthy of so great and precious a treasure. This Princess then, who despised
men, and ranked her self among the Deities, who thought she deserved Altars,
and that held nothing so glorious nor redoubtable as her arms; hearing the
commendations which every one gave to this Knight, could not believe at first
that he was so strong, so valiant, and every way so complete as was reported;
but having usde the means to have his picture made to the life, together with
that of the Monster which he had slain, she beheld it often with wonder, and
finding nothing to be added to the proportion of his body, and less to the
perfection of his beauty, she said; If the Painter has not flattered this
Knight, he is in my mind the most accomplished under heaven: But that which
most amazes me, is to see him so young, and to hear tell how he has defeated
this Monster, whose figure alone gives terror to the most confident; verily he
is worthy of a place among our Gods, the world may adore him, and if I were at
any time to bow unto the affection of a mortal wight, I should never choose any
other to sort my greatness withal. But good Gods! what do I say, if I were to
bow unto the affection of a mortal wight? me thinks I feel already a new
passion that torments me; and by what I could comprehend from the complaints of
them that have been in love, it must needs be that love whose power has been
so vaunted of, and that means to triumph over me, as over all the rest of
humane kind. For having always disdained to set mine eyes upon any one, I am
marvellously satisfied with this picture, the sight of this warrior pleases
me, and I find such powerful charms in him, that I love him with an extreme
desire to see him. O ye Gods! from whence comes so great a change, Trasiclea?
Where is that spirit which made thee raise thy thoughts to the heavens? Art
thou so weak as to suffer thy self to be vanquished by a man, nay to take
delight in confessing it? Where are those high resolutions of thine, to join
thy self to none but one of the greatest of the Gods, as capable alone to enjoy
the merit of thy beauty? I vow this is a strange baseness in thee, wherefore
altering thy mind, reassume thy former motions. My former motions? why this is
the way to follow my former motions: for there is nothing in the Gods which I
meet not withal in this Knight: behold, here is the best face in the world,
this grace contents me wonderfully, this gentle eye demonstrates an agreeable
disposition, this warlicke countenance a most generous courage, and this shape
an incomparable valor: What shall hinder me then from loving him with such
infinite perfections? Nothing, nor shall I ever be persuaded that I fail in my
choice, since I find in him all that can be wished for in a divinity. But to
what end serves all this, if he do not know my mind? For nothing but to trouble
me, wherefore I will no longer forbear to let him understand that I am resolved
to love him, so shall I be no way accessory to my own suffering. In this manner
did this proud beauty, forcing her natural inclination, conclude to see our
Frenchman; but desiring first to be satisfied, how far his valor extended, she
took her Arms, where with she was as much redoubted as with the charms of her
eyes; and encharging a Damsel with a picture which represented her so well to
the life, that there wanted nothing but speech: she left her fathers Court, and
rode four days together with little or no intermission, till she came near
the Island of Silvana, where she rested her self in a shepherds cottage, that
joined close to a bridge, over the which he was necessarily to pass; and
giving her Damsel, that followed her, ample instructions of her pleasure, as
also assuring her that she should find her in that place, she sent her into the
Island of Silvana for to draw the Knight of the Palms from thence. This Damsel
then proceeding in her journey, traveled three days with much amazement to
hear nothing spoken of but the commendations of this warrior; and being come
near to the capital City of the Island, she met with twelve Damsels, and as
many Knights, whereof one having kindly saluted her, demanded whither she went:
I am going, said she, to see the wonder of the world, the excellent Knight of
the Palms, the Hercules of this Island, and the Mars of the earth, that I may
one day boast I have seen the only rarity of our time. Now believe me, said
the Knight, you do not praise him without cause: for if you had beheld him in
the midst of Armies, as I have often done, when he fought for the beautiful
Merodiana, who is going here in this litter for to see him, you would say more
if it were possible. I have heard, said the Damsel, what he did in the wars:
for it is bruited every where, that in single co^bat he defeated the so
redoubted King of Licagena, and routed his forces with such mavelous valor,
that in an army of thirty or forty thousand men which he had, scarce two
hundred escaped: But it is strange, that neither in all this country, nor of
any one that ever I did meet withal yet, could I never learn what he is
Marvel not at that, said the Knight, these great warriors go always unknown
through the world, nor ever discover themselves, but upon some extreme
necessity. I have known him diverse months together in Merodiana's court, yet
could I never learn his name, or condition, nor do I think, our Mistress, who
questionless has a great power over him, can so much as tell of whence he is.
He is very reserved, said the Damsel; but I imagine that he conceales himself
so, to decline all diversions from his enterprises: howsoever we must conclude,
that he is the prime Knight of the world. This discourse having carried them to
the City, the Damsel followed Merodiana, who was received by her sister with
much show of gladness, though in her heart a thousand times she cursed her
coming; howbeit understanding that the Knight of the Palms was gone a hunting,
and would not return again till the next day, she presently got to horse again,
thinking she should have more liberty to speak with him in the woods, then at
the Court; and informing her self which way he went, she got to the Forest,
where having rode up and down a good while, at length she incountred a place
where the Knight of the Palms, in a hunters habit, was staying to refresh
himself. Sir, said she, guessing by his goodly presence it was he, can you tell
me where I may find the Knight of the Palms, who they say is in this forest?
Gentlewoman, answered he, you see him here before you, ready to do you any
service, if you please to employ him. Why then, said she, my travel is at an
end, and my mind at rest. My Lord, I do not seek you to importune you with any
request, but to let you see a piece, the like, I am persuaded, is not in the
world again: Whereupon opening the box, she presented him the picture of
Trasiclea; which as soon as ever he had cast his eye upon it, so transported
and troubled him, that he staggered as if he had been struck with thunder. Ah!
what a beauty is here, said he, and who would believe that Nature could be so
prodigal in the distribution of her graces? Surely all her treasures are here
assembled, to make this creature perfect; and, questionless, she took the
pattern of her out of heaven. You may well imagine so, said the Damsel: for she
derives her original from the father of the stars; but alas! you cannot
judge of half her perfections: for this piece represents not the grace which
she gives to her actions, and deprives her of the moity of her glory. I easily
believe it, said Alcidamant, but had she less then I behold, it were enough to
force the most insensible soul of the world. Boast then, said she, that you
have seen the rarest thing in the earth, and restore me my picture, for I mean
to take my leave of you, that I may not be benighted before I get me a lodging.
How Gentlewoman, said he, will you so soon bereave me of a thing whereon all my
content depends? Be not so cruel, I beseech you, but let me enjoy the sight of
this Goddess a little longer. By my faith, said she, smiling, I Will make no
bargain with you, until you have sworn to grant me such a boon as I shall one
day ask of you. You shall have all that you can desire of me, answered he. Why
then this picture is yours, said she, and further to oblige you, I will bring
you to the speech of her whom it represents, and place you in her favor. O
God, said he, can I be so happy! Yes that you shall, answered she, and if you
will go presently along with me, I Will not only let you see her ere it be long,
but so work, that you shall receive assurances of her love. I would abandon all
other felicity, said Alcidamant, to undertake this enterprise; wherefore, do
but give me leave to arm my self, and I will wait upon you presently. I Will stay
for you as long as you will, said she, provided you return not again to the
City. Whereupon, Alcidamant setting his horn to his mouth, winded it so loud,
that it was heard of Arnides* Troilus, and some other Gentlemen, who immediately
repairing unto him, were much amazed to see him arm himself.

Gentlemen, said he, and you my noble friend, (speaking to the Knight of the
Lions) I shall desire you to return unto my Lady, the Infanta Silvana, and
excusing me to her, please you to let her know, that the nec^ssity of certain
affairs, which concern the good of this Gentlewoman, will not permit me to go
and receive her commandments, for I am instantly to depart, and that I am not
able to prescribe my return; which nevertheless, shall be as soon as possibly
I can. Herewith, being quite ^ med, he took his leave of them, and followed by
his Squire, he rode away with the damsel, who to make the time seem s^ort,
fell to entertain him with a discourse of the greatness of her Mistress, whilst
Troilus and Silvana's Knights returned to the City. Their news extremely
discontented the two sisters, who having recourse unto their tears,
reciprocally accused each other of so great a misfortune: Their grief was
alike, their complaints were the same, and so was their opinion, that they were
betrayed by one another malice. My Knight unwilling to displease my sister,
said Silvana, has absented himself, because he will not caresse me before her,
though I think he will will return again as soon as she is gone; but I have
great cause to complain of him, for this fear testifies love, and puts me in a
jealousy. The absence of my servant, said Merodiana, gives me no less content
then vexation, it shows both respect and weakness, it makes me suspect some
familiarity between my sister and him, and yet declares that his affection
lives still for me: They have been inward together, I believe it,
nevertheless, I will not impute that fault unto him, for it is a hard matter
for a Gentleman to avoid the surprises of a shameless woman; my sister has
presented her self unto him, occasions tempt men, and make the most resolved to
err; but I must divert this mischief, retire my self, and send to him to come
unto me; he is much indebted to my favors, and I have always known him too
amorous for to fail me. Whereupon, calling for ink and paper she wrote a
letter, such as her passion indicted, and commanding Cistenia not to stir from
thence till she understood of his return, or if his stay were long to seek him
out; she went back to her own Island, leaving no less content by her
departure, then her coming had brought trouble to her sister, who being
confident that she should quickly see her lover again, remained well satisfied.

CHAP. XLIII. Alcidamant combatting the Knight of the Phoenix, near to a
bridge, is set upon by three Giants, whom with incredible valor he slayes, and
then he knows the Knight of the Phoenix.
THE Knight of the Palms traveling with an amorous impatience, found ages in
minutes, and thinking of the sovereign beauties of this Princess, he said: O
God! What Spirit possesses me, and why do I persuade my self that I may obtain
a favor worthy the birth of the greatest Monarch of the world. I know that m^n
ascribe little to merit, and that they look upon the greatness rather then the
virtue of persons; in the mean time I flatter my self, and foolishly presuming
upon that, which I should never hope for, I run to my ruin under the false
appearance of a good: me thinks it were fitter for me not to try this hazard,
and seek a fortune that becomes me, rather then lose my self in this vain
ambition, so should I live at quiet, and out of fear; whereas otherwise, I can
expect nothing butreproaches, for being so much wanting in judgment. But what
is this I say? Why do I travel up and down the world, if it be not with an
intent to equal my fortune with the greatest, and one day to receive a
recompense answerable to my virtue? If I should retire now, I were more to be
blamed for my cowardice then for my presumption, I must pursue the good fortune
which reaches a hand to me, of a mean Knight become a mighty Prince, if heaven
please to favor me, and above all endeavor, with the venture of my life, to
obtain those felicities, which are promised him tha^ shall possess so
incomparable a beauty. Entertaining himself in this manner, and with the
Damsells discourse, three days past away without any adventure at all; but on
the fourth, approaching a bridge, he saw a Knight presenting himself with a
Phoenix in the midst of his shield, sitting his horse in such a comely manner,
of so brave a presence, and so rich armed, that it did him good to behold him.
Now on my faith, said he, turning him to the Damsel, yonder is the gallantest
Knight that ever I beheld; but I doubt, in regard of the desire I have to meet
with no impediment in my journey, that I must be forced to combat with him
before we shall have our passage free; howsoever, if I be constrained to it, I
carry the key at the end of my lance. Herewith, the Knight approaching within a
pikes length of him, said: Noble Sir, I am obliged by the commandment of a
Lady, that soveraignizes over me, to die upon this bridge in maintaining that
she is the fairest in the world, or bring her the shields of all such as shall
pass over it; wherefore I am come to demand yours, and in case you deny it me,
then to wish you to prepare your self to fight with me, though I am very loath
to hinder the designs of so brave a Knight as you seem to be. Verily, answered
he, if the condition of your enterprise did not extend to the glory of Ladies,
your gentle language would peradventure have made me take my shield from off my
arm, and given it you without fighting; but seeing there is question of the
honor of beauties, we must see which of us two is the strongest, for having
been so happy as of late to serve the fairest and most accomplished Princess
of the earth, I cannot leave you in the error you are in, nor suffer any other
to be preferred before her Excellence. We may perchance have one and the same
Mistress, said the Knight of the Phoenix, and she whom you adore, may be her
that I serve. So much the worse for you, said the Knight of the Palms, that
being a just occasion to make us everlasting enemies, for not enduring a
concurrent, the dispatch of you shall free me of all competition, or I shall
leave you without jealousy by my death. Herewith, turning about their horses,
they came to encounter one another with such fury, that the ground trembled
under them; their fortune was equal, and their lances were broken upon each
others shield without any other effect, so as they passed by one another
unmoved, like two strong towers shocked together by the violence of the winds.
Alcidamant being extremely vexed to see his adversary in his saddle,
courageously drew out his sword with an intent to assault him; but he of the
Phoenix desired him to run still until such time as one of them was
overthrown. By my life, said he, wood is too weak for our desires, and the
importance of the quarrel; nevertheless, do as you please; whereupon the
Knight of the Bridge having caused four lances to be brought, each of them
chose that which he thought was the strongest, and taking the field again, they
incountered once more in such a rude manner, both with shields and bodies, that
they seemed to have hit against great rocks; the Knight of the Bridge lost a
stirrup, passing along with some astonishment, and the Frenchman finished his
course somewhat amazed at the valor of his enemy, whom he commended in his
thoughts for the strongest that ever he m^^ withal, next to the incomparable
Knight of the Roses, whom he termed the Phoenix of warriors. Howbeit, rage and
jealousy together made him take up the third lance, wherewithal he resolved
to vanquish, or to die; when as he perceived three furious Giants to appear,
whereof one espying the Palms on his shield, cried out: Mighty Gods, how much
am I bound to thank you for putting the murderer of Fangomadan into my hands,
that I may in^^ict some horrible vengeance upon him.

Herewith Alcidamant perceiving him to make toward him, turned his horse
about, and setting spurs hard to him, ran his Lance so just against this new
comers visor, that he past it quite through his head, sending him stark dead to
the earth, to the infinite discontent of the other two, who charging him both
at one instant with two heavy and terrible blows, made him bend with his
shoulders even to the saddle bow; but raising himself quickly up again, he drew
out his rich sword, and laying at him that first presented himself, he cut his
Shield in two, and gave him a great gash in the arm, whence the blood trickled
down apace upon his armor: therewith presently striking at the others head, he
had cleft him to the brain, if his sword had not turned in his hand;
nevertheless the blow was such, as it astonished him, and forced the blood out
of his ears and eyes. In the mean time the Knight of the Phoenix, who was
advancing to succor him, if need were, observed him with wonder, he was amazed
at his confidence in the midst of such danger, marvelled at the dreadfulnesse
of his blows, but especially admired his dexte^ity in striking, and avoiding
the swords of his enemies, upon whom his never fell in vain: the ground was
strewed with pieces of their armor, the blood issued out of five or six places
of their bodies, and they found themselves so weary and weak, that their
strokes fell not with such fury as at the beginning of the combat; which the
Knight of the Palms perceiving, he discharged so terribly on the helmet of him
that pressed him most, as he clove him to the teeth: and carried with the same
rage, he advanced his sword immediately to strike the other, who in extreme fear
would fain have avoided the blow, but being to slow, he received it with so
great violence, that it divided his body in two pieces, one moity remaining in
the saddle, and the other tumbling to the ground, with such amazement to the
Knight of the Phoenix, who beheld it, that he was lost in the admiration of
these horrible blows. Alcidamant seeing himself delivered from his enemies, put
up his sword, gave thanks to God for his victory, and approaching to the Knight
against whom he was running, when as the Giants assaulted him, he said, Now it
is time for us to decide our difference. I, said the other, who wondered at the
greatness of his courage, if you were in better case; but the pains you have
taken in this combat, will not permit you to begin another at this instant;
take time to breath and refresh your self, to morrow we will try for the
mastery; to obtain it now, would be no glory to me. In the mean while pass the
bridge, if you mean to get a lodging to night. What, said Alcidamant, shall I
leave a rival behind me? and is it thus that you defend the beauty of your
Mistress? Now as I live, you shall not escape me so: I esteem of mine better
then to testify so little love unto her; your excuses shall not serve your
turn, you must either confess my Mistress to be fairer then yours, or if the
beauty we adore be the same, you shall swear to pretend no interest unto her,
else resolve your self to fight: for I have courage enough to vanqu^sh you
upon this quarrel. Do not too hot, said the Knight of the Phoenix, I have
sworn not to comb^t with you to day, neither upon this nor any other occasion:
you would have me speak for the advantage of your Mistress, I am contented:
for I hold her to be fairer yet then you do, and love her much more then you
think for; but to tie me, by your menaces, not to love her, nor to pretend unto
any part in her favor, I cannot do it, breathing but by her, and for her
content: wherefore I may not promise you an impossibility. Nor may I, said
Alcidamant in choler, suffer you to part from hence, but upon these
conditions: and let me be forsaken at my need, if I leave you till such time as
either you or I be in case not to hurt one another any further. How, said the
Knight of the Phoenix, will you force me to fight against my will? I that I
will, said Alcidamant, or you shall confess before this Damsel, which has
the honor to belong unto her whom I serve, that you utterly renounce all
pretense unto her. Are you so hardy, said the Knight of the Phoenix, that you
dare threaten me, and think to vanquish me in the ease you are in? I know well
enough, said Alcidamant, that you are strong and valiant, the trial which I
have made of you, makes me not doubt, but I had rather die a thousand deaths,
then offend my Lady in any manner whatsoever. It seems you love her much, said
the Knight, seeing death is of less consideration with you, then the loss of
her favor. I, more then you imagine, said Alcidamant, but to what end is all
this discourse? Knight you must satisfy me otherwise then with words, there is
day enough yet to break a Lance, and two have two or three bouts with our
Swords: come, let us dispatch, and be not too backward where it concerns you so
much; this delay does not testify the passion which you say you are in for
her. Well, said the Knight of the Phoenix, who took great pleasure in
Alcidamants choler, I am ready to give you contentment; but it shall not be
before you have told me whether you know your Lady, or what her name is. I am
not so happy, answered he, for I never saw her but in picture. Well, I will do
you a good office then, said the Knight, in letting you know her indeed:
Whereupon doffing her helmet, she discovered an Angelical face; which our
Frenchman beholding, observed it to be the very same that Love had engraven in
his heart. O God! said he, presently alighting, and falling on his knees before
her, Madam, how have I erred in employing my Arms against you, to whose service
alone they are dedicated? ascribe this fault to my ignorance, which may justly
excuse me; and, receiving my vows, be pleased I beseech you, that as your
Knight I may give an end to all the adventures of the world under the favor of
your name. Valiant warrior, said she, being alighted to raise him up, my
greatness, which is more then humane, would not permit me to abase my self so
much as to salute you, did not your virtue render you worthy of that honor:
your valor, that carries your name over all the earth, has made me desire to
see and try you, that so I might know whether the effect be answerable to the
praises which the world gives you; but believe me, you have wrong, in that you
have not altars erected unto you, and your glory placed where it deserves:
howsoever it suffices that you are esteemed of me as you ought to be, and that
I have such an opinion of you, as obliges me not to pardon you, (because you
have never offended) but to grant you the favor to be my Knight. Wherefore I
receive your service and your vows, and do further promise to give you one day
that place in my bed which I had reserved for some one of the Gods, being
hitherto persuaded, that the earth had not a man worthy of that fortune. Madam,
answered he, trembling with joy to hear the sentence of his felicity pronounced
in so sweet a promise: Be sure, that to merit such grace, I will do things
above the power of man; and that in my services, you shall find all that can
be expected from an obliged soul, protesting nevertheless, never to dispense
with my self for the respect which I owe to your greatness. No, no, said she,
love will endure no constraint, and I desire we may live together without
ceremony, that we may with the more sweetness enjoy out conversation. I will
submit to such laws as you shall prescribe me, said Alcidamant, and you shall
see me eternally disposed never to fail against the obedience of your
commandments. That is it which I desire, said Trasielea, in the mean time get
you to horse, and follow me to the Emperor my father; unto whom I will present
you for to be admitted into the number of his Knights. Whereupon Alcidamant
mounting on horseback, after he had very humbly kissed her hands in some
acknowledgement of the grace she did him, rode along with her, and entertained
her with the best discourse his troubled mind would permit him to use.

CHAP. XLV. Alcidamant entertains amorous discourse with the beautiful
Trasiclea, and encounters Rozanel d' Astre in the midst of a wood who relates
unto him his love with Angelea of S^pradisa.
ALcidamant thinking no glory in the world equal to that which he had in the
sight of his Lady, rode on so contented, that he esteemed himself the happiest
man living; he often fixed his eyes on her, and finding her incomparably fair,
whether he considered the delicate features of a perfect visage, or thought
upon the ^orce which she had showed in justing, he conceived her to be that
Pallas whom the Ancients had worshipped: She on the other side, observing a
most extraordinary grace in his actions, an amorous face, a lovely eye, a sweet
disposition, a warlike and majesticall countenance, imagined him to be the God
of battles, whose power and arms the whole universe adored; in such sort that
their content was rec^procall, their glory alike, and their desires common.
Trasiclea beheld the letters which in gold were embossed upon her Knights
Armor, with a great mind to know the mystery thereof. Alci^amant many times
considered the figur^ which he saw in the midst of his Ladies Shield, musing
at the cause that moved her to affect that bird; both of them carried by the
same desire, were opening their mouths to inform themselves of it, and
retained by a like consideration, would not seem too curious. At last Trasiclea
less ^ash^ull, or more amorous, said unto him, Since you are my Knight, you
may not refuse to impart your adventures unto me, to tell me freely who you
are, and for the love of what Lady you have c^used those characters to be put
upon your Armor. It is more then fit, said he, that I should satisfy you
herein: I am a Knight errant, native of the kingdom of France, having no
better fortune then that of my hope, and most unworthy of your greatness, if
you measure not my merit by my love, strangers call me the Knight of the Palms,
and my friends know me better by the name of Alcidamant: As for my parents,
they are noble, but in truth not furnished with great estates, though I may say
without vanity, that Crowns are unjustly wanting to their worth. Touching these
Arms, which were given me by a learned Inchantresse, when I was to combat
Fangomadan; I conceive they were made upon the occurrence of our loves: for
here are the first letters of our names interlaced, a T, which signifies
Trasiclea, and an A, which is as much to say, as Alcidamant, so that I presume
with reason, that all this has been governed by the providence of heaven: But
Madam, I have been long meditating on the device you bear in your Shield, and
do therein find no less a mystery then in these characters: for bearing two
birds which never meet together, as being unique in their kind, I am persuaded
that you would thereby figure your merit, and my love, which separately, or
together, can receive no comparison in the world, nor ever can be incountred in
one and the same affection: for your beauties, which take their original from
heaven, and my love, which is derived from your divine perfections, seem to
make but one person of our two bodies, as these birds are united in such a
fashion, that you think them to be but one, were it not for the difference of
the heads.

I do believe with you, said she, that there is a great deal of mystery in our
encounter, for these arms were given me by a woman, who having told me, that
with them I should receive a wound, whereof I should never be cured, and yet
that the steel of no enemy should ever pierce them, it had dissuaded me from
ever using them, but that she added withal, how this wound should no way
endanger my life, but contrarily, I should find so much delight in it, that I
should bless the time wherein I got it; all which is manifestly made good at
this instant, my hurt being no other then the love wherewithal I am stricken,
which shall not diminish by the knowledge I have of your mean fortune; for
being a Gentleman, virtuous and valiant, I shall affect you far more, then if
you had Empires without virtue, courage, and glory; only live with me as I
have told you, and I shall prize your valor above all the Kingdoms of the
earth, seeing riches and crowns ought not to be the object of a generous
spirit. These lovers entertaining one another in this manner, traveled with
such content, that whole days past away insensibly, so that being not above
five leagues from Tarsipolis, the Capital City of the Empire of Tramazond,
Trasiclea sent Cesarina (such was the Damsels name that conducted Alcidamant)
for to see whether any adventure was befallen at the Court worthy a courageous
undertaking, that their appearance there might be so much the more remarkable.
The Damsel b^ing departed, then these lovers, transported with the excess of
their joy, which made them think of nothing else, lost themselves in a forest,
where they rode so long till they were overtaken by the night, and forced to
rest under the tree till morning, eating, in the mean time, of such prov^sions
as Ar^ides carried along with him, having no other light then that, which
reciprocally shone from their eyes, they supped with more content, then if they
had been separated in the richest palace of the world, with the best and most
exquisite meats that possibly could be had. This small repast being done, they
began to renew their discourse, when as they heard the voice of one that
complained hard by them. Their curiosity thereupon causing them to arise, they
took one another by the hand, and with their helmets on, went softly to the
place from whence the voice came, and heard one speak in this sort: Wretch that
I am! To what extremity does fortune reduce me, bereaving me of the means to
free my Lady, and reserving her deliverance to the valor of some Knight, who
finding her endued with such excellent beauty, may with reason demand her for
the recompense of his labors, and deprive me of that happiness, which I had
promised my self in the fruition of her. What, shall I survive then the grief
of her loss? Never, if I were once assured of it, but my hope in the goodness
of heaven does persuade some relief unto my misery: upon that then, Rozanel,
depend, and let no way be left unsought to succor thy distressed Angelea. This
complaint, closing with a world of sighs, exceedingly moved both Trasiclea and
Alcidamant, who advancing three or fowr paces, presently heard the Knight ask,
Who goes there? We are Knights, answered he, who would willingly bring some
remedy to your grief, and that desire you consider, how complaints do not be
seem a valiant and magnanimous man, seeing there is more glory in suffering,
then in such weak expressions. The darkness and silence of these woods are
very proper, I confess, to represent your sorrows unto you; but I shall desire
you to divert them with our company, to relate unto us the cause of your
misfortune, and afterward to make use of us, if you think us able to succor
you. I know not who you are, replied he, but your pity of my affliction does
testify that you are noble and courteous, wherefore I shall gladly obey you,
and recounting unto you my fortunes, i^brace the generous offers you have made
me. I am called Rozanel d'Astre, son to the valiant Amadis d'Astre, and to the
beautiful Rozaliana the Emperors daughter of the Parthians; I went out of
Constantinople certain months since, with an intent to make my self famous in
the world, in imitation of my father, who in his younger years never met but
with one equal to him in valor; namely, Spheramond of Greece his Cousin; I
traversed many Christian Kingdoms, giving an end to diverse strange adventures,
which I will not here particularize, to avoid ostentation, and traveled thus
glorious, without any other aim then honor; when as that proud tyrant of our
souls, Love, conducted me into the Kingdom of Sopradisa, to triumph over me by
the sovereign beauty of Angelea, Grandchilde to the invincible Amadis of Gaul:
I obtained her favor by killing a furious Giant, who knowing this Country to
be destitute of good Knights, ever since the loss which the Christians
received at the battle of Aleppo, committed mavelous insolences, and would
have married this fair Princess in despite of her self and her subjects, who
would by no means dispose of her without the authority of their Prince, named
Florian, then abroad in travel. This victory having given me all interest in
her, which a modest virgin may accord unto her lover, I lived so contented,
that I did not think fortune was able to cross me: But alas! I was not fully a
month in this felicity, when as to my infinite grief I perceived that our
happiness or unhappiness depend altogether on her. For one morning, I saw
three women enter into the hall of S^p^adisa, with their hair about their ears,
each of them bearing a torch in their left hand, a guilt truncheon in the
right, and viols on their heads, which tumbling down at such time as they had
made a circle in the midst of the hall, there arose such a thick fog, that it
was two howrs before one could discern any thing; at the end whereof, the
beauteous Angelea was not to be found, only near to the Royal Throne, a pillar
was seen, whereon hung a table of brass, with these words:

In revenge of the blood of Alifernes (so was the Giant named whom I killed)
Angele* sha^^ continually burn in a cruel fire, and shall not be freed from
thonce, till the pair without peer deliver her, the beauty of the valourous
Serpent having no less power therein, then the strength of the brave Lion.
Imagine now what case I was in, when I mist the object of my glory and desires;
verily. I was ready to die for grief; and had it not been for the ease I found
in my tears and sighs, it had stifled me; but fortune, that reserved me for
greater miseries, would not suffer me to end so happily. I remained then lying
altogether in affliction, unable to taste the comforts which the people of
Sopradisa offered unto me; and arming my self, I resolved to traverse all the
earth, and seek her even in the very jaws of hell; and accordingly, I have past
I know not how many countries, continually inquiring after the cause of my
mishap; nevertheless, being arrived in these unknown Kingdoms (whither I was
brought by as long and furious a tempest as ever was) without any news at all
thereof, I began to be in despair; when as a Damsel overtook me at the entry
of this wood, and told me that the deliverance of Angelea was nearer then I
imagined; but that the glory of it should not fall upon me, it being reserved
for the best Knight of the world; wherefore she bade me stay some time in this
Country, and follow such as showed themselves sensible of my sufferings; in
which regard, I will leave off afflicting my self, and if you please to accept
of my company, I will wait upon you, and see how propitious heaven will be unto
me in your assistance. Why this is nobly resolved, said Alcidamant, and I
assure you we shall be any way glad of your fair conversation; and therefore,
betaking your self quietly to your rest this night, to morrow as soon as the day
shall appear, we will set forth together, and peradventure we may find that,
which you have so much sought, with all the content you can wish for:
Whereupon, laying themselves down under the trees, Alcidamant caused Arnides to
keep watch, and amorously kissing his Ladies hand, he slept till morning.

CHAP. XLVI. Alcidamant, Rozanel, and Trasiclea leave the wood, Rozanel
delivers Cesarin^ whom three Knights pursued, Alcidamant slayes the King of
Dramir, valiantly gives end to the adventure of the burning Rock with the aid
of Trasiclea, Angelea is recovered, and the enchanted Knight is known.
LOve, and the inconvenience of their arms, not permitting these Knights to
take much rest, they arose with the Sun, and finding their horses, by Arnides
diligence, ready, they mounted thereon, with some amazement to each other;
Alcidamant and Trasiclea, observed Rozanel d'Astre, and seeing him so handsome,
well made, and with a countenance that promised much virtue and good, they were
exceedingly afflicted with his misfortune; on the other side, Rozanel beheld
the mavelous beauty of Trasiclea, whom he thought to be a Knight, and withal
admiring the martial look of Alcidamant, each of them finding something to
commend in his companion; and so they traveled together, till they got out of
the forest by the direction of a wood-seller, who set them in the way to the
City. Entertaining the time then with ordinary discourse, Trasiclea discovered
a Damsel that fled cross the fields to avoid the fury of three Knights that
pursued her. Being much offended with this baseness, she fell a gallopping
between Alcidamant and Rozanel, who desiring to make some proof of his valor
before these Knights, whom he greatly esteemed, he desired them to let him
chaftise these insolents, that went about to outrage women, and not to
interpose in his assistance, unless they found he was too weak for them. We
will do what you please, said Trasiclea, but if you enterprise this to give us
some testimony of your valor, your very countenance does sufficiently assure
us of that. I shall be glad, said he, to maintain this good opinion of yours in
the proof: wherefore, with your favor, I will undertake them single; so that
being not far from those Knights, he cried unto them, Turn about you villains,
and defend you from those that mean to punish this base outrage of yours to
women.

Yes Master fool, said they, hoping to dispatch him quickly before the other
two arrived, we will chastise your insolence, and teach you how to threaten such
as we are: wherewith they all three charged their Lances at him, and incountred
him in such sort, that had he been less strong and valiant, he might have kissed
the ground; but being not so much as once moved with this encounter, he ran his
Lance quite through the body of him at whom he had aimed it; and advancing out
his Sword at the finishing of his course, he discharged it so dangerously on
the helmet of him that was most forward, as he cleft him to the very teeth;
which made the third betake him to the wood, in hope to save his life from the
fury of this warriors blade: but his fortune was little better; for wanting
discretion to avoid Rozanels companions, Trasiclea incountred him so strongly
with her Lance, that she cast him out of his saddle with such mischance, as his
right foot hanging in the stirrup, he was dragged by his horse into the wood,
whither none of them followed to dispatch him, each of them making to the
Damsel, that upon sight of the defeature of her enemies, was returned. As she
came near them, Trasiclea perceiving her to be Cesarina, whom she had sent to
her fathers Cour to learn some news, wondered much at this which was befallen
her, and cried out, Cesarina, how came thou by this misfortune? Through the
insolence of Brandamar King of Dramir, answered she, who in revenge of a word I
let fall, as I past by him, made these Knights pursue me for to do me some
mischief; but that you may be the better informed of all, please you to
understand, that being entered into Tarsipolis, as you had commanded me, I was
much amared at the meeting of novelties worthy your curiofity: for the first
object appearing unto me in the hall, was a burning rock that walks of it self
(at the leastwise one can see no body that conducts it) and stays ordinarily
three days in the Court of a King or Prince in expectation, that some Knight
should make trial of the adventure, which in truth gives as much occasion of
pity as of fear: for in the hollow of the rock, one may behold a very
beautiful young Lady in the midst of the flames, who lamenting with a
million of sighs and tears, entreats for succor, and beseeches all good
Knights to draw her out of the fire, which diverse have undertaken to do; but at
the very instant when they go about it, a Knight all covered with fire comes
out, or if there be many that attempt it together, each one finds such a one
to encounter him, who having given him three or four blows with his sword, or
more, if the valor of the Knights be greater, he lays him all along in the
place, where all his pain is in the heat that he feels, which is not allayed
till such time as his arms be taken from him: and that which breeds the most
wonder, is, that the hall is not any whit the hotter for this fire, which
questionless is not material, and that no body feels the heat but only the
Knights that prove the adventure. This marvel seeming worthy of my pains, I
was upon returning to acquaint you with it; but espying two of my fellows, I
staid a while, and understood by them how all the Court was much troubled with
your absence, especially at a time when your presence was most necessary there
in regard of the interest of your beauty: for the King of Dramir, named
Brandimar, presented himself with intolerable insolency, in the lists of
Tarsipolis, where he maintained, that the beauty of his Mistress surpasses
all others whatsoever, and mads all the world to see him triumph over every one
that undertakes him, having so little right on his side, and from thence
proceeded the cause of my danger: for unable to conceal the anger I was in for
the wrong he did you, by preferring one before you that is not worthy so much
as to look on you, I said aloud as I passed by, that I would go and fetch a
Knight able to remove him from that error, and abate his pride; which put him
into such a rage, that he commanded them to follow me, and do me some outrage.
And this, Madam, is all the account I can give you of this journey. It is more
then I could hope for, said Trasiclea, but I am glad I met with thee so
opportunely, as to free thee from those Knights: Touching Brandamar, I doubt
not but to take such order with him, that either my Lance or Sword shall
determine the punishment of his temeritie. Madam, said Alcidamant, this combat
appertains unto me, and I should think my self most unfortunate if any other
should undertake the defense of your beauty, reserve your self for more
glorious interprises, and permit me to give you some small proof of my love in
this action. I grant it you, said Trasiclea, and shall be very well contented
to see him chastised by your hands. Whereupon doubling their pace, after they
had rendered thanks to Rozanel, who wondered to behold so fair a Princess bear
Arms, they arrived at Tarsipolis; where the first thing they did, was to go
straight way to the Camp to combat the King of Dramir, whereof the Emperor
being advertised, betook him presently to the windows, as much admiring the
gallant carriage of the Knights, as satisfied with his daughters return, whom
he easily knew by her Arms; and that having espied him, went up instantly to
him to do her duty. Your long stay abroad, said he, has extremely
discontented me; but your safe return makes a full amends for it: You will have
more cause to rejoice, Sir, answered she, when you understand how I have
brought you that famous Knight, who has filled all the regions hereabout with
wonder: he that slew the mighty King of Licagena, that with a handful of men
cut his Army in pieces; that killed the monster of the Island of Silvana, and
in my presence three furious Giants, with fingle might had made the greatest
Estate of the world to tremble. What a rich booty have thou got, my daughter,
said the Emperor, if thou can keep him here. He comes with an intent to be
of the number of your Knights, answered she, wherefore may it please you to
afford him as gracious entertainment as possibly may be: for I assure you,
Sir, he merits it more than any other Knight whatsoever. Be confident,
daughter, said he, that I will give him very much cause to abide in my court:
for all my treasures shall be upon him, and my chiefest Princes shall yield him
place. But let us see how he will carry himself against the King of Dramir,
which would prefer a common beauty far before yours, whose excellency only
deserves the title of Divine. Whereupon, going to the windows, they saw
Brandamar fly over the crupper of his horse, and the valiant Knight of the
Palms pass on with an admirable grace. Behold an encounter of the Lance, said
the Emperor, that does not belie the fame which this Knight has acquired in
the world; and if he can manage a Sword as well, our Amoroso shall miss of the
content he expects here. Trasiclea was about to reply, but was retained by
hearkening to her lover, who was alighted, because he would not fight with
advantage, and said to his enemy, that made but little haste in rising, having
been shrewdly shaken with his fall, Why how now King of Dramir, are you no
forwarder in defendidg the beauty of your Mistress? questionless she will
have but little reason to caresse you: up, up, it may be you shall rest in
another fashion by and by. These words, which made all the people fall a
laughing at him, having put him into an extreme rage, he rose as if he had
received no hurt, and drawing out his Sword, went and struck at Alcidamant in a
most violent manner; but he wifely avoiding it with admirable agility
discharged a full blow on his left arm, cutting it off sheer from his body.
Whereat this lame lover being strangely incensed, returned another with all his
force on the Frenchmans Shield, which proving impenetrable, it recoiled in
vain; howbeit nothing abashed therewith, he laid about him most furiously, and
rendered the combat very doubtful; but Alcidamant confidering that he fought
before the Father, and for the glory of his Lady, and disdaining to have the
victory any longer disputed, he advanced his Sword, and let it descend in such
a terrible manner on Brandamar, that it divided him to the very girdle;
wherewith all the assistants were so amazed, as they could not believe that this
blow could proceed from any other then the great God of Battles, and for such
would have adored him, would he have endured such vanity: but sheathing up his
Sword, and going to the Palace, he presented himself to the Emperor, who
received him with all the testimonies of a most extraordinary respect. Sir,
said he, kneeling down before him, the report which runs of the worthy esteem
your Majesty makes of good Knights, has given me the confidence thus to become
an humble suitor that you will be graciously pleased to accept of my service. I
am more contented with your presence, said the Emperor, then with the addition
of another Empire: whatsoever you desire in my Court shall be yours, and my
people shall honor you no less then mine own person. I shall never be worthy
of this favor, said the Knight: But Sir, I will perform such deeds of Arms for
your service, that you shall never repent any grace you have conferred on me.
Then turning himself to his fair Princess, and kissing her hands with
incredible delight, he assured her of the continuance of his vows. This done,
the Emperor would have had him conducted to his chamber; but being moved with
the complaints of that beauteous Infanta which he saw in the midst of the
flames of the burning rock, he besought the Emperor that he would vouchsafe to
entertain himself a while with beholding the trial of this adventure; and
desiring the same from his Lady, he was drawing out his Sword, when as he
perceived Rozanel advancing toward the rock, with the countenance of a man
half bestraught. My noble friend, said he unto him, whither run you thus?
Either to dye with my Angelea, said he, whom I see in that fire, or deliver
her out of her pains. Herewith the Emperor being advertised by Alcidamant, of
the love between this Knight, a great Prince among the Christians, and that
beautiful Infanta which he beheld in the rock, he stood to observe the success
of this enterprise; and saw, that having touched the rock with his Sword, a
Knight came forth of it, whose armor was covered all over with great flames,
and that showing a confident look, began one of the roughest combats with
Rozanel, that could be between two Knights, their blows were mighty, and
according to the extreme fury which Rozanel expressed in his fight, every
stroke he struck, gave an expectation of the end of this combat; howbeit, the
glory being reserved for another, he remained a little after extended in the
place, with an opinion that he should be consumed in his armor; nevertheless,
the heat allayed as soon as he touched the ground, nor was he further tormented
therewith when he was once unarmed, but such was his grief and displeasure,
that he would have thrown himself into the Rock, for to die with Angelea, had
he not been restrained by Alcidamant; who staying him by the arm, declared unto
him the fault he had committed by showing himself so weak.

Wherewithal, being somewhat pacified, Alcidamant drew his sword, and seeing a
man all in flames issue forth as before, he charged him with such fury that all
the hall was full of sparkles. The combat growing terrible, gave a world of
expectation to the beholders, every one looked with passion upon the Knight of
the Palms, who preferring death before the shame of not vanquishing in the
presence of his Mistress, pressed the enchanted Knight so hard, that ever and
(...) made him set his kno^s or his hands to the ground, and as much as he
could declined the strokes of his enemies sword, because he probably
conjectured that thereon depended the force of the charms, and that Rozanel had
resisted longer if his arms had not been heated with the Knights blows;
nevertheless, unable to avoid them all, he received one on his armor, which
beginning to burn him, as if he had lain upon the fire, put him into such a
rage, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it so dangerously
o^ his enemies helmet, that he laid him all along upon the floor, to the great
contentment of the spectators, and especially of Trasiclea, who finding no
less glory in her lovers victory, then if she her self had gotten it, was
going to caresse him, when she perceived a dwarf come toward her from the root
of the Rock, and say: Madam, you are to have a (...) in this adventure, and
(...) to show your self no less courageous then this famous Knight of the
Palms; for now on you alone depends the good or ill of this Lady. Lo here, the
means of her deliverance, said he, presenting her with a violl full of
oderiferous water, enter resolutely into the rock, brea^ this glass upon the
head of the Infanta, and then you shall s^^ the enchantment dissolved.
Whereupon the Emperor stepped forth wit^ two of his Lords to stay Trasiclea,
remonstrating unto her, that there was no trust to be given to sorcery, and
that she would be consumed before she was half way in the Rock; notwithstanding
all which, she went with a da^^^lesse courage through the flames, and broke the
violl over the head of the Princess of Sopr^disa, which was no foo^^r done,
but presently the fire was quenched, Angelea felt no more pain, and the ar^our
of the Knight whom Alcidamant had combatted, lost the color which it had,
himself standing on his feet as well as ever he was in all his life. Behold, my
Lord, said Trasiclea, presenting Angelea to her father, behold the fruit of ^y
courage, I have delivered this fair Princess out of cruel torment, given new
life to this Knight, pointing to Rozanel d'Astre, and shall be the cause of the
happiness of all their future being. You speak most truly, Madam, said
Rozanel, transported with an excess of joy to see his Mistress fr^^ from pain,
you have given us indeed a new life, and have exceedingly obliged us, not to
breathe, but for your service: wherefore please you to command us something,
that we may dispose our selves to obey you. That which I desire ^f you is, said
Trasiclea; that you live long contented together, and that you render your
affections of proof against the power of Fortune. Whereupon assuring them, that
they should receive all the assistance they could possibly desire from her, she
left them to entertain Alcidamant, to whom they gave a world of thanks, and
commanding the Count d'Alcane to see them furnished with money and shipping for
their return into Greece. After they had refreshed themselves a while in
Tarsipolis, she was going to retire with Alcidamant, when as the enchanted
Knight having put off his Helmet, went and kneeled down before him, humbly
thanking him for the succor he had given him. The goodly presence of this
Knight possessing Trasiclea with an extreme desire to know him, she entreated
him to tell his name. Madam, answered he, I am called Florisbel, second son to
the great King of France, who leaving Constantinople a while since, for to seek
adventures abroad, was carried by sea into Cataya; where meeting with no less
attractions in the beautiful Semarimis, daughter to the King of that country,
then my cousin here, meaning Rozanel d'Astre, who as yet had taken no notice of
him, has incountred the Princess of Sopradisa, I set my self to serve her
with that good fortune as she received me for her Knight; whereupon I undertook
such enterprises for her sake, as were worthy the glory of my Ancestors, sent
her two hundred shields, of Knights that I had overthrown at a Just which was
held for to publish her the wonder of beauties: and not satisfied therewith, I
went up and down doing mavelous deeds of Arms under the name of the Gray
Knight; when as one morning I met with 3 old witches, who conducting this
enchanted Rock, laid such powerful charms upon me, that I entered all armed in
it, having no other desire then to withstand all those that offered to deliver
this fair Princess. And this, Madam, is all the satisfaction I can give you
for the present, but not all that you may expect from me hereafter: for I will
seek out occasions to serve both you and this brave warrior that accompanies
you. Trasiclea having courteously thanked him, presented him with the same
favors which she had offered to Rozanel, who by this time coming to know him,
entertained him with a world of kindness, and had therein continued longer,
but that Trasiclea desiring to accompany her Knight to his chamber, so to show
her subjects how she would have them to honor him, caused them to be conducted
to another, giving the fair Angelea three Damsels to attend her, with a charge
to see her extraordinarily served. All things being thus happily disposed,
Trasiclea left her Knight, went and unarmed her self, put on one of the richest
gowns she had, dressed her self wonderful wealthy, and appeared so beautiful at
supper, where the three Knights were set at table with the Emperor, that every
one thought she had some divinity in her. The cloth being taken away, and the
Emperor having discoursed with Rozanel and Florisbel, who then took their
leave of him, whilst Alcidamant was talking with his Lady, every one withdrew
till the next morning; at which time our Princes of Greece having kissed
Trasiclea's hand, and bidden the Knight of the Palms adieu, who would not make
himself known to Florisbel, imbark themselves with Angelea for their return to
Constantinople, where we will leave them for to prosecute our history.

CHAP. XLVII. Alcidamant incountring Trasiclea apart, discovered his passions
unto her, and the answer she made him.
ALcidamant living with unspeakable content in the midst of honors, and the
praises of all men, and no less esteemed, then if he had been the Prince of
Tramazond, had nothing further to wish for, but some more particular favors
from Trasiclea; he had love and impatience enough for to desire them, but too
much respect for to ask them: so that the pain of his fear equalled the
pleasure of his hope. Some days being sweetly past away in walking, familiar
discourses, and solitary entertainments, one evening he espied his Mistress
fitting in the shadow, under certain trees; where, kneeling down before her,
and taking her hand to kiss, he said unto her: Madam, consider I beseech you,
the extremity of my passion by the excess of your beauty; and marvel not, if
unable to support the violence of my desires, you see me in some unreasonable
impatience: I endure all that a poor lover can undergo; and the sight of you,
which should assuage my martyrdom, increases it: for apprehending the felicity
which I am to expect from your more secret caresses, I cannot bear the
retardment of them but with incredible torment. I am too forward, I am too
forward, I confess, and this complaint of mine, which seems unreasonable
(since you have always assured me that you live for me only) may justly offend
you: But alas! that which I feel, will not permit me to be longer contained, so
that I am forced to discover it, for to find some remedy, and that wholly
depends on you, which I beseech you to grant me, if you have resolved to render
me one day happy, and without making me longer to languish, advance my felicity
with your delitious fruition. Sir, answered she, I did not think our
familiarity would have carried you to such insolency, or that my affability
would have made you forget the respect which you ought to have: Have you well
considered that you desire, and upon what conditions do you demand it? Alas!
said he with a trembling, which thoroughly testified his love, and that gave
mavelous satisfaction to Trasiclea, who therein observed that which she
desired in this fear: Madam, do you set down the laws your self, I will
never oppose them, I opened my heart to you, to make you sensible of my
suffering, not to provoke you to displeasure; be not offended then, I beseech
you, with this liberty I have taken: or if it be distasteful to you, command me
to suffer and be silent, and you shall never hear me open my lips hereafter,
but with that very respect which may be used to a Deity. I do not require,
said she in a gentler accent, that you should live after with me: for my
affection will not endure such ceremonies, but you shall oblige me for hoping
for any thing more from me, then what honor will permit me to grant you: for
our conditions being so different, that they may well draw my father to be
otherwise disposed then I am, if he were aware of our determinations; it is
very necessary, in my opinion, to wait the time, when as your services, and my
persuasions may induce him to receive you as his son in law, rather then ruin
them by precipitation; I do believe that this expectation is grievous to you,
and that it leaves you not without much desire, for I judge of your suffering by
mine own; but say, my Knight, will it not be worthy of your pain, and will not
your pleasure taste the sweeter for your enduring? Yes verily, it will be
dearer to you, having gotten it with difficulty, then if you enjoyed it
otherwise. Complain no longer therefore, I pray you, but live with more
content, and give me occasion to love you everlastingly.

Madam, said he, it is no little grief to me that you should find any offense
in my complaints, but since they displease you, be assured they shall never
importune you more, I will suffer with silence, and if the violence of my
passion shall enforce any sighs from me, I will so carry my self that none but
these trees shall be witnesses of them; In the mean time be graciously pleased
to sweeten the bitterness of my displeasure with some more particular favors,
and encouraging me to attend the happiness which you make me to hope for,
permit me to come and visit you in your chamber when all the world is at rest,
that so I may have the content to see you without fear. I will advice with time
upon that, said she, for it is a business that requires good deliberation; but
not to be so ungrateful as to give you nothing, receive this kiss, the first
that ever man received from my divinity forbidding me the imparting of so great
a favor; receive, I say, this kiss for an infallible assurance of my promise.
Whereupon, laying her mouth to his lips, she ravished him with the incredible
delight of so amorous a touch. In this manner did these lovers spend the time,
and lived with such a tranquillity of mind, that never did two find less
distaste in the birth of their affections. If they saw one another, it was with
new assurances of their love, if therein they were hindered by any occasion,
that defect was supplied with letters; Arnides and Cesarina were always
walking with new commissions; briefly, their discourse and conversation was a
very Paradise. This contentment being without crosses, Alcidamant without
jealousy, (because the pride this Princess had esloigned all such as desired
to present her with their service) she without suspicion, not being able to
imagine that ever he will be in any passion for another, their life was rather
divine then humane, and all things disposed themselves by little and little to
render them happy; when as fortune, that takes pleasure in her inconstancy,
would needs let them see that the content of men depends upon her will, and
that their designs do never arrive at a good port without her assistance. Two
storms arose at once, whereof one was like to have overthrown the greatness of
that Empire, by reducing the Emperor and his daughter to the extremity of the
loss of their lives, and the other to have utterly ruined these lovers hopes
for ever enjoying one another. The first happened by the treachery of Drumelia,
Aunt unto Brandamar King of Dramir, slain, as you have heard, upon the quarrel
of his Mistress beauty; and the second through the indiscretion of Cistenia,
whom Merodiana had left in the Island of Silvana, with a letter directed to the
Knight of the Palms, as I shall deliver by and by, having spoken of that which
did precede this misfortune.

CHAP. XLVIII. Drumelia Aunt to the King of Dramir would have betrayed the
Emperor of Tramazond; Trasiclea is led away by cunning, the Emperor is
assaulted by three Giants, falls down hurt: Alcidamant succors him, with
increaible valor, slaies the three Giants, arrives in the wood just as
Trasiclea was ready to be ravished, delivers her by the death of his enemies,
and returns to the City.
DRumelia, Aunt unto Brandamar, unable with patience to endure the death of
this King, whom she held as dear as her own life, had recourse unto magical
books, wherein she was wonderfully expert; and knowing that the Emperor of
Tramazond, upon whom she desired to extend her rage, was too mighty for her to
be revenged of by arms, she proceeded therein with cunning; wherefore desiring
nothing so much as his death, and the destruction of Trasiclea, she resolved to
govern her enterprise with such judgment, that both their ends should arrive
at one instant, so that taking five dreadful Giants, near kinsmen to
Brandamar, she caused her self and them to be carried by night, in a cloud, to
the forest of Tarsipolis, where making certain circles amongst the trees, she
rendered her conjurations so powerful, that the great and formidable Giants
seemed little deformed Dwarfs; seeing them in the estate which she desired for
to cover her malice, she put her self in the midst of them, advertised them
particularly of all that they had to do; and taking the way of the City, she
came thither just as the Emperor was returning out of the Temple from
sacrificing to his Gods. Howbeit, not thinking it fit to present her self unto
him any where but in the Palace, because she would not play one match without
the other, she followed fair and softly after him, giving the people occasion
to laugh, for to see her walk between five such ill-favored creatures; and
coming to the hall, even as Trasiclea entered, she presently advanced toward
her, and kneeling down, with tears and sighs, she thus began: Excellent
Princess, I am reduced to that pass, as it is not possible for a wretched
woman to be more miserable; in so much, that if I do not find some assistance
of your pity, you shall see me cut off the poor remainder of my life here in
your presence, and this poniard in my hand shall second the cruelty of my
fortune, which has lately deprived me of a son, whom I may richly boast to be
one of the best Knights of the earth, rendering him a prisoner in the hands of
a merciless Giant, that loving the same Mistress, which he served, to free
himself of a rival, purposes to take away his life, if he be not speedily
succored: Now the fame which runs of your valor, has induced me to make this
address unto your greatness, with an opinion that I shall not be refused. No
verily, said Trasiclea, that you shall not, for I will serve you most willingly
in this extremity. Madam, said Alcidamant, extremely discontented to see her so
resolved, I beseech you to pardon me if I say, that you promise too lightly; I
am fitter for travel then you, and your divine person is not to be exposed
unto hazard, without more occasion. Leave the care of this to me, and give
your subjects the satisfaction of your presence, whilst I go and dispatch the
affair. Why my Knight, said she smiling, are you not contented with so much
glory as you have acquired in the world already, but that you would bereave me
of this too? Let me entreat you to stay here for to serve the Emperor my
father in my stead, and because it will not be long ere I return, you shall
seek to entertain him in the mean time. Now by my Crown, said the Emperor, I
am also of his mind, daughter, and do not hold it fit that you should
undertake this enterprise, wherein it may be there is more danger then you
think for. Sir, said Drumelia, who was very much afraid that her designs
should be very much discovered, you need not doubt her esloignment, her valor
exempts you from that; and to let you see that I do not venture her person
lightly, as you imagine, I Will stay here my self with you, and she shall be
conducted by two of these Dwarfs, so that in case she return not safely by to
morrow, with all the contentment you can desire, inflict the cruellest
punishment you can upon me. Trasiclea said unto her father, My Lord, there are
so few occasions of glory presented in these quarters, that I cannot without
much wrong to mine honor refuse this same; therefore permit me, I beseech you,
to depart with your good favor, and comfort your self the mean while in the
company of this noble Knight of the Palms. Well, since you will have it so,
said the Emperor, I Will no longer oppose your desire, but I am in some mistrust,
I know not wherefore, and cannot be persuaded that this voyage will be
prosperous. Trasiclea, having thus obtained leave, presently armed herself,
little regarding the suspicion her father had of the enterprise, which she
imputed rather to the imbecility of his age, then to any assured judgment; and
therefore having cast a thousand looks on her Knight, for to bid him tacitly
adieu, she departed with Cesarina and two of those Dwarfs, somewhat troubled
for that she had not the company of Alcidamant: The displeasure whereof, so
took up her thoughts, that never minding her enterprise, she rode on till she
came to the wood, whereinto the Giants were no sooner entered, but they
reassumed their former shape, laid two blows with their heavy maces on the
head and shoulders of this Princess, who thus surprised, fell, and kissed the
ground, with little or no memory at all. The Giants seeing her in this posture,
instantly alighted, bound her with cords, and laying hold on Cesarina, that
seemed more dead then alive, they tied her to the foot of a tree. Whilst this
Tragedy was framing in the wood, a more bloody one was acted in the City:
Drumelia thinking Trasiclea sure enough in the hands of these Giants, desiring
to play her part, touched the three Dwarfs with a wand she had in her hand, and
making them appear with their natural greatness, much amazed the assistants,
especially the Emperor, who going to save himself, received a blow with a
scymiter on his arm, which laid him on the ground, liker to die then to live.
Whereupon, a great rumor arose in the hall, the Courtiers betook them to their
swords by Alcidamants example, who, with his cloak wound about his left arm,
gave one of the Giants so furious a blow on the shoulder, that he opened him to
the very girdle, and instantly ran one of the other two quite through the body;
the third, who made a horrible massacre of the unarmed Knights, seeing the fall
of his companions, in a mighty rage flew at Alcidamant, hoping to cut him in
pieces; but the advised Knight, whose judgment was not overcome with fury,
slipped aside from the blow, and losing no time, gave him a deep and dangerous
wound in the thigh. The Giant, boiling with choler, was not then much sensible
of it; but a little after, advancing his heavy scymiter to discharge it on the
Knight, and stretching himself upon his feet to render his stroke the stronger,
he fell all along, and carried with him more then half of our Frenchmans cloak,
who receiving a light hurt on the arm, did for all that forbear the taking of
his enemies head from his shoulders, and suddenly running to the door, made
stay of Drumelia, who, beholding the miserable end of her kinsmen, would have
saved her self. By my life, said he, you old witch, you shall not escape me so,
your head shall answer for Trasiclea's life; Say, wicked creature, Whither have
thou caused her to be conducted? What, will thou not speak? No, I will be torn
in pieces, said she, before I will discover it; her death shall yet make some
satisfaction for the King of Dramirs, and the inhumane butchery of these his
kinsmen. What a horrible treason is this, said Alcidamant? But the
horriblenesse of thy punishment shall be answerable to it. Whereupon, dragging
her into the hall, he committed her to the custody of certain Knights, whom he
commanded to look well unto her, as they would answer it with the peril of
their heads; and perceiving the Emperor to be come again to himself, and that
the Chyrurgeons assured there was no danger in his hurt, he ran presently to
his chamber, caused himself to be armed with all speed, and mounting on his
horse, gallopped away toward the wood; where at the first arivall, he heard
certain cries, which made him put himself amongst the thickest of the trees, at
one of the which he saw Cesarina tied, and his beautiful Mistress in the hands
of two Giants, who were pulling off her armor for to ravish her. This sight
possessing him with a strange fury, he alighted, and with his sword drawn,
approached these two Colosses, and finding the head of the greatest unarmed,
divided it in two, thinking he was not obliged to use any courtesy to persons
that were not capable of it. The other, grown wiser by his companions
misfortune, laced on his helmet, and cried out: Stand, Caitiff, that I may
revenge the death of a man, whom thou have basely surprised, and let this one
blow be the reward of all thy wickedness. Saying so, he discharged his
curtleax with such violence, that he stunned the Knights arm, making him recoil
a pace or two back; but his wrath increasing, and considering that the safety
of his Lady was at stake, he laid at his head with such a tempest, that albeit
his sword turned in his hand, and that he struck him but with the flat, yet he
sent him dead to the ground, his brains flying out with the horrible violence
of the blow.

That done, he came speedily to Trasiclea, and cutting the cords wherewithal
she was tied, he said, O God! what inhumanity is this, to inchain her that is
able to captivate all the world? Madam, these barbarous villains were not
ignorant of your valor, and therefore the fear of your sword had made them
secure themselves by binding you: But what trick did they use to reduce you
thereunto? They surprised me being in a muse, said she, and with two mighty
blows laid me along; where remaining without motion, I could not hinder them
from binding me: And even as you came, these villains were unarming me, and
threatened to make me serve for the satisfying of their brutish lust; but thanks
be to the Gods, I am freed by your valor: yet I wonder how you could leave the
Emperor, for to arrive here so luckily. How? said he, leave the Emperor? We
have seen strange things within these two howrs. Then he recounted unto her all
that had passed in Tarsipolis, whereat she remained so much amazed and
contented, that she could never commend her good fortune enough, which had made
her the Mistress of so brave and valiant a Knight. Let us go my dear friend,
said she unto him, let us go and release the Emperor out of the care he is in
for the loss of me; and let us think upon the pains wherewithal we may
sufficiently punish this wicked creature that had so cunningly betrayed us. It
were fitter to think of that which I endure, answered he; and if you were as
just as fair, you would leave the care of that execution to the officers of the
Empire, for to undertake a noble resolution to give some speedy end to our
sufferings, nevertheless, seeing you have commanded me to be ^ilent herein, I
will proceed no further, but refer the performance of your promise to your own
gracious pleasure. Why see now, said she, how time begets occasion to content
you: for have you not to day done things able to oblige my father not to deny
you what you so much desire? yes, my Knight, you have, and if you will be
patient, you shall quickly see your self at rest: let not your complaints then
diminish the obligation of your succor, but let me feel the contentment of it
without grief. Whereupon Cesarina being untied, they took the way of the City,
wherein they met with five or six troops of Knights, which the Emperor had
sent for the deliverance of Trasiclea, who seeing her return with the valiant
stranger, (for so was Alcidamant ordinarily termed) and understanding how
matters had past, they raised his praises to such an height, that he was
ashamed of them, and Trasiclea, the most contented on the earth. The speed they
made, having soon brought them to the City, Trasiclea went straight to see her
father, who taking her by the hand, fell a weeping with extreme joy. Do I see
thee again, my dear child, said he, being out of all hope both of mine own
safety and thy life? Ah! how much am I bound to the Gods for so great a grace?
and what do I owe to this brave stranger, who has this day done such wonders,
as never will be forgotten as long as the world endures? Daughter, it is you
that must requite them, I leave you the power to do it, and will no way oppose
whatsoever you shall ordain for his recompense. My Lord, answered she, this
service deserves no less then a Crown; but we shall have time enough to think
of it: our present care must be to look unto your health. I find my self so
well, said he, that the joy of your return surpasses the pain I feel of my
wound: Go and refresh your selves both of you, whilst I take a little rest, as
I am advised by my Physicians. Thereupon those lovers bidding him good night,
went and warmed themselves, and then walked into the hall together for to
behold an infinite company of Bonfires which the inhabitants of Tarfipolis made
in every part of the City for joy of the good success of this adventure;
which done, they both withdrew into their chambers, Alcidamant studying how he
might demand some ease for his sufferings, without offending his Lady, and
Trasiclea what more greater favor she might confer on him, then formerly she
had done, and not contravenne that modesty which a virtuous and discreet maiden
ought to have in her actions.

CHAP. XLIX. The complainis of Alcidamant, Trasiclea's resentment, she
promises to esponse him the next day: Cistenia arrives in the mean time with
letters from Mer^dian^: Trasiclea by wile reads them, becomes jealous,
banisheth Alcidamant, and makes him feel the effects of her displeasure.
ALcidamant dying in his impatience, and finding nothing so grievous as the
command which was laid upon him, not to make any show of his torment, was
oppressed with strange unquietness. He went ordinarily into the gardens, walked
up and down the allies, and getting many times into the orchard, he laid
himself down upon the bank of a little stream which ran along by it; where,
under the shadow of certain trees, his eyes full of tears, he spoke thus: How
I envy your nature, that does not render you subject to the misfortunes which
follow men: you know not what it is to love; insensible of lovers pains, you
mock their sufferings; and never caring for the injuries of time, you let the
seasons work their effects: and now behold, you are beautifully adorned with
green leaves, whilst I am in ma^ty^dome, and with so little hope, as makes my
life a very languishment. Is not this a wonderful misery? Doubtless it is,
yea such as makes me desire to change condition with you, if I might, and wish
my self covered with your bark, therein to spend the time which Love has
allott^d to my pai^, th^^ so I ^ight be freed from the griefs wherewithal I
am surcharged. Carrying himself frequently in this manner, every one marvelled
that he was never seen in the Court, but at such times as he must needs be
present there; yea, and his Lady suspecting something, extremely desired to
know what became of him: Whereupon she caused Ces^^ina to watch him, and
understanding one day that he was in the garden, thither she went, visited all
the alleyes, and not finding him, she past into the orchard, where espying him
to lie under the trees, she stole as near unto him as she could. He was then so
entertained by his fancies, as he spoke not a word; but his silence lasted not
long: for suddenly he said, O Madam! how hard is this commandment? and what may
I hope from the extremity of my passions, if you will not permit me to show
them? Either you love me, or your promises are feigned. If you have resolved to
make me happy by giving your self unto me upon such conditions as honor
allows of, why do you refuse me that now which you will grant me then? you
will say, that respect restrains you: Ah Madam! that is but an ill opinion for
to make lovers languish: and she that admits of such a consideration cowardly,
deprives herself of happiness. I would to God, not that you should feel my
pain (for I will never wish you so much hurt) but that you may know the rigor
of it, that you might see a million of tears in my eyes, and that you might
judge by these infinity of sighs which ordinarily I fetch, whether I can be
without grief to see my self so long delayed from the greatest bliss which a
Knight can hope for in the world, you would then, without doubt, be more
sensible of my endurings, and advancing my felicity, give end to the martyrdom
wherein you had seen me. These complaints moved Trasiclea exceedingly; and had
she not been arrested by that bashfulnesse wherewithal maids are usually
retained, questionless she had made use of time and place to show her lover
that she desired his contentment no less then himself; howbeit, stealing
softly back, she returned into the garden, where considering her lovers
reasons, she sometimes resolved to give him satisfaction, and then by and by
was quite of another mind. At length, having continued a good while in these
extremities, she concluded to make no further difficulty therein, seeing she
meant to take him for her husband. This is, said she to herself, this is but to
defer his contentment with too weak considerations; and so many nights as pass
away unprofitably, seem to accuse me of want of love, I do my self wrong to be
so difficile for mine own content; but I will repair this fault, and living
otherwise hereafter, I will give my Knight no more occasion to complain. This
resolution carrying her back again to the orchard, she began to sing a far off,
for to draw Alcidamant out of his fantasies, who was very much amazed to behold
her, and to be surprised with tears in his eyes; whereupon he took his
hankercher for to wipe them, but Trasiclea staying his hand, said unto him: I
am very glad, my Knight, to see you weep in this sort, not that I take pleasure
in my cruelty, but to make it serve for your content: your complaints which I
have heard, have had the power to alter both my will and mind, so that I am
now resolved to give your services their recompense, to espouse you secretly,
and to let you enjoy all the privilege which marriage can afford you, until
such time as we may dispose my father to receive you more openly. Wherefore be
of good cheer, and prepare your self to come to morrow in the evening to my
chamber, where Cesarina and my Governesse shall be witnesses of the faith you
shall plight me to legitimate our caresses. Thus have I resolved to do, both as
your merit and my affection require. O God! said Alcidamant, falling on his
knees before her, can I, Madam, ever deserve this grace? and may I not well
repute my self the happiest man of the earth? yes, without doubt, I may, nor
do I think that my felicity can be matched with another whatsoever. O blessed
sufferings! what reward are you to have? What fruit do I gather from my tears?
and what treasure have I found in my patience. O the most fortunate Knight
breathing! Do thou promise to thy self not only an Empire, but the
possession of a Divinity? No, no, thou could not, this favor surpasses all
thy hopes by far, and obliges thee never to be ungrateful: neither, Madam,
will I ever be, I will labor to be found worthy of this grace by a million of
services: and the more you have exalted me, the more humbler and more
acknowledging you shall find me; give me therefore, I beseech you, these fair
hands, that I may, upon their beauties, imprint my thankfulness for the
compassion you have been so graciously pleased to have of me. My dearest
Knight, answered Trasiclea, seeing I have promised you an absolute power over
the rest, sure I shall never permit you more to kiss my hands: for purposing
very shortly to be your wife, I am to entreat you otherwise then heretofore:
wherefore now you shall have my lips (saying so she kissed him) wherewithal I
shall desire you to be contented, until our marriage shall authorize you
further.

Hereupon these two lovers taking one another by the hand, walked up and down a
while in the garden; but Trasiclea, to avoid all suspicion that might have
grown by their being met so together, modestly withdrew her self, and left him
with such an ecstasy of joy, that he knew not where he was. Night ensuing
thereupon, he went to see the Emperor, who finding himself healed of his
hurt, and in better state of health then he had been of a long time before,
resolved to hunt the next morning by the break of day; which fitted our
Frenchmans disposition wonderful well, who thinking he should that way pass
the time better then to remain in the Court, promised to wait upon him; and
accordingly no sooner did the Sun appear the next morning, but he got into the
field, where thinking of his approaching happiness, he made his horse to bound
with such a grace, that it amazed every one to see how bravely he sat him:
Then calling to mind his Mistresses amorous words, and considering them
severally apart, he thought no felicity could be comparable to his, nor that he
could ever be subject again to the crosses of Fortune. But alas! she made him
soon know, that our good or ill depend upon upon her inconstancy, and that it
is a great error in men to promise any thing of certainty to themselves in
this world. Whilst he crossed the woods, following the cry of the hounds,
Cistenia, the secretary of Merodiana's affections, left (as you have heard)
with a letter in the Island of Silvana, arrived at Tarsipolis, and going to the
palace, by ill fortune met with Cesarina, and enquired of her for the valiant
Knight of the Palms. Gentlewoman, said Cesarina unto her, is it for the
execution of any enterprise that you seek him? No, answered this unadvised
maid, but only to deliver him a letter, which I believe will be accptable unto
him, coming from one of the fairest Ladies of the world, and that loves him
infinitely. Marry, and he is worthy of it, replied Cesarina; but he is not now
in town: wherefore if you please to rest you in my chamber till his return,
which will be in the evening, you may then speak with him at leisure. I shall
gladly accept of your fair courtesy, said Cistenia, since you are pleased so
far to olige me. Whereupon going into Cesarina's chamber, she set some to
attend her whilst she went unto Trasiclea* whom she acquainted with all that
she had learned of Cistenia. Gods me, said Trasiclea, if we could come by this
letter, peradventure we might discover some extraordinary secret. There must be
some Art used to get it, said Cesarina; but seeing you so desire it, it shall
go hard but I will give it you in your hand ere be long. So leaving her
Mistress, she went and put a little of the juice of Poppy into some broth,
which was prepared for Cistenia, who had no sooner taken it, but that she found
her self so sleepy, as she threw her self presently upon a bed; where Cesarina
perceiving her to be fast enough for waking in haste, searched her Pockets, and
finding Merodiana's letter, carried it with all speed to Trasiclea, who having
opened it, read thus:

Merodiana's Letter to the valiant Knight of the Palms.
IF I had as little affection, as you have sense of the favors you have found
in my imbr^ces I should not only say that you were ungrateful, but I should
seek to be revengedof your neglect, howbeit, considering that you received them
upon promise of rendering them one day legitimate, I will proceed no further
then to complain of you, and to put you in mind of them, for to oblige you
unto a return; and indeed it is more then time, at leastwise if you mean to be
loial, neitherwil my patience suffer you to run thus any longer about the
world, depriving me of the fruits of my love, which if either you have
forgotten, or that your weakness has carried you to other affections, let me
at leastwise know so much, to the end that I may in my death find that only
comfort, which is left to a woman betrayed.


O ye Gods! said Trasiclea, how am I this day bound to you, for the discovery
of a secret of such importance, you show by this your care of me, that you are
mindful of our alliance. Alas! I was going to commit an irreparable fault, and
giving my self to the most disloyal Knight that lives, had made my self a
grief for all my future days. Art thou a deceiver, Alcidamant? Ah! how is that
valor ill bestowed, and how unjust are the Gods in the partition of their
treasures? Thou thoughtest to beguile me upon such a promise as thou made to
that unfortunate Lady, but thou art far from thy reckoning, and the happiness
which I was preparing for thee, shall be for ever withheld. Thou will find out
some reasons to cover thy cunning, but I Will not permit thee, nor do thee the
favor to hear so much as one poor excuse; but banishing thee for ever from my
sight, I will preserve my self from faulting a second time. Come then and take
me away all these preparations which I have made for this wicked man, and thou
Cesarina give me some paper, a Letter is the cause of my good, and a Letter
shall be the occasion of his pain. Whereupon, walking a great pace up and down
her chamber, she remained a good while pensive; but not caring how she wrote,
so as she might express her mind, she framed a Letter, and sealing it up,
commanded Cesarina to deliver it unto the Knight as soon as ever he returned,
but not to receive any answer. Which being done, she fell to walking again; and
every minute finding new cause of displeasure, she rendered her passion and
hatred greater, insomuch that she was more in rage, then ever she had been in
love. Whilst fortune was thus putting all in disorder, Alcidamant returned most
contented, thinking of nothing less then the mischief which was to fall upon
him; and declining the Emperors table, that he might not fail his Lady, he
betook him to his chamber, where within a little after Cesarina presented her
self to him. Beholding her, he was troubled with extreme joy, and thought that
she was come to lead him to the paradise of his delights; but she entering with
a sad countenance, said unto him: My Lord, my Mistress has commanded me to
deliver you this Letter; Alcidamant taking it with a great change of color,
and kissing it, though it were with a strange suspicion, which Cesarina's
countenance had begot in him, he opened it, wherein he read these words.

To the most disloyal Knight in the world.
I Do not write to thee in way of complaint, for thereby I should still show my
love and weakness; but it is to tell thee, that thy wickedness renders thee
unworthy of the favors, which thou had thought to have found in my pity: I
will conserve my self for another, it may be less valiant and brave, but far
more faithful then thy self, and leaving thee in the liberty to keep thy word
with Merodiana, I will take the power to love some otherwhere. Get thee out of
the limits of this Empire, which thou have lost, as unworthy to possess it,
and never present thy self more before me, that thy sight may not renew the
vexation which I am in, to have been deceived by thee.


This Letter, so cruel, and that deprived the Knight of all hope, having
seized him with too sensible a sorrow, made him sink to the ground with such
appearance of death, that Cesarina leaving him in his Squires arms, returned to
her Mistress, infinitely discontented for that she had been the occasion of this
misfortune; and telling her what effect her Letter had wrought, she retired,
betaking her to strange unquietness.

CHAP. L. Alsidamants despair, the effects of his rage, by the defeat of
certain Giants and Knights: he turns Hermit.
WHilst Cesarina recounted unto Trasiclea the success of her message,
Alcidamant, being come to himself, by the diligence of (...) his Squire, made
such strange lamentation, that the most inhumane soul in the world would have
been sensible of his complaint. Ah why! said he, unjust heavens, why have you
made me hope for a happiness with such expectation, to deny it me now upon so
little reason? Ah beauteous Trasiclea! with what weakness are you carried? you
draw my ruin from that which serves for my glory; for despising Merodiana for
you, me thinks, I give you occasion to believe that you have the advantage of
her; yet you make her love, the cause of your hate, and my misfortune. Is this
done with justice? No, no, you are too much transported with passion, and if
you did not refuse me that through anger, which the severest judges in the
world could not with reason deny to the greatest offenders; I should justify
my self before you, and let you see mine innocence with so much truth, that you
could not but condemn this precipitation of yours; howbeit, that I may not hope
for, your forbidding me ever to appear before you again, utterly bereaves me of
the means to let you one day see your error. Ah! this is to testify more
cruelty, then ever you have showed love, and that my punishment does far
surpass the pleasure of my hope. You will have me gone: Alas! Can I do it and
live? I cannot, I cannot, yet it is fit that I prefer your commandments before
my life, I will be gone then, but lament my absence, fair Princess, it deprives
you of a servant, that has never had greater care, then how to honor the
merit of your favor. Whereupon, charging his Squire to go and make ready his
horses, he secretly armed himself, went to the stable door, mounted on
horsback, and dep^rting out of the City, took the first way presented it self,
making incredible lamentation. Behold, said he, how from the supremest degree
of felicity, I am fallen into the abysmes of a misery, out of the which I cannot
get without miracle. Good God! who would have thought, that having but one
tedious minute to pass, for to see my self in an unmatchable glory, fortune
should have found out the means to cross me? I could never imagine it, but to
my cost I perceive, that man cannot assign a time for his good, no more then
for the evil that is to arrive unto him. Ah, Cistenia! How well thou make me
pay for the pleasures thou procuredst me from thy Mistress? How dearly,
Merodiana, do I buy your favors? You say, that I promised to espouse you:
Alas! I had never such a thought, our caresses have been free, and the power of
disposing our selves never parted from us; Why do you say then, that it is time
to render our embraces legitimate? Can I be your sisters friend, and your
husband? By no means, it is a thing whereof you ought never so much as to
think; nevertheless, I endure the pains of your folly, and my banishment
proceeds from your passions; it is unjust, but I must bear it; the heavens have
always had a care of my life, the same regard they will have still of my
actions, if they please, and will assist me with some extraordinary favor,
since that I have a divine power for to make me hope for relief. Pronouncing
these words, he shed so many tears, that he saw not the way which he went,
though the moon shone very bright, in such sort that he crossed through a wood,
more by chance then otherwise, and finding himself, at the break of the day, in
a beautiful meadow, bordered about with numbers of trees, he alighted, let his
horse feed, and laying him down upon the green grass, began to think of his
ill fortune, and was about ^o renew his complaints and tears; when as Arnides
coming to him, said: Arise, Sir, and give over playing the woman, come and
chastise certain Knights that speak ill of Trasiclea, that intend to revenge
Drumelia, to take her from the Emperor, and to work your destruction by
treason. I believe, said he, that thou take me for Alcidamant, that slew
Fangomadan, and the Monster of the Island Silvana, that defeated the Giants on
the wooden bridge, that brought Brandimar to reason, that massacred the guards
of the Sorceresse Drumelia, and that would have made no difficulty to have
combatted a million of armed men; thou deceivest thy self, Arnides, I am but
his shadow, and the weakness of my arm could not fear the meanest Knight that
is. These desire to be righted of the wrong that I have done them, let them use
their pleasure upon me, here is my throat, which I will most willingly offer to
their swords; for loathing my life, I care not what becomes of it. Why this is
spoken like a desperate man indeed, said Arnides; What a glory were it for them
to vaunt in the Empire of Tramazond, that they had overcome you valiantly, and
how might they abuse Trasiclea if fortune should give her into their hands, as
such a thing may be? Now in good faith, this womanish courage of yours
exceedingly grieves me; and give me leave to tell you, that you lose much of
the reputation that you have acquired in the world, and particularly with
Trasiclea, who peradventure is not so much displeased, as she makes show for.
Well, Arnides, said he, I see thou will prevail^ and make me once more, against
my will, to draw my sword. Therewith arising, and transported with sorrow and
rage, he advanced toward two Giants and three Knights, whom he saw at the
other end of the meadow, and never examining the matter any further, charged
the first Giant so rudely, that he made his sword, arm and all, fly to the
ground together. You die, said he, for daring to attempt upon the lives of
Trasiclea, and her Knight, nor shall all your Gods save you from my hands.

Putting this high menace then in execution, he laid two of the Knights, that
showed themselves forwardest, dead on the earth, and striking furiously at the
other Giant, gave him three or four blows, which all drew blood of him;
howbeit, the first having taken his sword into his left hand, began to press
him very hard; but this brave Champion being in the supremest degree of his
rage, overthrew them both in the place with two terrible blows; and seeing but
one Knight, who on his knees begged for mercy, he gave him his life, upon
condition that he should go to Tarsipolis, and presenting himself before the
Emperor, recount the business how it had past. This done, he remounted on his
horse, and riding along, began his lamentation and complaints, to the great
coffeehouse of his Squire, who having eating nothing of a long time, much
blamed these strange humors of his Master in his mind. Whilst Alcidamant was
making thus from Tarsipolis, the Knight of the Giants arrived there, and
presenting himself in the palace before the Emperor was risen from dinner, he
declared what he had in charge; and publishing in the presence of Trasiclea the
moan which the Knight of the Palms made at his departure, it pierced so deep
into the heart of this displeased Princess, of whom the Emperor demanded the
cause of his absence, that she repented hereof a thousand times for entreating
him so cruelly, as to condemn him unheard. This action, said she to herself,
is an infallible testimony that he loves not Merodiana; and in that he obeyes
my command, it is clear that I do him wrong to suspect his loyalty. It may be
that this Lady, vanquished by her passion, or rather by this Knights charms,
which are inevitable, has given her self to him upon some hope of marriage;
but that this Knight has promised her, I cannot think it, he is too noble to
be so wicked; and if he were obliged by his word, questionless he would have
gone to her now, but he has taken a clean contrary way; and howsoever, his
sorrow renders him innocent.

Now, to be offended with him for what is secretly past between them, I have no
reason at all: for their caresses were precedent to my acquaintance with him,
so as he was no ways tied to observe any faith to me; wherefore I condemn my
jealousy, and precipitious carriage toward him, and do protest before my
Gods, to receive him into grace again, if he present himself before me. But
alas! that, I fear, he will not do, but will have more regard to my will, then
the satisfaction of his own desires: howbeit I may quickly remedy that; I have
committed the fault, I must make the amends; and sending Cesarina, who may
easily follow him by the fame of his brave acts, let him know, that I acquit
him as freely as before I condemned him unjustly. Whereupon writing a letter
full of excuses, and giving it to Cesarina, commanded her to repair her error,
and to use some means for to bring back this Knight, who, in the mean time,
rode on with incredible speed, never regarding the ways, which at length
having brought him to the kingdom of Clariana, he met with a Desert, wherein
the gentle current of a bubbling stream, together with the natural beauty of a
savadge grot, and the shade of certain trees, which seemed to make a pretty
walk from the rock to the water, so pleased him, that forsaking his horse, he
resolved there to spend his days. Living on the fruits that he found there,
and drinking of the water that pearled out of the stone, he lay upon a couch of
leaves, and limiting his walk among those trees, he consumed his time in his
usual complaints, accusing his ill fortune, blaming Trasiclea's cruelty,
adoring her picture which Cesarina had given him in the Isle of Silvana, and
which he had kept as the only relic remaining of all his hopes; and leading
a most solitary life, took pleasure in nothing but his own lamentations and
^ighes, where a while we will leave him, and take some time for to think on
the prosecution of this history.

The end of the Second Part.
THE LOVE AND ARMS OF THE GREEK PRINCES.

OR THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS, Written in French by Monsieur Verdere; And
translated for the Right Honorable, Phillip, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery,
Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty.

Tome III.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for Thomas Walkeley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the sign of the flying Horse, near York House, 1640.

Amadis of Trebisond, arriving in the Empire of Martaria, saves Floridan of
Persia from drowning: Their Adventures.
CHAP. 1.
AMadis of Trebisond, departing from the Castle of Serpents under the conduct,
and in the Chariot of Cassandra, as was delivered in the four and twentieth
Chapter of our second Part, was somewhat amazed to see himself almost in a
moment above the clouds, where he might well have had cause to fear his
falling into those vast Seas, which he beheld so far below him, or of
suffering the incommodities of an element full of fire, that he felt over his
head, had he not been carried from such apprehensions, by the relation this
damosel made him of the loves and noble acts of that renowned Emperor of
Greece, his Father, and of the prodigious adventures brought to glorious ends,
by the Princes of his blood. Five or six days being past away with these
pleasing discourses, one morning, even as the Sun began to enlighten the
world, he heard a dreadful noise, proceeding from the encounter of the
billows, which the violence of the winds raised sometimes as high as Heaven,
and then by and by cast down to the very center of the earth, herewith awaked
he looked round about to see from whence it came, and amidst the strange
disorder of these enraged waters, he espied a Ship, whose sails were rent all
to fitters, her shrouds and Tackle torn, her Masts blown over board, and
every part of her besides so terribly shaken, and beaten with the fury of the
merciless waves, that having no Guide but the evil fortune of those she
carried, at length she ran against a Rock, that was near to an adjoining
Port, and split in a thousand pieces, leaving some thirty persons to the mercy
of the cruel seas. This object so full of pity moved him very much; and as
he was about to bewail the mishap of them he had seen swallowed up, and to
desire that he could succor the rest which were also ready to perish, he
perceived that the Chariot descended conducting him to the encounter of a young
man, who swimming tugged courageously for his life, with that pitiless
element, making use then of this occasion, that succeeded according to his
wish, he thrust his Arm into the sea, and catching hold of the young man drew
him up into the Chariot, which instantly landing on the shore vanished with its
Guide, leaving them both on the sands very much astonished thereat. Howbeit,
Amadis ever confident, would not seem to be troubled with so sudden a
departure, but turned to his companion, whom for his beauty and comely
personage he much admired, and said unto him. Gentleman, take courage, and be
not dismayed, for now you are out of the power of the waves, nor can this land
you tread upon be so dangerous, though it be unknown to you. I cannot choose
answered he, after he was somewhat come to himself again, but be somewhat
amazed with the late peril I was in; yet Sir, it has not so deprived me of
judgment, that I should not have sufficient left me, to know how much I am
obliged to you for my safety; you have saved my life, which you shall always
dispose of; in the mean time may it please you to permit me to seek out
means to dry my self, for I cannot continue long thus wet without some danger
to my health. Here said Amadis, unbuttoning a coat, which many times he wore
over his Armor, cover your self with this whilst your clothes are a drying,
for I will not leave you till I see you in better case. This Gentleman taking
the coat went presently aside, and having stripped himself, sat down on a
stone, whither not long after Amadis came to him, whereupon wondering much at
his goodly presence in such rich arms, he arose somewhat ashamed to be seen
so half naked, and said. Sir, what may I do to show my self grateful for so
many good offices, which I receive from your courtesy? You may, answered
Amadis, pay all this debt with a few words, and by telling me who you are, and
what occasion brought you hither, you may oblige me as much, as you think you
are engaged to me. Could I serve you, said he, by declaring whom I am, without
doubt I should soon obey your command; but Sir, my name being of so small
consideration in the world, it will import you little to know, and me much to
conceal it, in which regard I shall humbly desire you, to dispense with me
therein, and to be pleased if I only say, that I am commonly called, the
Knight of the Flowers: Touching my arrival in this place, my destiny had
unluckily brought me hither, had I not met with you; for having imbarqued my
self in a Port of Greece, with a resolution to travel the world, in the quest
of glory I sailed very prosperously for three weeks together; during which
time I never combatted but once, and that was with a Giant for the rescue of a
Gentlewoman, whom he had forcibly carried away; presently whereupon the sea
began so to rage, that all the skill and courage the Mariners had were feign
to give way to the violence of this tempest, which continued very near three
months, and by reason we went still before the wind, I cannot be persuaded, but
that we are now on those unknown lands, whereof they of Asia and Europe speak
only by conjecture. These Knights having spent a good part of the day in this
and the like discourse, at length were so called upon by their stomachs, that
arising from the grass where they lay, the Knight of the Flowers with his
clothes on thoroughly dried, and Amadis in his armor, they walked almost two
hours without meeting any one that could direct them the way to the next
Village, in such sort that growing somewhat weary, they laid them down under
the shadow of certain trees, where not long after they fell asleep, but they
continued not so long, for they were awaked with the sound of some Trumpets,
which marched in the head of threescore horse, that were followed a good way off
by four Coaches, environed with three dreadful Giants, and a number of men
unarmed on hors-back. O me! said Amadis, rising up somewhat amazed, what
adventure is this? No very good one for you, said one of that troop, who upon
discovery of them came galloping before his fellows, for landing here without
the license of our Prince, you are to expect nothing but Irons for such your
temerity; By my best hopes, said Amadis, I will not be fettered so easily as
you think for, and if I must die I Will sell my life as dear as I can: Saying
so, he drew his sword, and therewith struck his enemy so furiously, that he
laid him stark dead on the ground: The blow being given in the sight of all
his companions, they presently compassed him about for to take him, but very
active as he was, he lightly lept into the saddle of his horse whom he had
slain, and setting spurs to him charged them home, whilst the Knight of the
Flowers seized on the dead man's shield and sword, wherwithall he overthrew
three or four of them at his feet, ere they could draw one drop of blood from
them; In the mean time Amadis laid about him, broke their ranks, cut off arms
and legs, made heads fly to the earth, divided men and horses in twain, and
rendered himself so dreadful, that the most of them having past by the edge of
his sword, the remainder turned their backs, for to have betaken them to
flight, had they not been retained by the arrival of the three Giants. These
Colosses marvelling to see so great a slaughter made by two men, whereof (...)
one was unarmed, drew out their heavy Simitars, and began to change them with
so much fury, that at the very first bout the Knight of the Flowers was
dangerously hurt on the shoulder, his shield not having been able to resist the
violence of so terrible a blow, which somewhat amazed him, but waxing more
courageous at the sight of his blood, he let drive in such manner at the Giant
that had wounded him, as he cut off his left arm sheer from his body, and
purposing to second his good beginning, he gave him a very dangerous thrust in
the belly, thinking to run him up to the ^ilts, but his sword proving too weak
to pierce his armor, it brake in five or six pieces, to the great astonishment
of the Knight, who now having nothing wherwithall to offend his enemies,
instantly received half a dozen strokes, which overthrew him to the ground with
little or no appearance of life. This while Amadis bestirred himself with an
admirable grace, for beholding himself environed with two Giants, and three and
twenty Knights, that were still remaining of the first troop, he avoided most
part of their blows, and let his own fall with such force, that in less then
an hour the two Giants saw their arms all dyed with their own blood, and
themselves unable to hinder the death of twelve of those that accompanied them,
which put them into such a rage, that their motions seemed to be very thunder.
Wherefore being ashamed, that in the presence of a number of Ladies which were
in the Coaches, one man alone should withstand them, they discharged two such
mighty blows at an instant, the one on the Helmet, the other on the Shield of
Amadis, that he was constrained to knock his chin against the pommel of his
saddle, casting great abundance of blood out of his mouth and ears, but
presently resetling himself, and more furious then ever he was in his life, he
advanced his rich sword, and letting it descend on the head of him he first
incountred, he cleft him down to the very wast: This dreadful blow having
terrified all the assistants, who beheld him with wonder, did but more incense
the remaining Giant; for in the highest excess of his rage, he took his great
Curtelas in both his hands, and thinking to determine this combat with one only
blow, he discharged it so strongly on his enemies Shield, that he divided it in
two, and gave him a greatgash on the arm, whereat Amadis was somoved, as casting
the remains of his Shield over his shoulder, he made such a lucky thrust with
all his force at his belly, that he ran him quite through and through, sending
him stark dead to the ground; wherwithall not contented, he was turning him
about to the rest of the Knights, when as he perceived them to gallop away, and
seek their safety in their flight; which caused him persently to sheath up his
sword, and approach unto the Coaches (where he beheld a many of Ladies in very
great fear) for to comfort and assure them against any doubt they might be in
of him; howbe it he had no more time then to see them, for before he could
speak to them, their Coachmen drove away withal possible speed toward the
City, which he discovered a little on the left hand; and so left him with
extreme displeasure, for so sudden a departure; his soul being deeply engaged
by one small glimpse he had of a Princess, whose eyes contained a million of
charms. This new passion not permitting him to see his Sun thus es^oigned from
him, he was going to run after it; but at that very instant perceiving three
other Giants to appear in the head of four hundred horse, which were come upon
the news of the others defe^^: he made a stand, and holding it to be far
greaterwisdome, and glory to (...) himself, then courage rashly to cast himself
away without reason or sense; he took the way of a mountain fast by, extremely
discontented so to retire, without knowing the name of the beauty that had
captived him; and leaving his companion (whose valor he had much admired) in
the hands of these barbarians. Trotting then along fair and softly, that he
might not seem to flee before his enemies, he rode very near an hour, before
he was overtaken by those that were best mounted of the Troop; who confident of
his overthrow, went to assail him with their swords drawn: But he that never
knew what danger meant, when necessity enforced him to fight; suddenly made
head against them, and without try fling out the time, laid a dozen of them on
the earth; howbeit, fearing to be environed by so many enemies at once, he
slipped into the wood, resolving under the shelter thereof, to attend the pleasure
of Heaven: But he very much marvelled that he was not pursued, and that a
little after he could perceive these Troops close altogether, and return to the
City; the occasion of which retreat and fear, shall be delivered in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. II. Amadis encountering a Shep^^^^d, learnes the name of his Mistress;
his resolution thereupon.
THE retreat of his enemies giving (...) time to breath; he began to think of
the encounter he had made, and taking much content in the confusion of his
thoughts, he laid him down on the grass; where the beauties of his Mistress
representing themselves to his memory, he entertained himself in this manner,
and said. Lord! what a change have I made to day? I affected nothing so much as
liberty, now I wish, and seek for captivity: I was a Soldier, now I am a
lover; glory was the object of my desires, love is now the uttermost of my
ambition: I love, alas! I love, but with little or no hope, and from whence I
can expect nothing but in supportable sufferings. Ah, if I could promise my
self to render her one day sensible of (...), after I had long adored her, why
then I could willingly (...) my self to any misery; but I do not so much as
know her, or if I did know her, I durst not present my self before her, having
jostly drawn her displeasure upon me, by the defeature of her people; What
resolution shall I take then? to dye, rather than seek a rer^^die in despair,
so great a (...), is not to be purchased without great labor; and the pains I
shall take to obtain it, shall never be less dear unto me, then the glory of
the most dangerous adventures that can be. Whereupon arising somewhat
comforted, he mounted on his Horse; and probably conjectaring that he should
meet with no body in the wood, he got him into the first highway that
presented it self unto him, where he had not rode long, but he descried a young
Shepherd coming from the City, whereat he was very glad, hoping to learn some
what of him concerning that which he desired to know; wherefore mending his
pace, he came very near to him, and said. Friend, I prithee tell me where I am.
At these words, the Shepherd who walked with his hat over his eyes; started, as
if he had been very much frighted, and was going to run away; had not (...),
taking hold of his arm; stayed him; and assured him with gentle speeches, that
he would do him no harm. Now in good faith, said the Shepherd, I was never so
a^^ear'd of the Wolf, as I was but now to see my self so surprised by you; for
I believed you meant to have sent me to keep company with them, that past by
the edge of your sword to day. Thy fear was (...), said Amadis, for I am more
ready to help, then hurt the^, but how (...) thou know that I have done all
that thouspeakest of; How do I know it, said the Shepherd, why I come newly
from the Ci^ie, which is all in an uproar; and the slaughter you have made to
day, has so astonished the Emperor, that holding it incredible he is come
forth in person to behold it; The Courtiers tremble at the sight of so many men
slain with such horrible blows, and the courage which you showed in combatting
such dreadful enemies, makes them talk of you, as of some prodigy: You are
known not by your name, (for it is said you are a stranger) but your arms have
been so well noted, that you cannot carry them here without greatdanger;
wherefore I would advise you for your good, either to change them, or to get
you quickly out of this Empire. Out of what Empire, said Amadis? How, answered
the Shepherd, do not you know, that you are in the Empire of Martaria, one of
the goodliest, and powerfullest Monarchies of the world? No verily, said
Amadis, I did not know it; for being arrived here but to day by a strange
accident, I could not have been informed of it, if by good fortune I had not
met with thee; but letting that pass, can not thou inform me who those
Ladies were, which I saw in the Coaches during the combat, and particularly she
in the green? That is said he the Princess of this Empire, and I am persuaded
the fairest of all the women living, she is called Palmirenna, and the other
two were her sisters, named Amplamira, and Archesidella, both of them so
accomplished, as they may well dispute somewhat with the eldest. Thou had
fully satisfied me, answered Amadis, would thou but resolve me of one thing
more; what was the reason, say they, why the Giants and the Knights their
followers, did not assail me in the wood, having so much advantage of me as
they had? The reason was apparent, answered he, for the way which you took was
so dangerous, that it was wisdom for them to retire, as they did. Wherefore was
it dangerous, said Amadis? In regard of a most dradfull Monster, replied he,
which arriving there not long since has made so great a spoil and havoc, as
the Emperor himself will be constrained to abandon Cardana, the capital City
of his Empire, for to reside in some other place. He has sent whole squadrons
of armed men under the conduct of three or four Giants against it, but still
they have been torn in pieces, for the fury of this creature is so terrible,
that the most confident tremble at the very sight of it: He has a body far
bigger then an Elephant, covered with green and yellow scails, so hard as no
steel is able to pierce them; he has two heads, one that casts forth a
million of stinking flames, through the midst of a number of teeth a cubit
long, and the other armed with two very huge horns, whereunto the inevitable
death of all such as dare assail him is fastened; his tail is eight foot long,
so strong and mighty, that with it he overthrovvs all the trees that stand in
his way; briefly, he is so horrible and cruel, that if the gods do not the
sooner put to their helping hand, this Province will shortly be laid vvast,
which were a lamentable thing, being so fertile and populous as it is: But
pardon me, Sir, if I be so bold as to ask of you, how you having been upon
the Mountain of Bears, where his ordinary hauntis, could elcape his fury? for
to speak truth, I hold it a kind of miracle. Heaven, that has preserved me for
his glory, said he, would not suffer me to fall into the power of this Monster:
but leaving this discourse, tell me what is become of the Gentleman that
combatted by me unarmed? I believe, answered he, that he will pay for the
harm you have done, for the Emperor having found him to be living, has
commanded the Surgeons to have a special care of him, reserving him as I
think, for to sacrifice him to his Gods, in regard of the extraordinary beauty
wherewithal he is endued. I hope he shall do better, replied Amadis, in the
mean time not to be ungrateful for thy good information of that which I
desired to know, I will give thee somewhat to relieve thy poverty, therewith he
took a Ring which he had on his finger of great value, and bestowing it on him
made him no less amazed, then contented. Look, said the Shepherd bowing
himself even to the ground for to thank him, how our opinions do many times
bring forth contrary effects, I thought I should have been undone by
incountring with you, and thereby I have found wherwithall to overcome the
miseries of my birth. Sir, your liberality obliges me to have a care of your
safety, pass on no further with these arms, for you shall be sure to meet
with none but enemies whersoever you go, time will best advise you for your
future preservation, in the mean while you shall spend this night if you please
in a poor cottage of mine, where without fear of any danger you may take a
little rest. Amadis seeing it was night, and perceiving the fellows good will
suffered himself to be conducted by him to a Village hard by, whereunto
entering secretly, and leaving the care of his horse to him, he sat him down to
supper, and having fed heartily on a Kid, that was served into the table, he
laid him down, all armed as he was, on a bed, hoping to sleep quietly
thereafter his hard travel; howbeit his new passion would not permit him so to
do, it represented the beauties of his Lady unto him, with the difficulties
which appeared in his love, that so disquieted him, as he could do nothing but
toss and tumble all the night long, at length being fully resolved, I must
hope, said he, instead of complaining and afflicting my self: I fear my
Mistresses, and the Emperors displeasure, in regard of the combat which I had
with their Knights, but I may repair that fault, and give them as much cause to
favor, as now they have to hate me; this Monster that spoils their Territories
must be fought withal; if I prevail, I shall oblige them with a service that
will produce their content, and the good of their people; if I fall in this
attempt it will give an end to my miseries, so that no way it can prove amiss
for me to undertake this Enterprise: Concluding then with himself in this sort
he fell asleep, and so continued till the Sun was of a pretty height, when
arising, and finding his breakfast ready, after he had eaten a little he drew
the Shepherd aside, and said unto him. Honest friend, J purpose to commit a
secret un to thee, but before Ideclare it thou shall swear to me, to do
whatsoever I shall bid thee. Assure your self my Lord, said he, that I will
make little account of my life where it shall concern your interest, only
command, and without any doubt of my fidelity, be confident that I will not
fayl in obeying you. Well, said Amadis, that which I would have thee do, is to
go along with me to the Mountain of Bears, to the end thou may be witness of
my actions, so as if I dye in the Combat, which I resolve to undertake against
this Monster, that destroys so goodly a country, thoushalt be obliged to find
out the beauteous Palmirenna, and shall tell her that the Knight, who slew her
Guard, stuck not to expose his life for the conservation of her people, thereby
to obtain her pardon, for the displeasure she received from his sword; But if
I get the victory, time shall further direct us. Good gods: said the Shepherd,
starting back, what is this you say, have you lost your understanding so far
forth, as to cast you self away? Ah, do not go about Sir, to employ those
forces, which the gods have given you on so despearate an adventure, reserve
your self for better fortune, and seek to escape hence some otherway. Thou
labourest in vain, said Amadis, to divert my resolution, it is not thy counsel
I demand, but a performance of thy promise, say then, will thou follow me? Yes,
answered he, bedewing his cheeks with tears, though it be much against my mind.
Whereupon Amadis road on to the foot of the Mountain, where the Shepherd taking
his Horse of him, commended him to his gods.

CHAP. 3. Amadis defeats the dreadful Monster of the Mountain of Bears, his
adventures afterward.
WHilst the Shepherd was weeping, Amadis traversed the Wood with an undaunted
courage, and calling to mind the glory which his Ancestors had acquired in such
like adventures, he resolved to be no whit amazed with the sight of this
horrible creature, whose dreadful form made every one to tremble at the very
apprehension of it; but when he saw him approach with most furious motions, he
could not be so confident, but that he began to doubt the end of his life;
nevertheless, choosing rather to dye, then show the least token of fear, he
drew out his rich sword, and discharged it full on his enemies body, hop^ng
therwithall, considering the strength with which it was delivered, to have
seen an end of thc combat, but perceiving it to fall without effect, by reason
of the hardness of his scails whereupon it lighted, he was marvellously
astonished; howbeit taking new courage he advanced it again, whenas the horns
of this creature meeting with his Shield, sent him to measure the ground, where
doubtless he lay not long, for knowing it would be his apparent ruin to attend
such another shock in the case he was in, he arose full of rage, and stepping
lightly aside he let his enemy pass by, making such horrible leaps, that the
earth seemed to groan under him, but desiring to make use of occasion, he gave
him so dangerous a blow as he went along, that he cut off half his tail,
though it were vvonderfull big, and covered over with exceeding hard scails,
which put him into such an excess of fury, that returning with incredible
svviftnesse he seized upon the Knights Shield with his teeth, and pulling it
easily from him, notwithstanding all the resistance he made to keep it, he
scrashed it into a thousand pieces whilst he trampled it under his feet. This
generous Warrior, that was not capable of fear, in the greatest and most
evident dangers, and that would not have regarded the glory of his enterprises,
but for the hazard wherewith they were accompanied, not losing his judgment in
such an extremity, suddenly cleared his arm from under one of the Monsters
feet, and thrusting his sword into his belly, ran him up with such force, that
he entered it even unto the very hilts, which made the Monster skip in so
violent a manner, as he lighted a dozen paces off, to the unspeakable content
of ou^ Knight, who neglecting no opportunity, speedily got up with a resolution
to avoid the like incounters if he could, but that he was not able to do, for
the Monster sensible of his hurt, flew madly at him without any regard at all
of his sword, wherewith he had in vain struck him on the head, and getting him
in his teeth overthrew him to the ground, pierced his armor in five or six
places, and died all the grass with his blood; Now was the Knight even at the
last gasp, being almost stifled with the stinking flames that incessantly
issued out of his mouth, but the remembrance of his excellent Mistress infused
such strength into him, that he so strugled with the Beast, as he made him
let go his hold, and at the same instant gave him another thrust in at the
throat, that reached to his very heart. Then it was that this Monster feeling
the pangs of death fell to storming, and making such horrible cries, that they
were heard even to Cardana, the Mountain shaking as if it had been stricken
with a million of thunderbolts: Whereupon the Knight perceiving him breathing
forth his last, retired aside for to kneel down, and render thanks unto God for
so glorious a victory; but being exceedingly weakened by the loss of his blood,
and overcome with the vile sent of the venom, which flowed out of the Monster,
he fell all along on the ground with little appearance of life in him. This
while the Shepherd amazed with the strange noise he heard was mightily
perplexed; Amadis his liberality made him desire to go and see in what estate
he was, but then again he was retained by fear, so as he knew not a good
while what to resolve on, at length his gratitude prevayling he set spurs to
his horse, and crossing the wood arrived at the place where the Monster lay
stretched forth, and weltring in his blood: His horrible figure so terrified
him, that he was upon the point of running back again, but espying the Knight
lying on the grass a little aside, he lighted instantly, and labored so
long, that he found the means to open his Helmet for to give him air; whereupon
Amadis came presently to himself, at which the poor man was wonderful glad, and
fain would have unarmed him, but unable to do it, he thought it best to have
speedy recourse to some other mean, getting up on his horse then, he rode away
to the City as fast as he could drive, where alighting at the Court, without
answering those that demanded of him what he would have; he went directly to
the Emperor, who was talking in the Hall amidst his Courtiers of the strange
noise they had heard, not conceiving from whence it should proceed, and falling
on his knees, even out of breath, he said unto him. Sir, I bring you joyful
tidings, the Monster of the Mountain of Bears is slain by the valiant stranger,
that yesterday did such wonders against your people. O ye gods! said the
Emperor, rising out of his seat, is it possible that so formidable a creature,
whose fury thousands of men, and dreadful Giants were not able to withstand,
should be killed by the hand of a mortal man? verily this report is scarcely
credible. Sir, answered the Shepherd, let me suffer, if I tell you an untruth,
for I saw him quite dead, and will conduct you, if you please, where that brave
Knight lies, still attending the succor of the gods, if man's assistance fail
him, being so dangerously hurt that he cannot live till night, if he be not
speedily provided for. That shall he be sure of, said the Emperor, for so
powerful an obligation, must cancel al other offenses that he has committed
against us, though I believe this combat was undertaken, more by necessity,
then any way to oblige us: Nay, ^eplied the Shepherd, your Majesty may be
pleased to give me leave to assure you that he performed it with a full
resolution to do you service, for before he entered the Wood, he commanded me
to tell the Princess Palmirenna in your Majesty's presence, that he went to
venture his life, to obtain pa^don, for the fault he had done in drawing his
sword against her servants; albeit, that mischance happened by their insolency,
and much against his mind.

That do I grant most willingly, said Palmirenna; and seeing his respect to me
has made him so regardlesse of such a danger, I shall be as sensible of that
good affection, as I would have been of his offense: Wherefore your Majesty
(said she, continuing her speech unto her Father) shall do well to command your
Chyrurgions away before, whilst we go fair and softly after to behold this
miracle. The Emperor very well pleased herewith, presently dispatched away his
Chyrurgions, with a great charge to employ the uttermost of their skill for the
recovery of the knight; and getting into his Daughters Coach, he followed them,
accompanied with all his Nobility, who could not wonder sufficiently at so
prodigious a thing.

But we will leave them (thronging the ways, and striving which should make
most haste to behold this redoubted Warrior; to whom this succor had been
unprofitable, if Heaven, that reserved him for his glory, had not otherwise
ordained of him) for to deliver what arrived to him after the Shepherds
departure. Recovering then by little, and little; he was rising to unarm
himself, when he pereceived a Dwarf that said unto him: Be of good cheer sir,
this action will bring you more glory, than harm; it is true, that your wounds
are very dangerous, by reason the Monsters teeth are venomous; but I have
assured remedies to preserve you, and will do that for your recoverie, which
the experience of the best Chyrurgions in the World would attempt in vain;
only follow me, and let us not decline those which come to seek you, for I
hold it not fit to put you into their hands; not in regard of the Emperor or
his Daughter, who with good reason prefer that which you have now performed,
far before yesterdaies offense, but the Giants death having rendered their
kindred your enemies, all the Princes favor cannot protect you from being
treacherously murdered; wherefore be careful, if you mean to abide here to
keep your self unknown. Saying thus, and and reaching him his hand, he helped
him up with such case; that he remained very much amazed, to find so much
strength in so little a body. Being able then to walk a little, they
descended down the mountain, on that side that looked to the Sea, and entered
both into a Grott, where Amadis was instantly unarmed: that done, he laid him
down upon a bed, which seemed to have been set there expressly for him, and
discovered his wounds to this little man; who having bathed them with a very
odoriferous liquour, and afterward laid certain plasters to them, he covered
him, and willed him to sleep.

In the mean time the Emperors Chyrurgions were much troubled, for being come
where the Monster lay; and missing the knight that had been so recommended to
their care, they were exceedingly afflicted; but especially the poor Shepherd,
who bitterly weeping, cried out. Alas! this is the place where I left him, the
grass is yet wet with his blood, and it is not long since he could be taken
away; surely some god came hither and has carried him to heaven. Ah noble
knight! why was not I here, that I might have participated a little of thy
glory; or if some worse chance has befaln thee, that I might then have run thy
fortune? Hereupon the Emperor arriving, and understanding how the knight could
not be found, he was exceedingly discontented, but Palmirenna much more; for
the matchless valor of this stranger, whereof she had been an eyewitness,
and the extreme peril wherun to he had exposed himself in the combat with the
monster for her sake had so taken her, as she was mavelous sensible of his
loss: howbeit her Father commanded his knights to disperse themselves in the
search of him; she comforted her self in hope to hear of him ere it were long,
and so went to observe the Beast, which seemed still so dreadful, as it made
all the assistants to tremble. O ye gods! said the Emperor, much astonished at
the sight of so horrible a figure; what a courage had he need of, that durst
encounter so deformed a creature, when as being dead it terrifies all that
behold it: Ah incomparable knight, then the which a more valiant never breathed
upon the earth; thou art afraid to present thy self before me, in regard of
one poor offense; but be assured no man shall ever be more welcome to me then
thy self: Go then and seek him out, and place the skin of the Beast stuffed with
straw, on the highest Tower of Cardana, valiant persons cannot be too much
honored. Saying so, he returned into Palmirenna's Coach, where all the way to
the City he entertained her with the praises of this knight, which he thought
could never be sufficient for so transcendent a merit.

CHAP. IIII. Floridan of Persiabeing delivered out of Captivity by the
victory of Amadis, becomes enamoured of Amplamira. The invention that Amadis
uses to see Palmirenna.
CArdana having just occasion to resent the death of this Monster, which in
short time would have rendered it desolate; was replenished in a moment with a
world of bonfires, and nothing was heard but shouts of joy, confusedly mingled
with the music of a million of instruments, in such sort that the Emperor
arriving, thereupon was conducted to his Palace with more magnificence, then if
he had triumphed over the greatest Monarch of the earth. This Prince beholding
his people amidst their content, chaunting his greatness, and the praises of
our Warrior; remembered the Gentleman that accompanied him in the slaughter of
his servants; and being magnanimous, commanded him to his Presence; whereupon
being presently brought before him in irons, he said unto him.

It were unreasonable, that in the e^nesse of a public joy deriv^^ from the
valor of your Companion, you alone should have cause to complain of fortune,
wherefore passing by the displeasure I received from you yesterday; It is our
pleasure that you be freed from these chai^s, and that you have the same power
here of your actions, as you had before your arrival in these parts; provided
that you let me know who the Knight is, and that you likewise conceal not your
own condition.

Mighty Prince, answered he; the generosity of Kings appears always in their
Cl^mencie, and as the cruelty of Tyrants tenders them subject to a thousand
kind of mischiefs, so does mercy assure good Princes, even in the midst of
greatest dangers; being a Prisoner, I expected as much relief from your pity,
as from mine own innocence, for I knew that reason would at length have drawn
you to consider, that I was forced to fight, and that a man cannot commit a
fault in preserving his life with the loss of theirs, that sought to deprive
him of it; howbeit, I acknowledge my self infinitely obliged to your Majesty,
for making me, without languishing any longer in misery; of a slave, your most
humble and faithful servant, in which regard your Highness shall always, and
absolutely dispose of the life you have now given me: And if I do not satisfy
your Majesty's desire, by telling you the name of this Knight, to whose valor
you say that you are engaged in such powerful obligations, be assured Sir,
that it is because I do not know it, not having had the honor of his
acquaintance but since yesterday, that he drew me out of the midst of the
waves; where, by the casting away of the bark which carried me, I was like to
have perished: for my own particular, you behold Sir, a poor Gentleman of
Persia, commonly called the Knight of the Flowers; who, having nothing at this
present, but the honor of the favor, which you are pleased to promise him,
will labor to deserve it by the greatness of his service.

This good will of yours, said the Emperor, does content me, and believe that
you shall have no cause given you to depart from hence; commanding him then to
be accommodated with all that he should need, he appointed him a Chamber, that
opened into the Gardens, and so fell to talk of the discretion, sweet carriage,
and handsomeness he had observed in him, which seemed so extraordinary unto
his Courtiers, that they were wonderfully taken with his rare perfections. He
retired then free from those chains, which might have fettered his hands, but
not from those love had prepared to bring his heart into subjection, for the
excellent beauty of Amplamira, second daughter to the Emperor, having bin
still present before his eyes, all the while that he was in the Hall, had made
so deep an impression in his soul, that he had wholly surrendered it into her
power; But it is time to leave him to the comfort of his deliverance, and to
the pleasing cogitations of his love, for to return unto Amadis.

This generous Warrior having slept very soundly all the night, awaked Just as
the Sun began to appear in the mouth of the cave; and feeling no pain of his
hurt, arose much amazed how it could be possible they should be healed in so
short a space. A more mighty hand, said he, looking upon himself, then that of
a man, has done this miracle, nature has not so great a power, no^ could all
the simples of the earth, gathered in any season whatsoever give so sudden a
cure to such (...) wounds, Cassandra certainly has do^e it, and the Dwarf that
conducted me hither was one of the creatures, which she uses upon her
occasions: be it as it will, I find my self I thank Heaven in cafe to put on my
A^^es; But what is that I say? am I not commanded never to wear them if I mean
to live? Ah (...) what tears will thy beauty cost me, and what pains do I see
prepared for^^e, if I thus wilfully persist in my affection? I cannot come near
thee without danger, nor esloign my self from thee without loss of my life;
what shall I do then to be at rest? or what counsel shall I take in so great
an extremity? Peril has some hope, whereas there is none in death, and apparent
loss is ever worse then hazard: Recourse must therefore be had to that which is
least to be feared, I will see Pa^mire^na, and rather meet with destruction,
then miss the favor which I must expect from her pity.

This resolution carrying him out of the grot with his sword by his side, and
beginning to enter into the way that leads to the City, he perceived something
floting on the sea, and making to the shore. This object arresting him a while,
he straight perceived a little wooden Coffer cast on land, covered with
fear-cloath, and a woman upon it stifled with the waves, whence judging it to
be some of the relics of the former days shipwreck he drew away the body with
a purpose to bury it, and render that last duty unto her being dead, but
desiring first to see what was in the Coffer, he cut the cords asunder with
his sword, and having very easily broken it up, he found in it a Gown of green
Velvet, whose ground was silver, an Head-tyre of the Greek fashion, with a
number of pretty knacks, belonging to women, his curiosity but little
satisfied with this encounter, he took the corpse, and meeting with a pit
made by nature, he laid her in it, and covered her with a little earth, that
done he turned again toward the City, the remembrance of Palmirenna
possessing him with an extreme desire to see her, and began to walk along still
casting with himself what course he might take to have a sight of her without
being known; after much musing he resolved at last to disguise himself;
whereupon calling to mind the Gown he had left behind him, he presently turned
back, and said.

Is it not with reason that Lovers are said to be blind? Fortune presented me
with assured means to free me from the care I am in, yet I neglected them, and
did not conceive they were useful for my purpose: this is that (taking up the
Coffer in his arms, and carrying it into the grot where he had lain) this is
that shall ease me of my pain, I have no hair on my face, nor is it much to be
misliked, so that having this Gown and tire on, I may easily pass for a woman.
Saying so, he stripped himself out of his clothes, put on the green velvet Gown,
fitted his hair under the tire with the assistance of a glass, and admitting
nothing that might serve to set forth a beauty, tricked up himself so neatly,
as he might well have been in love with his own form, had he not been so with
Pal^irenna; Being persuaded then, and not vainly, that he was very handsome in
this habit, he hoped to see a good issue of his design, and thought it long
till he was in the City, that he might be conducted to his Lady; but not
knowing how that might be effected, he began to be troubled anew: howbeit
rememb^ing the Dwarfs advise, he resolved to leave all unto fortune; wherefore
wrapping up his sword, which he very much esteemed of, in some linen clothes
he buried it in a corner of the grot under a little earth, to the end he
might find it there again upon occasion; that done, and little caring for the
rest of his Arms, he left the grot, and taking the most beaten way, he
walked on, still thinking how he might make use of his disguise: whereupon
fortune being more favorable to him then he expected, he heard some coming,
whom he made show, as though he would shun, but desiring nothing more then to
fall into their hands, he suffered himself to be seen, and then suddenly
retiring under the trees, seemed to be much afraid of those he saw, which were
about some six, who setting spurs to their horses came up presently to him where
he was. Beauteous stranger, said one of them that was foremost, and that
marvelled very much to behold so rare a creature, be not afraid, here are none
but such as are wholly devoted to your service, be therefore pleased to declare
what occasion has brought you hither; No other, alas; said he, shedding some
tears the better to beguile them, but my evil fortune, for departing from the
Empire of Greece, for to go unto Sicilia to the Nuptials of a sister of mine;
who was to be wedded to the Viceroy there, I was carried by the violence of a
most furious tempest into this coast, where not far from hence our Ship ran
against a Rock, and was cast away with all that were in her as I believe, my
miserable self excepted, who am reserved I fear for greater misfortune. You are
to hope better, answered this Barbarian, for the Gods have not preserved you
but for happier ends, as shall soon be made good unto you, if you can but love
me, as I affect you. Now by my life, said one of the others, whose heart was as
deeply wounded as his, she would show but little judgment to prefer your
affection before mine, that loves her more, and has greater credit, and
authority to assist her then you. At thesewords, the first giving him a furious
look, they both drew out their swords, and seconded by their companions, who
instantly sided with them, they charged one another so hotly, that in a quarter
of an hour four of them were laid on the ground to the great contentment of
Corazinda (so had Amadis then named himself) who stepping in between the other
two, desired them to become friends, and to tell him the name of the country.
Fair Nymph, answered the one, you are in the Empire of Martaria, commanded by
the best Prince of the world. Lead me to him then, said she, and not hazarding
your lives for so worthless a subject, share that recompense between you, which
your presenting of me unto him may produce. These Knights embracing so safe an
offer, and leaving the dead bodies in the place went away with her to the
City, where arriving at the Court before the Emperor, Corazinda with a sweet
and modest look fell on her knees, and making the same relation to him, which
she had done before unto his Knights, she besought him to have some compassion
of her fortune, not permitting her to be any way injured. Pretty one (said he,
very much wondering at her beauty, and already feeling some secret flames that
began to scorch him) you shall not want my favor, seeing the gods have been
pleased to cast you on my territories; and to show that your arrival here is
acceptable unto me, I will give order that you be lodged near my daughters,
with whose company you may the better pass away the time. Oh! how pleasing was
this saying unto our Warrior, and how easily might one have discerned the
alteration of his soul by his change of color, if one had had the least
suspicion of his sex; verily his desire ^^ew, and he thought it long till h^^
saw himself at the liberty to consider at leisure all the perfections of his
Lady, but remembering that discretion was more then necessary for his designs,
and that he was to govern his actions, if he meant to assure his happiness;
he made little show how much he was transported by this speech, contrarily
bowing himself even to the ground, with the best grace he could use in
acknowledgement of so much favor, he kissed his hand, and raising up himself
again, he very modestly followed him that was to conduct him to his Chamber,
wherein at first he fetched a thousand turns, blessing the good hap, which had
so prospered his desires. In the mean time the Emperor acquainted his
daughters with the acquisition he had made of one of the fairest slaves in the
world. Her eyes, said he, has so many winning charms, that my heart frozen
with a multitude of years, has felt the violence of their beams, her hair
sweetly set forth under a strange Attire, is not to be paraleld, her form is
goodly, nothing can be desired more in a face, most delicate in her skin,
briefly, next to you, who excel in all perfection, she may vaunt her self to
be one of the most beautiful creatures of the earth, judge then whether I can
think upon her without love, and whether it be not an hard matter for him that
shall converse with her to preserve his liberty? without doubt, said
Palmirenna, who had much ado to forbear smiling at this her fathers rapture,
being such as you describe her, she may work great effects, even upon the most
insensible; But Sir, I marvel that you will let her be a slave, seeing she
so deserves to be served? Think not (said he) that I will commit so great ^
fault, whereby I should ^ffend the gods, and my judgment, which forbid me to
entreat her with rigor, she shall have as much liberty as you, but I will
call her the fair slave, till such time as we better understand who she is:
your discourse, said Amplimira then, has possessed me with a great desire to
see her, will you be pleased, Sir, to grant us this contentment. Very
willingly, answered he; for I would have you acquainted with her, and use her
with the respect which I am persuaded she deserves, for her carriage assures
me she is nobly derived: Herewith Amadis being called forth came out of his
Chamber strangely perplexed, he had resolved with himself not to be moved, but
as soon as he appeared in the Hall, and was fallen on his knees, before his
Mistress, who was exceedingly taken with the sight of such a comely person,
he found himself to be so lost, that he was not able to utter a word, howbeit
she that beheld him with a particular good will, which she could not call
love; and that was no less ravished then he, desiring to confirm him, said
unto him. Fair stranger, what ayl you, will you not let us know, who you are,
and from whence you came? Madam, answered he, marvel not if I have not spoken
till now, to give you humble thanks, for the honor you have done me in
receiving me thus, I had no eyes, but to admire the excellency of your beauty,
which certainly cannot be humane; you ask me who I am, why here is before
you a poor Damosel of Greece, the object of the mischances, and misery of the
world, yet not so unhappy, but that she applauds that fortune, which has
brought her hither to enjoy the blessedness of your presence. Arise, svveet
heart, said Palmire^^a, and you shall see that we shall so cherish and caresse
you, as you shall have no cause to complain: Saying so, she stooped, and
kissed him, wherewith Amadis was so transported, as he was ready to sound with
extremity of pleasure, but recollecting his spirits, which were wandering in
this ecstasy, he was going to render the like unto the two incomparable
Infantaes, when as they prevented him with their kisses, after the example of
their elder sister, and not suffering him to kneel, led him by the Emperors
permission into Palmirennaes Chamber, who began to affect him no less then
she did her sisters.

CHAP. V. The life that Amadis led with Palmirenna. Floridans passions for
Amplamira. Amadis and he knows one another.
AMadis his behavior, accompanied with most extraordinary sweetness, made him
to be beloved of all, Palmirenna and her sisters held nothing so dear as his
company, their women idolatrized him, and as his habit beguiled every one, the
Gallants of the Court were as much enamoured of her, as she was of her
Mistress: Tarsander, the Prince of Balivana, Nephew to the Emperor, sighed
often at her feet, howbeit so discreetly, that the Emperor, who
notwithstanding his old years was extremely passionate for her, could never
perceive it: Every one adored her, but he that showed least fear, and most
affection, was Bustrafard the Giant, whose cruel soul delighted more in blood,
then in the exercise of any Gentleness. This Colossus having heard it often
said, that handsomnesse had as much power over the will of a woman, as the
continuance of services that were done her, labored to sweeten his look, which
was most dreadful, caused his horrible rough beard to be perfumed, combed his
hair, that was harder then any horses Mane, painted his swarthy face,
apparelled himself in the richest robes he could get, which made him more
hideous, and omitting no occasion to accost our Gentlewoman, entertained her
with the discourse of his valor, of his wealth, and of the antiquity of his
race; and propounded unto her incredible contentments in the possession of him.
Behaving himself thus in the sight of all the world, it exceedingly vexed
Tarsander, who would willingly have been revenged on him, had his forces been
answerable to his courage; but knowing full well that it would have been in
vain for him to have attempted any thing against him he concealed his mind,
hoping that Corazinda had more judgment, then to suffer her self to be carried
by such an ill favored and ugly beast. Whilst all these gallants dyed for the
love of her, she felt the same passions for the Lady, and because she durst
not sigh but in secret, she spent much of her time alone in the Gardens, where
she entertained her self in this manner. To what end serves this borrowed
disguise, if I have not an heart to crave a remedy, for the extremity of my
grief? I see Palmirenna, it is true, I kiss her hands, and by an excess of
good fortune, she sometimes joins her lips unto mine; but what does that
avayl me, seeing she does it in regard of the habit that I were, not of the
love that I bea^ her? Nothing questionless, but to increase my torment, these
are winds, which in stead of extinguishing my flame, make it burn with the more
violence, and if I take not a stronger resolution, I have labored in vain to
get the possession of so invaluable a g^mme: I must then either quit this
habit, or make another, and better use of it then hitherto I have done, women's
hearts are not without pity, and when Palmirenna shall know that I am a
Knight, she will not advance my death by manifesting it to another. But what
is this I say? will she not have just cause to blame this deceit, and to
banish me from her sight for a punishment of so heinous a crime? yes, no doubt,
and whereas the good will she bore me, whilst she thought me to be of her sex,
might counsel her to do otherwise, honor and decency will fence her to it, I
do therefore ill to yield to my desires, I am more happy then I deserve; for the
longer I suffer, the greater will be my glory. So resolving to be silent, and
leave her remedy unt^ time, she sat her down one day under a tree, upon whose
bark she had graven a thousand characters, where she began to renew her
complaints, when as Palmirenna arriving there by chance with three of her
Ladies, caught her by the arm, and said. What, Corazinda; are you still
weeping, cannot all our caresses make you forget our country? Truly I have
reason to complain of you, and will never believe that you love me so much, as
you say, since you continue so sad here. Think not, answered she, (some what
amazed to see her self so surprised) that I bestow these tears, on the
remembrance of my country, or friends their absence is the least of my cares,
but I grieve for that I cannot profit you by my service, nor advance my self a
whit in the honor of your savor, for loving you far more, and that beyond
all comparison, as I may truly say, then all the Knights of the world put
together can possibly do, I could wish that your eyes should rest no where but
on me, as my thoughts have no other object, then the excellency of your
beauty; I wonder, said Palmirenna, that you should complain thus of me without
a cause, does not my women's jealousy, who are vexed for that they cannot be so
free with me as you are; make it evidently appear how infinitely I love you?
clear your self of this sinister impression, and be confident, dear Corazinda,
that if your content depends on me, you shall live as happily as your own heart
can wish, being resolved to give you, and that most willingly, all that you can
desire of me, provided I may see you no more thus afflicted. Now are all my
sorrows at an end, answered Corazinda, for all the good of my future life is
tied to the effect of this promise, which I hope you will never forget, and to
make my happiness complete, there wants nothing but this; that whereas herein
the Court I am called the fair slave; you will be pleased, that hereafter I may
be called Palmirenna's fair slave. Here at the Princess fell a laughing, and
embracing her, said that it pleased her very well. Some hours being sweetly
spent in such like discourse, which testifying more and more an extreme love,
that gave the Ladies great occasion to marvel from whence the heat of so
powerful an affection should proceed, these two incomparable beauties retired
into the Palace, where the Emperor meeting with them, began on a sudden to
feel that fire burn which the first sight of our fair sl^ve bad kindled in his
breast: Pretty one, said he unto her, having withdrawn her to a window, do not
you think is time yet to case my pain and shall the discretion which you have
sound in my carriage leave you insensible of my sufferings? consider that my
love can make you the happiest Woman of the world, and that your good fortu^e
depends on the pity which you shall have of me, and that if you be inexorable,
you will give me just occasion to accuse your in gretitude, and to retrench
you of those favors, which you receivehere. Sir answered she, (knowing full
well that ^hee was to flatter his grief, rather than incense his choler) my
judgment is not so weak, as to make me neglect the contentment, and advantages
which the honor of your affection does promise me, but do you think, that
having yet sighs in my mouth, and tears in my eyes, to be wayl my captivity,
my esloignment from my country, and the loss of my friends, I can resolve for
any pleasure? verily I cannot, time the common Physician of our miseries, may
alter this peevish humor, and furnish me with other devises, be pleased I
beseech you Sir, to attend your remedy from thence, your delight will be the
greater when I shall give it you without grudging, and not forcing my will you
shall oblige me to comm^nd your gentleness, in the mean while let me obrain
of you, that you will not afflict yourself, and giving me leave to retire from
hence for to avoid the suspicion which may be had of your intent, leave me so
to manage my sorrows with time, as I may be ableere it be long, to satisfy
your hopes. Go my dearest Cornkinds, said be, insinitly contented with this
answer; the gods which have made you to ^air, make you as true. Palmirennaes
fair slave having got off in this manner, went to find on her Lady; but
understanding that she was laid down to sleep, she returned into the Garden,
where having made afewturns, she peceiveda man lying on the grass, under the
shadow of certain trees, who thinking he was not over-heand spoke thus.
Wretched Knight? what can thou expect from thy enterprise, but
insuppottabletonments? thou imaginest that time, and thy services will beget a
liking of thee in this Princess, but thou will be deceived, she will receive
them from thee, as from an ordinary Knight obliged by the liberality of her
father, what will thou do then? will thou discoverthy self for to serve her
openly? thou will not be believed, but say thou were, difference of religion
would serve for a cause to refuse thee; now to leave her is not in thy power,
seeing all thy future content depends on her favor. Powerful love open my
eyes, that I may find out the means to conserve my self, which I fear is even
at an end. Here with bedewing his cheeks with tears, he fetched three or four
sighs, whereof Corakinds, who measured another grief by her own, was so
sensible, that she resolved to comfort him: Whereupon approaching unto him,
she perceived that it was he whom she had taken up out of the Sea, at her
arrival in Marta^ia, which exceedingly rejoiced her, but making as though she
knew him not, she began to discourse of the inconstancy of things here below,
that many times succeed according to our desires, when we least hope for them;
Weak spirits, said she, mayfail, because they are ignorant of the good which
patience brings, bun a generous Knight ought to undertake without fear, and
dare any thing where by he may be able to merit; delight does notraste well,
without some proceeding labor, nor is content pleasing, gotten without pain,
the resolution you have taken to pursue your design, is courageous, and from
whence you cannot but attend recompense, proceed then, and be not dismayed with
the difficulties of our enterprise, Love will favor your desires, and for me I
will most willingly serve you therein to the utmost of my power. O me said the
Knight, who during this discourse had very attentively observed her, either I
am greatly deceived, or I behold one of the bravest Warriors on the earth, in
an habit quite contrary to his valor, diftrust me not Sir, I beseech you, I
owe too much unto your assistance to be any way wanting to your service, or to
disclosethat which you desire should be concealed, wherefore tell me boldly the
occasion of this transformation, which so amazeth me. I did not think, answered
C^razinda, that you could have known me thus disguised, but not to hide my self
longer from you, I confess that I am indeed the same that saved you from
drowning, you marvel to see me in this attire, but you know that love does
greater miracles, I will give you a reason for it by and by, so as you will use
the like courtesy toward me, by declaring truly unto me your birth, and
condition. That will I a thousand times over, if you please, said he, I am
called Floriden of Persia, son to Den Rogel of Greece, of whom peradventure
you have heard, conducted hither by my destiny, and constrained to abide here
for to obtain the favor of Amplamira, the Emperors second Daughter, whose
beauty has so engaged me, that I can never depart from hence without infinite
discontent. See, said C^razinda, embracing him very kindly; how unfortunate
have we bin not to know one another in this strange Country, where the advice
of the one might greatly avayl the other; my name is Amadis of Trebisond, Son
to the Emperor Amadis of Greece, your Fathers Grandfather, drawn hither as you
have seen by a mavelous adventure, and here stayed by the beauty of (...),
for the love of whom I have taken upon me this habit, believing that it would
facilitate the means to see her, and it may be to conduct my designs to a
better Port, then could have been done by my Arms, which I have made odious at
my arrival in this Province, where I am now known by the name of C^razinda,
though of late I am called (...) fair slave. Here with these two brave
Warriors renewing their embraces, infinitely caressed one another; but the fear
of being discovered, counseled them to retire, with a promise nevertheless to
meet every day, and confer of their Loves, at all other times carrying
themselves, as unacquainted; parting then with some grief Floridan went to his
Chamber, musing on the course that he might hold for to speak to his Lady, and
the fair slave to (...), whose absence was so insupportable to her, that she
was almost never out of her sight.

CHAP. VI. Floridan meets with Almerina in the Emperors Garden, their
discourse; Floridan discovering himself, writes to Amplamira.
WHilst Amadis beheld himself in those eyes, which his soul adored, sighed out
his passions, and under the favor of the habit that he wore stole kisses from
Palmirenna's delicate lips, whilst he lost himself at the sight of the two
little unparalled Worlds, that so graced her bosom; and languished in the
desire, and expectation of a greater felicity; Floridan was enraged for that he
could not come to speak unto his Mistress that he might acquaint her with the
secret fire which consumed him; he recounted his sufferings unto the trees,
desired relief from the Fountains, and as if these inanimate things had been
capable of his cmplaints, he besought them to comfort and assist him in so
great an extremity. At length, unable longer to endure the violence of his
desires, he resolved either by death, or the assurance of enjoying of that he
desired, to make himself happy; My tongue dares not discover my thoughts; said
he, my hand then shall do it that office; and if I must dye in this enterprise,
it is better I should do so quickly, then languish any longer amidst such
tormenting passions; Whereupon getting ink and paper, he wrote what love
indicted to him, but having finished his Letter, and not knowing how to convey
it into his Ladies hands, he was troubled afresh, and dispaired of all good
success, howbeit his fortune proved better then he expected, for walking
solitary in the Garden by himself, as he used to do; Al^^^ina (the Earl^ of
Frisoliae's daughter, and the faithful Secretary of Amplamira's thoughts, being
enamored of him, and therefore as much desiring to sp^ak with him, as he did
to talk with his Mis^^esse) came thither by chance, and espying him lying
under a tree, she approached unto him, ere he was aware, where watch fully
observing him, she hoped to have heard something come from him; that might
discover the cause of his ^olitude, but finding him silent with some tears in
his eyes, she presently conceived that her heauty had wrought these effects in
him, the rather because she remembered, that he had always sought occasions to
be present, where she was with Amplamira, this opinion, and her affection
emboldning her, she stepped to him, and pulling up his hat, which he had plucked
down over his eyes, with a smiling countenance she said unto him: How now
Knight of the Flowers, do these tears become the cheek of a valiant man? and
why do you afflict your self in a place where you are so caressed, not
answerably, it may be, to your merits, but as much as may be? come, this
carriage of yours rather befits a Woman, whose weakness is not capable of
generous resolutions, to withstand misfortune, and if you continue to do thus,
you will lose much of that good opinion, which out Courtiers have conceived of
you; a courageous mind seeks remedy for his disease, and never increases it by
cowardice; now if the loss of your friends, or the absence of some Mistress
makes your abode here distastful, the Emprour is a Prince so gracious, that he
will not deny you leave to depart from hence at your pleasure. Alas, said he
(no whit dismayed with this surprise, but resolved to discover himself, since
this encounter had happened according to his wish) my displeasure proceeds not
from the grief of seeing my self esloigned from my Country, since I
voluntarily forsook it, for to travel the world, but I complain for that I am
so unhappy, as I cannot hope for any content whilst I live, unless you will
take some pity of my suffering, I must speak, I can no longer conceal my
thoughts; Almerina, in your hands rests my life or death, I have endured
incredible things before I would resolve to discover my self; and the fear to
offend Amplamira, whom I love beyond all comparison, far more then mine own
soul, has hitherto closed up my lips, but now the violence of my pains so
terribly afflicts me, that I must impart this secret unto you; Sweet Almerina,
have some compassion on me, tell her that which I say, and joining your
entreaties to my tears, render her sensible of my suffering: I am too daring,
it is true, for such an accomplished beauty deserves no less then the
affection of a God, but if her eyes might stoop to a man, my birth has not
made me so mean, but that I may justly equal my self with the greatest of the
earth; now if I may receive a good office from you, be assured that you shall
not confer it upon an ungrateful person, nor ever repent any assistance you
may give me. These words finishing in tears, marvellously astonished this Lady,
who little expected such a discourse, and considering the speech she had
heard, which deprived her of all hope of ever possessing him, shrinking up her
shoulders, she said; O ye gods, now deceitful is the judgment of man, and
with what little assurance may one depend on things of this world; Indeed Sir I
guessed, that Love had drawn forth those tears, which trickled down your
cheeks, and as I was foolish enough to presume a little too much of my beauty,
I verily believed that I was the cause of it, loving you with no less ardour,
then you do your Mistress, but now knowing you better then I did, and no way
doubting of the greatness of your descent, I will quench those amorous flames,
and only reserve such a good will for you, ^^ may oblige you in your
enterprise; wherefore I Will promise to serve you therein with passion, not for
the hope of the recompenses you propound, but for the glory of having done
something for so noble a Gentleman, and to restifie unto you how willingly I
do this, I will presently go about it; Were it not amiss (said Floridan unto
her, after some kisses, and a thousand protestations, eternally to remember so
powerful an obligation) that she saw a Letter, whereby J was resolved to have
discovered my self unto her; It cannot choose but aid our design, said
Almerina, therefore give it me, you shall quickly have an answer of it, and be
confident that if it lie in me, you shall have no longer cause to complain:
Whereupon Almerina departing with some regret, to see all her hopes overthrown,
she went to find out Amplamira in her Chamber, who beholding her with a
troubled countenance, demands of her from whence she came? from learning out a
secret, answered she, of great importance for you: What is it, said Amplamira?
Madam replied Almerina, walking but now in the Emperors Garden, and thinking
of nothing less then Love; I discovered a Gallant the most inamoured that
lives, wot you who it is? That brave stranger, the Companion of him that
defeated the Monster, he lay upon the grass under the shadow of those great
trees, which make a demi-circle at the first door of the walk, and spoke
somewhat loud, not imagining that I was so near him; His first speeches were
nothing but complaints against fortune, that spares no body, and that
ordinarily falls upon the greatest, the better to demonstrate her power; but
passing from that to speak of Love, he fetched some sighs, and then proceeded
in this manner. O ye gods, said he, how fair is Amplamira, but why does not
she know that I love her? I have a thousand times resolved to let her
understand my affection, and a thousand times again has respect shut up my
mouth, fearing to offend her by the overture of my heart; nevertheless it is
necessary that she know it, at least wise if ever I will hope for content, but
how shall that be, dare I be so hardy as to speak unto her? No verily, fear
would tie up my tongue, and the lightning of her eyes would strike me dumb: To
acquaint her with it otherwise, alack I see little likelihood, here I am
unknown; and of millions that in my own country would most gladly serve me,
not one is present to undertake this afair, I must dye then with this regret,
that I have loved the fairest, and most excellent creature in the world, and
durst not publish it. These words being drowned with a sea of tears, he turned
him about, and took a paper out of his pocket, over the which he lamented
anew. How happy would thou be, said he, if thou might be permitted to
touch the delicate hands of my Mistress, and what would not I give then to see
my self in thy place? Doubtless J should not grieve at the loss of so much
greatness as a tends me; and though it should immediately preced my death, I
should be no way sorry for it. What should I say more? All his motions, Madam,
were full of love, he wished a thousand, and a thousand times that he might
be beloved of you; in the midst of this Agony he rose up, and went away,
leaving the paper which it seems he forgot, behind him upon the ground, where
I found it all bedewed with his tears, and which I present here unto you, open
it, peradventure you will meet with the same discourse in it, as I made you but
now. Whereupon kissing the Letter, which Floridan had given her, she delivered
it to the Princess, who made some difficulty at the first to receive it,
howbeit being a little urged by Almerina, but more by the desire she had to
learn who the Knight was, she opened it, and read this which follows.

To the fairest Infanta of Martaria.
MADAM,
I Doubt not, but you will think it very strange, that an unknown Knight
should dare so far, as to be a Suit^r to you for your love, before his
services might induce you unto it; but when you shall consider, that he is
enforced so to do, by the unresistable power of your divine beauty,
questionless you will excuse his presumption, and not think it ^^isse, if he
beg some grace from you, since it is the glory of the gods to grant it unto
the Prayers of m^^: He indures incredible pains, his desires never leave him
in quiet, his heart burns continually in a flame, which your fair eyes have
kindled his little merit, and your greatness make incessant was upon him, he
has no relief but in his sighs; in the which too he finds a great deal of
misery: Leave him not Madam, in the midst of so many Enemies that oppress him,
he will not live but for you, prolong his days for your service; and because
all his felicity depends thereupon, permit in the mean time that he may be
named.

Your KNIGHT.


Is it possible, said (...), that there should be so much temerity in a man! an
ordinary Knight address himself to me! motion love to me! and be a Suitor to
me for some favor? This is an unpardonable insolence, he must be relieved
Almerina, but in an other manner, then he hopes for; return prese^^ly to him,
and tell him, that I am acquainted with his intent, and that it lies in me to
have him most rigorously punished for it; howbeit, being more merciful then
he deserves, I will let him live upon condition, that he speedily void the
Country, and never present himself again before me. Madam, answered Almerina,
pardon me I beseech you, if J do nor approve of this your displeasure, and
justly you cannot lay so grievous a command upon me; he is one of the greatest
Princes now living upon the earth, and to entreat him so unworthily is against
all reason. How do you know, said Amplamira, that he is such as you deliver
him? I learned it by his discourse, answered (...) but without that, the brave
carriage of himself, his fair parts, and the confidence out of which he has
dared to address himself unto you, and most assured demonstrations of an
extraordinary, and high (...), Permit him, Madam, to love you, for I do not
think, th^^ i^ wh^^^ world you can meet with one that is so handsome, and so
(...) of you. That he is valiant you cannot doubt, the death of the A^^^^
(...), whom he slew in your presence, being armed but with a single sword, make
it good, what can you wish for more in a man? verily one of his merit is not
easily sound, and if you let this occasion slip, you will be the first that
will repent it.

Thou pleadest so well for him, said Amplanira, who hegan to feel the first
assaults of love, that I am resolved to over come my self for to affect him;
but at any hand I will not have him know so much. Pish, said Almerina, what
good can this affection do him, if he must be ignorant of it? would his
sorrows be assuaged, would he have less cause to complain and afflict
himself? No, Madam, he must be made acquainted with his good fortune, or else
you must not love him. Why, said Amplamira, would thou have me contrary to
all order, be a Suitor, and demand that of him, which he ought not to obtain
of me without a world of service and suffering. I do not mean so neither,
said Almerina, I only say, that he is to be received favorably, when he
shall present himself before you, and that you do not refuse him the favor ^e
desires, which is to employ his Arms as your Knight. This cannot bet
conveniently done, said Amplamira, for to speak openly with him would not
become me; since he is not known what he is, and for him to come he^her is far
more unfit, for so I might not only give my women occasion to talk, but
peradventure all the Court: what course shall we hold then that it may be
affected? A little thing troubles you, said Almerina; well take you no care,
I Will bring it to a good issue, so as you will leave it to me, and follow my
counsel, only be mindful to know of him who he is, when you see him, that
you do not engage your self inconsiderately, nor repent the loss of your
liberty. This discourse ended by the arrival of Palmirenna, and her fair
slave, who could not endure to be asunder, Almerina get her presently forth,
and found out Floridan, to whom having delivered in few words, that he was to
hope well, and that he should not fail to be the next day at the same place
and time, where she had met with him in the Garden, she returned, leaving him
more contented, then ever he was in all his life.

CHAP. VII. Amadis unable to endure the violence of his desires, discovers
himself to Palmirenna, her answer. Floridan is presented to Amplamira by
Almerina.
THe day beginning to break, Floridan to whom minutes had been unsupportable
hours, got him out of bed, and having apparelled himself in the bravest fashion
he could devise to appear the more pleasing in the eyes of Amplamira, went
down into the Garden, where he walked up and down, earnestly beseeching in his
heart, that proud divinity which triumph^d over his desires that he would
direct his tongue at his encounter with his Lady, and render her sensible of
his pain; but imagining that she could not come so soon, he laid him down under
certain trees, and fell into so deep a muse of his expected happiness, that
three hours past insensibly away, at the end whereof his passion making him
believe, that the leaves driven by a sweet and gentle breath of wind proceeded
from Amplamira's steps, he suddenly rose, and looked a thousand times about
him, howbeit, seeing no body appear, he got into an arbor, covered with
Iasemine, where the fear of meeting with new difficulties in his enterprise,
assailing him, he said.

In vain I attend a felicity that I have never deserved, Amplamira will not
come, and the sweetness of those hopes, which had already placed me in the
supremest degree of glory, will, I doubt, be changed into bitterness, the
hour prescribed me is past, Almerina appears not, what shall I think then of so
grievous a retardment, but that which has always accompanied the evil fortune
of my actions? I see there is no way for me, but to resolve for death, which
yet would be better then a life so full of crosses, at least wise Amplamira
being the cause of it, I shall endure it without grief.

Herewith going out of the Arbor, as if he would have sought for the end of
his days, he perceived that Sun to appear, whose approach he had attended with
so much impatience, which so transported him with the excess of a sudden joy,
as notable to sustain himself he fell on his knees, but so oportunely, that
Amplamira arriving thereupon, by the cunning of Almerina (who had gotten her
down into the Garden, under color of conferring privately with her, about the
last nights Affair) she believed that it was purposely done to obtain that of
her which he had sued for by his Letter. Their amazement being great, they
beheld one another a good while without speaking a word, Floridan trembled,
Amplamira found her self surprised by so unexpected an encounter, and knew not
how to speak to this Lover, doubting to show her self, either too free, or too
reserved; howbeit receiving incredible content, to see him at her feet in such
great humility, and judging by his fear, that he was extremely in love; she
said unto him, with a behavior that testified more Majesty, then good will,
Knight what is it that you demand? That which I can never hope for, answered
he, if you shall consider the excellency of your beauty, the greatness of
your birth, and the merit of your virtues; I wish for a place in your heart,
and that I may be permitted to bear Arms as your Knight. Why who are you,
replied she, that asks so freely what the greatest Prince of the earth could
not have without infinite labor? Madam, answered he, I will boast more in being
yours, and will draw more glory from your service, then from all the kingdoms
of the world, nevertheless if you will know who I am, it is fit I should obey
your pleasure; wherefore I will declare it to you, but Madam be pleased, it may
be conditionally that no body know it but your self, until such time as it
shall be requisite to have it published in the Court, I am named Floridan of
Persia, the son of Rogell of Greece, Heir to the Empires of Trebisond,
Constantinople, and Persia, of which peradventure you have heard little spoken,
in regard of the dangers which are met withal in traversing the Seas that
separate them from this Country.

Arise Prince, said Amplamira then (lending him her hand with wonderful
content to have learnt that his birth was so transcendent) your greatness will
not permit me to leave you in the state where you are, the kingdoms you speak
of, are indeed very remote from hence; but yet we have had some knowledge of
them, for our Admiral about three years since visited all those coasts, and
at his return recounting a good part of the warlike exploits of the Princes of
Greece, he brought us their names, amongst the which I well remember, how that
which you give to your Father is one; come let us make a turn in this Garden,
and I will tell you my resolution upon the demand, you made me: Whereupon
walking along the allies with incredible content to Floridan, who held and
kissed his Ladies hand, whilst she accepted of his service, and commanding him
to be no less faithful then loving promised to meet him oftentimes in that
place; provided that it might still be with that respect, which was to be
observed to one of her quality; whereunto Floridan having deeply sworn, she
wisely retired to avoid the encounter of any one, and left him better
satisfied, then ever he was in his life.

In the mean time, Love wrought strange miracles, he made Palmirenna in love
with her slave, and possessed her with as much desire as the other; beholding
her continually to sigh, she likewise sighed, and said to her self; O ye gods!
how cruel is my fate to make me feel the same passions for a Woman, as I
should do for a Knight! that which she indures for me, should make me wise,
and keep me from falling into the like inconvenience; what else can I expect
from this desire, but an impossible contentment, and a pain without all hope? I
called thee fool Corazinda, but alas I am a greater, and yet not so, our error
is common, our miseries are equally shared, I can give thee no remedy, nor
can thou bring me any, nature having made us so wretched, as to render us
impotent to our wishes. Why art not thou a man, or why am not I one? So should
we not languish in this sort; for preferring thy merit before the greatest
Crowns of the earth, I would become thy Wife, or I would soon be thy husband;
wherewith looking on her fair slave, who had then the same thoughts, she took
her in her arms, and feeling some thing by chance that women have not, she
joined her lips to hers, with such ardour, as did denote a more then ordinary
passion, whereof our Warrior was so sensible, that he was about to discover
himself, but being retained by the fear of precipitating his felicity, he
contented himself with giving her two kisses for one: upon the continuance of
which, Palmirenna still thinking of the encounter she had made, said laughing
unto him. Ah, Corazinda, nature has done us great wrong, for if you had been a
Knight, we might have lived together with incredible contentment. I Madam,
answered he, so as you would have conferred the same favor on me, which now I
receive from you. Believe me, replied she, that I have wished it a thousand
times of late; whereupon rounding her in the ear, that he might not be
overheard by Crestia, the most intimate of her Women that was by, he said
unto her, Madam, be pleased to remember this speech; the gods that heretofore
have animated a work of Marble, for the satisfaction of a mortal man, may
authorize your wishes, in hope whereof I will instantly go and sacrifice unto
them, for to obtain so infinite a grace.

This said he departed, and leaving a mighty suspicion in the mind of this
Princess, he retired into a room, that was but little frequented; and walking
there a good while, he resolved to discover himself as soon as he could; and
indeed not long after Palmirenna; who was much troubled, coming thither with
an intent to know more of the matter, he met her, and began the discourse,
which he meant to make unto her, with new assurance of his love, when as she
taking him by the hand, interrupted him, saying.

Corazinda, I am not hereto inform my self, whether you love me or no, I have
too certain proofs of that, but to understand the truth of a secret, whereof I
have already some knowledge, your speeches have opened my eyes, and do almost
assure me, that you are a Knight, disguised for some great design, discover
your self freely unto me, if you desire that I should contribute to your
Enterprise, I love you too much, either to reveal it, or to discover you
therein.

Madam, said he, falling on his knees before her, you indeed behold a most
unfortunate Knight, if you stand on the offense he has committed, appearing
before you otherwise then in Arms for your service; but the happiest in the
world, if you shall please to continue those favors unto him, which you have
given to the belief of his sex. Love, who never leaves a Lover, without some
means of relief, having two days after I had to my grief defeated your Guard,
conducted me to the Seaside, made me at the very same time meet with a
wooden Chest, wherein were the clothes that I had on, when I was brought hither
as a slave, and furnished me with the invention to fit my self with them,
imagining as it is fallen out, that I should fall into your hands, and that
Time, or my services might oblige you to love me: I know well, that this so
audacious a part deserves no less then death, whereunto I most willingly submit
my self; but when you shall have considered, Madam, that it will be more blame
to you, then praise, you will preserve him, in stead of seeking his ruin.

It were but reason (answered she somewhat coldly, the better to discover the
greatness of the Knights affection) that I should seek out punishment to
chastise this daring impudence of yours, but being more gently disposed, I will
only banish you my company, with a commandment never to present your self
again before me. O this is too rigorous a sentence, said he, to leave a Lover
with life, Madam. I will go and revenge you of my insolence. Therewith he fell
down in the place with so little color, and motion, that Palmirenna verily
believed he was dead, which put her into such a confusion, as she was ready to
follow him, howbeit taking a little courage to her, she got her speedily away,
and calling Crestia declared what had happened, conjuring her to assist her in so
important an Affair.

This Maid perceiving by her Mistris's speech, that she was deeply in love,
said to her with a smiling countenance. Madam, you are too much troubled upon
so little occasion, have you never heard that love has done far greater
wonders, only tellme whither the death of this Knight will please you, or
whether you desire he should live? Alas, said he, Crestia, do thou not know
that I was never cruelly minded. Enough Madam, answered she, leave the care of
this to me, and you shall see that I will cure you both; saying so, she took a
little water in a dish, and going speedily to the room where Amadis lay in a
swound, she sprinkled it on his face till he came to himself again. Seeing him
then to open his eyes, she said unto him: Verily I did not think you had had
so little heart, as to be discouraged for a word speaking: Up, up, Love is like
to favor you more then you imagine.

Hereat Amadis was going to rise, but he was so faint, that he was not able to
do so, without the help of Crestia, who led him to his Chamber, and having
given him a little preserve to comfort him, she said. Come it is no time now to
dissemble, or to conceal your thoughts from me; I know that which hitherto you
have kept so secret, for the Princess my Mistress has discovered whatsoever
has past betwixt you unto me, I am able to do much for you, but I will never
serve you, unless you will swear unto me by the faith which you owe unto the
order of Knighthood, to acquaint me truly with that I shall desire to know of
you, for thereupon depends all your future good or hurt. Let Heaven show some
strange judgment on me, answered he, somewhat faintly, if I do not tell you
freely whatsoever you shall demand of me. Declare then unto me who you are,
replied she, that if it can be done with reason I may restore you into the good
grace of my Lady, who doubtless had just cause to entreat you, as she did. I
will obey you most willingly, said he; My name is Amadis, son to the great
Emperor of Greece and Trebisond, but the most unhappy Knight breathing, if
having such powerto help me, you take not some compassion of my case, dear
Crestia pass by my little merit, and persuade this incensed beauty to pardon
me, or if so be my death is more agreeable to her, order it in such sort that
I may receive it from her hands, or by her commandment, for it would grieve me
far less, to have it come to me so sweet a way. She shall not be so
rigorous, answered Crestia, let me alone to make your peace, and be comforted,
whilst I take care to render you happy.

So leaving him in his bed, she went to find out Palmirenna, who trembled at
her coming, fearing some ill news of this Knight, whom she infinitely
affected; but seeing her look merrily, she was confirmed, and withdrawing her
to a Window, that jetted upon the Garden, she asked her what she had done.
Much more then you think for, answered Crestia, your Knight is living, and
which is more, I know him for one of the greatest Princes of the world, son
to the excellent Emperor of Greece and Trebisond, of whom our Admiral has so
often spoken since his return. Good gods, said Palmivenna, what is this thou
tellest me? is it possible that he is issued out of so high, and noble a race?
how great an error have I committed to use him so cruelly, I fear Crestia, he
will be too sensible of this affront. Nay rather, said Crestia, it has made
him more desirous to see you, but that he dares not do, because he will not
disobey your commandment, before he knows that you will be pleased with it;
He is in his bed, go to him after dinner, it will give you a great deal of
satisfaction to talk with him.

This Princess, being carried more by her passion, then Crestia's counsel
failed not to visit this sick patient, as soon as she was risen from table, and
perceiving some tears in his eyes, which the doubt of finding his Mistress
inexorable to Crestia's persuasions, had produced, she comforted him with so
amorous a grace, that he presently recovered his former hue, giving her a
million of thanks for the care she took of his health. There needed no less a
Physician, said he unto her, then you to cure so dangerous a disease; but,
Madam, will you never remember my offense? no my Lord answered she, but to love
you the more; for assuring my self that the violence of your affection
counseled you to disguise your self, and that your intents were fair, I find
my self indebted to my good fortune, so as you excuse me if ignorant of your
quality, I have spoken more rudely unto you then was fit. Ah, Madam! said he,
kissing her hand, you kill me with talking in this manner, for you have absolute
power over my life, and may entreat me as you please, at which too I may not
repine: whereupon most ^^orously interchanging kisses they vowed to love one
another eternally.

CHAP. VIII. The felicity of Amadis and Floridan, in the secret Marriages of
Palmirenna and Amplamira.
THese Lovers delighting in nothing so much, as the object of their own
beauties, beheld one another with admiration; Amadis adored her, she
idolatrized Amadis, he burned, she felt no less violent a flame, they equally
desired to see the way to their felicity open, but respect and shame stayed
them from attempting it, at length our Warrior remembering that fortune derides
such as do not rightly use the favor she presents, resolved to go on, and
not make a stop in so fair a course; fixing his eyes then on his excellent
Lady, he said unto her with a countenance that testified a great deal of
passion.

Since it is your pleasure that I shall live, leave me not Madam, in pains,
which length of time, would make most insupportable, let us make use of the
means that are offered us to set our hearts at rest, and not staying till some
evil chance may deprive us of the happiness, which now we may enjoy, let us
break through this fear, that foolishly restrains us; you assure me that I
have more interest in your heart, then all the men besides in the world, I have
sworn a thousand times that I never adored any, but you, and that I will never
sigh for an other, I will reiterate the same oaths, give me the same
assurance, render the effects conformable to your words, and making me partaker
of the glory of your bed as your husband, disdain not to be my wife, upon the
promise, which now I make you before Heaven, and your faithful Crestia, to
espouse you solemnly at Constantinople, or as soon as we shall have disposed
your father thereunto.

Why dearest Lord, said Palmire^^^, (that was possessed with no less powerful
desire, then he) I have as much affection as you, to wish our present content,
but pardon me, if I tell you freely that I am to be more careful of my self;
I have heard of a thousand misfortunes occasioned by the inconstancy of men, I
may fear the like; and when you were absent from me (as the fortune of war*
might many times carry you abroad) I should still be in doubt, that you were in
the power of some other beauty.

Ah Madam, said Amadis, shedding tears, and deeply sighing, which he knew was
of mavelous force to constrain the heart of a Woman, have I not cause to be
exceedingly grieved, that you will rank me thus amongst the worst of men?
Unworthy, and dishonorable spirits may offend so basely, but a man whose aim
is reputation, will never fall into so soul a fault; I may fail, but never so
much, and say I should be tempted with some such desire, have not you
wherwithall to make me sure; look but only on your eyes, and there you shall
find charms, able to arrest the most fickle humor in the world, and to assure
your fear: These considerations Madam, are cruel; and if you desire to see an
end of me, do but continue firm in the mind you seem to be in.

Your grief does much afflict me, answered she, nor will my love endure to see
you suffer thus any longer; wherefore I am contented to espouse you this
evening, but I will have my sister Amplamira, whom I hold most dear, to be
present with Crestia, at the vows and oaths you shall make, never to have any
other Wife but me. Madam, answered he, infinitely transported with joy, I am not
able to give you thanks worthy enough for the greatness of this grace, but I
will serve you so faithfully, that you shall never repent the conferring of it
on me, I am wonderfully well contented, that the Princess Amplamira may be
with you, for I hope ere it be long to do her the like good office. Why, said
Palmirenna, will you give her an husband? Madam, answered Amadis, the excess
of my happiness will not permit me to conceal any thing, how important
soever, from you, I will acquaint you with a very great secret, but with
condition, that you will be pleased to assist me to bring it to pass. The
Knight of the Flowers, whom you know, is my Nephew, son to Rogel of Greece,
Emperor of Persia, he is passionately in love with your sister Amplamira, and
by the means of Almerina, he has lately had access unto her, in such sort, as
I believe she will not refuse him, if you will present him unto her for a
husband, let one and the same time consummate these marriages, the knowledge you
have of a Lovers pains, together with my entreaties, may persuade you unto it,
but when you shall consider, that it is for your sisters good, you will be
carried to it with more affection. Verily this is strange, said Palmirenna, and
sure this day is fatal for the happiness of our house; my Lord, let us send
for this Knight, and know of him how far he has proceeded with Amplamira,
afterward we will dispose of the rest.

Crestia having order then to seek out Floridan, these Lovers remained alone,
to Amadis, unspeakable content, who feeling himself much pressed by his desires
would fain have entered into the possession of his felicity, but Palmirenna she
wing him how near it was to night, he was constrained to command over his
appetite, and have a little patience, the rather because Crestia arrived then
with Floridan, who going to Amadis, after he had kissed Palmirenna's fair
hands, he said unto him; what occasion, Corazinda, keeps you thus in your bed?
Nay, said Palmirenna smiling, call him boldly by his name; we have found out
his tricks, and which is more, we know your greatest secrets, does Amplamira
love you, and can you hope for any thing from your services? Hereat Floridan
blushed, and was so dismayed, that he could not return her a word, he beheld
Amadis laughing, and perceiving Palmirenna take no less pleasure in seeing him
so transported, he could not tell whether it were a dream, or no: At last
gathering his wits together, and concluding with himself, that all was
discovered, he answered her thus. Madam, you have so surprised me, that in good
faith I scarce know yet where I am; for that which you desire to understand of
me, concerns me so near, that I could rather dye, a thousand times, then
confess it any other where; but desiring to give all obedience to your
commandments, and satisfaction to the friendship of this Knight, I will not
stick to acknowledge unto you, that the Princess Amplamira wishes me well, and
that she has declared how she is pleased with my servitude. That is enough,
said Palmirenna, our danger will be brought to a good port, Sir follow me, and
be not troubled with the captivity wherinto I will put you, it shall not be but
to make you relish your liberty the better.

Going forth then with Amadis, who had made himself ready, she went into her
Cabinet, where she shut up Floridan; and seeing her sister come, she caused all
her women to leave the Chamber, retaining none but Almerina, and her trusty
Crestia, that done she took Amadis by the hand, and addressing her speech to
Amplamira, she said.

Sister I have prepared you for the marvels you shall behold, for being most
assured how much you love me, and that I may trust to you in all occasions, I
hold it unnecessary to use many Ceremonies with you. Love, whose power is
unresistable, unable to put me into passion, for any of those many Princes,
which heretofore have sighed for me, has possessed me with so much for this
slave, that not to lie, I was reduced to the uttermost of despair, thinking
that my affections was mad and impossible, but my good Genius having opened
mine eyes, I came this morning to know, that the habit she wore, was usurped
for the love of me, and that it covered the body of the valiant Knight, who
cleared this Province of the danger it was in, by the death of that dreadful
Monster, which would have rendered it desolate, this has induced me to resolve
(after I had learned of him that he was the son of the renowned Emperor of
Greece) to make him this day my husband, whereof I desire you should be
participant, as well to testify the trust I repose in you; as to entreat you
to be a witness for me, that I do not receive him into my bed, before he has
taken a solemn oath to espouse me publicly in his Empire, or here in our
fathers dominions, if we can dispose him thereunto: do that then (continued she
speaking to Amadis) which is to be done on your part, to the end that the
caresses, which you shall receive from me, may be without blame.

Madam, said Amadis then, I protest before heaven, before this excellent
Princess, and before these faithful Ladies, never to have other Wife, then
you, and to espouse you solemnly, whenever you please, as now I do espouse
you. Saying this, he took a rich Diamond from off his finger, and put it on his
fair Mistresses, who giving him an amorous kiss, called him her husband and
Knight.

O ye gods, what have I seen (said Amplamira, almost lost in the wonder of
these things) and what may not one believe, concerning the power of a divinity
that works such strange miracles? A woman changes her sex, a slave becomes in
an instant Lord of Martaria, and I have for my brother and Sovereign, the
Prince of Greece, whom but even now I beheld to be a vagabond Girl. Verily I
am lost, and must needs believe that these things are done by enchantment: Is
not all this an illusion sister? or do you not tell it me to make sport with me?

No indeed, said Palmirenna, I have spoken nothing but the truth, and therefore
you must be assured that this Prince here, whose name is Amadis, is my Lord and
Husband. It is fit then, replied Amplamira, that approving of your choice, I
acknowledge him for Sovereign of Martaria, and that I kiss his hands in token
of the homage which he is to expect from his Subjects. Madam, said Amadis; it
will be more glory for me to be your Brother, then your Lord, wherefore you shall
do me a favor, to let me have yours to kiss, by way of humble thanks, for the
consent you are pleased to give unto my good fortune, for a beginning whereof I
entreat you not to refuse me one boon I shall demand of you. My Lord, answered
she, I have no other will but yours, and therefore you may easily obtain
whatsoever you shall desire of me. Confer then (replied Amadis, stepping
suddenly to Palmirenna's Cabinet, and presenting Floridan unto her) confer
then, Madam, the same grace on this Knight, who is my Nephew, as I have
received from your Sister; the Empire of Persia attends him, and the merit of
his person deserves it from you.

O ye Gods! (cried Amplamira again, and moreamazed then before,) what second
wonder is this? must I be of the party too? That you must, Sister, answered
Palmirenna straight, if you desire your own good, for this Knight being one of
the handsomest, greatest, and most accomplished Princes of the world, you
cannot fall into a better hand. I receive him then with all my heart, said she,
but I would have the consummation of this Marriage deferred for a while. Ah,
Madam, said Floridan, be not less kind then your sister, nor give her the glory
of loving better then you, how miserable should I be, to sigh whilst others
live happily amidst their delights: Behold me with an eye of pity, said he,
kneeling down before her, and consider that time may make an end of me with
grieving. Arise, said she, joining her lips to his, my love and your merit have
overcom me. Herewith, Floridan having sworn the same to her, which Amadis had
done unto his Lady; she took a Ring of him, and accepted him for her Husband.
That done, they departed one from another, after they had concluded to keep
this affair very secret, and to leave unto Amadis his habit, and name, under
color whereof he lay with Palmirenna without suspicion; and so getting to bed,
they appeased the violence of their desires, wherein let us leave them for to
see what resolution Brustafard took, being wonderful passionate for the love
of the fair slave.

CHAP. IX. Bustrafard maintaining the j^^sts, for the love of Palmirenna's
fair Slave, is vanquished by Floridan.
WHilst our Lovers sought for delights in their kisses, for sweetest
satisfaction in their embraces, and whilst they met with unexpressable raptures
in the height of their pleasures; Tarsander sighed out his sufferings, and
Bustraf^rd was lost in the excess of his passion. This Giant, who presumed so
far, as to be persuaded, that Palmirenna's fair Slave would adore him, as soon
as she knew that he loved her, was much abashed at not finding her not sensible
of his flame, but seeking to flatter himself in some sort, he laid the fault on
the modesty which Maidens do always retain in their actions, and said that it
was discretion in her, to conceal her thoughts, howbeit perceiving that time,
and patience did but increase his desires, he resolved to board her, and so
know whereunto he should trust; yet considering with himself, that it would be
fit for him to oblige her first, by some remarkable service, to the end the
might have no excuse, if she would not affect him, he presented himself before
the Emperor one day, when as Palmirenna, her Sister, the fair Slave, and the
most of the Lords, were in the great Hall, and kneeling down, he said unto him
with a voice that might have dismayed the most confident.

Mighty Monarch of Martaria, I have often heard it said, that Love was the
author of all Gentillesses, and thereof you may now see an example in me, that
loath to let your Court be in idleness, am resolved to put it in exercise, so
as your Majesty will be pleased therewith all; for I will maintain for three
days together, against all comers, both with my Lance and Sword, that next
unto these three excellent Princesses, who admit no comparison, G^razinda is
the fairest Maid that lives; and that of all the Knights of the earth, I am
most worthy of her favor. This speech which drew laughter from all the
Assistants, made our fair Slave to blush, who answered him with a smile;
Knight, be well advised upon that which now you propound, the performance whereof
carries more difficulty with it, then you think for, and the injustice of
your cause may deny you the victory, which otherwise were most assured to the
force you have. I never fear that, answered he, for on so just a quarrel, I
would undertake to vanquish the gods. But what do you hope from this enterprise
of yours, said she unto him? Much honor in having served you, answered he, and
more contentment in enjoying of you, being most assured that my valor will
induce you to love me, if my affection cannot. But what if you happen to have
the worst, replied she? You may then, answered he, recompense my Vanquisher
with the favors I have desired from you. Your enterprise does so much oblige
me, said she, that not to be ungrateful, I will submit my ^elf to the
conditions you have propounded. Go then, so as it may stand with his Majesty's
pleasure, I will be the prize of your victory. O ye Gods! said Tarfander to
himself, what is this I hear? my hopes are at an end, nor can I wish for any
thing now but death, which I will seek for at the point of my rivals Lance. Ah!
Corazinda, how unadvised are you voluntarily to engage your self in so
loathsome a captivity? do you think to find delight in the bed of such an ugly
fellow, or any sweetness in the kisses of such beastly lips? you will curse the
time that ever you were so light of your promise, for had you done it with any
hope, there had been comfort yet, but alas! your misfortune is remediless, the
whole Empire has not a Knight able to resist the force of this Giant, so that
of Palmirenna's, you will become Bustrafards slave.

Whilst this Lover complained in this manner; Bustrafard having easily obtained
permission to Combat, went and armed himself, leaving the Courtiers not so much
marvelling at his vain craking, as at Corazinda's rash promise, who turning her
fair eyes to Palmirenna, said unto her: Excellent Mistress, do not ye think that
I had reason to entertain this gailant? No marry do I, said Palmirenna, who
seemed to be discontented with this accord, you have been a great deal to rash,
for since you are mine, my Will ought to be a Law unto you. Why, Madam, said
Corazinda, do you repine at my good fortune? Now on my faith, said Amplamira,
who could not forbear laughing, there is no body here that will envy you the
content of so sweet a servant. Howsoever I shall have this advantage of you,
replied Corazinda, that my beauty will do wonders, whilst you shall not be so
much as spoken of.

This discourse having redoubled their laughter, the Princesses led Corazinda
in triumph to the windows, where she and Palmirenna placed themselves together
for to be hold the carriage of this valiant Lover; who in the mean time being
very richly armed, appeared in the field with such a daring confidence, as no
body durst undertake him. Howbeit not very long after, a big Knight arived in
the Lists, who addressing himself unto Brustafard, said, Giant, I come not
hither to dispute with Corazinda for the glory of being one of the fairest
creatures in the world, for my estimation of her is as great, if not greater
then thine; but to abate thy pride, which persuades thee, that no other Knight
besides thy self is worthy to serve her. Now by my best hopes, said the Giant,
somewhat netled with his speech, I find thy body too little for so great an
attempt; nevertheless being here to receive all comers, I hold it fit to give
thee content. Saying so, they turned about to take the field, and charging
their Lances, they met in the midst of their course with such fury, that the
big Knight having broken very bravely in the midst of his Enemies shield, was
overthrown with his horse to the ground; the Giant passing on somewhat
astonished at so violent an encounter, howbeit setting himself well in his
saddle, he returned presently with his sword in his hand, but seeing the Knight
not stir, he caused his Squire to pull off his Helmet, and so discovered to all
the Court, that it was the amorous Tarsander, who (...) spaire had made to put
on Arms, with a resolution to die, or be revenged on his ryval; the fall of
this young Prince, who had no other hurt but his amazement, was so sensible to
the Emperor, that had he not feared the anger of Brustafard, and his Brothers,
which was dreadful to all his neighbors, the Jousts had been at an end, but
concealing his displeasure, he sent his Physicians to his Nephew, who was found
more touched with despi^e then harm.

In the mean time the Giant, with no other but his first Lance overthrew the
King of Arbales, the Duke of Corzan, the King of Calizant, the Marquis of
Bonport, the Duke of Plemond, and the Earl of Modiance, brave Knights, and that
had acquired much glory in the adventures of the world.

These Warriors so easily unhorsed, retired with extreme discontent, and not
long after the Emperor seeing no more appear, returned likewise into his
Palace, where he demanded of his Daughters what they thought of the Giants
designs. We think, answered Palmirenna, that there is more folly then courage
in it, for it is an unprofitable labor, in regard we are persuaded that
Corazinda will never yield her self up into the power of so ugly, and
il-favoured a thing, if his valor should happen to make him triumph over all
that oppose him. O Madam, said Corazinda, do not judge so amiss of a Maidens
promise, for why should not I love him? I find no defect in him, his hair is
not yet clean white, the perfuming of his beard takes away the ill savor of
his flat nose; he affects me much, I should be very ungrateful then, to let
him consume away without succouring him. I but, pretty one, said the Emperor,
speak you in good earnest? That I do verily, answered she, laughing with
Palmirenna at the Emperors fear; for if some valiant Knight do not ds-ingage
me, I may not be worse then my word, though it be in my choice whether I will
love him or no. Now in good faith, said the Emperor, drawing her aside, you
will much wrong your self, to prefer his satisfaction before mine. Why Sir, said
Corazinda, can you think I am so base-minded? believe it he shall never draw
any favor from me, and if I entertain such an opinion in him, it is but to
make sport; the honor of your affection is dearer to me then my life; and if I
do not satisfy your desire, yet assure your self, Sir, it is out of the
consideration of a thing which you will allow of hereafter.

This discourse finishing by the arryval of Brustafard, who came gloriously in
with the spoils of the vanquished, which he placed at the feet of his Mistress;
every one talked of this love til supper; where Palmirenna, and her Sister
Amplamira, would not be present, to have the more liberty to caress their
Lovers in private: Commanding a Table to be covered them in Palmirenna's
chamber, they sat them down all four; being attended by none but their
Secretaries, and falling to speak of Brustafards enterprise; Amadis entreated
Floridan to combat him the next day, which questionless had been most
insupportable to his Amplamira, had she not been persuaded that Amadis would
not have exposed him to such danger, if it had not been to have given him the
greater reputation in the Court, wherefore arming her self with patience, she
permitted him to undertake it, and perceiving it to be bed time, she secretly
retired with him, leaving Amadis with Palmirenna, without any suspicion of her
women.

The night being sweetly past away, Floridan arose, and desiring Amplamira to
be present at his combat with Bustrafard, he went to the King of Arbales, with
whom he had contracted some friendship; and being accommodated by him with all
that seemed necessary for his enterprise, he mounted upon a lusty Horse, and
appeared in the Lists at such time as the Giant having overthrown the King of
Arisdan, the Marquess of Rocque, and the Count Cordena, with an intolerable
arrogance, challenged the Knights of the Court to combat with him altogether,
the brave countenance of this Warrior, that managed his Horse in a most gallant
manner, having turned the eyes of all the assistants upon him, especially of
Amplamira, who beheld him with motions of love and fear, he approached unto
Bustrafard, and said.

Knight, your insolence does so distaste me, that I resolve to be of the number
of those whom you have driven out of the field, or cure your brain of the
distemper, wherwithall Corazinda's beauty has infected it. I had thought,
answered he incholler, that others example would have made thee wise; but
sincethou wilt needs be lost with them for company, accuse thine own folly for
it. Charging his Lance then with more fury then at any time before; he met
Floridan in the midst of the course, whose Shield being unable to resist the
violence of so strong an encounter, was pierced in such sort, as the staff
passing under his arm, had almost put Amplamira besides her self, out of the
opinion she had, that it was run through his body, but seeing her Lover in his
saddle, and his enemy on the ground, with a dangerous wound in his side, and
judging by the shouting, and clapping of the peoples hands, who thereby
testified the contentment they took in beholding that proud mass of flesh
overthrown, she grew somewhat confident, and prayed unto her gods, for to give
her Knight the same honor in his combat on foot, as he had had on horseback.

In the mean time, the Giant full of rage arose with strange blasphemies; and
in regard his enemy was alighted, because he would not fight with advantage, he
advanced his sword, and thinking to divide him with the first blow, he let it
fall with such force, that questionless the effect had answered his
expectation, had not Floridan, seeing it coming, warily avoided it, letting
him then cleave the air, and the ground in vain, he discharged so furious a
stroke on his Helmet, that he made him knock his chin against his bosom,
carrying away to the very skull, all that his blade met withal. O ye gods!
said the Emperor, what a horrible blow was this? doubtless this Knight is one
of the valientest of the earth; and if he continues in this sort Corazinda will
have power to bestow her favors on some other.

Whilst the Emperor was saying this, the Giant, that did not believe he could
have found so much strength in one man, staggered a little; but instantly
recovering himself with an incredible rage, he began to deal such desperate
blows, that every one looked each minute to see the Knight cut in pieces;
howbeit he avoided them with such quick agility, and gave him so many wounds,
thatall which beheld him cried out, that the very God of battails used not more
grace in his fight, nor more violence in his strokes. Some hours being spent in
the heat of this Duel, the Giant would have retired, to take a little breath;
but Floridan, who was vexed to be so long in vanquishing before his Mistress,
pressed him so hard, as he was constrained to defend himself, and renew the
combat, charging one another then with greater fury, then at the beginning,
they delivered a world of blows, whereof one chancing to light on Floridans
shoulder, gave him a wound more large then dangerous, which put him into such
choler, that taking his sword in both his hands, and advanting it with an
intent to cleave him asunder, he perceived a great Knight, accompanied with two
dreadful Giants, entering the Lists, who came gallopping in for to part them,
but in vain; for Floridan having his sword aloft, let it descend in such
terrible force on Bustrafards head, that notwithstanding he struck but with the
flat, he sent him to the earth, casting great abundance of blood out of his
mouth, and ears; whereupon leaping into his saddle, he made head to the Giants,
who this while were wondering, that so furious a blow should proceed from the
hand of an ordinary man; howbeit, seeing that they stirred not, and guessing by
their countenance, that they were not come to assault him, he retired to the
King of Arbales, who received him with incredible content, leaving Bustrafard
to the care of his brothers, that grumbling vowed to take a cruel revenge of
this affront.

CHAP. X. Don Rifantes, Prince of Cabilla, Brundemor, King of Corcutan, and
Rozagant, King of Alfanar, demand leave to maintain the beauty of the
Princesses of Martaria, the success of their Enterprise.
FLoridan's hurt being less then his desire to see Amplamira, he stayed not
long with the King of Arbales, but went in all haste to the Palace, where the
Emperor received him very graciously, and infinitely commended the adresse and
valor, which he had showed in the combat; he was amongst his friends, that
caressed him, he heard himself most worthily spoken of by all the Courtiers; yet
was he not satisfied, for not daring to speak unto his Lady, all the honor
that was done him, was but so much torment; wherefore resolving to withdraw
himself, in hope that Amplamira would do the like, as he was about to depart,
he perceived the Knight and the two Giants, of whom we spoke before, to enter
the Hal, who gravely marching along, advanced toward the Emperors throne:
That curiosity, which always accompanies the minds of men, making him stay for
to know who these strangers were, he followed them close, and saw that falling
all three on their knees, the Knight spoke thus.

Great Monarch of Martaria, the reputation you have of being as gracious, and
magnanimous a Prince, as any is in the world, has drawn hither Don Rifantes
the Heir of Cabilla, Brundemor King of Corcutan, and Rozagant King of Alfanar
to obtain two things of your Majesty, the which you may grant with this
assurance, that they shall not be requested of you, but for the good of your
estate, and the glory of your Crown; The first is, that we may be permitted to
maintain both with the Lance and Sword for three days together against all
Comers, that the beauty of these three excellent Princesses your Daughter,
does surpass that of all other Women living; and because the effect of our
valor ought to preceed that of the second, to the end you may willingly accord
unto it; we will forbear to speak of it till such time as you have seen the
power of our Arms.

Brave Prince, said the Emperor, rising out of his Thron to embrace them, the
pains you have taken, so much obliges me, that I gladly condescend to both of
your demands: my Daughters do not deserve that your Swords should be employed
to recommend them in the world; nevertheless, since you will do them so great
an honor, you shall find the Lists ready against you please, and my self
disposed to refuse you nothing which lies in me to grant. This is as much Sir,
said Don Rifantes, as we can desire from you, so that if your Knights have
Mistresses, we shall not want work; departing then, notwithstanding the
Emperors entreaty to have them lodge in the Court, they caused a rich Pavilion
to be set up in the place where Floridan had demeaned himself so valiantly
against Bustrafard, and there attended the coming of some Assaylant.

The Arrogance of these Knights growing odious to all the Courtiers, especially
to our Lovers, who were confident what their second design would be, diverse
Knights went to arm themselves for to combat them, of whom Floridan would have
been the foremost, had not his Lady absolutely commanded him to forbear, until
the Chyrurgions had taken order with his wound.

The place being on an instant covered with a world of people, six Knights
presented themselves, whereof three seeing Don Rifantes, and his companions ready
mounted, set spurs to their horses, but with such misfortune for them, that
they were all three overthrown to the ground, their Adversaries not so much, as
seeming to be any whit moved with so furious an encounter; Their fellows
exceedingly vexed at this accident, put themselves presently in their places,
with some hope to revenge them, howbeit their fortune was nothing better,
receiving such cruel falls, as made all the assistants talk of their enemies
extraordinary force, who returning to their station in a most proud manner,
were persuaded that they had terrified all the Court from attempting them
again; but they were not long in that mind; for Tarsander appeared in the
Lists, accompanied with the the Marquess of Bonport, the Earl of Tranates
Son, the Marquess of Rocque, the Duke of Corzan, the Prince of Balivana, a
young Knight but very valiant, and courageous.

These six Warriors furnished with strong Lances, planted themselves just
against the Giants, who at the sound of the Trumpet dislodged with such fury
against Tarsander, the Marquess of Bonport, and the Prince of Balivana, that
they broke their staves into a thousand shivers, leaving the three Knights so
shaken, that the least touch in the world had infallibly carried them to the
earth; howbeit resetling themselves, they took fresh Lances, and returned
against their enemies, who vexed to see them still in their saddles, incounterd
them so rudely, that they were constrained to fly over the Cruppers of their
horses, to the extreem discontent of the Duke of Corzan, who advancing then
with his companions, received the same disgrace as the former, and that at the
very first course.

These six of the best Knights of the Empire, being so easily vanquished, not a
man more presented himself, so that night approaching, the Emperor was fain to
retire, marvellously commending the valor of these strangers, but particularly
that of Rifantes, who having nothing so great a mass of flesh as the rest, yet
had showed as much force, and more address. All the evening being employed in
this discourse every one withdrew. Floridan into Amplami^a's Cabinet, who
charged him not to combat til the last day, and Corazinda with Palmirenna; that
having caressed one another, with as much demonstration of affection as could
be desired in two Lovers, they fell at length to talk of these Insolents, and
resolved, if their design were to demand them of their Father (as it was to be
presumed) that Amadis should then feign himself to be an Amazon, and should
get the Emperor to give him the order of Knighthood, to the end that seeing
him sight he should have no suspicion of his sex, which being concluded without
any difficulty they slept til morning; when as they were wakened by the sound
of the Trumpet, which led those great Knights into the Lists. Whereupon making
have to be up, they repaired a little after to the windows, and observed that
the strong Knight Lorgades Prince of Grizolia, the Emperors near kinsman, who
arrived but the night before, being accompanied with Rodamans and Arbalion,
Bustrafards brothers, were ready to charge their Lances against the Prince of
Cabilla.

The gallant demeanor of this Knight, and the unmeasurable corpulencie of
Rodamans, and Arbalion, that opposed the two Giants, no less dreadful and
great, persuading them, that the course would be worth their sight, they leaned
together close by the Emperor, where they had not been long, but they saw
those furious Warriors set forth, who meeting in the midst of the course
broke all alike, without so much as once moving in their saddles. Now by my
life, said the Emperor, this is one of the bravest incounters that ever I
beheld, and questionless Lorgades has justly acquired the name of a very good
Knight, since he is able to withstand Rifantes, but let us see what will ensue.

Here with the two Knights having taken fresh Lances spurred away, and
followed by their companions that carried Masts of ships, they broke again with
extreme fury; Lorgades losing his stirrops, was in danger of falling, had he
not caught hold on the Horses mane; Rifantes passed gallantly on, though
somewhat astonished; Arbalion and Rodamans were overturned upon their Horse
cruppers; Brundamor and the King of Alfanar did but how a little with the
violence of the shock; the Assistants remained all amazed with so furious an
encounter, and exceedingly desired, that the insolence of the strangers might
be abated, howbeit in vain; for these three valiant Champions transported with
an excess of rage to find so much resistance before Princesses whom they
adored, dislodged the third time, and encountered their enemies with such
violence, that Lorgades and his friends were laid in the dust, which so filled
the Victors with arrogance, that after two hours rest, no Knight appearing in
that time, they went and presented themselves before the Emperor, where on
their knees again Don Rifantes spoke to him on this manner.

Sir, I think that by this you have good experience of the force of our Arms,
and the greatness of our courages; wherefore we desire you will be pleased to
grant us the boon now, which yesterday you promised us. I have told you, said
the Emperor, that you shall dispose of all that is in my power as I my self, do
but ask, and I will most willingly grant it you. Sir, continued Don Rifantes,
you have then three sons in Law, Palmirenna is for me, Amplamira for the brave
King of Corcutan, and the Infanta Archisidella for the King of Alfanar.

The word of a King, answered the Emperor (a little surprised) ought doubtless
to be irrevocable, but Princes, you must understand, that in matters of such
high importance, I am to take the advice of my people, since all my authority
depends on their good will; besides, I must know whether my Daughters
affections, which cannot be forced without tyranny, may be accommodated to my
commands; I will propound this Affair to my Council, speak particularly with my
Daughters about it, and draw them, if I can, to receive this honor from you,
after you have performed the conditions of the Jousts which you are to maintain
all day to morrow.

Whereupon embracing them (though much against his heart) he withdrew into his
Cabinet to resolve so difficult an Affair, leaving diverse several passions in
the minds of them that remained in the Hall: The Princes of the Empire were
troubled; Palmirenna, and her Sisters were exceedingly displeased, Floridan was
mad with spite, and jealousy, but every one was amazed at the fury of the
fair Slave; who with eyes sparkling fire, addressed her speech unto Rifantes,
and said, Prince of Cabilla, thou think that Palmirenna is already in thy
power, but thou will be deceived, for be assured, that in satisfaction of the
distaste thou have given her, I will draw the blood out of thy body, even to the
last drop; and if I might combat now, as the Women of my country that are bred
up in Arms use to do, I would let thee languish no longer, but to morrow will
come.

Saying so, she depaated in a rage out of the Hall, leaving all there in wonder
at her speech; the Knight and Giants excepted, who laughed her to scorn, and
causing a Nag to be brought her, she rode toward the grot, where she had left
her Sword, being soon got thither, she found not the Arms which she had left,
but others enamelled all over with green and red, so rich and curiously
wrought, that she was much amazed at them, howbeit conceiving that Cassandra
had done this miracle, she would lose no time, making them up then in a bundle
with incredible content, she took her Sword that was fairer then ever it had
been, and remounting on her Horse, she rode to Cardana, where she came in time
to free Palmirenna from a great deal of fear she was in for her.

From whence comes my Corazinda, said she unto her, kissing her on the
forehead? from seeking out means to be revenged of these giants insolence,
answered she, wherefore Madam, look here. Saying so she undid the bundle, and
made them all marvel to see such rich and fair arms. Then you are resolved
Corazenda, to fight, said Palmirenna? But alas, how can you escape the fury of
their swords, which are so dreadful to the valiantest Knights that are. Madam,
answered Corazinda, I am not only resolved to fight, but to dye a thousand
times over, rather then let you fall into the power of a man so unworthy of
your greatness and merit, do but get the Emperor to give me the order, and you
shall see me cut out work enough for your enemies.

Ah Corazinda! said Amplamira, is it possible that being so delicate and fair,
you should have the strength to subdue such mighty men? I cannot but wonder
much at your courage, but withal I do no less pity you. Madam, answered
she, If I dye, it shall be with a great deal of content, since it is in the
service of so high, and excellent Princesses, but these arrogants ^hal pay
dear for their victory, and never do me the honor to love me more, if to
morrow I do not make them change their note; the Knight of the Flowers will
assist me, that is enough, only let us go and rest us a little, that we may
take the Emperor early at his rising in the morning. Herewithall the company
parting, she got to bed with Palmirenna, who mingling tears, with the kisses
that she gave her, testified her fear; but being comforted by her Lover, she
ceased to afflict her self, and slept till day.

CHAP. XI. The horrible Combat between Don Rifantes with his Companions, and
Palmirenna's fair Slave, the Knights of the Flowers, and of the
Flower-de-Luces. The end thereof.
AMadis and Floridans jealousy not permitting them to take much rest, they
arose with the Sun, and being covered with their Arms, wherein Amadis carried
so gallant a presence, that even with the opinion of his Sex, he made all the
Princesses Ladies in love with him; they entered into the Emperors Chamber,
where kneeling down, he said unto him; Mighty Monarch, I doubt not but you
marvel to see me in this equipage, and that at first it seems strange unto
you, to behold a Maiden slave at your feet, to receive that order from your
hands, which makes men Knights, and that gives them power to fight in Arms,
but when you shall be pleased to remember that the earth produces women
courageous, and strong enough to dispute the honor of a Combat with the
valiantest Knight in the world, you will cease to wonder at it, and being moved
with your Daughters tears, who justly fear to fall into the power of these
arrogants, which without any desert will have them whether they will or no, and
in whose company they cannot promise themselves an hour of contentment in
their whole lives, you will make no difficulty to give me this sacred order,
under the favor whereof I hope to set them free.

My dearest Corazinda, said the Emperor, much amazed at her discourse, but
more yet to see her so gallant, in such rich Arms, I believe that you have a
disposition gentle enough to be sensible of the tears which my Daughters shed
not without cause, nor do I doubt but your love does make you despise the
greatest dangers for to set them at rest, but sweetheart, your strength will
not correspond to this height of courage, and of one evil which is not yet
arrived, I should make two inevitable ones, if I should condescend to your
request, in which regard I may not satisfy your desire, for it would grieve me
to see you so cast away. I shall have reason to complain of you then, answered
Corazinda, and be assured Sir, that I will remember this refusal of yours,
which notwithstanding shall be no hinderance to my design, being resolved to
demand that honor of mine enemies, if this valiant Knight of the Flowers, who
is to second me in my enterprise, will not do it for fear of displeasing your
Majesty.

Whereupon arising in choler, she made as though she would be gone, when as the
Emperor constrained by his Daughters entreaties, stayed her by the arm,
saying; Be not angry, Corazinda, for believe me, it was only pity of you, that
restrained me from giving you content; you would be a Knight, why be so in the
name of all my gods, whom I heartily implore, to render you as valorous, as you
are fair. Saying so, he laid his hand upon her head, blessed her after his
manner; put her on a pair of golden spurs, and kissed her on the forehead,
left her to take the rest of her Arms from the hands of his Daughters, who
presently environed her, and were going to lead her to the field in triumph,
when as there was a Knight seen entering into the Hall, armed in azure Arms,
tall of stature, bravely disposed, of a very goodly presence, and mavelous
fair of face; who at the first sight knowing Amadis and his companion, was
about to embrace, and caress them, had not the Prince of Persia stayed him with
a wink of his eye, which made him instantly conceive that he was to forbear;
advancing then in a majesticall manner, he set one knee to the ground before
the Princesses, and addressing his speech to Palmirenna, who went foremost, he
said unto her.

Madam, if strangers may speak without offense, take it not ill, if being
unknown to all here, I dare ask of you, to what Enterprise you conduct these
two Knights, with such a train of Women? We are going to expose them to very
great hazard, answered Palmirenna, and to confrom them with three most
redoubted Knights, to the end they may revenge us of some insolence they have
offered unto us, I will accompany them then, if you please, said the Knight,
that so the party being equal, their danger may be the less; but I would be
glad it might be by the commandment of one of you. Apply your self then to me,
said Archesidella, for these two being my Sisters Knights, it is reason that
now you should be mine, seeing I have no less interest then they in the
quarrel. Madam, answered he, ravished with her beauty, which from henceforth
enthralled his liberty, I expected not so great an honor, but you rendering me
worthy of it, I will endeavor to deserve it as long as I live; whereupon he
took her hand and kissed it, in token of his servitude, and placing himself by
her, he followed the rest to the field, where all the world was in an uproar for
the death of the gentle Knight Lorgades, who desiring to try his fortune again
in other arms then those he wore the day before; was slain by the King of
Alfanar: but the tumult ceased by their arrival, and the grief which the
Emperor conceived, for the loss of so valianta Gentleman, was somewhat
appeased by the sight of his Corazinda, who having very much caressed Lucibel
of France, (being that Knight which so lately arrived, and unto whom she had
also in few words discovered the whole secret of this Affair) mounted upon a
strong and mighty Courser, she went unto the Prince of Cabilla, unto whom she
said.

Don Rifantes, behold I am come hither to make good the menaces which I made
unto thee yesterday, wherefore bethink thee of thy evil life past, and call
upon thy gods. Saying so, she turned about to her companions, who had planted
themselves just opposite to the Giants, and rendering all the world amazed at her
gallant demeanor, she stood still, until such time as the Trumpets made them
dislodge all six with such fury, that the earth seemed to tremble under their
horses feet.

These Knights being of the best on the earth, their encounter was mavelous;
Rifantes made two or three turns with his horse in the dust, the Giants were
carried to the ground, wounded both in their bodies, the Princes of France and
Persia, being unable to support the violence of so terrible a shock fell a
little after, with extreem discontent to be unhorsed before their Mistresses,
Corazinda alone remained in her saddle, to the incredible satisfaction of
Palmirenna, and the Emperor, who being no less joyful, then astonished, did
infinitely commend the valor of this Amazon.

In the mean time our Warriors equally transported with rage rose up, and
drawing out their swords, began one of the most outrageous combats that ever
had been seen in this Empire; the Giants whose motions were exceeding
dreadful, gave most horrible blows, and such as promised nothing less then
death; but our Princes were so active, and dextrous, as they avoided the most
part of them, and warded the rest with such force, that they left no hope of
prevailing to their enemies, who feeling themselves hurt every minute, made such
a terrible noise, as put all the Assistants in a mighty fright. On the other
side, Rifantes and Corazinda (who scorning advantage, had quitted her Horse)
entreated one another far worse, jealousy animated their strokes, and as often
as their swords were aloft, they fell with unexpressable fury, the place was
strewed with their armor, fire flew continually about their heads, they set
their knees and hands to the ground, and the rage wherewithal they assailed
each other, was so great, that the most confident Warriors of the assembly,
were some what touched with fear.

Two hours being spent in this sort, the violence of Brundamors, and Rozaganss
blows, began to relent, contrary to our Knights, whose strength increasing with
their travel rendered their swords more dreadful, which so madded the Giants,
that Rozagant taking his Curtelas in both his hands, discharged it with such
force on Floridan, that having divided his Shield in two, and given him a great
gash in the arm which sustained it; he made him set his knees to the ground,
where questionless his life had been in no little danger had he permitted the
Giant to redouble upon him; but getting up instantly, much ashamed that this
accident was befallen him before Amplamira; he struck the Giant with such
unaccustomed fury on the shoulder, that he cleft him to the very girdle,
sending him stark dead to the earth, to the great astonishment of Brundamor,
who having wounded Lucibel in the thigh and head, courageously disputed the
honor of the combat, when as this Prince extremely vexed, to see his arms dyed
with his blood, lent him so terrible a blow on the arm, that he made it
together with his Sword fly to the ground, and instantly redoubling a furious
thrust, he ran him quite through and through; so making him to breath out his
last.

These Giants being dispatched thus, to the incredible content of the two
Infantaes, who rejoiced to see their Lovers victorious with life and honor;
every one cast their eyes upon the furious combat, between Corazinda and
Rifantes, which was most fearful; for Rifantes mad at the slaughter of his two
Cosins, laid about him so desperately, that a Warrior less strong and
courageous then our Amadis had fallen under his fury, but he no less enraged to
find so much resistance in one man; and in a quarrel where Palmirenna's
happiness, and his own were in question, returned him such an exchange, that
his body was wounded in nine or ten places; howbeit choosing to dye a thousand
times, rather then make the least show of discouragement; he maintained his
party with mavelous valor; and at length being in the supremest degree of
rage he resolved to set up his rest upon one only blow; wherefore taking his
sword in both his hands, he struck Amadis so dangerously on his Shield, that
having parted it in twain, the point thereof light upon his shoulder, and hurt
it, making him withal to stagger in such manner, that he was fain to set one
knee to the ground to save himself from falling; but suddenly arising with
unspeakable fury, and gnashing his teeth for anger, he advanced his rich sword,
and let it descend with such violence on Rifantes Helmet, that if it had not
turned in his hand, he had cleft him down to the teeth; nevertheless the blow
was so rude, that he fell all along quite deprived of sense, and casting out so
great abundance of blood at his eyes, mouth, and ears, as without doubt he had
been quickly dead, had he not been instantly succord. Immortal gods, said the
Emperor, what a blow was this! Thunderbolts fall not with mightier force: Ah
Corazinda, had Heaven made thee a man, thou would have been the prime Knight
of the world.

Saying thus, he abandoned the window to caresse the two Knights, and his
Amazon, who keeling before the Princesses demanded their hands to kiss, but
they beholding them so besmeared with their own blood, abated much of the joy,
which otherwise they would have had for so important a victory, and not willing
to entertain them longer, they sent the Knight of the Flower De-luces, (so was
Lucibel called) into Floridans Chamber, where Amplamira, and Achesidella, who
held herself happy in meeting with our Frenchman, would fain have been present,
for to have taken care of their wounds; but knowing that such liberty was unfit
for them, they left the Physicians to visit them, and followed Corazinda into
Palmirenna's Chamber, who not able to forbear weeping at the sight of the
precious blood, which she saw flow from her hurts, she had been lost with
grief, if the Chyrurgions had not assured her, that there was no cause of fear,
comforting her self then with the hope of her speedy recovery: she caused every
one to void the room, for to leave her to her rest, and passing into her
Fathers Chamber, to discourse with him of the valor of the strange Knights;
and of her fair slave, who had filled every one with admiration at the wonders
she had performed, she learned that Don Rifantes being come again out of his
swound, had caused himself, together with the bodies of the Kings of Alfanar,
and Corcutan, to be carried aboard his Ship, for to return into Cabilla, with
furious resolutions, to be the death of an hundred thousand men, in revenge of
the affront which he had received. Let us give him leisure then to arrive in
his country, to muster up his friends, and subjects, and our Princes time to
recover of their hurts, and entertain themselves with their Mistresses, who
failed not to meet them every day, and let us come to the excellent Knight of
the Roses, whom so long we have left.

CHAP. XII. Rosalmond having quitted the combat with Alcidamant, at
Cassandrae's entreatie: enters into the Duchy of Bonnemar, his adventures
there.
THE combat between Rosalmond, and Alcidamant receiving such an end as was
delivered in the five and thirtieth Chapter of our second part. The
incomparable Knight of the Roses traveled on so vexed to have met with a man
that was able to arrest the fury of his arms, as he was overtaken by the night
before he had so much as thought of the place where he meant to lodge; seeing
it grown dark then, and himself fast by a Shepherds cottage, he resolved to
alight, and stay there till the next morning, as he did, with more rest and
content then he expected: for the Shepherd amidst the services which he did
him, ever and anon told one tale or another, that insensibly he forgot the
occasion of his displeasure; and in that humor casting himself upon a bed, he
slept till such time as the sun being of a good height, raised him to continue
on his journey, wherein he spent six hours, and met not with one living soul
that might inform him of the name of so desert a Country.

At last having discovered a Castle, stately and fair enough to invite him to
observe it nearer, he made to it with a resolution to refresh himself there, if
the Master of it were so courteous as to give him entertainment: Wherefore
knocking at the gate, it was a good while ere any one would speak to him; but
continuing still knocking, he perceived a young Maid, who looking out of the
window, asked him what he would have? Gentlewoman said he, I am a Knight
errant; that not knowing where I am, would willingly learn it of you, let me
therefore obtain of you that the gate may be opened. You may not hope for that,
answered she, for we admit no body here. Truly I shall have great cause then
said he, to publish the discurtesie of the place, however let me know the name
of it. Herewith a very fair Gentlewoman in mourning showed her self at a window
hard by, and said unto him: Sir what is that you would have? Madam, answered
he, I would fain have been let in, to refresh my self a while, but being denied
it, I know not how to desire it of you again. Sir, said she, very modestly, be
not offended at it, for it is not done but upon great occasion; howbeit you
shall enter, your demeanor does forbid me to suspect any harm from you. Saying
so, she caused the gate (which instantly was shut again) to be opened, and
descending into the Court for to receive him with more honor, she showed him
so good a countenance, that he could not forbear saying to her. Madam, to speak
truth I find so much difference between this gracious entertainment, and your
Mayds answer, that it much amazes me. Sir, answered she with tears and sighs, I
have not lived hitherto without knowing what is due to the honor and
assistance of good Knights, nor has this house ever been shut against them;
but the strange misfortune which has befaln me of late, has constrained me to
seem less courteous then I am; I Will tell you the reason in few words.

This miserable beauty whereof you yet behold some relics, maugre the
injuries of time, and the discontents I have undergone, having rendered me the
Sun of this Duchy of Bonnemar, wherein we are adjacent to the great Kingdom
of the Island of Silvana; I saw all the great Lords of the Country sigh at my
feet, and amongst the rest, two cousins of the Prince thereof, the most
disloyoll man that lives: Now the knowledge that I had of the many vices
wherwithall they were infected, no^ permitting me to give them a good look; I
made choice of the Marquess of Valombre, so is this place called; and finding
him courteous, valiant, and handsome, I married him publicly, which begot so
great a despite in the minds of those two cousins, that from thenceforth they
conspired his death, and my undoing: and indeed three years after our marriage
they surprised him in a wood, and taking him without other Arms, then his
sword, they most inhumanely butchered him; wherewithal not contented (alas my
hair stands an end to think of it) they went to Marcandon Duke of Bonnemar, a
man apt to commit any kind of villainy, and persuaded him to take his pleasure
of me, in such sort as he arrived here with the two murderers; where to make
short, they mingled the complaints of seeing my self ravished by them, with the
tears which I shed for the loss of my Husband, whom I had buried that day.
This wretched fact being perpetrated, they made themselves masters of the
house, and keeping me three days together with a dagger at my throat, if I
offered to resist, they glutted their beastly appetites, and leaving me in the
sorrows befitting so mighty an affliction, they went away without any fear of
their resentment unto whom I appertain, that far from seeking any revenge,
durst not so much as receive me into their houses, dreading the fury of this
brutish and tyrannical Duke, who has set such sure Guards on all the
passages, as I should try in vain to escape away unto the Queen of Sylvana, to
avoid his further cruelty; or to seek out some powerful person, that might do
me justice for so odious an insolence; judge now, Sir, whether I had not cause
to lock my self up as I did.

You had indeed, Madam, answered Rosalmond, but I wonder that the people will
endure the tyranny of this barbarous Prince; well, I will see him; and I
promise you by the order which I have received of Knighthood, never to part
from this country, till I have fully revenged you. Oh Sir, said she then, take
heed how you venture upon an enterprise, where the danger is too apparent; for
he himself is very valiant, his Cousins that always accompany him, are strong
and courageous; and he never stirs abroad, but with a great train of soldiers.
All that is nothing, said Rozalmond; God fights still against the wicked, his
death is absolutely resolved; and if you will permit one to conduct me even now
to the place of his abode, you shall soon see his head at your feet, in
satisfaction of this crime. I may not suffer you to part from hence to day,
said she; to morrow do what you please.

Saying so, she led him into a Chamber, to unarm himself, and from thence into
a fair Garden, where having discoursed of the miseries that follow the
licentiousness of a vicious Prince, they went to a table furnished with very
good meat, wherwithall havit, well satisfied their appetite, they heard a great
knocking at the Gate. Ay me, said she with a pale and frighted countenance, the
Murderers of mine honor are come. Yes Madam, said a fellow, that in a mighty
fear came running in, it is the Duke of Bonnemar, and his companions. O Sir,
said she, turning her to our Warrior, have some pity on me. Madam, answered he
with a mervellous confidence, be not dismayed, but think that Heaven has sent
them hither, to receive the punishment their wickedness has deserved, only
give me time to arm my self, and then let the Gates be opened a Gods name; yet
so as presently upon their entrance they may be shut again, that they may not
escape me.

Whereupon going instantly to his Chamber, whilst Artander ran to the Stable, he
put on his arms, and finding his Horse ready he vaulted into the saddle,
commanding the Gates to be opened, where they were still knocking very hard;
which being done, the three cousins entered in great anger, when as Rozalmond
having his sword aloft, discharged it so furiously on Marcandon, (who had been
so well described unto him, as he knew him from the rest) that having cut off
one of his arms, he sent him to the earth under his Horses belly, to the
extreme discontent of his cousins, that giving him two blows at once, the one
upon his Shield, and the other upon his shoulder, made him bow even to the
Horses crupper; whence rising in a rage, he struck him that was next him with
such force, that he divided him in two, wherewith the other was so terrified, as
he turned about to have fled away, but finding the Gates shut he fell to beg
for grace. Villain, said Rozalmond, dare thou speak for mercy in a house that
has no Master by thy treason, and before a woman, whom thou have wickedly
ravished? I should be guilty of the mischiefs thou would do hereafter, if I
should spare thee now, wherefore take this; and so advancing that dreadful
blade, which never found resistance, he cleft him down to the shoulders, and
being yet more unwilling to pardon Marcandon, whom he saw getting up, he went
and tied him to an Horses tail himself, and causing Artander to mount upon him,
he made him to be dragged up and down the Court so long, till his brains flying
out, his soul was sent to Hell.

Having taken this so horrible a revenge, Rozalmond commanded the Dukes Squire
to be locked up till the next day, and returning into the Hal the Lady
Marquess with tears of joy fell down and embraced his knees, unable to speak a
word; whereat being ashamed he raised her up, and desired her not to use such
submissions unto him. I have done nothing, said he, but what I was obliged unto
by the order of Knighthood, which was given me upon condition to employ my arms
for the service of such as were oppressed, and particularly for Ladies,
wherefore you are no way bound unto me; so unarming himself he talked with her
about advertising her friends of what had past, and then got him to bed with a
resolution to depart the next morning very early, as he did to the exceeding
grief of the Lady Marquess, who would fain have stayed him longer.

Taking the next way then that he met withal, and entertaining himself with
the remembrance of the valiant Knight of the Palms, whom he so mortally hated,
and of his Armazia, whose absence was very grievous unto him, he arrived about
evening at a Town, where finding it fit to lodge that night, he was entertained
by a rich fellow, that having no other children, but one daughter, a very
handsome Maid, endeavored to make him the best cheer he could, but without
doubt it had been the last lodging that ever he would have had, if Love that
reserved him for the contentment of his Lady, had not rendered his Hosts
Daughter passionatly in love with him.

This Town being under the obedience of Marcandon, the inhabitants were
immediately advertised of his death, and understanding that the Knight, which
was lately come thither, was the man that had slain him; they assembled
together in an instant, and arming themselves with Halberds, Pitchforks,
Swords, and Iavelings, they resolved to kill Rozalmond; but considering with
themselves that they should not be able to resist him, if once he set hand to
his sword, they concluded to surprise him in bed, and unarmed; whereupon they
sent one to the Masters of the house where he lay to advertise him of their
enterprise, that he might contribute thereunto on his part, and in the mean time
fearing some resistance, they dispatched one in post to a Garrison, thereby to
acquaint them also with it.

The man, that questionless was sorry for his Princes death, though his vices
rendered him odious to all good folks; and that on the other side was very
unwilling to betray his Guest, which had trusted him, was much distracted with
this message; nevertheless fearing lest the people would kill him, if he
should not show himself zealous to revenge their Lord, he received one of them
into his house, and because Rozalmond was in his Chamber, ready to go to bed,
he thought it the best course his Daughter should go up, and under color of
seeing whether he wanted any thing, that she should steal away his Sword; but
she, that to dye would not see him harmed, being come into his Chamber, she
told him in few words, how much she loved him, and the danger he was in.

Rozalmond exceedingly surprised with her relation, answered her briefly thus;
Sweet heart, your love does infinitely oblige me, and it shall assuredly be
recompensed as it ought, in the mean time wear this for my sake; saying so, he
drew a rich Diamond from off his finger, and presented it unto her, and forth
with arming himself, he sent her down furnished with an excuse. Alack, said
she, seeming to be vexed; you will not do what you desire without difficulty;
the Knight is indeed on his bed, but he has neither quit his Arms, nor his
Sword, which he holds in his hand, so that I have lost my labor. What shall we
do then, said the Master of the house, to him that accompanied him? why burn
him in his chamber, answered he, if we cannot surprise him. Will you so (said
Rosalmond, who was stolen down upon them) I Will take an order with you presently;
whereupon he lift up his Sword, thinking to strike the slave; but he that had
no mind to endure the blows, fled suddenly out of doors with the good man of
the house and gave the alarm unto his companions; they running to the cry that
he made, fell instantly to charging of Rozalmond, who put fourteen, or fifteen
of them to the sword, whilst Artander was sadling his Horses, upon which in
despite of this rabble, they mounted very seasonably; for at that instant two
hundred Knights arrived from the Garrison, which with a terrible noise assailed
him furiously on all sides, but this Warrior that was always most confident
in danger, flying in amidst these troops, began to make so great a slaughter
that all the streets ran with blood; he cut off arms and heads, cleftmen down
to the girdle, and quartered them in such sort, as the valiantest of the
company wished themselves within their Walls again; nevertheless being ashamed,
that one man alone should disorder them in that fashion, they speedily rallyed
themselves, and laid so many blows on him at once, that he had much ado to
sustain them; at length they killed his horse under him, but he was not long
on foot, for making a rampart of the dead bodies, under the favor whereof, he
retired always fighting to his Squire, who was got aside from the press, and
leaping on his horse he charged his Adversaries afresh with such fury, that he
laid threescore at his feet, some cut off by the middle, others cleft down to
the teeth, and the most of them opened even to the very wast, which put the
rest in such a fear, that they took the benefit of the darkness of the night to
escape away; Our Warrior then finding no more resistance, and seeing Artander
well mounted upon one of the slain Knights horses, he took the contrary way to
that where his enemies were gone, and rode till it was day, that he discovered
the Sea.

CHAP. XIII. Rozalmond arriving in the Island, of Silvana, defeats the Guards
which the Queen had established to arrest Alcidamant; his meeting afterward
with Merodiana, and departure from her.
OUr Knight finding a Ship ready according to his wish, embarked himself
therein, never regarding for what place she was bound; and being wholly taken
up with the thought of his dearest Armazia, he was carried along for two days
together with a prosperous gale, but the Sea (that seldom continues long in
one state) began to swell, and rage, in such sort, that the distraction, and
noise of the Mariners, which labored in vain, made him quickly get up to
assist them, howbeit the fury of the waves being extreme, his force that could
do much in Combats availed him naught, for the Vessel beaten on all sides,
sometimes carried up as high as the clouds, and by and by thrown down to the
Center of the deeps, no longer received direction from the guiding hand of the
Pilote, and having all her sails, and tackle torn, expected nothing but some
violent gust to sink her utterly.

Floting three days in this desperate manner, every one shut his eyes, that he
might not behold this horrible death, when as heaven giving care to the prayers
of the Parthian Prince, who during all this danger never changed countenance,
calmed the waves, and drove the Ship into a Port of the Island of Silvana,
where he caused himself to be set ashore, giving praise unto God in his heart
for his goodness in drawing him out of the danger of so dreadful a tempest.

Getting to his Horse then armed at all points, he rode into the Country,
which seemed very pleasing and delightful unto him, and traveled till two of
the clock in the afternoon, when as he met with a house very stately built,
whereinto entering to refresh himself, he perceived the gates to be suddenly
shut upon his back, and thirty Knights making head against him, whereof one
advancing before the rest, said unto him; Knight, we are here to make you to
render your Sword, or to oblige your self willingly to accomplish whatsoever
the Queen of Silvana shall command you. Good Knights, answered Rozalmond, will
never be enforced to promise any thing, much less be disarmed by their enemies
without fighting, wherefore I am not resolved to give you any thing that
appertains unto me, till you have dearly bought it. We must have your head
then, replied the Knight, wherewith drawing out all their swords, they fell upon
Rozalmond, who little moved at it, flew in amongst them, and with the very
first stroke sent him dead to the ground, that had menaced him, to the
exceeding grief of the rest, who thinking to defeat him easily, pressed him in
such sort, as he knew not well where to bestow his blows, nevertheless
cutting off now an arm, and then an head, he had soon laid a dozen of them at
his feet, and was ready to deal so with the rest, when as two dreadful Giants
appeared in the Court, who making a little stand to observe this Warriors
confident fight, were amazed to behold two men with two strokes, extended on
the earth, the one cloven down to the girdle, and another brayned with the flat
of his Sword.

These horrible blows making them think, that at length their Knights would
have the worst, they presently set forwards, and advancing their heavy
Scimitars, they discharged them so dangerously on him, that they forced him to
knock his chin against the pommell of his saddle, which so incensed him, that
raising himself up in rage, he took his Sword in both his hands, and therewith
struck one of the Giants with such violence on his shield, as he divided it in
two, sending his arm withal to the ground, and redoubling on the secoed, who
with reason feared the tempest of that Sword, hit him so rudely on the helmet,
that he made him reele three or four paces back; whereupon perceiving the
Knights had run his Horse into the belly with an Halbard, he quit his saddle
instantly, and flying in amongst them, covered the ground with three or four
of them, before the Giants were come to themselves again, both of them
returning then with incredible fury, they began to charge him with such
terrible blows, as he was many times constrained to bow with his knees,
nevertheless he fought so courageously, and so often drew blood from them, that
they had little cause to brag of any advantage; but being resolved either to
vanquish or dye, one of them took his Scimitar in both hands, and displaying
all his force, struck so mainly at his head, that if he had not wisely avoided
the blow, it had questionless been his death, howbeit leaping very lightly
aside, he let it fall upon the ground, whereinto it entered up to the hilts, and
taking hold of opportunity, whilst the Giant was drawing it out again, he
discharged his Sword so dangerously on his Casque, that he cleft him to the
brains, overthrowing him with a noise like to that of a Tower whose foundation
say^es; the other which had but one arm, and very little blood left, thinking
that his companion had been stricken with lightning, would fain have saved
himself by flight, but he was so weak, that at the very first step he fell down,
breathing out his last.

Our Warrior seeing himself freed from these Colosses which had exceedingly
troubled him, was going to set upon the rest, when as he perceived a Lady
coming in, mavelous beautiful, and followed by two and twenty Knights
richly armed, with a Giant far greater than the former, who addressing her
speech unto him, said; Knight, persist no further in this Combat, but put
yourself into my hands, if you love your life. I know very well, that your
valor makes you confident; for the slaughter I behold here may persuade you,
that you can courageously pass through any danger whatsoever, but I am able to
oppress you so with multitudes, that you must needs fall at last; besides, the
Guards of this place were not established here for you, but to surprise a
Knight, who though he be not so tall, yet is no way inferior to you in valor
and strength; sheath up you Sword then, and follow me with this assurance, that
you shall receive no displeasure here.

Madam, answered he, much amazed to behold so rare a beauty; I will gladly
submit my self to your power, for so sweet a captivity can not be but most
pleasing to me; and would I had spent more blood then this which is in my
Armor, that I had met you at the gate of your house, neither should I then
have been in the state I am in, nor you have had cause to complain for the loss
of your people, for yielding all obedience to the merit of fair Ladies, and
principally of those of your quality, I should freely have granted whatsoever
you had demanded; but their insolence having constrained me to draw my Sword, I
secured my self by their deaths, wherwithall I am now infinitely displeased,
because it may be an offense unto you, which I shall labor to repayr by all
the best services my uttermost ability may be able to do you.

I perceive, said she, laughing, that I shall have as much ado to overcome you
with courtesy, as my Knights have had with their Arms, wherefore I will debate
no longer with you, but let us walk to a Chamber, that your wounds may be
visited. I think they are so slight, Madam, answered he, that they need no
great looking to, howsoever your commandment shall wholly dispose of me.
Whereupon causing his Squire to unarme him, he discovered a small hurt on his
shoulder, and another somewhat greater, but one more dangerous in his thigh,
which the Chirurgions having dressed, he got him to bed, where he continued till
the next morning; when as he arose, feeling little or no pain, for to present
his service to the fair Princess, who being wonderfully well satisfied with his
goodly personage and behavior, entertained him awhile with ordinary
discourse; and finding him no less witty, then he had showed himself before
valiant, she led him into the Garden, where she freely discovered to him the
secretest of her thoughts, telling him that she was Queen of the Island of
Silvana, and that the Guards of this place were set to apprehend a Knight that
carried three Palms in his shield.

Truly, Madam, said Rozalmond then, I do not marvel now at your assembling of
so many Knights, and strong Giants, since it was to arrest a man, whose like is
hardly to be met withal in the world: why, replied the beautiful Silvana, Do
you know the Knight of whom I speak: Madam, answered Rozalmond, I neither know
his name, nor original, but all the earth is acquainted with his valor; and
would to God he were here now, that we might finish a Combat, which has twice
already reduced us to the extremest peril of our lives, without discerning to
whom the honor of it was justly due: whereupon relating all that had past at
Constantinople, and afterward upon the confines of Florertan; he gave her
mavelous contentment, to hear the praises of this Knight so published by his
greatest enemy. Verily, answered she, you have a great deal of reason to speak
well of this Knight, who has done miracles in this Kingdom, Combatting, and
killing a Monster, the hugest and most formidable, that ever nature produced,
but far more in my sister Merodiana's state, where the most redoubted Giants of
the world, have past under the edge of his Sword in the head of a mighty Army,
which the same day was cut in pieces by the sole virtue of this Knight, and not
by the multitude, or force of our soldiers, the Enemy being at the least
three for one.

But, Madam, (said Rozalmond, who was somewhat vexed, to hear so much glory
given to his Adversary:) if this Knight has done so much for you, why will you
expose his life to the hazard of the fury, and multitude of your men, which
sure were but an ill acknowledgement of his services. O that is a secret, said
she, which may not be imparted, I will have have him if I can, not to put him to
death, for I would sooner consent to mine own ruin, but to oblige him to keep
his faith. Your eyes, Madam, said Rozalmond (who then ghest at her disease) will
more prevail with him then your Arms, and he will sooner be constrained by your
beauty, then by your Giants; in which regard you are to procure rather by
gentleness then force. That course have I held already, said Silva^a; but,
alas! to no purpose, another has captived his heart, so that I am out of hope,
unless some disdain from his Mistress, shall make him think of me: Verily, said
Rozalmond, I hold him as ungrateful, as valiant, since he has broken his word
with you; and be assured Madam, that I will fight with him again upon this
quarrel, whenever I can meet with him; and if fortune favor me, I will bring
him back to you. Your good will does much oblige me, answered she; but if you
desire to do me a pleasure, forbear the execution of your intent, for the
Combat between you, could not be determined without an irreparable loss;
wherefore if you have any compassion of my suffering, rather counsel him to
remember his vows, the favor which he has received from me, and making him
sorry for abusing them, represent unto him, that my Crown, one of the richest,
and bravest of the earth, may arrest the ambition of any Gentleman, how great
soever he be.

This speech was finished with tears, but being comforted by Rozalmond; who
promised to use his best art, and all the arguments he could think upon, to
give her desire content; she dried her eyes, and returning into the Hall, she
sat down to dinner with him, entreating him a little after to make some abode
in her country, whereunto he having willingly assented, she carried him the
next day to the Capital City of her Kingdom, where she did him all the honor
she could possibly devise; sometimes entertaining him with Masks and Shows,
and at other times with Iousts and Tournaments, wherein he so behaved himself,
that Merodiana being advertised thereof, requested him to come and see her.

Leaving Silvana then in much grief for his departure, he went unto her
sister, who insensibly forgetting Alcidamant, was so taken with the beauty and
comeliness of this Prince, that she took no greater care, then to render her
self more amiable with the grace of clothes, and dressings (though nature had
made her excellent that way) for to win him to love her; but he that had a
constant soul, and that was wholly given up to his Armazia, was nothing moved
with her passion; howbeit fearing lest his faith at length might waver by the
continual pursuits of this beautiful Queen, who questionless had charms of
power to captivate the heart of the coldest affection, he resolved to depart;
wherefore one day taking his leave, which he had very much ado to obtain, he
got him to Sea, leaving so good an opinion of his valor in the Kingdoms of
these two sisters, as he was of no less esteem there, then the famous Knight of
the Palms.

CHAP. XIV. Rozalmond landing in the Kingdom of Clariana, arrives by fortune at
Alcidamants Great, he laments over his arms believing him dead, and afterward
incountring him they become friends.
Rozalmond having wisely avoided the danger of Merodiana's allurements rode all
the day with a resolution to travel into Gardacia, for to know whether time
had defaced him out of Armazia's affection; but fortune that meant otherways to
dispose of his actions, deferred the effect of this his intent, and caused him
to make another voyage more profitable, and necessary for the good of
Christendom: Being imbarqued then in a Ship; the wind which should have carried
him one way, drove him quite contrary another, and brought him upon the coast
of the Kingdom of Clariana, where the Pilot for fear of a threatened Tempest,
making some stay, he would needs go on shore to see the country, and
accordingly, getting on his Horse he spent two days, without meeting of any
adventure, whereupon purposing to return to the sea, he discovered a Brook,
whose sweet murmr invited him to alight under certain trees, that grew all
along the banks thereof, and cast a very pleasing shadow, causing his Horse then
to be tied, so as he might have the liberty to graze, he walked so long up
against the course of the stream, that he found himself at the bottom of a
Rock, whereinto there was a pretty large entrance, which gave him a desire to
approach it, for to see whether there were any thing within it, worthy the
employment of his courage: but he was marvellously abashed, to behold a little
Cross set up a good height under a tree; for considering that this mark made
glorious by the death of the Savior of the world, was not so much as known
amongst these idolatrous people, he was no less amazed thereat, then at some
prodigy; howbeit finding some consolation in the hope he had to meet with
Christians there; he was passing in, when as a new occasion of astonishment
arrested him; for at the foot of a tree he discovered a Cuirace, an Helmet, a
Shield, and other the arms appertaining to a Knight.

This Encounter possessing him with no less curiosity, then the former had
done with wonder, he went presently and looking upon the Shield, which was
almost covered over with rust, he perceived it to be that famous Ensign of the
three Palms, made glorious by the honor of a thousand combats, most
generously performed by Alcidamant; and assured himself that these were the
arms, which he had found invincible through the courage of his enemy. Virtue
that can do all in all with a noble spirit, having changed this Warriors mind
in a moment, he could not forbear shedding of tears, at the sight of so sad a
spectacle. Ay me, said he, kissing those Arms, with a great deal of
reverence, how do I find you in a state most unworthy of your greatness; why
do you no longer cover the body of that valiant Knight, which so much honored
you? You were odious to me always heretofore; but now, alas, I pity you as
much as I have formerly hated you, and as the world suffers a most irreparable
loss in you, so shall I grive eternally, that you should remain thus of no use
hereafter.

Whereupon laying all the pieces one upon another, he took that excellent Sword,
which was gotten at the Castle of Serpents, and that had shed many drops of his
blood, and having hung it on the bough of a tree, he forth with passed into the
Grot, in the midst whereof he incountred a bank of green turfs, raised in form
of an Altar, upon the which he beheld the portraiture of a Lady so exquisitely
fair, that he esteemed her no way inferior to Armazia for perfection; he
continued a good while observing her by the assistance of a Lamp that was
burning there, but desiring nothing more, then to meet with one that might tell
him some news of this Knight, whose death he greatly feared, he went on and
visited every corner of the Grot, where finding nothing but a bed of leaves, he
returned forth incontinently, and was going to fetch a walk under certain
trees, when as he espied a young Hermit in a long Gown of gray, that was laid
upon the grass as it seemed to take some rest; howbeit his grief not
permitting him to be silent, he brake out thus.

Who shall hereaf^er rely upon any thing in this world, since I, that had but
one poor minute to pass for to see my self Master of a felicity that is not to
be imagined, was so suddenly cast into the extremest of misery? and who is he
that at any time shall be in pleasure, that can promise to himself never to
taste of the pain which shall follow it, if I am now reduced to utter despair,
that had in my hand what might have satisfied the ambition of the most aspiring
Spirit? Verily, man has nothing less assured, then that which he thinks is in
his power; and when fortune smiles upon him, it is then when she means to undo^
him. But alas! from whence proceeds my misfortune, excellent Princess, it is
from you, that once was the object of all my desires as now you are the subject
of all my sufferings? yes certainly, if I would accuse you of weakness, and
say that you ought not to have condemned me without hearing (...) first, since
th^^ grace is not (...) the greatest off^nder that is: And yet not so if I
consider, that you might dispose of my will with more powerthen my self, I am
now faulty only inappearance, but I should be so indeed by complaining, the
respect which I owe to your greatness, not permitting me to (...) against you,
(...) offending you, wherefore you have not done (...) to (...) me from your
presence, since I have not merited the grace to enjoy that happiness. Shall I
lay the fault then on my destiny, or rather on (...)'s passion, who thinking to
oblige me has undone me? Ah beauteous Queen, how dearly do I buy the favors
which you have done me. I will remember your kisses, but it is with extreme
grief, for that I have lost ^ar sweeter by your means: Why were you not less
loving, or more contained, so should not the world have taken notice of your
want of government, neither should I have now seen my self thus languishing in
this desert place, nor lamented my cruel and untimely end; howbeit I accuse
you unjustly, it was no malice in you, but chance, and without condemning my
self, I cannot say that your love is the cause of my misery, since I sought it
with so much care; live then exempted from the reproach of my death, before
which, if yet I may be permitted to desire any thing, fairest Princess of
Tramazond, know that I have suffered most innocently, and that I dye without
grief, seeing it is to do you service, and by your commandment.

Herewith holding his peace, he turned him about toward Rozalm^nd, who being
come very near him; and that was not desirous to appear so soon, retired a
little to observe his face, which seemed to have been fair, but then so pa^e
and wan, that it made him shed some tears again to behold so great a Knight
reduced to so pitiful an estate; howbeit not able to let him be any longer in
pain, he approached for to comfort him, when as Alcidamant making two or three
turns upon the grass, thorough the violence of his grief rested close at his
feet: making use then of this occasion, that sorted according to his desire, he
took him by the arm for to raise him, but he that felt himself touched,
incontinently start up, and stepping two or three paces back, observed him a
good while without speaking a word, at length seeing him of so goodly a
presence, and covered with such fair arms, he came toward him, and showing a
great deal less fear, then at the first, he said.

Verily the sight of you did much amaze me, for this being a desert place, and
having never seen any person here, but a poor Shepherd, that every week brings
me a little bread to sustain me withal, and some oil for the entertainment of
a Lamp, which incessantly burns in a Grot hereby, whereinto I retire my self a
nights, I little expected the arrival of so accomplished a Knight as your
self; but you are very welcome to those poor provisions I have, only if it may
not be importunate to demand it, you might do me a singular favor to let me
know, who you are.

Noble Sir, answered Rozalm^nd, your encounter gives me no less contentment,
then you seem to have in mine; I am a Knight errant, that knowing you better
then you think for, and that but to day very much loving you, takes the liberty
to tell you, that you greatly wrong the world to deprive it of you, for the
satisfaction of a fickle and ungrateful woman, who wanting judgment to make
esteem of you according to your merit, does not ^^ compense your services as
(...) ought, the life you lead is unworthy of that courage, which you have so
often showed in the extrea^est dangers; change it S^^, I beseech you and
consider that in the case you are, you can hope for nothing, here you languish,
here you will dye, your Mistress she knows it not, or if she do she laughs at
is, from which neglect draw so strong a resolution as to despise her, onto
render you more happy by the knowledge of the alteration of her mind* it may be
she is as much troubled as you, inform your self, and leaving to play the woman
any longer return into the way which leads men to glory.

All this cannot move me, said Alcidamant, for you know not the respect a Lover
ought to carry to the commandments of his Lady or else you would not condemn
me for that I do, which is nothing but what her pleasure and my obedience
require. It is true that in all likelihood I should be better in the world,
where I might be useful for the assistance of some afflicted persons; but
shall I do so when it is not pleasing to her, whom I will prefer before all
that is under heaven. No verily, I must absolutely comform my self to her will,
she desires my death, and I will not avoid the occasions of it: As for that you
allege, how it may be she repents the miseries she has made me to suffer, I
can never believe it, for then she would have let me understood so much.

Does she know said Rozalmond interrupting him there, that your despair has
reduced you to this desert? without doubt she does not know it, answered he,
but my good genius would lead them hither that should come to seek me, if she
had any mind to see me again. Look now said Rozalmond, how extravagantly you
speak, and how your judgment is lost in the confusion of your thoughts, or with
the affliction that oppresses you, what likelihood is there that one may find
you out in this place, whither fortune alone can address those that stray out
of their way?

Be not, I pray you, so wilfully bent to end your days wretchedly here, rather
live for the service of your Princess, and labor to make your innocence
appear unto her, in stead of bestowing your time unprofitably in sighing out
your sorrows amidst these trees; your virtue which to day has begot a desire
in me to do you service, contrary to the resolution which formerly I had taken
for to purchase your ruin, makes me to use these words, therefore be pleased
that I may be your Physician since you are so sick, and accept of the good
counsel I give you for your better remedy.

Why now, we are come just to the point I desired, said Alcidamant, for setting
aside the reasons, I could oppose yours with, touching my purpose to dye here,
clear me in that particular, where you say you never loved me till to day. I
believe indeed, said Rozalmond, that you do not know me yet, because I want my
Shield; but if you call to mind the combat we had together at Constantinople,
and afterward upon the frontiers of Florertan, when we were parted by
Cassandra, you will quickly understand the meaning of the speeches I have used
to you; then you were the object of all the anger that a man could have against
another which disputed the glory of Arms with him, but finding you in so
miserable an estate, I was so sensible of your misfortunes, as I could not be
more for any that should arrive unto my self, so that now I love you far more
then I hated you before, and do also humbly beseech you to change your mind in
like manner, and to esteem of me no less, then of the faithfullest servant you
can have.

O me, said Alcidamant, what a happiness is this in the midst of my
unhappiness, to have my pains thus aslayed by the presence of the excellentest
Knight of the earth; Ah Sir! I will no longer complain of my misfortune, and
the content of this encounter is so dear unto me, that I will pass by all
remembrance of the cause of my sorrow for to caress you, if not as much as I
would, yet as much as I can. Herewith embracing one another with a great deal
of affection, they contrac^ed a friendship, which never ended, but with their
lives, and some other (...) having past betwixt them, they both returned into
the Grot, where Rozalmond desiring to speak of the cause of ^is retyrement, for
to withdraw him from it, demanded of him whether that which he saw there was
the picture of that rigorous beauty for whom he suffered so.

You behold indeed, answered he, the pleasing features of her face, you may
here likewise judge of the delicacie of her complexion; but not of the grace she
gives to her motions, nor of the powerful charms of her eyes, for there nature
far surpasses the art of the Painter. Whereupon without further entreaty he
discoursed unto him his whole life, and especially all that had past at
Tarsipolis, after he met with Trasiclea, which was very acceptable to the
Knight of the Roses, who alleged all the reasons he could any way devise to
diswade him from so sad a retyrement; but perceiving that he spa^e to no
purpose, and that his resolution was as firm as the rock wherein he lived, he
bethought him of another course to be held with him.

You are too wilfully set, said he, upon your own misery; nevertheless, being
persuaded that you do all things with judgment, I intend, because I will enjoy
your company, which I hold so dear, to pass my days here with you, and never
to return again into the world, after I have dispatched one voyage for an
enterprise, whereunto my faith has engaged me; I may not limit my return, in
regard we cannot dispose of time, nor of accidents that befall us, but I swear
unto you by the order of Knighthood, to come hither again, as soon as possibly I
can, so as you likewise promise me, not to depart from hence upon any occasion
whatsoever.

Dear Sir, said Alcidamant, it were most unreasonable to confine you so without
cause, continue still in the world, whereof you are now the wonder, for it would
be far more content unto me, to know you in delights absented from me, then to
have you here lead a languishing life; as for me, I am accustomed thereunto,
and be assured I will never abandon it for any cause whatsoever, since I do it
not at your request. This is as much as I desire, said Rozalmond, you shall see
me again sooner then you are aware, to which end I will be gone to morrow by
break of day, that I may give the speedier dispatch to the business I have
undertaken. So calling Artander, who was all this while with the horses; they
sat them down to supper with no other delicasies then a little bread, and
afterward laid them to rest upon a few leaves, where they remained til the next
morning, when taking their leaves of one another with tears, Rozalmond rode
away toward Tarsipolis, from whence how he was diverted, shall be related
hereafter.

CHAP. XV. The Adventures of Rozanel, and Florisbel, after their departure out
of Tramazond.
ROzanel departing from Tramaxond with Florisbel, and the beautiful Angeles of
Sopradisa, sailed fifteen days with all the content that a Lover could have in
the company of his Lady, not meeting any adventure worthy of his courage, but
on the sixteenth day they discovered two Ships fast grapled together, in one of
the which was a Giant with some thirty, or forty soldiers, and in the other
one Knight alone, of a reasonable big statu^e, who with his Sword in his hand,
defending the entrance into his Vessel, sometimes charged the Giant, and
sometimes the Soldiers, whereof ever and anon he overthrew one or other of them
into the Sea; the valor of this Knight giving them great satisfaction, and
being moved with a Gentlewoman that called upon the Gods for succor, they
joined the force of their Oars to the wind, and in a little time caused their
Barque to board the Knights, whereinto entering with fury, they presently
dispatched seven or eight of the most confident of the troup; and in regard the
Knight had received three or four deep wounds, from whence he had lost much
blood; Florisbel desired him to retire, and leave him to combat the Giant,
whilst his companion dealt with the rest of that ^^bble, but his heart was so
good, that he made no other answer, but gave his enemy two such cruel blows,
as with the one he wounded him very dangerously in one of his thighs, and with
the other made a great gash in his shield arm, which Florisbel observing, and
unwilling to stand idle, he drew to his friend, who never let fall his Sword
without killing a man, and making no less havoc, in a short time laid all that
remained at his feet: mean while the Combat between the Giant and the Knight
continued with mavelous rage, howbeit with so much advantage on the Knights
part, that they looked every minute to see that Colossus tumble into the water,
when as Rozanel casting his eye aside, espied a Knight, very little less then
the Giant, rush out of the Hold; who leaping into the Barque where Angelea was,
cut the Cables that fastened ^it to the other Vessels, and was putting to Sea
with so rich a prize, had not he suddenly advanced, skipping in then almost
as soon as he, and carried with extreme cholor, he gave him so strong a blow
upon his Helmet, that he made him set both his knees to the Deck, where he
stayed not long, for rising full of rage, he began to charge Rozanel in such
sort, that he was somewhat amazed arit; nevertheless seeing himself before his
Mistress, whose safety was in question, he became so furious, and so well
employed his force, that with three blows he first sent one of his arms into
the Sea, and then laid his head at his feet, to the unspeakable contentment of
the fairest. Angelea, who coming to caress him, asked him whether he were not
hurt? Madam, said he, kissing her hand, I feel no wound, but that which I have
in my heart; I am very glad of it, answered she, for as for that, I will ere it
be long give it such a remedy, as you shall have no cause to complain.

This short amorus passage rejoicing Rozanel not a little, he would have
returned to the other Ships, but a violent wind suddenly arising carried him
away, do what the Mariners could, to his infinite grief, for leaving his
friend so in the Giants ship, who unable to support his Adversaries strokes,
fell at length under the tempest of one of them, which divided his head in
twain; wherwithall Florisbel had been exceedingly satisfied, but for his
separation from his friend, nevertheless holding it vain to afflict himself for
that could not be helped; he turned him to the Knight to applaud him for a
victory, so gloriously obtained; but the stranger beholding him without his
Helmet, went to him with open arms, and embracing him, said; My noble friend,
how happy am I in this encounter? and indeed from whom could I hope for
succor, but from you? make me partaker, I beseech you, of your Adventures; and
tell me by what means you came so oportunly to deliver me out of the hands of
mine enemies.

Verily, said Florisbel, who then knew him to be Sestilian the Prince of Spain;
I am no less amazed at my meeting with you, then you are at my arrival here; I
complained of fortunes cruelty, for the loss of Rozanels company, whom the
winds have carried away, but now she has fully made me amends with your
presence; come let us go in and visit your wounds, we will talk at leisure
afterward of our fortune; whereupon entering into a Cabin, Sestilian got him to
bed, where the Gentlewoman of whom we spoke before, being very skilful in
Chyrurgerie, dressed his wounds, promising to render him well in fifteen days
at the most, to which end she advised him to betake him to his rest, but he
would by no means hear speak of sleeping till Florisbell had related the
enchantment of Angelea, the manner how he himself was put into the Rock, and
their deliverance effected by the valiant Knight of the Palms, and the
Princess of Tramazond, which very much satisfied this young Prince, who for his
part likewise discovered unto him, all that had befaln him since his departure
from Constantinople; Entertaining themselves in this sort, they passed away
certain days with great content; during which time, Rozanel and his Angelea
sailed with a prosperous wind, and at the end of two and twenty days, arrived
at a Port of great Britain, to the incredible joy of his beautiful Mistress,
who being set on shore, and meeting with an ancient Knight, she desired him to
inform her how the world went at Court.

Madam, answered he, all things go well there, and since the decease of our
great King, we have not seen such magnificences, as are now preparing at
Windsor, for the Celebration of the Nuptials of Tristor the young Prince of
Sobradiza, who within this four days is to be married to the fair Amazon,
Alteria the Queen of California's Daughter, there will be gallant Jousts, the
Tournament will be no less delightful, the rather in regard of the arrival of
diverse young Princes, which have met here by chance, and whom Garmant the
Viceroy of this Country labors to honor as much as he may, this, Madam, is
all the news I can deliver. It is more then I expected, answered she, having
given him many thanks, and so going to Rozanel, she acquainted him therewith,
and to testify the truth of her affection, she counseled him to post away to
Windsor, that they might be there before her Brothers Marriage, and take one and
the same day to render their desires contented, getting instantly to horse
then, they used such diligence, that the next morning they arryved at the
Court, where Garmant, Don Sinald^, Tristor, Alteria, and all the Lords which
were then present, received them with as much honor, as if they had been the
Sovereigns of this flourishing Kingdom.

Sometime being spent in complements, in the recital of the enchantments of
Angelea, and of that which past about her deliverance; Rozanel that dyed with
the impatience of his sufferings, in few words discovered unto Tristor the love
he bore his Sister, and desiring him to consider by himself how dear time was
to Lovers, he besought him, that the same day which he had designed, for his,
might make up their happiness, whereunto Tristor gave so good an ear, that he
went presently, and imparted it to Garmant.

This affair then being easily resolved upon, they were led all four the next
morning to Church, so richly attyred, that their beauty struck every one with
wonder, especially that of Angelea, on whom the eyes of all the world were
fastened. The Ceremonies being finished, and dinner done, all the Knights of the
Court went and armed themselves for to Joust with Quedragant, Agrian King of
Scotland, and the gentle Abies of Ireland, who meeting together in great
Britain, desired to come unknown to the Court for to honor the Marriage of
their friends. Let us pass by this Solemnity till we have seen Clarisel of
Guindaya, and his fair Shepheardess.

CHAP. XVI. Clarisel of Guindaya, and his fair Shepheardess, having given an
end to the adventure of the Torments of Cardoran and Lindorenna, depart from
Bellombre at their request.
CLarisel, and his fair Shepheardess living with incredible satisfaction, and
having nothing else to complain of, but the aversness of Fortune in advancing
their delights, continually gave one another new assurances of their loves, and
so passing away their time happily, they met ordinarily at the Rivers side,
whose waters served them for a glass, when their fair eyes did them not that
office, sometimes under the Sallows that bordered the Meadows, and often
retyring into the Wood, to sigh out their passions, they engraved upon the
barks of the Trees so many enterlaced characters, as they gave every one
occasion to wonder at such marks, of so sweet, and unparalelled an affection,
the same whereof running all over France drew so many Ladys and Knights to
Bellombre, that every house there, was full of strangers, which were stricken
with no less marvel then coment, at the incomparable perfections of these two
persons.

These Lovers then having one day driven their stocks into the great and long
walks, that separated the Wood of fur trees, Clarisel sighing at the feet of
his delicate Shepherdess, was about to represent his marryrdome unto her, when
as they espied a Damosel, coming before a Litter which was followed by a great
many of Gentlewomen and Knights, who addressing her self unto them, said.
Gentle Shepherds, the glory you have gotten, by loving more truly then all
others besides in the world; has made me forsake the Court of France, whither
fortune had conducted me of late, to repair unto you for the succor of two
enchanted persons, the History of whom is very lamentable, and that loving one
another most entirely, were conducted to the State, wherein you shall behold
them, by the malice of a Sorceresse named Orgelia.

This Megera, going upon a time to invoke her spirits in a wood, incountred
with Cardoran, Earl of Garaman (a country adjoining to the famous Kingdom of
Corolandaya) and finding that in him which might strike one in love, she left
the business wherabout she went, and arresting him, entertained him first with
ordinary discourse; but a little after told him most impudently, that she was
no longer her own, that his beauty had ravished her; and briefly that a violent
passion enforced her to offer her self unto him. Cardoran, who carried a noble
mind, hearing this speech, and seeing that the eyes of this Sorceresse had no
other charms, but such as were fit to captivate a Devil, had much ado to
forbear laughing, but desiring to appear as courteous, as she had showed her
self shameless, he told her that he was very sorry for the harm she had
received against his will, and modestly excusing himself upon the fidelity
which he owed to his dearest wife Lindorenna, he walked fair and softly away;
whereupon this woman, enraged to see her self so despised, took hold of his
arm, and said unto him. Cardoran, remember that no man scorns such as I, but
that repentance accompanies his offense, you have kindled a fire in my heart,
and will not quench it, burn eternally in the like flames, or at leastwise

Until such time as you have found out the excellent Dove, and the royal
Gerfaulcon under a disguised Plume. Herewith taking her Girdle she knit it
about his arm, and tying him to atree that was close by, she presently raised a
fire full of brimstone under him, wherewithal his Horse was so frighted, that
he flew away from his Master, leaving him suspended by the arm, and making such
grievous lamentation, as all the Woods about resounded therewith.

This me thinks was so cruella revenge, as might well have satisfied the anger
of any furious woman, but she that would not have Lindorenna exempted from
torment, because Cardoran had neglected her for her sake, caused her to be
advertised by one made for that purpose, of that which this wretched Gentleman
suffered; whereupon she instantly dislodged with me, hoping to succor him by
some means or other; But alas, as soon as she was come to the tree, she
suddenly with her husband, not perc^iving by whom, was put into a Litter, where
they now remain in the same sire that borned them before.

Of this their misery, I was so sensible, that I began to tear my hair in an
outrageous manner, when as the wicked woman coming to me, struck me with a
wand that she had in her hand, and so imposing a silence to my complaints,
advised me, if I desired the good of these unfortunate Lovers, to carry them up
and down till I could meet with such as could deliver them from so horrible a
torment, the which I have now done five years together, but to no purpose, for
of all that presented themselves thereunto, they always wanted either courage
or fidelity, the two things required for the undoing of this enchantment.

Opening the Litter then, and showing them Cardoran, and Lindorenna amidst the
flames, which made a very dreadful noise, and that burned them, without
consuming any part of their bodies, she thus pursued her discourse. Their
deliverance consists in two points, in the perfection of a pure and unspotted
love between two persons, and in the confidence to go and kiss them amidst
these flames; now see gentle Shepherds whither your Love which is talked of, as
of a miraculous thing, or whither the compassion of the pains wherein you
behold them, can induce you to free them.

I am well assured, replied Clarisel, gently turning himself toward his
Miralinda, that my love being without all defect, and as great as possibly may
be, I cannot be wanting to the succor of these afflicted couple, but now it is
that you must open your heart, and here satisfy the truth of those
protestations, which a thousand times you have made unto me. Why Shepherd
(answered she smiling) do you yet doubt of my faith? Verily, I have just cause
to complain of you; but not to give you the glory of loving better then my
self, I will defer the disputing of this matter, until I have demonstrated
by the contempt of this cruel fire, that I feel one in my soul far more
violent and great: Saying so, without any fear at all of the flames, she
courageously laid her lips on Cardorans, and therwithal taking him by the hand
raised him up so easily, that she struck all the assistants with wonder, who
beholding Lindorenna in the same estate by Clarisels confidence, filled the air
with a million of acclamations in the praise of these two Lovers, at whose feet
Cardoran and Lindorenna presently threw themselves, being every way in as good
a disposition as they were before their misfortune, desiring them to give them
their hands to kiss in acknowledgement of so remarkable a benefit.

Our condition, answered Clarisel, does not permit us to receive this duty from
you; wherefore be pleased to arise, and command us any other thing, if you think
us yet useful for your service. Gentle Shepherd, said Cardoran, the honor
which I have done you, I rendered to your virtue rather then the habit you
wear, on which I do not much stand, but since you are so courteous, as to
oblige us twice, I most humbly beseech you to grant me one boon, and this
beautiful Shepherdess another to my wife; for thereupon depends the
consummation of our bliss.

Demand what you will, said Clarisel, for I am so much yours, as not to deny
you any thing you shall desire of me, and be assured this fair Shepherdess
will be no more difficill in whatsoever this Lady shall be pleased to command
her. No verily (said Miralinda, who was no less satisfied with the proof she
had made of her own love, then with the knowledge she had of her Clarisels
fidelity) I have had as much courage, and I will be as liberal as you. We must
depart then from henceforthwith, said Cardoran, for to go unto ^^ Enterprise*
where your presence will be very avayleable, and n^cessary for me. You shall be
obeyed, said Clarisel, for I am persuaded that we are carried from hence by a
special providence from Heaven, that is working o^^ good, so that we will
dislodge as soon as I have armed my self. By my faith, said Mascarin, you shall
have my company then, though (...) you had r^^^er be without i^, for the beauty
of those ^^eld^ would be odio^^ to me, were the fun of it once gone.

Herewith all that were present fell a laughing, our Miralinda excepted, who
thinking more of the Journey she had promised, then of the fooleries of ^^is
little Lover, was much perplexed, because she knew not what might befall her in
this Enterprise; nevertheless passing by all kind of considerations, since she
should not part from her Clarisel, in whose affection she had placed all her
hopes, she willingly got to Horse as soon as she saw him arrive.

This small Troop then taking the way that led to the Sea, to the (...) grief
of all the people of Bellomore, but much more of certain Knights then present,
whose liberty had been captivated by the beauty of this Shepherdess, ^^avelled
ten or eleven miles, and were in sight of the Sea, when as Miralinda looking
back perceived four Knights come gallopping after the^, which by their
demeanor seemed not to follow them for any good; whereat being somewhat
troubled, she showed them to Don Clarisel, who ^^king his (...) from Mascarin,
that served him as his Squire, s^^tdown his Beaver, and stayed for them much
against Cardoran's mind, that was mightily vexed for that he was not in case to
assist him.

As soon as they had overtaken them, one of those Knights went strait ^o
Miralinda, and in a jolly manner said unto her. Fair Shepherdess, whither go
you? why would you know, answered Clarisel, or how is she obliged to you, that
she should render you an account of her actions? what is that to you good man
Cockscomb, said another; So much as I will knock his pa^e, answered Clarisel,
and make you know how to rule your tongue better; whereupon he struck him that
held Miralinda's bridle, with his sist Gan^let, and all so rudely on the head,
that his brains flew abo^^, and drawing out his Sword after he had thrown away
his Lance that did but hinder him, ^e began to charge the others with such
valor, that at the second blow he clove one down to the teeth, whose death
possessing those that remained more with fury, then fear, they let drive at him
both at once; and striking both on his Helmet, made him knock his chin against
his breast, wherewith he was so enraged, that grasping his sword fast in his
hand, he let i^ fall on him that was next him with such horrible violence, that
he divided his body in twain, to the great astonishment of Lindorenna, and her
husband, who marvailed exceedingly at so sudden an execution, which had been
accompanied with the death of the fourth, had he not by setting spurs to his
Horse found safety in his flight. Clarisel seeing no more enemies alive,
suddenly cast his eyes on his Shepherdess, and perceiving some tears on her
cheeks, blamed her for her unnecessary fear, considering wh^^ proofs he had
formerly given her of his valor, and so shortly after, with the rest of the
company they entered into a Bark, and put themselves to Sea.

CHAP. XVII. Clarisel narrowly escaping shipwreck, lands in great Britt^in,
(...) Florimond of Canabea, combats a Giant, resc^er Claristea, and marries her
to Florimond.
CLarisel and his company being bound for the county of Garaman, sailed with a
prosperous gale for two or three days, at the end whereof the Sea (that in
nothing is more constant then in its ^nconstancie) began so to rage with a
contrary wind, that the Vessel was carried sometimes as high as the clouds, and
by and by thrown down so low that they beheld mountains of water over their
heads; the Mariners (who little regard dangers, and that trust in their
experience, seeing such sudden and violentmotions) bestirred themselves, but
unable to resist the fury of the storm, they labored in vain, for the Sayls
being rent to pieces, the Tackle torn, and the Mast broken over board, all were
out of hope of escaping ship wrack, were they not speedily succored by some
particular grace from Heaven, which was so deaf to the cries of these poor
wretches, that it powered down such abundance of rain and hayl upon them, and
thundered and lightened so fearfully, as every thing seemed to be the Image of a
dreadful and cruel death, the horror of the danger augmenting by such
prodigious accidents.

Miralinda more dead then alive, was in her Shepherds arms, that nothing moved
with his own, bewailed the casting away of so fair a creature. Alas (said he
kissing her eyes) what a loss will the world make of these two Suns, and why
should so divine a beauty perish with humane things? O God! if my offenses have
begot this effect of thy displeasure, let it fall but upon me, and let not this
Innocent, which makes thee to be admired in the world, suffer a death she has
not deserved. Herewith believing that the Bark was sinking under water, he took
his Mistress in his arms, either to escape or drown with her; howbeit,
perceiving that the Sea grew calmer; and that the wind drove them gently
toward a Port, he began to take heart again, and comforting his Shepherdess,
he led her up to the Deck, and a little after approaching to land, he lept a
shore with infinite content, to see that which he loved so much, no longer
subject to the fury of a pitiless Element, the rest landing in like manner.

Clarisel caused his Horse and Arms to be brought him, and beholding no
habitation, and the night at hand, he made Lindorenna's Gentlewoman carry along
some provisions, and taking a little path, entered into a Wood, where, it
growing dark, he and his train alighted, and free from the fear of a troubled
Sea, fell to that which the Gentlewoman had provided with a very good appetite.

This little repast finished, they laid them all down at the feet of a tree,
and began to (...), who (...) with his pass^^^ (...) fortu^^, wherein he
continued not long, for hearing the voice of one lame^ting hearose, and going
softly to know who it was, he c^^e to five or six trees, planted in such sort,
that their branches (...), they made a little Cabinet, from whence the ^ight,
and complaints that he heard proc^^ded.

Alas! said a man (for the tone of his voice declared him to be so, What lover
was ever so unhappy as I, and how just cause have I to complain of my
d^stini^, that forces me to love an ungrateful Woman, who is insensible of
the (...) she has done me, and that takes delight in my ruin: my services are
despised, she laughs at my suff^rings, and which is worse, her retyrement
leaves me no hope of ever seeing an end of my miseries, but by death; Ah cruel
resolution! why did it not pr^cede the acquisi^ion she madeof my heart, or stay
till I was dead, so should I now have bee^ without (...), or happy in my Grave;
but I must needs lose my freedom for (...) end my days wretchedly, and the
S^ars having determined my life in this manner, I cannot avoid their decree:
let Death come then when it will I shall never seek to decline it: whereupon
con^^ding with a world of sighs, Cl^risel could not forbear, stepping in, and
saying unto him;

Sir, your affliction very much grieves me, and your complaints have conducted
me ^ither to tell you, that your courage ought not to give place to your
sufferings; (...) is to be seen in adversity, and men that are well acquai^^d
with the world never faint under pressures; you love a disacknowledging woman,
that will not recompense your services; change your mind* ^ill your affection
with despite, and leaving her to repent the loss of you, be revenged of her
neglect; But if your soul be too far engaged, and that it be not in your power
to get off, take a better resolution then ^o complain thus in vain, strive to
overcome her rigor, and serving her whether she will ^^ no, give her occasion
at length to condemn her ingratitude.

Alas! said he, whosoever you be that comforts me thus, know that it is not in
my power to make use of the good counsel you give me, the reason whereof I
s^al tell you, if you will vouchsafe to sit down by me a little. That is it I
much desire, answered Clarisel, laying himself down by him, but I cannot be
persuaded that there is any mise^ie so great or strange in the world, for which
there may not a remedy be ^ound.

Sir, said the solitary Knight, (after he heard the cla^tering of his Arms)
I must entreat you to pardon me, and (...) it to the darkness of the night, if
my speech has been less respectfull to you then it ought; No, no, replied
Cl^^isel, you may treat with me as you please; let not any such consideration
stay you, but tell me freely the cause of so great a solitude.

She, of whom I complain, said he, being one of those ^ayrest of France, that
may justly glory in their beauties, having on a time courteously (...) me in
her house, placed so many (...) in her eyes, as I was not able to look upon her
with that Liber^^^ which formerly I had, for I found my heart surpri^ed, and my
desire of traveling Countries to acquire that renown so much aspy redunto by
the best Knights, confine^ within the limits of her Walls, so that (...) of
pa^ing thence without some assurance of loving ^^ purpose, (...) cover my
thoughts unto her, and ind^^^ meeting (...) opportunity, I set her glass
before her, and demanded what opinion (...) of her beauty, but perdoiving that
modesty would not permit (...) to commend her self, I recounted unto her the
passions I had induced (...) my arrival, and used all the art I could possible
devise to draw (...) ^^ciprocall affection, howbeit in vain, for she returned
me^ most rightous answer, accompanying it with a command, never to come in her
sight again, I am not able to deliver the grief I was in for this so ^ru^^ a
change, suffices it that I went presently away in a despe^ate manner, and not
caring what became of me, I fell by accident into the power and person of
Nars^nder the great incha^er, from whom being freed by the valor of the
exc^llent Knight of the Palms, it was my fortune the next day after to espy
three Giants leading five or six Gentlewomen in a chain, (...) the which
perceiving my Claristea, (so is this inexorable sweet (...)) to be one, I made
no difficulty to expose my life unto apparent danger, and carried more by fury
then judgment, I set upon these three dreadful Monsters, and fought so madly
with one of them, the other two disdaining to meddle with me, that in few
words, I sent his soul to hell, whilst the brave Knight, of whom I spoke but
now, coming to my succor, dispatched the world of the rest; so delivering
this crue^^ say ^^, who falling passionatly in love with him, and feeling no
les^ violent destr^^, then those that continually torment me, would fain have
made him her Husband, but love (being just to punish her for her pride) caused
this Knight (who no doubt had some other Mistress) to go away and have her,
wherewith she was so discontented, that in stead of recompending (...) for so
great a service, whereby she had escaped de^^ouring by the Giants, she shut her
self up in a Cloister, taking upon her the vay^^ and habit of a Nun before my
face, for to deprive me utterly of all hope of enjoying her, which begot this
resolution in me, to aband on the world in ^^ke manner.

Verily, answered Clarisel, your case is worthy of much pity, but I have told
you, that virtue is to be showed in extremities, you can expect for nothing
from Claristea, apply your self to some other ^ad^^, ^^ pleasing, and more
kind, that may make you forget that ever you loved her; This is the right, and
sure mean to cure you of your misery, for wilfully to persist in so unadvised
a purpose as to dye wretchedly, (...) more of folly then discretion.

Your counsel is so good, said the solitary Knight, who was eve^ ^^at
Florimond of Canabea (of whom you have read the discourse in the nineteenth,
and twentieth Chapter of our second part) that I am resolved to follow it,
since reason and heaven do seem to command it.

Whereupon promising to depart with Clarisel, that told him what company he had
in the Wood, they laid them to sleep, and the next morning Clarisel causing him
to mount on (...) horse, they took the next highway they met withal, where a
little after they overtook a Gya^^, who very much taken with Clarisels gallant
deme^^our, said gently unto him; Sir, I should account it for no small
happiness, that your occasions would carry you my way, therefore you may much
oblige me, by setting me know whether you are bound. Your demand is so noble,
answered Clarisel, that I should be most ready to satisfy you, but we are
strangers here, and know not so much as the name of this Country, where we
arrived but the last night, being driven into it by a tempest. Why then I will
tell you, replied the Giant, you are in the Kingdom of great Britain, some
two little days journey from Windsor, where the Court is now resident, and in
preparation of great Triumphs for the celebration of certain Marriages that are
forthwith to be consummated; but I believe some there will come short of their
account, for I hope to interrupt their sport, and convert their laughter into
tears; Upon what occasion, said Clarisel? to be revenged of the wrong, answered
he, that my Predecessors, received from Galaor King of Sobradiza, who took the
rock of Galtares from the Giant of Albadan, my Grandfather, and gave it to
Gandalal the greatest enemy he had, and very oportunly has fortune conducted
me hither at this time, with the redoubted Z^robalan my brother (who has taken
another way the more securely, and closely to atchive our enterprise) for they
that are to be married, are the grandchildren of that King.

Clarisel, well observing this discourse, resolved to go to Windsor, as well
to be present at the Jousts, as prevent the effect of so pernicious a design,
but concealing his determination, he rode along with him aloof from the rest of
the company, when as the Giant, espying two women on horseback that crossed
the way, gallopping after them, and finding them to be mavelous beautiful,
he seized on her that liked him best, purposing to take his pleasure on her
instantly, if Clarisel arrived thereupon had not entreated him to forbear so
detestable an act.

By all my gods, said he, say what you will, you shall never persuade me to
quit so fair a prey. I shall be constrained to fight with you then, said
Clarisel. Fight with me, answered the Giant (giving him a furious look) Be sure
I Will chastise thy insolence for daring to say so; whereupon he houghed those
Gentlewomens horses, who presently ran away to hide themselves amongst the
bushes, and thinking to divide his enemy with the first blow, he discharged his
courtlas with such fury at his head, that making away through the shield, the
point of it lighted so rudely upon his Helmet, that it made him knock his chin
against his breast, which put Clarisel into such a rage, that he gave him a
dangerous wound in the thigh. The combat thus begun continued very cruelly for
an hour and better, at the end whereof Clarisel, perceiving his shepherdess
to look with an eye of fear, and pity on the blood, that issued from an hurt
the Giant had given him in his arm, grew so incensed, that he advanced his
sword, and let it fall with such a tempest on his enemies Helmet, as he cleft
him down to the shoulders, overthrowing him with a noise like to that of an
Oak rent up by the violence of the winds.

This horrible blow no less amazing Card^ran, and Lindore^na, then giving
content to Miralinda, they all came running in to unarme him, but feeling
little pain of his hurt, beth^n^^d them for their care of him, and desiring
them to go and seek the Gentlewomen, he stayed with Lindoren^^, and his
Shepheardess, who would not rest till she had got him to bare his arm, that
they might take a course to stanch the blood; that done, they walked to the
bushes, for to see what was become of the Knights, and the Gentlewoman, but
they had not gone far, when as they found Florimond on his knees before her
whom the Giant would have ravished, which spoke to him in this manner.

Get you away imporunate man, and do not trouble me in this sort, have I not
told you a thousand times that my heart was engaged under the Laws of another
far more pleasing to me then you; why do you force me then to say so again to
you now? I am not returned, I tell you, into the world for you. I, but you
shall be, said Clarisel, (who understood by her discourse that this was
Claristea,) at leastwise if you will not show your self the most ungrateful
woman in the world, this Gentleman wants nothing that is worthy of a fair
mistress, why will you refuse him then after so many testimonies of his love,
and such powerful obligations wherein you stand engaged to his valor? be not
so hard hearted I pray you sweet Lady, but do that which his desert, and your
duty requires.

Verily, answered she, (perceiving it was he that vanquished the Giant,) I must
acknowledge that heaven has had a special hand in this business; for, Sir,
the fame which you left behind you in France persuaded me that you were the
Knight, whose image is engraven in the bostome of my heart, I forsook the
Cloister, where I had resolved to have ended my days, and followed you a long
time with that opinion, but now seeing my self deceived in my hope, and
thinking of nothing less then meeting with this Knight, (pointing to Florimond)
I must believe that our destiny has brought us hither, he for to receive the
recompense of his services from me, and I to be assured that I shall never
enjoy the valiant Knight of the Palms, whom hereafter I will utterly forget,
wherefore at your entreatie I will accept of him for my Husband, as well for
the satisfaction of the bond wherein I stand indebted to you for my present
deliverance, as for his own particular merit.

O from what an abisme am I mounted, said Florimond, and can it be, that I
which was this morning the most afflicted man on the earth, should in a moment
be the most fortunate Lover in the world? Madam, continued he (kneeling down
again before her,) you shall never repent this grace of yours to me, wherefore
defer not the accomplishment, I beseech you, if you tender my life. You shall
not languish long if I may, answered she, for as soon as we come to any Town, I
will marry you very willingly, in the mean time let us see how we shall get
from hence. Madam, said Clarisel, (wonderful well satisfied of so good an
accord) so gracious a design sure shall not be retarded for want of your
horses, you shall get up behind your servant; the Damosel that accompanies you,
behind this Gentleman, pointing to Cardoran, and my little Squire shall walk
after us fair and softly on foot. Marry your favors are sweetly dispensed,
said M^scarin, but there is no remedy, I must have patience I see, and trust
to my legs. These words having made all the company to laugh, they presently
mounted on horseback, and rode to a Town not above a league from thence, where
resolving to pass the rest of the day, Clarisel caused the Giants body to be
fetched, and laying it in a Wagon, sent it instantly away to Windsor, there to
be presented to the Prince of ^obradiza from him, together with the relation of
all that had past.

That dispatched, Florimonds marriage with Claristea was propounded, whereunto
every one assenting, they were espoused the fame evening to (...) unspeakable
(...), who through the (...) of his (...), and Claristea's cunning never
perceived, that the (...) had been entered before by Alcid^^^^,

CHAP. XVIII. The Massacre that was made by the dreadful Giant Zorobalan at
the Io^sts at Windser, Clarisel a^^iving thereupon, after a dangerous Combat
kills him.
THE Nuptials of Rozanel and the fairest Angelea, of Tristor and the virtuous
Alteria being celebrated, all the Knights of great Britain were in the field,
the people filled the scaffolds, Quedragant, Abies, and the gentle Agrian of
Scotland were in the Lists, and the Trumpets began to sound a charge, when as a
Gentlewoman with two Knights appeared before a Wagon, wherein lay the body of a
Giant, whose head was divided in two; at the sight hereof every one came
thronging to it; and especially Garama^^, Don Si^ald^, Rozanel, and Tristor,
who very much marvelled at the greatness of the blow which they beheld, saying
that the Knight, from whose hand so violenta storm fell, must needs have a
strange and extraordinary force.

The Gentlewoman desired she might be brought before the Prince of Sobradiza. I
am he, said Tristor, will you have any thing with me? Gentle Prince, answered
she, here is one of your greatest enemies in case to conspire no more against
your person, as he had done with a brother of his, far greater and more
formidable then he, who purposes to be present at this assembly, to revenge
upon you the death of Albadan, whom your Grandfather, King Gala^^ defeated in
the quarrel, that Gandalac, had with him concerning the Rock of Galtares, the
handsome Shepherd (one of the best Knights of the world) sends him to you, with
this advise, that you take heed you be not surprised by that dangerous enemy
the surviving brother. Gentlewoman, said Tristor, I am infinitely indebted to
the good will and valor of this Knight, as also very much to you for the pains
you have taken in coming hither, which I will labor to acknowledge before you
depart from hence, touching the advice you have brought me, it shall not be
neglected, and if the Giant come, I doubt not but he shall find some here
courageous, and strong enough to arrest the fury of his arms.

Whereupon, retiring with an exceeding desire to know so brave a Warrior, he
caused the Wagon with the body to be fet in a corner of the Lists, and placing
himself in the window, he perceived eighteen Knights come marching in three
troops, the foremost whereof was conducted by Aristander, Duke of South Wales,
who was passionatly in love with Flori^^a, the daughter of Garamant, Duke of
North Wales, and desired to show his valor for the maintenance of her beauty;
the second by Orad^rt, Earl of Gloucester, who was no less affected to
Theiphila, the daughter of Don Sinaldo; and the third by Orian, Duke of
Norfolk, who had no other Mistress but glory.

These three Champions, being each of them accompanied with five of the best
Knights of great Britain, ranked themselves according to their arrival in the
place, and just opposite to Quedragant, Abies, and Agrian, stood Aristander and
two of his troop, who at the sound of the Trumpets dislodged very bravely, and
broke his staff upon his adversaries Shield, without so much as moving
Quedragant, that incountred him so strongly, as he made him lose his stirrops,
whilst his two Companions were unhorsed by Abies and Agrian: Aristander
extremely vexed for that he had done so little with his first staff, took
another that was bigger and stronger, ^^^ing to recover his honor at the
second course, nevertheless he and his Horse were both overthrown to the
ground.

These three being dispatched in this sort, the rest presently advanced, and
ran very gallantly, but fortune was no more favorable to th^^^, then to their
Companions, for they were all laid on the grass, and constrained to give place
to Gradart, who at the third course against Agrian helped to fill up the number
of the vanquished, and so did Oria^, and those of his train a little after, in
so much that these eighteen of the best Knights of great Britain being
defeated, they were conferring the prize on the Challengers, when as a Giant
presented himself so huge, and of so terrible an aspect, as frighted all the
assistants, those warlike Princes excepted, who choosing out good Lances
prepared themselves to receive him, and to maintain the honor which they had
acquired: howbeit, they never used them, for the great Giant having discovered
the body that lay in the Wagon cried out with a horrible voice: Immortal gods?
who could deal thus with my brother, since all the Knights in the world
assembled together were not able to withstand him; Ah dogs, you have surprised
him treacherously, but you shall all dye in satisfaction of so foul a crime;
Saying so he charged his Lance against Quedragant, and passing it through his
Shield and Arm, flung him half a dozen paces over his Horses crupper, then
suddenly returning discharged two such terrible blows on Agrian and Abies, that
having wounded the one dangerously in the thigh, and the other on the head, he
laid them both in the dust, from whence flying in amongst the rest he cleft
Gradart down to the wast, and never rever regarding upon whom his Sword
lighted, he began to make so great a Massacre of Men, Women, and Knights, that
he had overthrown thirty at his feet before Rozanel and Tristor, who had
speedily armed themselves, could come forth.

The Ladies shriked at the windows, the people fled away, the slaughter
continued, and the place was almost empty, when as a Knight of a very goodly
presence arrived, accompanied with two Gentlemen unarmed, a Shepherdess, whose
face was covered with a vayl, and certain Damsels richly clad, who beholding
the havoc that the Giant made, drew forth his Sword, and discharged it with
such violence on him, that he was forced to knock his chin against the pummell
of his saddle, which so rowsed the fury of this Monster, as raising himself up
full of rage, he thought to have divided his enemy with an horrible blow that
he intended at him, but the Knight, who w^^ no less advised, then valiant,
avoided it by slipping a^^de; nevertheless it being no longer in the Giants
command, it fell up on his own Horses head* wherewith he fell down dead, leaving
his Master on foot, which Cla^isel perceiving presently quitted his saddle,
because he would not take any advantage, and approaching his enemy showr^d so
many blows on him, that the blood began to dye his arms in five or six places.

Rozanel and Trist^^ coming in thereupon, were marvellously astonished at so
cruel a conflict, and knowing by his company that this was the handsome
Shepherd which had sent them the first Giant, they fell to observe the manner
of his fight; the force of his blows seemed extreme to them, they admired his
dexterity in shunning his enemies strokes, and thought it no less strange to
see with what assurance he supported them whersoever they lighted upon him.

In the mean time the combat continued very terrible, the ground was st^ewed
with pieces of their armor, the grass was stained with their blood, the place
was all fire with sparkles that flew from their Helmets, and without taking any
breath they charged one another so cruelly, that ever and anon they had much
ado to keep themselves from falling. Zorob^l^n, more ontragious then can be
imagined, combatted with greater passion then judgment, and cursing the gods
for producing a man able to withstand him, he roared out in that dreadful
manner, as made the very house to shake; At length transported with fury to see
three hours spent fift^e the beginning of the combat, without any advantage
over his adversary, he took his Courtelas in both his hands, and advancing it
let it defeend with such force on Clarisels Shield, that dividing it in twain,
it not only gave him a deep wound in the arm, but made him set his knees to the
ground, wherewith being wonderfully incensed, he suddenly got up, and struck the
Giant with such extraordinary violence, that he verily believed the ruins of
some building overthrown by lightning had fallen upon him, and had therewith
been laid along, had he not supported himself upon one of his (...) and hands;
howbeit, rising presently again, and resolving to dye or vanquish, he advanced
his Courtelas, and displaying all his strength, he discharged it so dreadful
on Clarisels Helmet, that he sent him tumbling down three or four paces off,
and casting a great deal of blood out of his mouth, which so frighted
Miralinda, that she swounded in Florimonds arms.

Rozanel being exceedingly grieved then at so heavy an accident drew forth his
Sword, and was going to oppose the Giant, when as he perceived Clarisel to
rise, and instantly to part with such horrible, and unexpressable fury, that
even (...) himself, who could not be persuaded that all the Th^^der bol^s of
Heaven could ever have made him fear, began to ^^emble at the apprehension of
the threatening. Tempest of his enemies advanced Sword, which cutting off his
arm, that for want of a Shield he had listed up in def^nes of his head, he
separated his body in two pieces, to the wonder and (...) of all the people,
and especially of Tristor and ^^zanel, who straight way coming in to him gave
him amillion of thanks, and (...) him to the very skies, but Clarisel, seeing
what case (...) was in, de^i^ed (...) to think him incivill if he did not (...)
that respect was due to their ^uality, for to go and succor his Shepherdess,
to whose safety his life was ins^^^rably tied* Wh^^^ upon running to Miralinda
he used such present remedi^s, as she came to her self again, filling all the
assistants with no ^^sse marvel at the excellency of her beauty, then they
were at his force and valor.

All things thus well resetled, Rozanel and Trist^r prevailed so far with
Clarisel and his company, that they were contented to take their lodging in the
Court, where Miralinda, Clarislea, and Lindorenna, were infini^ly caressed by
the fairest Angelea and Alteri^, who were sotaken with the incomparable beauty
of our Shepherdess, as they could never satisfy themselves enough in beholding
and admiring her.

Not long after, when as Clarisel, Qu^dragant, Abi^s, and the rest were* cured
of their wounds, the Triumphs and Iousts were renewed, where Clarisel performed
such wonders, as he acquired the reputation of one of the prime Knights of the
earth, and possessed all those Lords with such a desire to know him better,
that one day Rozanel entreated him before them all so far to oblige them, as to
let them understand his name, his country, and parentage.

If it were to do you any service, brave Prince, answered he, be confident, I
would make no difficulty to obey you, but knowing that it will little avayl
you, and that it much imports me to conceal it, I shall humbly beseech you to
excuse me, only be assured that the greatest glory I desire to have in the
world, is to be a Shepherd* for the love of this Shepherdess.

Judging by this speech that he would not discover himself, they importuned him
no farther,, and labored to give him the best entertainment they possibly
could devise for to stay him amongst them; but loath to lose time, he took his
leave a little after of all these Princes and Ladies* as also of Florimond and
Clarislea, who likewise returned into France, and imbarking himself in a Ship,
that Garament had provided for him, he sailed toward the Islands of Corolandaya.

CHAP. XIX. The arrival of the King of Cabilla, in the Empire of M^rtaria, and
the furious battle that was fought on the Seashore, in disputing the descent
of his f^rces.
THE bad estate wherein Rifantes returned into Cabilla, having mightily incensed
the King his Father, he presently dispatched away Commissioners for the levying
of Soldiers, thoughout all the parts of his Dominions, and resolving to make
use of his friends, he wrote unto the Kings of Astramer, of Zambian, of
Corniban, of Ircassia, of Langican, of P^ripatan, of (...), of Fortan, of
Alarmia, of Cassilana, and particularly to the redoubted Brizardan, Sultan of
Atalasi^, and to the powerful King of Filzandria, Meri^^ran, to ^ntreat them
to embr^ce with him the (...) so^, by t^^ Emperor of Mart^^^^* (...) of the
King^ of Allanar^, and (...) also to (...) Ar^^^, in such sort, that about two
(...), there arrived in his Kingdom thirty* thousand Horse, in the head
whereof marched Brizard^^ with three Giants, an^ two and twenty thousand Foot,
cond^c^^^ by the Kings of Astramer, and (...)* thirty and five thousand men
under the command of the King^ of Cor^ib^n, and (...)* fourscore thousand Horse
raised in the Kingdoms of ^^^ip^tan, and Lapgi^^^, with three Giants, eight and
twenty thousand Foot, with the Kings of Urbana, Alar^ia, and Cassilan; twelve
thousand horse of the territo^i^^ of Fo^tan, thirty thousand foot out of the
Kingdoms of Alfanara, and Corcutan; twenty thousand Horse, and six thousand
Foot, conducted by the bra^^ King of Filxandria, who was accompanied with the
pr^^^ (...)* o^^ of the strongest Knights of all Paganism.

These (...) unto two hundred and forty thousand men, having ^in w^^l
entertained, and all the great persons extraordinarily caressed, the king of
C^billa, being elected General of the whole Army, though he had long ^o^^ested
^o have had the command thereof laid upon the Sold^^ of Aral^fi^, caused all of
them to be carefully embarked, with a full in^^^^ to be thoroughly revenged on
the Emperor of Martaria, who in the m^^n time remembering (...) his ^^^oces,
prepared an Army of fourscore thousand Horse, ^n hundred and thirty thousand
Foot, and nine Giants, through the assistance of the Kings of Arbales, of
Grizolia, of Calizant, of Miria^^, of T^lin, of Bol^^^^, of Merlian, of
Carderia, and of Balivan, who s^conded by (...) fair Slave, and the two
strangers that lived with incr^dible delight, in the sweet and uncontrolled
fruition of their dearly-beloved Ladies, made no question of good success and
victory.

All things thus ordered then they expected their enemies, who being discovered
one morning, gave an alarm unto the Martarians, which suddenly ranged
themselves into three squadrons, the first conducted by the Kings of Arbales,
Beltona, and Grifolia; in the head whereof Cirazinda placed her sel^^* with
(...) Giants; the second by the Princes of Calizant, Merlian, and B^livan
accompanied with Floridan, and a like number of Giants; the third by the
Sovereign of Tolin, Miriana, and Carderia, unto whom Lucibel joined himself
presently, covered the Sea shore, courageously attending the arrival of the
enemies Ships, which carried by a favorable wind, and perceiving these troops
stand imbattelled, put themselves in order to combat and force them.

Approaching then with fury, they labored with a world of Boats, and Bridges
to land, but the Imperialists withstood them for the space of two whole h^^res
together, with such extraordinary valor, that the Sea was all blo^d, and full
of dead bodies, whereat the Sultan of Aralifia; Rifan^^s and the proud
Arastr^^, were in such rage, that leaping all three together a* shore with
above fifty thousand men maug^^ the resistance of their ene^i^^* they fell in
amongst them, making no less a slaughter then famished Wolve^ do amidst a
^^ock of sh^ep*

Howbeit, this (...) lasted no^ long, for C^^^zi^d^ accompanied with two Giants
^lew upon them, and meeting Arastr^n, first she discharged so mighty a blow
upon his Helmet, as she made him reele again, hurting* him dangerously* on the
head, wherewith the Pagan, who was one of the proudest men in the world, became
so furious, that advancing his Sword, he let it descend with such a tempest on
our Warrio^^^ (...)* ^s it cut off a good cantle of it, and made a shrewd gash
in his ^^me; on the other side the redoubted Sultan of Aralafia, and Rifantes
fought wi^h the Giants as bravely.

In the mean season the whole fleet landed, and the noise increased in such
sort, as all the coast resounded therewith, the Giants cut all in p^^ces;
Floridan and the Prince of France seemed to be thunder (...) the Soldiers
animated by their Captains example, some fell in the (...) some on the earth,
briefly all was in confusion, and the Sea shore was so covered with dead
bodies, that those which landed last could hardly pass for them.

Corazinda having a mighty opposite showed all her skill, but Arastron
combatted so well, that she had in everything her answer; Brizardan and
Rifantes were almost mad, that they could not succou^ their men, and especially
the valiant Souldan not enduring to be arrested so, took his sword in both his
hands, and therewith struck his enemy so ter^ibly, as he divided his head in
twain, from thence beholding Arastron to stagge^ with a dreadful blow which
Corazinda had discharged on his Helmet, he smote her so dangerously on the
shield, that he made her bend with her knees to the ground, where Rifantes
having likewise dispatched his Giant, charged her at the very same instant with
such violence, as she was forced to save her self upon both her hands with very
great jeopardie of her life, nevertheless rising again with more rage then
amazement, she went and gave the Souldan so huge a blow, that she sent him to
the ^arth with a great wound in the shoulder, and so astomished, that he quite
lost the fight of the Sun, and carried with the same fury, she had undoubtedly
made an end of Rifantes, had not the proud Arastron arrested the force of her
blow with his shield, which was cut in two pieces; But this mighty Pagan much
incensed to meet with one able to put his life in hazard, so redoubled his
strokes, that accompanied with Rifantes, and Brizardan, who was got up again,
and in the highest degree of rage, Corazinda questionless had been much
endangered, had not those two brave Champions, Floridan and Lucibel, glorious
by the death of certain Giants by them defeated, arrived in good time for her.

These two Princes seeing the evil plight Amadis was in, being on his knees
with three dreadful blows received all at once, instantly discharged with
such fury on Rifantes and Brizardan, that they were constrained to turn head,
and defend themselves, much amazed to meet with men, contrary to their
expectation, strong and valiant enough for to arrest the greatness of their
arms. In this manner began a Combat between fix incomparable warriors, which
might have lasted long, had no^ our Christian Princes, perceiving their troops
in disorder, by the valor of the Kings of Filzandria, and Corniban, with three
horrible strokes delivered on their Enemies all at an instant so astonished
them, that they had leisure to remount upon their horses, and set themselves
again in the head of their squadrons, with such a ruin of those they
incountred, as their people resuming new courage, spoke of nothing less then a
retreat: how beit these Princes, being as advised, as valiant, put them
presently in good order, and retired with them into their Trenches, in despite
of so many enemies having with incredible pains sustained the fury of those
that pursued them.

This so prudent, and courageous a retreat was much admi^ed of the enemy,
which commending the extreme valout of the fair Slave, and of the two
strangers, lamented the loss of fourteen thousand men, three Giants, and that
of the King of Ircassia, who was s^ain by the hand of the Prince of France,
nevertheless understanding that their Adversaries fortune was little better,
and that they had left nine thousand men, two Giants, and the Duke of Plemond
on the shore, they did not much afflict themselves, but went and planted their
Camp before Cardana, resolving to put all to fire, and sword, especially
Arastron, Brizardan, and Rifantes, who being marvellously incensed, would have
sent a Challenge (notwithstanding the danger of their wounds) to the three
Knights, that to their great grief were mightily incensed by every one, but the
King of Cabilla, relying more on these three Warriors, then on the rest of his
Army, would by no means permit them, so as they continued keeping of their Beds
ten or eleven days together; during which time our Champions having no less
need of rest, both sides prepared all things necessary for the Assault, and
defense of the City, whereat the fair Princesses were much troubled, but the
presence of their Lovers confirming them, they showed more affection then fear,
principally Archesidella, who being acquainted by Amadis of the quality of the
Prince of France, received him likewise for her Husband.

At length our Warriors perceiving all the field covered with Soldiers ready
for the Assault, they went and besought the Emperor, that nothing might be
ordered, but by their counsel, and presently thereupon caused threescore
thousand foot, to enter into the Town, which they divided into four
squadrons, commanded by the King of Arbales, and Miriana of Calizant, and of
Carderia, and then going with three Giants into their Trenches, they drew out
thirty thousand Horse, which they equally divided into three bands, and so
sallying out in three several parts they left the Kings of Balivan, of
Merlian, and of Grizolia, with fourscore thousand to guard the Camp, favor
their retreat and succor the Town if need were.

The Enemy approaching the Walls, began a most cruel and furious assault, the
great Sultan of Aralafia, Rifantes, and the proud Arastron, mounted first,
followed by fifty thousand men, but they were so valiantly opposed by the
four Giants, by the Kings, the gentle Knight Tarsander, and the forces that
were under their command, which remained in the Town, as the ditches were full
of dead bodies, whereat notwithstanding they were so little abashed, that it
seemed rather to augment their courages, in such sort, that their followers
carried by their example, behaved themselves so manfully, as the City was in
danger to have been forced, had not the Fair Slave appeared in the head of ten
thousand Horse, who entering furiously amidst the enemies troops ran a Giant
quite through and through, overthrew six Knights, before she brake her Lance,
and thundering amongst the rest with her Sword, she so cleared their ranks,
that she easily made way to the Walls, where incountring Don Rifantes with
thirty thousand Horse, which he had suddenly assembled, she gave him so
mighty a blow on his Helmet, that she laid him on the crupper of his Horse,
utterly derived of his senses.

This blow having terrified the enemies, they were ready to have betaken
themselves to flight, had not the proud Pagan arrived thereupon, followed by a
great multitude of Soldiers, who with a dreadful cry falling upon our
Warriors troops, began to make a terrible slaughter, in the nick whereof
Lucibel coming in, charged them a flank so furiously, that he cut off four
thousand of them. Brizardan seeing the confusion they were in, forsook the
Wall, and went to the succor of his companions; but Floridan having surprised
his men in disorder, put a number of them to the sword, nevertheless the
Sultan, being an excellent Commander, quickly reduced the most part of them
into order, and then addressed himself to run against Floridan, who observed
his coming, incountred him so furiously in the carriere, that they were both
overthrown in the dust, where our Knight had been in danger of ending his
days, under the horses feet, if the valor wherewith the Giant, that
accompanied him, arresting his enemies, had not given him leisure to remount on
his horse, which Brizardan could not so soon do because of the Giant,
nevertheless, being at length relieved by the assistance of those about him, he
drew out his sword, and began to make so cruel a massacre, that all the world
flew from before him.

In the mean time the valourous Corazinda, and the brave Prince of France did
things worthy of eternal glory, they killed, they cut off arms, and heads,
they cleft men down to the wast, and rendered themselves so terrible that the
very glistering of their swords, put the most confident in fear, howbeit their
number being too small to resist the fury of all these troops, which came
flocking together for to invest them, they retired in despite of so many
enemies, after whose example Floridan did the like notwithstanding all that the
brave Sultan of Aralafia could do; who understanding that his three Giants
were slain, with seven and twenty thousand men, and the Kings of Gallona and
Urban, the Emperor having lost but eleven thousand, he would have cast himself
in the Sea, had not the King of Cabilla wisely remonstrated unto him, how it
was but a trick of Fortune, that oftentimes opposes our desires, and will not
suffer us to triumph, but when she pleases, making a virtue then of
necessity, though it were with mavelous vexation, he resolved to determine
the business with one set day, whereunto having persuaded the King of Cabilla;
he sent accordingly to present the Emperor to battle, who relying on the
justice of his cause, and on the supreme valor of the fair Slave, and of the
Knights of the Flower-de-Luces, and Flowers, accepted of it to be fought on the
third day after, but at no hand would yield to any Truce during the time, and
that by the special advise of those Warriors which had undertaken an
enterprise, whereof you shall see the effect in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XX. The wonderful feats of Arms performedina sallie made by
Palmirenna's fair Slave, with the end of the General Battle, where all the
Emperors Forces were defeated by the unexpected arrival of the King of the
cruel Island.
TWo days being impatiently past away by the King of Cabilla's friends, who
attended but the third for to be revenged of the outrages they had received,
our Christian Princes considering what advantage the surprise of a careless
Enemy does bring, resolved to mount on Horseback about midnight, when as the
Moon might facilitate their design, and accordingly having each of them made
choice of two thousand approved Knights, they sallied out at three several
Gates, and with very great silence marched even to the enemies Sentinels, who
drowned in sleep, were soon put all to the Sword, a free passage being thus
opened to the Emperors troops, Palmirenna's fair slave entering first with
incredible fury, made so great a slaughter, that in a moment all the field was
covered with dead bodies.

The brave Sultan, and the proud Arastron, that were fast asleep, hearing the
dreadful noise of Arms, and the cries of thousands, which were yielding up the
Ghost, lept suddenly out of their beds, and finding four thousand Horse, that
were ever kept ready in reserve for all occasions, began to make head against
this invincible Championess, who overcame all, when as a new uproar arising
from the East side arrested them, not knowing well which way to take;
nevertheless being too courageous to be amazed with any alarm, they instantly
divided their forces, whilst Rifantes and the King of Filzandria, separately
caused the rest of the Soldiers to be armed, and marching bravely on, began a
most cruel bickering; for the Knights of Martaria desiring to imitate their
gallant Leaders, performed their parts most valiantly, and meeting with
terrified enemies made havoc of them every where.

On the otherside those two Thunderbolts of war, the great Sultan of
Aralafia, and the proud Arastron bestirred themselves with mighty loss to their
Adversaries, but Lucibel arising thereupon, flew in amongst them with such
fury, that above two thousand of their men were laid dead on the ground at the
very first brunt; and lustily pursuing his advantage he had cut eight or nine
thousand of the rest in pieces, had not Rifantes come presently in with thirty
thousand Horse, upon the sight of whom our Warriors, that wisely managed
occasions, rallied themselves altogether, and retyring in good order, so
mightily incensed those three valiant Pagans, that in a rage they followed them
with all their Cavalrie, hoping to thrust in with them into the City; howbeit
the King of Arbales arriving with eight thousand Horse, and four Giants charged
them in such manner with the assistance of the three Princes, and their troops,
which suddenly turned head against them, that rendering their designs vain, they
forced them to retire with the loss of nine thousand men, having left but
seven hundred of their Knights in the place, which were slain upon the first
encounter, whereat the Pagans were so infinitely enraged, that they could hardly
attend the rising of the Sun to put their Army into battle array.

In the mean time our Princes being come to the Town were reserved with strange
acclamations, and having somewhat refreshed themselves in Palmirenna's Chamber,
whither the beautiful Amplamira, and her excellent sister repaired to them at
the break of day for to give them skarfes, and to entreat them not to run into
unnecessary dangers, they went incontinently to the trenches where the Emperor
resolved to sight, and command the Battle in his own person, having learned by
his espials, that the King of Cabilla had an intention to do the like.

His Forces then being by the advice of the fair slave divided into three
Bands, the Vantguard consisting of twenty thousand Horse, and five and twenty
thousand Foot was given to the Kings of Arbales, Arisdan, and Carderia,
together with the Knight of the Flowers, and a Giant; the rereward of a like
number to the Kings of Grisolia, Metlina, and Ca^ilant, with the Knight of the
Flower de-Luces, and the Emperor reserving the main battle for himself,
wherein were thirty thousand Horse, five and thirty thousand Foot; the Duke of
Bonport, three Giants and the fair Slave, left the Marquis de la Rocque, and
the Count Vadian to guard the Town, the King of Mariana, in the Camp with
fifteen thousand men, and to the gentle Knight Tarsander, and the young Prince
of Balivan, he consigned four thousand light Horse to serve for wings unto the
Army.

All things being thus disposed of, they marched out of their trenches in good
order to encounter their enemies, who showing no less zeal to fight, then
advisednesse in marshalling of their Troops, followed Rifantes that led the
Vantguard with thirty thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot; this valiant
Chieftain conceiving that a good example was the best exhortation could be made
to encourage the Soldiers, setting sputs to his Horse, charged his Lance
against the King of Arbales, but Floridan seeing him set forth, parted at the
very same instant, and meeting him in the midst of the course broke his
staff very bravely, and received this Enemies Encounter, without so much as
once being moved in his saddle.

Both Armies herewith animated, a most dangerous conflict was seen in an
instant, the King of Arbales ran the King of Astramer quite through and
through, and overthrew him dead to the earth: The King of Carderia his
Companion, was by the King of Fortan cast under the Horses feet, where at
length he was stifled: The Martarians considering that the safety of their
Prince, their lives, and their liberties were in question, fought desperately;
The adverse part trusting to their numbers, carried themselves courageously, so
as all was in confusion, nothing was seen, nor heard, but bodies extended on
the ground, and the cries of dying men, which filled the air with their groans
and lamentations; Floridan seemed a Thunderbolt, death was ever tied to his
sword, Rifantes made such havocke* that way was given him whersoever he went.

The blood (...) along instrea^^, and every thing h^ng in suspense, when (...)
observing, how the safety or destruction of his side depended on the whole
valor of Rifantes, and the unspeakable force of a Giant, who made a heap of
dead bodies round about him, he most valiantly approached unto him, and
discharged so terrible a blow on his arm, that he cut i^ ^^eer off, and
following his advantage he redoubled on his Helinet with such fury, that he
sent him to the ground, where he was trodden to pieces under the Horses feet,
from whence ^^ying amongst the enemies Troops, he so terrified them, as they
began to fly, to the infinite discontent or the great Sultan of Arala^^^, and
Arastron, who accompanying the King of Cabilla in the main Battle, were mad
for that they were not as yet engaged in fight, whereupon suddenly advancing
with rage they were falling upon the King of Ar^ales Squadron, but perceiving
the Emperor of Martaria present himself with the gross of his Army, they were
constrained to alter their purpose, and make head against him; who desiring to
show his courage, in despite of age charged his Lance against the King of
Cabilla, and met him so lustily, that he threw him over the crupper of his
Horse; nevertheless unable to support his enemies encounter, he was also
compelled to fall, and that in danger to be trampled under the Horses feet, had
not Palmirenna's fair Slave (who had still an eye upon him) lept suddenly down,
and catching him up, remounted him in despig^^ of all the enemies fury.

The fall of these Princes having drawn the bravest Commanders of the Army
together, the sight grew so hot, as all the field was dyed with blood, (...)
incountring (...), ran him through the body with his Lance, and disdayning to
draw his Sword against ordinary Knights, flew upon Radamant his brother, who
had newly slain the King of Zamblan, and began to charge him with a m^^titude
of dreadful blows, but this Giant grown furious by his brothers death,
received him in such sort, as he gave him a dangerous wo^^d in the shoulder;
howbeit, the force of this Knight being more then monstrous, he endured not
long before him.

In the mean ti^^ our fair Slave overthrew all that came in her way, she cut
off men by the wast, cleft down others to the teeth, and made so strange an
havoc, that she might well have been compared to torrents, whose violence the
sturdiest Oaks are not able to withstand. On the other side Brizardan falling
on our troops with incredible rage, rendered himself so terrible, that his blows
were no less feared then death it self, every one gave him place, and which
way so ever he turned there no enemy appeared, at length beholding the wonders
performed by our fair Slave, he approached to her behind, and before she was
aware gave her so mighty a blow on her Helmet, as he made her bow with her head
to the Saddle bow, where raising her self up again with infinite fury, she took
her Sword in both her hands, and discharged it so dangerously on the Soldans
Shield, that dividing it she wounded him very desperately: from thence spurring
on to Arastron, who held the Emperor ^^der his arm ready to carry him away to
his Tent, she st^^^k him with such violence on the head, as she overturned him
on the crupper of his Horse, casting out a great deal of blood o^^ of his eyes
and ears, whereby freeing the Emperor, she caused him presently to be horsed
again.

Those two horrible blows having amaxed the enemies, they (...) give ground,
when as the Kings of Filzandria, and (...) ^^^manded the rereward entered with
strange ^^in: All was then in (...), and doubtless the Emperor had been in an
ill cose, i^ (...) had not oportunely arrived with the Kings of Grizolia,
Merlina, and thousand Gazilant, followed by twenty thousand Horse, and five and
twenty Foot. Then it was that the Heaven, Earth, and Air, seemed but one, and
the same thing, and so many Knights fell at this Encounter, that it was not
possible to tread, but on dead bodies.

Arastron, and Brizardan being come to themselves again, and in the supremest
degree of rage, put all to the Sword; the fair Slave, L^^^bel, and Floridan on
the other side made no less havoc, the Giants and the Kings were so many
furies, the King of Filzandria fought most desperately, Tarsander and the young
Prince of Balivan rode breaking the enemies ranks, briefly, nothing was seen
but blood and slaughter, and the noise of Drums and Trumpets was so great, as a
thousand claps of Thunder could not have been heard.

Brizardan, Arastron, and Rifantes did wonders, but our Knights so behaved
themselves, that the King of Cabillaes Troops began to turn their backs, when
as from the Sea side there appeared four dreadful Giants in the head of
fifteen thousand Horse, who having neither Army long in the uncertainty of
whose aid they were come unto, charged their Lances against the Emperor, in
whose Army, with the assistance of the unvanquished, which began to take new
courage, they ^^ew above an hundred thousand men, notwithstanding the uttermost
our Knights ^ould do, who having speedily drawn forth twelve thousand Horse
^ell (...) ^^ese fresh Troops with such incredible fury, as one would have
thought they would have been utterly defeated; howbeit the Cabillaes arriving
thereupon with an horrible shout, they were pressed and ch^^ged on so many
sides, as they were all cut in pieces except nine thousand Horse, and seven
thousand Foot, wherewith the Emperor got into the City, in despite of so
many enemies, especially of the Giants of the new Army, that hoping to enter
with them spurred on for life, but our three Champions being in the Rear, with
each of them a Lance in his hand, incountred them with such force, as they ran
them all three quite thorough and thorough, sending them dead to the ground, to
the infinite discontent of Arastron, who seconding them, had some part in their
disgrace; for Corazinda unable to endure his insolence, gave him so terrible a
blow on his helmet, that he cut off half his cheek, and so astonished him
besides, as if Rifantes had not presently come in to his aid he had fallen from
his Horse.

The horrible blow having arrested those which pursued them, the three Knights
had leisure to enter into the Town, where was strange lamentation made for so
great a loss, which amounted to seventy two thousand foot, and fifty seven
thousand horse, besides the Kings of Calizant, Merlina, and Carderia, and
repayring to the Emperor, who was very sensible thereof, they in some sort
comforted him by remonstrating, that it was but a chance of fortune, which
might soon change her copy, as much to their advantage; this done they went to
their Ladies, which infinitely rejoiced to see them return safe from the fury of
so bloody a Battle, and having assured them against all fear, they got them
instantly to the trenches, from whence they drew all the forces that were
thereinto the Town, the better to resist the assaults of their enemies, which
in the mean time caressed Alfer^ax the dreadful Giant of the cruel Island, who
brought them this succor, by means whereof they had obtained the victory,
though dearly bought, having lost nine and forty thousand Horse, threescore
and five thousand Foot, five Giants, the Kings of Astramer, Zamblan, Corniban,
Alarmir, and Langican, but comforting themselves with the hope of easily
forcing the Walls, in regard they had yet fourscore thousand men remaining, and
understanding that the Emperor had not a quarter so many, they resolved not to
let their Adversaries rest in quiet, but to give them an assault within two
days at the farthest, howbeit this design was interrupted, as you shall hear
by and by.

CHAP. XXI. The King of Cabilla sends Ambassadors to the Emperor, a Peace is
concluded; the Princesses of Martaria are granted in marriage to Rifantes,
Brizardans Meridoran, the Princes of Greeces resolution thereupon.
THE Prince of Cabilla's love being of more power then his spite, to have been
vanquished before Palmirenna, councelling him not to suffer the total ruin of
an Empire, the Crown whereof he hoped to enjoy, he went unto Brizardan, that
kept his bed by reason of some wounds he had received from the fair Slave, and
extolling the beauty of Amplamira, and Archesidella unto him before the King
of Filzandria, that was present there, after he had freely acknowledged his own
passion for the Princess Palmirenna, possessed them with no less affection to
these two excellent Infanta's, then that which he bore to his Mistress, in such
sort, as having ^ad some discourse upon this subject; they resolved to send
Ambassadors unto Cardana conceiving that the bad estate of the Emperors
affairs would make him willingly accept of the conditions they should propound.

Having then taken the advice, and consent of the King of Cabilla, that that
desired nothing so much as the contentment of his Son, they dispatched away the
Duke of Fransacra, and the Marquis of Robanara, fully instructed with what they
were to say, who appearing before the Walls with a trumpet, were presently
admitted in, and conducted to the Emperor, unto whom the Duke of Transacra
spoke in this manner.

Mighty Prince of Martaria, fortune has showed you that she favors your
enemies, and that it is in their power to deprive you of your Scepter when they
please, nevertheless she at this instant presents you with means, not only to
conserve you, but to make you more redoubted then ever you were; you know the
merit, and quality of D^n ^ifantes heir of Cabilla, the greatness of the
vali^nt Sultan of Aral^fia, and the riches of the puissant King of Filzandria,
make use of their good desire, to rendery on their Father-in-law, and do not
endure the ruin of so godly an Empire as yours is, their suit is advantageous
to you, and the possession of your Daughters will give them more satisfaction
then your estate, think that they will be so many Pillars, whereupon your
greatness may firmly rest, and consider that it is better to caress them as
your children, then to see them the enemies of your Crown; This is the business
of our Embassage, whereunto be pleased to return us a speedy answer, to the end
that either we may conclude an absolute peace with you, or resolve for a
continuance of the War.

My Lords, answered the Emperor very gravely, I am not ignorant of the
virtues, and quality of these three Princes which have sent you hither; but
having hitherto defended my self from their violence by the assistance of my
friends, it is reason that I take their counsel in so important an affair,
wherefore repose you here a little I pray you, whilst I advise with them
thereupon.

So passing to the Council Chamber, whither his Daughters, with the Kings of
Arbales, and Grizolia, Corazinda, and the Knights of the Flowers, and
Flower-de-Luces, being sent for, he propounded this demand, whereupon diverse
opinions were given; some drawn with the resentment which they were to have of
the outrages received from them were wholly against it, and others carried by a
better consideration of what was most convenient for the good of the State,
were altogether for it, so as they could not come to any resolution at at all,
when as the Emperor, being desired to deliver his mind, made it appear, that
he would not be very difficile to sign this accord, for remonstrating that his
(...) were spent, that these mighty Princes were his neighbors, and that
their alliance, would render his Crown most secure against all attempts
whatsoever, he restified that he had no greater desire then to see a Peace
concluded, and his Daughters in the power of those which demanded them, whereat
the fair Slave was so enraged, who perceived the utter undoing of her self, and
her cousins involved in the Treaty, that rising up with sparckling eyes, she
could not forbear saying to him;

Sir, I wonderat you, that in the midst of all your Subjects you are afraid;
what will the world say when they shall hear, that after such insufferable
outrages, you could so soon, and easily be persuaded to forget them? Do you
fear that your Daughters being so accomplished, and beautiful, shall never
meet with Princes so great and valourous, as these which now present them
selves? Sir, I know some, that yield not to them either for merit, or birth,
and from whom you may have more assistance, and content, then you hope for from
these. They threaten you with a continuance of the War, are not your Walls all
entire, and do not they know to their cost, that it had been determined
otherwise, had not Fortune showed her self what she is? she has done her
worst, and therefore is not to be further feared, nor shall this arm, wherein
hitherto you have found safety, ever be wanting to your succor, provided your
resolution be more generous; at leastwise understand from your Daughters,
whether they like of these matches, and do not more then the gods, which leave
us a power over our own wills.

Sweetheart, answered the Emperor, I verily believe that the love you bea^
me, ma^^s you speak with ^uch passion, (...) that it touches my particular,
when I talk of an accord with these Princes, but you do notknow how the
affairs of a King are otherwise treated of, then those of a private man, the
good of my State has counseled (...) to that which I say, my Daughters must
conform themselves to my pleasure, and therefore I command them to prepare
themselves for these Nuptials, whereby those mischiefs may be declined which
otherwise would arise, should I wilfully pers^stin this War.

These words ^o resolutely delivered, having drawn all the rest to his opinion,
except the beautiful Princesses, which spoke not but with their tears, the
Ambassa^^ours were called in, and so satisfied, with the promise which the
Emperor made them in the presence of all his Barons, as they would have fallen
on their knees before these Infanta^s, but they not able to endure the fight of
them, presently departed, and ^^utting themselves up in their Chambers,
resolved to dye a thousand deaths, rather then violate the faith which they had
plighted to their beloved Lords, who in the mean time were not a little
disquieted, making a milion of furious desig^es upon the lives of those
insole^t Princes, that labored to usurptheir right.

The Ambassadors being returned then with all the content they could desire, a
thousand, and a thousand Bon^ires were instantly made in the King of Cabilla's
Camp, the gates of Cardana were set open, all passed losses were forgotten,
most of the Troops were discharged, six thousand Horse only were reserved to
honor these Princes, Briza^da^ g^t out of his bed, Rifantes, and Merid^^^ King
of Filzandria trickt up themselves, and de^iring to enjoy the happiness of
beholding their Mistresses, they went all three unto the Emperor, who received
them with open arms, and insensible of all that was past, conducted them
himself into (...)'s Chamber, where all his Daughters were assembled, who
notwithstanding their Fathers presence, could not choose but show their
discontent, speaking very coldly unto them.

Howbeir these Princes willing to ^latter themselves, and hoping that time or
necessity would beget affection in them, they departed a little after, so
pressed with the desire of tasting the felicities, which the fruition of
theirincomparable beauties did promise, as they humbly besought the Emperor,
that their happiness might not be deferred but for a day or two at the most,
which having been promised them, the Emperor returned to his Daughters, who
thinking to move him to pity, fell on their knees before him, and with tears
entreated him not to render them miserable for all their lives, by giving them
Husbands most incapable of love, and under whose power they could expect
nothing but constraints, but all could not move him, for resolved to see the
consummation of these Marriages he commanded them anew, to prepare themselves
thereunto within two days, which commandment was so harsh unto them, as they
would quickly have made an end of themselves, had they not the hope they had to
find out some means by the counsel of their Lovers to avoid this mischief,
persuaded them to prolong their lives a while.

Having sent for them then as soon as it was night, they shut themselves up with
them into a Chamber, where lovingly joining their lips unto theirs, the tears
trickled down their fair cheeks, whereby Amadis too well knowing their grief,
said unto them; Ladies, complaints are vain, nor will weeping do any good, you
love us, the favors we contin^ally receive from you, assure us of it, but yet
you are to give ^^ further proof thereof, vex not your selves at the cruelty
of a barbarous Father, who without the regard of your content will subject you,
to men you cannot love, France, Persia, and Greece, are Countries goodly enough
to invite you without sorrow to abandon the ingracefull Land, thither let us
go my excellent Mistress, and make no difficulty to follow us, I have a way to
carry you hence in despite of all that would oppose my my enterprise, so as
you have sufficient courage, and love to undertake it with us.

Alas! my dearest Lord, answered Palmirenna, this is all that we can wish for
in the world, declare unto us the secret of so difficult an affair, you shall
find us most resolute, and if there were occasion to take away the lives of
these deteshed Lovers, be assured that I would be the first to let out the
heart-bloud of Rifantes, Amplamira, and Archesidella, testifying no less
courage and affection for the contentment of their Lords, Amadi^ continued his
discourse in this sort;

Afflict your selves no longer then I beseech you, but when the time comes,
dress you in the bravest manner you can, for to be led to Church, in which
instant of time, Floridan and I will come into the Hall, in unknown Arms,
whilst Lucibel shall attend us at the gate adjoining to the Haven, and under
color of obliging you by some promise to descend into the Court yard, for the
deliverance of two enchanted Lovers, whom I will feign to be enclosed there in
a Coach, you three shall go into it; that done, six Horses shall gallop away
with you to the Sea side, where we shall find the Prince of Frances Barque,
which to morrow we will cause to be made ready for that effect.

This enterprise seems wonderful difficult, said Palmirenna, for you will be
in danger of exposing your selves against the power of all these Kings, and the
Emperor together, howsoever we will cast away all considerations, for if you
dye in the execution thereof, we will not survive you a minute, wherefore be well
prepared, and we will follow you infallibly. This resolution being taken, they
got them to bed, where with infinite content they lay till morning; when as
Lucibel sent for the Pilot of his Barque, who promised him that it should be in
a readiness against the time appointed.

CHAP. XX. Amadis of Tr^bisend, Floridan and Lucibel ca^^y away the Infanta's
of Martaria, the dreadful Combat maint ai^ed by them on the Sea short, they
are strangely succored, when they are past all hope of life.
THE violence of the Pagan Princes desires exceedingly pressing them, they
arose with the Sun, which was to give light to the day of their Nuptials, and
putting on very rich apparel, to appear with the moregrace in their Ladies
eyes, they descended into the great Hall of the Palace, whither not long after
came those excellent Princesses, so fearful of the danger, wherinto their
Lovers were ready to expose themselves, that a shivering palenesse eclipsed
much of the luster of their beauty, they felt strange palpitations of heart,
and beholding so much people assembled, they greatly doubted, that their
Enterprise would not succeed so happily as they wished.

Some small discourse being past, upon occasion of the prepared magnificences,
there entered two Knights in gilt Arms, who kneeling before the Emperor,
desired his hands to kiss. Now truly (said the Emperor, who knew them to be
Luparba^, and the gentle Knight Meander, Nephew to the great Duke of Moscovie,
of whose valor in the wars, between the Emperor of the Parthians, and the
King of Sibilla there was so much talk) you are most heartily welcome; for I
joy more in your arrival, then I can well express. Sir, answered Meander, no
men living can be more your Majesty's humble servants then we are, saying so,
they arose and went to do their duty unto the great Sultan of Aralafia, and to
the King of Cabilla, by whom, and by Rifantes, and Meridoran, they were
received with as much honor as might be.

Their complements being over, two other Knights entered covered with gray arms,
whereof (...) falling on his knees before the Emperor, said unto him. (...) of
Martaria, the fame of your magnanimity, and good^^^ (...) us hither to obtain
one boon of your Majesty. Say on, (...) (who felt himself tickled with the
praises which the Knight gave him) it shall be granted you very willingly, I
expected no less from you greatness, replied the Knight, Sir that which I
desire, is you will vouchsafe to take compassion of two Lovers, who are buried
alive in a Coach, which is below in your Palaceyard, by the malice of an old
Sorceresse, that maligning their faithful affections, retains them there in
most ^^ell torments, be pleased therefore to command these fair Princesses to
del^ver them from their sufferings, for the end of this adventure depending on
three excellent, and rare beauties, I hope to see it now finished, in regard I
do not think that the whole world can furnish three such again, as your
daughters are.

Verily, answered the Emperor, it much contents me, that my daughters should
join the glory of this adventure, to the triumphs that we make for the
celebration of their Nuptials with these valiant Princess; wherefore I like it
well that they go along with you, and to encourage them thereunto, I will in
person accompany them down. Whereupon the Princesses, who know their Lovers,
began to descend the Palace stairs, trembling as if they had not an hour to
live; but remembering how much it concerned them, they assumed new courage, and
taking one another by the hand, they got them suddenly into the Coach, and the
(...) their saddles, which done, the Coachman drove away a^ though he had been
mad, whilst Amadis lifting up the vizier of his (...) the Emperor thus. Prince
of Martaria, think that Her^^^ will not permit thee to be the Tyrant of thy
Daughters contentment, they are no^ in the power of Amadis, Prince of Greece,
and Trebisond, and not of ^ wom^n Slave, as thou have hitherto believed.

Wherewith going to spur his Horse, Lupar^^n that was next him with a proud
countenance seized on his bridle, which our Warrior perceiving lift up his
fist, Gauntlet, and all, and struck him on the head with such horrible
violence, as he laid him dead at the Emperors feet with his brains beaten out,
and observing that Meander had drawn his Sword, and was striking at him, he
presented his Shield to the blow, which was strong and mighty; howbeit, knowing
that then he was to show what he could do, he discharged so terribly on his
Helmet, that he divided his head in twain, and not staying till he was
environed by the press, he gallopped away, leaving all the assistants
terrified with those dreadful blows, the Emperor grieving for the death of
those two Knights, and the Lovers in the supremest degree of rage, to see
themselves so cunningly deprived of their expected felicity.

O ye gods! said the Emperor, shall I receive so great an affront without
some horrible revenge; To arms, Knights, to arms, and let not these villains
escape so. Herewith fifty Knights, which always attended ready armed for every
occasion, posting after our Warriors overtook them hard by the Seaside, and
charged their La^^ces all at one instant, but Amadis and Floridan that only
stood them, whilst L^^i^^l conducted the Ladies into the Bark, remaining firm
in their (...), let them break all their staves upon them, and then (...) a^
charge them in such sort, that in an instant they had laid ten (...), and
entreating the rest no better, they followed them (...) at the return of
Lucibel, there were but six left, who (...) as fast as they could drive,
rendered their retreat free, (...), Rif^^^es, and Merid^^^^ arrived, followed a
far off by four (...), before whom marched the Giant of the cruel Island.

Our warriors seeing them coming with strange fury, took three good Lances
which they had reserved, and being carried with no less rage they incountred
them so dangerously, as they were all cast out of their saddles, the Prince of
France excepted, who ran his Lance quite through the body of Meridoran,
overthrowing him dead to the earth, but the other^ arising all together began
so dreadful acombat, that the sh^re seemed to tremble under the violence of
their strokes.

These Pagan Princes being infinitely incensed with jealousy, Brizardan gave
(...) so mighty ablow on his Shield, that his arm not able to support the force
thereof, it beat it so rudely against his head, as he was forced to knock his
chin against his breast, and Rifantes discharged his Sword so on Floridan, that
notwithstanding the opposition of his Shield, which was ^le^t a^under, he
received a deep wound in the shoulder, which put our Grecians into such fury,
that doubting le^t they should be forced to sustain the assaults both of these
Warriors, and of these Troops, which they saw come gallopping (...) on them,
they discharged their Swords with such a Tempest, the (...) ^rizard^^^ Helmet,
and the other on Rifan^^s Shield, that the Sold^^^ was overthrown under the
horses feet, dangerously wounded in the head, and Rifantes with a great gash in
his arm ^umbled senseless out of his saddle, close by Brizardan who was in no
better case.

These two horrible blows having wrought the effect, which our Champions
desired, they lept presently into their saddles, and beholding themselves
environed with four hundred Knights, and the Giant of the cruel Island, a
daring man, and endued with extreme force, unto whom the Prince of France
opposed his Lance, which he had reserved entire, they began to charge them
with such fury, that in less then half an hour, they had laid thirty at their
feet; nevertheless the rest persisting very wilfully, they were so followed,
and charged on every side, as their horses being killed under them, they were
constrained to alight, and present themselves to their enemies, who fell down
dead as often as they encountered their blades.

In the meantime the Prince of France, being withdrawn a little aside,
maintained a dreadful combat with the King of the cruel Island, whose arms
were all imbrewed in blood, and questionless the death of this Colossus had
ensued from the choler of this valiant Prince, if a dozen of Knights had not
charged him so rudely behind, that unable to support the fury of an other blow
given him by the Giant at the same instant on his Helmet, he was forced to the
ground, where he lay not long, for considering the danger he was in, he arose
more enraged then a Bull bayted with a Company of dogs, and clasping his sword
fast in his hand with four strokes, he ^left four of the most confident of the
Troop asunder, and flying upon the Giant he ran him into the thigh, making him
set both his knees to the ground for to save himself, which little avayled him,
for this Prince calling to mind the pri^e for which he fought, gave him such a
blow on his shoulder that he opened him to the very wast.

This while (...) and (...) came again to themselves, and observing such a
horrible Massacre round about them, they arose transported with rage and
despite, and falling upon our Warriors, they charged them so furiously, with
an hundred and fifty Knights, that were still left, as they covered their
bodies all over with wounds, but being resolved to sell their lives dearly,
they grew so enraged, by thinking that their deaths would leave then Ladies in
the power of these Barbarians, as having given Rifantes and (...) two dangerous
hurts more they cut forty Knights in pieces, to the strange (...) of the
Emperor, and the King of Cabilla, who then arrived with fifty Knights,
thinking th^^ t^ be rather furies, then mortal men.

But to what end served the courage of their invincible hearts, ofering they
were to combat an Hydra, and that they always met with (...) women in the
places of them they slew? Truly the wonders they did w^^e to no purpose, for
being so weary, that they were scarce able to lift their arms, they expected
nothing but a glorious death, for to crown all their passed labors, when as
they perceived a Bark make to the land, out of the which two gallant Knights
suddenly lept a shore, marvellously astonished to behold so many bodies
extended on the earth by the valor of three men, which still resisted the
violence of such a remaining multitude.

These two Warriors (which were Fl^^^sbel of the star Lucibels uncle, and
the gentle Sestilian, Prince of Spain, whom fortune had very oportunely
brought thither,) admyring the virtue of these excellent Knights and not able
to endure the continuance of so unequal a combat, quickly unsheathed their
swords and advancing on, fell in so furiously upon those that held these
Princes straightly beseiged as they laid six at their feet with the first six
blows that they gave, which so revived our Gretians courages, as they seemed
to reassume new forces, running all three then into the midst of their
enemies they performed such feats of arms, as appeared even impossible to the
beholders, insomuch that threescore Knights more past by the edge of their
swords.

Howbeit Brizardan and Rifantes carried with unspeakeable grief for the
ravishing away of their Ladies, and the little satisfaction they could hope for
of it, having taken some breath, made toward them afresh accompanied which
Brustafard, and fifty Knights that came newly from the City, and renewed
their assault with such rage that it was a prodigious matter to see five men
endure so much, who nothing failing in courage were not withstanding so weary,
as unably longer to subsist, they were resolved to dye a thousand times over
rather then show the least jot of fear or faint heartednes, but desiring to do
something now at the last cast, Amadis; displayed all his force, and discharged
such a terrible blow on Rifantes head, that he clove him down to the shoulders
to the unexpressable grief of the King of Cabilla his father that beheld it.

Floridan and Lucibel had the same design upon the Sultan and Brustufard,
howbeit their arms wanting vigor their blows wrought not the effect they
desired, but contrarily finding themselves charged on every side by a multitude
of Knights they were compelled to set their knees to the ground, where as well
as they could they defended themselves a good while, as in the like manner did
Florisbel and Sestilian, that were ^carceable to wagge.

Amadis alone stood on his feet, so transported with fury to behold his
kinsmen in that lamentable plight, but much more to be the cause of his
Mistress death, who stayed but to see him fall for to cast her self into the
Sea, that laying desperately about him he was even ready to fall into the same
ease his companions were in, when as two brave war like Knights arrived,
whereof the one carried a Salvage pourtrayed on his shield, whereby you may
guess that it was the redoubted Gria^ the Salvage, and the beautiful
Bradimande his Lady who had acquired such renown in the world, as their
incomparable valor was every where spoken of.

This mighty and valiant Champion, ravished which admiration at the ^ight of
four hundred men and two giants massacred by the sole valor of five knights,
believed that heaven had brought him thither for their assistance, so that
furiously setting spur^es to his horse, he addressed himself against
Brustafard, upon whom he discharged his sword which such violence that he
divided his body in two pieces to the great astonishment of our Christian
Princes, who possessed which more courage then strength rose instantly up, and as
if they had done nothing all that day charged their enemies afresh, who
terrified which this new succor betook them all to flight, Brizardan only
excepted, that careless of his life, since he had lost the hope of enjoying
Amplamira, went and with all his force struck Brandimanda so furiously on the
helmet, that he overthrew her from her Horse to the ground, shedding great
abundance of blood, out of all the passages of her head, which put Grian into
such a rage, as he returned him so terrible a blow, that if his Sword had not
turned in his hand, he had cleft him to the middle, but lighting flatling on
his head, it so astonished him, that he fell as it were dead upon his
companions.

This horrible blow having mightily terrified the Emperor, and the King of
Cabilla, they fled away after the rest; whereupon our Christian Princes
perceiving no more enemies afoot, went to give thanks unto these incomparable
Warriors, at whose valor they exceedingly wondered, especially at that of
Grian, who in all have ran to his Lady, unto whom they applied such remedies
that she began to come to her self a little: seeing her then pretty well, they
fell to complementing one another; that done, our Knights having desired the
rest to enter with them into their Barque, they three, and their Ladies, got
aboard first, and as Grian was going to follow them, the Cable breaking that
held their Barque, she was carried away to Sea, whether they would or no, to
the extreme discontent of these Princes, especially of Floris^el and Sestilian,
who thought they should know the Princes of France, and Persia; howbeit there
being no remedy, they imbarqued themselves with the redoubted Knight of the
Salvage, and his Brandimanda in their Vessel, with a resolution to follow, and
overtake the other, but they were disappointed of their purpose, and driven
otherwhere.

CHAP. XXIII. Amadis his Ship being driven by a tempest to the Isle Du-bois,
two Leagues from Cardana, the Lovers are betrayed by a Merchant, and being
ready to fall into the hands of the Emperor of Martaria, they are miraculously
enchanted.
WE evermore find some cross to our content, and the sweetest delights have
some intermixture of bitterness; These Princes went on betwixt joy and grief,
esteeming themselves happy to be at the mercy of the winds, rather than of a
salvage, and cruel Emperor, but were no less troubled with the absence of
those brave Champions, to whose valor, and courage, they did owe their lives.
Those matchless Princesses did like wise simpathize with them in the like
passions, exceedingly joying at their happy escape from so desperate an
enterprise, but sorrowing no less at the number of their Lovers hurts, which
for want of a skillful Surgeon in the Ship might prove dangerous.

Howbeit Amadis bethought himself of a box of precious Balm, that he found in
the Grot, where the Dwarf dressed his wounds after his conflict with the Monster
of the Mountain of Bears, which instantly he caused to be sought out and
delivered it to his fair Mistress, who refused to entrust any other then her
self with his cure, and attendance, and therefore being laid down with the
other Princes, his associats, Palmirenna filled his wounds with that so
precious ointment; which having done, not without some tears and kisses, she
presented the Box unto her Sisters, who performed the like office unto their
Lovers, and so having shut the windows, withdrew themselves, and left them
asleep.

Mean while the Sea growing high and boystrous, overmastered the Pilots, and in
despite of their art, and industry, drove them back toward the place from
whence they were departed: they not able to withstand their destiny, were in
the end enforced to strike sail, and to comply with the present necessity;
Driving along then with the current, they came to the Isle Du-bois, two small
leagues from Cardana, the Mariners not knowing what Country it was awakened
the three Princes, who found theselves whole and sound, to the no less joy and
contentment, then wonder and astonishment of the Ladies: now, because the Sea
being rough, and the Harbor exceeding open, there was no safety in the Ship,
they persuaded the Lovers to go ashore, to which they willingly assented, in
regard they thought themselves out of the reach of Fortune, and far enough from
Martaria.

Not long after, as they walked on, they espied a stately House, where they
resolved to rest themselves until the weather grew more calm; Coming
therefore to the Master of it (a rich Merchant) he gave them very courteous
entertainment, but soon after taking notice of their persons, and being
thoroughly acquainted with that days passage, which already was grown public,
allured with hope of reward, as also thereby to shun the Emperors displeasure,
he resolved with himself to discover their arrival unto him: Dissembling then
his intent, and masking his countehance with cheerfulness, the better to avoid,
all thought of suspicion, he stayed till supper was ended, and the said lovers
were retired to their Chambers, at which time he speedily went to Cardana,
where being brought to the Emperors presence, he fell at his feet, and spoke
in this manner;

Sir, the affection I owe to your service, as your most faithful subject; has
brought me hither for discovery of a secret of no small importance: The Sea
has enforced your Daughters, with them that stole them away, to land in the
Isle Dubois; They are in my house, and you may easily have them in your power
without running the hazard of trying anew the fury of their Arms, for I left
them in bed more disposed to sleep; then to fight, where I am confident they
may be surprised without danger.

Immortal gods I said the Emperor, how welcome are these news to me, and how
much do I owe unto their providence, that restores my honor to its first
glory, by affording me the means to right my self for the outrage done unto me;
Ah traitors, racks and torments, shall not be wanting to your insolence, and I
shall take so horrible a revenge, that after-ages shall ever speak of it; And
you, impudent and disobedient Daughters, who have preferred the inticements of
strangers, before the grave admonitions of a Father, be confident that your
punishment shall be proportionable to your offense; You shall find how
powerful the resentments are of a Father, and a Prince thus provoked. Friend,
said he, speaking to the Merchant, thy sidelitie deserves no little recompense,
whereof thou shall be most assured, but to secure this business, fetch me hither
the Captain of my Guard. Then walking in his Chamber after a strange manner,
and with gestures, both of head and hands expressing much passion, he expected
the Captains arrival, under whose command having reduced all such Courtiers,
as he could gather on a sudden, he departed suddenly with nine hundred Horse,
and about two in the morning arriving at the Isle Dubois, he invested the
Merchants house on all sides without the least noise. The Emperor, who much
desired to surprise the Lovers in bed, where they lay embracing each other,
nothing dreaming of this treason, caused the doors to be opened very softly;
and advancing forwards, he espied a woman with her hair discheveled, bearing
two burning Torches in her hands, who on an instant having encompassed the
house, incountred him just at the Gate, upon the which having made certain
figures, the air was suddenly all on a fire, infinite, and most terrible claps
of Thunder were heard, and a shower of Hayl fell with such violence, that above
five hundred Knights were killed therewith, so that the Emperor, and the rest
were enforced to seek shelter in the neighboring house, to avoid the fury of
the storm, which having continued above two hours, ceased at the rising of the
Sun, that presented to their view, not the Merchants house, whose body was
found covered with Serpents, that devoured him, but a great Tower of Crystal,
divided into three stories; at the foot whereof lay two Lions, so fierce, and
terrible, that none durst come near it. This noveltie having bred a great
desire in the Emperor to behold it nearer, he (...) it, seeing the Lions
stirred not out of their place, and the first thing he espied, was a Table
hanging, wherein these words were written;

Prophecy.

THe Paradise of Love, shall last until the enchanted Lions dye, by the claws
of the strongest Lion in the world; then shall the glorious prisons l^se their
pleasures, the Doves shall be invisible, and the angered Cock shall burst to
vomit his poison, living after the recoverie of his treasure, for the glory of
an unknown Altar.

These words, too mystical to be understood, having detained him for a while,
he perceived in the bottom of the Tower, as in a Tomb, Arm^lina, Orestia, and
Melia, who seemed to slumber; in the first stage Palmirenna, with Amadis, in
the second Amplamira with Floridan; and above that, Archesidella with Lucibel,
all six in bed, kissing each other so amorously, and using such other
expressions of love, as if they had no witnesses of their actions, which so
enraged him, as tearing his hair, and beard, he cried out: O ye Gods! Am I not
the unhappiest Prince of the earth? I have seen my power abated by three
Knights alone, this day a greater affront is presented to my view, and I am
become a spectator of that which I cannot behold without shame; who could not
be mad, and burst with rage at this? Come soldiers, break me this Tower in
pieces, and let us be avenged of these robbers, and impudent queans, in spite
of all Enchantments.

Hereupon thirty, or forty of the stoutest, and most resolute of the company
stepped forth, and with hammers thought instantly to have broken the crystal in
pieces, but the Lions forthwith rushing upon them, made so quick a dispatch,
that the rest hoping for no better usage, quitted the place to the proud
Arastron, who having before disdained to pursue those Princes with so much
inequality and advantage, ambitious of glory, advanced immediately toward the
Lions, with whom he fought so valiantly, that having with a most furious blow
stricken down the greatest, he was about to have dealt so with the other, when
as on a sudden three Centaurs of a mavelous bigness issued forth, and
discharging their massy clubs on him all at once, laid him all along on the
ground, to the unspeakable grief of the Emperor, who fell into such a passion
of fury, and uttered things so extravagant, that had not the Kings of Arbales
and Grisolia endeavored to comfort him, he had undoubtedly become frantic, but
these Princes gravely remonstrating unto him, that it was a sign of their gods
displeasure, which punished him for the violence he would have offered to his
Daughters wills, who had just cause to despise such deformed persons, he
commanded Arastron to be taken up, that immediately came again to himself, and
retired to Cardana, so exceedingly grieved, that death would have been far more
acceptable to him then life.

In the mean time the Emperor hoping, by the valor of some excellent Knight,
the said Enchantment might receive a period, he proclaimed throughout all his
Territories, and the Kingdoms adjacent, that whosoever could give an end to
this adventure, he should have the Crown of Martaria for his reward, judging
his daughters disobedience a sufficient cause to disinherit them. This moved
sundry Knights from diverse for^aign parts to repair thither, allured with the
promise of an Empire, but none could ever approach the Tower with that intent,
that was not straight-ways torn in pieces by the Lions, insomuch that the
cruelty of those untameable beasts being no less notorious, then the Emperors
promise, no Knight could be found that durst undertake so dangerous an attempt.

CHAP. XXIV. Griolanis arrival in Corolandaya, his combat with the Guards of
the P^rt, he is entertained by the Queen, and accepted for her Knight.
GRiolanis carried with a longing desire to see the real beauties of the
excellent Princess of Corolandaya, whose Picture he evermore kept about him,
grew impatient of so long delay, but having past five weeks with a prosperous
gale, and without the least interruption of his intended voyage, he at last
arrived at one of the Ports belonging to his fair Mistress, to the unspeakable
joy and contentment of his Conductresse, Arlandria, who using her wonted
freedom, said unto him. Sir, I make no question, but the power of your arms
will easily prevayl over our ablest Knights, yet if you will follow my advice,
use no other then that of your beauty, to captivate our Queen, who for your
sake will break her wonted custom, and will never permit you to hazard your
life for to win a place in her favor; will you give me leave to advertise her
of your arrival? Yes, Lady, replied he, you shall do me a singular courtesy
to assure her, that ever since I first had the honor to behold her Picture, I
have burned in continual flames, and that I have no greater ambition, then to
let her know how infinitely I affect her; but withal I must desire you not to
go about to hinder me from incountring her Knights, the forbearance whereof
would convince me of weakness and cowardice; for should I present my self
before her in any other manner, then victoriously I should give but her too
just occasion to deny me that, which must be the sole reward of my virtue;
wherefore set forward presently, if you think good, for to morrow I will enter
into combat with the chief Knights of the Port; I never expected other answer
from you, said Arlandria, neither did I think you would judge my advice
honorable, and therefore not to molest you any farther, by urging my former
proposition, I shall in obedience to your commands let her know both your merit
and affection.

Having spoken thus she presently got to Horse, and used such diligence, as the
next day ^he came to Agrica^t, the Capital Town of Corolandaya, where going
straight unto the Palace she fell on her knees before her Mistress, who making
very much of her, demanded what wonders she had seen in her voyage. Madam, said
she, they are such, that should I undertake to give you a particular relation
thereof, you would hardly be induced to believe them: I bring you the names of
two hundred brave Knights manfully overcome by Silvion, and of threescore and
twelve Princesses besides, over whose beauty yours has most justly tryumphed;
but which surpasses all, I have brought with me the fairest, stoutest, the
most courteous, and most lovely Knight in the world. The Prince of Argilles,
though he were rank't with the best, by reason of that extraordinary prowess,
which renowned him every where, yet compared with the valor of the Champion,
whereof I speak, was but as a common man, whose actions being no less full of
sweetness, then of courage, makes him so amiable, that he steals the hearts of
all that behold him.

The praises thou give this Knight are so great, said Adelazia, that I
suspect thee to be in love with him. Alack, Madam, said Arlandria, such flowers
are too precious for my wearing; neither do his affections stoop so low, for
as he is the most accomplished Knight that is, or ever was, so has he made
choice of the most absolute and peerless Mistress in the world. Do thou know
her, said Adelazia, that felt some unaccustomed motions? Yes, Madam, answered
she, you are the Sun which he adores; and your beauty is it alone that ever yet
could captivate his soul. How can that be, said Adelazia, since he never saw
me? Your Picture replied Arlandria, has wrought that miracle, nor could his
passion be more, had you employed all the charms of your unresistable looks on
him: On shipboard his eyes were perpetually fixed thereon, he kneeled, he spoke
to it, and as if it had been sensible of his sufferings, he craved some
asswageme^^ of his torments: To be short, it is impossible for any man to give
greater testimonies of an affection, then what I have seen in him during this
voyage.

This fair Princess willingly harkening to these discourses, and pleasing her
self with the thoughts of her new love, longed very much to see the effects
answerable to the high commendations which this Damosel had given him; but lest
her carriage should discover her mind, she kept on her former gravity; howbeit,
desiring to continue this talk, she said unto her. Verily, these speeches of
thine have bred a kind of desire in me to see him; for it is scarce credible,
that so many perfections should concur in one man: But tell me, is he come
hither? Nothing less, Madam, answered she, he is yet in the Port of Carican,
and it may be now combatting with your Guards, for he is resolved not to
present himself before you, but as a worthy Knight should do, that renders
himself esteemed by his virtue. I was never a friend to cruelty, said Adelazia,
and the shedding of humane blood was always abhorred by me, nevertheless I
would willingly see him fight, thereby to judge impartially, whether his valor
be correspondent to thy praises.

Madam, answered this Maid, you have the best opportunity that may be, I doubt
not but he will make a quick riddance of all such, as this day shall dare to
encounter him, since the Prince of Argilles, who came far short of him, has
been able to do it, wherefore if you please, you may see him amongst the
Knights that guard your Ports, but for your better satisfaction, if you go
forth to morrow into the fields, and under pretense of walking will take the
way he intends to come, you shall soon behold him make through your Troops,
since he may not arrive at your presence without forcing his passage, then
shall you know that all I have said comes far short of his valor and merit.
Nay, said Adelazia, I may do far better, for it being too-great a cruelty to
expose one only Knight to the fury of so many, I Will exempt him from that danger,
and shall rest satisfied if I may see him break five or six staves, against a
dozen of the ablest of my Kingdom; and to this end I shall appoint them a
rendi-vous under the great tree of the Fantosmes, which is not much out of his
way. By this way I shall both content my self, and secure his life and honor:
Truly, said Arlandria, (who perceived this tenderness to proceed from love)
you show yourself no less wise then beautiful, for to speak troth I have
often wondered how you could be so cruel, as to admit no Knight to your
presence upon easier terms, then the price of his blood; keep you still in this
mind, and in the mean time advise with your self what entertainment you will
give him.

Hereupon in most humble manner withdrawing her self she left the Queen much
troubled with the blow she had given her, who calling to mind the speeches of
her Damosel, which represented unto her thoughts, as well the valor, as the
beauty of the Knight, remembering withal how he had behaved himself to and
before her Picture, spoke thus to her self. If this Knight be such as he is
described unto me, I shall never be able to be Mistress of my self, since the
bare fame of him has begotten so earnest a desire in me to see him: But what a
weakness do I show to be thus overcome by the first motions of a passion that
assayles me? And what will the world say of me when it shall be knownthat I
have so suddenly changed both my mind and purpose? I shall be counted very
fickle, and one that is not able to govern her affections. And yet not so, but
in regard that virtue is always to be beloved, they will rather judge that I
have reason to affect him, and that it is not possible for a woman to resist
such powerful charms: I will therefore show him favor, and since I am
accountable to none, but the gods for my actions, I Will put the Scepter of
Corolandaya into his hand, if I find him worthy of that grace.

This Princess yielding up her self in this sort unto Loves Dominion, (from
which no creature living is exempted) was insensibly enamoured, and this little
spark grew suddenly into a flame, when as a Soldier diverting her thoughts
delivered in few words the wonders Griolanis had performed at his first entry
into that Kingdom. Madam, said he, your Guards of Garicana^e forced by the
valor of the most puissant and ablest Champion in the world; And since that
combat was full of prodigies, I may not rob you of the contentment you will
reap by hearing the particulars thereof related: This morning he presented
himself with an headless Lance, and forced seven Knights to quit their
saddles, ere it brake in shivers, thence rushing through the rest with the flat
of his sword only, he sent fifteen or sixteen of them to the ground, and this
with that force as needed not the help of a second blow; Truly, Madam to
relate unto you with what address and dexterity he seartered the rest in less
then a moment is impossible, for in despite of their weapons, which left not
so much as the least impression upon his armor, he made his way like
Lightning, and forced his passage through all oppositions, with no less
violence then a Thunderbolt when it lights upon a Steeple: And to be short, he
has won the day without shedding one drop of blood, whereat your Knights being
amazed, who judged this proceeding of his over mild and gentle, toward those
that had withstood him, they demanded the reason thereof, wherein he expressed
no less courtesy, and sweetness of disposition; then he had courage and
valor. Sirs, said he, since we all have one Mistress, it were unfit for me to
harm those whom she protects, my chiefest ambition being to win her favor, and
maintain her Sovereignty: And if I have taken up Arms against you, necessity
has enforced me thereunto, since there is no other way to serve her, or to be
admitted into her presence.

These speeches, wherein this fair Queen took mavelous delight, being as
bellows to kindle the flame that began to scorch her, she felt within her self
such violent desires, as made her wonder at this sudden and unexpected change,
but dissembling her thoughts, she began to extol the prowess and courtesy of
our Warrior, whose fame and renown had so filled the Court, that most of the
Knights resolved to combat him. Adelazia then having spent the night in
confused and restless thoughts, in the morning a number of Knights were espied
upon the way of Garican, whereof the Queen having had notice, she arose
immediately, but could not be ready time enough to see the beginning of the
fight, nevertheless word being brought her, that the stranger was in the midst
of her Knights, she hastened away, and arrived there just as Griolanis having
dismounted three of them, so terrified the rest with the violence of his
Encounter, as he put them all in disorder.

These redoubted, and yet courteous blows, since he struck only with the flat,
bred in her a wonderful content, and no less astonishment, when she observed
his manner of fighting, his Sword guided by judgment, lighted with violence,
his motions were furious, and that which not a little delighted her, was to see
him keep firm in his saddle, in despite of so many Incounters, neither could
she sufficiently admire to behold two and fifty Knights already laid on the
earth, and the^fore desiring no greater testimony o^ his valor she advanced
toward him, who quickly discerning what impression he had made in her soul,
alighted suddenly from his horse, pulled off his Helmet, and falling on his
knees took his Sword by the point, and presenting her with the handle: Madam,
said he, it is in your power to triumph over me, as I have done over your
Knights, neither shall I reap less glory by this victory of yours; then I have
done by their defeat: This Sword, which if you please shall never be employed
but in the honor of your service, shall serve as a witness that I willingly
submit to your power. Madam, let the tender I make thereof be acceptable unto
you, and let me hope that you will one day take pleasure in seeing it employed
to maintain your excellency throughout the world.

The Princess being ravished with the sight of so beautiful a face, whose
charms were no less powerful to captivate a Ladies heart, then the majesty
thereof to work upon a Soldiers courage, did observe and behold ^^ with strange
motions, trembling with the very violence of her pa^sion, but forcing her self
with the consideration of so many persons as attended her, she replied.

Brave Knight, I cannot refuse the glory you give me, not despise this
dreadful Sword, since you present it me, as the merit o^ my beauty,
nevertheless I return it you, with this assurance, that I shall ever highly
esteem the service thereof; but left I should prove ungrateful for the pains
you have taken in accompanying my picture, let me tell you, that you are most
welcome to my Country, where I shall endeavor to give you an entertainment
worthy your merit. Hereupon she took him up into her Coach, and went toward
the City, no less satisfied with his personage; then her Knights astonished at
the valor he had showed in the Combat.

The fame of this warlike achievement having spread over the whole Town, the
Ladies and Gentlemen stocked together in the streets, who beholding the
admirable perfections of this Knight, gave him such excessive praises, as he
himself was much ashamed of; on the contrary, Adelazia was exceedingly pleased
therewith, esteeming her self incomparably happy in his company, so that she
resolved to admit him for her Knight: howbeit to keep her self within the
bounds of modesty she gave him to understand, that his sole virtue was the
cause of her respect to him, by no means discovering the love she bare him:
Having therefore entertained him with ordinary discourse, she brought him to her
Palace, where having lodged him most stately, she sent him very rich and
sumptuous apparel, wherein he afterward appeared so lovely, that all the
Ladies were enamoured of him, and the common sort amazed to behold so many
accomplishments in one Knight.

A few days being spent in passions, restless thoughts, discourses, and
assurances, Adelazia not able to conceal her affection any longer, led him to
a fair garden, where she could not be overheard by any body, and thus spoke
unto him. Knight, I know it is impossible for me to requite the pains you have
taken in my behalf according to your merit, but desire any thing within my
Kingdom, and it shall be granted you as readily, as you can demand it. Madam,
said he, I was never covetous of gain, honor has been the only object of my
enterprises, and if you please to accept of my service, I shall value that
favor of yours far above all the Kingdoms of the world, but if you will deign
to be so liberal, as to bestow where you are no way obliged; then, Madam, look
not upon my want of desert, make me your Knight, and permit me under the favor
of your beauty, to try all adventures whatsoever; you may justly condemn me of
rashness, but Madam, remember that our enterprises are glorious when they are
high, and that it is far more honorable to fall with courage, then fail
through cowardice. Knight, replied she, did I not prize your virtue above all
worldly greatness, I could not but take offense at the freedom of your
discourse, in regard of the respect which is always due to such as resemble
me, howbeit loving your perfections, and flattering my self with the conceit,
that my beauty has prevailed over you, I shall willingly pardon the passion
that troubles you; and believe that it proceeded only from a desire to work
your content: You are desirous to be my Knight, I admit it, but consider what
obligation this draws upon you, you are no more at your own disposing, your
love must be faithful and sincere, and your will wholly subject unto mine.

Alas! said he, these conditions (...) happy, Madam, you shall never find me
without love, fidelity, respect, and obedience; henceforth I renounce all the
power, which hitherto I have had over my self, and wholly surrender it into
your hands, dispose of me as you please, your commands shall be a law unto me,
which for no occasion will I ever disobey. Begin then, replied she, to give me
some testimony of this your protestation, and tell me freely, and truly, who
you are, and whether you were ever in love before, for it were unfit for me to
have an unknown servant.

Madam, said he, (trembling with joy, that he had obtained his desire) it is
very meet I should satisfy your demand. I am a Knight errant of the Kingdom
of Macedon, near unto Greece, who have no other fortune then that of my hopes,
and sword, and most unworthy to behold you as a lover, unless you will
vouchsafe to stoop so far, as to weigh the greatness of my services and
affections, with that of your beauty; My name is Griolanis, my Parents noble,
and eminent, but Scepters, Madam, are wanting to their merit, which to my grief
I fear, considering the difference of our conditions, will be too just a motive
for you, to reject the humble tender of my service: As for any other Mistress,
believe me, Madam, and I swear it by the sovereign power of these your eyes,
whose beauteous splendour I adore, that my soul was never sensible of the
allurements of any beauty that ever yet I saw. Your word suffices without
swearing, replied she, and I am exceeding glad to be the first object of your
vows, and so consequently to be free from competitors; For what concerns our
conditions, that shall put no difference betwixt us, since fortune does not
always confer Crowns upon such as have best deserved them, and seeing you are
a Gentleman, both valiant and virtuous, I shall esteem better of you, then if
you possessed whole Empyres without courage, or glory; This Kingdom is
spacious enough to limit our ambitions, only carry your self with respect
until time shall produce a happier change; And so parting equally satisfied,
they went to supper; after which, having recreated themselves with dancing,
each withdrew himself until the morrow.

CHAP. XXV. The brave Jousts that were held at the Court of Corolandaya, and
the issue of a most wonderful adventure that happened there.
GRiolanis spending his time in most incomparable delights, highly favored by
his Mistress, bonoured and respected, as if he had swayed the Scepter of
Corolandaya, wanting nothing he could desire, but the fruition of that
happiness which love does yield: his impatience was great enough to make him to
require it, but the doubt of displeasing his Mistress, would not suffer him to
move it, in so much as the torment of his fear was no whit inferior to the
pleasure of his hope.

Twelve days were insensibly spent in confused thoughts, in raptures, in sighs
and moans, till the Knight, unable to withstand the flame that consumed him any
longer, was about to seek some rest in the confidence of his words, and by his
tears to work his Mistress to a compassionate regard of his sufferings, when
behold, there comes into the Hall a fair and comely Damsel, who falling on her
knees before Adalazia, said unto her; Beauteous Princess, the fame which is
spread abroad of the incomparable valor of the strange Knight, that resides in
your Court, has bred an extreme desire in four of the most warlike Princes now
living, to maintain here two days together, that the Mistresses they shall
bring, are the fairest in the world; The first is the valiant Armoran, Caliph
of Paran, who leads with him the fair Alarina, Infanta of Zizima; The second
is the mighty Grinaldo King of Pergaza, with Marselia, inheritrix of Corangia;
The third Falemond the brave Duke of Cardambes, with the gracious Philotea,
Princess of Oriana; The fourth Crisander, the warlike Duke of Marsingues,
servant to the most lovely Elymena, Daughter to the King of Filamonna; They
will begin with Jousting, neither shall it be lawful for any to use his sword,
whilst they are able to keep their saddles, now what answer will you please to
make us?

That which their merits may expect, replied the beautiful Queen, they shall
find hearty welcome, and if any endeavor of mine may requite the honor they
intend to do me, it shall not be wanting unto them. Hereupon the Damsel
taking her leave in most humble manner, departed, leaving the Courtiers
somewhat troubled, for knowing what reputation those Knights had acquired
abroad in several adventures, especially Almorand, and Grinaldo, esteemed the
best Warriors of all the neighboring Provinces, they very much doubted, that
they should not be able any longer to maintain the glory of Corolandaya, unless
it were by the valor of Griolanis, who coming close to his Mistress, spoke
thus softly unto her. I have reason to thank Love for affording me occasion to
serve you, and to purchase your beauty the just estimation it deserves; These
Princes come hither fraught withglory through the numberless enterprises they
have most courageously achieved, and the Ladies that accompany them, hold the
victory of their beauties most sure in the force of their mighty arms; but,
Madam, having justice on your side, I dare promise without ostentation, to
bring them in triumph unto you, and to make them acknowledge you to be
incomparable, so that to the right of my cause, you would be pleased to add
but the obliging me by some favor.

It would be unreasonable, replied she smiling, to refuse ought that lies in my
power, since beauty is in question, which by our sex is had in highest
estimation tell me therefore freely what you desire of me. Two things, said he
trembling, would infinitely satisfy me; The first, some Scarre of yours, that I
might wear in the Combat; The other, that in commiseration of my sufferings,
you will permit me to come to your Chamber, when your women are asleep, that so
I may with more liberty represent unto you, the violence of the flame that
consumes me. Ah my Knight! answered she, you do not consider how nearly this
request of yours concerns mine honor, the grant whereof when it comes to be
divulged, would make me odious to my people. Alack, said he, such a fear befits
not your Majesty, you may do much more then that without caring what eyes, or
speeches pass upon your actions, but if it be your pleasure to see me languish
in my pain, I shall submit to your will without opposing it, or repyning at my
torment, yet withal youch^afe to consid^^ that when I am brought to
extremity, I shall be unfit for remedy. Well, said she, I Will rather overcome my
self, then give you the least cause to complain of me, to morrow you shall have
your desire, but upon condition you will not be too importunate, and that all
your actions shall be governed with respect. Madam, replied he, half
transported with joy, my passion shall never make me abuse the freedom, which
you are pleased to grant me, nor shall you ever repent this grace you have
conferred on me.

But a sudden noise in the Courtyard having put a period to their discourse,
they presently looked out, and saw four Knights in very good equipage, with
each a Lady in his right hand of excellent beauty, and richly appareled, who
lighting off their horses, turned their faces toward the Windows to salute the
fair Adelazia, that returning them the like again, sent to entreat them by the
Marquis of Beltamir to take a lodging in the Palace, which they modestly
refused, intending not to visit her till after the Jousts: Two rich Pavilions
being set up, the Knights entered into the one, and the Princesses into the
other: The rateliers were stored with Lances, the shields of these four
Princes were placed near to the Barriers, that whatsoever Knight came in,
might by touching thereof make choice of a party to joust withal; close by hung
the Pictures of those beauteous Ladies, which were to be the prize, and reward
of the Victor; This done, four gallant Horses were brought to the Pavilion of
the said Princes, who sitting ready armed, expected the arrival of some
Adversary.

This glorious Equipage having bred an extreme desire in most of the Nobility
of Corolandaya, to encounter these strangers, twelve Knights came forth on the
sudden, at the sight whereof the Challengers getting to horse, the Trumpets
began to sound, and the Knights to spur on so lustily, that incountring each
other in the midst of the course the Defendants were dismounted, without so
much as stirring the Challengers, which at first did much increase the good
opinion of their valor, but much more when they saw the other eight reduced to
the same estate, ere they brake their first staves.

These twelve retyring with more grief then hurt, were seconded by the Marquis
of Beltamir, and the Count of Pandolia, two of the most renowned and noblest
Lords of that Island, and Suitors to the Infantaes of Falangia, near of kin to
the Queen; whereupon the people began to hop^ for better success, but the
Marquis attaching the valiant Armorand, and the Count the brave Grinaldo, they
were shamefully overthrown at the second Encounter, and after them fourteen of
the hardiest Knights of the Kingdom, insomuch that the Challengers being left
alone, Adelazia withdrew her self, exceedingly praising the valor and address
of the said Warriors, who had deservedly acquired unto themselves so great a
reputation in the world.

The evening being spent then in discourse, every one betook them to their
rest, but Griolanis longing to see the day in which he might combat, and enjoy
again the sight of his Mistress, could sleep but little, so that rising with the
Sun he resolved to be the first within the Lists, thereby to prevent the
strangers from dismounting any before his arrival, but considering with
himself how necessary it was for him to have his (...) a (...) of the Combat,
he went to her Chamber all armed, his Helmet and (...) excepted. Here I am,
said he as he came in, ready to avenge the insolence of these Knights that so
much wrong your beauty, Madam, will you give me leave to encounter them? Yes,
my Knight replied she, but the day being long enough for that business, let
others begin. Then calling for a most rich scarf she tied it cross his
Corsle^, which so much transported our Lover with joy, that he thought himself
in a Paradise of pleasure.

Returning then all due thanks and acknowledgement for this her favor they
espied nine Knights arriving, who were all dismounted at the first Encounter,
and after them the Marquis of Farlantes, and the noble Admiral of Corolandaya,
both brave Warriors, and the most renowned of that Kingdom, which made the
Spectators adjudge the victory to these strange Princes, when as Griolanis
having leave to descend, appeared within the Lists with a most martial
countenance, and very richly armed, to the unspeakable joy and admiration of
his fair Mistress, the Spectators forthwith changing of opinion began to clap
their hands, in token that all their hope rested in that Knight, but which
delighted them most of all was the sight of Adelazia's Picture, that he brought
in, and placed above the strange Princesses, with no small ceremony and respect.

This extraordinary act of his made the four Challengers think, that it was the
valiant Knight, which had filled the whole Country with amazement, so that
they exceedingly admired his brave and gallant demeanor, but hoping to make
his glory an accessory to their former triumph, they called for fresh horses,
and the strongest Lances they could meet withal, in which manner they
expected to see what he would do.

The Duke of Cardambes being to come first in play, because Griolanis had
touched his Shield, he presented himself with a most undaunted countenance, and
at the third sound of the Trumpets he put on with that violence, as at the
first Encounter his Lance flew into a thousand shivers, together with his
adversaries, who met him so strongly, that he made him lose both his stirrops,
himself passing on so unmoved, that all the world applauded him. This put
Falemond into such passion, as calling for a stronger Lance, he began to run
afresh against our Knight, but with far worse success then before; for being
dismounted with the violence of his adversaries blow he fell to the ground
hereft of his senses, to the exceeding joy of all the multitude, especially of
Adelazia, who thought her self the happiest Princess on the earth, in enjoying
so handsome and so valiant a Knight.

This done, Griolanis went straight to Elimen^'s Picture, and removing the
same, placed it beneath his Mistrisses, to the great content of all the people;
but Crisander succeeding Falamond, with a resolution to revenge his ill
fortune, ran against Griolanis with that fury, as he made him lose one of his
stirrops, himself being so terribly shaken with the Encounter, that he was
forced to take hold of his horses mane to uphold himself; Taking therefore a
second Lance, and breaking it to the very handle, he was so furiously
incountred, that both horse and man fell back to the ground in danger to have
been bruised in pieces.

He that had then beh^ld the Spectators, might have observed most different
passions, the beautiful Queen of Corolandaya expressing a most unspeakable
delight in her actions, and the fair Infanta of Filamonna, together with
Philotea, exceedingly grieving, the people full of acclamations and shouts of
joy, and the two remaining Knights bemoaning the ill fortune of their
associats, who nevertheless hoping to revenge them, the stout Grinaldo
advanced forwards, and setting spurs to his horse in a most violent manner
(after that Griolanis had set Philotea's Picture below his Mistresses) was as
bravely incountred, and though their Lances flew up into the air, yet sat
they fast and unmoved: This furious Encounter giving mavelous contentment to
all that were present, the two Knights called for new Lances, and meeting with
greater strength each brake his staff upon his enemy, Griolanis bowed a little
with the force of the blow, but the other was so stund, that he had much ado
to save himself from falling, wherewith he was so vexed, that calling for a
stronger Lance he charged him the third time; but so unfortunately, that his
horse falling upon him bruised his leg very sorely; at which fight the
beauteous Princess of Corangia was much displeased, and yet far more, when as
she saw her Picture taken down and placed with the rest, which served for the
glory of Adelazia's triumph; nevertheless reposing much confidence in the
valor of the great Caliph of Paran, she suppressed her grief, and caused her
Lover to be taken up, who showing more courage then hurt gat quickly on his
feet, avaunting (the better to excuse his fall) that Griolanis was the prime
Knight of the world.

In the mean time Armorand and having taken a resolution, either to vindicate,
or follow his friends misfortune, set spurs to his horse, and made three of the
bravest, and most furious courses, that ever was seen in Corolandaya, whereby he
acquired unto himself the repute of one of the ablest Warriors on the earth,
but Griolanis combatting for the honor of his Mistress, incountred him the
fourth time so dangerously, that he cast him clean over the crupper of his
horse, laying him along for dead.

The victory being thus gloriously achieved, he gave Alarina's Picture with
the rest to his Squire, and taking that of his Mistress down himself, with no
less respect and ceremony then before, he carried it to the Palace, laying the
others at his Ladies feet to her unspeakable joy. This done he descended to
welcome the strange Princes, to whom he seemed so accomplished and courteous,
that notwithstanding their received disgrace they could not choose but love him,
telling him withal that the world did him much wrong in denying him Altars;
whereupon, having embraced one another with many testimonies of affection,
Griolanis was going to the Princesses Pavilion, which exceedingly desired to
see him, when as there appeared four misshapen Dwarfs, who carrying each of them
a great Pillar of Jasper, advanced to the midst of the place, where making a
stand all together, the Pillars stood up of their own accord, and instantly
made an Arch, on the top whereof a little Cupid was seen holding a Garland of
Roses in his hand, at the bottom was a winding stair by which one might ascend
unto him, and upon the tops of of the said Pillars were those four deformed
creatures, which with Instruments in their hands began to play so melodiously,
as ravished all hearts and ears that heard them. These prodigious spectacles
striking all the assistants with amazement, Griolanis and the strange Princes
espied a small Table hanging at the Cupids feet, where they read these words:

J will not part with this Crown, but for the glory of a faithful Love. By all
my gods, said A(...)d, I Will be the first that shall prove this adventure, for
since I was never conscious to my self of any want of love to my dearest
Alarina I am persuaded this occasion is offered of purpose to mitigate my
grief, for having bin overcome in the quarrel of her beauty: Thereupon he
called for his Helmet, and unsheathing his sword, he drew near to the stairs,
upon which having made but one step, he felt himself charged with so many
blows, as he was forced to set both his knees to the ground, but rising thence
in a rage he behaved himself so manfully, that he gat up to the fifth step,
where the violence of the blows being redoubled, he was stricken down to the
earth, deprived of all sense, to the unspeakable grief of the beautiful
Alarina, who loving him most dearly was much troubled with this his disaster.

The valiant Crisander, no whit discouraged therewith, advanced next, but
notwithstanding his best endeavor to out-goe him, he could reach no higher
then the third step, where he found no better success then his companion, and
soon after Falemond and Grinaldo, who got up as high as the fourth: Whereupon
Griolanis casting his eyes toward his Mistress, that was then courteously
entertayning the strange Princesses, and comforting them for the misfortune of
their Lovers; drew forth his sword, and pressed on with such violence, that
without any stay he gat up to the sixth stair, but there found such resistance,
as was able to discourage another; nevertheless the contemplation of his
Ladies presence, before whom he chose rather to die* then any way to yield, so
revived his spirits, that (...) his forces, and redoubling his blows, he
ascended to the ninth (...)* but there found himself assaulted with such
strange violence, as he was ^ain to fall both on his hands and knees to save
himself; howbeit calling to mind; how un^^^thy he were of his Mistresses
favor, if he remained in that posture, he soon reassumed new strength, and
began so to lay about him, that he gat up to the last step, where his invisible
enemies forbear to strike him any longer, and that very seasonably, in regard
he was quite out of breath, and unable to subsist any longer.

The meditation of so glorious an adventure breeding in him an extreme delight,
by reason of the singular proofs he had given of an extraordinary affection, he
came near the little Cupid, and laying hold on the Crown of Roses, and offering
to pluck it away, his hand and arm were on a sudden so (...) unto it, as he
could not possibly withdraw them: Whereupon the fair Princesses, conceiving
immediately that the said Crown was reserved for one of them, stepped forth.

The first that ascended, was the beautiful Princess of Corangia, on whose
head Cupid and Griolanis set the Crown, which rendered a most excellentodour,
but taking it off presently again she was forced, not without shame and grief,
to give place to Phi(...), who finding no better entertainment made way to
Alarina, on whose head it remained somewhat longer, but at last was constrained
to withdraw to her unexpressable (...) with their misfortune, refused to
succeed them, whereupon the unparaleld Adelazia presenting her self, Cupid and
Griolanis fell on their knees before her, and instantly rising up again they
left the Crown on her head, which they had no sooner done, but the music
ceased, and with a most terribleclap of Thunder all vanished away, the said
precious flowers excepted, to the great ama^ement of all the Spectators, who
were astonished at the variety of such prodigious fights; Grionalis and his
Mistress remained full of joy and coment, postposing all worldly glory to their
present estate: The strange Princesses on the other side repined at the honor
which that excellent Queen had acquired, and wished themselves at home;
nevertheless seeing no remedy, they thought it best to extol and magnify her
with the rest of the company, and upon her entreaty were persuaded to go into
the Palace, where they were entertained with a most sumptuous supper, and a
Hall accompanied with all pleasure and delight.

CHAP. XXVI. The dreadful Enchantment of Griolanis, and the fair Adelazia.
THE hour of rest being come, all those Princes retired themselves unto their
Chambers; which were prepared for them; but of all most willingly the beauteous
Queen of Corolandaya, who mindful of her promise to her Lover, that seemed by
his passionate looks to crave some special favor a^ her hands, sent all her
women to bed, retayning only Arlandria, to whom being laid down, she spoke in
this manner. Dear Arlandria, I may no longer disguise my thoughts, the
confidence I have ever reposed in thy trust has bred a resolution in me, to
reveal unto thee at this present a secret of no small importance: The Knight
whom thou broughtest with thee, has captivated my soul with his beauty, my
love to him is beyond imagination; and to be short I am resolved to make him
King of Corolandaya; but since I have not yet disposed the affections and good
will of my subjects thereunto, and that undoubtedly he suffers much, for want
of liberty to impart himself unto me in public, I conceived it most fit to
show him some favor; In confidence therefore of his love, whereof the Crown of
Roses purchased me by his valor, is a proof sufficient; I have made him a
promise to entertain him this night in my Chamber, on condition, that he shall
have due regard to the greatness of my quality, and show the same respect in
his actions, which he would do in the eye of the whole world. As soon therefore
as every one shall be retired, being him to me.

In troth, Madam, said Arlandria, I marvel not that you are sensible of his
pain, for so amiable is his person, and his perfections such, as it is not
possible for any, not to wish him well; but Madam, will you give me leave to
tell you freely what I conceive? Most willingly, replied she, for since I
entrust thee with my secrets, I may not reject thy advice. I exceedingly
wonder, said Arlandria, how you can resolve to let him languish so long, and
satisfy your self with a bare discourse, since you are minded to make him your
Husband; It is to lose time, Madam, which hereafter you will repent, and all
this artifice, that is but the tormentor of man's felicity, serves to no
purpose; Not that I would persuade you to proffer him that, which must be the
reward of his most earnest suite, but Madam, being persuaded, as it is most
probable, that the height of his affection will not rest satisfied therewith,
I would counsel you not to show your self over-modest, and difficult. Nay,
said Adelazia; I mean not to resolve on any such thing, do what you are
bidden, and leave the rest to me. I will not contest with you, Madam, replied
Arlandria, only be pleased to remember, that Lovers observe time, place, and
persons, and look to make use of occasion, and fortune, when they are presented.

Hereupon going forth, she left this beautiful Queen full of strong passions;
Her affection persuading her to follow Arlandria's advice, and her modesty
forbidding her to entertain any such thought: Amidst this irresolution, she
waited the coming of her brave Knight, who considering with himself, that
opportunities are often lost through want of resolution and courage, and that
Lovers speed best, when they are somewhat daring, he kneeled down before his
Mistress, and in a most trembling manner taking her by the hand, he sixth his
lips thereon a good-while, and so not being able to utter his mind in words, he
fetched three or four sighs, wherewith that fair Queen, who took no small
delight to behold his respect in his fear, and his love in his silence, was so
affected, that growing impatient of his suffering, she thus spoke unto him;
Well, my Knight, is this all you have to say to me? Ah! Madam, replied he, my
heart is overcharged, and wants words to ease itself: What would you have me
say? Madam, I expect some favor, show it me as to your Husband, since you have
thought me worthy of that honor.

These words being uttered in such a sort, as did plainly discover a most
extraordinary passion wrought such effects in that excellent Princess, that
unable any longer to contain her desires, or to withstand the charming tears of
her Lover, thus said unto him; Verily, your perfections have no less power
over me, then your Sword has had over all those whom it does encounter; Get
you up, and swear unto me before this Damsel, that you will never marry any
other but me. Madam, said he, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and putting his
hand within hers, I swear unto you in the presence of God, whom I adore, and of
your faithful Arlandria, that I will marry you solemnly whenever you shall
please, and will never long after other beauty, and if ever I break this oath,
let heaven execute its fiercest vengeance on this head of mine.

This oath having satisfied his Lady, he straightway threw off his doublet on
the Table, and transported with joy, he got immediately to bed to her, where
they fell to mutual imbracements, to the incomparable delight, and
satisfaction of each other: Adelazia's lips were fastened to her Lovers, and his
no less amo^^os^y fixed on hers, she by the light of two Tapers that burnt fast
by, my^ed her self in his eyes, and he quite lo^^ himself in the contemplation
of their secret beauties which he beheld; To be short, a thousand blandishments
entertained them with fresh delights, until the heat of those fires being
cooled, they sought out new desires in their passions, which redoubled their
pleasure in such manner, as the night feeming but a moment, the day forced them
to part with much regret, and far less satisfied then before, nevertheless
assuring themselves they should not want meetings, since their love was
reciprocal, Griolanis stole away leaving his Mistress to her rest, where she
continued till noone, at which time she got up fully contented, that she had
met with so lusty and gallant an Husband. Thus loving each other entirely,
their minds were at quiet, their affections without disturbance, their visits
frequent, their discourse wholly taken up with the mutual assurances of their
affections, and their whole life so incomparably pleasant, as they might justly
have boasted their happiness before any Lovers whatsoever.

But envious fortune, which takes delight in crossing of our pleasures, and
bringing us in subjection, could no longer brook so happy, and so blisfull an
estate; for Maxiana, the great Inchantress, Aunt of Silvion, Prince of
Argilles, whom Griolanis flew in the quarrel of Adelazia's picture, as is
specified in the ninth Chapter of our second part, desirous to know what state
her Nephew was in, took her books, and conjuring up her spirits, had notice of
death, and of all that passed in Corolandaya; whereupon growing furious, she
prepared whatsoever charms her art could afford, and so transported her self
into Corolandaya, where she arrived three days after the secret Marriage of
these Lovers, and just at such time as they were all in dancing, and every one
standing by his Mistress.

This Sorceresse entering into the Hall with a burning Torch in her hand,
followed by three Maids all dischevelled, and carrying certain monstrous, and
hideous Serpents, came to the beauteous Wife of Griolanis, who stood quivering,
and thus spoke unto her; It is time thou should smart for the death of the
Prince of Argilles, since thy cruelty occasioned it, and that he which slew
him, should share with thee in the torment, His beauty made thee infringe a
Law, which proved fatal to thet unhappy Prince; Undergo therefore jointly, a
due and direful vengeance for it. Saying so, she threw her Torch on the
floor, which presently filled the Hall with as dreadful a flame, as all the
spectators astonished therewith, betook them to their heels, Griolanis only
excepted, who with his fair Mistress, standing fast, and unmoved, by virtue of
the Charms, were forth with environed with a terrible fire, and six horrible
Serpents, that seized on them, began to gnaw, and tear their faces and
breasts, with a cruelty no whit inferior to that of the flames, which made
them break forth into such doleful lamentations, and cries, as was easily
heard all over the Palace.

Ay me! said Adelazia, that such variety of delights, should be followed by so
great a torment, and that the glory I found in the fruition of such valor, and
beauty, as was in Griolanis* should now be turned into grief, by the cruel
usage of such Furies; Envious fates, what had I done, or this courteous Knight
committed, worthy of such hard measure? Ah I Griolanis, the loveliest of
mankind, the pains I suffer, you see is great, but far greater are yours to
me, then my own; your misery it is which I bewayl, and not mine, but since I
cannot succor you, be persuaded to patience.

Dearest Lady, replied Griolanis, it is your martyrdom, and not my torments,
that draw from me these complaints; for how is it possible I should behold
these wonders of nature perish before mine eyes, and not accuse the heavens of
injustice? The Prince of Argilles fell by my sword, it was most fit I alone
should rue it, yet are you made to parta^e in my sufferings, as I did in your
favors, neither does their cruelty rest here, I am made the spectator of your
misery: Hellish f^end, thou ought to have powered out thy spite and malice
on me, and have spared that beautiful face, those two little worlds of love,
that delicate skin, and not to scorch those fair eyes, the perfection of the
whole world; for mine own particular I could willingly endure thy revenge, were
it crueller, and never complain; but woe is me, thou art insensible to my
moans, and are more merciless then the Tiger; thou delightest in the horror of
a thing, which might mollify the very stones: Thou think to triumph over my
valor and courage; alas! thou art deceived, I will cut these Furies in a
thousand pieces, and then must thou look for no better usage at my hands.

With these words he laid hold on his Sword, and whilst he thought to kill
those Serpents, he ran her through the body, and laid her grovelling as if she
had been dead; But she instantly getting up, and plucking the Sword out of her
bosom, thrust it into Griolanis breast, being led by the same desire, to rid
him of such troublesome creatures, and preserve him from being devoured, which
rendered the spectacle most doleful, and worthy of all compassion. But this
divellish Witch took unspeakable delight in it, and was so well pleased to see
them two butcher each other in so cruel a manner, that having remained there
above half an hour, she quitted that hell, which she named, THE MARTYRDOM OF
GRIOLANIS AND ADELAZIA; and meeting Falimond, Crisander, Armorand, and
Grinaldo, who moved with the Lovers doleful cries, were hastening to their
succor, she resolved to make use of them in the execution of her designs. You
shall serve, said she, to further my enterprise, whefore I command you to
defend the passage to these wretches, against all such as would come to their
rescue, for which purpose striking them all with a wand that was in her hand,
she so enchanted them, as they remained fixed with their Armor on, like to four
Towers, before the gate of the Palace Court, dreaming of nothing but to combat
whomsoever should appear before them.

These Princes were a guard sufficient to have prolonged this Enchantment,
nevertheless, this old Hag desirous, if possible, to make it last eternally,
raised up at the stayres foot, a most hideous Serpent, fifteen foot long, with
a most terribl^ Monster, as big as an Elephant, having the head and breast of a
dreadful man, the arms hairie, and great as a tree, with a very keen axe in
his hand, the back parts resembling a Bears, his paws were arm^d with crooked
claws a cubit long; and to render the enttry more difficult, yet she caused
Griolanis arms to be brought, which she placed at the Hall door with such
powerful Conjurations, that she made them have the same motions, and adresse,
as if the Knight had been in them, adding moreover all that ever she could
devise to make the (...) invincible: the spectacle having somewhat satisfied
her, a Pillar appeared before the gate with a Table, hanging thereon wherein
these words we^e written.

Prophecy,

AProach not hither, unless thou be the most valiant in the world, for these
Enchantments shall never cease, until the excellent Turtle, and the dreadful
Lion, issuing out of the same Prison encounter each other within the flames*
Then the strayed blood shall be known, beauty shall resume her former glory,
and the punishment of a Law violated shall be converted into pleasures and
delights.

And so hyding her self in the midst of a cloud, with her three attendants, she
became on the sudden invisible, leaving behind her plenty of tears and
lamentations, and a Town full of doleful, and confused cries, but especially
of Alarina's, Elemina's, Philoteas, and Marselina's, whose griefs for the
loss of their Lovers no comfort could assuage; Howbeit considering that tears
were unprofitable, and that other means of succor were to be sought out, they
returned to their Countries with a resolution to send throughout the world in
the search of the bravest Knights to anull this Enchantment, which example was
followed by Adelazia's Damsels, whereby it came to pass, that the fame of
this enchantment being spread abroad, there came from all parts a great number
of Knights to Corolandaya, for to undertake the deliverance of the said Lovers.

CHAP. XXVII. The Giant Gorgophon being sent Ambassador to Gardacia from
Moranteon, Sultan of Circassia, steals away the beauteous Armazia; he is
driven into the Isle of Corolandaya, and proves the Adventure of the martyrdom
of Adelazia.
THe renowned beauty of Armazia, Princess of Gardacia, having filled the
whole world with admiration, so inflamed the heart of Moranteon, Sultan of
Circassia, that without the possession of so rare a creature, he thought he
should never pass his days in quietness, willing he was to see her, and
become a suitor to her Father for her, being persuaded that the consideration
of his power and greatness, above other Pagan Princes, would soon procure him
what he desired, but fearing lest his extreme deformity might breed a contempt
of him in the Princess, being of ill shape, of a Salvage countenance,
flat-nosed, bobber-lipt, hollow-eyed, corpulent and crooked, he conceived it
much better to treat the match by Ambassadors, then to alienate her affection
by the view of his defects; Having therefore considered all his Subjects, and
finding none fitter for that employment, he sent Messengers to Gorg^phon,
Colonel of the Giants, who lived in the redoubted Island, not far from his
Kingdom, desiring him to r^pai^ unto him about a business of great importance,
which he was to impart unto him. This Giant the greatest then living, the
strongest of all Pagans, the most terrible and furious amongst men, being an
intimate friend of the Soldans, went straight to Circassia, where being
arrived, and nobly entertained; after a world of Ceremonies and Caresses,
Moranteon thus spoke unto him.

I am persuaded you cannot be ignorant of the power of that little god, which
challenges a right over all men living, and since your self have felt the
power of his Scepter, you will not find it strange to see me from military
exployts, and the love of my people, to settle my affection on a woman; I shall
therefore tell you freely, that the Princess of Gardacia is she that
captivates my soul, and that without the fruition of that blessedness, which
he only can expect that shall enjoy her I cannot possibly subsist: I have a
strong confidence in your love, and it is in your power exceedingly to oblige
me, by undertaking a voyage to the Emperor her Father, to demand her in
marriage, declaring unto him, that the Crown of Circassia is a purchase
sufficient to satisfy his Daughters vastest desire and ambition; Your
presence, together with the fear of disobliging us, will make him seriously to
consider the demand, ere he give a denial: But in case he should prove so
averse, as to return an answer not suitable to our desires, spare not to let
him know our resentment, and that his indiscretion will cost him no less then
the loss of his Empire.

Well, said Gorgoph^n, I intend not to amuze my self, with giving you other
testimonies of my love and friendship, then by the careful managing of the
charge committed to my trust; Armazia is yours, and though her Father should
prove so proudly insolent, as to reject the honor you do him, you shall not
be put to the trouble of raising an Army, I Will cut him into a thousand pieces,
and bring away his Daughter in despite of all his subjects: Let nothing
therefore disturb you, but prepare your self to receive us, as if we were
already coming.

And so causing a ship to be made ready, he imbarqued himself with a young
Giant that attended him, and with a favorable wind in few days arrived in
Gardacia, where getting a shore he went toward Parmonda, the place of the
Princes ordinary residence, but understanding that the Emperor and his
Daughter were gone to hunt in a Forest there by, he caused a country fellow
to guide him thither, and came just as they were uncoupling the Hounds.

The Emperors Knights seeing these two dreadful Giants appear on the sudden
were extremely dismayed, and imagining that they had a purpose to assault them,
they prepared themselves for defense, though they were mightily terrified with
their furious countenances; nevertheless choosing rather to dye a thousand
times, then leave their Prince and his Daughter in extremity, who trembled in
the midst of them, they began to advance, when as Gorgoph^n testifying in his
carriage, that he had no intent to do them any harm, said unto them. Forbear
foolish Pigmies, for I could soon make an end of you if I meant to fight, but
being come hither for another end, you shall not at this time feel the thunder
of my Curtelas: Which of you is the Emperor? I am he, answered Aliander, all
pale and wan with fear, would you have any thing with me (...) Mighty Monarch,
said he, the gods resolve to augment your glory and g^eathesse, so as you will
make use of the good they intend you: You behold ^^^g^phon, Colonel of the
Giants, Lord of the redoubted Islands, and ^ervant to the great Sultan of
Circassia, who has sent me to let you know, that he very much desires to be
your Son in law, and that it lies in you to make Armazia the happiest Lady in
the world, by joining the Crown of Circassia, to that which she hopes from you,
this offer if you will not embrace, then prepare your self for war: Now let me
hear what answer you will return.

Valiant Warrior, replied the Emperor, who did not look forsuch gentle words,
the Prince of Circassia honors me very much, in seeking my alliance, and no
less am I obliged unto you for the pains you have taken in coming hither, to
let us understand his desire, whereunto I should presently consent, if I could
without blame pass by theregard, which I owe unto a people that render me
great by the obedience they yield me, but I am first to consult with them about
it, since there is question of giving them a new Prince, in expectation whereof
if you please to repose your self a little with us, we will do you all the
honor we may.

This answer having marvellously contented the Giant, who could not
sufficiently admire the beauty of Armazia, which already triumphed over his
liberty, they went on hunting, wherein with much delight they spent above two
hours, during which time G^rgophon entertained himself in the corner of a Wood
in this manner. What, said he, can I affect Armazia, after I have once demanded
her for the content of another? or rather should I leave her to the hope of any
whomsoever, seeing she may serve for mine? She is too fair, I have too much
love, and without treason to my passion, it is not fit for me to speak
otherways, but for mine own content; yet what will the Emperor her Father say,
if he should hear me speak in this sort, and what cause would the Sultan have
to complain of me for depriving him of a beauty that was done to his merit?
They would both wonder at this change, and questionless they would exclaim of
me, but what is that to me? I am to love my self more then others, and if the
Father of Armazia do not satisfy my desire, I carry that by my side which
shall procure it me: And if Moranteon will not be contented with another
Princess, whereof I will make him Master ere it be long, I shall not much
care; for neither am I his subject, nor do I fear his power, if he assayl me I
will defend my self, and were he mightier then he is I will soon make him
quiet: The Emperor then must be frighted with menaces, if fair means will not
prevayl.

Whereupon getting to horse, he went to seek out Aliander, when as he heard the
Forest resound with cries, complaints, and a very dreadful noise, so that
advancing forwards he met with nine or ten Knights flying away as fast as they
could drive, of whom not being able to learn the cause of their fear, he went
on til he came where a great and furious Serpent was devouring one of Armazia's
women, and promising no better entertainment to that incomparable beauty, which
with fear was fallen down under a bush with her cousin the excellent Agriclea.
The desire he had to oblige this fair one by some service having made him
suddenly to approach he drew out his Cymetar, and giving his horse, that by no
means would come on to his compani^^, ^e discharged so mighty a blow on the
body of this creature, as might w^ll have divided an Anvile, but the scales
wherewithal he was covered, being impenetrable he did but ^ow a little with
it, nevertheless it forced hi^ to quit his pray, for to make head against the
Giant, who ^o w^it dismayed, gave him another full on the head with such a
prodigeo^^fall, as made his brains fly out in five or six places, sending him
dead to the ground.

This dangerous enemy being in case to hurt no body any more, Gorgophon went to
Armazia, and finding her in aswound, he took her up in his arms for to recover
her, howbeit considering that he should never have a more a favorable
opportunity he remounted on his horse, after he had set Agriclea behind his
companion, and making away with incredible speed he got to the port, where his
ship rode, into the which he embarked himself with his rich pray, so joyful
for having brought his designs to such an happy issue, as he would not for all
the Crowns of the world have exchanged the content he was in.

This while the Emperor and his Knights, grown somewhat more confident,
returned to the succor of Armazia, but not finding her, and beholding the
Serpent slain in that sort, they imagined that none but Gorgophon could give
that dreadful blow, whereupon they concluded that he was gone toward the
City with the Princess* and the beauteous Infanta of Clariana, so that with
this opinion they left the Forest, but not long after they met with two
Saylors, who acquainted them with all the business, and assured them that the
two Giants were at sea with the Princesses. At this news some ran to the ships
for to pursue them, others fell to crying out, and complaining in such manner,
as nothing was heard but strange lamentations.

On the other side Armazia and her fair cousin were in as bad a case, for
coming to their senses, and beholding themselves in the power of those hideous
Monsters they presently dissolved into tears, and took on most grievously,
being fully resolved to cast themselves into the sea, which doubtless they had
performed, if Gorgophon, qualifying his proud and barbarous humor, had not
assured them that they should receive no displeasure. Madam, said he, to his
fair Mistress, before whom he was on his knees, moderate these sighs and tears,
Gorgophon is not so cruel as you, think he is, nor will he ever have any thing
from you, but what what you shall be pleased freely to grant him, time shall
acquaint you with his merits, and the good office he did you, snatching you out
of the jaws of that Serpent, where your death was inevitable, shall be followed
with so many services, that it may be you will judge him worthy of some favor.

This speech bringing a little comfort to these afflicted Ladies, they wisely
resolved to make use of the power their beauties had gotten over these Giants,
and to entertain them kindly, to decline the violence, which they exceedingly
feared from them, in regard whereof the excellent Armazia answered him thus.
Giant, if you carry a mind noble enough to observe these promises you have made
us, we may in time dispose our selves to wish you well, but if you offer to
force us in any thing, be con^ident that our deaths shall prevent your cruelty,
and that we will never want courage to rid our selves out of the world:
Further, if you desire any way to oblige me, do not carry me to Circassia, for
the Sold^n being so deformed, as it is reported unto me, I shall never endure
to come near him; you merit me thinks far more then he; wherefore keep this
good fortune for yourself, and deserve it more by respect, then by your
services.

Madam, replied the Giant (transported with extreme joy at this answer, which
Armazia reserving her self for Rozalmonds content, had made of purpose to hold
him in hand, hoping by some accident or other to get out of his power) Madam,
be assured that I will dye a thousand deaths rather then do any thing shall be
distasteful to you, I will gladly attend all the time you shall please to
ordain for my suffering, in the mean while we will go to the redoubted Islands,
of which I am Lord, where the power of all the Monarchs of the world shall
never take you from thence, being able enough to conserve my self, and defend
you; But Madam, in sign of the grace that you promise me, permit me to kiss
these more then delicate hands. Most willingly, said Armazia, who desired to
acquire an absolute command over his will, and I think my cousin will show no
less favor to your companion, saying so they tendered them their hands, which
these Giants kissed with so much ardour and affection, as they had much ado to
contain themselves from passing further, but that they were restrained by the
hope they had of enjoying all quietly, wherefore being marvellously
contentented they fell to discourse with these Princesses, and in this sort
were carried by the wind, which rising very high drove them by the will of
heaven, that would not permit the undoing of these two incomparable beauties,
not into the redoubted Islands, but into the Kingdom of Corolandaya, where the
fame of Griolanis and Adelazia's enchantment possessing them with a mavelous
desire to see it, they landed there, and the next day went to Agricant with
some hope for those Ladies to meet with some redress of their miseries.

The fire which showed very horrible out of the windows, and the lamentation of
those unfortunate Lovers, having moved Armazia to pity, she turned her to
Gorgophon and said unto him; Sir, if your valor can give these poor wretches,
any relief you shall do me a most acceptable service to succor them. Madam,
you have said enough, answered Gorgophon, for if they were in the hands of all
the Devils of hell I would go and fetch them out, since you have commanded me
unto it; whereupon having laced on his Helmet, he made bravely to the door,
where the four Pagan Knights charged him very rudely all at once, but nothing
abashed therewith he gave Falemond so dangerous a blow on the head, that he
extended him on the ground (from whence by the force of Enchantment, he stirred
not til after the combat) but presently feeling two mighty strokes on his
Helmet laid on by the gentle Armorand, and the strong Grinaldo, he turned
toward them with such fury, that if the charms had not hindered his Curtelass
from drawing blood of them, he had cleft Grinaldo to the teeth, nevertheless
the blow which he discharged on his shield was so violent, as it laid him along
by his companion, to the extreme discontent of Armorand, and the gallant
Crisander, who suddanly charging him made him recoyle two or three steps back,
wherewith he was so incensed, that with his two first blows he overthrew them
both on the floor: That done, he advanced toward the stayres, and no whit
dismayed either with the Serpents fearful hissing, or the dreadful howling of
the Monster, which made at him with horrible rage, he went to encounter them,
and began one of the most terrible combats that ever was seen; He sustained
(...) incredible courage the blows which the Monsters cutting hatchet laid off
his shield, his Curtelas was always deseending on the Serpent, and finding
himself so shrewdly pressed by two such mighty enemies, he fought with such
unreasonable fury, as made all the houses round about to shake.

This b^ckering having lasted almost two hours, the Monster advanced his
mighty arms, and discharging a thundering blow at the head of Gorgophon the
combat without doubt had been terminated, if warily observing the coming of
this tempest he had not lightly slipped aside, letting that dangerous steel
enter into the earth, which flying out of the Monsters hands, he fell down
instantly thereupon altogether without vigiouror force, whereat Gorgophon was
exceeding glad, for thinking he had then no more to deal withal save that
huge Serpent, he valiantly opposed his shield to him, but he presently saw a
Knight descend, covered all over with fire, who giving him a cruel blow on the
head, made him set his hands to the ground, and straight way redoubling another
on his cuirace, laid him all along on the earth, from whence he was suddenly
carried, not knowing by whom, beyond the outer gate of the Palace.

Hereat, when he came again to himself, he was so mad, that he made a vow
never to depart out of the Island before he saw the end of the adventure, and
because (said he, full of rage and despite) that the destinyes have not
reserved it for me, I will combat first with all such as shall present
themselves to prove it; Whereupon he caused Armazia, and her cousin to be put
into a little tower which was hard by the Gate, under the guard of the Giant
that accompanied him, and compelling those of Agricant to set him up a rich
Tent, he lodged himself therein, protesting anew, not to suffer any to try the
adventure before they had combatted with him, whence it came to pass, that
being endued with extreme forces, he vanquished in the space of a month above
forty Knights, which came from all parts thither; But let us give him time to
fill the world with the renown of his valor, and to garnish the walls of
Armazia's Tower with shields, whilst we discourse a little of Rozalmond.

CHAP. XXVIII. Rozalmond arrives in Martaria, undoes the Enchantment of the
Crystal Tower, delivers Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel, with their Mistresses;
they are afterward driven into C^rol^ndaya and prove the adventure of
Adelazia's Martyrdom.
FOrtune does ordinarily cross the designs of men, Rozalmond having left
Alci^^mants Hermitage, with a resolution to go unto Tramazond, sailed for two
days together with a prosperous gale, but but upon the appearing of the third,
the wind grew high, and so contrary, as the Mariners were constrained to turn
their sails, and comply with it; Being carried then by the ordinance of
heaven, he continued a whole week and better, in some danger of shipwreck, but
at the end thereof the rage of the Sea being well allayed, he came to coast along
by the Isle Du-bois in the Empire of Martaria, where the Tower of crystal, in
which Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel, with their Ladies were enchanted,
possessing him with a mavelous desire to know what it was, he caused himself
to be landed, and going to the place, by fortune he found the Emperor newly
arrived there with a Pagan Knight, who more audacious then strong and valiant,
was come thither with a purpose to combat the Lions, howbeit his courage, that
contemned the greatest dangers, when he was in a chamber, proved so abject at
the sight of those furious creatures, as he would not so much as touch his
sword, remonstrating unto the Emperor, that to undertake a Combat, where death
was so assured, was nothing else but rashly to cast away his life.

Which observed by out Warrior, that could not choose but laugh at the Pagans
boutade, he approached to the Tower, whereupon beholding written in letters of
Gold; The Paradise of the Princes of Greece; he fixed his eyes attentively upon
them, and presently knew not Amadis, whom he had never seen, but Floridan and
Lucibel, whereat being wonderfully glad he was in doubt whither he should
deliver them for to render them again to the world, or leave them still in a
place so full of bliss; nevertheless, considering that a Prince owes more to
his glory, then his pleasure, he resolved to employ all his strength for to
bring this enchantment to an end, whereupon he was going to draw out his Sword,
but desiring first to inform himself of the cause of so sweet a captivity, he
returned to the Emperor, and setting one knee to the ground, he said unto him;
Great Monarch, I could be willing to undertake the finishing of this
Enchantment, so as your Majesty would be pleased to declare the story of it
unto me. That were to renew my sorrows, answered the Emperor, notwithstanding
I will satisfy you in few words.

The Sea, that many times brings strange Vessels into these coasts, having one
day landed two Knights not far from hence, they were incountred by some of my
men at Arms, who more insolent then I would have had them, set upon them for to
make them my prisoners, but being very valiant, they defended themselves with
such courage, as they left thirty or forty of them, together with two Giants
dead in the place, and which is more, one of them retired into a wood thereby,
in despite of certain troops that came to succor their friends, the other,
who fought unarmed, remained behind so wounded, that he was fain to be carried
to my Palace, where I committed him to my Chirurgions care, reserving him for a
sacrifice to my gods, but I quickly fell from that resolution, and set him at
liberty in acknowledgement of the service his companion did me two days after
by killing a great and dreadful Monster, which spoiled all the Country, and
considering the exceeding valor he had showed in the combat against my people,
I began to affect him very much. In the mean time I caused the other Knight to
be sought after, that I might recompense him for so great a benefit, howbeit he
would never present himself in Arms, whether it were that he feared my
displeasure, or that he had some other design, as we have conjectured since,
but disguising himself in the habit of a woman, he caused himself to be brought
hither as a slave, and to make short, being endued with a most rarebeautie he
appeared so amiable, as my Daughters could not to endure to be without his
company, especially Palmirenna, who was to succeed unto my Crown, had not her
bad life given me just cause to dis-inherit her; To tell you all that passed
between them I am notable, but so it was, that mistrusting no practice amongst
them, I left themto so great a liberty, as Amplamira, the middlemost of the
three that you behold, being made acquainted with the secrets of her eldest
Sister and her Slave, yielded to the affection of that strange Knight, unto
whom I had given his life; and the third, which would show no more obedience
than the rest, became passionately in love with the Knight whom you see there
in the upper part of the Tower with her.

Nature that obliges us to the care of our childrens well-doing, having
persuaded me to bestow them richly in marriage, I made choice of the heir of
the mighty King of Cabilla, the valorous Sultan of Aralafia, and the King of
Filzandria, to support my Crown with their greatness: but being upon the point
of leading them to Church, this Slave with the first Knight coming armed at
all parts, under color of succouring two unfortunate Lovers, which they said
were at the Court-gate in a Coach, they caused my Daughters to go thither, who
being intelligent with them, got suddenly into the Coach, and galloped away
with that speed, as they were instantly out of sight, whereof being exceeding
sensible, I commanded them to be pursued, when as this Slave lifting up the
Vizier of his Helmet, told me, that he was not a woman as I had believed until
then, but a Knight named Amadis, Prince of Greece and Trebisond. At these words
some of my Knights advanced for to stay him, howbeit he laid him that first
presented himself, dead at my feet with a blow of his fist, and discharging his
Sword on the Helmet of a very valiant Gentleman, called Meander, who arrived
but that morning, he cleft him down to the shoulders, and so departed like
lightning for to follow the Coach. To what end should I relate all things in
particular unto you? briefly they got to the Seaside after they had slain
above six hundred Knights, and with the assistance of three or four Knights
errant, that came thither by chance, they imbarqued themselves in despite of a
thousand Knights, which endeavored to arrest them.

Away they sailed them, as they hoped with a prosperous wind, but the gods who
never suffer so foul a crime to rest unpunished, drove them the very same day
into this Island, where having invested them with four thousand Knights I had
taken them in their beds, and executed some horrible vengeance on them, if I
had not been prevented by the arrival of an old Sorceresse, who unexpectedly
appeared with a flaming Torch in her hand, made certain circles, and muttered
diverse obscure words, which were no sooner uttered but there fell so cruel a
storm of huge Hayl-stones, as above five hundred of my Knights were knocked
down therewith, and my self constrained to fly for shelter to these houses you
see, from whence after the sky was cleared again, I beheld this Tower erected
in the place of the house wherein they were; Now judge, Sir, whether this be
not a strange affliction unto me, and whether I have not reason to wish them in
my power, for to wash away the affront they have done me with their blood.

Mighty Prince, said Rozalmond, (who had been much delighted with this
discourse) the Heavens do sufficiently testify by the care they have taken of
these Knights, that they do not approve of the revenge you desire, I could
give you better counsel, if your Majesty could be pleased to accept of it:
These Knights, of whom you speak, are all Lords of a quality, nothing inferior
to yours, of whom the first according to report, is son to the mighty Amadis
of Greece: the second, whom I know very well, is Heir to the Sovereign Monarch
of the Persians, and the third is Nephew to the great King of France; seek not
their ruin then for an offense they have done you, compelled thereunto by love,
but receive them like a gentle and merciful Father, and if you wish for their
deliverance, let it be to rejoice with them in their alliance, which shall so
secure you, as all the Princes of Paganism shall not dare to look on you, but
for your service; If therefore you can carry a mind inclined to pardon, then I
am ready to undertake the restoring of them unto the world, if not I will never
be the instrument of their destruction by putting them in your power.

You amaze me, said the Emperor, in telling me that these three Knights are
such great Princes, in which regard I blame not my daughters so much as I have
done, but my resentment will not permit me so lightly to pass by such enormous
an offense. O but you must Sir, replied Rozalmond, at least wise if you will
appear as generous, as I know you are, and in the assurance thereof I will no
longer defer this Enterprise.

Whereupon drawing out his rich sword, he advanced toward the Lions, which
rose with fury, and at the first onset discharged so mighty a blow on the leg
of him that was next him, that having cut through all the hair, he gave him a
great gash in the flank, whilst the other fastening his claws on his Shield,
labored to tear it from his arm; nevertheless he bravely resisted him, and
desiring to lose no time, he struck him so strongly on the paw, that he sent it
divided from his body to the ground, which made him roar most dreadfully, at
the noise whereof Armelina, Orestia, and Melia, which seemed to be asleep at
the foot of the Tower, presently start up, and transforming themselves into
horrible Centaurs, flew all at one instant on Rozalmond, who was therewith
marvellously troubled, not knowing well where to bestow his sword; the Lions
pressed him with their claws, the Centaurs showred blows on him with their heavy
clubs, and thinking to avoid the fury of the one, he fell into the rage of the
others, howbeit nothing dismayed he laid with such violence at the body of one
of those Lions, as he cut him in two pieces, and turning withal toward a
Centaur, he struck him so dangerously on the head, that though his Sword
lighted flatling, he overthrew him to the earth, where instantly changing her
shape, she reassumed that of Almerina, who began to slumber as before, which
made him resolve not to strike the Centaurs any more with the edge of his
Sword, turning all his fury then against the remaining Lion, that had plucked
his Shield from his arm, he ran him so lustily into the belly, as he laid him
dead by the other.

Being very glad at the defeat of these enemies, and the recovery of his
Shield, he made head afresh against the Centaurs, which so laid upon him, that
he felt himself bruised all over with their heavy strokes, nevertheless he
avoided them as well as he could, and at the length found the means to fasten a
blow with the flat of his sword full upon the body of one of them, wherewith
being overthrown she reassumed her former shape, and so did the other not long
after, who abandoning her horrible figure, took the form of Orestia again, at
which our Warrior very much rejoicing advanced to the Tower, and with the
pummell of his sword, he knocked the Crystal with such force, as it brake
into a thousand pieces, making so great and dreadful a noise, that the Island
being covered over with a thick Fog, shaked for two hours together, at the end
whereof the Sun receiving its former light, neither the crystal Tower, the
Lovers, nor the ship wherein Rozalmond came were to be seen, only a Pillar
appeared in the midst of the place, upon which Rozalmond read this inscribed.

Vrganda to the Emperor of Martaria.

GReat Monarch, wonder not if thy daughters, destined to the Princes of Greece,
follow the way of their glory, thou shall one day go and find them in
Corolandaya, whither now I conduct them, for to have thy share in the
contentment of their Nuptials, and to bow after their example before unknown
Altars.

Well Sir, said Rozalmond, did not I tell you that Heaven had taken the defense
of these Knights in hand, and that therefore you should not wish their
destruction? It has miraculously delivered them from your power, that they
might not be subjected to your displeasure, will you still persist then in
opposing the ordinances thereof, and not consider that they are your children,
which fly from you that they may not leave you the regret for having followed
rather the motions of a Tyrant, then a Father?

Without doubt, answered the Emperor, (and caressing him as if he had been his
Son) your reasons are such, as I am resolved to yield unto them, but let me
entreat you to stay, and refresh your felfe here a while with me, and withal
to let me know who you are* Sir, replied Rozalmond, I have such important
affairs, as I may not well sojourn here above a day at the most, yet to obey
you I will make it up two, and to testify unto you how much I glory in the
honor of your favor, I will tell you that, which for some particular reasons
I would otherwise conceal from all the world, and will freely confess unto
you, that I am Rozalmond of Greece, son unto Spheramond, Emperor of Parthia,
and very near of kin to those Princes, whom I desire you to call your children.

Noble friend, said the Emperor, embracing him a new, I am more contend with
this encounter of you, than with the acquisition of a Monarchy, I am not
ignorant of the glory your Fathers have gotten in the world, and yet I am
persuaded that you surpass them far in valor, wherefore I shall make a dear
account of the honor of your alliance, so that with all my heart I forgive my
daughters, and will go into Corolandaya, since they are to be there, in
assurance whereof you shall see (during the two days, which you promise to
abide here) what Bonfires I will cause to be made in Cardana for joy of their
marriages, which at their return shall be renewed all over my Empire: Whereupon
he returned to the City with Rozalmond, who was entertained there with a world
of magnificense and triumph.

In the mean time Amadis, Floridan and Lucibel were sailing on the Sea, so
infinitely satisfied with the free enjoying of their Mistresses, as they past
away eleven days insensibly; at the end whereof they arrived in Corolandaya,
where the mavelous enchantment of the Queen having arrested them, they
resolved to prove the adventure, and accordingly Lucibel and Floridan having
been after a long and dangerous combat vanquished by Gorgophon (more by the
advantage of an armor and shield, which Diabolion the Inchanter had given him,
as to one that he held to be the firmest Pillar of Paganism.)

Amadis putting on his good arms, and presenting himself in the place ran
against the Giant with such force, that incountring in the midst of the course,
they were both of them carried so rudely to the earth, as they remained a
pretty while astonished; nevertheless indignation having raised both with
equal fury they drew out their swords, wherewith they began so cruelly to cut
one another, that in a moment the ground was all strewed with pieces of their
armor: Gorgophon, who thought there was not a man in the world able to resist
the fury of his Curtelas, discharged most dreadful blows, but our Warrior
knew so well how to decline them, and to make him such sharp returns, that the
combat became most terrible, their arms were al dyed red with blood, and as
often as their weapons were in the air, every one looked to see their heads
thundered in pieces, Gorgophon beheld Armazia, Amadis cast his eye on his
Palmirenna, wherewith they were so animated, that the horrible effects of their
rage drew pity from all the assistants: Four hours being past since the
beginning of the combat, Gorgophon enraged, for that he had no advantage of his
enemy, took his Fauchion in both his hands, and advancing it he let it descend
with such violence on Amadis his shield, as dividing it in two it opened his
arm that sustained it, and forced him to set his knees to the ground, which so
incensed our Knight, that rising up in a mighty chafe, he discharged such a
stroke on his Helmet, as made a wound two fingers deep in his head, and
constrained him withal to stagger in that sort, as he had much (...) keep
himself from fal^ing* but being (...) by shame, (...) the fight with such
honor, that caused all the Spectators to tremble.

In (...) of them possessed with equal fury, after six hours (...), and
without taking of breath, they (...) their sword^ (...) in their hands, and at
one (...) discharging upon each other with most strange force, Gorgophon with
the violence of the blow fell down backward from his (...) to the (...), quite
deprived of all sense, and his casque so full of blood, that (...) he had been
(...), had not the Giant his companion sp^^dily (...) him; on the other side
Amadis not able to support the fury of that which he had received, dropped
presently after to the earth in like manner, with so little appearance of
(...), that Palmirenna tea^ing her hay^, began ^o (...) his death, but his
Helmet being suddenly opened, he came straightway to himself agai^e, and was
carried to the Marquis of Belt^^^^'s house; where the Chyrurgions having found
his wounds to be very dangerous, promi^^d notwithstanding to cure him in a
month, and Gorgophon in six weeks.

CHAP. XXIX. Rozalmond (...) with Trasiclea, leads (...) Alcidamants (...), her
regrets upon his arms, their (...) and Reconciliation.
Rozalmond having been three days in Cardana, most magnificently honored, and
entertained, departed with infinite discontent to the Emperor, who to testify
the esteem he made of him, conducted him in person to the port, where with many
protestations of service and friendship out Knight embarquing himself, put
forth presently to sea, and ^ayling with a prosperous gale toward Tramazond,
the remembrance of his Armazia, of whom he had not heard any news since he left
her, representing itself unto his mind, helped him to pass away the time with
many sweet and pleasing thoughts. Beauteous Mistress, said he to himself, you
have reason to forget my services, and to engage your self under the power of
another, since I have absented my self so long from you to follow the world,
and yet I am so confident of your virtue, that in stead of fearing a change in
you, I will believe that you attend me with very great impatience, and that you
still conserve me that part in your heart, which heretofore you have promised
me, in regard whereof I swearby that incomparable beauty of yours, not to
undertake any other adventure, but to return instantly unto you, as soon as I
have drawn the excellent Knight of the Pal^^ from that hermitage, where the
best of his days is so unbef^^^ingly (...).

Having past eleven or twelve days with a favorable wind (...), at length he
arrived in the Kingdom of Claricana, where the (...) having assured him that
his shortest way to Tarsipolis, was to go^ thither by land, he caused himself
with his Squite and horses to be set (...), and traveling along, in three days
together he met with no adven^^^e, but at the end thereof, and at such time as
the Sun was in the midst of his course, he perceived a Knight coming out of a
Forest, whereinto he was entering, who bearing a Phoenix with two heads in his
shield, sat with such a grace on his Steed, and wore such brave and rich Arms,
being all covered over with azure and gold, as he had a mavelous desire to
know him, and to try whether he were the same he seemed to be; whereupon fair
and softly advancing he desired him to break a Lance with him for the beauty
of his Mistress, but this Knight returning him no answer, nor so much as taking
any notice of him, rode on as his horse pleased to carry him, which at first
somewhat netled Rozalmond, thinking he ought to have been more courteous,
howbeit observing that he went hanging down his head, and that may be he was in
some deep muse, whereby he was detayned from hearing him, he followed on the
faster for to speak once more unto him, but understanding him break forth into
speech, he came up close to him, and lending an attentive ear, he heard him say
thus.

Jealousy, false jealousy, how many tears will thou cost me, and what pains
do I see prepared for the punishment of so great a fault? Ah my Knight! I
should have been more temperate in mine anger, I should have heard you before I
had forbid you my presence, and should have considered that I was too rashly
displeased with that which proceeded our acquaintance; had I been more advised,
or less curious, we should at this present have lived contented, a thousand
pleasures would have accompanied our delights, and not caring much for this
Princesses complaint, I might have possessed you without fear of being abandened
for another.

These words finishing with sighs marvellously a^^^ed Rozalmond, who could not
comprehend the sense of them, wherefore he watched if any new complaint would
discover this secret unto him, but perceiving him continue a good whil in
silence, he took herby the arm and s^^d unto hi^ Knight it is time for you now
to awake, and to tell me whither you will break a lance for the honor of your
Mistress: Now in faith, said he starting up, you have done me so great a
displeasure, by interrupting me in my musing, wherein I took incredible
content, that I will run most willingly against you, rather to revenge me of
your insolence, then to oblige any Lady. Saying so, and taking the field he
came to encounter our Warrior with such a fury, that their Lances flew into
a thousand shivers, whilst they past on as unmoved as Rocks, which scorn the
violence of winds and waves.

Their course being finished, he drew out his sword, and returned with like
rage to charge Rozalmond, who greatly marvelling at his force and valor, went
^rotting fair and softly toward him with a countenance that testified he had
no purpose to combat with him, whereupon the Knight made a stand, and said unto
him; What Sir, are you satisfied with so little, and will you not do more for
your Mistress sake? If there were question of her merit or beauty, answered
Rozalmond, you should see that I would well conserve her that advantage, which
nature has given her above all that I know, but having desired to prove my
self against you only, out of the esteem I had of your valor, which
questionless is nothing less then I judged it to be by your gallant
demeanor, we will proceed no farther if you please, for one ought as much to
decline a Combat ill grounded, as to seek out such where justice may get us
glory. You com^end me, said he, viewing him from head to foot, for that which I
admire in you, and the force of your arm amazeth me no less, then that
martial c^riage of yours, wherefore I consent with you, that we sit down
contented with the breaking of our staves, and that having no just cause to
fight, we remain friends; this being concluded, I shall entreat you to grant me
one boo^ which I very much desire of you. I will not deny you, replied
Rozalmond, provided you accord me another. With all my heart, said the Knight.
Declare then unto me who you are, replied Rozalmond, That is it, answered the
Knight, which I desire to know of you.

Being first obliged by promise, said ou^ Warrior, it is reason I should
satisfy your demand, before I obtain mine; I am a Knight errant, born in the
Empire of the Parthians, by all my friends called Rozalmond, who in the
adventures of the world seeks that which a noble mind is to expect from his
travels. Without doubt, said the Knight, you cannot choose but acquire immortal
same, since honor is the sole aim of your actions, for being the strongest of
all that ever I incountred, next to one with whom you may compare, I am
persuaded you can find nothing on the earth, but will do homage to your Arms;
Now, whereas you desire to know me; I will no longer conceal my self from you:
I am Trasiclea, hei^ apparent to the Empire of Tramozand.

O Madam! said Rozalmond, lighting presently from his Horse for to render her
the greater respect, how luckie is this chance which has brought me hither to
make trial of your valor so redoubted of all the world, I was going to seek
you at Tarsipolis, for to obtain a suit of you, but being assured that you
will be as courteous here, as any where else, I will now make the same request
to you, which I intended to have done at your Palace, wherefore beauteous
Princess, grant me one boon I shall demand of you.

Valiant Warrior, answered she, discovering her face, the more civilly to
receive his submissions, I am very glad that I have freed you from the pain of
proceeding farther, demand what you please, it shall be easily granted you, for
I will deny your merit nothing, wherefore get upon your horse, and tell me what
it is I must do for you.

Madam, replied Rozalmond, (vaulting into his saddle, with much wonder at such
rare beauty,) conducted lately by a young Squire, to the execution of a very
dangerous enterprise, I met with a Magician of my acquaintance, who stopping me
in the midst of my way told me, that I traveled in vain, and that the end of
this adventure would never be seen, till such time as the most excellent Knight
of the earth be accompanied with the strongest and fairest Lady of the world
for the accomplishing of it; I am not so vain to presume, that the Destenies
have made choice of me for it, but withal not distrusting my own forces, and
knowing that the earth bears not a more valourous and beautiful Princess
then your self, I come most humbly to desire you, that you will be pleased to
assist my courage with yours, and undertake with me to surmount the
difficulties of this enterprise, from whence if any glory redounds, it shall be
wholly yours, if the success be not such as it should be, I will accuse any
^^^^nesse for it.

Let us go, let us go, answered she, the danger shall be very great if we fall
under it; so taking the way Rozalmond directed, they traveled five days
without finding any adventure that might stay them, but at the end thereof, they
arrived at a terrible great rock, whose bottom was b^^hed with a little stream,
that ran along under the shadow of a great many fallowes; Rozalmond alighted,
and taking his shield as if he were going to fight, he said unto Trasiclea;
Madam, now is the time to show our courage, this is the place of danger, and of
our enterprise.

Herewith Trasiclea forsaking her Horse, drew out her sword, and following
Rozalmond, that went foremost, she came to a Tree, at the foot whereof she beheld
an Armor covered over with rust. Behold, Madam, said he, here it is where our
first Combat must be, these arms you must vanquish before you can pass
further. How, these arms, answered Trasiclea, have they any force in them lying
in this sort? Do but advance, Madam, replied Rozalmond, and you will meet with
greater difficulties then you think for. Whereupon Trasiclea imagining that it
was some Enchantment, approached so near unto them, that she could discern
three Palms in the midst of the shield, which so amazed her, as she let her
Sword drop out of her hand.

Madam, what ails you, said Rozalmond unto her, who well enough knew the cause
of her distemper? Alas! answered she with a languishing voice, it was not
without reason that you judged the danger of this enterprise to be great, take
me from hence I beseech you, for the sight of these Arms in the state they are
in, will kill me with griese, they belonged to the best Knight of the world,
whom my rigous without doubt has laid in his grave, but I will not long
survive the loss of him, and this desert which hides his bones, shall be
strewed with my ashes.

Brave Palms (continued she throwing her Helmet on the ground, and unbuckling
her Armor) brave Palms, that never feared the tempest of blows, sustained by
a Master so strong, tell me if you can, what is become of him? And thou
excellent Sword, that foundst no temper hard enough to resist thy fury, declare
unto me where that mighty arm is which made thee do such wonders? Thou make
me remember him, but thou can not represent unto me the grace wherwithall he
made thee descend upon his Enemies; he has abandoned thee in these Deserts,
mine also will I leave with thee, and join my arms to thine: Saying so, she
laid her Armor by Alcidamants with so many tears and sighs, as Rozalmond
could not forbear weeping.

Madam, said he unto her, you must hope better, let us search the Desert,
peradventure we may find this Knight alive. Ah! I fear it, answered she,
howsoever I will omit no means that may be used for to learn the truth thereof;
Whereupon rising up with Rozalmonds help, she went as far as the Grot, where
beholding her Picture erected with such honor, she fell into new complaints.
O! said she, how well does this testify the injustice of my anger? Alcidamant;
thou would not have chosen such horrid Deserts for thy dwelling, had thou
not been the loyallest of all Knights living: and had not my love been dearer
to thee then all things else, thou would have been now amidst M^rodiana's
caresses, or in the embraces of her S^^^er, who loves thee no less; Thou have
preferred my rigor before the pleasures thou might have enjoyed with them,
wherefore I will prefer death before the contentment of life, I will dye to
satisfy thee, and since I could not possess thee here, I will go and present
my self unto thee in the Elizia^ field^; it may be thou will not be so cruel
as I have been, but pardon me, and forgetting that thou did through my
default, thou will le^ our souls joint, though I have heretofore refused our
bodies should do so.

Herewith she swoun^d in Rozalmonds arms, who running speedily to the bro^k,
took some water in his Helmet, and sprinkled it so long on her face, till she
came to her self again. Take courage, Madam, said he unto her, and despair not
thus without cause, the light which you see burning in this lamp, this picture
so well preserved, and this bread that lies here, are mighty proofs for to
persuade you, that your Alcidamant lives, let us seek him out, I beseech you,
and stand no longer spending of tears in vain, we have time enough still to
afflict our selves, when we are sure of a misfortune, therefore we ought not to
anticipate our sorrows before their being. Your reasons, answered she, shall
make me prolong my life yet awhile, go then whither you please, and I will
follow you. Whereupon leaving the Grot, they walked toward the trees just at
the time when as Alcidamant was returning to sigh according to his custom,
before the Picture of his Lady.

This poor Hermit, coming softly along in regard of his weakness, perceiving
through the trees the glistering of Rozalmonds Arms, knew him straight, but
seeing a woman in his company, with her hair about her ears, he was so moved,
that he began to tremble like the leaves of the boughs under which he was,
nevertheless recollecting himself, he advanced five or six paces, but having
discovered the beautiful face of Trasiclea, his blood instantly retired into
his veins, and all pale and wan, he tumbled in a trance to the ground;
Trasiclea seeing him fall, ran suddenly to succor him, and kneeling down for
to help him up, she was so amazed to see him in that miserable plight, as I
think she would have been in the like case, had not Rozalmond suddenly arrived,
who said unto her; Now, Madam, is this the Knight you mean? Yes, yes, replied
she, but so changed, as I can hardly know him, for he is now so unlike himself,
that if love had not well engraven his image in my heart, I should never
believe that this were my Alcidamant, but what is that I say, my Alcidamant?
Alas! I doubt I shall never see him alive again; Alcidamant, speak to me, your
Trasiclea asks you forgiveness, open your eyes to her, that opens her heart
to you: O comfort me with one word if you will have me to live for you; What,
will you not speak to me? Ay me! I am undone, his body is as cold as ice, there
is no hope of life in him, one Tomb shall hold us both. Dear Sir, continued
she, turning her eyes to Rozalmond, see it performed I beseech you, even for
that pity which you cannot choose but have of two such unfortunate lovers.
Saying so, she laid her lips to Alcidamants, and overcome with excess of
grief, she fell down by him without pulse or breath, whereat Rozalmond being
exceedingly moved to compassion, ran again to the brook, and with the water
thereof, which was mavelous fresh, the brought them in little space to
themselves again.

Opening their eyes then almost both at one instant, they beheld one another
without saying a word, but Trasiclea thinking it (...) part to (...) first,
sat down on the grass, and laying her arm about his ^eck* she made such
pitiful moan, as would have moved a very rock, Will you not pardon me, said
she, and will you see me dye repenting my cruelty unto you, and not be sensible
of my tears? Remember not, my dearest Knight, what you have suffered by my
fault, I will repair the wro^^ I have done you, and you shall never desire any
thing of me, which I will refuse you.

Most excellent Lady, answer this Lover transported with the excess of a
content which he never hoped for, you have no ways failed against me, that
request you make unto me, I ought to make unto you, and if I receive any grace
from you, I hold it merely from your pity* A new life you give me, I will
receive it, for to employ it in your service, and forgetting all my passed
pains, since I have the happiness to see you again, I will imagine that I
have been all this while in a Paradise of delight, and being lifted up from an
abisme of miseries, to an heaven of felicite, I will think that you did make me
suffer for to render my glory the greater, But it was time, my dear Princess
to come, for if the remedy had been never so little more retarded, I had been
incapable of receiving it.

Well, Madam, said Rozalmond then, (wonderfully well contented with that which
he saw) did not I tell you true, that this adventure would never be brought to
pass, till the bravest Warrior of the earth, and the most valorous, and most
beautiful Princess of the world were assembled together, I brought you hither
on purpose to behold the misery of this Knight, little thinking that you were
so well inclined to relieve him, but thanks be to heaven for the good success
of my design. Hereupon Alcidamant rising up, went, and in a most kind manner
saluted, and caressed our Prince of Greece, giving him a million of thanks for
the care he had had of his life and content.

That done, they returned all three to the Grot, from whence Rozalmonds Squire
was sent to the next Village, to provide them meat for that night; the next day
they went to Armelant, one of the fairest Towns of the Kingdom of Clariana,
where they resolved to stay three or four weeks, for to restore and cherish up
Alcidamant, who during that time, having caused his Arms to be new furbished,
caused the Palms to be taken out of his Shield, and a burning rock upon an
Hermitage, to be painted in stead thereof, for which cause he was always
afterward called the Knight of the burning Rock.

CHAP. XXX. Rozalmonds (...) of Armazia's (...): He (...) Gorgopho^s (...)
there very strangely (...)* being in (...) of his life.
_(...) having with time, good keeping, and the care of his beauteous Mistress,
recovered new strength, gr^w to bein so good plight, as it could h^^dly be
(...), that despair and neglect had ever brought (...) so near ^is and,
whereupon they depart^d all three from Armelant, with a purpose to goeunto
Tarsipolis, for to render Alcidamant happy in his long desired marriage, with
the excellent Trasiclea, but fortune, that meant otherwise to dispose of them,
put them upon a clean contrary course; for as they traveled along they met
with a D^^osel, who in a most lamentable manner thus complained.

Alas! what greater misery could befall this unfortunate Princess, then to be
captived under the power of so cruel a man, whose brutish nature will not be
stayed by a^y consideration of her greatness, from offering violence to her
chast^y; O vali^nt Knight of the Roses! if so strange a misfortune were come to
thy knowledge, surely thou would employ a thousand lives for to revenge the
outrage which is done to thy Armazia.

At these words Rozalmond being infinitely perple^ed, observed the Damosel very
narrowly, and found that it was Armazia's woman, whereupon he said unto her.
Dear Ormelinda, what ayls you thus to complain? Ay me, answered she, looking
up, and knowing Rozalmond by the three ^oses in his shield, how ^uckily have I
met with you, my Lord, you are undone if the gods do not prevent it by some
strange miracle; Gorgophon, Colonel of the Giants of the cruel Island, has
lately carried away your Armazia, with her consin Agritlea.

Ah Heaven, said Rozalmond, is Armazia, the fairest Princess of the world, in
the power of an inhumane Giant, and must serve for the satisfying of his
abominable lust? Dye wretched Knight, since there is nothing now left for
which thou should desire to live. Dye do I say? nay rather desire to live
yet a while to take some horrible revenge for so unsufferable a wrong;
Audacious Giant, thy death shall precede mine, and were all the Ministers of
hell assembled together for to succor thee, thou shall not escape the ^ury of
my sword. Saying so, he spurred away over the fields, and never regarding
whither he went, he ran all the rest of the day with such extreme rage, that
his horse dying under him just as it was night, left him in a very desperate
case. Ungrateful fortune, said he, tearing his (...) for very madness, thou
shall not triumph over me for all this, thou think by a^resting me thus here,
to make me subject to the worst of thy malice, but thou ^^^lt not be able, for
thou shall see that in despite of ^^ee I will notwithstanding go on.

Running along then in the dark, as if he had had no armor on, he continued so
till midnight, when quite out of breath, he was constrained to lie down on the
ground to rest himself a little; nevertheless so violent was his grief, as
remaining there not long he got up again, and drawing new strength from his
desire to be revenged, and to succor his Mistress, he ran again till such time
as the Sun appeared, by the light whereof discovering the Sea near at hand,
he began to take some little comfort, which was quickly converted into fury
again, for seeing the coast desolate, without either ship, or man, he fell to
crying out, and roaring in that dreadful manner, as all the shore about
resounded therewith: What did (...) say, and how did he curse his stars? Verily
his passion was so violent, that mad with desperation, he was going to throw
himself all (...) was into the Sea, when as he perceived a little su^^^
arising (...) ^he waves, which displaying his beams very brightly, (...)
^esign, and his body that was tottering, and ready to fall (...)

This prodigy at first astonished him, but havin^ (...) by little and little
appear, together with sayls, and Sa^vages (...) in their hands, he straightway
knew that it was the Vessel of the Sune, wherein he had formerly sailed with
Cassandra, which made him tremble for joy, as he had before with rage and
anger: Beholding then this goodly ship quite discovered, he rendered a thousand
thanks to thoses Sages for assisting him thus at his need; and having not the
patience to stay till it came up to him, he presently lept into it, and walking
from one room to another, he espied a table very well furnished with excellent
meat, upon the which there also lay a paper folded up, wherein having opened
it, he read these words.

Alcander to the valiant Knight of Greece.

EXcellent Prince, if you consider, that virtue and greatness do not exempt
men from the misfortunes of the world, you will take comfort notwithstanding
the just cause you have to be afflicted, and finding such remedies as are
necessary for your grief, in a resolution to receive all things patiently from
the Mighty hand of God, you shall even force Heaven to perserve Armazia for
you, whose safety will cost you so much blood, that if the bastard bird,
together with the amorous Fanlcens do not arrive just in the nick to rescue
you from your enemies, the Roses will lose their odor under the weighty
burden of their mother.

This Letter giving him more consolation then fear, he fell to the meat before
him, and then laid him down on a bed, for to rest and refresh himself, after
his so many past-travels, leaving the ship to be conducted according to the
good pleasure of the great Alcander.

In the mean time Alcidamant and Trasiclea, carried by the remembrance of the
powerful obligations, wherein they stood engaged to this Knight, followed him
with a resolution to serve him in this affair, which so much concerned him; but
having taken a different way they arrived at a Port of the Sea, where hearing
no news of that they sought for, they embarked themselves in a ship, commanding
the Pilots to steer their course toward the cruel Island of Gorgophon,
imagining that Rozalmond was undoubtedly gone thither, and indeed the Vessel
of the Sun, wherein he was, having for many days together run very swiftly
through the Waves, at length aboarded that redoubted Coast, upon the which
Rozalmond causing himself to be landed with an extreme desire to encounter the
Ravisher of his Mistress, it was his h^p at the very first dash to meet with an
a^rogant Giant, at whose sight his blood beginning to boil very furiously in
his veins, he drew out his sword, and believing that it was Gorgophon he
discharged so mighty a blow upon his Helmet, as he cleft him down to the very
shoulders, wherewith certain Mariners, that were walking on the shore, being
marvellously affrighted, betook them to their heels, and fled into a great
house, that was not far off whence he presently perceived four dreadful
Giants make toward him, whose presence possessing him with more wrath, then
fear, he advanced courageously, and demanded of them with an incensed
countenance, which of them was Gorgophon? Wretched creature, answered he that
marched foremost, what would thou have with him? Marry, replied Rozalmond, I
would send his soul to hell, for the satisfaction of an offense he has
committed against the great Emperor of Gardacia, by forcibly carrying away his
Daughter Armazia, and a cousin of hers. O Jupiter! said the Giant, what is this
I hear? Dare thou, poor Pigmey, speak of combatting him, who would quickly
cut an hundred thousand such as thou art into a million of pieces? now by all
the gods which we adore, I will chastise this audaciousnesse of thine so
cruelly, that if all mankind were here assembled, they should tremble to behold
it.

Saying thus, he advanced his heavy Scimitar, that was twelve foot long, and
made so horrible a blow at our Warrior, as would have proved fatal to his
life, had he not warily declined it, leaping then very lightly at one side he
let it thunder on the ground, whereinto it entered even up to the hilts, and
careful to lose no opportunity, he let drive with such force at the Giant,
that he cut off both his hands, which remained fastened to that dreadful
weapon, whereat the others were so enraged, that instantly approaching they
charged him with three such terrible strokes, as he was constrained to set his
knees to the ground, being dangerously wounded on the shoulder; nevertheless
rising up full of despite, he began to deal such dreadful blows, that his
very enemies were astonished at them, and hacked and hewed them in that cruel
manner, as dyed all their arms with their blood, that issued from their wounds:
howbeit considering that he should be tired at length, if he continued still in
those terms, he took his sword in both his hands, and let it fall so deadly on
him that most troubled him, as he divided him in two pieces, wherewith yet not
being contented he discharged so dangerously on the shoulder of another, that
he separated it from the rest of his body, sending him to the earth with a
noise like to that of a Tower, overthrown by the wind.

These horrible blows much amazed the fourth, but seeing five more of his
companions coming to his succor, he began to assail our Champion with more
courage, than he had done all the day before, who beholding himself invi^oned
with these six monstrous Colosses, thought that he was now near unto his end,
nevertheless resolving to sell his life ^learly unto him, he laid about him
with that fury, as he seemed rather a devil then a mortal man, but being
charged on so many sides, and hurt in five or six places, he was even ready to
faint under the violence of their blows, when as a brave Knight, who bare two
Eagles in his shield, arriving in a little Bark, lept suddenly on shore, and
wondering to behold four Giants extended at the feet of one man, who seemed to
fight courageously enough for to reduce six more, that combatted with him, into
the like estate, he laid hand on his sword, and discharging with choler upon
the first that presented himself he cleft him to the teeth, so as he fell down
close by Rozalmond, who being not a little glad of such seasonable succor took
new heart, and hit another of them so dangerously on the shield, that he made
it together with his arm fly to the ground; The remaining four rather more
encouraged, then terrified with the death of their fellows, discharged their
heavy Scimitars all at one instant, two on the Knight of the Eagles, whole
armor was easily pierced, and two on Rozalmond, whereby he received another
hurt on the Shield arm, which so incensed these two valiant Warriors, that
Rozalmond ran the next to him upto the hilts, and the Knight of the Eagles cut
the leg of him that had hurt him sheer off.

These dreadful blows having laid two Giants on the earth, gave the Knights
assured hope of victory, but six other Giants, more deformed, and greater then
the former, making toward them, under the conduct of Bramartan, Gorgophons
Lieutenant, rendered their deaths most inevitable, when on the other side a Bark
suddenly arrived, out of which two knights, the one bearing a burning Rock on
his shield, the other a Phaenix with two heads, lept a shore, and withal
celerity opposing these new enemies, they charged them with such fury, that
they laid two of them* stark dead at their feet, the first divided into two
parts by the Knight of the burning Rock, and the other run through the body by
him of the Phoenix.

Rozalmond observing the violence of these blows, perceived this succor
proceeded from his friend, the brave Alcidamant, and the beauteous Princess of
Tramazond, which so revived his courage, that accompanied with this Knight, he
did not believe it was possible for all the world to defeat him: flying upon
them then with no less force, then at the beginning of the combat he cleft one
of them to the teeth, whilst Alcidamant desirous to show his valor unto this
great Warrior, having discharged again on the mighty Bramartan, he divided his
body in twain, with one of the most dreadful strokes that ever parted from the
hand of a man; the four that remained beholding such a prodigious execution,
would fain have retired, but the fury of our Champions was such, as after
equart^r of an hours resistance, they were all cut in pieces, to the infinite
coment of Rozalmond, who went and embracing Alcidamant, said unto him. Dear
Brother, could I hope for safety from any but you, unto whom all glory is due?
Ah! how well have you now recompensed the pleasure I did you heretofore; And
what do I not owe to the incomparable valor of your Mistress? you have given
me life, but I will employ it whenever you please in acknowledgement of so
great a benefit: And you, brave Warrior, continued he, turning him to the
Knight of the Eagles (who looked upon them with wonder, for that he did not
think the world could show three such again) being no less obliged unto you,
let me desire you to take the same assurances of my service.

Whereupon, putting off his Helmet a little to refresh himself, the Knighs of
the Eagle^ presently lift up his Bever, and knee^ing down before him, said; O!
how happy do I account my self for coming hither thus seasonably to do you
some service? My Lord, give me your hands to kiss, in satisfaction of the
blood I have so gloriously shed for you, I am Russian of Media, the humblest of
all your servants. At these words, Rozalmond remembering that he had seen him in
the Grecian Court, where he was esteemed every way as good a Knight as the
Emperor Spheramond his Father, caressed him anew in a most loving manner.

Now, Alcidamant and Trasiclea, coming by this mea^^ to understand the
quality of Rozalmond, would have showed f^r ^ore (...) unto him then before,
but embracing them again with (...), he refused the honor they would have done
him, and (...) entreated Alcidamant, whom he valewed more than all the (...)
world besides, to live with him like a Brother. Some time be^^g (...) in the
pleasure of this encounter, Alcidamant would have (...) and the gallant Russian
of Media (unto whom ^^e protested much service) to the care of Ormelinda, for
the looking to their wounds, whilst he and Trasiclea went to the Castle, to
learn some news of Armazia, but Rozalmond by no means would stay behind,
wherefore they walked all four thither, where finding none but certain
servants, who assured them that Gorgophon was not in the Island, they returned
to the Sea side, and getting aboard the Ship of the Sun, which instantly
sailed away as swiftly as before; they all admired those rare and excellent
things they beheld there, especially Trasiclea, who was wonderfully taken with
her own, and the other five Pictutes of those incomparable Ladies, so perfectly
represented to the life.

In the mean time Rozalmond, and Russian, being unarmed, had their wounds
visited by Ormelinda, who being very skillful in Chyrurgerie, and carrying
always about her such things, as were necessary for the like purpose, dressed
them incontinently, and promised them by the help of God to make them sound
again in twenty days.

CHAP. XXXI. Alcidamant and Trasiclea meets with Parmelina, who relates unto
them the history of her strange love with Clarismond.
WHilst Rozalmonds and Russians wounds were inhealing, twelve days past
insensibly away, at the end whereof the Vessel of the Sun staying close to a
rock, on whose top, a great smoke appeared, Alcidamant and Trasiclea, armed at
all points, leapt on shore, and passing under certain trees, they traveled
above an hour without incountring any thing, but a very great silence over
all, whereupon concluding that this was some Desert, they turned toward the
ascent of the rock, and began to mount it with pain, in regard of the weight of
their Arms, when as they perceived a huge fire from whence that smoke which
they had seen proceeded; The curiosity, that had made them leave the Ship,
carrying them on, they saw a woman on her knees before the fire, who lifting up
her hands to heaven, seemed to beg for something with her prayers; they would
fain have heard her complaints, before she should have discovered them, howbeit
they could not approach to her so softly; but that she discryed them, whereupon
rising up, she was going to run away, when as Alcidamant catching her by the
arm, said unto her; Gentlewoman, be not frighted with our presence, for we are
come hither rather to do you service, than any hurt. Knights, answered she,
having been a twelve month, or more, in this Desert without seeing any body,
truly I was afraid at the sight of your Arms, but since you have so well
confirmed me, let me know I pray you, what you would have with me, to the end I
may give you satisfaction therein, if it lie in my power. That which we desire,
said Trasiclea to her, is that you would tell us why you kneel thus before
this flame, what is the cause of your complaints, and of your retreat into this
Desert place. That were to renew my sorrows, answered she, but I take such
delight in the rehearsal of my misery, that I shall be as ready to relate, as
you are willing to hear it.

This fire, which but testifies the same, that has long consumed my heart,
serves for a sacrifice to the ghost of noble Clarismon^d, one of the loveliest
Knights that was in all the Kingdom of Filamon, whose body is buried under the
ashes of this fire, that every day is renewed by me just at this hour; his
death is as strange, as the history of our loves, which not to abuse your
patience, I will recount unto you as briefly as I can. This Knight, a great
friend to one named Martander, being taken with that little beauty, wherewith
it pleased heaven to indue me, showed himself so desirous to be in all places,
and companies, where I had occasion to be present, that by his looks and
carriage, I easily came to know he was in love with me, howbeit being then, I
may well say, blind, because I did not consider his merit, I could not by any
means affect him, but contrarily carrying some particular good liking to
Martander, that cared not for me, the sight of him did very much displease me;
I found fault with all that he did, and the more he labored to serve me, the
more was I incensed against him. His suit then being troublesome unto me, I
resolved to let him understand, that he much dis-obliged me, by soliciting me
in that manner, and accordingly taking occasion on a time, when he besought me
to carry a gentler mind, and to have some compassion of his suffering, I told
him how my actions were the images of my thoughts, how I had showed
sufficiently, that I did not love him, and how in vain he expected relief from
me, for if I would give my self to any one, Martander should have more power
over me, then all the Knights on the earth.

Hereat Martander, who was then present with Clarismond, gave me many humble
thanks for the election I was willing to make of him; but, Madam, said he,
being Clarismonds friend, I may not receive the honor of your favor, which
would be better conferred where it is due, then on me. Some months passing
away, Clarismond obstinate in his suit, I in my hate to him, and affection to
Martander, these two friends plotted together how to deceive me. You may do me
a most friendly part, said Clarismond one day to Martander: Parmolina, (so is
this miserable called that speaks to you) loves you with passion, and when you
please, you can prevail with her to grant you any thing, serve me faithfully,
I beseech you; feign as much love to her, as she bears you, and labor to
obtain of her that she will spend one night with you, upon promise you may make
her, of rendering her kisses legitimate; the dark keeps all things unknown, I
will go to her in your stead, and so by this means you shall save my life, which
otherwise cannot long continue.

Martander, who to help his friend would have made no difficulty to have gone
even into Hell, most willingly undertakes this affair, comes to me, and
craving my pardon for his so long neglect of my affection, in such manner
counterfeits the motions of a man transported with love and impatience, that I
verily believed he was thoroughly taken; his sighs very much grieved me, the
vows that he made never to adore any but my self, exceedingly contented me, I
was sensible of his passions; what should I say more? There was naught resting
to render us the happiest Lovers in the world, but the fruition of our desires,
whereunto he labored to arrive for the satisfaction of his friend; but finding
dangerous obstacles therein, by reason I lay always in my Mothers chamber, in
a bed apart by my self, I could not resolve to run such hazard; nevertheless,
what could not the tears of a Lover, or of one that seemed so, effect in the
heart of an amorous Girl?

At length I past by all respects, and promising him to leave all our doors
open, I sent him away so contented, as he seemed not to envy any felicity
whatsoever: Midnight then being come, I received Clarismond in mine arms,
thinking it was Martander, and losing my self in his embraces, I little thought
of this change of persons, insomuch, that the next day I spoke to Martander, as
thinking I had acted that with him, which I had done with Clarismond, and as
for him, he carried the countenance of a man so infinitely pleased, as it was a
fortnight before I knew by what cunning I was deceived, because we durst not
speak but very softly, in regard of my Mother; howbeit Clarismond not enduring
to taste his delight any longer under the coverture of another, discovered
himself one night, as we were in the midst of our pleasure, and freely
confessed to me, that he was constrained to have recourse unto wiles, since he
could not other ways prevail: I will not tell you how much I was astonished
at this discourse, nor what error I was then about, to have run into by crying
out, as though I had been ravished by force, but to proceed, I will assure you,
how instantly changing my mind, with the consideration that the matter was past
remedy, I loved Clarismond a thousand times more than ever I had done
Martander, and began to have Martander far more, than ever I had done
Clarismond, unto whom, (excusing my self upon the weakness of my judgment,
which had not permitted me to choose the better party,) I protested so much
love, and gave him such testimony thereof by my most kind usage of him, and
caressing of him anew, as he thought himself happy in disclosing this trick
unto me.

But now see what sport love makes with men, Martander hearing Clarismond
continually talk of the unspeakable delight he enjoyed with me, began to love
me most passionatly, and preferring his affection before his friendship, he
began to vow and protest that truly unto me, which he had dissembled before,
hoping that the passion I had been in for him, was not yet quite extinct. I am
not able to express what infinite content I received to behold him sigh at my
feet, and rejoyeing to see him languish through his own fault, I told him that
my Mothers in-disposition detained me from receiving him a-nights, as I was
wont, but at length no longer to abuse him, I plainly said unto him, how I very
much wondered to hear him desire a treasure which belonged unto Clarismond,
and knowing well enough that he possessed it, I could hardly believe he could be
so wicked, as to seek to bereave him of it; At this speech he was so
confounded, that he was ready to dye with grief, and indeed he lay three weeks
sick upon it, at the end whereof being unable any longer to endure the yiolence
of his desires, it came into his head to crave the same favor of Clarismond,
which he had received from him; Laying before him then the peril of his life,
the imbecilitie of men that forced him to violate the laws of friendship, the
power of that proud divinity, which uses to triumph over those hearts that
go about to resist him, the merit of my beauty, and briefly all that he
thought could serve for his enterprise; he put Clarismond into a strange
perplexity, his love, and the resolution he had taken to marry me, forbad him
to yield unto the unjust request of this friend, nevertheless, choosing rather
to dye than be ungrateful, he concluded to deprive himself both of his life
and happiness together Insomuch, that having promised to give him satisfaction
in the very same manner, as he had received it, he drew this Lover from his
bed, and came a little after to see me, but without so much as speaking a word
of what ^ad past between them, howbeit having observed some extraordinary
sadness in his countenance, and not knowing any just occasion he could have
for it, I began to suspect this practice, in regard whereof I purposed not to
admit of Clarismond any more, but upon safe terms, nevertheless making no
show of it, I promised to entertain him as I used to do.

Night being come then, I left only the outward door open, shutting those fast
within, and standing close at a window, that looked into the street, first I
heard (...) very (...) ear, because they made (...) I could hear Clarismond
say, farewell dear friend, the (...) happy than I am. Having spoken in this
manner, away he (...) going to ou^ house, who finding the (...) return with far
le^^hope, than he came.

Being marvellously (...) with (...) of this business, I was much incensed
against Clarismond, and (...) to (...) him soundly for his fault, though I was
fully resolved to (...) him, but alas! he gave me no opportunity to do so; for
never appearing again before me, he advertised me by a Letter, that wa^ brough^
me the next day, how through grief and despair he was gone to end his days in
a Desert.

This sad and sudden departure of his derived from the excess of his love to
me, cast me into a dangerous sickness^, which questionless had carried me out
of the world, if my hope with meeting with Clarismond again, had not made me
desire to live, but my love to him restored me within a little after to my
health, when hearing no news of him, careless of mother and friends I forsook
my country, and seven months together traveled from place to place in the
search of him, at the end whereof coming to this Rock, I found my Clarismond
clothed in a long Hermits Gown, who hearing me (...) how I had beg^iled
Martander, was so overcome with joy, as he dyed suddenly in my arms. O! who can
express the sorrow I was in then* Let it suffice that it cast me into a
swound, and how long I continued so, I (...) able to deliver, but at length
being reserved for greater (...)* to my, (...) I (...) my self again, howsoever
(...) my last in this very (...), where ^e so unfortunately expired.

Behold, noble Knight, the cause of my grief (...)* which I earnestly beseech
you, seek not to (...) by a (...) of reason, since I am obstinately bent never
to admit of my (...).

Seeing you are so minded, said (...), we will ^orhear (...) ^ouble you any
further, and (...) of your lamentable case, we will commit you to the
protection of heaven, which we hope yet may in time reduce^ yo^ to a better
(...).

Whereupon descending the hill, and going toward the Seaside, they incountred
with four (...) Knigh^^, the foremost of which, bearing a Salvage in his (...)
unto them. Worthy Knights, necessity (...) you, that you will grant us room in
your (...), until such time, as we may (...) as some h^bitabl^ place; we
landed here (...), wherein to employ our (...), but (...) desolation; and in the
mean^ time two (...) have (...) away the Bark we come in, leaving (...) hence,
unless it be by your assistance.

Noble Sir, answered (...), which you behold there is so (...) for bringing you
with us, (...) if you please. Being gotten (...) to the Prince of (...) at the,
(...) their Helmets (...) Giv^ (...) your hands to kiss, for here is Florisbel
of the star, and Don Sestilian of Spain, your servants, with the redoubted
knight of the Salvage, who did such wonders at the turnament at Constantinople,
and the fair Amazon, his Lady Brandimanda: At these words Rozalmond rising up
in his bed most kindly entertained the Princes of France and Spain, and with no
less honor caressed Grian and Brandimanda. Alcidamant and Trasiclea (at whose
goodly presence those four Warriors were marvellously astonished) together
with Russian renewed their complements, and so they sailed all the rest of the
day with exceeding great content, which was much augmented by the recital that
Alcidamant made of the history of P^^melina and Clarismond. Let us leave them
cutting a speedy way through the waves, whilst we are preparing to declare the
marvels, that were seen at their arrival in Corolandaya.

CHAP. XXXII. The dreadful combat between Rozalmond, and Gorgophon, for the
deliverance of Armazia; The wonders that Alcidamant performed in bringing the
Inc^antment of Griolanis and Adelazia to an end.
CErtain days being sweetly spent in the pleasure, which might well be
expected from the conversation of so many excellent Knights, the Vessel of the
Sun made a stay in one of the ports of Corolanday^, where all those Princes
disimbarking themselves, were very much amazed to see sixteen Salvag^s come out
of the ship, the first eight having each of them a mighty courser in his hand,
and the others, eight staves so strong and stiff, as they seemed to have been
made for some important design; being presented with these horses and lances,
each of them lept into his saddle with many thanks to Alcander for this care of
them, and marching two and two, they took the way that led to Agricant, being
resolved to prove the adventure of the martyrdom of (...) and Adelazia.

After they had ridden then about one hour, they arrived at the Royal Palace,
where Rozalmond had but newly laced on his Helmet, desiring to be the first at
the essay of the adventure, (...) as he heard a woman speaking to the whole
Troop in this manner. Stay, said she, brave Knights, and if you have as much
valor, as your presence does promise, leave not a poor afflicted Damosel in
this prison, combat you altogether that Colossus, which you see there, for her
deliverance, since his extreme forces will not suffer him to be vanquished by
one single man, the gods will recompense your pain^, and I (...) one day
acknowledge this service of yours. At these words; (...) ^^ king round about,
perceived two Ladies of a mavelous beauty, sta^di^^ ^^ the (...) of a little
Tower, toward whom being advanced* so (...) and (...) them of their
deliverance, he presently discerned ou^ of (...) ^o be (...) (...), which so.
So (...) like (...) over his liberty! O wonderful! said he, being no less
transported with fury (...), is it possible that I should find you in this
(...) M(...)? You shall quickly see the outrage that is done you most horribly
revenged; here is the Knight of the Roses, that having served you heretofore
against the redoubted (...), will likewise free you out of the hands of
Gorgoph^^; whereupon turning him to A(...)t. Dear brother, said he, I am now in
the supreme degree of my glory, since I have met with Armaria, dispatch the
Giant that keeps her imprisoned, whilst I go and chastise the insolence of the
Ravisher of my excellent Mistress.

Noble Sir, said Russia^ then, which likewise knew the beautiful Jnfanta of
Clariana his Lady (whom he had disinchanted at Constantinople, when as he gave
an end to the adventure of the Piramides, as has been related in the eight and
thirtieth Chapter of our first part:) Noble Sir, leave me this combat I beseech
you, for I have no less interest in the deliverance of these incomparable
Ladies, than the gallant Prince of Greece, as for your self you cannot want
employment, if you please, in the trial of the adventure. I would always give
more to your merit, answered Alcidamant, go then and render this good office
to your Mistress, whilst I seek to know whether the release of these Lovers be
in my power.

Whereupon casting his eyes on Rozal^^^^, and Gorgophon, who carried with
equal rage were then set forth, he saw them meet like two clouds violently
rushing together in the midst of the air, and pass by one another like
lightning, without so much as being once moved in their saddles by their
Lances, which were broken in a thousand shivers: By this furious encounter
guessing at the exceeding force of Gorgophon, he stayed to observe how they
would entreat one another with their swords, their two first blows very much
amazed him, for their shields were divided in twain, and their blades fell with
such violence upon their Helmets, as they were constrained to bow with their
heads, even to the very arson of their saddles* from whence arising so full of
choler, that it terrified all the people which beheld their combat, Rozalmond
discharged such another terrible blow on Gorgophons head, as it made him see
many more stars then there are in the sky, but he returned him an answer
nothing less cruel and dangerous, for he received so mighty a stroke, that
having loft one of his stirrops, he staggered as if he had been deprived of
judgment; nevertheless shaming to appear any whit inferior to his enemy
before the grea^est Knights of the earth, he quickly resetled himself in his
saddle, and began to charge the Giant very fiercely, who nothing abashed fought
so well, that he showed himself to be one of the best Knights in the world.

The field was strewed all over with pieces of their armor, the blood g^shed
out in many places of their bodies, and so dreadful were their blows, that all
the houses round about resounded therewith. The noise which proceeded from the
combat of these Warriors, and that of Russian of Media, with the other Giant,
being little less cruel, drew a world of people thither from al parts, and
amongst others the three Princesses of Martaria, with their Lovers, who very
much wondering at the fury of this Knight, admired the dexterity of the Grecian
Prince, who mad for that he could not vanquish his enemy took his sword in both
his hands, and let it descend so dangerously on Gorgophon, that it gave him a
great gash on the shield-arm, whereat the Giant was so incensed, that
discharging a full blow on his shoulder with all his might, he entered his
Fauchion two fingers deep into his flesh, and making him lose his bridle and
stirrops so astonished him, that if his horse by carrying him away had not
prevented his enemy from seconding the former with another stroke, doubtless
he had been in great peril of his life.

Alcidamant, who was still looking on this combat, seeing this horrible blow,
and knowing how far Rozalmonds forces extended, admired G^rg^phon more than
before, and was very much afraid that his friend would not come time enough
again to himself, but on a sudden he beheld him resettle him in his seat, and
fly upon the Giant with such fury, as made all the assistants to tremble; and
indeed the blow which he discharged on the crest of his Helmet was so
dangerous, that though it could not cleave it by reason of the Enchantment,
wherewith Di^boli^n had framed it, he overthrew him on the crupper of his
horse, casting such a deal of blood out of his ears and mouth, and his arms
and legs hanging in that manner, as all the world believed he was dead;
nevertheless he was seen a little after to raise up himself with such extreme
rage, for that he was so ill entreated by one man alone, that Rozalmonds
friends were in some fear of him, howbeit our brave Champion no whit dismayed
courageously presenting his face unto him, they renewed the combat with more
horror and cruelty then at first.

In the mean time Russian of Media, who had not so puissant an enemy to
encounter, discharged five or six blows together on him, with such a mighty
force, that he laid him breathless at his feet, and seazing on a key that he
carried about him, he presently opened the door of the Tower, mounted up a
little pair of stayrs, and kneeling down before the Ladies, almost transported
with joy, he said unto them. Beauteous Princesses be pleased to give me your
hands to kiss, in recompense of the beginning, which I have given to your
releasement, and descending with me come and assure the victory to the valiant
Knight of the Roses, that is now fighting for your deliverance. Sir, answered
Armazia, who was not a little contented to hear that her Knight was there; I
may not permit you to kiss my hands, being so exceedingly obliged unto you, as
I am. Command then this fair Jnfanta to do me that favor, replied he, seeing
I have the glory to be her Knight. My Knight, said Agriclea, since when I
beseech you? since I freed you from the Enchantment, whereunto you were reduced
by Fulgosons Aunt, answered he, for then you did me the honor to avow me for
your Knight, and to say that my service should always be agreeable unto you.
Ah my Lord, said Agriclea, pardon my ignorance I pray you, for truly I did not
know you, but I shall be ready to amend this error. Whereupon giving him her
hand, rather as it were to raise him up, then for any other end, she suffered
him to kiss it a thousand times, and so descending all three they presented
themselves before these Warriors, who at the sight of Armazia became so
furious, Gergoph^^ to see her delivered after such hope of enjoying her, and
Rozalmond to continue so long without vanquishing in her presence, and for her
quarrel, that they discharged at one instant two such terrible blows upon one
another, at they were ready to pitch with their noses on the ground;
nevertheless being retained by shame and anger, they redoubled their mortal
strokes, and finding new force in their rage, they hewed one another for four
hours so cruelly, that all men wondered how they could endure so long, for
their arms being all covered over with blood, the end of their lives was every
minute expected.

This while Alcidaman^, being confident that the victory would undoubtedly rest
on the Prince of Greece, whose courage augmented with time and danger, and
desiring not to remain idle, he presented himself before the Palace gate, with
a resolution to prove the adventure of Adelazia, and accordingly seeing his
passage defended by the four Princes, he drew out his rich sword, and warding
himself with his shield, he discharged so rude a blow on Armorand, that if the
fury of his blade had not been arrested by enchantment, he had cleft him down
to the teeth; nevertheless the blow was so violent, as it made him set both
his knees to the ground, but being diverted from further prosecuting his
advantage on him by three dangerous blows received all at once from the
others, he suddenly made head against them, and laid so terribly on Falemonds
Helmet, that he sent him to the earth quite deprived of judgment, as also
Grinaldo, whom with another stroke he overthrew in like manner.

The misfortune of these Knights having marvellously incensed the other two,
they discharged both at once so strongly on his head, as they made him reele
three or four steps backwards, with a million of lights before his eyes, whereat
he was so mad, that gnashing his teeth for anger, he delivered two such blows
successively on Arm^rants and Crisanders Helmerts, as he laid them senseless at
his feet.

In the mean space the fight between the Grecian Prince and Gorgophon, having
lasted above six hour^s, was most terrible, for shame and jealousy equally
anim^ting them, they employed all their skill, and strength to become
victorious; Rozalmond was enraged to meet a man able enough to dispute with him
for his M^stresse, and the honor of a Combat, whereunto all his glory was tied*
and Gorgophon, the most audacious Giant of the earth, bitterly s^orming,
uttered strange blasphemies against his gods, and me^acing the very heavens,
seemed as though he would divide them with his Curtelas, which oftentimes
lighting on Rozalmonds Arms, always carried some piece thereof along with it,
his own being in no better estate, under the sword of his enemy, who being in
the supreamest degree of rage, resolved either to dye or vanquish.

Returning then out of an astonishment wherein he had been reduced by a most
horrible blow of Gorgoph^ns, which had overturned him on the ^^^pper of his
Horse, he parted with such fury, as all the assistants terrified there with,
began to ^^^mble, and displaying all his force, he discharged so unmea^urable a
blow, full on the crest of Gorgophons Helmet, that if he had struck with the
edge, he had divided him to the wast in spite of all Diabolions charms, but
his sword turning in his hand with choler, the flat fell so dangerously on his
head, that thinking he was smitten with a thunderbolt, he fell in a swound to
the earth, making a noise like that of some mighty Tower, which the wind has
hurled out of its place.

At this b^ave stroke, Ar^^^zia marvellously rejoicing, advanced toward her
Knight, who suddenly alighting fell on his knees before her, and said; Madam,
be pleased that this small service may repair the fault, which I have
committed in abandoning you so long. Alas! my dearest Knight, said she with
tears of joy, and grief, to see him so bloody all over, let us not speak, I
pray you, of pardon, for I find my self so happy in meeting you thus, that I
can never remember any misery past; come let us go and visit your wounds, and
know what we are to hope for of your recoverie. Madam, answered Rozalmond, I
feel they are dangerous, but yet not so much as to make you to fear, or keep
me from rejoicing with my friends for the good success of mine enterprise;
whereupon perceiving Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel coming to him, together with
the Princesses of Martaria, to give him thanks for their deliverance out of the
crystal Tower, he went and caressed them withal the kindness that might be,
and so did Armazia, Trasiclea, Brandimanda, and the fair Infanta of Clariana,
who were no less amazed at the excellency of their beauties, than they were
to see them every way so accomplished.

Some time being spent in these salutations and compliments (and Gorgophon
freely suffered to be carried away by certain of his servants to his Ship,
where a little after being fetched out of his swound, he was so mad, for that
he had been vanquished, as they had much ado to keep him from killing of
himself) Rozalmond hearing that Alcidamant was upon proving of the adventure,
he went where he beheld him engaged against the Serpent, and the Monster.

This invincible Warrior seeing himself delivered from four of his first
enemies, and looked upon by so many excellent persons, most courageously
boorded those two creatures, and desiring to display the uttermost of his
forces, he discharged his Sword with such violence upon the Serpents head, that
though it could not pierce the hardness of the scales, yet it made him stoup
to the very ground, presently whereupon being laid at by the Monster, he
dexterously declined the blow of his axe, which fell in vain upon the floor,
The first fury of those horrible beasts being in this sort avoided, Alcidamant
finding that the astonishment wherein the Serpent was, gave him opportunity to
perform something the mean while upon the Monster, he took his sword in both
his hands, and slipping by the danger of a second blow from him, he let it
descend with such strength, on his left arm, which was as big as a tree, that
he cut it sheere from his body.

This lucky stroke animating him to do better, he turned to the Serpent,
thinking to avoid his fury as before, but he was so surprised, and incountred
with such force, as he was laid all along in the dust, where this creature
running on him, labored to seize on his Helmet with his teeth, in which
danger, still retaining his judgment, he ran him up into the belly, that made
him make a mighty skip into the air, by means whereof our Knight had leisure to
arise, but being scarce well upon his legs, he received so great a blow from
the Monster, as he was constrained to set both his knees to the ground, where
shame and danger not suffering him to continue long, he got up again so full of
rage, that casting his shield on his shoulder, he discharged with such fury on
that monstrous creature, as having incountred the handle of his axe, and cut it
in two, his sword fell with that tempest on his head, that it cleft him down to
the wast. O heaven! said Rozalmond, what a dreadful blow was this, and who can
be able to resist the thunder of such a mighty arm? Questionless this Warrior
is the nonparil of the earth, unto whom all the world has reason to give place.

This speech, which Alcidamant heard, having rendered him infinitely courageous,
he let fall an horrible stroke on the Serpent, that came leaping toward him,
and watering the floor with the blood that issued from the wound in his belly;
never thelese, having not so much as made any print on his scales, he was
enforced to step suddenly aside for to give him way, and was ready with his
sword aloft to have smitten him on the tail, when as he perceived a Knight all
on fire, come out of the Hall, who presently gave him so mighty a blow, that
it made him stagger, and in that manner amazed, as he knew not in what world he
was, howbeit instantly recovering his spirits he became so enraged, that
beholding the Serpent raised on his two hinder feet for in fall upon him with
all the weight of his body, he ran him with so mortal a thrust into the flank,
that he overturned him on his back, where leaving him amidst the pangs of
death, and making such horrible cries, as all the place shaked therewith, he
turned to the enchanted Knight, and began to charge him with so much force and
agilitie, as though he had not fought all the day before, nevertheless he
endured strange pain, for the fire which covered the enchanted Knight so
heated him, that he thought he was consumed in his arms; but what will not a
valiant man suffer, that would dye a thousand times, rather then forgo the
honor of a difficult enterprise?

He employed all his force, and delivering his blows with no less strength,
then when as he divided the body of a Giant, he charged the enchanted Knight so
terribly, that he forced him to mount up the stayrs again, which exceedingly
encouraging our Warrior, he followed him, redoubling his horrible blows, till
he came up to the top of the stayres, where his enemy returned him such a
stroke on his Helmet, as made him fall on his knees, ready to tumble down all
the steps, but staying himself on his hands, he arose full of fury, and
discharged his sword with such violence on the Knight, as it extended him on
the earth, where Alcidamant going to unlace his Helmet for to take off his head
in satisfaction of his anger, he perceived that they were empty Arms without a
body in them, at which he would have very much marvelled, had he not been well
acquainted with the power of Magicians, wherefore being very much moved with the
lamentable complaints of Griolanis and Adelazia, he made no further stay, but
burst open the door with the pummell of his sword, and no whit regarding those
horrible flames, which appeared all over the room, he went directly to the two
Lovers, hoping to carry them easily from thence; nevertheless, he was fain to
undertake a new combat, the Serpents which devoured them, flew upon him, and
winding themselves about his legs, they labored to overthrow him to the ground.

This new difficulty, far more troublesome than dangerous, having held him a
good while without knowing how to free himself from these creatures, he let go
his sword, and closing his hand, he knocked them down with his fist; that
done, a phantosme presented it self before him, which borrowing a thousand
figures one after another, labored to affright him; but he that could not be
moved with any danger whatsoever, having cut the ay^e in vain with his sword,
discharged it at length on the shoulder of a furious Bear, that was catching
him by the throat, which being divided in the middle it appeared to be the body
of the sorceresse Maxiana separated in two parts, that no sooner touched the
floor, but a most horrible Earthquake arose, accompanied with thunder and
lightning, and so dreadful a noise, as it seemed the very Palace would have
sunk into the center of the earth.

This noise, earthquake, and confusion, having continued a long time, there
entered into the Court a middle-aged woman, followed by a g^llant Knight, and a
most beautiful Shepherdess, who with the grace of her habit, which was of
white Taff^^a, fastened together in sundry places with sparkling Rubies, was
thought to be one of those Nimphs so adored in the Forests; whereupon, every
one giving way to these three persons, that Woman took a Vial out of her
pocket, and presenting it to the Shepherdess, said aloude; It is you
Miralinda, that must lend the last assistance to this enchantment, you have
heretofore contemned the fire that burned Lind^renna, fear not then the flame
that torments Griolanis, but enter into this room where you will discover a
secret very much importing you, and breaking this Vial on the Armor of the
Knight, who has performed such incredible wonders for to come unto these
unfortunate Lovers, you shall find your self, before you are either lost, or
sought for.

This Shepherdess then, who was no other then Miralinda, that was come thither
with Clarisel, and Urganda the unknown, without whose help this enchantment
would never have been ended, ascending the stayrs, entered courageously into the
room, and finding Alcidamant extended fast by Griolanis and Adelazia, who
seemed to be dead, she brake the Vial upon his Armor, which was no sooner
done, but the air began to clear, the fire to be clean extinct; and the two
Lovers as sound and fair as ever they had been, rose up with the same judgment
they had before their torment, and assuring themselves that their deliverance was
effected by the valor of Alcidamant, and confidence of Miralinda, who had upon
her head the crown of Roses, which Adelazia had gotten in the adventure of the
triumph of love, they kneeled down to thank them for their assistance, but they
not enduring such submission, presently lifted them up, just as Urganda, that
was not yet known, came in with Clarisel, Rozalmond, Armazia, Trasiclea, Gri^^,
Amadis, Palmirenna, and the rest, whom Griolanis and the fair Queen of
Corolandaya, caressed in that manner as is not well able to be delivered,
wherefore I will pass it over in silence, to tell you that an hour being spent
in these compliments, during the which Urganda being known, and very much
honored by all those Lords, she desired them to give her audience, whereupon
she said unto them.

Incomparable Princesses, and you most excellent Knights, ye have indeed great
reason to rejoice at the presence of one another, because the whole world has
nothing so rare and precious as you, howbeit I will add somewhat yet to the
glory of your contentment. Fair Shepherdess, said she to Miralinda (who
rendered all those Princesses amazed at her mavelous beauty) give me that
Crown of Roses, and remember the speech I used to you, at your ascending
hither, that you should find your self, before you were either lost, or fought
for: You believe that you are Daughter to Armedor, a Shepherd of Bellombre,
behold your descent in these three Roses; so presenting the Crown, which she
held in her hand, to all the company, they discerned these words written about
it; Miralinda the the Daughter of the Marquis of Monteclare. O! Is it possible
said Alcidamant, that I should meet with a Sister here of such value* Come and
let us embrace my dearest Miralinda, for I am Alcidamant your brother, and son
to the Marquis of Monteclare. Hereat Miralinda being very much amazed, was not
able to speak a word, but at length better recollecting her self, she fell on
her knees before Alcidamant, and with tears of joy said unto him. My Lord, this
is a lucky day for me, and how much do I owe to my good fortune, which has
made me known to be the sister of so great a Knight! Ah Madam, continues she,
addressing her speech to Vrganda, how wonderful is yourskill, and what can you
wish from me hereafter, which I will not most willingly give to your service?
you have drawn me from out the lees of the people to raise me in this manner,
but I will abase my self whenever you shall please for to testify that I
will never forget so powerful an obligation. It was not I alone, said Vrganda,
that knew the secret of your birth (though no body now could discover it but I
this wicked woman, whose body you see here divided in two pieces, had foretold
it in this Pillar, which is standing yet before the Palace gate, for this is
her Prophecy.

The Prophecy.

WHen the excellent Turtle, and the redoubted Lion, coming forth of one
prison, shall (...) in the flames, the strayed blood shall be known, beauty
shall reassume her former luster, and the punishment of a vielated Law shall
be converted into joy.

The intelligence of these words is it not now clear? are not you that
excellent Turtle? and this famous Knight, is not he that redoubted Lion, both
come from one womb, which the Inchantresse figured by a prison, and out of your
own knowledge do not you see the strayed blood recovered? But let us pass
farther, Beauty shall reassume her former luster. Is not that true by the
deliverance of this brave Knight, and of the sovereign Lady of this Kingdom,
who are now as much in their luster, as ever they were, and the torment they
have suffered, is it not changed into delight? Certainly you now know the
verity of these obscure words, and no man can doubt but you are descended of
that illustrious race, which produces such worthy and generous persons.
Embrace then again this valiant brother of yours, and further call to mind how
when he was knighted by Don Clarisel, a Damosel advertised you from the learned
Merea, that you should not make difficulty to girt on his sword, for you should
one day more esteem of the knowledge of him, then of the possession of an
Empire.

Hereat Alcidamant and Miralinda well remembering all that Vrganda had spoken,
and embracing afresh, their caresses were renewed, Adelazia, Trasiclea,
Palmirenna, Armazia, (...), Archedidella, Brandimanda, and Agriclea gave
Miralinda a thousand kisses with such content to Don Clarisel, that he was even
ravished with joy, to see his Shepherdess so exceedingly honored; Night then
being come, Adelazia having caused her Palace to be adorned with her choysest
furniture, assigned to those excellent Princes the chiefest part of it, and
remained with those beauteous Ladies in her own ordinary lodgings.

CHAP. XXXIII. The brave Turnament that is held at the marriage of Rozalmond,
Alcidamant, and those other Princes of Greece.
VRganda having closed up Rozalmonds wounds in a night, all those Princes,
which infinitely desired the accomplishment of their happiness, assembled
together, and resolved to take one and the same day for the consummation of
their content, but having no less care of their Ladies salvation, then of
their own satisfaction, they concluded in representing their pains unto them to
set before their eyes the vanity of their Idols in the greatness of that
Almighty God, who vouchsafed to shed his most precious blood, for to restore us
unto the way of grace, from which we were strayed by the revolt of our first
parents: Entering then all with this design into the room where the Princesses
were, they persuaded them to go and walk into the Gardens, and there separating
themselves into several walks, and each one taking his Mistress by the arm,
spoke so passionately and effectually for himself, as he easily prevayled with
her, to resolve upon the third day following, for the celebration of their
Nuptials.

This first point being determined according to their desires, they began to
talk unto them of the excellency of the Christian Religion, of the mystery of
the Trinity, of the Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection of the Son of God,
of the mission of the Holy Ghost, of the Institution of the Sacraments, and
showing them the Heavens and the Sun, they drew them insensibly to the
knowledge of the Creator of them, which could not be but far more perfect and
excellent, in so much that being assisted with the love they bore them, they
were soon induced to be baptized, and accordingly the same day Adelazia sent
for three Christian Hermits, which she had suffered to live in her Kingdom, by
whom being yet better instructed in the chiefest Articles of the faith, the
Temple of those Idols, she had formerly adored, was cleansed of a number of
several Images, whereof three or four being beaten to pieces by our Knights,
confirmed them further in the belief that they were of no power.

Time and desire then pressing our Lovers, and making them hasten every thing.
These Princes received the first Character of Christians, Armazia conducted by
Alcidamant, who was her Godfather, Trasiclea by Rozalmond, Palmirenna by
Florisbel, Adelazia by Amaais, Amplamira by Clarismond, Brandimanda by
Floridan, Archesidella by Sestilian, and the fair Agriclea by Griolanis, which
being performed they returned to the Palace, leaving those good fathers in the
Church for to instruct the principal persons of Corolandaya, who after the
example of their Sovereign cheerfully embraced this new Law, believing by what
was showed them, that it was much better than that which they had so long a
time professed.

Mean while our Lovers, thinking of nothing but the day, which was to place
them in the supreme degree of their glory, prepared most magnificent apparel,
and especially the Ladies, who desiring to make a demonstration of all their
beauties, omitted naught that could add any thing to grace themselves withal.

Nothing was heard but Violms, Haubois, consorts of Instruments, and voices,
all the shops of the City were shut up, the people made bonfires, and
preparations for Masks, Plays, and Feasting; from all parts of the Kingdom
arrived Knights and Ladies, that came to celebrate the deliverance and nuptials
of their Queen: Briefly, all things were disposed to delight, and the third day
seemed no less tedious to the people, then to those valiant Princes, who at
length beholding it appear thorough their windows, were incontinently attyred
most richly, and so entered all into the presence, whither those Princesses
repaired not long after like so many Goddesses.

Many sweet and amorous discourses passing between them, Rozalmond in a suit
and cloak of blew velvet, embroydered with gold and pearl, placed himself on
the right hand of Armazia, whose Gown was of the same color, and Florisbel on
the left: The brave Alcidamant followed him in a dublet of white satin, his
hose and cloak of crimson velvet, enriched with an embroyderie of gold, pearl,
and stones, being on the right side of the beautiful Trasiclea, attyred in the
same colors, whom Don Sestilian held by the left hand: Amadis was the third
with his fairest Palmitenna, and the Marquis of Beltamir, having his cloak and
hose of black velvet, powdered over with silver oes, amongst the which a number
of sparkling diamonds being aptly placed, gave a mavelous luster: Clarisel of
Gunidaya was the next in a dublet, hose, and cloak of green satin wrought al
over with gold and silver, having the incomparable Miralinda, betwixt him and
the Count of Pandelia, in a Gown of white satin, cut upon carnation taffea,
and all set with great diamonds. After him went Floridan with his Amplamira,
and the gentle Marquis of Cardana, apparelled both in purple satin most richly
embroydered: Griolanis and the most beauteous Adelazia followed them,
accompanied with the King of Bronzartes, near kinsman to the Queen, so set with
stones, as every one was amazed at the riches of their clothes: Then marched
Lucibel, and the fair Infanta of Martaria, Grian and Brandimanda; Russian, and
the delicate Agriclea, assisted by the chiefest Princes of the Kingdom, and so
sumptuously apparelled, as they had no cause to envy their companions.

This excellent troop at length arrived at the Church, where the Hermits having
sung Mass, they were married together with all the ceremonies requisite in
such cases: That done they returned to the Palace, and there dinner being
prepared with all the state and magnificence that might be, they sat down
attable in the same order as they went to Church.

Having been entertained then with all the most exquisite and choysest meats,
that water, land, or air could yield, they resolved to make a turnament, wherein
a thousand selected Knigts should be divided into two bands, one of them to be
led by ^^zalmond, that was to be seconded by Amadis, Clarisel, Floridan,
Luci^el, Sestilian, Florisbel, and Russian; and the other by Alcidament, who
was to be assisted by Grian, Grielamis, Trasiclea, Brandimanda, Armorand,
Grinaldo, Crisander, and Falemond, who being disinchanted by the valor of
Alcidamant, would by no means depart before the solemnization of the nuptials
of these Lords.

Now dinner being done, and a thousand Knights ready within the Barriers, the
Princes went and armed themselves, and a little after appeared in the place
like so many gods of Battle: The Marquis of Beltamir, and the Admiral of
Corolandaya being placed, as the Judges in their scaffolds, and the trumpets
sounding from all parts, those two troops, wherein the glory of all the
Knighthood in the world was assembled, began to set forth, and those two
invincible Champions, Alcidamant, and Rozalmond, charging their Lances one
against another, incountred with such fury, that the earth even trembled under
their horses feet, their staves were broken into a thousand shivers, and yet
they not so much as moved in their saddles, passed along like two Rocks
standing firm against the violence of an enraged flood; Amadis and Grians
course was performed with as much grace and force; Griolanis and Clarisel ran
against each other with like fortune; equal was the honor between Trasiclea,
and Floridan, betwixt Brandimanda and Lucibel; but Grinaldo was unhorsed by the
gentle Russian of Media; Armorand and Sestilian were both overthrown to the
earth, so was Crisander by the valiant Florisbel, and Falemond dismounted him
against whom he addressed his Lance; In the meantime the two troops being
incountred, above two hundred Knights were laid on the ground, who withdrawing
aside for fear of being trampled under the horses feet, there began almost
pleasant bickering: Alcidamant and Rozalmond put all in confusion, their swords
fell like thunderbolts whersoever they lighted; Amadis overturned all that he
met withal, Grian left not a Knight in his saddle; Clarisel flew about like
lightning, Griolanis seemed a fury, Floridan, Lucibel, Russian, and Florisbel
did wonders as they went, Trasiclea, Brandimanda, Armorand, and Grinaldo, who
were horsed again, made no less an havoc; briefly, the victory hung equally
balanced every where, and upon the sole force of the Chieftains depended the
content of the turnament.

Rozalmond jealous of Alcidamants glory, Amadis of Grians, and Clarisel envying
the honor which Griolanis acquired, went and assailed them all at one time,
and began one of the bravest combats that ever were seen amongst six Knights,
Rozalmonds, and Alcidamants blows were tempests, those of Amadis and Grian had
little less fury; and when one delivered a terrible stroke, he was sure to be
presently paid again in the same money; now was Alcidamant overturned on the
crupper of his horse, by and by Rozalmond was stricken down to the pummell of
the saddle; Amadus and Grian knocked their chins against their breasts;
Griolanis and Clarisel lost their stirrops; Trasiclea, Brandimanda, and the
Pagan Princes valiantly sustained the fury of Russian, and his companions; and
the Knights animated by the example of their Leaders, maintained themselves
still upon equal terms, in conclusion this turnament wherein no blood was
drawn, yielded a most delightful spectacle: Alcidamant and Rozalmond wearied
with one another horrible blows, Amadis, and Grian amazed at each others
strength, Clarisel, and Griolanis vexed for that neither of them could prevayl,
separated themselves all at one instant, and began to fly in again amidst the
troops, when as they saw thirteen most dreadful Giants appear, mounted on such
great Horses, as their heads seemed to touch the very clouds.

The sight of these Collosses possessing them with a new resolution, the Troops
rallyed together, whilst those eleven courageous Princes, accompanied with
Trasiclea and Brandimanda, got suddenly sharp Lances, and placed themselves
most opposite to those thirteen Giants, with whose desormitie the Ladies had
been very much troubled, had not Urganda laughing, made them confident of the
valor of their Knights.

These Monsters then approaching, with each of them a great Mast in his hand,
all those Princes set spurs to their Horses, and dislodging with fury, went to
encounter them in the midst of the race, with good hope to be revenged of the
interruption they had brought to their sports; but their staves being broken as
slightly, as if they had been Reeds, they were marvellously astonished to
behold those horrible Giants, changed in an instant into thirteen little
Dwarfs, which marched before a Chariot, wherein Rozalmond knew Cassandra, with
the most beautiful Penamonda of Greece, his Sister. O my dearest friend I said
he addressing his speech to Cassandra, how much am I joyed with the sight of
you, but how comes it that you are thus accompanied with my sister? My Lord,
answered she, I do not bring her without good cause, she comes to congratulate
with you, for your good fortune, and to go along with you about a sevennight
hence in an adventure of very great importance. Both you, and she, are most
heartily welcome, replied Rozalmond, and I am very glad that she is here to
keep my Armazia company.

Hereupon the Princes alighting from their horses, went and saluted the young
Princess, who ravished them all with the wonder of her beauty, which no less
amazed the Ladies, that came presently down to her, than she was carried with
admiration at the sight of so many graces as were assembled in them.

A good while being spent then in complements, these Lords and Ladies were
ready to ascend the Palace, leaving the ending of the turnament to another
time, when as they descryed two hundred Knights richly armed, following a
triumphant Chariot, wherein sat an old man on a golden Throne, with an
Imperial Crown on his head, and a young Lady at his feet: This so stately an
equipage drawing every one narrowly to observe them, Palmirenna perceived that
it was the Emperor her Father, and her cousin Agiliana, the King of Arbales
Daughter, whereat both she, with Amplamira, and the French Princes wife were so
troubled, that they were ready to sink down in the place, whereas contrarily
Rozalmond, who knew his mind well, went straightway with Griolanis unto him,
and bid him very welcome to that Court; The Emperor presently knowing that
valiant Prince, and understanding that Griolanis was King of Corolandaya,
instantly descended from his Chario^, and exceedingly caressing them, demanded
whether these Tryumphs were not for the celebration of the Nuptials of
Palmirenna, and her Sisters. Great Monarch, answered Rozalmond, they are indeed
this day married, and so is also the Daughter of the mighty Emperor of
Gardaci^, whom it has pleased heaven to bestow on me, as likewise that of the
Sovereign Lord of Tramazond to this invincible Warrior, showing Alcidamant
unto him, together, with the Queen of this Country, the Princess of Clariana,
and the fair Brandimanda, Lady of the Amazons. Now verily, said the Emperor, I
praise my good fortune for conducting me hither so opportunly for to have a
share in this your joy and solemnity; But where are my Children, that they do
not appear before me? Sir, answered Roz^lmond, the fear of your displeasure,
for the fault they have committed against the authority of a Father and a
Sovereign, no doubt keeps them away, but assuring my self that you have freely
pardoned them, I will present them straightway unto your Majesty, whereupon
Amadis holding Palmirenna by the hand, Floridan Amplamira, and Lucibel
Archesidella, they fell on their knees before the Emperor, so ashamed, as they
durst not look him in the face, but he having very much caressed them, and
testified that these Princes alliance did infinitely content him, they rose up
for to entertain Agiliana, whilst the Emperor, admiring the excellent beauty
of the Ladies, went and saluted them with all the courtesy that might be.

These compliments done, they returned all to the Palace, where the Emperor
being very honorably lodged, left his Neipce Agiliana in the hands of
Palmirenna, or to say better of Don Sestilian of Spain, who having never made
trial of the power of love subjected his freedom to the merits of this
beautiful Infanta, remaining her Knight, by the consent of Palmirenna. Supper
time come, and the Tables sumptuously covered, all the Lovers were set as at
dinner, where they began to discourse with the Emperor, of all that had past
the day before, who taking great delight in the sight of this brave company,
beheld them one after another, and fixing on Amadis, he could not choose but
tell what passion he had been in for him, when he thought him a Wench, which
made them all to laugh, especially Palmirenna, that then called to mind, the
pleasure she enjoyed at that time, under the disguise of Amadis his sex, but
Supper lasting too long for these Lovers, they rose and went to Dancing, the
better to entertain the Emperor, who knowing the impatience of their desires,
caused them to be lighted severally to their chambers, where we will leave them
gathering the fruit of their amorous pains, with such delight, as may be better
imagined, than expressed.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The mavelous adventure that happened in the Court of
Corolandaya, and the strange end thereof.
THe night having been too short for the desires of these Lovers, especially of
Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and Clarisel, who till then had never tasted the
pleasure of their Ladies chaste embraces, they all met together in the Hall, and
for diverse days together continued their joy with such contentment, as Fortune
seemed unable to cross them, but that inconstant Goddess, which always mixes
bitter with the sweet, changed the face of all their delight, and so overthrew
the hope of this Court, that without the particular providence of heaven, all
the glory of it had been lost in a moment.

One day as all this princely company were discoursing together, there entered
into the Hall a young Gentlewoman with her eyes full of tears, and of so sad a
countenance, as moved all that were present to pity, in one hand she had a
very rich sword, and her left arm sustained one of the goodliest Shields that
ever was seen: As Soon as she was advanced to the midst of the Hall, she for a
good while observed all those Lords and Princesses, ravished as it were with
the sight of so rare an object, and finding that there was a general silence
over all, in expectation of that which she would say, she demanded for
Griolanis, and the beauteous Queen his Wife. Here we are said they, making
toward her, Gentlewoman, will you have anything with us?

Great King, answered she, falling on her knees before him, it is not without
reason that every one talks of you, as of the prime Knight of the world, and
that the beauty of this incomparable Queen, whom the gods have given to your
merit, is preferred before all other on the earth, for now I see more than
heretofore I could believe; I am come hither to obtain one boon of you, and of
this fair Princess, refuse me not, I beseech you, nor let me be the only
afflicted woman living that fails of succor from you. Gentlewoman, answered
Griolanis, if I am able to do any thing for you, you may speak freely, for I
will most willingly grant whatsoever you shall desire of me, and so I think
will the queen my Wife. Yes verily, said Adelazia, I will promise her any thing
she will ask.

I could expect no less, replied she, wherefore Sir, be pleased to Arm your self
presently, but you shall use no other Sword nor shield, then these most
excellent ones which I have brought of purpose for you, and come both of you
along with me, you to combat a Giant that has ravished me, and she to deliver
a servant of mine detained in the charms of an old Sorceresse, which torments
him for disdaining her affections. It is no small displeasure, said Griolanis,
to leave such good company, but since we are obliged by promise, we will follow
you instantly, whereupon causing his Arms to be brought him, he took leave of
all those Princes, who were exceedingly grieved at their so sudden departure,
and finding in the Palace-yard the Gentlewomans coach with six lusty Horses,
he and his Wife entered into it, and were carried away with such speed, as they
were instantly out of sight.

The whole Court being very much troubled with this adventure, every one spoke
diversely of it, and some of the Knights were already of opinion to follow after
them, when as Urganda, and Cassandra, coming from making their Conjurations
cried out; To Arms, Knights, to arms, and suffer not Griolanis, and his Wife to
be so wretchedly cast away, they are betrayed by Lestrigond, Neipce to that
Maxiana, which the other day was cut in pieces, and if they be not rescued
before night, you shall never see them more.

At these words the Hall was presently empty, the Knights ran all about through
the Palace, and the astonishment was every where so great, that no body took
care of comforting the Ladies, which were mightily afflicted, whilst all the
Princes were arming themselves, and their Squirs were making ready their
horses, whilst the people were running to the Church to pray unto the new god,
whom they adored, for the safety of their Sovereigns.

Griolanis and his Wife being swiftly carried away, arrived at a Forest some
three leagues from the City, where the Knight alighting out of the Coach at
the sight of two dreadful Giants, drew out the Damsels rich Sword, and with
greatfury discharged it upon one of them with an expectation to see him lie at
his feet, but it broke into an hundred pieces as that very first blow, nothing
remained in his hand but the bare hilt, whereat he was very much amazed, but far
more when as he beheld his Shield fall all to fitters, as it had been glass,
with the stroke of the other Giant; for all this danger yet being no way
dismayed, albeit he thought he was betrayed, he caught up a great arm of a Tree
to defend himself, but those two horrible Collossos delivering two terrible
blows both at one instant on his Helmet, laid him all along on the earth, where
with cords, which they had ready for the purpose, they bound him hand and foot,
and so carrying him to the Coach, where Adelazia was, who tearing her hair
filled the air with her shrieks, they instantly galloped away as fast as they
could drive.

In the mean time Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and Grian, being sooner mounted then
the rest, rode away with such speed, as in less than an hour they arrived at
the Forest, where unluckily taking a wrong way, they rode up and down seeking
in vain for Griolanis, and his Queen, who at length met with a big Knight,
bearing two Bears in his shield, which moved with the cries of the Lady, first
of all cut asunder the harness of the horses that drew so rich a prey, and then
sheathing up his Sword, he charged his Lance so furiously against the Giants,
whom he saw making toward him, that he ran one of them through the shield, and
arm, overthrowing him to the ground, but being scarce able to support the
violence of both their incounters upon him at once, he had much ado to keep
himself in his saddle, nevertheless he re-settled himself well again, by that
time the other Giant had finished his course.

This fortunate beginning possessing Griolanis with some hope, he would fain
have got out of the Coach to have succored the Knight, in regard he beheld the
ove^thrown Giant, and the other set both upon him together, but finding no
means to unbind himself, Adelazia being also in the same case, he was ready to
burst with grief, whilst the combat grew very cruel and dangerous: The Knight
of the Bears, who had not been used to lose blood, feeling a great gash on his
left arm, discharged his sword with such fury upon him that seemed to be most
eager in pursuing him, as he cut away a good piece of his Helmet, together with
one of his ears, the point lighting upon his shoulder with that force, as it
overturned him on the crupper of his horse, whereat the other mightily incensed
struck the Knights shield so rudely against his head, that he made him knock
his chin against his breast.

This terrible blow rather animating, than any way discouraging the Knight of
the Bears, he took his sword in both his hands, and let it descend with such
fury upon his shoulder that struck him last, as he opened him to the very
waste, overthrowing him to the earth with a noise like of that of a Pyne, which
the violence of the winds has torn up by the roots, wherewith the remaining
Giant, being more en^aged then afraid, thundered in such sort on the Knights
Helmet, as made him knock his chin against the pommell of his saddle, quite
deprived of sense. O! said Grialanis, (as much vexed with this, as he was glad
at the former blow) that I should be thus unable to revenge my self on this
Giant, who has unfortunately reduced this brave Knight to such an estate, as
he will not be able to deliver us; whereupon striving with all his might, but
in vain, to break his cords in sunder, he descryed a gallant Knight come
gallopping to them, whom by the devise of his shield, he knew to be the
valorous Princess of Tramazond, which so assured him of their liberty, as he
shouted for joy, with the noise whereof the knight of the bears coming out of
his trance resetled himself more furious than a Bell bai^ed with a company of
dogs, and fearing lest the Knight that he saw approaching, should bereave him
of the honor of the combat, he turned him to the Giant which pursued him, and
discharged so cruel a stroke on his arm, as he sent it together with his
Curtelas to the earth, and giving him no leisure to bethink himself, he made a
thrust with such force at his belly, as it ran him quite through and through,
chasing his soul to hell, there to receive the punishment of his wicked life.

In the mean while the fairest Trasiclea arrived, who having with wonder
observed the valor of this invincible Warrior, to her altogether unknown, and
beholding Lestrigond save her self by flight, she unlooses the two Lovers,
which presently went to the Knight of the Bears, and gave him all possible
thanks for their deliverance. I have not done any thing, said he, but what a
good Knight is bound courageously to undertake for the succor of the
afflicted; wherefore there is no thanks due unto me for it, but if you think
yourselves any way obliged unto me, acknowledge it by telling me who you are.
Noble Sir, answered Griolanis, that was as much taken with the beauty of his
face, as with the force of his arm, I am called Griolanis, and this fair Lady
is the Queen of Corolandaya, wherein you now are, both of us this day most
wretchedly betrayed, and no question had served for the satisfaction of our
enemies malice, without the assistance of your valor. Is the enchantment then,
replied the Knight, wherein you were retained brought to an end? Truly I am
very sorry for it, not in that you are freed from the torment you suffered, but
in regard I arrived not time enough, to try whether the honor of that
adventure, for which I have made a long Journey hither, would have lighted on
me.

Now who is that fortunate Knight, which has acquired such glory? The Husband
of this excellent Princess, answered Griolanis (poynting to Trasiclea, whose
exquisite beauty the stranger much admired) named the knight of the burning
Rock, that formerly bore three palms on his shield. Verily, said the strange
Knight, I do not marvel at it now; for that brave Warrior, being
incomparably the best Knight I have known, it was likely that no other could be
able to carry it from him. Ah Madam, continued he, kissing Trasicleas hands,
how happy are you in the possession of so renowned a Knight. It is the greatest
bliss I have in the world, answered she, but Sir, I could wish it were
accompanied with the knowledge of you, for the brave act, which you lately
performed, obliges so many of us together, as I cannot be without this
curiosity. Madam, answered he, as it is my extreme good fortune, that you
desire to know me, so I must humbly beseech you for some reasons to excuse me,
if I do not obey you herein for the present.

Trasiclea perceiving that he desired to conceal himself, importuned him no
farther, and causing Griolanis and Adelazia to mount upon one of the Giants
horses, they all rode on toward Agricant, and on the way they met with
Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and Grian, who beholding Griolanis and his wife safe
from all danger, went and embraced them, with such demonstration of joy and
affection, as if they had not seen them of a long time before, and desiring to
be informed of their deliverance, they showed them the valiant Knight of the
Bears, to whom Rozalmond addressing himself, said. Noble Sir, shall we not
have the honor to know you? That you shall, answered the Knight, for being
altogether your servant, I may by no means conceal my self from you;
whereupon suddenly alighting, and lifting up the vizier of his Helmet, he
discovered himself to be Persides, brother to Floridan of Persia, whereat
Rozalmond was so exceeding glad, that he held him a great while embraced in his
arms, and then left him to the entertainment of the rest, who after many
compliments, having related unto him all that had past in Corolandaya, they all
got to horse, and rode to the City, where after the return of all those which
were gone in the quest of Griolanis, there was such joy for that so dangerous
an affair had (beyond all hope and expectation) so prosperous a conclusion,
that nothing was to be seen but bonfires, tryumphs, and feastings.

CHAP. XXXV. All the Princes depart out of Corolandaya, some to go to the
Castle of Treasure, and the rest to return into Martaria.
THE arrival of the gentle Persides of Greece, and the happy deliverance of
Griolanis and Adelazia, filling all the Court of Corolandaya with joy, the
Emperor of Martaria, persuaded to the embracing of the Christian religion,
resolved to be baptized, and to make chois of those two Lamps of war,
Alcidamant, and Rozalmond, for his Godfathers, which was performed with all the
state and magnificence, that so short a time would afford: And such were the
delights and pleasures of this Court, as it seemed to be an earthly Paradise,
but who knows not that there is not any content of long continuance in this
world? for fortune interposing her envy, Brandlmanda falls extremely sick,
whereat every one very much grieving, begins to fear some greater misfortune,
which accordingly was not long in coming.

Vrganda, seeing them one day all assembled in the hall, caused silence to be
made, and then spoke thus unto them. Brave Princes, if you esteemed more of
delight then glory, I should not now tell you that it is time for you to betake
you to your arms, first for the honor of that great God, whom we adore, and
then for the conservation of those Empires, which are under the obedience of
your Parents; The care that I have always had to maintayn them in greatness,
having made me the last night to consider the aspect of the Stars, and the
motions of the Moon, I discovered some presages of a mighty misfortune toward,
and all the signs which I observed were so many thunderbolts, ready to fall on
Christondome, whereupon turning over my books for to come to a more particular
knowledge of the mischief, that so I might prepare a remedy for it, I found
that the storm is raised by the instigation of Idalcan, Emperor of Melly, who
being infinitely displeased, for that he was vanquished by Silvan, at such time
as Fulgoran and Prigmaleon covered the fields of Greece with an innumerable
multitude of soldiers, stirs up all Paganism, together with Falanzar, great
Emperor and Caliph of Siconia, his near kinsman, in revenge of that affront,
taking a slight occasion in the first place, to ruin the Empire of Ethiopia,
(whereby he will commence his conquests) upon the alliance which Prigmaleon,
who possesses it, has made with the Princes of Greece, changing his Religion
for to have Polixena, the daughter of Don Florisel of Niquea.

The Posts run up and down, and their league is like to be so great, that most
of the Princes of Paganism, and of the bravest Knights that worship Idols, are
shortly to assemble, for to bring an incredible number of people into the
field, in which regard I have resolved to dispatch away Cassandra, presently to
advertise Don Florisel thereof, to the end that drawing all the Christian
Princes to his party, he may labor to repel the tempest, which is to fall on
Ethiopia; I know that the loss will be great on both sides, but if I be not
much deceived, these Infidels shall not get out of so dangerous an enterprise,
in any better sort then they have done at other times, for

The Prophecy.

THe Lions, that diverse ages have been shut up for their own good, being free
from the chains which so long a time has detayned them, shall then come
forthroaring so dreadfully, that the Crows, unable to make use of their wings,
shall be torn in pieces by the claws of these resuscitated beasts.

In consideration whereof it is most necessary, that fix of you dissoldge to
morrow, to give an end to the enchantment of the Castle of Treasure, situated
in the dangerous Forests of the great Kingdom of Martan, near adjoining to the
Empire of Mexico, a most difficult adventure, but upon the achievement whereof
assuredly depends the happiness or ruin of Christendom. You shall be the
first, said she to Rozalmond, that shall be engaged herein, as having most
in^erest in the business, you shall be accompanied with Am^dis, with Clarisol,
with Alcidamant, with Grian (who shall not defer this voyage for his wives
sickness; the care of whose recovery I will take upon me) and with the brave
King of Corolandaya. You shall carry all these fair Princesses your wives along
with you, who will stand you in no little stand, and because the vali^nt Knight
of the Salvages wives keeps her bed, in her place we will send Penamonda of
Greece, of whom I hope he will have no less regard, then of his own life.

Madam, answered Rozalmond, if we did not know that the proudest buildings are
soonest stricken with lightning, and that fortune makes greatness the object
of her tyranny, we should wonder to see such flourishing Empires, as are now
under the protection of a Cross, subject to the menaces of a ruin, but being
well assured of the inconstancy of the things of this world, and that God will
chastise his people that take no care to serve him, weverily believe that the
rage of these infidels might soon overthrow our glory, if we should not be
assisted from heaven, and with your skill; wherefore we will most readily
prepare our selves for the Enterprise which you have propounded, since it is of
that importance you speak of, and not staying till to morrow we will dislodge
instantly if you please. It will suffice that you depart at the time I have
appointed, replied Vrganda, so that I would have you take order for your
affairs, whilst I turn over my books, and see whether I may be permitted to
succor you in any sort.

Going then from the hall to her Chamber, she left the company astonished at
such unwelcome news, but the greatness of these Champions courages not
permitting them to fear any danger whatsoever, they turned them to the Emperor
of Martaria, who desiring to appear a Christian, and to show the Princes of
Greece what esteem he made of their alliance, told them that he was resolved to
return into Martaria, as soon as ever they were gone, and raise fifty thousand
horse, for to pass into Ethiopia, under the conduct of Persides, Lucibel, and
Sestilian, who was very glad of this occasion, that he might not be so soon
separated from the beautiful Agiliana, his Mistress, who acknowledging the
merits of this young Prince loved him very dearly.

This zeal of the Emperor obliging the Grecian Princes, they rendered him a
thousand thanks, and protested he should never find them unmindful of so great
a favor. On the other side Griolanis, seeing that he was suddenly to depart,
gave out Commissions to leavy twenty thousand foot, under the leading of the
gentle Russian of Media, and of the Marquis of Beltamir, Brandimanda being
resolved to join twenty thousand Amazon horse unto them, which she sent to have
raised in her dominions, attending her recovery in Corolandaya.

Whilst our six Warriors were preparing themselves, Cassandra flew away in a
Chariot, which was never wanting to her designs, and all these Princes began to
feel the displeasure of so sudden a separation; Agriclea sighed for the
departure of Armazia, the Jnfantaes of Martaria, for that of their sister the
fairest Palmirenna, and the mirth of the Court was suddenly converted into
tears.

The next morning then, Vrganda assembled all these great Knights in the hall,
whither she caused six complete armours to be brought, all of them so rich and
strong, as they amazed every one, and presenting them to the six Knights, which
were engaged for the Enterprise of the Castle of Treasure, they presently
quitted their own arms, and put on them, and as they were about to take their
leave of the Emperor, a little Dwarf entered in, followed by a very handsome
Squire, who beholding all these Princes without their Helmets, went and fell at
the feet of Alcidamant with tears of joy in his eyes. O my Lord! said he unto
him, how haypy am I, that have found you out thus, when least I hoped for it,
do not refuse to own me, I beseech you, but grant me the honor, as formerly I
have been, to continue still to be your servant. That thou shall, my dear
Arnides, answered Alcidamant, for I will not turn thee away now, as I did whenI
was anHermit, but how did thou know that I was here? My Lord, replied he,
when you commanded me to leave you to the liberty of your sad thoughts, and
return into France, I could not endure to quit you so, wherefore I retired to a
Village some three miles off, from whence I went once a-week to your Hermitage,
but because I would not displease you with the sight of me, I came into your
Grot at such times, as I knew you were making your accustomed complaints abroad
under the trees, and judging by the continuance of the Lamps burning; that you
were still alive, I stole away again softly, by which means at length finding
you departed, I betook me to travel up and down, hoping that one day I should
meet with you; and hearing of the wonders which have happened in this Court of
late, by good fortune I came hither. I commend thy affection as much, as I am
well pleased to see thee, said Alcidamant, thou art come very seasonably,
wherefore prepare to be gone with me instantly.

This short discourse ended, the Dwarf approached to Amadis, and said unto him;
My Lord, do not you know me? No verily, said Amadis, for I do not remember that
ever I saw thee before. Why thus it is, answered he, to do service unto such
as you are; can you call to mind the Grot in Martaria, whither I led you, when
you had defeated the Monster of the mountain of Bears? Ah! my little Bastinel,
said Amadis unto him, I must now confess my fault, thou art he indeed that
healedst me in a night. It is true, answered the Dwarf, that I am he who cured
your wounds in less time then you speak of, but you never think of the
recompense which you promised then to give me. Ask what thou will, said Amadis,
and I will grant it thee. Why then, said Bastinel, I desire nothing but the
favor, to be either yours, or the fair Princess of Martaria your Wives
Squire. Verily, said Palmirenna, that for all her sorrow, to part with her
Father and Sister, could not choose but laugh, I will entertain thee most
willingly, and me thinks it were better for thee to be with me, then my Lord
Amadis, for so thou shall be sure to lead a quieter and pleasanter life. Be it
so then, said Bastinel, but, Madam, it shall be upon condition that if I fall
in love with any of your fair Maids, you shall not be offended with it.

Hereat every one fell a laughing, especially Mascarin, Miralinda's little
Lover, that pressing through all the company, fell to caressing of Bastinel, and
had much increased the mirth, if the sage Urganda had not urged the departure
of these Knights, who addressed themselves to the Emperor for to receive his
commandments. He having embraced them, left them to take their farewell of the
rest, which was not done without many tears shed by these Princesses, that were
to accompany them, howbeit considering that this separation was but for a
further good, they went and seated themselves in a magnificent Chariot, which
with eight excellent Horses Adelazia had prepared, and attended by these
Princes mounted upon their Steeds, took their journey toward the great
Kingdom of Martan. Two hours after, the Emperor imbarqued himself, with his
two Sons-in-law, Persides and Lucibel, for to return into Martaria. Let us
leave them traversing the Land and Seas, to speak a little of the Pagans
resolution, who assembled with a design, to abate the greatness of the
Christians, and range tham to the adoration of their Idols.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Emperor Falanzar, Caliph of Siconia, solicited by Idalcan,
Emperor of Melly, assembles all Paganism; the resolution they take to make
war upon the Princes of Grease, with the general muster of their Army.
MEn that are generous, have nothing so tender as their honor, which they
cannot endure should be any way touched without some great resentment thereof:
Idalcan Emperor of Melly calling to mind the slaughter of the Kings, and of a
flourishing Army, which he had conducted to Constantinople for the succor of
Prigmaleon, and being no less grieved for having been vanquished in his own
particular, by Silvan, the son of Don Silves de la Silva (as has been related
in the five and thirtieth Chapter of our first part) he resolved once more to
employ all his Friends, and to Arm all the world, rather than want the revenge
of so outrageous an affront. To this effect he dispatched away Courriers to
diverse parts, as soon as he was arrived in his Empire, desiring all the Kings
and Princes adjoining to his Country, to repair unto Falanzar, great Emperor,
and Caliph of Siconia, his near kinsman, for to deliberate of certain affairs,
much importing the glory of Paganism.

These dispatches made, he commanded all his Captains to come before him, unto
whom he delivered commissions for the raising and arming of threescore thousand
men, and departing instantly thereupon, he went into Siconia, where his rage
furnishing him with reasons able to persuade very much, he so incensed Falanzar
against the Christians, that he resolved to set up his rest on this quarrel,
and to revenge his Kinsman at the cost of all the Pagans.

Bethinking him then of those which might best serve his enterprise, he sent
away messengers to the furious King of Grifalara, to Brufaldar, King of
Gedrosia; and to the valourous Artogant, Sultan of Francapa; to Marmaran, Sophy
of Bultera; to Brizardan, Sultan of Aratifia; to the grand Salvage; to the King
of Russia; to Gronfalin of Moreda, King of Facea; to Gorgophon, the redoubted
Colonel of the Giants; to Marcelian, Emperor of Medra; to the proud Caliph of
Francapia Antomedon; to Fierastron, King of Balivan; to Asturion, the strong
Sultan of Brutacon; to Furcamond, King of Martan; to Moranteon, Sultan of
Circassia, whom afterward he reconciled to Gorgophon about the carrying away
of Armazia; to the King of Cabilla; to Palamedes, King of Cassandria; and
briefly to all the Princes from whom he could hope for any assistance, in such
sort, that at the end of two months, there were in person at his Court,
together with the Kings of Mauritania, of Tremizen, of Zamphara, of Zambar, of
Cartagena, of Aganezes, of Angali, of Numidia, of Bisaura, of Thunes, of
Teneri, of Miramolin; of the Isle of Till, of the Tragonites, of Zanfara, of
Calizan, of Morlavia, of Nazamor, of Siziphala, of Tingafort, of Barnagas, of
Monomatapan, of Arginare, and of Cornata (all which came at the request of the
Emperor of Melly) an hundred and thirteen Kings, Emperors, Caliphs, Soldans,
and Sovereign Princes, from whose valors great wonders were to be expected.
All these great Lords being by Falanzar assembled in a stately and spations
Hall where he had caused so many Thrones to be erected, and perceiving a
silence over all, he spoke in this manner.

The Oration of Falanzar Emperor of Siconia, to the Pagan Potentates.
MIghty Princes, I have troubled you so far, as to assemble you here for to
represent two things unto you, which are of great consequence for us. The glory
of our Altars much abated by the insolence of certain petty Princes of Greece,
and the little resentment of the outrages, we have a thousand times received
thereupon; It is more then time, me thinks for us to rouse up our selves, to
appear more zealous in the service of the gods, more sensible, and less
daunted for some passed losses, which have fallen upon us by the indiscreet
managing of our designs, and by our neglect of taking hold of occasion, when
it has been fairly presented unto us. We have suffered them to grow great,
for which they mock us; nay, that is worse, are so vain, as to threaten to come
and share our Crowns with us at their pleasure, to put us all to the sword, to
force our people to acknowledge their Dominion, and to render all the earth
subject to their command. Is not this a vanity too insupportable to bear, and
shall we endure to have them come and seek us in our houses, for to deprive us
of our Wives, our Lands, and our liberties? Verily it amazes me, that all
Paganism being replenished with mighty Emperors, Callphs, Soldans, Princes,
and excellent Knights, no man would never yet speak of overrunning these
insolents, and not leaving them so much as a foot of ground, upon which they
might tread as Masters; For mine own part, I am resolved to exhaust all my
treasures, put all my subjects into Arms, and not to leave a soldier in all
the Empire of my Cousin of Melly (who has far more cause to complain, and
speak as I do) for to march into the Empire of Ethiopia (whose Prince has of
late played Bankerupt without gods, for to allie himself with their enemies)
and utterly to subvert it, to the end that in some sort discharging the duty I
owe unto their providence, which have made me Lord of a great people, I may not
draw their displeasure upon me, so that if your zeal be like unto mine (as by
your countenances I am persuaded to hope;) you will not stick at the
consideration of the pains you are to suffer, but will cheerfully go to the
Empires which are destined to your valo^rs, and appropriating the Crowns thereof
unto your selves, you may in such sort receive some kind of satisfaction for
your labors; Now if you apprehend the dangers which are oftentimes incident to
these troublesome undertakings, remember that you shall do no more than my
self; I will always ^arch with you in Arms, I will encounter the enemy
courageously, and ever being the first at blows, I will still be the last, if
I may, to retire. Behold, great Kings, the Emperor of Mellyes designs,
together with mine freely discovered, let us now understand your minds, to the
end we may know from whom we may expect to be succored in so just and glorious
an enterprise.

It is usual with men to differ in opinion upon the proposition of any matter
whatsoever: The most part of these Princes, and especially they which desired
to seek for glory in blood and slaughter, found this design to be generous,
howbeit the rest, who weighed all things with a more mature deliberation,
thought it not fit to be embraced. Falanzar required a general advice, but
because they could not speak all at once, every man cast his eye upon the King
of Cabilla, a man of age and experience, and desired him to answer for them
all, who after he had often refused to deliver his opinion before so many
Emperors and Princes, that were far more eminent in greatness than himself,
at length spoke in this manner.

The King of Cabillaes answer to Falanzar.
GReat Monarch, the Design you propound is very generous, full of zeal for
the glory of our Altars, and for the honor of our Crowns, but it is no less
difficile than great, and when I consider the mischiefs that follow Wars,
whereof the event is ever doubtful, I neither can authorize, nor will counsel
you to follow it. You attempt most redoubted enemies, that were never beaten,
either abroad or at home, all together, or apart, and that know so well how to
manage their affairs, as they will make an Elephant of a Rat, and so favored
of Fortune, that when a man thinks them at the lowest of the wheel, he shall
be sure to find them on the top. Our Predecessors have many times covered the
fields of Greece with an infinity of men; Have they thereby abated their
greatnes^e? Nay, ^ather they have augmented it, and their own defeat has
served to render them more more glorious. If you will call to mind the mighty
assemblies which the progenitors of the great Duke of Muscovy, that now hears
me, have heretofore made, or that furious voyage of Aleppo, where it was
believed that all the earth would tremble at the very sight of our Standards,
but not to go so far, if you will consider that here are now present, many
Successors of a number of Princes slain in these last expeditions, rashly
undertaken for the King of Canabea, who at length proved to be their Kinsman,
and for the young Emperor of Ethiopia, whom love has turned enemy to his
own gods, without doubt you will not so lightly precipitate year selves, nor
forsaking the rest you so quietly enjoy, will you go and seek out travells,
whose recompense is but ill assured; the Descent to hell is easy, so is not
the return, we may carry a million of men into their Territories, but how many
of them can we say, that we shall save from the fury of their swords? I know
that revenge is sweet, but I condemn those that desire it, when they are not
able to obtain it. Nor d^e I speak this, because I misdoubt the valor of our
Knights, and of so many Giants as we have, whose forces are extreme, but figure
(...) your selves I pray you, Prigmalion, Fulgoran, and the brave Bastard of
Media, in the heads of an hundred thousand Horse, cutting our squadrens in
pieces; represent unto your selves Florisel of Niquea, Don Rogel of Greece,
Spheramond Emperor of the Parthians, as three furies amongst our Troops, and
fifty Princes of their blood, nothing inferior to them in valor, overthrowing
all that ever they meet withal; besides, have you not heard of those two
invincible Champions? Alcidamant and Rozalmond, whose blows are no less
violent then lightning; Ask of the mighty Gorgophon, who has seen and
encountered them in arms, what is to be expected from their fury; Demand of the
redoubted Brizardine, Sultan of Aralafia, and of the brave Arastron, whom here
you behold, or rather of me alas! Demand I say what they think, and what I
believe concerning the valor of a young Amadis, who in the Empire of Martaria,
that went disguised in the habit of a maiden Slave, they are witnesses of his
force, and for my part I can tell to my ever lasting grief, that his blows are
so many tempests, under the fury whereof I have seen Rifantes, who might justly
vaunt himself to be one of the best Knights of the world, cleft down to the
shoulders; but to go further yet, what think you of the famous Knight of the
Salvage, who fills all the earth with wonder, or of a young Shepherd called
Clarisel, before whom the strongest Giants have fallen, are not they to be
feared? Or will the Jncounter of the valiant King of Corolandaya, and a
thousand more that I could name, whose swords would be so many thunderbolts, on
the heads of our friends, leave you in assurance of victory? Verily me thinks
J see our Soldiers already tumbling into the Sea at the landing of our ships,
I see them some cut off by the middle, others divided in twain, and all of them
bathing in a River of blood; Wherefore J will never conclude for war, ^or
counsel you to be Author of their destruction, for it is a greater glory to
preserve, then to conquer a people. Hewbeit, if they should prove so a^dacious,
as to come hither, for to see how our Crowns would become their heads, then
would J speak no longer of rest, but would be the the first in the field, and
let the world know, it was not the fear of death made me produce these
reasons, which I have delivered to persuade you, that a certain peace is
better than an uncertain victory.

This discourse very powerful, and maintained with the experience of things,
having put them all in suspense, every one began to consider the consequence of
this design, when as Roussardan the furious King of Grisalara, rose up, and
casting a disdainful look on the King of Cabilla, turned him to Falanzar,
saying.

GReat Emperor of Sciconia, the advice which the King of Cabilla gives you, is
indeed very fit for him, that prefers his pleasures before glory, but most
pernicious for a Prince, that desires to render himself greater by his own
virtue, than by the possession of States, and I wonder that so many excellent
Knights, wherewith this place is replenished, could all this while endure such
prating, as has done nothing but undervalew us; he b^asts the power of our
enemies, as if ours were less, and measuring every ones arm by his own,
which is unable to support more then one Scepter, would persuade us that those
of the Christians are stronger, and their swords better edged than ours, but we
should prove as cowardly, as he to bel^^ve him, and it would for ever hereafter
be a shame unto as, if we should n^w retire upon so unworthy a consideration: I
agree with him, that the effect of War is doubtful, nor will I deny but that
some of their Knights are strong and valiant, but where should we seek for
honor but in dangers, and what shall crown our work, but the difficulty of our
enterprise? That is it which must renown us, and the rememberance of the passed
wars, ought to work a contrary effect to that he speaks of, not to increase
our fear, but our courage, for obtaining that which our Predecessors could not
obtain to, we shall join the glory of their actions to ours, and tryumphing
over those that have vanquished them, we shall fill the world with the praises
of our valor, for mine own part I will join my forces with yours, and I
believe there are few here but will do the like.

What cannot the persuasions of a valiant man do with active spirits? All
those Kings, the most part so inclined of themselves, and the rest in imitation
of them, rose up and protesting for the war, marvellously rejoiced Falanzar,
who having assured them that he expected no other from the greatness of their
courages, gave them infinite thanks, and particularly caressed Roussardan, the
Grand Salvage, and Gorgophon; whereupon he let them depart with a promise of
return within three months, at which time there appeared in the playns of
Siconia; first, fourscore thousand Horse raised in the dominions of Falanzar,
whose Imperial Ensign carried two silver Doves in a field azure; threescore
thousand of Idalcans subjects, the Emperor of Melly, who bore a Gerfalcon
crowned: Thirty thousand the followers of Artogan, Sultan of Francapa, that
carried three Escallops in a golden field: Thirty thousand in the head, whereof
marched the Cornet of Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, with three Griffons, struck
all through with one sword; Thirty thousand under the conduct of the furious
King of Grifalara, whose Arms were two Lions in a chayn, held by the force of
one hand; Thirty seven thousand that came from Aralafia, whose Sultan carried
three Roses, separated by a broken cheveron; Forty thousand followed Armandor,
the great Duke of Muscovy, who bore three Eagles in a sky; Twenty thousand were
led by the brave Moranteon, Sultan of Circassia, having three Bears in a silver
field: The Grand Salvage conducted fifteen thousand, with his son Furiander,
Tipheus, the huge and dreadful Giant Burcandor of the Rock, and Bucarquant his
brother, two of the strongest and valiantest Giants of the earth: Gorgophon
followed them accompanied with thirty Giants, and twenty thousand men; Next
after marched Marcelian, Emperor of Media, bearing two fishes argent hanging
at a line in a field gueles, with five and twenty thousand, two and twenty
Giants, Argantor, Lizart, Bronta^or, and Borald the stout, most redoubted
Knights, and of great esteem in Arms; The stately Caliph of Francapia,
Antomedon carrying a Panther tied in a silver chayn, appeared in the front of
sixteen Giants, and twenty thousand Knights richly armed; The strong Astrurion,
Sultan of Brutacan, having an Ape between three Wolves, followed next with two
and twenty thousand men, Margenio, Fiortan, Brandimart, and Plaiartes,
excellent Warriors; After him Policastaleon, King of Zeilan, a valiant Pagan
bearing a Siren in the midst of a troubled Sea, conducted fifteen thousand
very brave Horse, fourteen Giants, with the gallant Alceus, Astrenion the
glorious, and Cariander the hairy; The redoubted King of Baleon, Fierastron
bearing a bloody sword in his Cornets, marched with five and twenty Giants, and
twenty five thousand men, then Gronfalin King of Pacea, presented himself with
twelve thousand Horse, and fifteen Giants; and last of all marched the valarous
Brufaldon, King of Gedrosia, bearing a great many of Ermines in a Cressant,
with seven and thirty Giants, and two and twenty thousand men, well appointed.
After the Muster of this Cavalery, which amounted to five hundred thousand
Horse, and more; all the Infantry advanced, conducted by the Kings of
Mauritania, of Tremisen, of Zaphir, of Zambar, of Cartegena, of Aganazes, of
Budomel, of Moraria, of Arger, of Angali, of Numidia, of Bizaur, of Thunes, of
Teneri, of Miramlin, of the I Will of Till, of the Tragenites, of Zanfara, of
Calisan, of Morlavia, of Nazamor, of Siziphalt, of Tingefort, of Barnagas, of
Monomatapan, of Arginari, and of Cornate, which being composed of four hundred
thousand men, and an hundred Giants, gave infinite content to Falanzar, who was
by an unanimous consent elected General of all those Troops, which amounting
to nine hundred thousand men, and upwards, were imbarqued speedily, and put to
Sea, where we will leave them sailing with a prosperous wind, and turn to see
what our Christian Princes will do, being advertised by Cassandra, of such a
dangerous expedition against them.

CHAP. XXXVII. Cassandra arriveth at Constantinople, to advertise the Grecian
Princes of the mighty Army the Pagans had brought into the field, to march into
Ethiopia; the resolution they take thereupon.
CAssandra posting as nimbly through the clouds, as a Bird, whose wings had the
assistance of a favorable wind, arrived in two days at Constantinople, to the
great content of all the Princes there, and especially of Don Florisel of
Niquea, who caressing her, demanded what good news she had brought them of
their children, and of the health of Arquiffe and Vrgand^? Sir (answered
Cassandra) my father and my mother were never in better estate, nor more
disposed to your service, Amadis of Trebisond, Rozalmond, Clarisel of Guindaya
your son, Persides, Floridan of Persia, Lucibel of France, and Russian of
Media, have got so great a reputation, performing daily such wonderful
exployts, that they are deservedly accounted the bravest Knights of the earth:
It will not be long before you see them here, accompanied with their wives, the
fairest Princesses alive: Your son enjoyes the incomparable Shepherdess of
France, Miralinda, the excellent luster of whose beauty has filled the world
with amazement, whose virtues do^ far exceed her birth, though that cannot be
denied to be most noble, she being daughter to the Marquis of Monteclare, one
of the first houses of France, and Sister to that invincible Knight of the
Palms, of whose valor your self have been sometimes a witness; Rozalmond is
the only favorite of the matchless Armazia, Princess of the great Empire of
Gardacia; Amadis of Trebisond, shall succeed the Emperor of Martaria, by the
enjoying of Palmirenna, heir to a multitude of fruitful and flourishing
Provinces: Lucibel and Floridan of Persia, shall marry the two sisters of that
Princess; and gentle Russian having taken to Wife the fair Agriclea, is
possessrd of the Crown of Clariana.

Dear Lady (said Florisel to Cassandra) it is no less content to me to hear
my Son is that renowned Knight, of whom all France, and Great Britain as speak
of some prodigy, then that my Brother and Nephew have gained the Empires of
Gradaria and Martaria, for I value the merit and wisdom of Miralinda at so
high a rate, that I esteem no less of her, than of the greatest Princess
alive. And believe it, when they shall present themselves unto me, I will not
fail to receive them with a hearty entertainment.

Without doubt (replied Cassandra) you can do no less, neither can you choose
but rejoice at the happy event of these things. But Sir, it is most necessary
that I should a little disturb the quiet, and content you now enjoy, and impart
unto you a secret which I fear will find but a bad welcome. All the Pagans are
up in Arms, at the instance of Idalcan Emperor of Melly, who not long since
received an overthrow in this place, and so great is the number of the forces
they have assembled, now ready to fall upon Ethiopia (because of the alliance
the Emperor Prigmaleon has lately made with you) that unlesst it be assisted
by some peculiar providence from heaven (who never suffers his to perish for
want of succor) you cannot easily prevent their ruin: I know very well the
greatness of your courage will contemn this danger, but take heed what you do,
for all other Armies that you have seen assembled heretofore, are nothing in
comparison of this, where so many brave Knights will be ready to encounter you,
that the force of your unconquered Armies, and of your friends, were never more
useful, and necessary than now.

Let them come when they will, said Florisel, we will be prepared for them, and
I hope to give them such entertainment, as shall well abate the fury of their
pride; and the rather, I make no doubt if you will assist us a little with some
effect of your skill. Sir, answered she, you must expect succor from heaven,
and your own valor; the assistance of my skill can afford you none, unless I
should raise the dead, and bring them to fight for your safety; but I perceive
you do not understand these words, nor can I speak in plainer terms till the
Destinies give way unto it: think only upon those things which a good Captain
ought to put in practice for the annoying of his enemies, and being seconded by
Fortune, who is always your friend, make them know that you are still
invisible.

You have advised so well, answered Florisel, that if you please to go and try
what entertainment our Ladies will give you, I will in the mean time deliberate
thereupon; so leaving her with Sidonia, and the other Princesses that
accompanied her (to whom she was forced to make a particular relation of the
loves and adventures of Amadis and Clarisel, and to describe the beautiee of
Armazia, Mirglinda, Palmirenna, and her Sisters.) He caused a^l the Princes
then present at Constantinople to assemble in the Council chamber, where he
spoke to them in this manner;

Sirs, I did not call you hither to resolve whither we ought to make a War or
no, since necessity enforces us thereunto, but to consult with you what means
we had best use to oppose the violence of so mighty an enemy, as is now ready
to fall upon us: It is a matter of no small consequence, our eternal glory, or
absolute ruin depending thereupon; Wherefore I am of opinion, our states having
so long a time enjoyed peace, and being now furnished with a multitude of brave
soldiers, who desire nothing more than opportunity to show themselves so, that
it will be the best way to employ our Subjects, our Allies, and all our
friends, and to raise as many men as possibly we can, without taking from such
garrisons as shall be necessary in important places, so to prevent the
insolences of our enemies, and cause that desolation, which continually waits
upon War, to fall rather upon their own, than our Territories. They aim at
Ethiopia, wherefore (said he, addressing himself to Prigmaleon) my advise shall
be, since that Empire receives your Laws, and acknowledges your Sovereignty,
that you depart suddenly with such forces as I will send along with you, that
you employ all the friends you can make in these parts, that you cause your
Ports, and Frontier Towns to be fortified with all diligence, and that you
manage your affairs with such discretion, that you may be able for a while to
withstand the assault of so fur^ous an Army; In the mean time we will hasten
your succor, and cut out so much work for these Insolents, that perhaps it may
prove the last design they shall ever undertake against us.

This oppinion meeting with no opposition, was equally received of all, as the
most profitable; so every one retired to consider of his charge. Florisel gave
out Commissions for the speedy levying of fifty thousand Horse in Greece, sent
certain Gentlemen to Don Rogel, to Spheramond; to the Queen of Alaxtraxerea, to
Lucondus King of France; dispatched his Courriers to Rome, to Germany, to
Sardinia, to great Britain, to Guindaya, to the Kings of Dardania, of
Comogena, of the greater Indies, of Samothracia, of Lydia, of Cataya, of
Poland, of Hungary, of Moldavia, of Ireland, of Scotland, of Turkey; in brief,
to all the Princes of his acquaintance; entreating them to meet him with their
forces at Constantinople, as soon as they possibly could.

He having made all these dispatches, and being taught by experience, that the
wisdom and foresight of men do oftentimes exempt them from eminent dangers, he
caused Prigmaleon and Fulgoran to depart in a small Flyboat, which cost the
fair Polixena his Wife many a tear, who was forced to stay behind him; and four
days after he sent the valiant Esquilan of Poland, in whose virtue he was most
confident, with him the two Cenophales, Rosanel of Astrea, who was then in the
Court with the fair English Lady his Wife, ^lorian, Tristor, Perionaf Turkey;
Quadragant, Agrian, of Scotland; Abies of Ireland; Dordanio, Florisartus,
Leonidas of Mesopotamia; Armond of Bohemia; and Melford, in the head of fifty
thousand Horse, commanding them to repair with all expedition to Saba, the
chief City of Ethiopia; and to acknowledge Prigmaleon for their General,
until such time as he should be there himself in person.

In the mean space whilst these troops were advancing Prigmaleon and Fulgoran,
at the Sea, had the benefit of afair wind, but we seldom arrive at our desires
without some crosses, for on a sudden the Sea begins to swell, and waxes so
rough, that the Mariners foreseeing a violent tempest, were forced to cast
Anchor at the edge of a rock which made the point of a little Island, where
these two Knights dis-imbarquing themselves to decline the trouble of the Seas,
advanced into the Land, commanding the Pilot to wait their return.

The Island seemed to be very delightful, by reason of the abundance of Trees
planted in a handsome order, upon the sides of little pleasant hills, and
shadowing the crystal Rivolets, which environed the fruitful Meadows: As they
were discoursing of the wonders of God, the Creator of all those things that
presented themselves to their view, they espied a beautiful young Lady coming
toward them, who ever and anon tearing her hair, uttered these sad and strange
complaints; Alas! said she, must the fire consume so sweet a face, and can a
woman's rage be the cause of so great a disaster! O ye gods! let this day
produce some miracle, and if ye will preserve me alive, deliver this Knight
from so cruel a death.

These words disposed the hearts of the two Princes to a sensibility of
compassion, so that drawing near to her, Fulgoran spoke in this manner; Lady,
may it lie in our power to do you any service in this so pressing an
affliction? Yes, without doubt, replied she, and the pains you take, will be
most honorably employed, in saving from death a most deserving Knight, one of
the most amiable the eyes of man ever beheld; if you please to walk forward,
I Will give you the whole relation, for I fear, if we should make any stay here,
we should come too late to relieve him.

This Knight arrived three months since in this Island, which is called the
deceitful Island; It was his ill fortune to fall into the hands of Gargaracia,
a Giantesse, none of the largest in the world, but the cruellest that ever was,
for taking pleasure in shedding of man's blood, she continually entertains a
multitude of Ruffians in a Castle, who either by surprisall, or force, seiz
upon all the Knights that pass this way, and cast them into prison, from
whence she brings out some of them once a year to facrifice to her Idols;
This young Gentleman, I say, being arrived here, encountered twelve of her
Soldiers, which thinking presently to lay hands on him, were charged with such
an undaunted valor, that ten of them being cut in pieces, the other two betook
themselves to their heels; this Knight pursuing them with too much confidence,
came at length before the Castle gates of this Gyantesse, who making use of me
for the better accomplishing of her treasons, caused me to descend to appease
his anger, and to entreat him to take the benefit of the Castle to refresh
himfelf in, and to be assured that he should not receive the least wrong there.

His ill fortune enduced him to believe me, so that he presently followed me
in, and unarming himself, he showed me so rare a beauty, that to say the truth,
I began a little to feel the power of love, which bred in me such an extreme
sorrow, that I had been the means to imprison him within those cruel Walls, as
at the same instant, I had set him at liberty, by causing him to retire, if
Gargaracia had not then entered with a design, rather to take from him his
life, than to give him any courteous entertainment; but the ravishing charms of
his looks overmastering this bloodthirsty humor, she forthwith became
passionatly amorous, resolving to spare him for the satisfying of her filthy
lust, and shamelesly embracing him, she let him know, that her intent was to
make him happy, by vouchsasing him a part in her own bed.

At those words the Knight taking a full view of her, and seeing her face
furrowed with wrincles, her eyes sunk into her head, her grisly knotted hairs,
blobberd-lips, flat nose, accompanied with all the marks of ugliness, could
hardly forbear laughter, nevertheless considering that there might be danger
in provoking her, he made this reply, that his faith obliging him to be ever
true to the affections of a certain Lady whom he loved, he humbly besought her
not to take it ill, that he could not embrace the honor she was pleased to
offer him; How, said she, in a great rage, do you slight me thus, knowing that
you are now in my power? believe me you shall repent it at leisure. Then laying
hands on him, she called twenty of her servants to her, by whose assistance
having fast bound him, she cast him (to my great grief) into a dark Dungeon,
purposing to infflict daily upon him insufferable torments; but her passion of
love bearing a greater sway than that of anger, she called me to her at break
of day, and telling me that the nights rest had not freed her from those
unquiet thoughts whereto the beauty of the young Knight had subjected her, she
desired me to visit him, and to advise him to live in her favor, otherwise he
must expect no mercy.

This command suiting with my wishes, I presently took a Torch in my hand, and
went down to the place, where I found the Knight bound, who perceiving me
coming toward him, demanded if I brought him the first news of his death,; to
whom I answered, that my coming was not to afflict him, but to let him know,
that in my opinion he could do much better, to give way a little to my Ladies
passion, then to submit himself to her cruelty; she is preparing, said I,
horrible torments, avoid them, I beseech you, since you may, and be not so
cruel to your self, as to become your own Murderer. How, replied he, yield to
the affection of such a Monster! Lady, if this be the end your discourse ayms
at, I must needs let you know you loose your labor; she thinks to affright me
with the threats of punishment, and I am resolved to endure them all even to
death, than in the least measure to satisfy her desires. You are then said I,
either very faithful, or else too wilful in your opinion; Neither the one nor
the other, answered he, for I cannot acknowledge my self guilty of any
wilfulness, in refusing the embraces of an old carcass, the very sight
whereof is a terror to me: neither do I decline them to keep my affections
entire to any Mistress, my soul as yet being free from subjection to any beauty
whatsoever, and if I did to her use this diffimulation, it was only in hope to
escape by that means out of her hands, but since that and all other shifts
fail me, let fortune dispose of me as she pleases. You refuse her then, said
I, because she is not beautiful. Yes, answered he, for that only reason, but
if I should desire to have any interest in her, I could wish for my own sake to
see her deformities changed into your perfections.

Upon these words (to acknowledge the truth; and my own weakness) those first
sparks of love, which his sight only had before kindled, did so inflame my
heart, that laying aside the consideration of modesty, which ought never to be
separated from a young Lady, I ran hastily and embraced him, promising him
withal, to deliver him upon any conditions, though never so dangerous: Then
leaving him somewhat comforted with the hope of escaping, I went to seek
Gargaracia, to whom I reported that the Knight began to speak a more pleasing
language, and that without doubt, her courteous entertaynment would prevail
much more with him than her cruelty; wherewith she being not a little
satisfied, gave me commission to conduct him into a Chamber, whereof she her
self kept the key, to whom notwithstanding I had access twice a day, faining
continually some excuse or other, by means whereof I enjoyed sweetly the
embraces of this young Knight, still keeping Gargaracia in a firm opinion, that
she should ere long have the full fruition of him, so that we led a life full
of content and happiness, in the midst of misery.

But that improvident passion, which blinds the eyes of all Lovers, ruined us
also, even then when we had invented a way, how to escape and save our selves:
for I going this morning to visit him, and forgetting to make fast the doors,
left a passage open, through which Gargaracia espied us, in the hight of such
amorous dalliance, as Love uses to suggest unto those, whose hearts she has
already united, which put her into such a rage, that forthwith she advanced
toward us, intending with her strong boisterous hands to bind us both, had she
not been prevented by the Knight, who with his first blow struck her to the
ground, with a resolution to strangle her, had she not suddenly called for
succor; I saved my self among the Soldiers, who being ignorant of what had
passed, sought not at all to stay me, and so crossing these fields, used the
best diligence I could to fly from thence, to the end that I might not again
fall into the hands of that pitiless woman, and to see if it might be my good
fortune to meet with some charitable Knight, that would undertake the rescue of
this poor Gentleman, who questionless by this time is very near the flames,
for the cruel Hag supposing fire to be the extremest of punishments, has
taken order that he shall be suddenly cast into it.

Fair Lady, said Fulgoran, comfort your self, and be assured of the Knights
safety, if we can but arrive soon enough to find him living; then putting spurs
to their horses, they presently came before the Gates of the Castle, where they
saw thirty soldiers coming forth to lead this Knight to the fire; whom
Fulgoran knowing to be Cilinder, the son of Dorigel, King of the fortunate
Island, of whom there had been no news heard since he received his order of
Knighthood at Constantinople, he pressed toward him with an incredible
violence, and cleaving down to the girdle five or six of those that encompassed
him, put the rest into such a fright, that on a sudden they all left him, which
Fulgoran perceiving lighted from his horse to unloose the cords wherewith he
was bound, deeming the force of Prigmaleon alone, sufficient enough to cut the
rest of the rascals into a thousand pieces; and indeed this noble Warrior made
so great a massacre amongst them, that in half an hour, he laid eighteen dead
at his feet, which Gargaracia seeing to her great grief, and hoping to fare no
better than her Champions, cast her self immediately into that fire, she had
prepared for Cilindor, who presently knowing Fulgoran and Prigmaleon, gave them
a thousand thanks for his deliverance.

Gargaracia being consumed, Cilindor delivered, and none else appearing to
oppose the designs of these Knights, they caused the prison doors to be all
opened, where they found the Giant (...) and the unknown Knight, their
especial friends, with forty or fifty more of their acquaintance, whom after
they had saluted, they asked by what accident they were fallen into the hands
of that cruel woman; by the most villainous treachery in the world, answered
(...), for arriving both together here, and being courteously received we were
led into a Chamber, where drinking of wine mingled with Poppy, which was
presented unto us, we fell into so sound a sleep, that we were ^asily bound and
carried into this Dungeon, where we lay above eight hours before we awaked.
Thanks be to the gods, said Prigmaleon, who appointed us to arrive here so
opportunely for your deliverance; Come let us quit this melancholy place, and
we will relate unto you at leisure, the occasion that brought us from
Constantinople; then committing the care of the Castle to Milcana, Cilinders
Mistress, who received but little joy with it, being ready to take leave of her
servant, without hope of ever seeing him again, they took their way toward
thesea, which at their return they found calm, and promising a quick passage
into Ethiopia; where they being arrived, Prigmaleon assembled his Council,
caused Saba to be very well fortified, laid strong Garrisons in the most
important places, and joining fifty thousand other Horse, to those which
Florisel sent him, who arrived three weeks after, he expected without fear or
amazement the fury of his enemies.

CHAP. XXXIX. The arrival of the Pagans in the Empire of Ethiopia, the cruel
fight where with all the Grecian Princes entertained them at their landing.
THE Christian Princes having no greater object, than the honor of God, the
glory of the world, and the preservation of those Empires they possessed,
prepared themselves immediately upon the receipt of Don Florisels Letters, and
levying Forces out of each particular Kingdom, they brought to Constantinople,
the bravest troops that ever was beheld; First came Don Rogel with thirty
thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Foot; the excellent Emperor of the
Parthians, with twenty thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Foot; Don Lucendue,
with thirty thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; Alastraxeret, with twenty
thosand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; Derigel of the fortunate Island, and the
fair Cilinda his Wife, with twelve thousand Horse; Melind^^ of Clotona, and his
wife Casti^^a, with fifteen thousand horse, his Brother Olid^r with the Queen
of Castora his Wife led fifteen thousand Foot; Silran and his Wife eighteen
thousand Horse; Amenia of Asre, fourteen thousand Foot; Anaxander King of
Dardania, twelve thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot; Fl^^idan his Brother,
King of Comogena, eighteen thousand Foot; Gel^dan, and the valiant Arletta,
fifteenthousand Horse; Oriander, King of Sardamira, seventeen thousand Foot;
Galard, King of Megera, eight thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot; the King
of Catay, nine thousand Horse, and seven thousand Foot; Liscard, King of
Licaonia, twelve thousand Horse; Rozafar of Austria, eleven thousand Foot;
Gadard King of Hungary, ten thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot; Filadart,
King of Poland, eight thousand horse, and ten thousand Foot; Ladazan of Nudia,
and Parmenian of Ciprus, five and twenty thousand Foot; From Rome there came
fifteen thousand Horse; From Germany fifteen thousand; from Guindaya eleven
thousand; and besides all these, Don Florisel had raised thirty thousand Horse
in the Empire of Greece.

These Troops which amounted to the number of three hundred thousand Horse, and
two hundred thousand Foot, being all speedily imbarqued; Florisel and the other
Princes of Greece, took their leaves of the Ladies, who with tears conjured
them to have a special care in the preservation of themselves, amidst so many
dangers as they were sure to encounter; and so getting aboard, they caused the
Mariners to hoist the sails, which the wind presently began to fill with a
favorable gale.

In the mean time the Enemies innumerable Army were upon their voyage at Sea,
sometimes driven forward violently with the threatenings of atempest, sometimes
again arested with the stillness of a calm; so that five weeks after they were
shipped in the Empire of Siconia, they discovered the strong Walls of Saba, and
appeared in the view of the Christian Princes there, who endeavoring by the
best means they could to prevent their landing, fortified the shore with fifty
thousand Horse, under the command of Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, the two Cenophales,
Perion, Quadragant, Florestan, Cilindor, Florian, and Tristor, which being
perceived by the Pagans, who made thitherwards with full sails, they presently
ranged their Ships in the best order they could, for the dis-imbarquing
themselves without confusion, and advanced till they were near enough to begin
the charge with Bows and Pikes.

Roussardan, the terrible King of Grifalara, Gorgophon, the Graund Salvage,
Furiander, and fifteen Giants which had the command of the foremost Vessels,
arriving with an incredible fury, there was heard even in a moment a confusion
of cries, mixed with the hideous noise of the waves, and the shrill and loud
sounds of Drums and Trumpets, the air being clouded as it were with a
multitude of Arrows, which flew both from Sea and Land, a man could hardly
discern neither the sands that were covered with dead bodies, nor the waters
all dyed red with the blood of those that fell therein.

The Pagans being confident as well in their numbers, as their valor, and
advancing courageously, without any fear at all of the Christians shot, began
to place their Bridges and scaling Ladders, to the end that they might win the
bank with less difficulty; But Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the Cenophales, and the
other young Princes that assisted them, did so stoutly repulse them, that as
many as adventured to quit their Ships, they tumbled into the Sea, so that in a
short time the waves were covered with such a multitude of dead bodies, as
those four proud Pagan Knights not enduring to behold so miserable a massacre
of their people, on the sudden with their Giants, and a hundred thousand men,
leapt on shore in spite of the Christians resistance, and fell to it pell
mell, with such incredible violence, that a man might perceive more men fall
than blows; all those those that stood in (...) way, he cleft down to the wast,
Gorgophon cut them in pieces; F^ri^nder and his Father made such havok, and
their Fanchions were so terrible, that every one shund them like so many
furies; on the other side Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the Cenophales, Perion, and
their companions, made so great a slaughter, that the most part of the Pagans
cast themselves into the water, to avoid the furious execution of their swords;
In this manner the battle waxing hot, so many fell dead on every side, as was
most dreadful to behold; Fulgoran and Prigmal^on being incensed marvellously,
at the sight of so great a slaughter, which proceeded not so much from the
multitude of their enemies, as from the force and valor of their Leaders,
being accompanied with the Cenophales, and making themselves way with the death
of all that opposed them, they in an instant charged them with such fury, that
the fierce stroke Ro^ssardan received from Prigmaleons sword, made him knock
his chin against his breast, Gorgophon bowed his knee underthe violence of
Fulgorans blow; the Grand Salvage with F^riander his son, were staggered by the
weighty blades of the two Ge^ophales, and of the Giants two were slain by
Cilind^r, and P^rion.

But into what a rage were these proud Pagans driven at the resentment hereof?
they rowsed up their spirits again, and became more furious than Tigers, and
raising their weapons into the air, they let them fall with such a tempest upon
the Christian Knights, that Prigmaleons shield was cleft in two pieces, with a
hurt on his arm, Fulgoran wounded on the shoulder, and the two Cenophales were
forced to stoop with their hands to the ground to save themselves from falling.
These fearful blows would have utterly astonished men of less valor and
courage, but having begotten more fury than fear in the spirits of these
invincible knights, they began again to lay about them so fiercely, that these
four arrogant Giants, who thought the earth could not produce men of sufficient
power to resist them, plainly perceived that the overthrow of their enemies
would prove a matter of more difficulty, than they expected.

In the mean time whilst this tempestuous fight lasted, between these eight
Combatants, Quadragant, Tristor, Florian, Florestan, Perion, and Cilindor
rallied their troops, but so far had the Giants and their assistants gained
the field, that notwithstanding the valor of those Knights, who made heads and
arms fly about, and cut down and killed all that came in their way, the
Christians began to retire, when in the instant there arrived the valiant
Esquilass of Polonia, Grandimore, the unknown Kninght, Agrian, Fl^^isa^t,
(...), Frisel, Abies, Armond, and Melfort in the head of thirty thousand Horse,
who suddenly pressing into the midst of their enemies troops, then confused and
in disorder, slew above twenty thousand upon the place, and doubtless all the
Pagans at that time on the shore had been put to the sword, if the haughty
Antomedon, accompanied with Marisgelf, thirty Giants, and threese ore thousand
men, had not speedily encountered the Christians, amongst whom with the very
first blow he cleft Florizartus of Trapobana, down to the wast: on the other
side his Giants made such a Massacre, that the first ranks being all broken,
the other betook themselves to flight, to avoid the fury of their devouring
swords; which so much incensed the valiant Esq^it^^ of Polonia, that he with
Grandimore, the unknown Knight, and the rest of the young Princes that
accompanied him, being all well appointed with good Lances, at one charge ran
nine of the Giants quite through and through, and after that behaved themselves
so bravely against their enemies, that they were wonderfully amazed thereat.

Nevertheless the valor of the other Giants being no whit abated, and the
number of the Pagans being excessively great, questionless the Christians had
been discomfited, if fourscore Vessels passing without suspicion through the
midst of the enemies fleet, had not very opportunely disembarqued forty
thousand men, who falling suddenly on the Pagans, which were deceived with an
opinion, that they were part of their own forces, they put them marvellously to
rout, under the conduct of two excellent Knights, which at the same instant
encountering with Brandafidel, King of Brutaxia, a mighty Giant, and Brandimart,
King of Parmonda, they past their Lances quite through their bodies, so
astonishing the rest of that party, as the Christians had leisure to rally
their troops, and to make a handsome treaty, and yet not without very much
difficulty.

Prigmalcon and Fulgoran, who were no less discreet than valiant, seeing the
honor of the Christians recovered by the unexpected arrival of this Army,
would have retired with their troops, but Roussardan, Gorgophon, the Grand
Salvage, and Furiander were so enraged, that they met with such a forceable
resistance, as they began to redouble their blows with more strength then at
the first, which put our Greeks into so much fury, that Prigmaleon uniting the
whole strength of his body into one stroke, which he laid on Roussardans
Helmet, he gave him a dangerous hurt on the head, wherewith he was so
astonished, that he knew not what world he was in, and Fulgoran following his
example, wounded Gorgophon very dangerously in the thigh, by which means having
very happily the leisure to releeve one of the Cenophales, who being unable to
withstand an heavy stroke lent him by the Grand Salvage, he had fallen at his
Horses feet, had he not been sustained by him; Furiander in the mean time had
received a sore hurt on the arm by the other Cenophales.

These astonishing strokes putting the Pagans into the extremity of rage; they
addressed themselves again to be revenged, threatening no less then death with
their tempestuous swords, but the Princes who well understood they were
accomptable for the people under their charge, and that knew the safety of the
soldiers consisted in the preservation of their Leaders, retired to their
troops, leaving the Pagans in despair of having that revenge upon them they so
much hoped for.

The Christians having thus prudently made their retreat, they desired to know
the names of the Commanders of the new Army, and finding that it was the brave
Russian of Media, with the beautiful Amazon, Brandimanda, (who departed from
Corolandaya, by the advice of the wise Vrganda, before the others were in the
field) gave them a million of thanks, and especially to Brandimanda, whose
matchless beauty, joined with that invincible prowess, whereof they had so
lately experience, they could never sufficiently admire, then causing the
Amazons to be led into a quarter a part, and the Soldiers into the trenches,
they conducted them to the Palace, where disarming themselvest they found every
one hurt except Russia, Brandimanda, the valiant Esquilan, Cilindor, and
Leonidas of Mesopotamia, who with Alteria was left in the Town, if need were,
to make good the retreat: Prigmaleons hurt was on the arm and head, Fulg^rans
on the shoulder, the Cenophales in two or three places, Grandimore on the left
arm, by the sword of the proud Giant Antamedon; Perion and the rest in diverse
parts of the body; notwithstanding which, they had some cause to rejoice for
the loss the enemy had, amounting to the number of threescore and seventeen
thousand men, three and twenty Giants, and the Kings of Brutaxia, and
Parmondia, as they understood by their Spies, besides those that were hurt, in
the number whereof were Roussardan, Gorgophon, the Grand Salvage, Furiander,
Antomedon, and the valiant Artogant, Sultan of Francapia, with a multitude of
common Knights.

But when they bethought themselves of the loss of the gentle Florizartus of
Trapobana, and of thirty three thousand men, that remained dead in the field
(the greatest part whereof perished rather by the sword of the Giants, than the
multitude of the soldiers) they could not believe that Fortune had much
obliged them, by the advantage they had gained; nevertheless, putting on a
brave resolution, they comforted themselves with the hope of some other
succors; and so placing trusty Sentinels in all places requisite, they went
to refresh themselves with a small repast.

Afterward, those that had escaped without hurts, assembled themselves in
Prigmaleon and Fulgorans Chamber, who would by no means lie asunder, where it
was resolved that Russian and Brandimanda, with each of them a troop of ten
thousand Horse should sally upon the Enemy two hours before day; whereupon
they went to repose themselves for a while. In the mean time Falanzar enraged
at the massacre of so many of his men, and for the loss of his Kings and
Giants, by so small a number, environed three parts of the City, and causing
great Trenches to be cast up, and covering the field with his Soldiers for
the space of two miles round, he promised to himself that he would gain the
Walls at the first assault, seeing all his Giants should have now elbow-room to
bestir themselves; but his opinion deceived him, as you shall see in the
Chapter following, and made him conclude, that the end of his enterprise would
not prove so feasible as he expected.

CHAP. XXXIX. The brave feats of Arms performed in a Sally by Russian of Media,
and Brandimanda; the furious assault given by the Pagan Princes unto the Town,
which being reduced to extreamitie, is marvellously relieved.
THis mighty Fleet of the Enemies having gained the Shore, the night was almost
wholly employed in making of Trenches, and setting up Tents, and Pavillions; so
that it being near that time of the day, which chalengeth a kind of security
over all things; the Soldiers annoyed with the Sea, wearied with their late
travels, and importuned by sleep, betook themselves all to their rest, being
confident that the Christians durst not so much as once peep out of their
Walls; But they like brave spirits, who thought there was no glory equal to
that which was gotten in the midst of dangers, and hating all rest which might
be accompanied with disgrace, had no other design than continually to be
pulling some feathers out of their enemies Wings, whereby they might stop the
fury of their flight; they rose presently after midnight, and arming twenty
thousand of their best, and lustiest Horses, they divided them into two Troops,
whereof one was commanded by Russian, Cilindor, and Leonidas; the other by
Esquilan, Brandimanda, and the fair Alteria; and so sallying out at two
several Ports, they advanced softly toward the Pagans till it was break of
day, which affording them light to discover their Sentinels all asleep, they
presently cut their throats without any noise, and so falling aboard with the
rest, who were in no better estate to make resistance, they began to commit so
great a slaughter, that the ground was covered over with dead bodies, before
the Alarm was taken in the Camp, Russian, Cilindor, and Leonidas, over-runall;
Soldiers they cut in pieces, Knights they cleft down to the shoulders; Tents
and Pavilions, they turned upside down; and meeting with little or no
opposition, they made a strange havoc.

Falanzar General of the Pagan army, who lodged not far from the place where
they first fell on, easily hearing the fearful cries and groans which came
from his men, as they were dying, rose up immediately, and finding Brufaldar
King of Gedrosia, Brizardan the redoubted Sultan of Aralafia, with Moranteon,
Sultan of Circassia, he gave them thirty thousand men to resist the fury of
their enemies, whose number he conceived to be fifty thousand at the least, and
so ran speedily himself through all parts of the Camp, to put the rest in
battle array.

These three proud Pagans, who had not been at the last nights service,
cheerfully embracing this charge, began presently to march forward, and being
conducted by the noise which continually increased, they forthwith encountered
the Christians, and plainly perceiving the smalnesse of their number, divided
their troops with an intent to environ them, and to charge them on every side,
but those valiant Knights not affording them the leisure to put their Design
in practice, broke through them with such a tempest, that the blood ran along
the ground in little rivers, which put the incensed Pagan Brufaldor into such a
fury, that turning his horse upon Leonidas of Mesopotamia, he gave him so
violent a stroke on the shoulder, that his sword notwithstanding his Arms, made
way to his very waste, dividing his body into two parts; which so displeased
Russian, who saw the sad effect of the blow, that clasping his sword fast in
his hand, he returned the Pagan such an exchange, as cutting his shield in two,
he gave him a great gash on the arm, and so quiting him he flew upon Moranteon
Sultan of Circassia, wounding him very dangerously on the shoulder, and
perceiving Brizardan grapling with his friend Cilindor, whom he doubted might
be too weak to fustain so strong a charge, he made toward them with an intent
to discharge full on Brizardans head, but Torismond the valiant Pagan prevented
his blow, by giving him such a smart stroke on the arm, as made his sword fall
out of his hand, and yet without any other harm, save only a slight hurt,
which put him into such a choler, as suddenly taking hold again on the handle
of his sword that was fastened with a riband to his wrist, he let it fly in such
sort at his Adversary, that he cut him almost in two pieces, sending him dead
to the ground.

In the midst of these hurliburlies, the brave Esquilan entering on the other
side of the Camp, struck no less astonishment into the minds of those that
encountered him, than the other had done before; no resistance could withstand
the fury of his sword. Brandimanda seconded him with equal heat and courage,
and the gentle Amazon Alterea followed them both so close, that she seemed to
threaten no less a ruin than the former.

At this new alarm Falanzar, Idatcan Emperor of Melly; Armandor, King of
Russia, with Fierastron the proud Giant of Balivan, advanced themselves in the
head of forty thousand men; but the fear of those that ran away, having put
their soldiers which they led into disorder, the Greeks charged them with such
fury, that more then six thousand of them were beaten down; the greatest part
whereof were stifled under the horses feet. The unpleasing sight of this
accident had driven Falanzar into despair, but that he earried too generous a
mind, for to harbor so base a guest, wherefore meeting with Esquilan, he
discharged so terrible a blow on his Helmet, as he made him knock his chin
against his breast, being very much astonished at the mighty strength of this
Pagan, but grinding his teeth together for anger, he advanced his sword, and
let it descend with such a rage on this Caliph, that he overthrew him on the
crupper of his horse, casting out great abundance of blood at his mouth.

In the mean while, Brandimanda and Fierastron, Iaalcan, and the gentle
Alterea, charged one another home, and made a quick exchange of most
fiercestroaks. But Esquilan who would not afford them any leisure to rally
their troops, and who judged that to be no fit season for him to be a spectator
of a single combat, let fall on Idalcan Emperor of Melly so furious a blow,
that he cut his arm sheere from his body, and at the same instant with another
which he laid on Fierastrons headpiece, he quite deprived him of his senses;
which being done, he put his men into good order, and following the example of
Russian, who took the way that led into the City, he made an honorable
retreat in spite of threescore thousand Horse, and fourscore Giants, which
came in the pursuit of them.

This courageous, and prudent retreat, and the death of the Emperor of Melly,
that ensued two hours after, with the great slaughter of their men, which
amounted to the number of thirty nine thousand, the Christians having left on
the place but five thousand six hundred, having enraged the Pagans, they
resolved every man of them to dye on the place, or else that very day to win the
City, which together with all the Christians therein, they would consume to
ashes, in satisfaction of so great a loss.

Their Troops then being ranged, and every Captain having received order to
charge his Company, with the carriage of a certain number of scaling-ladders,
the Army was divided into three bands, each consisting of one hundred and
fifty thousand men; Falanzar led the first, with the which was Brufaldor King
of Gedrosia, the proud Knight Arastron, generous Alceus, Marisgolf, that
terrible and mighty Giant, twenty Knights of the best repute in the whole Army,
and threescore Giants: The second was commanded by Astrurion the great Sultan
of Brutacan, the good Knight Armorand, Brizardon Sultan of Aralafia, fifty
Giants, and twenty two other Knights, who had purchased a great renown by
dangerous adventures: The third by Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, with King
Armandor, of Russia, of the Giants race; Palamedes, King of Cassandria, the
redoubted Tipheus, Barcandor, fifty Giants, three and twenty Knights, of no
mean esteem, and Broncaldion, King of the Arcofibrats, who had the leading of
twelve hundred Elephants.

The christian Princes who slept not in the mean while, seeing these
presumptuous preparations, put threescore thousand Knights into the Town, and
so furnishing the walls with abundance of pitch, sulphur, boiling oil, stones,
and other necessaries for their Enterprise, made up three bands; the first was
conducted by Russian with Cilindor, the second by Esquilan with Algantas chief
General of Ethiopia; and the third by Brandimanda with Alteria, who lodging
themselves close under the walls, with a resolution not to appear before the
enemies had almost gained the top, expected the coming of their troops, which
hearing no noise at all in the Town, were persuaded that the Christians were
all asleep; whereupon they presently fastened their scaling Ladders, which their
Giants and other Knights of the best spirits first ascended, to give
encouragement to the rest to follow them; but on the instant they perceived
fifty thousand men, who with a sudden tempest of stones, oil, pitch and
sulphur, overturned all those that were then upon the Ladders, and began to dam
up the Moat with dead bodies, then the assault became most violent and cruel.

The Giants enraged to see their Companies lie grovelling on the ground, the
Ladders broken, ten thousand Soldiers massacred, as it were in a moment, began
to grow careless of their lives, they got upon the wall, and fell to grapling
with the Christians, fighting rather like furies than mortal men, there were
scarce any that durst oppose the violence of their swords, unless it were
Russian, Esquilan, Brandimanda, Alteria, Cilindor, and some few of the
valiantest, who perceiving the favor the wall afforded partly in sheltring
them, and annoying their enemies, delivered such blows on the Pagans, as for
the most part carried death along with them. Russians represented a
Thunderbolt, overturning as many Giants and Knights as it lighted on, neither
was Esquilans or (...)'s much less terrible than it; but the Pagans, the
greater the number of the Christians were which they perceived on the
Battelments, the more resolute they began to be, and caused a multitude of
Pioners to sap the walls; the Arcofibrats approached with their Elephants, and
the nearer they advanced, the more blood was spilt, and the more fell dead to
the ground, the Elephants being got under the walls, they quit their bows and
arrows, and fell to handy strokes: Their Cymitars lighted with such a weight on
our soldiers, and the Combat grew so cruel, that there was nothing to be
heard amongst them but cries, and pitiless groans, which did so encourage the
Giants, who met with little or no resistance, that three of them adventured to
scale the walls in spite of all those that opposed, and began to make a
terrible massacre amongst the Greeks, whose sudden flight giving Russian to
understand the extremity of the danger, he and Bandimanda ran thither with all
speed, and encountering these three Colosses, the first whereof was Arginassus,
of the cold Desert, he saluted him so rudely on the head with his sword, as
cleft him down to the shoulders, and gave the other such a thrust in the belly,
as ran him up to the hilts.

In the mean time Brandimanda animated with the like desire to revenge; had
made a shift to make a separation between her adversaries head and his body;
the vast trunks of these three Giants being taken on the instant, and thrown
from the walls, struck such an amazement into those that followed, that their
hasty and eager desire of entering the City was soon abated; In the mean time
the Elephants being ranged on the other side, and their Castles manned with
stout and courageous soldiers, there was instantly a bloody encounter, but the
Christians pouring down boiling oil upon those mighty creatures, caused a
sudden confusion, for as soon as it began to pierce their skins, they quitted
their stations, ran violently into the body of their troops, broke their
Battalions, and were the cause of the death of above two thousand soldiers.

Amongst the rest they overthrew Barcandor of the Inhabitable Rock, who was in
no small danger of being stifled; nevertheless being speedily rescued by his
brother, he received no other hurt, but the astonishment he was in by his fall,
which rendering him more furious than ever he had bin in his life before, he
caused a Ladder to be fetched, and being accompanied with the dreadful
Tiphe^s, Bucargant, and other Giants, he went to place it with a resolution,
either to dye or force the wall, howbeit perceiving a great piece thereof
falling down, which buried above four hundred Knights, he quitted his
Enterprise, and drawing out his great curtelas, he and his companions entered
the Town, together with six thousand Pagans more, which began to make so great
a slaughter, that doubtless all had been lost, had not Russian, Brandimanda,
and the brave Polander opportunely come in with ten thousand fresh men, who
seeing their safety or utter ruin to be then in question.

At the very first onset they cut off three thousand Knights; nevertheless
Tipheus, Bucargant, Barcandor, (...), Bulti^d^r, and the other Giants fought so
furiously, that they be^e^t them almost of al hopes of preserving their lives,
Esquilan being wounded in three or four places, Russian in the arm and the
thigh, and Brandimanda by the force of two cruel strokes, which she received
on the head, from the hands of Tipheus, and Bultendor, lying senseless, if not
breathless, on the ground; but at the instant Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, the two
Cenophales, Grandimore, the unknown Knight, Perion, Tristor, Florian,
Florestan, Abies, Quadragant, Dardanio, Florisel, Agrian, Armond and Melfort
hearing the rumor of it, and well knowing the peril the Town then was in, ro^e
presently, and with their Armies marched to the place of Combat.

These seventeen brave Warriors beholding the extremity their friends were in,
never felt the incommodity of their wounds, but set upon the Giants with such a
fury, that at the very first encounter they massacred the greatest part of
them; and now the Christian troops renewing their courage at the presence and
valiant example of these renowned Princes, made a speedy slaughter of seven or
eight thousand men, the Giants themselves being all cut in pieces, except
Armandor, Palamedes, Tipheus, the two brothers of the Inhabitable Rock, and two
and twenty others, who persuading themselves that they were yet strong enough
to take the Town, began a fresh charge upon our Christian Princes, but their
resistance was so brave and courageous, as the greatest part of the Pagans ran
upon their own deaths.

Marmaran Sophy of Bultara, Tipheus, Barcandor and his brother Bucargant, being
the whole number that remained alive, who considering that policy, was no
less requisite to men of Arms, than courage, made their retreat with a
resolution to bring new forces to the fight, and so at length to weary the
Christians, which presently causing the breach to be repaired, and Brandimanda
to be carried to the Palace, they made haste to the aid of Cilindor, and the
fair Alteria, that were scarce able to make any longer defense against the
violence of Falanzar, who yielding a noble example to the rest of his
soldiers, with Brufaldor, Arastron, Alceus, and some few others, had wel-nigh
forced the walls; but the coming of these Knights did much abate the fury of
the Giants, twelve whereof at their first arrival fell dead to the earth,
nevertheless the wall being very low on that side, where Astrurion the mighty
Sultan of Brutacan gave the assault, they could no longer have made good the
Town, if on the sudden certain Courriers had not come to advertise Falanzar,
that above four hundred thousand Christians were newly landed, and in array to
fall upon their troops.

Wise men make use of all advice that is given them, so Falanzar conceiving
that this news did much import the safety of his Army, caused Marmaran
presently to retire from the Walls, and joining his own troops with him, they
made a body of three hundred thousand men, and wheeled about with his forces to
the Seaward; howbeit not thinking these sufficient, he sent unto Marcelian
Emperor of Media, and to Fierastron, to repair thither with two hundred
thousand more, that had not yet fought, and so making in this manner two mighty
squadrons; they expected to see what resolution their Enemies would take, who
were commanded by Florisel of Niquea, by Rogel, Spheramond, Alastraxerea, and
other Christian Princes, which were very desirous forthwith to charge the
Pagans; but Florisel whose valor was well tempered with experience, and
discretion, would by (...) give way that they should the^ engage themselves,
both because the night d^^w on, and that they were also wearied with the Sea,
and especially for that he knew not what condition his friends were in, but
withal to let them see, that what he did, was more out of experience then
fear, he caused his men to advance, till they came even under the Walls, before
which having caused Trenches speedily to be made for the safeguard of his
soldiers, he pitched his Tents and Pavilions, during which time the Pagans did
not so much as make show of stirring.

In the mean while the Sultan of Brutacan having received no order to make his
retreat, was persuaded to follow his good fortune, and entering the breach which
he had made, to put himself into the midst of the Town, but finding a greater
resistance from the Princes and Soldiers within, then they had from the walls,
there began a most fierce and bloody combat; The Giants advanced bravely,
making way with their swords, and their Soldiers taking courage from their
example, followed as resolutely, making a vast and terrible slaughter; whereof
Brandimand^ being advertised, and finding her self prettily recovered, she
thought it a dishonor to dye in her bed; wherefore she took six thousand men,
reserved for an extremity, and meeting with Cilinder and Alteria, who had
retired for a while to refresh themselves, they fell on with such a fury upon
the Soldans troops, that at the very first encounter, above four thousand of
their Enemies, and fourteen Giants were cut in pecces, which so incensed the
horrible Cressamagrant, that advancing his dreadful Faulchion, he let it fall
with such a violence on Frizel of Arcadia, that it cleft him down to the
shoulders, and laid him dead at Prigmaleous feet, who in a great rage requited
the Pagan with such another, as cutting his leg from his body, he fell to the
ground with a noise like thunder.

These dreadful strokes giving equal courage to both parties, the fight waxed
more furious than at any time before, and if the enemies could at once have
made use of all their forces, without doubt they had carried the Town, but the
breath being but equal, the Christians though but few in number were able to
withstand those that would enter, so that they held them play until night,
which drawing on to the great grief of Astrurion, it made him bestow his blows
with the more violence, amongst the which one lighted so boisteroufly upon
gentle Abies of Ireland, that it cleft him almost to the girdle, whereat
Fulgora^ was so enraged, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged
such a blow upon the head of the great Sultan, as turned him over and over, and
doubtless he had quite made an end of him, had not fourteen Giants, that were
retyring carried him off.

The City being thus delivered from so tedious and cruel an assault, they
employed a multitude of Labouters to repair the breaches, and caused the
bodies of Frizel of Arcadia, and Abies of Treland to be carried to the Palace,
the loss of whom had been much more grievous uno them, but that they were
comforted with the assurance of this new succor, which they understood
proceeded from the Emperor Florisel of Niquea, that was accompanied with many
other Christian Princes their friends, whom they went to visit in their
trenches, before they could so much as lay aside their Arms, where many kind
salutations passing between them, they related the danger the Town had been in
all that day, the loss of Frixel, Florizartus, Abies, and Leonidas, and the
whole story of all that had happened since they departed from Constantinople, and
so for that present they departed with a resolution, to take a full revenge of
their enemies.

CHAP. LXI. The furious Battle between the Pagan and Christian Princes; the
conclusion thereof, with the number of the dead.
THE rage of the Pagan Princes, who had lost in this assault threescore and
seven thousand men, three and fifty Giants, with Fiortan, Brontaiar, Argantor,
and Lizartus, all worthy Knights, not suffering them to take any rest: Falanzar
gave order for the interring their dead, and assembled his Captains together,
to whom he spoke in this manner. Mighty Princes, I see no reason why we should
be discouraged, though fortune has not favored our designs, we have lost
Soldiers, Giants, and many persons of quality, rather by the difficulty of
scaling the walls, than by the valor of our enemies, but now we have a fair
occasion to revenge our selves, and to repay with interest the displeasure they
have done us; we may now give them a day for all, and this Grecian Army newly
arrived, will rather further, than any way hinder our designs; let us offer
them battle, they are hardy enough to entertain it, and we powerful enough to
obtain the victory, the advantage is ours on every side, we have a multitude
of brave Knights, the meanest whereof will make the strongest of our enemies
sweat for it, our Soldiers are more in number, and no whit inferior in
courage, they shall be assisted by a multitude of valiant Knights, who are able
to astonish even the whole world, so that we shall undoubtedly revenge our
former losses; It is true, that for the present the one half of our bravest
Knights are confined to their beds, by reason of their wounds; I hold it
therefore convenient to give them some respite for their recovery: In the mean
time let us enquire, whether this may agree with the consent of our friends and
allies.

Great Monarch, replied Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, the proposition you make,
is so good, that there need no reasons be urged for the authorizing your
opinion, and I dare assure you, that it agrees with the desire of the whole
Army, let us then if you please send to our enemies, and demand a truce for
eight days, that in the mean time time we may put every thing in good order,
and to give the King of Grifala, and the rest of our friends leisure to recover
their strength, that they may be the better able to do you service: Hereupon
Polidarchus King of Amazia, was entreated to take the charge of delivering this
message to the Christian Princes, which being willingly undertaken by him, he
went presently to Don Florisel of Niquea, presented him with a bloody Gauntlet;
and demanded seven days of Truce, he appointed the eighth for the set battle.

We know not how to deny our Enemies, answered Florisel, when they invite us to
fight, I accept of the battle on the same day that you demand it, and desiring
to be more courteous, then you have been violent, coming hither to seek the
ruin of our Empires, without any provocation at all on our part, are content
to ratify the Truce for the term required by you. Pilidarchus being thus
returned back, every man prepared for the battle; they used all the skill that
could be, for the recovering of those that were wounded, and the Captains
diligently employed themselves in advancing the courage of the Soldiers, for
on the victory of this furious day, the ruin or glory of all Christendom, or
Paganism depended.

Seven days then being insensibly past away, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Russian,
and their Companions, having quit their beds, met with the rest of the
Christian Princes to consult of their affairs, where they all agre^ing to
submit themselves to the prudence and direction of Florisel of Niquea, he
ordered it all in this manner.

The number of the whole Forces consisting of three hundred thousand Horse, and
two hundred thousand Foot, without counting those which Prigmaleon had in the
Town, for the manning of the Walls, he divided into four troops, each containing
seventie thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot; the first was commanded by
Prigmaleon, Fulg^an, Russian, the Cenophales, Esquilan, Brandimanda, and all
the young Princes that had been their assistants in the former Combats.

The second was commanded by Spheramond, Alastraxerea, Melindus, Clidor, his
Wife Cassiana, Amanio of Arestrea, the Duke of Laiaze, the King of Cataya, his
Wife Crothea; Galard, King of the barren Island, with Rozafar, and the King of
Lacaonia.

The third was commanded by Don Rogel, Lucendus, D^rigel, Silvan, the fair
Salvage his Wife, the valiant Silverin of the Desert; Gadart, King of Hungaria;
Filiard, King of Polonia; Oriander, King of Sardamira, his Queen Oronsa;
Parmenian, of Cyprus, and Garmantes.

The fourth by Don Florisel of Niquea, with Anaxander King of Dardania;
Floridan, King of Comogena, his brother; Troilus, the renowned Knight of Savoy,
and twelve young Princes, upon whom he had that day conferd the order of
Knighthood, with all the magnificent Ceremonies the Camp could afford: Every
thing being thus ordered, every man retired to visit his Horse and Arms, with a
command to be in readiness at break of the day.

In the mean while the Pagans slept not, for knowing of what importance the
issue of this battle would be, they armed themselves with a resolution to
redeem their honor, though they paid their blood for it: being advertised of
the course the Christians had taken in ranging of their Troops, they held it
best to observe the same order, and not to think of reserving any part,
persuading themselves that it would be more difficult to rout their troops,
being united than separated; and so they divided their whole Forces, consisting
of eight hundred thousand into four Bands.

The first whereof was commanded by Roussardan the furious King of Grifalara, a
man of a Gyant-like nature, with grifly hair, a face covered with black
patches, an ugly flat nose, and ill-fashioned legs, but withal so valiant,
that next to Gorgophon, and Bravorant, King of Morimont, there lived not a
braver Pagan upon the whole earth; his Associats were Moranteon, Souldan of
Circassia; the grand Salvage, Furiander his son; Artegant, Souldan of
Francapia; the proud Arastron; Gederion, King of Arginaria; Furcamond, King of
Martan; Aliodorus, Torismond, Arciles, and Teliander; all brave Knights, with
threescore Giants.

The second by the valiant Marmoran, Sophy of Bultara; Bravorant, Gorgophon,
Marisgolfus, Salander, King of Balsandria; Polidarchus, King of Amazia;
Giracond, King of Toriana; Don Margenio, Rindar, Brandimart, threescore Giants,
and Broncaldion King of the Arcofibrats, who would no more make use of his
Elephants, because in the preceding assault, they had occasioned so great a
disorder.

The third by stout Astrurion, Sultan of Brutacan; with the haughty Antomedon,
Caliph of Francapa; Brizardan, Sultan of Aralafia; Marcelian, Emperor of
Media; Rodomart, King of Fortan; Asmorian, King of the upper Indies; Bemond,
King of Java minor, diverse other Knights of quality, and threescore Giants.

The fourth was reserved for Falanzar, great Emperor, and Caliph of Siconia,
with the King of Russia; Anaxamena, the valirnt Amazon his Wife; Palamedes,
King of Cassandria; Fierastron, the redoubted Giant of Balivan; Polecastaleon,
King of Zeilan; Brufaldor, King of Gedrozia; the dreadful Tipheus, Barcandor,
Bucargant, and threescore Giants; In the mean time Mambrinian King of
Fornascia, with the Kings of Zamber, of Saphotir, of Siziphalt, and fourscore
thousand men guarded the Camp.

All things being thus resolved upon on both parties; the day of Battle was
expected, which being come to the great content of both the Armies, to whom all
delay was insupportable; the Pagans began to draw their men out of their
Trenches, much astonished to see themselves prevented of their Enemies, who
already had possessed themselves of the field, and there stood in battle array.

The first that appeared on the Pagans side, was the furious King of Grifalara,
who marching in a glorious, and most magnificent manner, under a multitude of
Standards, whereon were represented two Lions chained together only by the
force of one hand, caused the charge to be sounded.

At the same instant Prigmaleon, (who thought no Oration could so animate his
Soldiers to behave themselves bravely, as to give a sudden testimony of an
undaunted courage) gave the Signal to his troops immediately to join: most
violent was the encounter of these two brave Warriors, who saluted each other
so boistrously, that their Lances bounded into the air in a thousand slivers,
Fulgoran and the Grand Salvage fell to the ground, the one hurt on the left
arm, the other on the breast; Russian of Media, and the proud Knight Arastron,
broke their Lances very furiously upon each other, and yet past on unmoved,
like two rocks in the midst of the Sea. The two Cenophales, and Grandimor,
running against Furiander, Artegant, Sultan of Francapia, and Moranteon, Sultan
of Circassia, received such an astonishment from each others encounter, that
all six remained for a long time sensslesse; Gedereon, King of Arginarea, was
overthrown by Esquilan, Brandimanda passed her Lance through the body of a
Giant, three other Pagan Knights fell down dead at the feet of Perion,
Cilind^r, and the unknown Knight, and so many Cavaliers fell to the ground on
both sides, that the field was full of horses that ran up and down masterlesse,
Lances were broken in pieces, sword blades flew into the air, and the Battle
waxed so hot, that the dust was all tempered with blood; Roussardan, the Grand
Salvage, and the proud knight Araston, cut down all they met withal, making
head and arms fly about, which bred such fear in the Enemies, as they were no
less terrible to them than thunderbolts.

On the other side, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Russian, Brandimanda, Esquilan, and
the two Cenophales, who disdaining to employ their Swords upon common persons,
charged the vastest Giants with so great a fury, that in an instant, three and
twenty of them lay breathless on the earth; when as Arastron, Roussardan, and
the Grand Salvage, marching in the Front like so many torrents sweeping all
before them, let fly with such a violence upon Quadragant, Agrion of Scotland,
and Dardanio, that they cleft them all three down to the teeth; and seeing that
Prigmaleon, Russian, and Fulgoran, (having dispatched the mighty Brucalan, with
Arbadan and Pandarus his Brothers, by the force of three terrible strokes which
sent them dead to the ground) had made way into their Troops massacring all
without mercy, that gave them any opposition, in great rage they clapped spurs
to their horses, and making toward these three Knights, they discharged three
such dangerous blows upon them, that had not their Arms been of the best in the
world, they had without doubt added them to the number of the dead;
nevertheless, these rough salutations that humbled their chins to their saddle
bows, did nothing else but incite them to a sudden requital, which they
returned so bravely, as there was little cause left them of boasting, and so
there began the most dangerous Combat that ever man beheld between these six
Knights.

On the one side the Giants made huge massacres; Esquilan, Brandimanda,
Grandimore, and the Christian Princes, bestird themselves lustily on the other,
and their brave example made the courage of their men, supply what they wanted
in number; so that above threescore thousand Knights being slain both parts,
the victory remained as yet doubtful.

Whereupon the Pagans impatient of delay, caused their second Battalion to
advance, which being led by Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, accompanied with those
incomparable Warriors, Bravorant, king of Morimont, Marisgolfus and Gorgophon,
Colonels of the Giants, gave so fierce an assault upon the Christians first
Squadron, that they had cut them all in pieces, if the Emperor Spheramond had
not opportunly opposed their fury.

By this time the ground was all covered with dead men, and the confusion so
great, and crpes so loud, that a thousand claps of thunder would not have been
heard amongst them: Bravorant, Gorgophon, and Marisgolfus, having addressed
their Lances against Galard King of the Barren Islands, Alvida his Wife, and
the Duke of Laiaret, they ran them quite through the body; and so did in like
manner to five or six more, before they brake; but great was the slaughter they
made, when as they hod drawn out their great and heavy Fauchions, for the
Lightning falls not with more violence, than did their blows, which meeting
with no resistance sufficient to oppose them, they strewed all the ground with
dead bodies.

Spheramond having encountered Marmoran, Sophy of Bultara, they both brake their
staves upon each other, and so pressing in amongst the multitude, they slew as
many as had the ill hap to come within their reach, Alastraxerea made such
havoc amongst her enemies, that every one fled from her, as from some deadly
contagion; Melindus, Clidor, and Amiano of Astrea, did no less wonders; But
the Enemies were so mighty, and Bravorant joining with Gorgophon, made so
bloody a massacre, that this second Squadron in spite of the best resistance,
Spheramond, Alastraxerea, and the Grecian Princes could make, had been utterly
routed, if Florisel wisely foreseeing that the flight of those forces might
cause a general ruin of the whole Army, had not opportunly given order to the
young Cavaliers that he had armed the day before to advance: who desirous to
season their first undertakings by some memorable testimony of their valor,
made so fierce a Sally upon the Giants, that with their Lances they overthrew
twelve of them to the ground, then laying their hands on their swords, they
began to do such strange things, that the Greeks recovering, as it were, a new
courage, gave their enemies so furious a charge, as they made them begin to
startle; nay, almost to betake themselves to plain flight.

Nevertheless being detayned by the only valor of Braverant, Gorgophon, and
Marisgolfus, and the brave Sophy of Bultara, who resembled so many furies, they
continued the fight so stoutly, that the blood made large Rivers through the
midst of the fields; the earth was covered with the bodies of those that were
already slain, and the air filled with the groans of those that were then
dying: Spheramond wheresoever he passed carried death on his sword; Bravorant
and Gorgophon ran up and down raising mountains of dead bodies, Marmoran and
Marifgolfus appeared like lightning: Alastraxerea, Melindus, Clidor, Cassianus
met with no resistance, unless it were from the Giants, who did often times as
well as their fellows taste the keenesse of the Christian blades; In brief it
was a spectacle full of such horror, as the like has seldom been beheld by
the eye of man, and the slaughter so indifferent, that it was heard to say to
which side the victory did most incline.

The Pagans who could not endure to be idle, whilst their Companions were busy
in the pursuit of glory, marched up with their third sqadron, conducted by the
valiant Astrurion, Sultan of Brutacan, Antomedon the proud Caliph of Francapia,
Brizardan, Sultan of Aralafia, and Mercelian, Emperor of Media: These vast
troops led by such proud and mighty Commanders, fell on the Christians with
such fury, as promised no less then utter ruin at the very first onset: But
the Emperor of Persia seconded by Lucendus, Dorogel, Silvian the fair
Salvage, the noble Silverin of the Desert, Gadard, King of Hungaria, Filadart
of Polonia, Oriander and Oroncus charged them so fiercely, that made them
quickly turn their faces to defend themselves from the cruelty of their weapons.

This brave Prince encountering Antomedon with his Lance, ran him through the
shield and arm; yet not without great danger to himself, for from the Giants
Lance he received such an encounter, as tumbled him upon the crupper of his
horse, ready to have fallen to the ground, if he had not been upheld by some of
his followers.

Thus the third Squadrons falling to it pell mell, there continued a most
cruel battle; the valiant D^rigil did deeds worthy of himself, following the
brave example of his father, who held all the enemies in admiration to see him
alone act such wonders, the noble Silverin of the Desert stopped the fury of
Brizardan, and behaved himself so bravely against him, that by those that saw
him, he was judged no whit inferior to the best Warriors of the world,
Lucendus sent Marcelian Emperor of Media, to keep company with the dead;
Filadart, Gadart, and the Princes that followed them fought with so much
courage and vigor, that in a moment they covered the fields with the
slaughtered carcasses of their enemies.

In the mean time Don Rogel and Lucendus seeing the great massacre made by
Antomedon, and the mericilesse Sultan of Brutacan, immediately assaulted these
two proud pagans, who were almost ready to swim in christian blood, shed by
their own swords, upon whom they bestowed a couple of such violent blows, as
Antomedon was laid flat upon the crupper of his horse, the blood gushing out at
his mouth and ears, and the great Sultan received such a stroke from Lucendus,
as rendered him in little better case then his fellow; These terrible blows,
which probably should have been the cause of the Christians victory,
contrariwi^e exposed them to extreme danger, for these two great Warriors
recovering themselves again, and taking their swords in both hands, advanced
with so eager a desire of revenge, that meeting with Filadart of Polonia, and
Gadart King of Hungaria, they fell upon them with such a tempest, as the one
was cleft down to the shoulders, the other to the girdle, which being soon
perceived by Don Rogel, he made with his best speed toward Antomedon, upon
whom he discharged so furiously, as he quite dismounted him, and put him in
great danger of being trampled under the horses feet, but being suddenly
releeved by his friends, he was by them immediately carried to his tent.

The retreat being known of these two mighty men, it gave a fresh supply of
courage to the Greeks, Rodomart King of Fortan, Armositan King of the upper
Indies, and Tarsides King of Pergazus, perished by the swords of Silvan the
fair Salvage his wife, and Dorigel; and fifteen Giants being insta^tly slain by
the other christian princes, the pagans began to give ground, when in the nick
arrived Falanzar, with the redoubted King of Balivan, the dreadful Tipheus,
Bucargant, Burcandar King of Russia, Palamedes King of Cassandria, the
excellent Knight Artogant, and the incomparable Alceus; and on the other party
Don Florisel of Niquea, with his troops, who mingling themselves in a furious
fight with those Pagans, caused on the sudden such a general confusion, that
the earth, the air, and the Heavens seemed to be but one, and the same thing;
for the Leaders some of them were no less terrible than so many furies, others
begat an stonishment in those that had the ill hap to encounter them, equal to
that of thunder and lightning, and the Soldiers animated by the example of
their Captains fought with so much courage and cruelty, that nothing was to be
seen but blood and slaughter.

Falanzar charged Florisel with an incredible fierceness, who was no whit
behind hand with him in the requital; Roussardan, Gorgophon, and Braverant
threatened such a ruin where they went, that the very glittering of their swords
frighted the faint-hearted to death; neither were Spheramond, Prigmaleon, and
Fulgoran less terrible to their enemies than they; the Grand Salvage,
Furiander his son, Marmoran, Brufaldor, and Policastoleon charged the
Christians through and through, till they scarce left a rank unranked:
Silverin of the Desert, Russian, Brandimanda, the Cen^phales, and Brandimore
did as much to the Pagan troops.

In brief these mighty Armies sustained by the valor of the Princes that
commanded them, had as yet gained little advantage of one another, which
raising Bravorant, Gorgophon, and the proud Knight Arastron, to the utmost
extremity of rage, they fell all three with such a violence upon Don Rogel,
Florisel and Spheramond, that they beat them all down to the ground, where they
made no long abode, though they were much astonished, but be took themselves to
their feet again, and on the instant made themselves such elbow room, that
except these three mighty enemies, who pressed upon them with a mad kind of
fury, none durst come near them; nevertheless diverse others of the Pagan
Champions coming also to assail them, the three Princes were in danger to
have made a glorious end of their days, had not Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Russian,
and Silverin, seeing them in this necessity, come in to their aid, and let fly
at these three mighty Pagans with such a force, that they had almost lost their
saddles, and so affording leisure to the Christian Knights to supply themselves
with the next fresh horses they met, they began to cover the earth anew with
dead bodies.

These fearful blows adding rather anger than fear to the bold Pagans, they
rose up more furious than ever they had been before, and not finding those that
had put them into this disperate plight, they fell upon Oriander, Atletta his
wife, and Parmenian of Cyprus, dealing such mavelous strokes, that two of
them were cut in two pieces, and the third cleft down to the teeth, so the
battle waxing more bloody on every side, every thing appeared so full of
horror, that the Sun appeared as it were mourning, for the expense of so much
noble blood, obscuring his face behind a cloud.

The Pagans sounded a retreat, and the Christians rallied their disordered
troops, to the great grief of Gorgophon, Bravorant, the Grand Salvage, Arastron
and Roussardan, who seeing their own wounds, and dispairing of a present
victory, retired to their Tents, and the Christians part into the Town, and
part into their Trenches, where being at leisure to number up their losses,
which amounted unto two hundred and threescore thousand men, besides the King
of the barren Island, and his Wife; the Kings of Hungaria, of Polonia, of
Licaonia, of Moldavia, of Sardimira, of Cataya; the valiant Lady Arletta,
Parmenian of Cyprus, R^zafar, Quadragant, Agrian of Scotland, Dardanio, of
Rhodes, and the gentle Armond of Bohemia, they had a just cause of lamentation;
but seeing that their chief Leaders were preserved, and that it was in vain to
murmr at the chastisements of a mighty God, they comforted themselves, and
causing their wounds to be searched, which they found to be dangerous enough,
they all betook themselves to their beds, except the valiant Esquelan of
Polonia, that was much afflicted with the death of the King his Father;
Cilindor and the twelve new Knights, whose brave feats of Arms performed that
day, had acquired them an immortal fame;

On the other side, the Pagan Princes had no less cause to mourn, and repine
at their sad fate, having lost an hundred and sixteen Giants, T^rism^nd,
Arcilles, Celiander, Gloridian, Celianis, Panizell, Armelion, three hundred and
forty thousand men, the Kings of Fortan, of Gianazana, of Salberna, of
Pergarus; the Emperor of Media; Polidarchus, king of Amazia; Bemond, king of
the lesser Iava, the king of Sisiphalta, of Zambar, of Cartagena, of Maramor,
of Argocana, of Zaphotir, and almost all the rest were confined to their beds,
except Falanzar, (who had received only one slight hurt in the arm by the
sword of Florisel,) Palicastaleon, Fierastr^n, and Brufald^r; but not
withstanding these losses, they desiring to appear invincibles they made no
show of discontent in their countenances, lest thereby the courage of the
Soldiers might be abated, and to give a testimony of the care they took for
their dead, they sent immediately to demand a truce for twelve days, which
being granted, and agreed on both parties, every man sought out his
acquaintance to perform unto them the last office of a friend.

The Christian Princes were solemnly interred; and the bodies of the Pagans
burned, as their custom was; which being done, Falanzar gave Broncaldion, King
of the Arcofibrats a party of fourscore thousand men, with order to surprise
Goraxa, and Zeiden, two of the strongest Cities of Ethiopia, supposing that the
remainder of his horses, which amounted to the number of three hundred, and
threescore thousand was powerful enough to give an absolute defeat to their
enemies: And now let us leave them bewayling their losses, and devising new
stratagems for the ru^ing of the Christians, and let our discourse return to
those Knights, which are departed from Corolandaya, to go to the surprisall of
the Castle of Treasure.

CHAP. XLII. Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their company arrive at the dangerous
Forests of the great Kingdom of Martan, the carrying away of the Princesses,
and the adventures of Rozalmond, inextring of the Castle of Treasure.
ALcidamant, Rozalmond, and the other Princes that left the Court of
Corolandaya, to go to the Castle of Treasure, having been three and twenty
days upon their way without any adventure, that might yield them either trouble
or content, they entered into the dangerous Forests of Martan, and continuing
on their Journey, at length they arrived at a place, where they met with ffoure
several ways, and there being overtaken by the darkness of the evening, they
purposed to attend the morning light, wherefore alighting from their horses
they fate down together upon the gra^^e, and causing such meat to be set before
them, as their Squires had provided, they began to feed as heartily, as if they
had been feasted at the tables of the Emperors of Gardacia, or Martaria, the
Knights needed no lights, the place being illuminated by the fair eyes of
their Mistresses, and those excellent Ladies did not a little comfort
themselves with the protection which their company gave them assurance of from
all disasters that might occur.

The short collation being ended, the Squires retired to their horses, which
were feeding not far off, and the Ladies overcome with the heaviness of sleep,
laid themselves down under the next adjoining trees, environed with the
Princes, who rested at their feet, to secure them from any danger, that uncouth
place might produce.

Their past travel caused them quickly to fall into a sound sleep, and so
continued till midnight, when as six dreadful creatures laying hold on the
Ladies stole them from amidst the Knights, wherewith they being wakened, and
crying out with such a shrill voice, as quickly pierced the ears of their
Champions; they rose up full of amazement, which was immediately converted into
fury, as soon as they perceived the Centaurs run through the thickets of trees,
laden with such precious burdens; their grief for this theft allowing them no
leisure to look for their horses, they made after them on foot with the best
expedition, conducted only by the woeful cries of those they sought to rescue,
and so leaping over hedges and ditches, with a far nimbler swiftness, than
those unto whose feet despair has added wings, they wandered to their great
grief till break of day.

When Rozalmond being on the top of a Mountain, saw one of these Monsters
standing in the mouth of a cave, and grasping in his rude arms the beautiful
Armazia, which spectacle ministering unto him no small content but much more
fury, he doubled his pase, and was not far behind him, when he drew his sword
and entered the cave, with an assured confidence that his first blow should take
his head from his shoulders, but the place was so dark, that after he had
advanced three or four steps, he could see neither Centaur nor Lady;
nevertheless being directed by the complaints, which he well understood came
from Armazia, he fell to running with no less speed, then if he had been in
the plain field, enjoying the favor of the sunbeams to direct him, and
finding the vault still larger and larger, he made no stay till he came to the
brink of a violent Torrent, whose swift streams made so loud a noise, that
there seemed to be some dangerous precipice before him, these dreadful waters
taking from him al hopes of passing further, he turned back and sought up and
down the Vault for the Centaur, when on a sudden he heard the voice of Armazia
on the otherside of the Torrent, which with many a heavy sigh uttered these
words; alas shall I meet with no relief, and must I perish by the violence of
this Monster, who goes about to force me, help, help, noble Knight or Armazia
is lost forever.

Rozalmond hearing these pitiful words, transported with rage, throws
himself into the River, whose waves tossing him for a while, to and fro, at
last they landed him in a Hall of a stately Palace under ground, so amazed, as
if his senses had utterly forsaken him; howbeit his spirits being a little
revived, he rose up and walked a turn or two up and down that obscure room, and
would have gone further, if he had not there discovered the Centaure, who with
a great club in his hand came to assault him; this fell object did rather
rejoice, than affright him that was incapable of fear, so that he charged this
Monster with so fierce a blow, as he thought would have divided him in two,
whereat he being little or nothing astonished, let fall his merciless club
with such a might on Rozalmonds arm, as almost deprived him of the use thereof.

The fury of this Knight growing to extremity, (he being now about a piece of
work of the greatest importance that ever he undertook, namely the redemption
of her that was dearer to him than all the world besides, the combat began to
be most dangerous, the Centaure avoided the strokes of his adversary with such
a skillful nimblenesse, as he was seldom or never there with touched, and
returned his so dexterously, and with such a force, that poor Rozalmond was
oftentimes constrained to make use of his hand and knee to save himself from
falling: Oh God, said he, am I come hither to fight in such manner, as I shall
not be able to rescue Armazia from the cruelty of this Monster? why did not
these waters that I passed rather stifle me, or the rocks beat out my brains,
than that I should escape both, and live to see my Wife, my only comfort
ravished from me, and I want the power to relieve, or revenge her? give me a
resolution either to deliver her from him, or my self to death, since all my
quiet and happiness depends on her safety; whereupon beholding the Centaur
with knit brows, eyes sparkling out fire, and gnashing his teeth, all evident
tokens of an enraged soul, he let his sword fly with such a tempest at his
head, as cleft him down to the shoulders, overthrowing him to the ground with
such a noise, as seemed to threaten the ruin of the place.

This fortunate blow rendered him not a little contented, but he was forthwith
marvellously astonished, to see such a multitude of Sepents arise from the
blood of this Monster as covered all the room, but advancing with his sword
that never failed him, he cut half a dozen of them that were the forwardest to
assault him in pieces; which begat a greater wonder, for these twelve pieces
were transformed into twelve furious Lions.

Then was this incomparable Warrior in no small straight, for (being environed
and assaulted by all these Lions, and feeling the Serpents twining about his
legs, whereby he was so encumbered, as he had scarce any power to stir) he knew
not from which to defend himself, nor upon whom to bestow his blows; he often
lifting up his sword above his head, attempted to let it fall again with no
less force than would have cleft down a Giant, but the Lions being terrified
with the glittering of his blade, instantly with their paws seized on his arm,
and so prevented the blow: In brief, he knew not what course to take, but was
so full of rage, that he could almost have found in his heart to have converted
his fury to his own ruin; nevertheless, calling to mind his Armazia, and
somewhat comforting himself with the remembrance of his wonted courage, and the
happy success which he ever had in all difficult enterprises, he resolved to
quit his sword, and clenching his fist let fall his Gantlet upon the head of
one of the Lions with such a force, as sent him dead to the ground, which
giving him hope of the like defeat upon the rest, he laid about him so
furiously with both hands, that it was not long ere he sent the rest to keep
company with the former.

These dangerous enemies being dispatched, he would willingly have taken a
little breath, but the cruel war which the Serpents still continued against
him, offered him no leisure, so that he laid his hand again on his sword, and
prepared for the slaughter of these troublesome creatures; howbeit remembering
that from their pieces had sprung such fierce and ravening creatures, he let it
hang at his arm, and griping these Serpents in his hands, he strangled them all
one after another, but with so much pain and labor, that he was fain to fall
upon his knees, not being able to support himself any longer on his legs, this
victory which had made him sweat more than ever he had done in any Combat in
all his life, giving him some hope of a lucky end, he sat him down on the
ground, where not staying so long as to take breath, he suddenly arose, and
going to a very fair Damsel, which he saw come out of the cleft of a Wall,
with an opinion that it was his dearest Armazia, he said unto her, ah Madam,
what care and pains has the loss of you cost me, but I hold them all well
bestowed, since they have been able to serve you, and that I find you living,
after I had utterly despayred of your safety.

My Lord, answered she, how glad am I of meeting with you thus, but that I may
be a assured it is you, pull off your Helmet, that so by the light of your fair
eyes, I may be cleared of all farther doubt. I never disobeyed you as yet,
replied he, wherefore I will bare my face, that you may know I am not here by
any enchantment; whereupon going to unlace his Helmet, a woman catching him by
the arm, said unto him, Knight, what mean you to do? take heed of discovering
your self, for otherwise you will never get out of this place; who are you,
said he, stepping a pace or two back, that counsels me to displease my Lady, by
the neglect of her command? and observing her a little better, he continued
saying, O me! what do I see? Sweet Cassandra, what is it has brought you
hither now? Only the care of saving you, answered she, for if you give credit
to this fantosme that represents unto you Armazia, you shall never see her
again, and shall with your self lose all those excellent Knights that
accompanied you out of Corolandaya, together with the glory, and greatness of
all Christendom.

At these words Rozalmond staying, cast his eyes upon the former Damsel, and
acknowledging in her face the very favor and beauties of Armazia, he was
strangely distracted, for it grieved him to have any other will, then such as
his Mistress pleased, and on the other side, he was assured that Cassandra loved
him, and that her skill was most admirable, in so much that he stood looking
very wistly on them both, without speaking one word, when as she that seemed to
be Armazia, said unto him, how now Knight? Do you more regard the speeches of a
Sorceresse that means to deceive you, than of your Wife? do you not perceive
this to be the face which you have so often adored? are not these the very
clothes I had on at the time of our cruel separation? Verily I have great
cause to complain of you, and to say that your love was but dissimulation,
bethink you therefore, whether you will believe me, or no, for be assured if you
refuse to give me your Sword and Helmet, I will return into Gardacia, and never
look on you more.

Madam, answered Rozalmond, (who began to suspect her, and that knew well
Armazia loved Cassandra, better than to speak ill of her) you may be confident
that I will never prefer any thing on the earth before your contentment, but be
pleased to consider, that men are subject to a thousand dangers, and that I
should not be in case to fight, if any new enemies should chance to arrive,
whilst my arms were in your hands, and what good will they do you? Let me
alone with them, I beseech you, for to serve you; and to withdraw you out of
this Cave with less danger; It imports not you much to see me now, but much it
concerns me to keep me as I am, wherefore you shall have that content, as soon
as we shall be in any place where the Sun may assure me that I am in the world.
Uncivil Knight, answered she, thou shall presently feel how much thou have
displeased me, saying so, she took upon her, the form of a most hideous
Fantosme, which with a burning Torch in her hand, began to charge him so
furiously, that her blows seemed to be so many thunderbolts, falling on his
head and shoulders; he looked about for Cassandra, but perceiving her to be
gone, he laid hold on his Sword, and giving a thousand, and a thousand strokes
in the air without hitting any thing, he was so weary, as he was constrained
to rest himself against the Wall, where this Fantosme came, and making most
villainous faces, and with most dreadful howlings, assailed him again, giving
him such terrible blows, that another less strong and courageous would have
fainted under them.

Five hours being spent in this Combat, the Knight that saw nothing because
the night was very dark, but by the eyes, and Torch of the Fantosme, desiring
to free himself from so great a vexation, flourished with his sword all about,
and cutting the air as before, five or six turns up and down the room, at
length by chance met with an entry, wherinto he was no sooner entered, but the
Fantosme vanished away, and left him in such darkness, that every step he
made, he was in fear of falling into some precipice; whereupon he stood still,
and leaning upon his Sword, rested himself for half an hour in that manner, at
the end whereof being wonderful desirous to see a period of this adventure, he
went on groping with both his hands, until about the break of day, he
discovered a very stately Court, full of most admirable Pictures, and lymited
with three great bodies of lodgings built triangle-wise, of which the Walls
being curiously covered with Porphirie, Jasper, black Marble, and Crystal,
cast so bright a luster, that he stayed the more exactly to observe the
workmanship of it.

Nevertheless advancing presently forward, he past in at a Door which he saw
open before him, and had scarce set one foot within it, when as he felt two
such terrible blows discharged on his Helmet, as he was fain to kiss the
ground, from whence suddenly arising, he espied two dreadful Giants, each of
them holding a mighty club aloft in the air, and ready to fall again upon him,
if lightly leaping aside he had not avoided them; his fall, and the sight of
these great Colosses having stirred up his courage, he took his good sword in
both his hands, and with it struck one of the Giants in such manner, that
having divided his iron club in two, the point thereof light so rudely on his
shoulder, as he was forced to set his knees and hands to the ground, and going
to second the former blow, he was prevented by the other Giant, who gave him so
cruel a stroke between the neck and shoulders, that it made him (...) against
the Wall, but he quickly recovering himself, let drive in such sort at him that
wanted a club, as he laid him ^lat on the earth, which presently opening,
swallowed him up, and straightway closed again.

Being thus rid of one, he turned him about to the other, and thinking to avoid
his thundering club which was descending upon him, he was so surprised, that he
was constrained to slide under the Giants arm, and s^i^^ on his body; then
might be seen a most dangerous wrestling, the Giant took him fast by the
shoulders, and gave him such twitches, and terrible heaves, that he had many
times like to have overthrown him, howbeit refuming new courage in hope of
acquiring immortal fame by being victrious, he put the Giant so many ways to
it, and so often showed him such tricks as are practiced in wrestling, as after
two hours travel, he extended him on the floor, which instantly swallowed
him up, as it had done the other.

These two dangerous enemies being thus dispatched, our Warriou^ looked about
him, to see whether there were any more to combat with, but perceiving none
appear, he went to observe those excellent Pictures, where he beheld Amadis of
Gaul, Amadis of Greece, and other Princes of their blood, together with the
glorious feats of Arms performed by them in their life time, so lively
represented, that he had been lost in the contemplation of them, had he not
been directed by the sight of the five Knights entering into the Court together,
out of five several doors.

CHAP. XLIII. The mavelous exployts of Alcidamant, before his entrance into
the Castle of Treasure.
THE day appearing to Alcidamant, upon the top of a Mountain, after he had made
a thousand and a thousand turns, discovered unto him a Centaur of a prodigious
greatness, that carried away Trasiclea toward the mouth of a cave, from
whence issued huge flames of fire, which making him forget his former pains,
he began to run more lustily then he had done all the night before, and
traveled so long, till he approached the said cave, which seemed to be another
Mount Aetna, where the Centaur making a stand, threw Trasiclea into the midst
of the flames, and advancing his mighty club, he let it descend with such a
tempest on our Champion, that he was fain to set his hands to the ground, for
to save himself; but transported with extreme fury, and desiring to be
revenged on the Monster, for precipitating his Mistress in that manner, he
returned him so terrible a blow, as he made him stagger five or six paces
backward, wherewith the Centaur marvellously incensed, discharged so terribly on
his helmet, that he thought the ruins of some Tower had fallen upon him;
nevertheless being in the (...) of (...), he took his sword in both his hands,
and therewith stri^ing at this (...), ^^coun^^ed his club first, and b^at it
with such violence against his h^^d, that it overturned him into the midst of
that dreadful Fur^^ce.

Then it was when this Warrior seeing himself alone, without hope of taking a
greater revenge for the death of his Lady, which he believed was reduced to
ashes, that he began to cry so horribly, as made all the valleys about resound
therewith; his actions were nothing but expressions of madness, and all his
motions so full of rage, that the most confident Giants would have trembled at
the sight of him. Why stay I any longer, (said he laboring to pluck off his
Helmet, that he might tear his hair in pieces) wretch that I am, why stay I
any longer, to make an end of my self in any sort whatsoever? my Mistress is
not in the world, what should I do in it then? no, no, I must leave it, dye
the same death that she has done, and join my ashes to hers: saying so, he
^lung his shield to the ground, and casting his eyes by chance toward the grot
with such piercing sighs, as if his soul would every minute have parted from
his body, he perceived a little Pillar, where beholding a table hanging, he
approached unto it, for to read these words.

Jf thou have courage enough to pass these (...), thou shall recover the
Treasure, which thou beleevest is l^st. O me, said he, more contented than ever
he had been furious, am I permitted yet to hope, and can the safety of my
Mistress consist in my adventures? away with all regard and fear of danger, and
let the world see that my soul does burn with a far more fierce and glorious
fire; whereupon taking up his sword and shield, he went on and threw himself
into those horrible flames, wherein having continued above a quarter of an
hour, without feeling any heat at all, he found himself in a meadow environed
with inaccessable Rocks, saving one only overture which appeared in the form
of a door, whither addressing himself he perceived three monstrous fowls come
out of it, the least whereof was as big as an Ox, which striking at him with a
most dreadful noise, laid him all along on the ground, from whence fear and a
desire to meet with his Lady, having quickly raised him up again, he took his
sword, and (...) when these creatures were returned with their former fury, he
hit one of them so luckily, just on the joint of the wing, that he cut it off,
which caused that dangerous creature to fall to the ground, where becoming
more (...) by the sight of his blood, he r^^ upon him with a m^^vellous force,
but the Knight presenting the point of his sword, stroke him to the heart; and
so sent him dead to the earth.

In the mean time the other two be^^ing their mighty wings, stooped to him, and
catching him in their tallon^, carried him up into ^^e air, where by his fall,
or the fury of these Mon^^ers he could have expected nothing but assured death,
had he not for^^^^tely met with the ^elly of one of them, where into he past
his sword almost to the (...), by which means the p^ngs of death wherein he was
made hi^ un^oo^^ his hold, and let our Knight fall in such a grievous man^^^,
that he verily thought all his bo^es had be^^e bro^e^ within hi^* nevertheless
^^^ing the other (...) toward him, he presently got up, yet not so soon, but
that having first caught him by the Helmet, he lift him up above two foot from
the ground, howbeit finding him too heavy for his hold, he quit him, and
forced him to fall again upon his hands, where suddenly returning, he hit him
with his hooked beak so ^udely on the shoulders, that the club of a mighty
Giant could not more cruelly have bruised his flesh.

This Champion desiring to vanquish his enemy, who by no means would now come
within the reach of his sword, struck at him a thousand and a thousand times in
vain; where-with-all being very much wearied, and finding how that was not the
way to prevail, he held his sword close under his shield, and watching the
Monsters next stooping to catch hold on it, he thrust up his hand with such
fury, that he ran him quite through, and through, laying him dead hard by him.

This trouble some combat, which had lasted three hours, being gloriously
finished, he sat him down on the grass, where the remembrance of his Mistress
not permitting him to stay long, he arose and made toward the Grot, and in
pursuit of his good fortune entering into it, he felt so many strokes upon his
shield and Helmet, that he had much ado to keep himself on his legs; howbeit
standing stiffly to it, and covering himself well with his shield, he laid about
him with his sword, though he saw no body upon whom he could fasten a stroke,
yet feeling that he found resistance, and that his blade did encounter Armor,
now he gave a downright blow, then a thrust, and bestirring himself with
mavelous fury, he still made way; notwithstanding, the more he advanced, the
more was he pressed by his invisible enemies, which so belabored him, that to
his remembrance he never endured so much pain in all the combats he had fought
before; his courage that never knew what danger meant, and that sought for
glory in the greatest difficulties, made him redouble his blows, and go on in
despite of those he did not see, till he saw himself freed from so furious a
charge.

One would think now that our Knight had a great deal of reason to rest
himself, but the desire he had to find out his Mistress, made him go on
without any stay, till he came to a great door, against the which he ran so
forceably with his foot, that it flew open, and gave him entrance into a very
spacious room, where at first sight he was taken with much wonder, for in the
midst of it a crystal Coffer appeared, bordered about with twelve burning
Torches, and twelve huge Pillars that supported the whole edifice, out of the
which on a sudden issued as many dreadful Salvages, with each of them a mighty
club in his hand, who straight way assailed him on all sides, but he received
them in such manner, that at the very first blow he laid one of them on the
ground in case to do him no harm any more, and flying in amongst the rest, he
cut off three more almost by the waste; whereat the others being nothing
dismayed, laid upon him like eight hammers upon an Anvill, wherewithal he was
so terribly battered, as his very bones seemed to be broken within his flesh,
nevertheless hoping for no worse success than he had found in his former
dangers, he bestirred himself with such fury amongst them that he ran up one
to the hilts, cleft another to the girdle, and the third had both his arms,
together with his club sent to the ground.

This so sudden an execution encouraging him to do better, he valiantly
pursued his good fortune, but coming to want breath, he went and leaned
against one of the Pillars, that so he might have them all before him to fight
withal, presenting them his shield on the one side, and the point of his sword
on the other, he attended the approach of these furious and cruel creatures,
which in stead of assaulting him, fell to make such horrible cries, that the
very room shaked withal; by this means having opportunity to rest himself,
he continued about half an hour in that manner.

But pressed with desire to see the end of so many marvels, he advanced toward
these Salvages, that with their clubs were ready to receive him, and resolving
either to dye, or vanquish, he cast his shield behind his back, took his sword
in both his hands, and discharged it so dangerously upon one of them, as he
divided his body in two, cleft another down to the shoulders, and so terrified
the rest, that they began to run all up and down the room, to avoid the fury of
his blade; nevertheless being at last overtaken with incredible pains, two
were overthrown dead upon the place; and the last threw himself upon the great
coffer of Crystal, where by signs he would have begged for life, but
Alcidamant was in such a rage, that without taking heed to what he did, he gave
him so mighty a blow, as having cut him in two pieces, the point of his sword
fell so rudely on the coffer, that it broke it into a thousand pieces;
whereupon there instantly ensued such a terrible clap of thunder, that our
Warrior fell down upon the floor quite void of judgment, where having lain
some two hours, as it were in a trance, he arose without so much as feeling
the least weariness of his passed labors, and beheld instead of the coffer, a
guilt Cuirace enameled with red and green, and garnished in many places
withgreat Diamonds, which rendered a mavelous luster, so excellent, and of so
high a value, as all the richest and bravest Arms that ever he had seen were
nothing in comparison of this, hard by was a most stately Helmet of the same
metal and color, as also a shield with the same device as was in his own;
the desire he had to possess himself of these Arms pressed him so far that
he was about to quit his own, for to put them on, but fearing some trick or
enchantment, he began to consider them with wonder, and to observe them so
narrowly, as he perceived a scrole within the Cuirace, wherein this was written
in the French tongue.

Alcidamant make no difficulty to take these Arms, for they are due to thy
merit, and above five hundred years before thy birth, they were made for theeby
the most excellent Magicians of the earth. Verily said he then, I have no
reason to make any further doubt, for my name that is here written, and the
devise of the shield may well assure me; therewith doffing his own, he put on
that excellent armor which he found so fit for him, that he was confident, it
was made for his service; whereupon being armed at all points, he looked round
about him, and perceiving a large Alley, he entered into it, hoping to crown his
designs with a happy concsiluon.

CHAP. XLIV. What happened to the gentle Clarisel of Guindaya, before he entered
the Castle of Treasure.
C Larisel of Guindaya, bing mightily vexed at the carrying away of his fairest
Miralinda, ran up and down so long, till he discovered a woman in the hands of
three Giants, who leading her tied with cords, made her go very hastily along;
the violence of passion which beguiles the eyes of men, and that represents
things unto them quite otherwise then they are, persuading him that it was his
beautiful Shepherdess, he cried out, O ^^ is it possible that I should behold
her most inhumanely bound with cords, which might captivate all the world? Ah
Madam, these villains, shall not long continue the wrong they do you, for I
will punish them so cruelly, that if all the Giants on the earth were assembled
together, they should learn what it were to lay hands on a creature of your
merit; stay wicked wretches, and do not thus tire so inestimable an
excellence, stay I say, or else be sure that I will cut you into a thousand
pieces; whilst he uttered these words, love and fury lending him wings, he ran
with all his might, and made such speed, that within less then half an hour
he saw himself upon the bank of a great pool, and so near those three
Colossus, as he had the means to discharge a blow on the Helmet of him, that
went hindmost, with such fury that he cleft him down to the teeth.

At the noise of this terrible stroke, and the fall of that Giant, the other
two that were before drew forth their heavy Fauchions, and charged our valiant
Warrior so rudely, as they made him reel very much astonished three or four
steps back, but instantly calling to mind, that the safety of his Mistress was
in question, for whom he would have fought with all the world together, he
instantly recovered himself, and returning to his enemies, he began to shower
most horrible blows upon them, both one after another; nevertheless they
pressed him in such manner, and their strokes were so heavy and thick, that if
the arms he wore had not been framed by Vrganda, without doubt he had been in
very great danger.

This Combat having continued two hours with strange fury, the Giants were
covered all over with blood and wounds, and Clarisel began to grow feeble, by
reason of the incredible travail which he had endured all the night long; but
drawing new forces from the greatness of his courage, and the hope he had of
delivering his fairest Mistress, he took his sword in both his hands, and with
mavelous agilitie passing by two horrible blows, that descended upon him at
one instant, he let his sword fall with such violence upon the shoulder of one
of them, as he opened him to the very girdle, which possessing him that
remained with more rage than fear, he discharged on our Warriors shield with
such fury, as having beaten it against his head, he made him knock his chin
against his breast, and set his knees to the earth, where desiring to overthrow
him quite, he abandoned his great Curtelas, and taking him between his mighty
arms, he gave him three or four terrible twitches: nevertheless, the Knight
being in spite of him risen up again, settled himself well on his legs, and
laying very fast hold on him, he began to bustle very strongly with him, and
put him so to it, as he left him without hope of easily overcomming him.

This dangerous wrestling having continued an hour and better, to the
exceeding discontent of Clarisel, who was vexed to the heart, that he could not
prevail, he became so furious, as making use of all his force, he thrust the
Giant in such sort, that not able to make him let go his hold, they went both
to the ground, where desire of vanquishing animating them alike, they tumbled
up and down so long together, till they fell both into the Poole, where being
separated he knew not how; our Warrior felt himself pulled by the feet, as if
he should be drawn into some precipice, and indeed he found himself in a Cave,
where treading on the carcasses of men, he was marvellously astonished, for
that he perceived not the water to be any longer over his head, nor how he came
there, for casting his eye round about, and perceiving neither Window nor
door, he knew not what to think, nor say, at his being in so dark and hideous
a place, from whence he had little hope to get out.

Nevertheless, being incapable of fear, he went groping by the walls some
twenty or thirty paces, when as he chanced to hear most dreadful hissings,
whereat making a stop, he espied a furious Serpent of an unmeasurable
greatness, which scraping up the earth, stared upon him with two terrible
fiery sparkling eyes, able to terrify any other less confident than our
Knight, who being lighted by those two horrible torches, quickly presented his
shield to the claws of the Monster, and being guided by his good fortune, he
thrust him so just in one of his eyes, that his sword entered three fingers deep
into his head, which caused him to make such strange leapes and cries, that all
the place round about trembled again; and provoked by the smart of his wound,
he flew with such fury at Clarisel as overthrowing him to the earth, he set his
teeth, and claws to his shield, breaking it as easily in pieces as if it had
been glass, and not contented therewith, he plucked so violently at his Helmet,
as if he would have disarmed him, for to devour him, when as the Knight full
of assurance and judgment in the midst of such danger, gave him so sore a
hurt in the belly, that feeling himself touched in this manner, he made a skip
up to the very roof of the Vault, and so suffered the Knight to arise
suddenly, which was to good purpose for him, in regard that the dangerous
creature lighting down presently made at him with such rage, as he could not
possibly choose but have gone again to the ground, had he not warily declined
him, wherefore retiring aside with more agilitie than his weariness seemed to
permit, he let him pass by like lightning, and desiring to make use of
opportunity, he discharged so mighty a blow full upon the body of him, as might
well have divided an Anvile in sunder, howbeit his sword returned without
effect, his scales being so hard, that it did not so much as make any dint in
them, which at first somewhat amazed him.

Nevertheless being ever most confident, where most difficulty appeared, he
resolved to strike him no more in vain on the back, but to try his belly, and
accordingly when this furious Serpent returned, he courageously attended him,
and beholding him raised up on his tail, he thrust his sword so strongly at
his breast, that he ran him up to the very hilts, yet could not that keep him
from being overturned again to the earth by this terrible creature, which in
the pangs of death so crushed him with his claws, and the weight of his body,
as he thought he should have died before he could have cleared himself, but
the greatness of his courage would not suffer him to continue long in that
manner, for quickly ridding himself of so heavy a burden, he withdrew into a
corner of the Grot for to let the Serpent dye, which stormed so horribly, as
the Cave seemed to fall into ruin.

Half an hour being past with this dreadful noise, a general silence
succeeded, whereby Clarisel judging that the Monster was dead, followed the
wall as before, so long till he felt a door, upon the which having bestowed
all his strength, both with his feet, and the pomell of his sword, he brake it
open, and then entered through it into a spacious room, along the which he
perceived thirty very fair Damsels coming who courteously saluting him, he
was encouraged to say thus unto them; Ladies, the honor you do me, does very
much oblige me, but you would add much unto this favor of yours, if you would
tell me any news of an incomparable beauty, which was most unfortunatly stolen
from me in a certain Forest here by. We will give you this content, answered
one of them, but Knight, it must be upon condition that you promise us what we
shall demand of you. If it be in my power, answered Clarisel, assure your
selves, Ladies, you shall not be denied; That which we desire is, replied she,
that you put off your Helmet and kiss us one after another in way of
salutation as the manner is, and that also you will lie with each of us one
whole night together. Your demand, answered Clarisel (exceedingly offended with
this sha melesse speech) being repugnant to the faith which I have plighted to
my Lady, be pleased to dispense with me if I do not satisfy your request,
which in plain terms seems not very honest unto me. How now, wicked wretch,
said the Damsel, do you reproach us to our faces, after you have violated
your word to us? come sirs, lee us make this insolent Knight see that we are
able to revenge our selves when we are wronged; Here with they all of them took
out rods from under their coats, and environing the Knight, began to whip him
so cruelly, that their blows which fell upon his Armor, were no less weighty
than the clubs of the strongest Giants of the earth.

Our Champion seeing himself entreated after this manner, was marvellously
abashed, for though he had his sword in his hand, yet durst he not use it
against them, because they were women; on the other side feeling all his body
battered with multitude of strokes, he was mightily vexed, and could not tell
what to do; for as soon as he avoided the hands of some of them, he found
others presently at his shoulders, and how to get from them he knew not, in
regard they had planted themselves so close together, round about him, that
they stood as strong as a wall; in the mean time their battery continued, and
the Knight found himself in worse case then he was, under the dreadful blows
of Zorobalan, and his brother in great Britain, so that being constrained to
resolve upon somewhat, he held his sword over his head, and running with his
shield against them in a strange fury, he suddenly laid five or six of them on
the ground, which making him way to advance forward, he labored to gain a
porch that he beheld on his left hand, but the rest presently overtaking him,
he fell into his former suffering; whereupon doing as he did before, and having
thereby overthrown a dozen more of them, he got nine or ten paces forward,
where feeling the violence of those blows, to be far greater than at the
beginning, he became so incensed, that rushing forth with all his force, he
passed to the entrance of the porch, in despite of them all; where thinking
himself safe, because they were vanished away, he perceived a Knight in black
Arms make toward him, who without telling him wherefore, saluted him with so
terrible a blow on his shield, as made him set one knee to the ground, which so
enraged him, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it with
such a tempest on his helmet, as made him fall all along, believing that he had
made an end of him; nevertheless, he saw him rise up instantly again, and make
at him with a strange fury, as if he would be thoroughly revenged, but viewing
that dreadful blade aloft in the air, he recoyled to the end of the porch,
where Clarisel having stricken him with all his strength, he sent him to the
earth, which swallowed him up with a most fearful noise, leaving our Warrior
amazed at so many wonders, and exceedingly contented to behold a very stately
Court, toward which he addressed himself with an assured hope to see a
successful issue of his Enterprise.

CHAP. XLVII. The mavelous adventures that befell Amadis of Trebisond, in the
enterprise of the Castle of Treasure.
NEither bushes, trees, nor thorns being able to arrest Amadis, whom the loss
of Palmirenna had made desperate he ran without intermission, until the Sun
grown somewhat high, discovered unto him a spacious Lake, whose further bank
was bordered with a number of magnificent Palaces; the opinion he had, that he
might there hear some news of those Centaurs retreat, possessing him with a
desire to pass the Lake, he coasted so long till he met with a Boat,
whereinto entering, he began with the oars to make way through the water; the
Lake was very calm, and the wind blew with a gentle gale; but at the third
stroke of his oars the waves began to swel and encounter one another with such
rage, as the little skiffe was now carried up as high as the clouds, and by and
by thrown as low as the center of the earth; so sudden and dangerous a tempest
having somewhat amazed the Knight, he labored to surmount the fury of the
waters, and rowing with incredible strength and skill, he kept his Bo^^ steady,
when as a multitude of monstrous fishes ran with such violence against it, that
it was five or six times ready to overturn; the hazard he was in of drowning
was much; nevertheless trusting in the mercy of Heaven, he left mastring the
waves, and fell to combat those creatures with his oars, he struck one, beat
down another, turned him on every side, now stepped forward, then again retired;
besides the Lake was so terrible rough, as he could not stand upon his legs;
but ever and anon was on his knees; briefly, he endured such fearful payns,
that he wished himself a thousand times in the midst of six such Monsters,
as he defeated at his arrival in the Empire of Martaria, rather than be
constrained to deal with these aquaticall horrors, which in the mean time so
tossed the poor skiffe from one to another, that after they hade made it caper,
I know not how often up to the very sky, they turned it over and over, casting
our Knight into the midst of the proud waters, which incontinently swallowed
him up, being unable by reason of his armor to swim for his life.

Then it was that he verily believed, that the end of his days was come,
wherefore assuring himself that the bottom of the Lake should be his
Sepulcher; he bestowed his first thoughts in bewayling his eternal separation
from his Lady, and his last in repenting his sins; but he was marvellously
astonished to find himself in a round Hall very sumptuously built, and
sustained with twelve huge Arches, in the midst whereof he beheld a dozen of
Monkies making such ill-favored faces, and playing such gambals, as
notwithstanding the height of his displeasure he could not choose but laugh;
howbeit this contentment lasted not long, for he presently perceived those
little creatures transformed on a sudden into so many furious Bulls, of a
prodigious greatness.

This unexpected metamorphosis, counselling him to draw his sword, he began
with it to stand upon his guard; when as they all ran together at him with such
rage, that instead of overthrowing him to the ground, they hurled him up into
the air, and then so tossed him with their horns from one to another, that he
made ten or eleven turns before ever he came to the ground; whereby, though
his armor could not be pierced, his flesh and his bones were mightily bruised:
The Knight seeing himself blanketed in this sort, thought he was in no less
danger, then when he was on the water, and was exceedingly grieved for that he
could not make use of his strength and valor; but the most courageous
resolutions are ordinarily found in the greatest dangers, he took hold of one
of these Bulls horns, and settling himself on his back, clasped his sides fast
with his knees and legs, caught up his sword that hung at his wrist, and
setting spurs to him, made him serve in lieu of an horse to combat the rest,
advancing his sword then, he discharged it so dangerously upon one of them,
that he divided him in two, and continuing such horrible blows, laid four of
them on the ground within less then an hour, the rest with dreadful
bellowings so butted him on the thighs and back, that he was in extreme pain;
nevertheless choosing rather to dye than not to vanquish, he so bestirred
himself amongst them, that he extended the rest of the eleven dead at his
feet; and because that, upon which he was, troubled him infinitely by not
giving him leisure to alight, he took his sword in both his hands, and let it
descend with such force on his head, that having cleft it asunder, he sent him
to the earth breathing out his last, himself being cast five or six paces off
by the violence of the beast in his pangs of death.

This dangerous combat being finished in this sort, our Warrior sat him down
upon one of the dead Bulls to take a little breath, but the extreme desire he
had to meet with some one that might tell him news of what he sought for, not
permitting him to take much rest; he got out through a very little door, and
found himself under a rock, from whence issued a very clear Fountain, by the
which having espied Palmirenna sitting, he made toward her with incredible
joy, but she perceiving him coming, rose suddenly up and began to run away, as
if the fear of some mischief had made her fly from the Knight, who much
amazed knew not what to say to it, but imagining that she did not know him, he
followed after her, crying as loud as he could,

Alas! Madam, why do you fly me, and what fear you from me, that do not
breath, but for you? do you not see that I am your slave, or to say better,
that man whom you have made happy by the possession of your favors? stay, I
beseech you a little, and be assured that I am here to preserve you against all
the world, rather than to hurt you, and consider that these my arms, are the
very same which I put on for your service, when we undertook this voyage with
your friends: Do you fly from me still Palmirenna? what may I think of so
great a neglect, but that you have forgot your so many vows, and that ever you
loved me? Palmirenna I am your Amadi^, why do you run from me then with such
cruelty? whence comes this change? Alas! tell me; stay and let me know
wherein I have offended you, that so I may with my death make satisfaction to
your displeasure.

Whilst our Warrior with tears and sighs entreated thus in vain, he still
mended his pace, and running with all his might, was even ready to catch
Palmirenna, when as he perceived four Bears come out of a thicket, whereof
one seizing her, made away with her into the Wood, which put him into such a
rage, that he discharged his sword with that force on the foremost of them, as
having cut off both his paws, the point of it fell so furiously on his
shoulder, that it sent him dead to the earth.

This blow succeeding according to his desire, he was going to set upon the
rest, but being first laid hold on by them, he was overthrown to the ground;
where keeping him down under their cruel claws, they began to set their teeth
to his Armor, thinking to devour him very easily; but our Knigh^ making use of
his judgment, by little and little dis-ingaged his left hand, and drawing
forth his Poinard, he struck it so far into the belly of one of these Beasts,
that having reached his heart, he killed him outright, where with the third
being the more enraged, caught the Poinard between his teeth, biting it in
pieces, assailed the Knight afresh, who finding but this enemy to encounter
with, got up first on hisknees, and then rising all together, took him in his
arms, and laying him on his back stabbed him three or four times up to the
hilts.

The Bears being thus dispatched, he could have found in his heart to have
rested himself, but considering the danger his Lady was in, he flung into the
thicket, where he made a thousand turns without meeting any body, or finding
any way to get out again, at length after two hours travel, he discovered
three frames of building in triangle erected with mavelous art, to which
there was no passage, but by a long ally, that appeared on his left hand
wherein he went along until he came to a gate, and finding it shut, he knocked
twice or thrice, as hard as he could drive, whereupon he perceived one of the
most hideous, and dreadful Giants that ever he had seen look out of a window,
who with a hoarse voice, and in an arrogant manner said unto him; Wretched
Knight, what would thou have? Come thou to seek for death which all
others so decline? I would wish thee to be gone, and not to trouble me thus,
lest I come down, and cut thee into a thousand pieces. Audacious Giant,
answered Amadis, thy very look assured me of thy insolence, which moves me not
a whit, only descend, and open me the gate, we shall then see whether thou art
able to do that thou so much braggest of.

At these words the Giant having clapped too the Window, as if he were in a
mighty chafe, came down a little after, and showed so big to Amadis, that he
wondered how nature was able to frame so huge a mass of flesh, nevertheless
insensible of fear, he gave him with all his force ^ most terrible blow, that
cutting his shield in two, constrained him to recoile five or six paces
backward, howbeit this Collossus quickly recollected himself, and with a
mighty Fauchion began to deal such horrible blows, as the least of them had
been able to have cleft him down to the teeth, if ever he had stood them, but
avoiding them all with admirable address, he so mightily charged him both with
point and edge, as it had been a matter of great wonder to any that had beheld
the precedent labors which he had undergone all the day before; The Giant
stormed for that he could not fasten a stroke on him, and casting forth a thick
smoke at the vizier of his Helmet, hindered himself from seeing where his blows
should light, so that his Curtelas falling incessantly on the ground, had cleft
it in fourteen or fifteen places, which put him into such infinite excess of
rage, that every thing about them trembled with the very sound of his horrible
roaring.

Three long hours being spent in the first fury of this Combat, the Giant
began to grow weary and weak, and our Champion perceiving his advantage over
him, charged him afresh, but seeing him dispute the victory still with him, he
took his sword in both his hands, and struck his enemy so dangerously, as he
gave him a great wound in the arm, making him to reele withal; whereat he was
so mad, that resolving to determine the Combat, he also took his heavy
Scimiter in both his hands, and making as though he would strike on the one
side, discharged with such violence on the other, that Amadis being surprised
therewith, fell tumbling five or six paces off voyding a great deal of blood
at his mouth; This dreadful blow having showed our Warrior how dangerous it
was to receive the like, he arose so strangely transported with rage, that this
Colossus, who did not think any thing in the world was able to strike him with
the least touch of fear, began to apprehend the fury of his enemies sword,
which descended with such a tempest on him, as it opened him to the very wast,
sending him stark dead to the earth. Having performed this to his infinite
content, he lift up his eyes to heaven to give thanks for the assistance he had
received, and wondering much at the strangeness of those things he had lately
seen, he approached to the Gate, which being open, permitted him to behold a
stately Court all plastered with Porphyrie, ^^per, black Ma^ble, and Chry^^all;
whereinto let us le^ve him with an extreme desire to enter, and let us speak of
the (...) which befell Gri^^ the Salvage, and Gri^l^nis.

CHAP. XLVIII. The Mervails which happened to Griolanis, and the Knight of the
Salvage before their entrance into the Castle of Tr^asure.
THe grief wherein Gri^lanis and Grian the Salvage were, having made them
travel six hours with incredible pain, they met together coming out of
athicket, exceedingly vexed for that they could not learn any news of the loss
they had made; hereupon having rested themselves a little, they took the first
way that presented it self unto them, in which they went so long, till they
encountered certain very high walls, at the fight whereof they were wonderful
glad, hoping to hear somewhat of that they sought for; having walked then about
half an hour, they perceived two Damsels upon the battlements of the walls,
unto whom Griolanis addressing himself spoke in this sort. Gentle-women, if
you be as courteous, as fair; tell us whether you saw any Ladies, which were
forceably carried away from us the last night in a Forest hereby. Knights,
answered one of them, we could soon let you see them you ask for, if you were
in this Garden; but the way to come hither is so difficult, that you shall not
be able to obtayn that contentment, if you be not the prime Knights of the
earth.

Gentlewomen, said Grain, it were a vanity for us to be persuaded that we were
any of those, the best in the world; but thus much we will promise that we will
with courage undertake, that which a Knight may perform; and to come where you
are, though we should pass through hell to it; wherefore we desire that you will
be pleased to show us the way. I know not, said the Damosel, whether your
actions will be answerable to your words; but to give you cause to adventure
your selves, look here, said she (showing Penamonda of Greece, and the gentle
Adelazia at one of the cranies tied with cords) these I think are those you
seek for, they shall continue in this estate, until you free them from their
bonds, and save them from greater punishment, which they are to suffer, if your
valor be wanting to them at this present: What, said the King of Corolandaya,
equally seized with joy and grief, shall we want courage in such an
Enterprise? Be assured, Gentlewoman, that we will be chopped into a thousand
pieces, rather then fail in their need, only do but tell us where we may get
in; Through a gate faid the Damosel, which you shall find about an hundred
paces from hence; the same shall show you two ways, let each of you take that
where into his fortune shall direct him, without returning for my consideration
what soever.

Here upon these two valiant Champions advancing forward, met with the Gate the
Damosel spoke of, and courageously entering into it they discryed two little
paths, the right Griolanis took, and Grian the Salvage the left, which lead
him to a cave, where a number of lighted torches hanging on the top of the
roof, plainly discovered the ground unto him, so covered with the points of
swords, pikes, halbards, and partisans standing upright, that was impossible to
make a step without treading on the sharp steel, which somewhat troubled him
at the first; nevertheless being ashamed to make a stop at any difficulty,
having been so charged to the contrary by the Damosel, he stoopst down to pull
them up, as the best mean to pass along; but just as he took hold of an
Halberd it sprung out of the earth, and hit him with such violence on the
breast, that it turned him over and over; where withal being much incensed he
arose, set his foot in the void place, where the halberd had stood, and feixing
with each hand the point of a sword, felt himself hit as before, with so great
force, that he had again been overthrown, had he not stood stiffly to it.

Having then room enough to place both his feet, he was going on to do as he
had begun, when as a mighty noise suddenly rising, he beheld all those points
to come out of the ground, the torches in an instant exringuished, and without
seeing any body, felt himself charged with such a tempest, as he was a long
quarter of an hour on his knees, being enforced to bow under an infirmity of
heavy blows laid upon his shield, his shoulders, and his head; but choosing
death rather than to fail in his enterprise, he arose in a rage, began to cut
those pikes, partisans, halberds, and swords asunder, and by little and little
gayning ground, sometimes flung his blade furiously about his head, then gave a
downright, and by and by a cross blow; briefly, he skirmished in that manner,
as if he had had a thousand Knights in head against him. This dangerous combat
having continued above two hours, with so much pain and labor, as a Knight
less strong and valiant, could not have endured it; he met with certain
steps; upon the first whereof having but set his foot, this so terrible a
charge ceased, which gave him leave to fit down on the second step, so much out
of breath, that he was feign to lift up the vizier of his helmet to take in air.

This while Griolanis was no less perplexed, for he likewise came to a cave
full of lighted torches; but his adventure was far more pleasing than Grians;
for he found the ground covered with exceeding fair women, which lay stark
naked so close one to another, that he was of necessity to tread upon their
bellies if he would pass on, whereat he was no less abashed, then his
companion had been at the sight of the pikes and halberds, so as he remained a
pretty while in suspense, not knowing what to resolve; and that which put him
more into confusion was to hear these women, who one after another said thus
unto him. Cruel Knight, what mean you to do? will you add unto our misery,
and not contented to behold us in a torment, far worse than death, will you
increase it by treading on our tender naked bodies? be moved with our tears,
take another way we beseech you, and perform your enterprise without our
pain; could you be contented to remember another day, that you have been the
destruction of an hundred Gentlewomen which never offended you? The remorse
whereof questionless would torture your conscience, nor would you ever look
upon a woman, but it would extremely grieve you, to think that you had been
wanting in pity to them.

This speech very much disquieted Griolanis, and he was upon the point to have
quit them, and undertaken his Companions way, had he not called to mind that
his Lady would then remain eternally in bonds, and that he had been advised to
pass on notwithstanding any consideration whatsoever, wherefore thinking that
he might without hurting these women, pass along by lifting them up one after
anotheer, he took the first by the arm, and set her on her feet, which was no
sooner done, but she gave him so terrible a blow with her fist on his Helmet,
that in his opinion a thunderbolt could not have hit him with more violence;
How now Gentlewoman, said he, is this the recompense of my good will? forbear I
pray you, and let me deliver your fellows: wherewith not able to appease her,
that still continued beating him, he resolved to spend no more time in words,
but took up the second, by whom he was entreated as by the former, and so
proceeding to lift up those that were next, he received so many blows on his
head, breast, and back, that he had much ado to keep himself on his legs:
nevertheless, what is not feazable for a valiant man, that desires to draw his
Mistress out of so grievous a captivity, as that wherein he had seen his
Adelazia? His courage augmented with difficulties, and though his flesh and
bones were all battered and bruised, yet he labored so long, that he rendered
the passage free, and had no sooner set his foot on the first step of a pair
of stayres that he beheld before him, but immediately these women vanished,
leaving him in rest, whereof doubtless he had as much need as Grian.

These two Warriors then having sat awhile arose, and going up a matter of
twenty steps entered just both together into a stately garden, and meeting at a
Fountain, where they were about to have refreshed themselves with a little
water, they perceived a kennell of hounds of diverse colors, coming along
behind two huntsmen, whereof one of them said unto them in an arrogant manner;
Wretched Knights, who brought you hither without my permission, and how dare
you be so bold, as to meddle with the water of my Fountain? be sure that you
shall pay for your presumption; go, said he, speaking to his Dogs, fall upon
these audacious fellows, and devour them in satisfaction of their crime;
whereupon these two valiant Warriors turning about to defend themselves, saw
no Dogs, but fifty or threescore Tigers, that having environed them, flew upon
them with strange fury, some bit them by the legs, some seized on their
shields, and some hung on their backs, briefly they were so close pressed by
them, as at first they were not able to use their Swords, but breaking from
them in a mighty rage, they began to deal such desperate blows, that in less
than an hour they had laid twenty at their feet, whereat the rest becoming
more cruel, assaulted them in such manner, as if their arms had not been of
the best in the world, these troublesome beasts had drawn blood from them, in
an hundred places, but turning back to back, and renewing the fight with
incredible courage, within two hours they made an end of the rest; howbeit
they were so weary, that they were constrained to fit down and rest them, where
with wonder they observed how all about the Garden there were Statues of Marble
placed, of several colors, so well done, as they wanted naught but speech,
and that the Fountain with most admirable art, sent forth water on every side;
the desire they had to know wherefore all this cost was bestowed there not
permitting them to rest any time, they arose, looked round about them, and
descrying no passage out, they resolved to compass the Wall till they met with
one.

Griolanis went one way, and Grian another, wherein being ravished with the
mavelous things they encountered, they were an hour before they could
compass it, at the end whereof, and at such time as they were not far from one
another, they met with two great Pillars, upon either of which, was a Table
hanging, where in the Greek tongue was this written;

Knight, if thou will pass into the Castle of Treasure, and find that which is
lost, cut down this Pillar, and be not dismayed at the difficulties thou shall
meet with in the alley. These words having showed the Knights how they should
bring their enterprise to pass, they with their Swords laid at these Pillars,
which at the very first blow going to pieces with a most dreadful noise, out
came two Salvages upon Griolanis, and two furious Lions on Grian, who seizing
on him with their paws, labored to pull his shield from his arm, but our
Warrior discharged such a blow upon one of them, as he laid him dead at his
feet, and a little after ran the other up to the hilts; in the mean while
Griolanis more courageous than ever he had been in his life, out of hope which
he was in, to find out his Mistress after this Combat, had cleft one of the
Salvages down to the waste, and cut off the other by the middle; that done,
they entered into one of those alleys, which ended in a large Court of a most
Sately Castle built trianglewise, and going along they felt themselves so
terribly pelted with a shower of stones poured down upon them from a number of
great trees that were planted on each side, as notwithstanding they warded
themselves well with their Shields, they had much ado to get unto the
threshold of two Gates which gave entrance to the Palace, the walls whereof were
all of Porphyrie, Jasper, black Marble, and Crystal.

CHAP. XLIX. The adventure of the Castle of Treasure is brought to an end,
whereupon all the Princes depart for Ethiopia.
WE left Rozalmond diverted from contemplating the excellent Pictures, that
were in the stately Court of the Castle of Treasure, by the arrival of five
Knights, which presented themselves all at one instant out of five several
doors: Now let us tell you, that they were the incomparable Alcidamant,
Clarisel of Guindaya, Amadis, Grian, and Griolanis, who having gloriously
surmounted the difficulties, which they had encountered, as appeared by the
precedent chapters, entered with their swords drawn, being much amazed at their
unexpected meeting thus together.

Hereupon these Princes having caressed one another, and made particular
relations of the strange adventures that had befallen each one in this
Enterprise; they resolved all to pass on, and beholding three great pair of
stayrs, they were going to ascend them two and two together, when they
perceived an old man with a great deal of Majesty present himself; his habit
was black and long, his beard white, his hair confusedly spread upon his
shoulders, in one hand a book, and in the other a golden wand, every one
observing him; Amadis knew him to be the Prince of al Philosophers, the great
Alcander, a special friend to the house of Greece, whereat being wonderfully
glad, he went immediately and embracing him, said. Oh father, how happily have
we met with you, for to free us of a care that mightily troubles us; we have
lost that which we most esteemed in the world, so that if we be not relieved by
you, we are like to be the wretchedst Knights living.

Excellent Princes, said this honorable old man, after he had saluted them
with a great deal of reverence, you have reason to be pleased with this
encounter of me, seeing I am more your servant, than all the men besides in the
world; but it is I that have the greater cause to rejoice at your arrival,
having attended you here an hundred years, since I first gave beginning to the
enchantments of this great Castle; you have this day done such wonders as no
other Knights could perform, which will make your valor to be spoken of
eternally, and the difficulties which you have surmounted are so great, as they
will hardly be believed, but infinite will be the praise for so many brave
actions, and the profit which will redound thereby to all Christendom, that
could not subsist without the end of this adventure, will render you so
recommendable, that you shall be the object of future ages marvel: You do not
know what good you have done; wherefore it is fit that I declare it, to the end
that you may be the more courageously prepared for the labors you are yet to
undergo.

You shall be the means of reviving the great King Amadis of Gaul, the
excellent Amadis of Greece, Don Silves de la Silva, Agesilan, and thirty
Princes more of their blood, withdrawn by me out of the number of the dead, at
the great battle of Aleppo, and hitherto conserved safe by my skill, as also
the unparragoned Knight of the Sun, with Claridian, Poliphebo, Rosicler,
Clarimant, Rozabel, Helen of Dace, Claridiana and Claribel, whose mavelous
acts have filled the world with amazement; and moreover the invinsible Belianis
of Greece, Belforan, Fortiman, Dolister of Nubea, Polista de la Silva,
Policertes, Don Clarinel, Astridea, Periana, Furibond the brave Giant,
Saliverna without fear, and Hermiliana, being all such valiant, and
accomplished Knights, that I have labored by my enchantments to keep them
alive, until such time as Christendom by their assistance and yours, may
triumph over the greatest number of enemies, that ever yet assaulted it: Is not
this greater good, than can be expressed in words? without doubt it is, and be
assured that the fame which you shall acquire hereby, shall ever live in the
memory of men.

Touching the trouble you are in, for the carrying away of the Princesses your
wives, clear your minds of it, for they have been all this while, as now they
are, safe from any such violence: the Centaurs, which you saw, being only fanto
smes, that I caused to appear unto you, knowing full well that you would never
have precipitated your selves, the one into a dreadful flood, amidst the
horrors of a fearful darkness, and the other into an horrible Furnace; and
briefly, that you would never have undertaken such almost impossible things as
you have achieved, had not the hope of recovering your Ladies, made you
contemn such wonderful dangers; and for that only consideration did Vrganda
cause them to come along with you, whom you shall meet with again, as soon as
you have finished the adventure, which now consists alone in forcing these
Princes, that I have named unto you out of the rooms, where they are enchanted,
but without employing your swords on them, or drawing drop of blood from them,
which will not be effected without very great pains, but I am sure it would
grieve you to leave so glorious an Enterprise in so fair a way.

Ah father, said Rozalmond, how strange and mervellous is this, that you have
recounted unto us, we thought that all these excellent Princes had been
converted into dust long ago; howbeit, seeing they live we will most gladly
render them unto the world if it be in our power, you say it will not be done
without much labor, why we are resolved to undergo any whatsoever; wherefore
be pleased, but to show us how we may get to these rooms. Then Alcandar having
appointed Rozalmond, and Don Clarisel, for the deliverance of Amadis of Gaul,
and Amadis of Greece; Alcidamant and Griolanis for the Knight of the Sun;
Amadis and Grian for Don Belianis, he caused them to ascend three several
pair of stayrs, whilst he himself remained walking below in the Court.

These six Warriors, more glorious than ever they had been in all their lives,
in regard of their undertaking of the most glorious enterprise, which had at
any time been spoken of in the world, being gotten up to the top of the stayrs,
found the doors there fast shut, but having easily heaved them off the hinges,
they entered all with their Swords unsheathed, and their bodies well covered
with their shields, where knowing what to do, Rozalmond seized on Amadis of
Greece, and Clarisel on the great King of the Gauls, with a resolution to
carry them forth: but these two strong and valiant Princes began to resist them
with such fury, that with good reason they had been esteemed in former times
for the prime Knights of the earth. Amidst this their dangerous wrestling, Don
Silves, Amadis d'Astre, Agesilan, and the rest fell upon them, and with their
swords showred such an infinity of blows upon their shields, that it made them
almost despair of effecting their enterprise, howbeit calling to mind the
great Alcanders words, they stood stiffly to it, and thrust those two great
Knights along with such force, as at length they set them out of the room,
whither they instantly returned to lay hold on Don Silves and Agesilan, who
troubled them no less than the others; nevertheless, they were likewise born
forth, and after them all the rest, but with so much pain and labor, as
questionless these two Warriors had never prevailed, had they not been
prepared thereunto by Alcander.

This while Alcidamant and Griolsnis, Amadis and Grian, were no less moiled,
for the great Knight of the Sun, and the brave Poliphebo his bastard brother;
Belianis and Belstoran, so stoutly withstood them, and were so assisted by
their Companions, as they were almost out of hope of carrying them forth; but
Alcidamant pushed the Knight of the Sun along with such fury, that with much
adoc he got him out of the door, Griolanis having done the like with Polipheb^,
Am^dis with Belstoras, and Grian with Belianis, they returned so often unto the
room, that in the end they carried them all forth, which was no sooner done,
but there was heard a thousand, and a thousand claps of thunder, accompanied
with such dreadful flashes of lightning, as it struck all these Knights to the
ground quite deprived of their understanding, in which estate having remained a
pretty space, Alcander by virtue of a certain Water brought them to their
senses again, when as they perceived all those goodly buildings to be vanished,
and themselves in the Garden through which Grian and Griolanis past at first,
(which was not made by Enchantment) so amazed, as they knew not what to say or
do; but Alcander coming to them spoke thus.

Excellent Princes, now am I in the height of my content, and beholding you
thus resussitated, as it were from death, I am notable to express the
greatness of my joy. You may very well remember, said he, speaking to Don
Belianis, the many good offices which I have heretofore done you, and how being
desirous to preserve you from a mischief that would have fallen on you and
your friends, I carried you from Constantinople to this place where now you
have been an hundred years; You cannot likewise forget, continued he, turning
himself to the valiant Knight of the Sun, that for to deliver you from the
conspiracic of certain Traitors, which were to have murdered you, and yours,
whilst you were in your beds; I put you into a Chariot, and conducted you
hither to decline the bad influence where withal you were menaced; And I doubt
not but you, said he, casting his eye upon Amodis, and his kinsmen, are
mindful yet of the service that I rendered you, when as I took you up from
amongst so many thousand dead bodies, at the furious battle of Aleppo, and
that having cored your wounds, I then saved your lives, in regard whereof I will
not go about to make any excuse for having retained you here so long, since it
was for your preservation, and for the glory of Christendom, that by your
assistance shall triumph over her enemies, only I would desire you to be
friends, and not to stand upon the possession of Empires, which you had, that
are to remain in the hands of those that now hold them, for the Crown of China
is reserved for you, said he, speaking to the Knight of the Sun, and that of
Mexico attends Belianis of Greece, which are Empires great and mighty enough
to take away the memory of others, so as having no cause to be troubled at this
change, you may all prepare your selves with courage for those bloody wars,
whereby the honor of the Cross shall be maintained in its excellency, and the
Altars of the Pagans overthrown.

But now it is fit that I should let you know, who these six brave Warriors
are, unto whom you are obliged for your deliverance. The first is Rozalmond,
the son of Spheramond of Greece, your grandchild speaking to Amadis; The
second, the incomparable Alcidamant, now Emperor of Tramazond; This is Amadis
of Trebisond, your son, said he, to the Emperor of Greece; This is Clarisel of
Guindaya, son to Florisel of Niquea; This other is the valiant Grian the
Salvage; and this last is Griolanis, the gentle King of Corolandaya. Upon this
speech the Princes of Greece understanding that three of these Knights were of
their children, embraced them with so much affection, that they shed abundance
of tears for joy; In the mean time Alcidamant, Grian, and Griolanis,
complemented with Belianis, the Knight of the Sun, and the rest.

These Princes having thus caressed one another, the Queen Oriana, the Empress
Niquea, Diana, Pentasilia, Claridiana, Olivia, Florisabella, Bellianiza,
Sirenna, Bergelina, and the other Princesses of Greece, that had been
enchanted, as you have seen in the first Chapters of our first part; being much
amazed at each others beauties, fell to kissing, and embracing one another; but
all these Ladies, and the Princes, were almost lost in wonder at the sight of
Armazia, Miralinda, Trasiclea, Palmirenna, Penamonda, and Adelazia, which were
brought in by Cassandra, immediately upon the ending of the Enchantments of the
Castle of Treasure; then it was that their joys were renewed, that these
Warriors were not able to express their gladness for the recovery of their
Wives whom they had bewailed as lost; that Amadis embraced Armazia, Miralinda,
Palmirenna, and Penamonda, that he humbled himself before the excellent
Princess of Tramizond, and the beautiful Adelazia, that the Knight of the Sun
and Belianis marvelled how nature could produce creatures so rare, and that
Claridiana, Florisbella, and the rest, did them all the honor they could
possibly devise.

These welcomes, these complements and rejoycings having endured two hours, and
more, Alcander leading them into a long and spacious grot, made them a
sumptuous collation, at the end whereof placing himself in the midst of
them, he declared unto them in few words the furious war that was in Ethiopia,
as also the harm that might redound to all Christendom, if they made any
longer abode there, and then made fifty excellent white armours to be brought
in with red crosses, both before and behind; and having presented them to these
Princes, and to the fair Amazons, Trasiclea, Claridiana, Pentasilea, and
Hermiliana, together with an Horse and a lance to every of them, he caused
them to be armed with all diligence; which was no sooner done, but that two
great Chariots appeared in the air, drawn by four strange creatures; Into one
of them he made all the Princesses to enter with Cassandra, who carried them
to the I Will of Corolandaya, and bestowing himself in the other with all these
Princes and Amazons, to made toward Ethiopia, where they arrived within three
days after, he perform the wonders which shall be related unto you in the
Chapters following.

CHAP. L. Amadis of Gaul, and his companions arrive in Ethiopia, their
resolution to pass through the Enemies Camp; Rozalmond and his friends being
separated from them, surprise the strong Fort of Zeilan.
ALcanders Chariot having made way through the clouds for two days together;
the great Fowls that drew it abated their flight, and lighted on the ground at
the entrance into a Forest, where the reverend old man causing them to
descond, said unto them. Brave Princes, you are now arrived in Ethiopia, where
you are to employ your valor and awaken those forces, which have been so long
time asleep; here you shall meet with the valiant Florisel of Niquea,
accompanied with all the young Princes of Greece, their Allies, and three
hundred thousand men, although he has in the precedent battails lost two
hundred thousand and above; but the number of the Pagans is so great, that
notwithstanding the slaughter of four hundred thousand men cut in pieces by
the Christians, they have yet above five hundred thousand remaining, besides so
many excellent Warriors, as your presence is more then necessary at this time
to arrest the fury of their Enterprises; I refer all to your wisedoms, take
this way which will lead you directly to the enemies camp, and managing your
fortune wisely, give her occasion to favor you; These six Warriors, the
Authors of your deliverance shall follow you ere it be long, but they are
first to perform an enterprise of great conse quence, to which end they must
take this path of the left hand.

Having spoken this he mounted into his Chariot, and was instantly carried out
of sight; whereupon these Princes dividing themselves to the great grief of
Alcidamant, that was feign to part from his Trasiclea, they began to march
several ways. Rozalmond and his companions having traversed the Forest,
which was not very long, met with a Peasant, that discovering them would have
fled away; but Clarisel having staid him, asked him why he was afraid? Alas!
answered he, I have more cause then would I had, for I doubt you are some of
our Princes enemies, who lie in wait here for some surprise; but surely you
will loose your labor, for your troops have so ravaged all about Zeidan, that
every body is fled into the woods and mountains here about, for fear of falling
into your hands, I only am the unfortunate man, who going to give advice unto
our Emperor of taking in of that Town could not decline your encounter. Honest
friend, said Clarisel unto him, thou art much mistaken; for we are Christians,
and such as would willingly serve thy Master, who is a friend to the Princes of
Greece. I would advise you then, said he, to advance no farther forward, the
fields are all covered over with an hundred thousand men, which after the
surprise of Zeidan, have laid siege to Goraxa, one of the strongest Towns of
this Empire, and all the riches of the world could not ransom you out of their
hands, should they once lay hold on you, which were great pity, for by your
countenances you appear more than ordinary men. God a mercy friend, said
Clarisel, laughing, for thy good opinion of us, howsoever we do purpose not to
follow thy counsel; so letting him go they consulted together about the
course they should hold, and resolved to go straight into Zeidan, faining
themselves to be Pagans, cut the Garrisons in pieces, and so restore that
strong Town into Prigmaleons possession.

Riding on then, after an hours traveling they presented themselves before the
Gates, which were presently opened unto them, the Pagans never imagining that
six Knights being enemies durst hazard themselves amongst eight thousand men,
that kept the place; Nevertheless Rozalmond which marched foremost, seeing
himself within, drew out his sword, cleft the first to the teeth, and flying
among the rest, left his companions to follow his example, who desiring to show
as much force and courage, began to make such a slaughter, that threescore lay
dead at their feet, before the Town took the alarm; but the hurt men running
up and down with fearful (...), two thousand came suddenly in, which falling
furiously upon them, thought to make an end of them in a trice; but these
incomparable Warriors, that would not have been afraid of all the world
together, went and met them with such confidence, as made the most courageous
amongst them to tremble, they ran up and down like lightning, and keeping close
one to another, they slew so many, that it was a most dreadful sight to
behold, all the streets were covered with dead bodies.

The noise increased, the number of the enemies augmented, and from every part
came soldiers hurrying in, which rendered the confusion more horrible. An hour
being spent in the fury of the first fight, during the which sixteen hundred
men had been massacred, all the rest began to fly, when as six Giants appeared
with three thousand men, who seeing so much blood and murder, could not
believe it was done by the hands of six Knights alone; howbeit perceiving their
people to fall at their feet, as often as the swords of these Knights
descended, they advanced all with such an excess of rage, as the fire flew out
of their eyes: Our Princes, who perceiving rightly, that the victory consisted
in the death of those six Colossus, beholding them arrive with fury, incountred
them with the like order, and desiring to display the uttermost of their force,
in regard it so concerned them, discharged upon their helmets with such a
tempest, that Rozalmond and Alcidamants opposites were cleft down to the
girdle, and the rest to the teeth, which put such a terror into their
followers, as they labored to save themselves by flight, but the Inhabitants
of the Town rallying themselves, and finding them in disorder charged them so
rudely on the other side, that their fear increasing, they were all cut in
pieces, four hundred only excepted, who betaking them to their heels, fled
to the gross of their Army, and there so published the wonders which these
Knights had done, that they believed them to be Devils.

Whilst these six Princes were cried up to heaven in the Town by the people;
who promised to maintain themselves for the time to come, by the favor of
their Walls and Fortifications; Amadis of Gaul, and his Companions having
marched two days together, and one evening discovered the enemies Camp, were
marvellously astonished to behold so many Pavillions, and Tents; that at first
they wished for Alcanders Chariot to carry them into the City; but being
courageous enough to make their passage thither with the sword, they resolved
to attend the break of day, so that they might surprise the Enemy asleep, and
accordingly they entered into a little thicket, where having taken a little
rest, they arose, and advancing toward their Enemies, they entered pell-mell
amongst them with such fury, that above five hundred men lost their lives in
less than half an hour; the Tents went to ground, Pavillions were
overturned, and the massacre continued with such horror, as the Sun seemed
loath to appear, because it would not be spectatour of so cruel a butchery.

The famous Amadis of Gaul pressed through them like lightening, Amadis of
Greece thundered every where, the invincible Knight of the Sun overrun all
like a torrent; Belianis of Greece carried himself like a fury, the four
excellent Ladies, Trasiclea, Claridiana, Pentasilea, and Hermiliana did
wonders, Belstoran, Rosicler, Claramant, Poliphebo, Don Silves, Fortiman of
Greece, Amadis d' Astre, and ^he rest cut off arms, cleft men in two, hewed
Knights in pieces, and nothing appeared before them but went to the ground; the
uprore increased; the whole Camp put themselves in Arms, the Christians were
amazed, and could not imagine from whence so great a disorder should proceed,
were it not from the Army of Martaria, that was every day expected; briefly all
was in confusion, and the Commanders not able to be informed by those that fled
of the cause of this tumult, knew not what to resolve upon; nevertheless,
Falanzar a prudent and courageous Prince, advancing with Brufaldor King of
Gedrosia, Roussardan the furious, Bravorant, King of Morimont; Marisgolf, the
grand Salvage, and Furiander his son, encountered these fifty redoubted
Warriors, and seconded by twenty thousand Horse, thought to vanquish them very
easily, but Amadis of Greece, the Knight of the Sun, Amadis of Gaul,
Rosiclere, Poliphebo, Belianis, and Belfloran, having arrested the fury of
these seven proud Pagans, that were persuaded they could carry all the world
before them, the rest flew in amongst their troops so courageously, that after
they had past two and thirty Giants by the edge of the Sword, they put them to
flight with an incredible slaughter.

In the mean time the Combat between these fourteen Knights became most
horrible and cruel, howbeit our Pinces not meaning to stay till the whole
Camp were in arms to invest them, having valiantly dif-ingaged themselves out
of their hands, drew toward the City, but encountering the proud Knight
Arastron, who came accompanied with Marmoran, Sophy of Bultara; Brizardan,
Sultan of Aralafia; Gorgophon, (...), the great Caliph of Francapia; Moranteon,
Sultan of Circassia; Fier^s^on, the redoubted King of Balivan; Barcandor, and
Bucarguant, their pastage thither grew more difficult than they expected;
nevertheless, Trasiclea, Don Silves, Amadis d' Astre, Claridiana, Claridian
her son, Claramant, Forti^^^, and the gentle Doliftor of Nubia opposing
themselves to these nine Warriors, there began a most cruel and furious fight
between them, whilst the rest had much ado to save them from an hundred
thousand men that came in from all parts, and questionless they had been in
great danger, if Florisel of Niquea, who imagined that they were some valiant
Knights that labored to pass unto his Camp, had not suddenly issued forth
with thirty Princes of Greece, and fifty thousand Horse, which falling
furiously on these disordered troops, overthrew so many to the ground, as it
was almost covered with them.

Then it was that those brave Champions hearing Grecia cried on all sides, took
new courage, and flying amongst the Pagans, made so great a slaughter, that if
Falanzar had not caused his Forces to retire, his Army had been in danger to
have been cut in pieces, although he was assisted with two hundred Giants, but
this prudent Monarch, and his followers after his example, having quit the
combat, which they had with Amadis of Gaul, and his friends, the Christians
had liberty to return to the City; where that great Amadis of Gaul, with
Amadis of Greece, and Don Silves being discovered; Florisel, Don Rogel, and the
other Princes of Greece, were so confounded, as they remained a good space
without speaking a word, believing that this succor proceeded from the art of
Alquif or Urganda, and that those personages were no other than Fantosmes, but
being cleared from that, by the speech of these great Princes, who declared
unto them how they had been preserved in the Castle of Treasure, and delivered
by Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their Companions, together with Belianis and the
Knight of the Sun; whom they made known unto them; Florisel, Don Rogel, and
Spheramond, were ready to swoun for joy; they fell on their knees before their
Grandfathers, embraced Don Silves, Pentasilea, Amadis d' Astre, Agesilan,
Fortumian, and the rest, and with much honor caressed the Knight of the Sun,
Don Belianis of Greece, and their companions.

My Lord, said Florisel of Niquea, embracing the knees of Amadis of Greece, am
I so happy as to behold you again? I never thought it possible, and when I saw
you enter into the crystal Chamber of Cenotaph, where you were enchanted, I
verily believed that the clap of thunder which brake forth at that instant, was
the sign of your death; But how true, O great Alcander, was your prediction
then, and now I understand the meaning of those secret words you wrote unto me,
as also the Prophecy you left at Constantinople; for the Crows, which were to
assemble to possess the sleeping Eagles neast, are with out doubt these
enemies that lie about our Walls; and now I see that Prophecy fulfilled which
said, The Earth shall open to render forth the treasure it concealed, and the
tears shed for a loss not suffered, shall be changed into gladness; The truth
hereof is unquestionable, and the excess of my content past all expression.

Florisel having said thus, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, and Russian, made themselves
known to the new comers; and Silvan having with a thousand embraces received
Don Silves, and the fair Pentasilea, his mother, some hours were spent with
incredible rejoicing, at the end whereof, and just as they were sitting down at
a table; a soldier entered, who as a most prodigious matter, delivered that
Zeiden had been recovered by the valor of six Knights alone, who in one day
had slain six Giants, and seven thousand five hundred Knights that guarded it;
look said Amadis of Gaul, here is new occasion of joy, which doubtless
arrives unto us by Rozalmond, Alcidamant and their companions, who are said he,
speaking to Florisel, the best Knights of the world; my Lord answered Florisel,
I have seen them in fight, and must thereupon conclude, as you have done;
Herewith sitting down to dinner, they were served in great state, with all the
exquisite meats that possibly could be had, where we will leave them and return
unto the Pagans.

CHAP. LI. The Pagan Princes present the Combat of an hundred, to an hundred
unto the Christians, they accept of it; the forces of Martaria, with the
assistance of Rozalmond, and his friends, defeats Artogants Army, that besieged
Goraxa.
WHilst the Christian Princes were drowned in pleasure and gladness, the
Pagans much more vexed at the hardiness of these incomparable Warriors, which
were able to repress their fury, then at the loss of three and thirty
thousand men slaughtered in their Camp, were at the supremest degree of rage,
but desiring some way of revenge, they assembled in Falanzars tent, who
demanding their advise upon the consequence of another Battle, with a
proposition to send for Artogant and his Army; but Bravorant, King of Morimont,
the most redoubted Pagan of the earth, rising up with Gorgophon, that bit his
fingers for spite to have met with enemies able to resist him, he said unto
him with a carriage that testified his rage.

Great Monarch, when I consider that our troops are less by half, than they
were at our arrival here, I cannot choose but marvel, either at our
misfortune, or at our enemies well managing of their wars, their cunning is
more than their courage, their men are better than ours, and it is too evident,
that numbers have stood us in little stead in our enterprises; wherefore I hold
it not fit, nor will I counsel you to hazard the honor of Paganism, and the
greatness of our hopes any more on the weakness of the arms of such a
multitude of soldiers as we have, which ordinarily fail us in our occasions,
and are the means to make their Captains lose the glory, which otherwise they
might obtain, knew they but how to obey and fight: You have here two hundred
Knights, as valiant as any the earth does bear, the meanest of which would make
the most valorous of our enemies to faint, embrace this as the best course,
propound a combat of an hundred to an hundred, and in that manner decide our
differences: The Grecians are rash enough to undertake it, trusting in the
force of thirty or forty amongst them, whom they not a little value, but I am
confident that you will this way obtain the victory, whereof we are else like
to fayl, if by past success we may probably conjecture of that which is to
come. Your advice is such and so good, answered Falanzar, that I resolve to
follow it, if the rest of these Princes here are of our opinion.

Mighty Emperor, said Gorgophon then, proceed on boldly, for I will undertake
that not one of this assembly, but is desirous to spare the blood of so many
men, as infallibly would be spilt, if we should be so wilful as to meet the
enemy once more in open field; wherefore cause a challenge to be drawn, as soon
as you please; and let the conditions of the combat be, that you shall be Lord
of this Empire, if the victory be ours, or that we will dislodge with all our
troops, and leave it still in their possession if fortune shall favor them.
This said, all the Princes rising up, as it were to authorize Gorgophons
speech, Falanzar sent this which follows, to be presented to the Grecian
Princes, by Gedereon, King of Arginaria.

The great Emperor, and Caliph of Siconiaes challenge to the Princes of Greece.
THE pity which we have of our people, and the horror of so many dead bodies
that we have seen lying in these fields, inducing us to prefer their welfare
before our own fafety, does oblige us to conserve it with the hazard of our
lives; In which regard we have sent to present you with a combat of an hundred
Knights against alike number of ours, so to determine all our differences with
the victory of the one, or the other party; consult with your courages and
forces, and let us know whether the world does commend you with reason: The
King of Arginaria, our Ambassador, having absolute power from us to dispose of
the conditions of this fight, you may take his engagement for all our
combattants, and send us a like assurance of your parts.


The excellent King of great Britain, unto whom all the rest of the Princes
referred themselves, having read this challenge, turned him to Gedereon, and
said. King of Arginaria, you may behold the answer, that is to be returned you,
in the countenances of these Warriors, which are here assembled, there is no
need of further advising with them about it, they testify sufficiently, that
their desire, and yours, is one and the same; wherefore not to hold you longer
in suspense we say, that we are contented with the number you have chosen, and
with the conditions you propound for the possession of this Empire, though you
have no right at all unto it, but if our ill fortune takes it from us, we have
three or four others to recompense our Son Prigmaleon withal; whereupon the
Emperor of Aethiopia having protested to perform whatsoever Amadis had agreed
unto, the Secretary was called to write this.

The King of great Britains answer to Falanzar Emperor, and Caliph of
Siconia.
WE are no less tender of our people than you, and your resentment that way
seems so just unto us, that never sticking at the right you have to claim the
Crown of the Empire, we are very well contented to set it upon the end of a
Lance before the Judges of the Combat, which you demand, and whereunto We
agree, to be performed betwixt our two Camps five days hence, with the same
assurance, as you have given us; And because the election of the Arms is in Us,
We choose those which are usual with Knights Errant, and in the mean time We
will make a truce for four days.


The King of Arginaria returning with this answer, all the Pagans were
marvellously astonished at the name of Amadis of Gaul, whom they thought had
been dead long before, and understanding that he was the chief of them that had
made way through their Camp with so great a slaughter, they believed that so
many Princes were resussitated to torment them eternally; nevertheless, their
own pride persuading them that the earth could not contain men that could
resist them; Falanzar caused a List to be drawn up of those that were to
Combat, and never going about to give them reasons, for to render them the more
courageous, he sent them away to their Tents, there to take order that their
Horses, and Arms, might be well fitted for this furious fight. Let us give
them time to make their preparations, and recount the brave actions performed
by the Martarians: You may remember that the Emperor of Martaria being made a
Christian, departed from Corolandaya, with Persides of Greece; Floridan of
Persia, Lucibel of France; his Sons-in-law, and gentle Sestilian of Spain,
servant to the fairest Agiliana, Princess of Arbales, to carry succors to the
Princes of Greece.

This great Monarch desiring to manifest his zeal to the glory of the new God
which he adored, and the esteem that he made of the Princes of Constantinoples
alliance, being fortunately arrived in his own Empire, made forth Commissions,
caused an hundred thousand Horse, and threescore thousand Foot to be levied,
bestowed most part of the Infantrie in five or six Frontier Towns, and levying
twenty thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, under the conduct of the King
of Arbales his Cousin, to withstand all attempts of his neighbors, if they
should chance to stir in his absence, he resolved in person to conduct an Army
of fourscore thousand Horse into Aethiopia.

Having then accodingly imbarqued them with his Sons-in-law, and himself, he
was carried with so prosperous a gale, that having run along by the coasts of
Guinea, Cephala, and Calicut, in seven and thirty days he arrived within three
leagues of Zeiden, where informing himself of the state of the War, he
understood that Artogant, the Sultan of Francapa, being separated from the body
of the Army, held Goraxa very straightly besieged with great likelihood of
carrying it, in regard it could not be succored without much prejudice to the
Christian forces, whereupon putting his men in battle array, he marched toward
Goraxa with a resolution to charge the enemies, and accordingly, finding them
prepared to receive him, for that Artogant had been advertised of their
descent, he caused Lucibel and Sestilian to advance with thirty thousand
Horse, who incountring six Giants in the head of forty thousand men, they
charged their Lances so luckily, as two of the Giants were run through, and
through.

The encounter of these first troops was very furious, and so many Knights were
overthrown, that within less than half an hour, the ground was all covered
with them; Lucibel and Sestilian, having broken their staves in the bodies of
the two Giants, began to disorder the Pagans, and overturning all that came in
their way, they filled every part with such fear, as the soldiers flying from
the tempests of their swords, declined them more than they would have done the
pestilence; On the other side the four Giants enraged at the death of their
companions, made so great a slaughter, as was most lamentable to behold: In
this sort the fight became most cruel and bloody; and every minute so many men
fell, that in the field was nothing but heaps of dead bodies. Two hours being
spent in the heat of this first conflict, and the victory as it were hanging
in equal balance, there arrived six Warriors from Zeidens side, who
understanding by an hurt soldier of all that had past, they fell in amongst
the Pagan troops, and began to make such a massacre of them, as they were no
less dreaded, than all the Army besides; they cut off arms and heads, cleft
men down to the waste, divided Knights in two, and the fury wherwithall they
fought was so great, that they alone seemed able to destroy all the Pagan host.

The Giants perceiving this disorder, went and ran all four together, with
such confidence against those six incomparable Warriors, as if they would
easily have laid them in the dust, but they were so rudely incountred, that two
of them had their arms, swords and all, sent to the ground, and the other two
were cleft down to the teeth. Then it was that the Pagans, beholding so sudden
a defeat of those four Colosses, in whom they had placed all their hope,
betook them to flight, ready to be cut all in pieces, had not the Sultan of
Francapa come in to their succor with ten Giants, and threescore thousand
Horse; The arrival of these new forces having restored their courages, they
turned head against the Christians, and began to lay about them with incredible
valor, but the Emperor of Martaria approaching with Persides, and Floridan,
the fight began to be so hot and violent, that the face of the whole field was
covered over with slaughtered carcasses, and the air sounded nothing but cries
and lamentations of dying men; The Giants did wonders, they cut and hewed down
all before them, and keeping themselves still close together, they made such a
miserable havoc whersoever they went, as it was a spectacle of incredible
horror.

The Martarian Emperor desiring to show that he was a Christian, ran without
fear into danger, being guarded by the thundering swords of Persides, Floridan,
Lucibel, and Sestilian, who always accompanied him, and the slaughter was so
great wheresoever they past, that the Giants being unable to arrest their
^^ying people, advanted to encounter them, and charged them with such fury, as
Sestilian and the Emperor were overthrown under the horses feet, where
doubtless they had been stifled, had not Persides, Lucibel, and Floridan kept
off the enemy, till such time as their followers had taken them up, and carried
them out of the press. This while the three Princes were in much danger amidst
so many Giants, and being oppressed on so many sides, they had little hope of
escaping with life, when as those six Champions that came from Zeiden
incountring upon that place, fell in with the Giants, and discharged their
swords all at one instant with such a tempest, that six of them sunk down dead
at the feet of the three besieged Princes, who knowing those six incomparable
Warriors to be Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their companions, were so far
encouraged, that clasping their swords fast in their hands, they delivered
three such horrible blows, as three of those Colosses fell downdead on their
fellows.

The Pagans nevertheless being nothing dismayed, stood very stoutly it, after
the example of the Sultan of Francapa, who that day rendered mavelous proof of
his force and courage, in so much that the Pagan Army being resolutely bent to
fight it out, were within three hours cut al in pieces, six thousand only
excepted, which with Artogant saved themselves in a wood, leaving the Christian
Princes with the loss of thirty thousand men, whereof they were not much
sensible, the rather for that the Emperor and Sestilian were well recovered of
their hurts. Having continued then some time to bury their dead, during the
which Rozalmond and his friends had recounted the deliverance of Amadis of
Gaul, and of so many enchanted Princes, with all that had past in that
adventure; The Emperor raised his Camp, and marched on toward Saba, being
somewhat perplexed with thinking how he should get to the City, by reason of
the enemies lying round about it, but having learned of certain Courriers, who
had been sent to seek Alcidamant, and his fellows, for to be of the number of
the Combattants, that there was a truce between the Pagans and them, he quietly
advanced without any impeachment to the gates of the City, where all those
great Princes did the Emperor of Martaria so much honor, and so caressed
those excellent Knights, that came along with him, as cannot well be expressed
in words; wherefore I will pass it over, and relate the combat betwixt the
Christian Princes, and the Pagan Kings, for the determination of their wars.

CHAP. LII. The dreadful combat of an hundred Christians, against so many
Pagan Princes; the end thereof, with the bloody slaughter of all the enemies
troops.
HAd not the hope of an horrible revenge in some sort mittigated the
displeasure, which the pagans conceived upon the advertisement of the defeat of
Artogants Army, by the Martarian forces, they would have been even mad with
rage, but attending the day appointed for the combat, with much impatience,
they comforted themselves in the confidence they had to put all the Christians
to the sword, when as they should be disfurnished of their Commanders,
whereunto they were the more assuredly persuaded by the arrival of the fairest
Azamandra, who came unto the Pagans Camp, with a very stately equipage.

First of all there marched in excellent order fifteen thousand Amazons richly
armed, and mounted on Unicorns, whose furniture was all guilt over; a little
after, but at some distance, rode nine other Amazons with golden Crowns on the
top of their helmets; then followed a tryumphant Chariot, carried upon twelve
great wheels of Ivorie, and drawn by twelve Unicorns, as white as snow, which
being fastened together with golden chayns, were guided by twelve little Dwarfs,
apparelled in cloth of gold; the Chariot was of a mavelous fashion, the
length of it was fifty foot, the breadth fifteen; a sumptuous Pavilion enameled
with red and green, covered the top of it; the two sides were two Arches,
whose roofs were enriched with a world of precious stones; against the back of
it was a throne all set with diamonds, which sparkled round about in a
wonderful manner: Therein sat Azamandra, armed all over save her head and
hands, with such a majesticall beauty, as amazed all that beheld her; thirty
Trumpets environed this Chariot, continually sounding with an admirable
consort, nine Amazon Queens followed close after, and a good way off marched
fifteen thousand Amazons in the same order as the first.

This excellent Princess was received with all the honor that possibly could
be done her, especially by Falanzar, who being stricken in love at the sight of
so rare a creature, kissed her hands, and said unto her. Madam, I must believe
that the gods have inspired you to come hither, for to comfort us with your
presence, after so many losses as we have received: Great Prince, answered she,
it very much grieves me, that I have been so slack in bringing you this
succor, which now proves altogether unprofitable, in regard of the accord that
you have made with your enemies; but if there remains a room yet in the number
of the hundred, which you have chosen for the combat, let me entreat you to
give it me, that I may testify the desire I have to serve our gods, and to
make trial of my self against the Princes of Greece, who are every where so
cried up with incredible applause. Madam, replied Falanzar, it were a grievous
sin methinks to expose so precious a Jewel, as your incomparable self, to the
hazard of Arms; nevertheless, since you desire it, we will by no means oppose
your pleasure, whereon we will all of us absolutely depend; You shall tomorrow
then have the prime place, and so many Princes as you behold here, shall but
second the greatness of your courage.

Having said so, he with the most part of the Pagan Kings conducted her to her
quarter, and leaving her there, to refresh her self, and pitch her Tents, he
assembled all his Commanders to his Pavillion, where having briefly
remonstrated unto them of what importance the next days fight would be, he
desired them to permit him to dispose of the order that was to be observed in
so dangerous an affair: wherefore having chosen fifty of the strongest Giants,
that were still remaining in the Army, he nominated fourteen of the best Knights
Errant of all Paganism, whose names shall be delivered hereafter, thirty two
Kings, and four Amazonian Queens, with Azmandra, for the Combat. On the other
side Amadis of Gaul, upon whose care the Christians altogether relied,
entreated the Emperor of Martaria, seeing his age did exempt him from the
exercise of Arms, that he would be pleased to be Judge of their Combat,
whereunto he having condiscended, he ordained that Gelodan, Atletta his Wife,
Astibel and Timbres of Egypt; Oriander, the King of Catay; the Queen Castora,
and Parmenian of Cyprus, should be for the guard of the Camp; as also to see
their men might still be in readiness for all kind of accidents, then finding
that the rest of the Princes there assembled, amounted to the number of an
hundred, he commanded them to be all prepared against the next morning, which
at length appearing, to the equal contentment of both parts, our Christians
heard Mass, and disposed of themselves, as men fitted for another world,
whilst the Pagans to render their gods favorable, offered a thousand
sacrifices unto them.

That done, the Emperor of Martaria, and the King of Argosan, Judge for the
Pagans, having begirt the Barriers with four thousand men for the surety of
the field, and the Trumpets being placed, the Pagan Kings presenting themselves
first with incredible confidence; The beauteous Empress of the Amazons marched
foremost clad in such rich Arms, that the Diamonds upon them dazzled the eyes of
all the spectatours; then followed Falanzar, Brizardan the Sultan of Aralafia;
Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara; Policastaleon, King of Zeilan; Mambriman, King of
Fornacia; Furiander, son to the grand Salvage; Asturion, the stout Sultan of
Brutacan; Alceus, the generous; Artogant, Sultan of Francapa; Bacarguant; the
proud Knight Arastron; Brufaldor, King of Gedrosia; Moranteon, King of
Circassia; Bravorant, King of Morimont; Gorgophon; Roussardan, the furious King
of Grifalara; Antomedon, Caliph of Francapia; Typhaeus the dreadful; the
gentle Knight Armorand; Fieraston, King of Balian; Marisgolf the great; the
horrible Giant Bramanaldon; Pandaro the stout; Radamant, the inexorable, and
fifty Giants; After whom went Gedereon King of Arginaria; Gronfalin, King of
Facea; Meliander, King of Russia; Armorand, Palamedes, king of Cassandria;
Asmorian, King of the superior India; Salander, Giracond, Brandimart,
Raiartes, Boraldo the strong; Broncaldion, king of the Arcofibrats; Rindar,
Artilian, Cariand^r, Argilles, ^^dismond, and Alarban.

These hundred Champions, selected out of the best of all Paganism, being
placed by the Judges, the invincible King of great Britain arrived with the
rest of his fellow Knights, in a most brave and gallant manner: Trasiclea,
Claridiana, Alastraxerea, Hermiliana, and Pentasilea, entering first into the
Lists, were by the Emperor of Martaria, opposed against Azamandra, Tomiris,
Zenobia, Anaxamena, and Neophona; and Amadis of Gaul set himself against
Falanzar; Belianis of Greece, against Brizardan; the Knight of the Sun against
the most valiant Bucarguant; Amadis of Greece, against Fu^iander; Florisel of
Niquea, against Mambriman; Don Rogel, against Asturion the strong Sultan of
Brutacan; Spheramond, against Policasteleon; Don Silves, against the generous
Alceus; Claridian, against the proud Knight Arastron; Poliphebo, against
Brufaldor; Rosicler, against Radaemant; Claramant, against Pandaro the stout:
Rozalmond, against the redoubted Bravorant; Alcidamant, against the great
Gorgophon; Amadis of Trebisond, against Roussardan the furious; Clarisel of
Guindaya, against the grand Salvage; Persides of Greece against the dreadful
Typhaeus; Floridan of Persia, against Antomedon the proud Caliph of Francapia;
Amadis d' Astre, against Artogant; Russian of Media, against Barcandor;
Fulgoran, against the gentle Knight Armorand; Prigmaleon against Marmaran,
Sophy of Bultara, and the rest just opposite to one or other of the Pagan side.

These two hundred Knights, the choice of the whole world, being placed, as
aforesaid, the Judges parted the Sun between them, and commanding the Trumpets
to sound, they let them dislodge with such fury, that the earth trembling under
the Horses feet, it made all the assistants look pale with fear: The renowned
Amadis of Gaul having incountred Falanzar, just in the vizier of his Helmet,
overturned him on the crupper of his Horse, himself passing along unmoved;
Amadis of Greece, and Fariander, were both overthrown, and at one instant
recovered their horses again; Florisel of Niquea ran Mambriman quite through the
body, sending him dead to the earth; Policastaleon and Spheramond, met without
any advantage; Bravorant, Gorgophon, Roussardan the furious, the grand Salvage;
Antomedon, and the dreadful Typhaus, having incountred Rozalmond, Alcidamant,
Amadis of Trebisond; Clarisel of Guindaya; Grian, and Griolanis, in the midst
of the course with strange fury, their staves flew about all in shivers, and
passing along like lightning, and unmoved, they seemed to have run against
rocks; Brizardan and Belianis, tumbled down wounded; Bucarguant lost his reins
in his encounter against the Knight of the Sun; Arastron and Claridian, were
both of them much astonished; Marmaran lost his Stirrup, Prigmaleon tottered in
his faddle; Don Silves and his Adversary, the generous Alceus, were both
overturned on the cruppers of their horses; Russian of Media, ran Barcandor
into the shoulder, and was himself hurt in the arm; Fourteen Giants were slain
by Rosicler; the brave Poliphe^o, Claramant, Agesilan, Falanges, Astrapalo,
Fortunian, Anaxartes, Dorigel, Silvan, Amanio, the two Cenophales, and
Grandimor; and at this first encounter, Filin, Artaurus, Zair, Lindimart,
Florarian, and Lucencio, were overthrown dead to the ground by those against
whom they ran.

The fury of Lances being over, all these Knights drew their swords, and
mingled themselves one amongst another, except Bravorant, Gorgophon,
Roussardan, the grand Salvage, Fieraston, and Marisgolfe, which would not quit
Rozalmond, Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, Clarisel, Grian, and Griolanis,
between whom there was one of the most horrible combats that ever was seen
under the cope of heaven: The Christian Princes did wonders, the Pagans ran up
and down like famished Lions, the field groaned under the violence of so many
Warriors blows, and the two Armies were equally terrified with the fury of
their Combattants.

The Amazonian Queens, having had equal fortune with their Lances, charged
one another very valiantly in a quarter, aside by themselves; but the fight
between Bravorant and Alcidamant, Rozalmond and Gorgophon, and the other eight
was so dreadful, that men shut their eyes, not daring to behold it; the strong
Bravorant displayed his force, gave Rozalmond most terrible blows; but having
the prime Knight of the earth to deal with, he was followed so close, as he
had no leisure to think of any thing, save how to defend himself. Gorgophon
thundered upon Alcidamant, Roussardans strokes fell like lightning on Amadis,
his shield; the grand Salvage charged Clarisel with incredible force;
Fierastron made Grian sweat drops of blood; Marisgolfe would not suffer
Griolanis to take any rest; the dreadful Typhorus hammered continually on
Persides helmet; the great Caliph of Francapia, put Floridan very dangerously
to it; nevertheless the Christian Champions demeaned themselves so well, as it
was impossible to ascribe any advantage to their enemies.

Bravorant enraged to meet a man able to arrest the fury of his Arms,
discharged his sword with such violence on Rozalmond, that having divided his
shield in twain, the point of it lighted so rudely on his helmet, as it made
him knock his chin against his breast, with an opinion that all his teeth were
broken to pieces, which so incensed out Warrior, as advancing his sword he let
it descend with such a tempest on Bravorants head, as he overturned him on the
crupper of his horse, voyding blood out of his mouth, and ears, and so besides
himself, that his horse carried him up and down the field for dead; but
suddenly resetling himself in his saddle, he became so mad, as thinking to fly
upon Rozalmond, who with another blow had cut a Giant in two, he discharged his
great curtelas so terribly on Lucendus, Prince of France, that he cleft him
down to the shoulders, and finding Don Flores of Greece hard by him, he gave
him so deadly a blow, that he sent half his body to the earth, wherewith yet
not contented he lift up his arm to have stricken Don Rogel behind, when as
Rozalmond observing the ruin of those two blows, set spurs to his horse, and
discharged his sword with such fury on this audacious Pagans helmet, that it
pared it away, to the very hayr, carrying a piece of his ear along with it,
whereat he was so enraged, as taking his curtelas in both his hands, he let
down at Rozalmond with such force, that if his armor had not been of the best
in the world, his death had undoubtedly followed.

On the other fide Alcidamant and Gorgophon entreated one another with no less
violence, this proud Infidel cursing heaven, for making one able to oppose his
Arms, took his mighty Fauchion in both hands, and therewith so struck
Alcidamant on the head, as not being able to pierce that rich helmet, which he
got in the enchanted Castle of Treasure, he made him to knock his chin against
the pommell of his saddle; this horrible blow rather awaking his courage, than
any way amazing him, he rose up, and g^ashing his teeth for very anger, he ran
him with his sword into the thigh, and instantly redoubling on his helmet, he
overturned him on his horses back with a great wound on his head: Thinking him
then to be dead, he flew in amongst his enemies, where meeting the horrible
Bramanaldon, who had newly sheathed his curtelas in one of the Cenophales, he
lent him so deadly a blow on the shoulder, that he cleft him down to the waste.

In the mean time Gorgophon being come to himself again, and most strangely
incensed with the bad usage he had received of his adversary, flew like a
tempest amongst the Christians, cleft Florenio to the teeth, struck Filizel de
Montespines brains out, and in his fury meeting with Lucidamor of Boetia, he
divided him in two pieces; then incountring with Amadis of Greece, who having
newly killed a Giant, came from astonishing Furiander, he let drive at him with
all his might, hoping to lay him in the dust with the rest; but this excellent
Emperor, having scarce his match in the world, sustained his blow, and
striking him with that heroical strength, which tryumphed over the Giants of
the Siclades Island, he gave him a dangerous wound; in the mean time the
invincible King of great Britain, having separated Falanzars head from his
body, ran up and down with Agesilan, Falanges, Astropolo, and Fortunian, giving
assistance to such as stood in need thereof; Prigmaleon on the other side
behaved himself most bravely, against Marmoran, so did Russian of Media,
against Barcandor; Fulgoran against the gentle Knight Armorand; Don Silves
against the generous Alceus; the Knight of the Sun against Bucarguant; Belianis
against Brizardan, and all the rest sought so well, that four hours were spent
before it could be discerned, to whom the victory would incline; but Rozalmond
and Alcidamant seeing it was time to display the uttermost of their forces by
some remarkable blows discharged with such force, the one upon Bucarguant, who
had left the Knight of the Sun almost senseless, and the other on Barcandor his
brother, as they cleft them down both to the teeth, and continuing in this
rage, Alcidamant cut the Sultan of Circassiaes head in pieces, and Rozalmond
the King of Gedrosiaes.

The death of these four mighty Pagans, being accompanied with the slaughter of
sixteen Giants, and of Al^rban, Danizel, Argilles, and Rodismond, the number of
the Infidels began to diminish, which perceived by Bravorant, Gorgophon,
Roussardan, Fieras^on, Marisgolfe, the grand Salvage, Antomedon, Typheus,
Marmaran, and the proud Knight Arastron, they discharged such horrible blows
upon their enemies, that having hurt them all very dangerously, they fell in
with such fury amongst the Christians, as the valiant Anaxartes was cut in
pieces by Brav^rant, Argantes; Emperor of Germany, by Gorgophon; Lind^^^^t
King of Rhodes, by Roussardan; Olidor of Siramque by Fieraston, Anazander King
of Dardania, by Marisgolfe; Floridan his brother, by the grand Salvage, the
remaining C^nophale by Antomedon, Lisc^^d King of Siconia by Typh^^s, Grandimer
by Marmoran, and the gentle Dorigel, Lord of the fortunate Hands by Arastron,
wherewith the Princes of Greece were so displeased, as Rozalmond, Alcidamant,
Amadi^ of Trebisond, Cla^^sel, Grian, Grio^^^^, (...), ^er^ides, Clarid^an, and
Bel^^^^ having incountred them, vowed never to leave them, till they had
revenged their deaths; whereupon the combat renewed with more cruelty than
before, wherein Arlanges of Spain, Arlantes his son, Cassia^^s, and the Duke
of La^azo were likewise slain.

But Amadis of Gaul, Amadis of Greece, Florisel of Niquea, the knight of the
Sun, Rosicler, Poliphebo, Don Eleno of Dacia, and Lucibel of France joining
together, began to run over the field with such rage, that having laid nine
Giants dead at their feet; namely Radamant the cruel, the strong Pandaro,
Razartes, Coriander, Artili^n, Gedereon King of Arginaria, Rindar, Broncaldion,
King of the Arcofibrats, and Meliander, the rest were cut in pieces, together
with Artogant, who dyed by the hand of the Knight of the Sun; so that of the
hundred Pagan Knights, there remained no more but the mighty Bravorant,
Gorgophon, Roussardan, the grand Salvage, Furiander Typhaeus, Antomedon,
Fierastron, Marisgolf, Marmaran, Arastron, Brizardan, Policastaleon, Astrurion,
Sultan of Brutacan, with whom Don Rogel had fought all day without any
advantage, the generous Alcaeus, and the gentle knight Armorand, who by no
means enduring any speech of rendering themselves, combatted like desperate men,
but having continued fighting almost two hours after the rest, they were fain
at length to fall at the feet of their enemies, more void of blood, than of
courage.

The Victory being thus gloriously obtained, the Judges went and parted the ten
Amazons, sent them out of the field with equal honor, and causing those
sixteen famous Pagan knights to be conveyed into the City, that their wounds
might with the more care be looked unto; the Christian Princes were marching
out of the Lists in triumph with the Emperor of Martaria, who greatly rejoiced
at their good fortune, when as they perceived the Enemies troops ranged in
battle array, under the conduct of the great King of Ma^ritania; Zazifalt, and
Monomatapan, to make toward them for to refcue the Pagan knights out of their
hands, whereat being marvellously incensed, they put themselves in the head of
their Squadrons, and fell in upon them with such fury, as the Pagans wanting
valiant and skillful Leaders, began within less than an hour to betake
themselves to flight; whereupon our Soldiers were so encouraged, that
imitating their renowned Commanders, they made such a terrible ma^saere, as the
ground for four leagues about, was covered all over with dead bodies; and that
which rendered the defeat yet greater, and more horrible, was the Sea, which
hemmed them in almost on every side, so that since the Creation of the world so
great a slaughter was never seen, for of four hundred, and three score, and
sixteen thousand men, the remainder of so prodigious an Army, scarce fifteen
hundred escaped, and that by the benefit of the night.

The Christian Princes seeing themselves absolutely victorious returned into
the City, where they found that they had lost of personages of mark;
Lu^^nd^^, Anax^^tes, Argantes, Emperor of Germany; Melindus King of Cloton;
the Cenoph^^es, Flo^aria^ of Thrace; Luceneio, L^cid^mor, Flor^nio, Emperor of
Rome; Filizel of Montespin; Don Flores of Greece; Zair, Filin, Artaurus, (...),
of Rhodes; Arlanges of Spain, Arlantes his son, Dorigel of the fortunate
Islands, Gol^^^ his Wife; young Leod^^^^, the valiant Tr^il^^, Grand^^^^, the
Duke of (...), Floridan of So pradiza; Perion of Turkey; Florestan, of
Sardinia; Cassianus, Anaxander, King of Dardania; Floradin, Gelodan, Prince of
Moldavia; Alettha, Oriander, King of Sardamira; Oroncius, Alvida, the Queen
Castora; the King of Catay, Rozaphar, Parmenian of Cyprus; Garmantes, Don
Smaldo, and Tymbres of Egypt, whereof some were slain in the Combat, the rest in
the battle; much were they grieved for their deaths, and with many tears did
they lament them, but they were comforted, for that they dyed in the bed of
honor, and that also the principalls had been preserved from the fury of so
bloody a day, for which having rendered humble thanks unto heaven, they gave
order for the curing of the wounded, and solemnizing the Funerals of the
deceased, with all kind of pomp and magnificence.

CHAP. LIII. The Pagan Knights are delivered; Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond,
and Rozalmond are crowned Emperors of Tramazond, Martaria, and Gardacia; The
separation of all these Princes.
THE Pagan Knights being mad with rage for the slaughter of so many Kings, and
valiant Giants, that had kept all the world in awe, but much more for that they
were vanquished by their enemies, would not suffer the Chirurgians to dress
their wounds, desiring rather that a speedy death might free them from the
misery of a long expected captivity, which being declared unto the King of
great Britain, he went the next day to visit them, and knowing that whatsoever
he should do, would be authorized by the Christian Princes, having found them
all in a room together, he said unto them.

Knights, I imagine that if fortune had favored your designs, and that we had
been in your power, as now you are in ours, you would have taken pleasure to
have made us suffer unworthy things for the satisfaction of your revenge, but
we will let you see, that the Princes of Greece are gentlier disposed, that
they love not slaughter, nor blood, neither do at any time shed it, but when
as they are obliged thereunto, either for the maintenance of the order of
Knighthood, or to defend themselves from such as do assail them: your despair
has made you decline the remedies, which we would have given you for the
healing of your wounds, you shall go and seek them where you please, to which
end we set you freely at liberty, whereby also we desire you should know, that
we never did, nor will fear the greatness of your arms; If you shall be
sensible of our courtesies, and shall at your return contain your subjects in
peace, we shall be very glad of it, if otherwise it shall not much trouble us.
Whereupon having formerly commanded a ship to be rigged and victualled, he
caused them to be carried aboard without attending any answer, letting them go
to Gorgophons Island wonderfully amazed to find such courtesy from enemies,
that had been so exceedingly outraged, howbeit all this could not work upon
their hardened hearts, for they resolved to be revenged at any rate whatsoever,
and once more to turn the world upside down.

This affair being then expedited, Amadis accompanied with seven or eight of
the Grecian Princes, that kept not their beds, went to visit the beautiful
Emperesse of the Amazons, and did her so much honor, as she repented the
employing of her Arms against them. Sovereign Prince, said she after a most
gentle manner, I would not believe, that you and yours were every where
invincible; nor could think that the applause, which the world gave you, were
justly due to you, but having seen incredible effects of your matchless
valor, and found a generosity in you, not common to other men, I say the world
does you wrong, not to erect Altars unto you; wherefore I beseech you to pass
by that which I have done against you, and to honor me so far, as to place me
in the number of the truest friends you have. Great Lady, answered that
magnanimous King, and bowing himself for to kiss her hands, I do no longer
lament the loss we have sustained, seeing we have gotten so fair a thing, as
your most excellent self; your desire does very much oblige us, and the
performance of your commandments, shall always be our uttermost ambition.
Hereupon having entreated her to take a lodging with them in the city, she and
the Queens her followers were conducted by him and the Princes thither, and
were brought to Trasicleas Chamber, where all the other Princes were assembled,
by whom being infinitely caressed, both sides stood amazed at each others
beauties.

Shortly whereupon it grew to be a very great court; for Cassandra arriving
from Corolandaya, with all those excellent Ladies, of whom we have spoken
heretofore, and all the brave Knights being recovered of their hurts made up
such a royal presence, that it much astonished this fair Emperesse; but when
as Rozalmond, Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, Clarisel, and Griolanis,
presented themselves for to kiss her hands, she was so ravished with the sight
of their goodly personages, and gallant demeanor, as she could not forbear
saying openly, that now she had seen all that the world had of most rare, a
praise that blushing made these Princes protest they would serve her eternally.

Whilst all was thus in joy, and triumph, and that the Princes were talking of
their own departure, and dismissing of the Christian forces, two ancient
Knights entered into the hall in mourning weeds, which looking round about, at
length went and kneeled before Trasiclea, who presently knowing them, demanded
what news they had brought from Tramazond. Very bad, Madam answered one of
them, for being to acquaint you with the decease of our Emperor, we are
assured that natural affection will make you rather lament his death, than
rejoice to see your self Mistress of his Scepter, which now does attend you,
and your faithful subjects wish for nothing so much, as your presence to
appease certain troubles, arising from the ambition of the great Lords, that
strive for the government of the Empire; wherefore we most humbly beseech you,
in tender compassion of your poor people to resolve upon as speedy a departure
thither, as convenience will permit.

At this speech Trasiclea dissolved into tears, and so bewailed the loss of
her Father, that it pittyed every one to behold her; but after they had for a
while given way to her sorrows, the Princes endeavored all they might to
comfort her, especially Alcidamant, who desired her to consider, that the
condition of all men was infallibly to dye, so that by degrees having assuaged
her grief, the King of great Britain propounded the coronation of her and
Alcidamant, which two days after was solemnized on a scaffold, erected for that
purpose, where in their richest roabs, Alcidamant and she two days after
presented themselves on their knees, before Amadis, the Emperor of Martaria,
Belianis of Greece, and the Knight of the Sun, who with many ceremonies set
two Imperial Crowns on their heads, and caused them to be placed on two
Thrones, where all the Princes that were present went and kissed their hands,
except the Emperor, Amadis of Greece, Florisel of Niquea, Don Rogel, and
Spheramond, which kissed them on the cheek.

All these solemnities being finished, Alcidamant and his Lady descended from
their Thrones, when as the Emperor of Martaria causing silence to be made,
spoke thus. My Lords, the age wherein I am, more proper for rest, than for the
cares that wayt upon Kings, advises me to lay them all upon the Princes, which
it has pleased heaven to bestow on my daughters; wherefore said he, taking
Amadis of Trebisond, and Palmirenna by the hands, let these be placed in those
Thrones, as Emperors of Martaria; as for Floridan he shall be King of Orgalia,
and Lucibel of Cleogena, two states that hold of my Empire, whereupon taking the
Crown from off his own head, he delivered it unto Amadis of Greece, who with
Florisel of of Niquea, Don Rogel, and Spheramond, crowned Amadis of Trebisond
in the same manner, as they had done Alcidamant.

This done, the two new Emperors marching foremost with their Ladies were
conducted to the Palace with more magnificence than can be well expressed, and
the feast was far more sumptuous than at any time before, during the which, all
the young Princes waited upon Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, and their wives.
The rest of that day, and eight days after, were spent amidst incredible
contentments; at the end whereof every one preparing himself for his departure,
Florimond of Canabea (that at the suit of Rozalmond had been sent Ambassador
to the Emperor of Gardacia by Spheramond, for to advertise him of Armazia's
deliverance, and to desire him, that he would be pleased to bestow her in
marriage on his Son) returned with this report, that having been marvellously
caressed by that great Emperor, he had noly approved of the match, but had
resigned, and sent his Crown to Rozalmond; whereupon the former Ceremonies were
renewed, and that brave Knight was Crowned by the two new Emperors,
Prigmaleon, and the renowned Amadis of Gaul; Feastings, and tryumphs were
likewise revived with as much, or more magnificence than before, to the
unspeakable joy of all these Princes, and especially of Fortiman of Greece,
Belianis grandchild, who unable to behold the excellent beauty of Penamonda,
Rozalmonds Sister, without adoring her, began to breath forth a thousand
amorous passions, whereof we will speak more at large in our fourth part.

These delights continued fifteen days together, during the which, the
Christian Army had been dismissed, and sent away, all these Princes separated
themselves with many tears; Amadis of Gaul, Amadis of Greece, Don Silves,
Clarisel of Guindaya, the valiant Esquilan of Poland, and the beautiful
Empress of the Amazons, who would needs accompany them, went with their Wives
to Constantinople; Florisel of Niquea into Trebisond with Falanges,
Alastraxerea, Agesilan, and his fairest Diana; Don Rogel with Persides, and
Fulgoran into Persia; Amadis d' Astre to the Empire of the Parthians, where the
fair Infanta Rosiliana, was ready to expire with joy at his arrival;
Fortunian into France with Florisel; Rozalmond, Russian, and Silverin of the
Desert into Gardacia; Amadis of Trebisond; Floridan and Lucibel with their
Father-in-law into Martaria; Alcidamant with Trasiclea, Grian and Brandimanda
to Tramizond; Griolanis and his beauteous Adelazia to Corolandaya; Prigmaleon
remained in Aethiopia, until such time as his Subjects were somewhat better
assured; The Knight of the Sun* and Belianis according to the great Alcanders
directions, set forth with their kinsmen toward China, and the Empire of
Mexico; And all the other Christian Princes embarquing themselves, set sail
for their own Countries, where we will leave them to enjoy all the happiness
of peace for to finish this third Volumne, in the sequel whereof shall be seen
the adventures of Don Belianis, and of the Knight of the Sun, together with a
continuation of the mavelous acts of Alcidamant, Rozalmond, Clarisel,
Persides, and other young Knights of Greece.

FINIS.

