A Prophecy Uttered by the daughter of an honest Country man, called Adam
Krause.

Who on the eighteen of January, between three and four of the Clock in the
afternoon gave up the Ghost, and being esteemed for dead, was laid out to be
buried.

The next day between one and two of the Clock, when men came to have buried
her: she came again to her self, and received both life and strength, as in
former state before: having so lain in the form of a dead corpse for the space
of two and twenty hours: and being so come to her perfect speech, she
Prophesied of many Plagues to ensue, with worthy admonitions that after
happened according to her speech.

This happened at a Town called Rostorff a mile from Melwing: written for a
worthy remembrance of Gods omnipotency, by the worshipful, Master Eyriak
Schlichtenberger, Superintendent at Melwing. 1580.

The wonderful work of God, showed by the Prophecy of a poor Country man's
Daughter, in Germany.
Upon the.18. of January, last past, 1580. There was a Marriage solemnized at
Rostorfe, a mile distant from Melwing, in Germany, between one James Cranisen,
an honest Towns man: and one Margeret Hensters, the daughter of one Hans
Steeman of Melwing, deceased. This James had been servant and Clark, unto the
woorshipfull master George Ramyts Gentleman, the time of twelve years, who
was (by his Master and sundry other persons of good calling,) brought to the
Church, and at their return were conducted to his Masters house again, who
had prepared for him and his guests, a sufficient Feast, at his own costs and
charges: And although this James was but a husband ma^s Son, yet was he
beloved of the whole inhabitaunts, and that of the cheifest sort. Thus was this
Feast kept in good order, with great Love and quietness: mixing with their
meat, honest mirth, well lyked, and noted of sundry Nobles and Gentlemen,
being present at the same Feast, and inhabiting there abouts.

The next day following, a young maid of the age of fowreteene years, being
Sister to this Bridegroom, came to ye wedding house of her brother, bringing
with her the daughter of one Simon Franiken of Melwing: both which after they
had seen the house, and in what order things stood, were desirous to see the
Daughter of the worshipful Master George van Ramyttes, whose name was Mystres
Annys: who being in her Chamber, they both went to visit her, and doing their
duties, they demanded how she did: she answered, indifferent well. Then the
two Maids fate down by her, where together they co^ferred of many matters,
especially, as concerning their attire and apparel. The Bridegroom before
specified, had made his Sister a silken upper body, with which she had dressed
her self as handsomely as she might, and withal she wore the best and
seemlyest apparel that she had, put on for yt day. But the Gentlewoman seeing
it, began to floute at her, saying: Can thy Father cloth thee thus, and seem
so poor? Alas Mistress (quoth the Maiden) hitherto my poor Father has
always to his power appareled me: but this which you see, my Brother has
bestowed on me, to do him honesty at his marriage: God knows who shall wear
it out, how long I shall owe it, or when I shall put it on again. And though we
be poor in goods: I trust God will make us rytche in spirit, and so she
held her peace, departing for a fine Cake and Wine, wherewith they made merry.
Soon after, the Citizens Daughter that was well apparelled (and somewhat
vainglorious withal) said that her mother gave her all things she could get,
but her Father was so hard, yt she might not wear that she had, but was feign
to keep it from his sight. The Gentlewoman replied saying: my Father byddeth
me wear what I will, and if it were not for offense unto the Nobillitie, he
would apparel me like a Princes: and therwithall she caused sundry fair
Jewels and Chains to be taken forth of her Chestes, which were very curiously
wrought, and caused great admiration unto the beholders. The poor country
Maid yt knew no Pride, nor had any such attire to beast on, held her peace,
accounted her self with her poverty, as acceptable before god, as ye richest or
fairest of those fine Dames present: saying inwardly to her self, God is a
ielous God, he hates pride, he punishes ye unrighteous: he comfort the
poor, which have no delyght therein: and maynteyneth them that are continually
bent to the service of him. After that all together had talked their pleasures,
to their contentment: every one severally took their leave one of an other,
and after a while departed to the houses of their Parents.

The third day after this Marriage was solemnized, all the joy was turned
into heaviness, for the death of two of the Maidens before mentioned: namely,
the Daughter to the Gentleman, and the sister of the Bridegroom, who dyed
both in one after noone, between three and four of the clock. This so
soddayne death, brought great terror and fear unto their Parents, and also to
the hearers thereof, in so much that some thought them to be poisoned, and other
gave forth their judgments according to their fantasies.

The next day after, preparation was made for their burial: Nicholas Faber,
Parson of that Villadge, would have had them both buried in one grave, but the
Gentleman would not. Great lamentation was made for both these Maidens, the
Gentleman and his friends, for the loss of his daughter: and the Father and
Mother, with her Brother and friends, for the loss of their godly Child.
Now the mother of this poor Maid, understanding that her neighbors were in
hand to wind her up, and so to send her to the earth: came unto them and
desired that she might yet once more see her Daughter, which they wyllingly
granted: so they went all together to the dead Corpse, (which had been laid
forth, the full space of two and twenty hours) and the Mother lyfted up the
sheet, syghing, purposing then to take her last farewell, and sight of her
dear Daughter, whom she so tenderly loved. But contrary to her expectation,
and of all the beholders: her Daughter even as one awaked from a slumber,
raised up her self, and with a mylde and cheerful countenance, spoke unto
her mother as follows. My most dear Mother, why have you sinned so sore
against God? You have made me sorrowful many times, but be you content, God
has forgiven all, for I am sent as a messenger to you, and within five days I
shall return again to the place I came from, where I shall live in all peace.
Therewith they fetched her clothes, which she put on, and walking with them, she
demanded meat:

This sudden sight amazed the beholders, for they looked for some other
meaning in it. But where as this Maid was seldom before seen to be merry:
They now perceived her more cheerful, and with a pleasant disposed
countenance, so that the apparaunt show of her iesture was wonderful to
behold, then meat was brought, and she did eat in all men's sight,
disgesting it naturally.

Diverse of the chief of the Town came to see this strange event, where after
many speeches by them uttered: the maid required silence, and to them all she
sayds.

Beloved Christians, wonder not that I have been a short time from you: but be
thankful to God, that he has certified you by sundry signs, how the end of
the world is at hand, and the day of rest coming to rejoice us: Our charge
shall be taken away, and our travail have an end: Let us make our selves
ready against the Sabbath of our Savior, the only true son of God. Let us
now with pure hearts, prepare to meet the heavenly Brydegroome, that with him
we may enter into his everlasting Kingdom, where we shall enjoy eternal life.

Master Nicholas Faber, (Parson of the Town) demanded of her where she had
been? To whom she answered: I was over taken near the bridge of the Brook,
by a comely old man, with a long gray Beard, who saluted me, saying: Daughter,
whether will thou? Is thy Father at home? I answered yea. Then said he to me,
come my loving Daughter, I must needs talk with thee, and tell thee that
which as yet is hidden from thee: for great effect depends thervppon. And be
not afraid, let the grace of God suffice thee, and look that you conceal not
my words, but reveal them to others: tell what I show you, unto old and
young.

So we came to a fair costly Forte. (no Princes Court like it, nor any earthly
building to be compared unto it,) where we were let in. In which place, we saw
many bright Angels, shining like ye beams of the sun, all singing
melodiously with clear voice: Holy, holy, holy, is our Lord God of Sabbath.
Among which I knew a great number: But the old man forbade me to speak unto
any. Forthwith I was brought again to the Brook, where he ouertooke me. I
became very pensive, when I thought of the worthiness of the place where I
had been.

But the old man, wylled me to rest contented, for this short time shall
quickly have an end, and within five days thou shall be brought again into
this place.

He wylled me besides, to manifest (unto the Penitent) the mercy of God, and
to say unto the world, that he is bent to wrath: cheeflie to those that
despise, and give no credit to his examples, which he myraculously has showed
unto his people. These are but warninges sent us, to mollify our hard hearts,
and to admonish us from the detestable Pride, which is here maynteyned,
because before God you shall find it dampnable.

O people full of contempt, despising one an other, some for Riches, some for
Beauty, others for Wisdom, some for one thing, some for an other: where as
before God, we are all alyke with him, poor and rytch: notwithstanding, he
will not go forward with his anger, he will hold his hand, and moderate it
with mercy, if he find but some small number, penitent for their sins.

If you amend not, and turn to God, he will forthwith send on you a general
alteration, and such an one, as not only men, but Birds of the air, and all
living things, shall tremble at his wrath. Wars shall greatly grieve the
earth, and they shall destroy Countries and people: Men shall be most
grievously chased from their houses, and most myserably murthred. And before
this happen, there shall come a great dearth: and then God will take his own
that have turned unto him, not suffering them to see this myserie: but those
that live after, shall truly feel ye wrath of God, so that those which remain
in the third year, shall well say. Where have you been, that you are not yet
destroyed? Many for fear shall decay: there shall be great Earthquakes,
through which. Towns and Steeples, Castles, Fortes and houses, shall be
thrown down on heaps. Then shall follow such a mishappe, as is not
necessary to be spoken of, for the sin of the people is abominable and
curssed before God.

After this great and terrible trouble, there shall great Peace arise, and the
people shall live in great tranquillity: there shall be want of learned men,
and good Rulers: wherefore good people, let this terrify your Pride, being
even the whole puddle of sin, and the root of abomination.

The clothes which Mystresse Annys did wear, for the Pride and vain glory
of her Parents, they shall become loathsome to all persons, whereby none shall
be able to wear them, but shall remain as a necessary example to all persons,
and as this does prove true, so shall the rest come to pass. This speech
twice spoken, was marked of many: and others were inquisitiue, to see the
clothes: which being styrred, there arose a great and detestable stincke,
that no man could either wear them, or abide by them. Which strange thing,
the good Gentlewoman her mother considering: caused the said Chamber to be
walled in, so that none may come to them any way. Thus the Maid continued in
these and sundry such other speeches.

In the mean time, diverse learned Preathers came unto her, and talked with her
as concerning Spiritual matters, which she was glad of. To whom she yielded
hearty thanks, signifying to them, that the fifth day was now come, wherein she
should be taken from the world. But before she departed, she was desirous to
receive the Sacrament, and Christian Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, which Master Nicholas Faber did minister unto her: And all ye day he
did reason with her, to whom she uttered such godly reasons as it made him
merueilously astonished.

Many people came to see her as that day, and to see what would fall out. Then
meat was brought, and she sat down at the Table, be said Grace, thanked God,
and blessed her Father and Mother, and instantly desired her Brother, that he
would honor his Parents* and not to leave them in their old age: and in so
doing, he should be rewarded with the blessing of God.

Master. Faber came now again to visit her (as his manner was) and he said
unto her, how do you? To whom she freendly gave her hand, and smyling,
thanked him of his pains which he had taken with her.

Then for a last farewell, she rehearsed all the warnings to the poople,
desyring them, not to be unmindful of them: And anon after, between one and
two of the clock, patiently sitting in a Chair, she committed her Soul to
God, and yielded up the Ghost. Being the.xxv. of the said Month of January.
1580.

FINIS.
Truly translated according to the Copy Printed in high Dutche.

The names of certain men of good woorshippe and credit, that were then
present.
Master Nicholas Faber, Parso^ of the said Town. Master George van
Ramittes. Master Ioachim Schiell of Melwing. Master Peter Schulban of
Melwing. Adam Dorhoff of Margenberg. Hans Ronneman, Scowt of the Town. Master
Stephen. Lawrence the Scholemaister. Hans Lidwig: And Peter Barchart.
Master Eiriak Schlichtenberger being Superintendent of Melwing, had the
examination of the truth, before it was published in Print.

First printed in Dansk, next at Lubick then at Hambrough: and now at London,
by John Charlewood, for William Wright. 1580.


