THE RELATION OF a Wonderful Voyage made by WILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOVTEN of
Horn.

Showing how South from the Straights of Magelan, in Terra Del-fuogo: he found
and discovered a new passage through the great South Sea, and that way sailed
round about the world.

Describing what Islands, Countries, People, and strange Adventures he found in
his said Passage.

map showing new passage through the great South Sea south of the Straits of
Magellan in Tierra del Fuego

LONDON Imprinted by T.D. for NATHANAELL NEVVBERY, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star, under S. Peter's in Corne-hill, and in Pope-head Alley.
1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight, Governor of the East
Indian Company. etc.
THIS Treatise of the Description of a Voyage, made by William Cornelison
Schouten of Horn, by a new unexpected and never heretofore discovered
Passage, by him found out in Terra del-Fuogo Southward, from the Straights of
Magelan, into the great South sea, and that way into the East Indies, and so
round about the World: coming to my hands I judged no man more fit (for the
protection thereof) then your Worship, not only because of the great desire
you have, and pains you daily take to advance such travels: but also in regard
of your place of Governor of the East Indian Company, whom this Voyage
specially concerns. If it please you to accept it, I shall think my pains
well bestowed in the translation thereof out of the Dutch, wherein it was
written: wishing it a means to further and advance your trade in India: and to
your Worship health in this world, and eternal felicity in the world to come.

Your Worships to command, W. P.

THE PRFEACE.
THE general States of the united Netherland Provinces, having granted their
Letters Pattens to the East India Company resident in the said Provinces, to
traffic into the Indies, and none others but they only, with a stricke
prohibition unto all other Merchants, and Inhabitants of the said Countries,
not to sail or traffic Eastward beyond the Cape de bona esperance, nor
through the Sraights of Magelan Westward, either into India, or any other
unknown or not discovered countries. Isaac le Maire a rich Merchant of
Amsterdam, dweling in Egmont, having a great desire to traffic into strange
and far Countries, and William Cornelison Schouten of Horn, (a man well
experienced in Seafaring, who before that time had sailed thrice into most
parts of the East Indies, for Master, Pilot, and Merchant) and yet very
desirous to sail into and to discover new and unknown Countries, oftentimes
speaking and conferring together, reasoned among themselves, whether they might
not enter into the great South sea, by an other way, (then through the same
ways which in the East Indian Companies Letters Pattents are formerly
forbidden and prohibited.) There to discover great and rich Countries, where
they might lade their ships with rich wares and marchandises, whereof the said
le Maire, affirmed he had some knowledge, and that if it did not fall out as
they desired, yet that they might pass through the before said great South
seas, into the East Indies, and there traffic freely with great profit: upon
which conference at the last they agreed together, to make a discovery through
the South undiscovered and unknown part of the World, Southward from the
Straights of Magelan, to seek out a passage into the said South Sea, which
they thought very likely to be performed: for diverse circumstances and reasons
to them known and by others at sundry times found about the said Straights of
Magelan. And to that end agreed, between them to enterprise such a Voyage,
taking order that Isaac le Maire should provide the one half of the money, and
William Cornelison Schouten the other half, to furnish the said Voyage, by the
help and furtherance of their friends, the care whereof, and to make provision
for the said voyage being referred to William Cornelison Schouten, who to
effect the same, procured Peter Clementson a Brewer, an ancient Burger Master
of Horn, John Ianson Molenwerf one of the Schepen, John Clementson Keis
Senator of the said Town, and Cornelius Segetson a Merchant of Horn, to
contribute in the same with them, and they together with the aforesaid William
Schouten, Isaac le Maire and Jacob le Maire his Son, in short time prepared
so much money, as they thought convenient and sufficient for the said voyage,
not once making known to the owners of the ships, what their pretense was
touching the said voyage, but kept that secret to themselves that disbursed the
money for the same.

And to finish the said voyage, the Merchants aforesaid prepared and rigged a
great and a small ship of Horn, The great ship called the Unity, of 360. tuns
whereof William Cornelison Schouten was Master and chief Pilot, and Jacob le
Maire Merchant and principal Factor, in it having 65. men, and 19. great
pieces, and 12. slings, with muskets and other munition for war
proportionably, with a Pinnace to sail, an other to row, a boat, and a Scute,
anekors, cabells, ropes, sails, and all other necessaries belonging thereunto.
The lesser shipp called the Horn, of 110. tuns, whereof John Cornelison
Schouten was Master, and Aris Clawson Merchant, in it 22. men, 8. great
pieces, 4. slings, and other furniture as need required, and was necessary for
such a voyage. And for that they would not make known to any man as I said
before whether they meant to go, they hired all their men, both common Sailors
and Officers to sail unto every place whether the Masters and the Merchants
would go, which made the common sailors and people to speak and guess of that
voyage diversely, and at the last gave them the name of the gold finders, but
the Merchants named them the South Company. The ships being ready, upon the 16
of May 1615. the men were mustred by the Scout and Schepen of Horn, and the
25. of the same month the Unity set sail, and arrived at the Tessell upon
the 27. The 3. of June, the lesser departed from Horn, and the next day came
to the Tessell: What further happened and fell out unto them during the said
voyage, is in this Book at large set down, and declared from the reports and
writings of those that saw and tried the same, and which in the same voyage
were the chief and principal persons.

THE RELATION OF A Wonderful Voyage made by WILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOVTEN of
Horn. Showing how South from the Straights of Magelan, in Terra Delfuogo: he
found and discovered a new passage through the great South Seaes, and that way
sailed round about the world. Describing what Islands, Countries, People, and
strange Adventures he found in his said Voyage.
UPON the 14. of June 1615. we sailed out of the Tessell, and the 16. of the
same month, being in sight of Dunkerke, past between Dover and Callis: the 17.
ankoring in the Downs, William Cornelison Shouten went on shore at Dover to
get men to bring us fresh water, and the same day set sail from thence,
about evening by the Shingles meeting with a great fleet of Holland Ships
laden with salt. The 21. and 22. having a great storm we put into the Isle of
of Wight, where our Master would gladly have hired a carpenter but could not.

The 25. we set sail from Wight, and upon the 27. entered at Plimmouth, where
the Master hired a carpenter of Maydenblicke. The 28. we leaft Plimmouth and
sailed with a north north east wind and fair whether, and the 29. the Master
and Marc^^nt of the Horn came abord the Unity to agree together about order
to be taken upon the 4. of July, for sharing of our victuales, according to the
manner and custom used in ships that sail long voiages, where they deliver
the sailors their meat and drink by weight, and measure, to every man alike
and according to his quality.

The 4. of July, according to the aforesaid resolution, it was ordered that
every man should have a can of beer a day, 4. pound of biscuit, and half a
pound of butter (besides sweet suet) a week, and five cheeses for the whole
voyage.

The 8. being under 39. degrees and 25. minutes right against the Bassels, our
carpenters Mate dyed.

The 9. and 10. with a north and north east wind and a stife gale, the 11. we
had a sight of Porto Santo and Madera, and held our course east.

The 12. in the morning we saw the Saluages, which we leaft on backe-bord about
2. leagues from us.

The 13. in the morning we saw the Islands of Tenerifa, and great Canaena, and
the same day about noone we sayld between them both with a stiff north north
east wind, and a swift stream.

Between the 14. and the 15. with the same wind and stream we passed Tropicus
Cancri.

The 16. in the morning, with a Northeast wind, we found very hollow water, at
which time the boat that was drawn at the Unities stearne was full of water,
and therewith the rope brake, and the boat sunk and was lost, which till that
time we had drawn after the ship without any danger: about noone the same day
we were under 20. degrees and 30. minutes.

The 17. and 18. with fair weathe^ and an indifferent wind north and
northwest, we sailed west and by south, and on the 19. in the morning were
under 14. degrees and 45. minutes.

The 20. on the morning we fell on the north side of Cape Verde, and had 8.
fathom deep when we first saw the land, sailing along by the coast, and at
Sunne-rising the Cape lay west and by south from us, so that with a north
northeast wind we could not get beyond it, and were forced to ankor at 32.
fathom deep: that night it blew hard, with a great storm of rain and
thunder.

The 21. in the morning the wind south southeast, and after Sunrising
variable, we set sail with our course to to Seaward, first west and by north,
then northwest, and that whole day sailed not above 6. leagues.

The 22. we lay driving all day long with a calm, and no sails up: then Cape
Verde lay east from us: about evening we saw a ship southward, that held her
course northwest.

The 23. in the morning having a South wind, we could not reach above the
Cape, but were forced to ankor, by reason of the stream, about noone we set
sail, with a west wind, and got beyond the Cape, and that evening ankored
within the second Island, in the ordinary road, at 10. fathom deep.

The 24. it rained sore, and we made ready to fetch fresh water from the land.

The 25. the Alkaire, or governor came aboard our ship, with whom we agreed
for eight states of Iron; that we should peaceably fetch fresh water from the
shore.

The 26. it rained, and the weather very dark: the same day we saw a ship that
sailed toward us, and ankored two leagues from us, under the land being a ship
of Rotterdam, that came thither to traffic along the coast.

The 28. and 29. we fetched water, mean time the Horn hoysed sail, and went
to the place where the ship of Rotterdam lay, in a Bay called Refresco, to see
if we could there find any Limonds, but came again in the evening, and could
get none.

The 31. there came a French ship and anchored by us. The same day we had
stayed a Negroes ship, who at night showed us a fit place to fish in, and our
men carrying their nets on the firm land, took as many fishes of diverse
sorts, as both our ships could eat in two days.

The first of August in the morning we set sail from Cape Verde, with the
Rotterdamer, who at noone time left us and set his course for the Salt Islands:
all that time we had fair weather, and a fine gale of wind out of the north,
our course southwest.

The 2. we had fair weather, with a fine gale of wind, at which time we klled
a little calfe, and a goat that we got at Cape Verde, which served all our
men in both ships, for a whole days meat.

The 3. we had but small wind, and that night fair weather, but when day
appeared, it was thick and cloudie, with thunder, rain, and lightning.

The 4. about noone, we were under 12. degrees and 12. minutes, with very fair
weather and a good swift gale, as also the 5. day.

The 7.8. and 9. it rained fast, but yet with an indifferent gale.

The 10. it rained, with a small wind that night we saw a Spanish Bark under
sail.

The 15. we had a reasonable fresh wind, and good weather, and made
indifferent good way: then we saw great store of birds called Rabos forcados,
and took a Dorado.

The 16. about noone we were under 7. degrees and 40. minutes, with fair
weather and a good wind, as before.

The 17. at noone we were under 7. degrees 12. minutes, with fair weather, and
an indifferent cool gale southwest: that day we took many Bouetes and
Corretters.

The 18. and 19. we lay by the wind, resolving to hold our course for Sierra
Liona, there to refresh our selves, because many of our men had a great
scouring, all that day we had a stiff contrary wind, and were forced to lie by
the weather, it being then too late to go speeedily under the Line: and at the
Cape we got but little refreshing, at that time about noone we were under 7.
degrees and 55. minutes.

The 20. in the morning we were under 7. degrees 45. minutes, with fair
weather, and a good gale of wind out of the South, we held our course East,
and East and by North; at which time we saw great store of land fowls, and
change of water: about evening we cast out the lead, and found 30. fathom
sandy ground, and had land almost 40. leagues nearer then we gessed it to be,
the same night we anchored at 16. fathom, and were upon the west end of the
Baixos, or shallows of S. Anna Island.

The 21. in the morning, by Sun rising we set sail, and saw the high land of
Sierra Liona, about 6. Leagues from us Northeast and by North: we likewise saw
the Islands of Mabrabomba, which lie on the south point or corner of the high
land of Sierra Liona, north from the Baixos, or shallows of S. Annas Island.
Sierra Liona is a very high land, there is no land so high as it between Capo
Verde, and the coast of Guinea, whereby the point is most easy to be known:
that day we labored as we could to get to land, for the most part having
stormy weather, running to the point, and over the Baixos, or shallows of S.
Anna, at 10.9.8.7. and 5. fathom water, and as we sailed northward, the water
waxed deeper, but eastward shallower, so that about evening we anchored with a
high water, at four fathom and a half soft ground, and in the night time we
had but three fathom and a half, but it was fine clear weather.

The 22. in the morning at Sunrising, William Schouten went aboard the Horn,
and sailed in it before us, the great ship following, holding our course north
northeast with a northwest wind, and an ebb under the bough, and so got off
from the Baixos, to 18. fathom water, and from thence to the Islands of
Mabrabomba, which are very high, and lie all three on a row, southwest and
northeast, half a league from Sierra Liona to seaward, there we had shallow
water at five and four fathom, soft muddy ground, we anchored about a league
from the land, and going on shore found no man dwelling therein, but perceived
the foote-steps of many great beasts, but all the land lay wast like a
wilderness, with low marshes or bogs, and high hills.

The 23. in the morning, Jacob le Maire went aboard the Horn, and from it with
both the boats on shore, where he found a River, at the mouth thereof having
many cliffes, sands, and rocks, whereby no ship could go into it, but within
it was very deep, and broad enough for ships to turn and wind, there they
could perceive no people to dwell, but saw three wild Oxen, and a great many
Monkeis, and some birds that barked like dogs. They rowed at least 3. leagues
up into it with the flood and there found a wild Palm tree, but in the
evening came aboard again, and heard of no people, neither found any fruit
that might serve their turn to eat.

The 24. both our Scouts went on shore again to seek for men or some
refreshing, each of them in a several River, at least 5. leagues into it: Aris
Clawson the Merchant of the Horn, with one of the Assistants into the one, and
Claus, Johnson, Ban, with our masters mate in the other, and the 25. in the
morning came on board again: The Merchant of the Horn had been in a salt
river, and brought with him 5. or 6. wild Palmites, Claus, Johnson; and Ban,
had been in a fresh river, and there found a place wherein there grew 8. or 9.
Limond trees, which they shook, and got about 750. Limonds, most ripe, ready
to dry. There also they saw great store of Tortoyses, and some Crocodiles, but
no people. We determined to try if we could get into the fresh River with
both our ships, therein to make provision of fresh water and Limonds, and to
that end set sail, but found the water so shallow, that we were forced to
anchor at 6. fathom. The Horn anchored before the River, on the lower land,
but there found shallow water, by means of the point of the Baixos, or
shallows of S. Anna Island. Jacob le Maire and Aris Clawson, the merchants of
the Horn and Unity, went with the boat up into the river.

The 26. we had a stiff gale of wind South southwest, so that we could not
sail, yet the Horn beat on the south point of the bay, which is about five
leagues broad from the north to the south side.

The 27. in the morning we hoyst anchor to sail to the Horn, and about noone
time the Horn boat came with Jacob le Maire on board again, bringing with
him about 1400. Limonds which they had found in diverse places here and there in
the river. In the evening we got to the Horn, and there anchored at three
fathom and a half, soft ground.

The 28. our master went up the river, before the which we lay with both the
boats, and about evening came again, and found no good land to go upon, nor
any signs of men, but only a Bull with a Calfe, all the ground being marshie
and full of trees that stood in the salt water.

The 29. perceiving that we were not in the river of Sierra Liona, we
determined early in the morning to set sail, and to go northward of the high
land, and about noone we got above the Islands of Mabrabonda, westward, along
toward the north part of the high land, till we had 12. and 15. fathom water,
and in the evening got about the point, where we anchored at 15. fathom deep.

The 30. in the morning, we hoysed anchor, and drove with the stream, and a
south wind before the village, in the right road of Sierra Liona, where we
anchored at 8. fathom, sandy ground, about a musket shot from the land, there
we saw 8. or 9, houses covered with straw.

The Moors called unto us in their Language, to fetch them aboard our ship,
and because they had no Canoes we sent our boat on land, which presently came
back again with 5. Moors in it, whereof one was their Interpreter: but
before they came, they desired that we would leave some of our men, to stay
with them as pledges, for that not long before there had been a French ship
there, which had taken and carried away 2. of their Moors. Aris Clawson the
merchant that went a shore with the boat, stayed there with them, and haueing
certain beads, he there bartered them for 700. Limonds, most ripe, and two
bunches of Banauas almost ripe also. The Interpreter spoke all kind of
Languages, one with an other. In the mean time, our men having fair weather,
laded fresh water, which is there easy to be had, by reason it falls down
out of the hill into the road, so that we held the barrels under the shore, or
fall of the water, and filling them put them straight into the Scute, the water
was very good.

The 31. when we had filled our vessels full of water, and that morning Jacob le
Maire, Aris Clawson, Claus Johnson, Ban, and all the assistants went on land,
and bartered for about 25000. Limonds, for a few beads, and some slight
Norremburgh knives, we might have had 100000. Limonds there at the least, if
we would, for there they grew by whole woods full: the same night we bartered
with the Negroes for a shole of Fish.

The first of September we hoysed anchor, and drove before the stream, and
that evening anchored at the mouth of the Sea, before a small River.

The 2. we set the Horn upon the Strand to make her clean, having a god place
to do it, for there the water falls 7. foot up and down, in the evening our
men came on board again, and brought a little beast named an Antelop, which
they found in a wood, in a net or snare set there by the Negroes, and some
Limonds, and after that the boat went out to fish, and got a great number,
and some Palmitas, which they had not cut down in the wood.

The 3. in the afternoon, the Horn being made clean was lancht into the
water again, and our master went out to fish, in the evening bringing a great
shole of fish with him, in fashion like to a shoemakers cutting knife, and
every man 150 Limonds for his part.

The 4. early in the morning, we hoysed anchor, and set sail out of Sierra
Liona, with an indifferent wind, but in the evening having contrary wind,
anchored again at 14. fadom, good anchor ground.

The 5. In the first quarter, we hoyst anchor again, and sailed with a calm,
but in the third quarter anchored again, at 14. fadome, sandy ground.

The 6. In the first quarter, we set sail again, but the wind contrary, were
forced to anchor at 12. fadome, sandy ground, there we could still see the land
of Sierra Liona, in that place there went a strong stream.

The 9. We set sail, but the wind contrary, we anchored in the evening, at
32. fadom sandy ground.

The 10. in the first quarter, having a southwest wind, we set sail, but the
weather being calm, we let anchor fall, with our sails still up, and not long
after, the wind beginning to rise we hoyst anchor, but in the third quarter in
a calm, anchored again, at 29, fathom: the last quarter the wind beginning to
blow, we set sail, but do what we might we could not go forward.

The 11. we set sail, but anchored again in the second quarter, by reason of
the calm, there the stream went northward. Not long after we hoysed sail
again, with some small wind, but it calmd again, and the weather waxed very
thick.

The 12. We were under 9 degrees and 20. minutes, at evening we anchored at
17. fathom.

The 15. We set sail with a west northwest wind, all that quarter it rained,
In the mean time, the Horn, in a thick mist sailed out of our sight, and we
shot two pieces, an hour between each shot, to call her, and about 10. of the
clock she came again.

The 16. and 17. the vvind was variable, we anchored at 15. fathom, with
rainie weather, yet the vvind blevv hard.

The 18. about noone we set sail, the Horn lost an Anchor and Cable in the
vvinding, the vvind blevv hard, and the water went somevvhat hollovv.

The 19. Having contrary vvinde, and we being very weary, by reason the
vveather was rainy and stormy, we determined to go back again to Sierra
Liona, to refresh our selves, and take in fresh water, but after noone having
a good northvvest vvind, we changed our course southvvard again, and went
forvvard.

The 20. with a good vvinde we sailed southvvard, and were under 8. degrees
30. minutes.

The 21. and all that month out, we had variable vvindes, with calmes, and
every day great store of rain, and upon the 30. day we were under 5. degrees

In the beginning of October, we had variable vvindes, and some calmes, with
great store of rain, night and day.

The 5. we were under 4 degrees 27. minutes, the same day about noone there
was such a noise in the bough of our ship, that the Master being behind
in the Gallerie, thought that one of the men had fallen out of the fore ship,
or from the boesprit into the sea, but as he looked out over the side of the
ship, he savv the Sea all red as if great store of blood had bin povvred into
it, vvhereat he vvondred, knovving not what it meant, but afterward he found,
that a great fish or a sea monster having a horn had there with stricken
against the ship, with most great strength, for when we were in Porto
Desire, where we set the ship on the strand to make it clean, about 7 foot
under water before in the ship, we found a horn sticking in the ship, much
like for thickness fashion to a common Elephants tooth, not hollow but full,
very strong hard bone, with had entered into three planckes of the ship, that
is 2 thick planckes of green and one of Oken wood, and so into a rib, where
it turned vpvvard, to our great good fortune, for if it had entered betvveene
the ribes into the ship, it would happily have made a greater hole, and have
brought both ship and men in danger to be lost, it stuck at least half a
foot deep into the ship, and about half a foot without, where with great
force it was broken of, by reason where of the great monster bled so much.

The 6.7.8. variable winds and some rain, the 10. we took great store of
fish, and were under three degrees 30. minites, with South and variable winds
for certain days.

The 15 we were under 2. degrees 35. minutes that day we took 40. Bouets.

The 16. we were under one degree 45. minutes, that day we took great store
of fish, and saw many whales.

The 19. and 20. about noone we past the equinoctial line, and had a south
east and a south southeast wind until the 24. and then an east south east
wind and held our course south. The water being so hollow, that our blind
sail was stricken in pieces with the sea, that day at noone we were under 3.
degrees 43. minutes southward of the line.

The 25. the wind continuing, we held on the same course, until that time we
had sailed, and no man in our ship, (unless it were the master, William
Cornelison Schouten, and Jacob le Maire our Merchant) knew whether we should
go, and then they told us what voyage they intended, which was, to seek by an
other way then the straights of Magelan, to enter into the south sea, there to
discover new countries in the South parts, where they thought to find great
riches, and that if it fell not as they desired and pretended, then that they
would sail along through the great south Sea, southward to the east Indies.
This being known, our men were very glad and rejoiced, hoping every man for
his part, to benefit by that vioage, to their advancement.

The 26. we were under 6 degrees, 25. minutes with fair weather and a good
gale, and all the rest of that month for the most part sailing southward, with
an east, and a northeast wind, we were under 10 degrees and 30. minutes.

The first, of November we past the sun, whereby at noone time, it was North
from us.

The third we were under 19 degrees 20 minutes, then we saw some black birds
and two or three fowls called sea mewes, and after noone, we had a sight of
Martin vads Islands called Ascension, which lay southeast and by east from us,
under 20 degrees, there we found our compass to varrie Northeastward 12
degrees, The wind being North northeast, as the day before, and held our course
South, That day our men had double allowance of wine, because we had past the
dangerous sands called Abrothos. The day ensewing to the 10. we held our
course for the most part, south and Southwest and were under 25 degrees 33.
minutes.

The 11, we found our compass to vary 17, degrees northeastward, and with a
south wind, held our course West and west and by south.

The 12 with a southeast, and by east, and an east wind we sailed south
southwest and southwest, and were under 26 degrees 45 minutes.

The 13, 14, and 15, we sailed south, and southwest, with an east wind.

The 16, 17, and 18, the wind south, we held for the most part west south
west, and were under 34, degrees 15. minutes, and saw much Walschot drive.

The 19. with a north and northeast wind, we sailed south south west, and
perceived that the stream drove us much to the south.

The 20. we were under 36. degrees 57. minutes there we saw many Quallen
drive, and a great number of sea lice, which are a kind of lice for greatness
like to small flies.

The 21. we were under 38 degrees 25. minutes, and had alteration of water,
there we cast out our lead but found no ground, the compass then varied 17,
degrees northeastward, that morning we saw the new Moon being 21. hours old.

The 22 it was ordered by our master and his counsel, that one man should have
a cup of sack every day, and a measure of oil weekly, our french wine and
butter being all spent.

The 23. we saw many Whales, and white water, and were under 40 degrees 56.
minutes.

The 24. we saw many more great fishes, and much Odenkwos drive, the water very
hollow out of the west and saw many birds.

The 30. we had white water, as if we had bin hard by the land, and were under
46. degrees 15. minutes, and saw many birds.

The 2. of December being under 47. degrees 45. minutes we saw much Steencrosse
drive.

The 4. we still saw Steencrosse white water, and many birds and were under 47
degrees 25 minutes, and 16. degrees northeastward variation of the compass,
then we cast out our lead and found 75 fathom sandy ground.

The 5. we cast out our lead and had 65. fathom, savv many birds and
Steencrosse then we were under 46, degrees 25 minutes, and had 54. fathom, that
night we saw many Whales.

The 6. in the morning we had 46 fathom water and with a northvvest vvinde
sailed west southvvest, and at noone were under 40 degrees 37 minutes and had
42 fadome water, about 4 in the after noone we savv land not very high, but
white and some what flat, we fell (according to our desire) on the north
side of Porto Desire and at night anchored at 10 fathom deep, about a league
and a half from the shore with an ebb that ran Southvvard, as strongly as
the sea runs betvveene Flushing heads.

The 7. in the morning we hoysed anchor, and sailed South, until noone, then
we were before the haven of Porto Desire, lying under 47. degrees 40,
minutes, and made toward the entry thereof, where we had very high water, so
that the cliffes (whereof Oliver van Noort writes, which sailing into that
haven must be left northvvard from us,) were clean under water, but on the
south point there lay certain cliffes open, which we took to be those, and
therefore went southward on, but sailed southward of the right channel into a
crooked bay, and there at high water anchored at four fathom and a half, and
when the water was low, we had but 14. footwater, whereby the Unity lay with
her stearne fast on ground, it being full of cliffes, the wind was west from the
land, and smooth water to our great fortune, for if we had had an east vvinde,
with any gale, for certain, we had lost our ship: upon the cliffes we found
many eggs, and took great mustles and other fish, and among the rest smelts of
16 inches long, and for that cause we called that place the Smelt bay, our
Shallop went to the Pinguijns Island, lying east southeast two leagues from
Porto Desire, and came aboard again late in the evening, bringing 2 sea Lions,
and 150 Pinguijns, which we eat the next day.

The 8 in the morning, with the land vvind we sailed out of the Smelt bay,
and anchored right before the haven of Porto Desire, and sent our Shalop out to
sound the depth of the channel, and found 12 and 13 fathom, entering in after
noone with a high water and a northeast wind we set sail, the Horn first,
and so entered into the haven. When we had sailed about a league and a half
into the river the wind turned, and we anchored at 20 fathom: there the ground
was slippery stones, for about half an hour after, the wind blowing hard
north west, both our ships lying with 2. anchors a piece out: presently drove
upon the South shore, for there 25: anchors could not have holden them, so
that we verily thought both our ships would there be cast away. The great ship
sat with herside upon the cliffes, and shoke with the falling water, some what
lower, and still kept stanch, but the Horn fell upon the cliffes, so that the
water went clean from it, whereby at low water a man might have gone dry
foot under the keele, right against the maine mast, the keele was above a
fathom out of the water, fearful to be hold, but as the wind blew hard
northwest, it kept it from falling over, which appeared to be so, for that when
the wind ceased, it fell from the land against the wind upon the side, at
least three foot lower then the keele, whereat we were all abasht, thinking
we had surely lost her, but when the flood came with still weather it rose up
again, whereat we all rejoiced. In the morning with calm weather we wound of
from the wall, and the same night the Horn came to us.

The 9. in the morning, we set sail again, and went further into the river,
and came to the Kings Island so called by Oliver Van Noort, the Horn went
behind it, and there anchored, but we could not get in with the Unity,
because the wind was contrary, our men went on shore into the Island, which
was almost covered ouerwith eggs, for a man standing still on his feet; with
his hands might reach to 54. neasts, each having 3 or 4 eggs a piece much like
(but some what greater) then Sea-Mues eggs, the birds were blackish Sea-mewes
we carried thousands of them on board and eat them.

The 10. our boat went on the north side of the river, to seek for fresh
water, but found none, for digging holes of 14. foot deep, they found
brackish water, both on the high hills and in the valleys, and returning on
board again, brought great store of birds and eggs with them.

The 11. the boat went lovver into the River on the south side, to seek for
men and water, and found nothing but brackish water, there they savv some
Estriges, and beasts like Hearts, with very long necks, which were afraid
of us. Upon the highest part of the hills we found some burying places, which
were heaps of stones, and we not knowing what that meant, pulled the stones of
from one of them, and under them found men's bones of 10 and 11 foot long, they
buried the dead upon the top of the hills, flat on the ground, and cover them
also with stones, which keeps, them from being deuouered by beasts or birds.

The 12.13.14.15. and 16. our men went continually on land to seek for water,
but found none, every day bringing good store of birds and fishes on board.

The 17. We laid our ship within the Kings Island on the wall, with a high
water, to make it clean, where it was dry that we might go round about it
dry foot.

The 18 the Horn was also laid on shore about 2 musket shot from our ship, to
make it clean.

The 19. as we were busy about both the ships to make them clean, and burnt
reeds under the Horn, the flame of the fire suddenly got into the ship, and
presently took such hold thereof that in the twinkling of an eye, it was so
great that we could by no means quench it, by reason it lay 50. foot dry
from the water side, and by that means we were constrained to stand still, and
see it burn before our eyes, not able to do any thing to save it.

The 20. at a high water we lancht the Unity, into the water again, and went
to the Horn and quenched the fire, but the ship was burnt clean down to the
water. The next day when we had cast the water out of that part of it that was
left, we saved all the wood, iron-worke, anchors, ordinance, and what else that
was to be gotten and put it into ourship.

The 25 our men found certain hols full of fresh water which was white and
very thick, from whence some of them daily fetch water, in little rondlets on
there shoulders some went armed with muskets to defend them, others fetch
birds, and eggs, and young sea Lions which we eat, and are of a reasonable
good taste. The sea Lions are a kind of fish, as big as a little horse, with
heads like Lions, and long rough hair about their necks, but the she Lions
are without hair, and not half so great as the he, we could not kill them
but with musket shot either in the breast or the paunch, for though we gave them
100. blows with staves and other things, and made the blood run out of their
mouths and noses, yet they would run away: while we lay there in the river, we
had great winds and some times much rain, and storms.

The 9. of January, 1616. we left fetching water into the ship, and the 10.
we set sail, to go on our voyage, but the wind coming out of the sea, we
were forced to anchor again by the Lion Island, and that day got great store
of fish and birds.

The 12 our Pinnace rowed to the Pinguijns Island, to fetch Pinguijns, but the
weather was so foul, that they could not get a board again that day, but lay
all night in the Smeltbay and next morning came to us laden with Pinguijns, but
by reason of the great number of them, they were spoiled, and we cast them over
board.

The 13 about noone, we sailed out of Porto Desire, but the sea being calm we
anchored before the haven, and when the wind began to rise, hoysed anchor and
put to sea,

The 18 we saw Sebaldes Islands south east from us about 3. leagues, they lie,
as Sebald Dewert writes, distant from the straight, east northeast, and west
southwest, about 50. leagues, then we were under 51. degrees.

The 20 we saw Steencrosse drive, and perceived that we had a great stream
that went southwest, then we were under 53 degrees, and gest that we were
about 20 leagues south ward from the straights of Magelan. The 11 we were
under 53. degrees.

The 23 in the morning we had a South vvinde, and about noone it vvaxt calm,
then the vvinde blevv west, and we had ground at 50 fathom black sandy, with
small stones, after that the wind turned north, with smooth water and fair
weather, The water showed as white as if we had been within the land, we
held our course south and by west, about 3. of the clock after noone we saw
land west, and west south west from us, and not long after that we savv it
also in the south, then having a north wind we went east southeast, to get
above the land, it blew so hard in the hollow water, that we were forced to
take in our top sails.

The 24. in the morning, we saw land on starre-boord not above a great league
distant from us, there we had ground at 40. fathom, and a west wind, the land
strecht east and south, with very high hills, that were all covered over with
ice. We sailed along by that land, and about noone past it and saw other land
cast from it, which also was very high and ragged.

These lands as we gest lay about 8. leagues one from the other, and seemed as
if there were a good passage between them, which we were the better persuaded
unto, for that there ran a hard stream Southward between both those lands.

Then about noone we were under 54 degrees 46. minutes and after noone we had
a north wind and made toward this opening, but about evening it calmed and
that night we drove forwards with a hard stream, and little wind. There we
saw an innumerable number of Pinguijns and thousands of Whales, so that we
were forced to look well about us, and to wind and turn to shun the Whales,
least we should sail upon them.

The 25 in the morning we were close by the east land, which was very high and
craggy, which on the north side reaches east south east, as far as we could
see, that land we called States land, but the land that lay west from us, we
named Mauriceland. We perceived that on both sides thereof, there were good
roades, and sandy bays, for on either side it had sandy strands and very fair
sandy ground. There are great store of fish, Pinguijns and Porpesses, as also
birds and water enough, but we could see no trees, we had a north wind in
the entry and went south southwest, with a stife course, at noone we were
under 55 degrees 36 minutes, and then held our course south west, with a good
sharp wind and rain, and a stife gale: we savv the land on the south side of
the passage upon the west end of Maurice van Nassawes land, reach west south
west and south west, as far as we could see it, all very high and
craggie-land. In the evening the vvinde was South West, and that night we
went south with great waves or billows out of the southvvest, and very blew
water, whereby we judged, and held for certain that we had great deep water
to loefward from us, nothing doubting but that it was the great South sea,
whereat we were exceeding glad, to think that we had discovered a way, which
until that time, was unknown to men, as afterward we found it to be true.

There we saw extreme great Sea-Mewes, bigger of body then Swannes, their
wings being spread abroad, were each of them above a fathom long. These birds
being unaccustomed to see men, came to our ship, and sat thereon, and let our
men take and kill them.

map showing new passage through the great South Sea south of the Straits of
Magellan in Tierra del Fuego

The 26. we were under 57 degrees, with a flying storm out of the West and
south west, the whole quarter, with very high and blew water, we held our
course Southward, and in the north west saw very high land, in the night we
turned north west ward.

The 27 we were under 56. degrees 51, minutes, the weather very cold, with
hail, and rain, the wind West and West and by south, and we went Southward
and then crossed northward with our maine sails.

The 28 we hoysed our top sails, then we had great billovves out of the
West, with a West vvinde and then a northeast, and therewith held our course
South, and then West and West and by South, and were under fifty six degrees
and forty eight minutes.

The 29, we had a northeast vvinde, and held our course south west and saw two
Islands before us, lying West southwest from us, about noone we got to them
but could not sail above them, so that we held our course north, about them
they had dry gray cliffes, and some low cliffes about them, they lay under 57
degrees, southvvard of the equinoctial line, we named them Barneuells
Islands, from them we sailed West north west: about evening we saw land again,
lying north west and north northwest from us, which was the land that lay
South from the straights of Magelan which reaches Southward, all high hilly
land covered over with snow, ending with a sharp point, which we called Cape
Horn, it lies under 57. degrees and 48. minutes.

Then we had fair weather, and a North vvinde, with great Billows out of
the West, we held on course west, and found a strong stream that can westward.

The 30. we still had great billovves out of the west, with hollovv water
and a strong stream that went vvestvvard, which assured us that we had an
open way into the South sea, then we were under 57. degrees, 34. minutes.

The 31. we had a north vvinde, and sailed west, and were under 58. degrees:
then the wind turning west, and west southwest, somewhat variable, we passed
by Cape Van Horn, and could see no more land, and had great billows out of
the west, and very blew water, which then fully assured us that we had the
broad south sea before us, and no land: the vvind was very variable with
great store of hayle and rain, which forced us often times to vvinde to and
fro.

The first of February, we had cold vveather, with a storm out of the
South-vvest, and sailed with our maine sails, lying northvvest and west
northvvest.

The 2. the vvinde west, we sailed southvvard, and were under 57. degrees
58. minutes, and found 12. degrees Northvvarde variation of the Compass. That
day we savv many great Sea-mevves, and other birds.

The 3. we were under 59. degrees 25. minutes, with indifferent weather, and a
hard west wind, and gessed that we were that day under 59. degrees and a
half, but saw no land, nor any sign thereof in the South.

The 4. we were under 56. degrees 43. minutes, with variable winds, most
southwest, and wound to and fro as the wind blew, with 11. degrees
northeastward variation of Compass.

The 5. we had a strong stream out of the west, with hollow water, whereby
we could bear no sail, ^ut were forced to drive with the wind.

The 8. the wind was south, and we held west, and the wind blowing
northwest, we turned southward, being under 59. degrees, little less: the wind
being stiff northwest and north northwest, with mist, cold, hayle, and snow,
we had our maine sails out, and held our course west.

The next day, it was very cold, raw, moist and mistie vveather.

The 12. our men had each of them three cups of wine in sign of joy for our
good hap, for then the Sraightes of Magelan lay east from us: the same day by
advice of all our counsel, at the request of our chief Merchant, the new
passage (by us discovered between Mauritius land and the States land,) was
named the Straights of le Maire, although by good right it should rather have
bin called William Schoutens Straight, after our Masters Name, by whose wise
conduction and skill in sailing, the same was found.

During the time that we passed through that New Straight, and sailing
southward about that New found land, till we got to the West side of the
Straights of Magelan for the most part we had a very strong stream, hollow
water, continual rain, mists, moist and thick weather, with much hayle and
snow: whereby we endured much trouble, misery and disease. But in regard that
we had so luckily discovered that Passage, and hoping that the places which we
were yet to discover would likewise fall out well; we were encouraged, not
once thinking upon our former hard passage, with assured minds determined to
go forward on our voyage.

The 13. we still had much rain and misty dark weather, and saw many birds
and Porpesses.

The 14. We were under 51. degrees 50. minutes, with misty dark and moist
weather, as also the 15. but slight water, being under 51. degrees 12. minutes,
the wind West, holding our course north, and found that the stream there, ran
north.

The next, the wind still held northwest, north northwest, and west, to the 23.
day, then we had the general South wind, and good weather, with hollow
billows out of the southwest and were under 46. degrees and 30. minutes,

The 24. We hoysed our upper Ordinance out of the hold, and placed it above
upon our deck.

The 25. of January, we hoysed all our sails, because we entered into a
peaceable Sea, and had past all storms and hard weather.

The 27. We hoysed up our second tire of Ordinance, and placed it in our second
Orlope, for in Porto Desire we had laid it down in the hold, and all things
that might hinder the wind, and then were under 40. degrees with fair weather,
a south, and south southeast wind, and a good gale, as the day before, and
held our course northward.

The 28. our counsel and the four Masters determined to sail to the Isles of
John Fernando, there to refresh us, because some of our men by means of the
great pains and labor taken by them were extreme weary, and some had the
flux: that day we were under 35. degrees 53. minutes. In the evening we bare
but small sail, fearing to fall upon the land by night, and because we would
not pass bey and it in the night, we sailed northeast.

The first of March in the morning we saw the Islands of John Fernando, right
before us, north northeast, with a south wind, fair weather, and a good gale.
About noone we got to them, under 33. degrees and 48. minutes.

These are two Islands, both of them very high land: the smallest lying most
westward, is a very dry bare Island with nothing in it, but bare hills and
cliffes, the greatest (lying eastward) is also full of very high hills, but
has many trees, and very fruitful. Therein are many beasts, as hogs, and
goats, upon the coast admirable numbers of good fish; which makes the
Spaniards often times come thither to fish, and in short time fill their ships
and carry them to Peru. We went on the west side of those Islandes, which was
not well for us, for there we must have gone about eastward to get into the
Road, which lies on the east point of the greatest Island, for going about on
the west side behind the land, we should have gotten under the land in the
calm water, because the land there is high and calm, so that we could not get
to the land to anchor with our ship, and therefore sent our boat out to
sound the depth, which came aboard again in the the evening, and told us, that
close by the land we had 40. and 30, fathom sandy ground, which still
lesseneth till it come to 3. fathom good to anchor in, besides a fair green
valley, full of green trees, pleasant to behold, but because of the shortness
of the time they went not on shore, and in diverse places saw fresh water in
great streams run down off the hills, they likewise saw many goats and other
beasts upon the hills, which they could not well know, being so far off: they
had also in short time taken a great number of good fish, for the hook was no
sooner in the water but presently they took fish, so that continually without
ceasing, they did nothing but draw up fish, most of them being Corcobados, and
Steenbrasses, and saw many sea Wolves: these news cheared up our men,
specially those that were troubled with looseness hoping there to refresh
themselves: that night it was calm weather, so that the stream drove us
somewhat backward.

The 2. day we were with our ship close under the land again, but could not
get so near (what means soever we used) to find ground, we once again sent
our men on land, some to fish, and some to seek for cattle, they saw many
hogs, goats, and other beasts, but by reason that the woods were thick they
could not get them: and the while that some of them fetched water, they that
were in the boat had taken almost two tons of fish, all with hooks, and so
we were forced to leave that fair Island, and could get nothing else there.

The 3. we drove at least 4. leagues beneath the Islands, notwithstanding that
all that quarter we did the best we could to sail near to it, whereof at
last being vvearie, (seeing it was impossible to be done) we determined to
leave them, and to hold on our course, to perform our voyage, every day having
a good fore-vvinde, to the great grief of our sick men, who thereby were
clean out of comfort, but God help them.

These Islands are under 33. degrees 40. minutes: this resolution taken, we
set our course northvvest and by West, with a good South gale of vvinde, and
fair vveather.

The 11. we past Tropicus Capricornus the second time, with a south east
vvinde, our course northvvest, there we had the general east and east
southeast vvinde, and held our course north north west to the 15. till we were
under 18. degrees, then we changed our course, and went west, and made our
rovving Shullop ready, to use it when we came near any land.

The 17. we were under 19. degrees, and held our course West northvvest.

The 20. we were under 17 degrees, with very high billovves out of the
south, the vvinde southeast as before, we held our course West northvvest, our
Compass then being half a Strike variation north westward, every day we saw
many Pilsters, and other birds, Pilsters are white birds, with red bills, and
reddish heads, and long white cloven tails, of two or two foot and a half
long, they are to be seen in all parts of the world, wheresoever we sail, and
are as big as a common Sea mew.

The 24. we were under 15. degrees, and held our course west, every day having
hollow billows out of the south, and continual stiff cold wind east southe
ast, and still went forward, with a good gale.

The 3. of April being Easter day, we were under 15. degrees 12. minutes, at
which time we had no variation of Compass, for the needle stood right north
and south, then the flux began much to trouble our men, for at times, half of
them at the least had it.

The 9. John Cornelius Schouten that had been Master of the Horn, (William
Cornelius Schoutens Brother, our Master) died, when he had lain sick a month.

The 10. In the morning after we had prayed, his dead body was thrown over
board, and presently after we savv land northvvest and northvvest and by
north, about three leagues from us, a low Island, not very great, there also
we saw great numbers of Sea-mewes and fish, and set our course to the Island,
thinking to have some refreshing, whereof in regard of the flux we had great
need. About noone we got to the Island, and cast out our lead, but found no
ground, and therefore put out our Shalop, to see if we could find any ground,
the Shalop returning, they told us that they found ground at 25. fathom about a
small musket shot from the land, they said also that they had seen many Hayes
and other fish, such as we found about John Fernandos Islands, but we durst not
go with our ship so close under the land, fearing some danger. Then our Shalop
went to the land again to see what they might get there, but coming near to
the Island they could not get to the strand with the shalop the water rusht so
hard against the shore, which our men perceiving, leapt into the water and
swam, and drew one another to land, leaving the shalop fast with a drag, about
evening they came on board again, and could get nothing, but only some green
he arbes, which tasted like unto Holland Tuinkars, they said, that there they
had seen three Dogs, that neither barkt, nor made any noise, and in it found
some places full of rain water, that had fallen that day.

The Island as we perceived, seemed at high water for the most part to be
overflowed, it had nothing about it but a kind of wall like a ditch, full of
green trees, pleasant to behold, and in the middle of them and else where,
much salt water. It is under 15. degrees twelve minutes, distant from the Coast
of Peru by our estimation nine hundred twenty and five leagues. That quarter
the wind was North, and we held our course West, to wards the Islands of
Solomon, and called that Island Dogs Island.

In the night it blewer hard, with a great shower of rain.

The 14. the wind east and east southeast, we sailed West and west and by
north, with wind and weather before said, and saw much fish, and many birds:
after noone we saw another low Island North west from us being very great,
and reached northeast and southvvest, whereat we rejoiced, hoping to get
water and some refreshing there, and made to it, holding our course northwest.

About evening, being with our ship about a league from the land, there came a
Canoe to meet us, with 4. Indians in it, al naked, of a reddish color, very
black long hair: they kept a good way from our ship first calling to us,
making signs to have us come on land, but we understood them not, nor they us,
not withstanding that we ansvvered and called to them in Spanish, Molucus,
Iauan, and our own Netherland speech.

About evening at Sunne-setting, we got to the land, but found no ground, nor
no changing of water, although we were so near to the shore, that with a
musket we might shoot into it, and therefore put to Sea again, and the Canoe
to land, where a great many Indians stood upon the shore to watch for them:
not long after again there came another Canoe from the Land to our ship, but
would not (as the first) come aboard, they called to us, and we to them, but
understood not one the other, at last their Canoe ouerthrewe in the water, but
they soon turned it up again, and leapt quickly into it, they shevved and
pointed to wards the land, and we the like to them toward the ship, but
they would not come, wherewith we held on our course and left the Island,
sailing South and southwest to get above the land: the Island was not broad,
but somewhat long, and full of trees, which as we gessed were Palmitas and
Cocus trees, it lies under 15. degrees 15. minutes, having white sand ground,
that night we saw fire upon the land in diverse places.

The 15. in the morning, having in the night sailed about ten leagues south
southwest, we sailed close along by the land, where we saw many naked men
standing on shore, calling and crying (as it seemed) to bid us come on land,
and then again there came another Canoe from the land toward our ship, with
three Indians in it, which also called to us, and would not come aboard, but
rowed to the Shalop, and went close to it, our men showing them all the
friendship they could, giving them some beads and knives, but they understood
not one another having been a little while by the Shalop, they left it, and
came so near to our ship, that we cast out a small rope to them, which they
took, but would not enter into the ship, but went into the Shalop, which came
back from the land without doing any thing, and having bin a good while in it,
at the last one of them came into the gallerie, and drew our the nails of the
windows in the merchants and Masters Cabines, and taking them away, hid them
in his hair, they were desirous of Iron, for they ventured to pull out the
bolts with their hands, and to earry them away, we sought to keep one of them
in the ship and to send one of our men with the other two in their Cano to land
to make friendship with them but they would not, they were very theeuish
people, all naked, only a piece of a mat hanging before their privy members.
Their skin was marked with diverse figures, as Snakes, Dragons, and such like
things which showed very blew, as if they had bin burnt thereon with
gunpowder, we gave them wine, as they sat in the Canoe, but they would not
give us the cup again. We sent our Shalop once again to the land, with 8.
musketeers, and 6. men with svvords Claus Johnson our under Merchant, and
Arice Clauson the Merchant of the Horn, went with them, to see what was to
be gotten in the Island, and to make friendship with them. But as soon as
they were by the strand and the men went on shore, there came at least 30
Indians out of the vvood with great Clubs or Cudgels and would have taken our
men's arms from them and thought to dravv the Shalop upon the land, ventred to
take two of our men out of the Shalop, thinking to carry them into the vvood,
but our musketeers, having their muskets ready, discharged three of them
amongst them, and verily thought that they either killed or sore vvounded some
of them. They likewise had long staves, with very long sharp things at the
ends thereof, which (as we thought) were sins of black fishes, they
also cast stones with stings, but (God be thanked) hurt none of our men, bows
they had not, as far as we could see. Our men saw some of their women,
that cried and claspt their men about the necks, but knew not what they
meant, but thought they did it to get them from thence. That Island (by reason
we could there find no ground to anchor) we called the Island without ground.
On the out side it was low plain ground, full of palm trees, but within full
of salt water. At last when we saw that there was nothing to be gotten we
determined to leave it, and with an east vvinde held our course West to
seaward. There we had slight water and no billows as the day before we had out
of the South, and therefore we gest that Southward there was more land, it is
under 15 degrees, about 100 leagues distant from Dogs Island.

The 16. in the morning betimes, we saw an other Island, North ward from us,
which we made to, but found it as the other, without anchor ground, within also
being all drowned land, yet on the sids it was full of trees, but no plume nor
Cocos trees. We put out our Shalop to sound the depth, but, going to the
shore, found no ground, and therefore came a boorde again, without doing any
thing, or seeing any men. We sent our Shalop once again to see if we could
get any refreshing or water upon the land, who returning again told us that
they had found fresh water not far from the shore, in a pit or keele, which
they might bring with buckets to the strand, but hard to get into the ship,
for the Shalop, by reason of the billows, lay fast at a dreg, by which means
the men were forced, to draw one an other with a rope on land, and in like
sort on boorde again, so that it was very troublesome and dangerous to go on
the land, and therefore fetched but four small fats of water. There also we
found such herbs as we had in the Dogs Island, whereof we brought a
sackefull a boorde, and some crabs as also some shells, and horns, that had
fish in them of very good taste, That evening we held on our course Westward,
with an east wind, and an in different gale, rainie weather and smoth water.
The same day we were under 14. degrees 46. minutes. That Island was 15.
leagues distant from the other, we called it the water Island, by cause there
we got some water.

The 17. we gave our men six cups of water, and sod a great ketle with pottage
made of the green herbs that we had in water Island, which did our men some
good and eased them of their looseness.

The 18. in the morning, we saw an other low Island south west from us, lying
West north west, and east south east, as far as we could see, at the least
twenty leagues, distant from the other. We made to it, and being hard by it,
sent out our boat to sound the depth they told us they found ground by a point
of land, from whence there came a stream at twenty, twenty five and forty
fathom, running softly down, about a musket shot from the land, whereupon we
sent the boat with our empty caske thither, hoping to find water. When it
came to the land, they let the Schut lie fast at a dreg in the water and drew
one an other with a rope though the water, to land as they did before, there
they sought a good way within a vvood for fresh water, but because they had
no arms with them, and savv a vvilde man, who as they thought had a bovv in
his hand, they turned presently back to the Shalop, and came aboard again
without doing any thing, and lying a good way from the shore, there came
five or six vvild men to the strand, who seeing that our men were gone, went
back again into the wood. Upon that Island there were great store of green
wild trees, being also full of salt water within. When our men came into the
ship they were covered all over with flies, in such abundance that we could
not know them, their faces, hands, and Scute and all full, and the owers also
as far as they were out of the water, were covered over with black flies,
wonderful to behold: those flies came with them aboard our ship and flue so
thick upon our bodies and in our faces, that we knew not how to shun them,
for we could hardly eat or drink, but all was full of them: we still wipt
our faces and hands, and made flaps to kill as many as we could, this
continued two or three days with great trouble unto us all: at last we had a
good gale of wind, whereby, and with continual killing them, in the end when
three or four days were past we were rid of them, we called that Island, the
Fly Island, and therewith set forward from it, and had some rain, as also the
next day, whereby we gathered so much water, with clothes and sails that it
help us well, in the night we made no great way but often times let the ship
drive, that we might not by night fall upon such low Islands, and spoil our
ship.

The 23. we were under 15. degrees 4. minutes, and then again had great
hollow bill ovves out of fly south, which the next day also continued, the
wind was north east and most part east, and east and by south. There they
said that Terra Australis which we sought for, lay yet 250. leagues further.

The 25. we filled four vessels full of rain water; and still had hollow
billows out of the south, as we commonly have in the Spanish seas out of the
north west.

The 3. of May the wind was still east, and we say led West, and at woone
were under 15 degrees, 3 minutes, That day we saw many great Dorados which were
the first that we had seen in the south sea.

The 9. We were under 15. degrees 20. minutes, and at that time as we thought
were 1510. leagues distant from the coast of Peru and Chili. About noone we
saw a sail, which as we gessed was a Bark, coming out of the south, and
went northward toward us, we presently made toward it, and as it came near
to us, we shot at it with one of our pieces right over her, to make them
strike, but they would not, then we shot again, but yet they would not
strike, with that we put out our Shalop with 10. musketeers in it, to take her,
which calling to them we shot another piece, yet without any intent to reach
or to hurt them, but they would not strike, but sought as well as they could to
get away from us, and got to loofeward of us, but our Shalop being too crafty
for them rowed to them, and being about half a musket shot from them shot
four muskets one after an other, as they drew near to her, and before they
could reach her some of her men in great fear leapt ouerboord, whereof one of
them had a little child, and another was hurt, and had three holes in his
back, but not very deep, for it was hayleshot, those we fetched out of the
water again: they also threw much of their goods over board, and amongst the
rest three Hens, our men leapt into their ship, and carried them into our
ship, they not once resisting, for in truth they had no arms, when they were
in our ship we fetched two men more that were left in theirs, which presently
fell down before us, and kissed our feet and hands, one of them was a very old
man, the other a young man, we could not understand them, but used them
kindly, and presently the Shalop rowd to fetch those that leapt ouerboord, to
save their lives, but they got but two of them, that drove upon one of their
oars, and pointed to our men with their hands to the ground, as much to say,
that the rest were drowned: one of those two that was hurt, whom we dressed, had
long yealowish hair. In that ship there was at least eight women, three
young sucking children, and some of nine or ten years old, so that we made
account they were three and twenty in all, clean naked prople, both men and
women, only something hanging before their privy members. About evening we
set the men on board their ship again, that were welcome to their wives,
which claspt them about the necks and kissed them. We gave them beads, (which
they hung about their necks,) and some knives, and showed them all the
friend^hip we could, and they the like to us, giving us two fir^^ Matiens, and
two Cocos nuts, for they had not many, that was all they had to eat and
drink, and they had drunk out all the water out of the nuttes, so that they
had no more drink. We saw them drink salt water out of the Sea, and gave it
also to their young children, to drink, which we thought to be against
Nature. They had certain clothes, which they vvare before their privy
members, and therevvith covered themselves against the heat of the Sun, of a
yealowish color. They were reddish people, that anointed themselves with
Oil: the Women had short hair, like our men in Holland: Men's hair was long,
curled, and very black: their ship was of a strange fashion: It was made of 2.
long fair Canoes with a good space between them, in each Canoe about the
middle thereof, there lay two whole broad planckes of fair read vvood, to
keep out the water, and diverse planckes laid cross over, from the one Canoe
to the other, which were made fast together, and hung a good way over on both
ends, without the Canoes, very close above to keep out the water, before at
the end of one of the Canoes, on starre-boord, there stood a Mast, at the end
thereof having a forke, whereon the yard lay. The sail was made of mats, and
as the vvinde blow they sailed, without Compass, or any Instruments for the
Sea, but hooks to fish withal, whereof the upper part was stone, the other
black bone, or Torroyses shelles, and some of them were mother of pearl.
Their ropes were very fair, and almost as thick as a Cable, made of such
stuff as the fig frayles in Spain are. When they sailed from us, they hold
their course southeast.

The tenth, We had the vvinde South southeast, and southeast and by South, and
held our course West, and southwest In the morning after breakefast, we saw
very high land on backeboord, lying Southeast and by south, about eight leagues
from us: we made to it, and sailed all that day with a good gale, but could
not reach it, and therefore held off in the night, in the evening we saw a
sail a great may beneath the land, and presently after another also, a great
deal below they often wound to and fro and in the night they made fires, and
drew near one unto the other.

The eleventh in the morning, we were near a high Island, and about two
Leagues southvvard from thence, an other long low Island, that day we sailed
over a bank of fourteen fathom deep, stony ground, lying about two
Leagues from the land, and as soon as we were over it, we could find no
more ground. One of the Ships aforesaid came to us, and we cast out a rope
at our stern thinking they would take it, and draw themselves by is aboard our
ship, but they could not get it till one of our men leapt over board, and
holp them to take it, which they untied, and took it into their ship, and
tied two Cocos nuts, and 3 or 4 flying fishes to the rope, and so let it go
calling aloud to us, but we could not understand them, but we thought their
meaning was, that we should pull the rope on board again: they also carry a
Canoe in their ship, which what time soever, they can put out: and are very
good Sea men. Their ships were of the fashion asoresayd, with good sails, and
are so swift of sail, that few ships in Holland can out sail them. They
steer behind with 2. oars, on each Canoe a man, and sometimes row, with their
oars before, when they will wind, the ship also winds of it self, when they
pull the oats out of the water and let it go, or alone with the wind, we
put out our Shalop to sound, which came and told us that they had found ground
at 15.14. and 12. fathom, sheluie ground, about a canon shot from the land,
we presently made to it to anchor, and took in our sails. The Negroes seeing
that, made fignes to us to go to the other Island, and sailed thither before
us, but we anchored at the end of the Island, at five and twenty fathom
sandy ground, a great Cannon shot from the land. That Island is a high hill,
almost like one of the Molucos Islandes, full of trees, most Cocos trees,
therefore we called it Cocos Island.

The other Island is much longer, but lower, lying East and West. As soon as
we were at an anchor, there came three small ships, that sailed up and
down about our ship, and at least nine or ten Canoes boorded us, some from
the land, and some out of the little ships, among the which, two of them
put out little white flags in sign of peace, and we did the like. Their
Canoes, which had 3. and 4. men a piece in them, were flat before and sharp
behind, hewed out of a whole piece of reed wood. Wherewith they could row
exceeding swift, and when they came near the ship, they leapt into the water,
and swam to our ship, with their hands full of Cocos nuttes, and Vbes roots,
which they bartred with us for nails and beads, whereof they were very
desirous, they gave four or five Cocos nutts, for one nail or a small string
of beads, so that the same day we bartered for 180. Cocos nuttes, and at last
there came so many on board, that we scarce knew how to bestirre our selves.
We sent our Shalop toward the other Island, to see if there we could not lie
better, for there we lay in the open sea, but the Shalop was no sooner off from
our ship, rowing along by the land, but it was enclosed round about by 12 or
13. Canoes of the other Island, and still more came to them, the people within
them showing as if they were mad, having certain staves of hard wood in their
hands, like Clubs, sharp at the point, and a little burnt. They boorded our
Shalop, and thought to have taken it from us, but our men being thereby
constrained to defend themselves, let flee three muskets among them, whereat
first they laughed and mocked, thinking it but a sport, but the third time one of
them was shot into the breast clean through his body, which his fellows seeing
went presently to help him, and finding him to be so sore hurt, all of them
kept of from the Shalop, and went to one of their small ships with sails,
and calling to it would have had them to over row the Shalop, as we gest,
but they would not, for their Canoes had bin aboard our ship, where they had
been well used, and friendly dealt with all. Those people were very theeuish,
for in our sight they stole one of our leads wherewith our men used to sound,
and whatsoever they saw, they would steal and swim away with it as some of
them did. that stole away one of our men's pillovves and couerlet. others took
knives and what else they could find. Wherevvith they presently leapt over
boorde, and svvam away, so that in the night we were forced to take in our
Shalop, least they should cut the rope, and carry it away, they were
exceeding desirous of iron, looking round about upon the nails and bolts of
the ship, thinking to pull them out and to steal them away, but they were
to fast in the vvood. They were lusty men well proportioned, and of great
stature, and went all naked and unarmed only their privy members covered.
Their hair was dressed after diverse fashions, some short and some finely
curled, some had long hair bound up in plaits in several manner, they were
notable svvimmers. That Cocos Island lies under 16 degrees 10 minutes. The
twelfe in the morning after breake-fasttime, there came more Canoes a boorde
our ship with Cocos nuts, Bananas, Vbas roots, and some little hogs, and some
vessels full of fresh water, that day we bartered with them for one
thousand two hundred Cocos nuts, we were 85. men aboard and every one had
twelve nuts. They strove who should get first aboard and those that could not
get to the ship, leapt out of their Canoes, and diued under the other Canoes,
to get to the ship to sell their vvare, holding Vbas roots, and bunches of
Cocos nuts in their mouths, and climed so many, and so fast up to the ship,
that we were forced to keep them down with staves. When they had sold
their wares, they leapt out of the ship and swam to their Canoes again. They
wondered at the greatness and strength of the ship, and some of them crept
down behind at the rother, under the ship, and knocked with stones upon the
bottom th^reof, to prove how strong it was. There came a Canoe from the other
Island, that brought us a young black wild hog, which the king sent us for a
present, we would have given the messenger somewhat for it, but he would not
take it, making signs that the king had charged him not to take any thing.
At noone the king himself came in a great ship with a sail, of the fashion
aforesaid, like an Ice Slead, with at least thirty five Canoes to accompany
him. This king was by his men called Latou, we received him with Drums and
Trumpets, where at they wondered, because they never had scene nor heard the
like before, They showed us great honor and much friendship outwardly, with
bowing their heads, clapping their fists together over their heads and other
strange ceremonies. When he was a little way from us he began to call and to
cry out alowd, as if he had prayed after his manner, all the rest of his
men did the like, we not knowing what it meant, but gest that it was in steed
of a welcome.

Presently thereupon the king sent us a Matien by three of his men, to whom we
gave an old hatcher, a few beads, some old nails, and a piece of linen
cloth, which he willingly received, laying it three times upon his head, and
bowing it, in token of reverence, or thanks, and courtesy. Those that came
into our ship, fell on their knees, and kissed our feet, and wondered much at our
ship. We could not know the king from the other Indians, for he was likewise
clean naked, but only that they showed him reverence, and he commanded over
his men. We made signs that the king should come aboard of our ship, his
son came aboard, and we entertained him well, but he himself durst not, or
would not come, but they altogether made signs to have us come to the further
Island, with our ship, where there was enough of all things to be had. Among
other things we bartered with them for angles of hair, that were made of reed,
as in Holland, but some what thicker, with hooks of mother of Pearl. The
kings son went to land again, and the Canoe where in he went had a great
piece of wood on backeboord, wherewith it kept upright, upon that piece of wood
their angle lay, ready to take fish.

The 13. in the morning, there came at least 45. Canoes aboard, to traffic
with us, with an armado of 23. small ships, made like ice sleads, each of
them one with an other, having 25 men a piece in them, and every small Canoe 4
or 5 we not knowing what their intent was. The Canoes deait with us bartering
Cocos nuttes, for nails, and made show, as if they were our great friends, but
afterward we found it otherwise: all of them made signs to us to sail to the
other Island, the king who the day before had been at our ship, came
likewise in his ship with a sail to our ship, and all of them made a great
noise. We would gladly have had him aboorde, but he would not, where with we
suspected treason fearing some mischief, and the rather, because all the
ships and Canoes kept close round about our ship, and that the king went out
of his ship into a Canoe, and his son into an other, and presently they
stroke upon a kind of drum that was in his ship, whereat all the Indians
began to cry out alowd, which we esteemed to be a warning given unto them,
altogether to fall upon us, to take our ship from us, and then the ship
wherein the king sailed before he went out of it, boorded us, coming so hard
upon us, as if it would have suncke us, but it struck against our ship with
such a force that the two heads of the Canoes before brake in pieces, wherewith
the men that were in it, (among them having some women) leapt into the water
and swam to wind ward, the rest began to fling great number of stones at us
thinking therewith to fear us, but we shot at them with muskets and 3 great
pieces (laden with musket shot and old nails) wherewith all they that were in
the ship and Canoes that lay about our ship, leapt into the water, we made
reckoning that some of them had forgotten the way to go home again, and
that diverse of them ^^^o were sore wounded, and therewith they went back: they
knew not what such manner of shooting meant, but yet when they saw how we had
handled them with our shot, they kept aloof out of the reach of our pieces,
and we hoysing anchor, set forward again on our voyage, holding our course
west, and west and by south. We were of opinion that the king at that time,
had assembled all his forces, for he had at the least 1000. men, or rather
more, among them we saw one that was clean white.

When we were about four leagues off from the Islands, many of our men would
have had us go back again to the Islands, by force to go on land, to
refresh our selves, in regard that we had but little water, but the master and
the Merchant would not. The first Island that was so high, we named Cocos
Island, and the other that lay a league distant from it, we called Traitors
Island, because the most part of the Indians that sought to betray us, came
from that Island.

The 14. in the morning, we saw another Island right before us, about seven
Leagues distant from us, which seemed to be round, and as we gest was thirty
Leagues distant from the Islandas, foresaid. That Island we called the Hope,
and made toward it, hoping there to get water, and better refreshing, but
coming to it, could find no ground, and therefore put out our Shalop, to sound
a long the shore, which about a musket shot from the land, found ground at
forty fathom, small black, and soft stony ground, sometimes also they had
twenty and thirty fathom, but as soon as they were a Shalops length or two
from it, they had no ground again. Then ten or twelve Canoes came to our
ship, but we would not let them come aboard, but showed them friendly
countenance, and bartered with them for four flying fishes, for the which we
gave them some beads, which we let down by a rope at the stern of the ship,
and they taking them tied the fishes to the rope, and we pulled them up, in the
mean time our Shalop sounded along by the land, which they in the Canoes
seeing, presently made toward it, and being close by it, at first spoke unto
the men, but withal compast them about with fourteen Canoes, and therewith
some of them leapt ouerboord, thinking to fall upon the Shalop, or to draw it
away with them, which our men perceiving, shot with their Muskets among them,
(there being six Muskets, and other arms. Courtelasses and Pikes in the
Shalop) and therewith killed two of the Indians as they sat in their Canoes,
whereof one presently fell dead ouerboorde, the other sat still with his hand
vviping off the blood upon his breast, but at last fell likewise over board:
the rest in the Canoes, were thereat in so great fear, that in all have they
made away, at which time we saw many men standing upon the shore, that cried
and made a great noise. But for that we there could find no fit anchoring
ground, we took our Shalop in again, and went forward on our voyage, holding
our course southwest, the better to get to the south, hoping there to find
firm land. And it was so rough near to the Island, that it was a very bad
place for a boat to go on shore. The Island was all full of black cliffes,
green on the top, and black earth, and was full of Cocos trees, and green
herbs. We also saw many houles along by the Sea side, and clofe by the strand
there was a great Village, the land was hilly, but not very high.

The fifteen we were under sixteen degrees twelve minutes, fair wether, the
wind southeast, our course west, and west and by south.

The 17. the wind being Northeast, we went west and by south, but the two
last quarters, we saylde west north west. That day it was agreed among us,
because our victuales beegan to wax scant, that in steed of breakfast, we
should give our men, half a cup of sack.

The 18. being under 16. degrees, 5. minutes, we had variable west winds,
that day we called our Counsel together, to whom William Cornelison Schouten
our Master showed, that then we were at the least one thousand six hundred
leagues, eastward from the coast of Peru, and Chili, and had not discoured any
part of Terra Australis, as our intent was, that there was not any appearance
to discover any thing to our contentments that we also had sailed further
westward, then we intended, that sailing foreward in that manner, without all
doubt we should fall southward upon Noua Guinea, and that if there we should
find no passage or way to get through, (it being very dangerous, uncertain
and not known) that then both ship and goods would be lost, and we our
selves likewise should perish, it being impossible to come Eastward back
again from thence, by reason of the steadfast East vvindes, that in the west
parts continually blow, that we also had but small store of victuals, and saw
no means as yet to increase them, and therefore asked their counsel, whether
it was not their best way to alter their course, and to sail northvvard,
thereby to get northvvard to Noua Guinea, and so to the Molucoes, which they
considering of, and well weighing found his reasons to be true, and thought it
necessary to be done, and therefore all with one consent agreed to sail
Northward, not to fall southward upon Noua Guinea, being an uncertain way, but
rather Northward, to hold a certain course, which was presently put in
effect, and we set our course north northwest

The nineteenth, the wind South, and our course North, at noone we saw two
Islandes, Northeast and by East, about eight leagues from us, which seemed to
lie about a Cannon shot distant one from the other. Then we went northeast, to
sail about the land, with fair weather, but no great gale.

The 20. The wind was northeast, and we did the best by laboring to get to the
land.

The one and twentieth, the wind was East, with a small gale: and when we
were about a league from the land, there came twenty Canoes to our ship, to
whom we showed all signs of friendshipp, but one of them with a wooden
Assagay (sharp at the point) in his hand, threatened to shoot at one of our
men, and cried alowde, as they did in the other Island, which we thought was
a sign among them, to fall upon us, whereupon we discharged two of our great
Pieces, and therewithal some of our Muskettes, whereby two of them were hurt,
and the rest presently made away, as they fled throwing a shirt overboord,
which they had stolen out of our gallery. After that, some of them took
courage again, and came once more with certain Canoes to our ship, and we
sailing closer to the land because we had no ground, put out our Shalop to
sound the depth, with 8. musketeers in it, but they found no ground, and when
they thought to come back again to the ship, 6. or 8. Canoes boorded them,
thinking to enter the boat, and to take their arms from them: wherewith to
defend themselves they were forced to shoot with their muskets among them, and
killed six, and hurt many of them, for when they fled our men rowed to one of
their Canoes, that had no man in it but one that lay dead, whose legs hung
still in the Canoe, they threw his body into the Sea, and brought the Canoe
aboard their Shalop, wherein they found a Club, with a long staff like a half
pike. In the night time our men came again to us and could find no anchor
ground, and therefore that night we held off and on close by the land.

The 22. we did the best we could to get to the land, and coming to it, sent
out our Shalop to sound along by the shore, that found ground at fifty
fathom, sheluie ground about a Cannon shot from the land, which still lessened
and waxt shallower to 30. and 35. fathom and we anchored at 35 fathom,
sheluie ground, till we could find a better place. Our ship master rowed
with the Shalop and our boat to sound every where, and found a fit place to
lay the ship in, which was close by our ship, in a creek, hard by a little
fresh river, whereunto we presently sailed, and for that the wind was
contrary, we sailed into it, so that being in the bay we lay a stones cast
off from the shore, in the creek at nine fathom water sheluie ground. There
we made our ship fast with four ropes, in smooth water, and the fresh water
ran down out of the hill into the sea, right against the place where our
ship lay, whereby while our men fetched water, or did anything upon the
shore, if the Indians had set upon them, we could beat them off with our
ordinance. The same day there came diverse Canoes to our ship, bringing some
Cocos nuttes, and Vbas roots, others brought a live hog, and two roasted hogs,
for the which we bartered and gave them slight knives, beads, and nails.
Those people also were theeuish, and would swim and diue exceeding well, as
those in the other Islands could do, their houses stood along the stra^d which
were round and made of leaves sharp on the top and close like a paint-house,
to let the water fall down, about five and twenty foot in compass, and ten or
twelve foot high, with a low hole to go in stooping, in them there was nothing
to be seen, but some dried herbs, like hay, to sleep upon, and an angling
rodd or two, and in some a wodden club or staff, that was all their household
stuff, both the best and worser sort, for the king himself had no more.

The 23 we bartered again for more Cocos nuts, and Vbas roots, which the
Canoes brought to our ship, that day there came a great number of men down to
the strand, which as it seemed came from all places of the Island, wondering to
see our ship.

The 24. Aris Clauson, Reymie Simonson Snocke, and Cornelison Schouten went on
land to be hostages, to make friendship with the Indians, and for them we had
6. of their principal men in our ship, whom we used friendly, giving them
meat and drink, and some presents, as they did to our men, giving them Cocos,
and Vbas roots to eat, and water to drink. The king showed our men great
reverence, and gave them four little hogs, that day our men fetched five fats
full of water peaceably with out quarreling, for when any of the Indians came
near our boat, the king himself came thither and drove them thence, or sent
one of his men to do it. His men were very obedient unto him: for as it
chanced that one of our coutelasses was stolen away from us, and we told one
of the kings gentlemen thereof, he gave some of the Indians charge to fetch it
again, and presently he that had taken it, was sought for, and although he
was gone a good way of, they brought him back who being come, the coutelasse
was laid down at our feet, and he was beaten with staves, they making signs
unto us with their fingers upon their throats, that if the Herico (that is the
king) knew of it, his head should be cut off, and after, that we had nothing
stolen from us, neither on the shore, nor in the ship, nor else where:
neither durst they take a fish that we angled for. Those people were very
fearful of our shooting, for when we shot off a musket, they all ran
quaking and shivering away, and we put them in more fear, when we showed
them that we could shoot with the great pieces, which the king desired us
once to do, which being done they were all so fearful and abasht thereat,
that all of them as also the king, (sitting under his Belay, or canopy,
notwithstanding all that we could say or do to persuade them,) sore amassed
ran into the woods, and left our men sitting there alone. But not long after
they came again, scarce half well assured.

The 25. Aris Clawson, Claus Johnson, and Daniel le Maire, went on land again,
to barter for hogs, but they would not barter. But after the king had said
his prayers, (which he used to do every time that we went on shore,) showed
us great friendship, and we the like to him.

The 26. Jacob le Maire our Merchant and Aris Clawson went on shore but could
get no hogs of the Indians, because they themselves had great need of them,
having little else to eat but Vbas roots, Cocos nutts, a few hogs, and some
Bananas, our men were very welcome unto them, and had great reverence showed
them, for they trod upon mats, and the king and his lieutenant gave them their
Crowns, which they took of from their own heads, and set them on their
heads, in recompense whereof, Jacob le Maire gave them some presents of little
worth, wherewith they were very well pleased.

The crowns were made of long small white feathers and underneath and above
mixed with some red, and green feathers, for they have many Parrots, and some
Doves, whereof they make great account, for every one of the kings counsel had
a dove by him sitting upon a stick, those Doves are white on their backs, and
all the rest black saving their breasts which are reddish, all that day we
fetched water, and bartered for good store of Cocos nuts, and Vbas roots.

The 27. and 28. we got all our water into the ship, then William Cornelison
Schouten our master, and Aris Clawson went on land with the trumpets, which the
kings took great pleasure to hear, and with much ado got two hogs.

That day the king of the other Island came to visit the king of the Island
where we were, who after great reverence and wonderful ceremonies used one
unto the other, gave each other certain presents, as roots and other things,
at last making a great noise, as we gest, because the king of the other Island
desired to try if he could take our ship, and to keep our men there, which
the other king would not consent unto, fearing some hurt might happen unto
them. The kings Lieuetenant or his Son came once aboard our ship, whom we
used in good sort, and wondered much to see it: that evening our men daunced
with the Indians, whereat they much rejoiced, marueling that we were so
familiar, and behaved our selves so courteously among them, we were there as
free and friendly as if we had been at home in our own houses.

The nine and twentieth, in the morning, Iacoble Maire, Aris Clawson, with
Claus Johnson, Ban, and one of our Pilots went on shore, and being there, went
into the land, and climed up upon a hill, to see what fruit grew thereon, and
to behold the cituation of the Island, and being upon the hill, the old king
and his brother came thither to bear them company: there they saw nothing but
wilderness, and some valleys that were all bare, by reason of the great store of
rain that had fallen, they also found some red color, wherewith the women
color their heads and faces, and when they saw that our men were weary with
going, they made signs unto them to go down to the ship again, and led
them by a good way, to a place where there was some Cocos trees, full of nuts,
there they made our men sit down, and the kings Lieuetenant putting a string
about his feet, or his hands, climed quickly up a smooth high tree, and in a
trice fetched down 10. Cocos nuts, which at one crush with a stick or a piece
of wood, he so soon opened, that our men wondered to see it, They told us that
they always had war with the men of the other Island, and showed us many
holes and caves in the hill, and bushes and groves in the way, from whence they
issued out, and spoyld and killed each other: and would gladly have had us go
with our ship, to the other Island to help them there, to fight against
those Indians with our Pieces, but it being no profit unto us, we refused it.
About noone our men came aboard again, bringing with them the young King and
his brother, that dined with us, and while he sat at the table, we told them
that within two days we would go from thence, whereat the young King was so
glad, that for Joy, he presently leapt from the table, and going into the
Gallerie, cried out, and said, that within two days we would be gone. They
were in great fear of us, (although we showed them all the friendship we
could,) and doubted that we would take their Country from them. He promised us
that if we would go thence in 2. days, he would give us 10. hogs, and a
great number of Cocos nuts, which they called Ali. When we had dined, the old
king came aboard our ship, who after their manner was a stately seemly person,
about 60. years of age, bringing with him 16. of his counsel: we received and
welcomed him as well as we might. When he entered into the ship, he fell down
upon his face, and prayed, then we led him into the hold, and there again he
prayed, he wondered much at that he saw, as we also did at his behavior: his
men kissed our feet, and took them in their hands, and laid them on their
heads and their necks, in sign of submission. The King looked into all places
of the ship, both before and behind, and looked as if he had been in a
dream, but specially he wondered at the great Ordinance, for 2. days before
he had heard them shot off, to honor him. When he had seen the ship in every
place he desired to go on land again, and went away with great reverence
made unto us. Our Merchant went with him, till he came to his Belay, where he
ordinarily sat, and then went out to walk with the young king, and about
evening came aboard again. In the evening with moone-shine, Aris Clawson went
out to fish, and having taken a great shole of fish, went to the king, there he
found a number of young wenches dancing before him, one played on a hollow
piece of wood like a pump, which made a noise, whereat the young wenches
daunced after their manner, very finely, and with a good grace, according to the
measure of the noise of the Instrument. Our people wondered to see those wild
people dance in that sort, and in the night they came on board again.

The 30. In the morning, the king sent us 2. little hogs for a present: the
same day, the King of the other Island came to see the King of that Island, and
with him brought 16. hogs, and 300. men in his company, all of them having
certain green herbs hanging about their midles, whereof they make their
drink. When the King was near unto the other King, he began a far off
with strange ceremonies and reverence to bow down his body, falling with his
face upon the ground, and praying with a great noise, and much zeal, as we
thought. The other king went to meet him, and likewise with a great noise and
strange gestures, used him very reverently, and after much ado, they both rose
up on their feet, and went and sat together under the kings Belay, and there
were assembled together at least nine hundred men. When they went to sit down
they prayed again, according to their manner, hanging down their heads, and
bowing down to the ground, holding their hands one in another, which we
admired. After noone, Aris Clawson being on shore, Iacoble Maire, Claus Johnson
Ban, were sent for, who went a shore, with four trumpets and a drum, to the
two kings, there the trumpets blew, and the drum played before them, wherein
they took great pleasure: after that came a company of Pesants, bringing with
them a quantity of green herbs, which they called Caua, such as the 300. men
aforesaid had about their midles, and all together at once began to chaw the
herbs in their mouths, which being chawd they took it out of their mouths,
and laid it all in a wooden vessel, like a tray, or trough, and when they had
chawd a great deal, they poured water into it, and so stirred and pressed it
together, and gave the liquor thereof to the kings to drink, who drank
thereof with their gentlemen: they also presented that notable drink (as a
special and a goodly present) to our men, but they had enough, and more then
enough of the sight thereof. They also brought a great number of Vbas roots,
which they had roasted, and sixteen hogs that were only ripped, and the guts
taken out, but all bloody, and not washed, and having certain hot stones put
into their bellyes, and outwardly their hair singed off by the fire, were well
roasted after their manner, and they eat them as sauourely and with as good an
appetite, as we could do when they are well sodden or roasted after our
manner. Those people yield great reverence and respect unto their Kings, for
all the meat which they brought before their King, (who in their language
they call Herico) they laid it upon their heads, and kneeling on their knees,
set it down before the king. Of those 16 hogs aforesaid, each king gave us
one, presenting us therewith in this sort, first they laid them upon their
heads, and kneeling laid them with great humility at our feet, and with them
gave us 11. little live hogs, and some indifferent great. And we gave them 3.
copper beakers, 4. knives, twelve old nails, and some beads, where with they
were well pleased. This feast, and meeting, our men saw with great delight and
admiration, which done about evening they came aboard.

The 31. in the morning, the kings of both Islands came aboard our ship, with
their troops of gentelmen, after their manner. The chief of them had green
Cocos leaves about their necks, in sign of peace. We received them (as they
had done to us) with great reverence, and led them into the Cabin, and into
every place of the ship, and when they had seen all, they gave us six
hogs. Both the kings themselves laid them first one after the other upon their
heads, and then down before our feet, with great humility, bowing their heads
down to the ground, mean time while we took away the hogs, we led them into
the cabin again, where we gave them two bundels of beads, and each king two
knives and six nails, and there with they friendly took their leave of us,
and went on land. Iacoble Maire our Merchant bear them company to the shore,
to whom they gave three hogs more. Which he brought aboard the ship, and
then we prepared our selves to set sail, to the great contentment of the
Indians of that Island, because as long as we were there, they always feared
we would kill them, and take their country from them. Those people were men of
good understanding, and of great stature, for the least man of them was as big
as the tallest of us, and the tallest of them was far higher then any of us,
they were strong men, and well proportioned of body and limbs, they went very
fast, and swam and diued under the water excellent well, their color was
altogether brown yealow, they were very curious in the dressing and trimming
of their hair, some had it curled, some frizled, some ware it bound up in
long foldes 4.5. or 6. together, as our women do in haire-laces, and some
(which was strange to see) had their hair standing upright upon their heads,
about a quarter of an elle long like hogs bristles. The king had a long lock
of hair on the left side of his head, that hung down beneath his hipps, bound
up with a knot or two. His gentlemen had two such locks, on each side of
their heads one, they went naked all alike both men and women, only some little
thing handsomely tied before their privy members. The women were very
unsightly both in face and body, of small stature, Their hair cut close to
their heads, as our men's in Holland, their breasts long hanging down to their
bellies like lether satchels, they are very lecherous, for they suffer
themselves to be used by their men openly in all men's sight, and in the kings
own presence, only under a mat. We could not perceive that they worshipped
God, or any Gods, or used any devotion, neither the one nor the other, but
lived without care, like birds in the wood. They had no skill of buying or
selling, but with flaggs they delivered us some what, and we in like sort to
them again. They neither sow nor reap, nor do any work, There the earth of
it self yeeldes all that they need to sustain their lives: as Cocos, Vbas,
Bananas, and such like fruit. When the water falls. The women look upon the
shore on the sea side for fishes, and when they will, they take them with
their hooks, and eat them raw, so that there men may plainly behold and see
the golden world, whereof the Poets write. When we left that Island, we
called it Horn Island, after the name of the town from whence we came, and
the bay wherein we anchored, the Unities bay, after our ships name: that
day for the most part, we were busy to get out, and to hoyse up our anchors,
one of our cables was fretted in pieces with the sharpness of the ground
where it lay, so we lost that anchor, then we drew up an other anchor, and
the cable fretting upon a cliffe, brake as we wound it up and lost that anchor
also. This bay lies on the south side of the Eye land, in a docke, on the one
side their is a sand, which at low water is dry, on the other side, the firm
land but yet foul upon the Shore. There we lay with four anchors and four
cables out, at 10. fathom sandy ground, about a musket shot from the little
river from whence the fresh water ran. We might well have lain with the ship
in the little river without danger, in the place where we lay we could not
stir, because it was so narrovv: about noone we were under sail, and
ran West south west till evening, to get into the broad sea, after that we
held our course west, with an east vvinde, glad that we had eased and
refreshed our selves so well at that good Island, and were so well provided
of good water, some hogs, Vbas roots, and a great number of Cocos nuts, and
Bananas: the place where we lay, is under 14. degees 56. minutes.

The first of June, about noone we were under 13. degrees 15. minutes, the
vvinde east, our course North. The next day the vvind still continued easterly,
and we went northvvest and west, and most part northvvest and by west, with
a hard course, we were under 14. degrees 45. minutes, then we savv great
store of birds, and held west, and west south west, with hollow billows out
of the south southeast.

The 20. the wind northeast, we went west, and in the evening saw land, all
that night driving without sail, to keep off from the land, and then were
under 4. degrees 50. minutes.

The 21. the wind east, we made toward the land, that was very low and
going near unto it, found many sands which strecht northvvest of from the
land, there were 3. or 4. Islands, all very small but full of trees. There a
Canoe boorded us, being of the same fashion as before, but some what greater,
able to hold 5 or 6 men. The men in all respects as the former, and spoke the
same language, but some what blacker having some thing before their privy
members. Their arms were bows and arrows, which were the first bows that
we saw among the Indians in the south sea, we gave them some beads and
nails, but they pointed toward the West to tell us that there was more land,
where their king dwelt, and many things to be had. Therefore we held our
course vvestvvard again, finding no fit place to anchor in. This Island lay
south southvvest, and west from us, under 4. degrees 47. minutes.

The 22. the wind east south east, we sayld west, and west and by north,
under 4. degrees 45. minutes, that quarter we had a good gale of vvinde, and
fair weather, and that day saw at least twelve or thirteen Islands, one close
by an other, west south west from us, reaching southeast, and northvvest
about half a league, but sailed along by them, leaving them on backeboord.

The 24. the vvinde south, at noone we saw land on back-boord, being 3. low
Islands, that lay southwest from us, very green and full of trees, two of them
were 2 miles long a piece, the third very little, the shore was hard cliffie
ground, there likewise we could find no anchoring: we called them the Green
Islands. We also saw a high Island that had 7. or 8. houels forth right, lying
west and by north from us, in the night we held off and on, staying till day.

The 25. in the morning, as we were sailing by the aforesaid Island, we saw
other land before us, in the southwest, which was exceeding high, which we
thought to be the point of Noua Guinea, we made toward it, leaving the other
high Island that lay westward, which we called S. John's Island, because it was
S. John Baptists day. About noone we got to it, and sailed along by it with an
east southeast wind, but could find no anchor ground, we sent out our Shalop to
sound the depth, that went along by the shore between the ship and it; and
being somewhat near the shore, there came 2. or 3. Canoes to it, with black
Indians in them, all naked, without any thing before their members, which
fiercely cast stones at our men with slings, but as soon as our men began to
shoot at them they fled away. The Shalop came on board again, without finding
any ground, telling us that the peoples language was clean contrary to the
former, we sailed along by the coast, which was very high and green, pleasant
to behold, there we saw much land as it had bin houses, at evening we got about
the point into a bay, there we anchored at 45. fathom, unfit and uneven ground.
The same evening there came 2. Canoes to the ship, and spoke to us, but we
understood them not, all that night they held watch against us, with fire all
along their coast: we lay about a Cannon shot distant from the shore, against a
running river: that night it was very still calm moone-shine weather, the wind
on the land, there came some Canoes close under the gallery of our ship, from
whence we threw them some beads, showing them all the friendship we could,
withal making signs unto them, to bring us some Cocos nuts, hogs, oxen, or
goats, if they had any, but they stayed still most part of the night by us,
crying and hollowing after their manner. They were wild black and rude men.
This land as we gest, lay distant from the coast of Peru, 1840. leagues.

The 26. In the morning, there came 8. Canoes about our ship, whereof one had
11. men in it, the other 4.5.6. and 7. men. They rowed close about our ship,
and were well furnished with arms after their manner, as Assagayes or Clubs,
wooden swords and slings, we showed them what friendship we could, and gave
them beads and other trash, making signs to them to go on shore, to setch us
hogs, hens, Cocos nuts, and other fruit, such as they had, but they had
another meaning, and all together began fiercely to sling with their slings,
and other weapons, thinking to master us, but we standing upon our guarde, shot
with our muskets and great shot amongst them, and slew at least 10. or 12. of
them: They left the great Canoe, and 3. other, and leaping into the sea, swam
to land, we put out our Shalop, and rowed with it among those that swam away,
and slaying some of them, brought three of them prisoners into our ship, that
were sore wounded, and 4. of their Canoes, which we hewed in pieces, to make
fire for the Cook. The hurt men were cured, but one of them dyed, about noone
our men rowed with the 2. wounded men to the land, along the shore, there the
prisoners cried to their fellows to bring us hogs, Bananas and Cocos nuts,
wherewith one Canoe came aboard, that brought a little hog, and a bunch of
Bananas, we set one of the men at ten hogs ransom, the other that was sore
hurt, we let go in the Canoe, because we doubted he would not live, those men
had 2. holes bored in their noses, on either side one, wherein they ware rings,
strange to behold. There we saw an other Island, lying North from that great
Island.

The 27. We filled our empty vessels full of water, and that day we got a hog
from the land, and there saw diverse red birds.

The 28. there came certain Canoes aboard our ship, but brought nothing with
them, neither would they ransom their man, therefore we let him go on shore
again. We thought those people to be Papoos, for all their hair was short,
and they eat Betell and Chalk mingled with it, that night we hoysed anchor,
and set sail, with a small gale of wind.

The 29. the wind was variable, and our course was northwest, and northwest and
by north, with fair weather till noone, then it calmd. At evening we were
still in the sight of the point of the Island, and yet we sailed along by the
land, which reached northwest, and north and by west, with many bays and
crookes. The same day we savv three high Islands more, that lay northward from
the great Island, about 5. or 6. miles. Then we were under 3. degrees 20.
minutes.

The 30. in the morning, driving in a calm, diverse Canoes with black Indians
came aboard our ship, who in sign of peace, as they entered, brake their
Assagayes over their heads, they brought us nothing, but desired something of
us. They seemed to be better and friendlyer people then the other for they
covered their privy members with leaves, and had better kind of Canoes, set
out before and behind with some carved works, they are very proud of their
beads, which they paint with chalk and the hair of their heads also. Upon
the three or four Islands, from whence those Canoes came, there was great
store of Cocos trees: they brought us nothing, how earnestly soever we urged
them, that we had need of victuales: There they stayed till evening, and then
went on land again.

The first of July in the morning, after we had driven all the night in a
calm, before the stream about two leagues, we anchored between an Island of
two miles long, and the firm land of Guinea, about noone there came 25. Canoes
toward our ship, with many men, well armed: being the same people who the day
before brake their Assagaies over their heads, and made a friendly show unto
us, but with intent to abuse us, as after it appeared, who seeing us to lie in
a calm, thought to take our ship from us, we had 2. anchors hanging out before
at the bough, a little pulled up, whereon they sat, on each anchor a man, with a
Pingay or girdle in their hands, wherewith they use to hold or draw forth their
Canoes, and so thought to draw the ship to shore, the rest hung fast upon the
ship, we still standing upon our guarde: at last, they began fiercely to throw
at us with stones, and other weapons, and thereby hurt one of our men, being
the first that was hurt in all our voyage, but while they were busy to assail
us, thinking they had got the upper hand, we shot among them with our Muskets,
and with our upper tire of Ordinance, and killed at least 12. or 13. of them, and
hurt many more: and while they fled away, our men rowd with the shalop, (well
armed) after them, and took one of their Canoes with 3. men in it, whereof one
that was dead they threw ouer-boord, the other 2. leapt into the water, but one
of them being killed by one of our men, the other yielded himself prisoner,
being a young man about 18. years old, whom we named Moses, after our man's
name that was hurt. Those people eat bread made of roots of trees. After this
fight we saild all along by the land, with a good gale, west northwest, and
northwest and by west.

The 2. we were under 3. degrees 12. minutes, and that day saw low land on
backe-boord, and also a great high hill, and right before us a low Island, we
sailed softly west northwest, with slight water east northeast.

The third we saw high land again, west from us, about 14, leagues from the
other Island, under 2. degrees and 40. minutes.

The 4. as we were busied to pass by the aforesaid 4. Islands, we saw at
least 22 or 23. others, great and small, high and low, which we left on
starrboord, only two or three on larboord.

They lay close one by the other, some a league, or a league and a half, and
some more then a Cannon shot, distant one from an other, under 2. degrees 25.
or 30. minutes little more or less. That evening we hoped to find a road, but
were forced to hold because night came on. The same time we savv a sail
come toward us from one of those Islands but because it was night, it boorded
us not, and in the morning the wind falling contrary, we left it, and yet were
close by it.

The 5. the wind being south east, and east southeast, and our course south
and by west, and south west, we had much thunder and rain, and were under
3. degrees 56. minutes.

The 6. sometimes we had a hard vvinde, and some times calm with rain,
lightening and thunder, and before noone saw a very high hill being southwest
from us which we sailed unto, our master was of opinion that it was Banda, by
reason it was very like to the hill called Geomenapi in Banda, and very like
for height, but going near unto it, we might see two or three hills more like
unto it, that lay on the north side of the first hill, about 6. or 7. leagues
distant, whereby we knew that it was not so. Behind that hill, we saw very
much land east and westward, which was so long, that on either side we could
see no end thereof, sometimes high, and then low, reaching east south east,
whereby we gest it to be Noua Guinea, and for that night came upon us we held
off from it. The 7. in the morning, before day we wound again toward the high
hills, which was a burning Island, casting fire and flame from the top thereof,
and therefore we called it Vulcans Island, the wind then was south west with
fair weather. This Island was well inhabited, and had many Cocos trees in it,
the people came with some Canoes to our ship, but were very fearful of us,
they called unto us, but we understood them not, neither could our black Moses
tell what they said, they were all naked, only their privy members covered,
their hair some short, some long. There we found no ground, and so could not
anchor. In the north and northvvest, we savv more Islands, at which time, we
went north west and by west to a low Island, that we savv before us, which
in the evening we got unto: Then we took in our sails, and let the ship
drive. There we found diverse colors of water, green, white, and yealow, which
we gest to be water coming out of rivers, for it was sweeter then the sea
water. There many trees, leaves, and boughs drove in the water, whereon some
birds and crabs sat.

The 8. the wind being variable, we held our course west south west, and
west north west, with fair wether and a reasonable gale of wind, having on
starre-boord a high, and on larboord a low Island, reasonable high, we made
toward the land, which about evening we got unto, and found good sandy
ground, at 70. fathom deep, about a cannon shot from the land. There certain
Canoes came to us, with a kind of ill favored people, all Papoos, their hair
short, and curled, having rings in their noses and ears, and strings about
their heads or arms, and hogs teeth hanging about their necks, for an
ornament. They also eat Betel, and were all defective persons some great legs,
others swollen arms, and so forth, whereby it is to be thought, that there
about it is unwholesome land, and the rather, because their houses stood upon
stakes, about 8 or 9. foot from the ground, there we had 3. degrees 43
minutes and found a little show of ginger.

The 9. in the morning, lying at anchor, our Shalop rowed to look for a fit
place to anchor the ship in, and returning told us, that they had found a fit
bay, where unto we went, and anchored at 26 fathom good. sandy ground mixed with
clay. There about stood two small villages, from whence there came many Canoes
aboard our ship, that brought a fevv Cocos nuts, but they esteemed them very
dear, for 4. nuts asking a fathom of linen cloth. Whereof they were very
desirous, they also had some hogs which they held at a deerer rate, and what
need soever we said we had thereof and made signs to to them to bring us
some, they would not do it. That day every man in our ship had allowance of 5
pound of bread and a measure and a half of oil a week, a cup and a half of
Sack a day, and a Niperkin of aquauita all our pottage, as pease, beans,
gurt: and our flesh, bacon, and fish being spent, and we knew not where we
were, being uncertain whether we were far or near to the Indian Islands, as
also what place we were in, though we sailed continually by the land, not
knowing whether it was Noua Guinea or no, we only gest at it, for all the
Cards that we had, did not agree, nor were not like to the land that we
saw. That evening we had great store of rain, with thunder and lightening,
which held all night with very dark weather.

The 10. there came at least 20. Canoes, on board of our ship, with men, women,
and children in them, all naked, only their privy members covered, but brought
no great matter with them.

The 11. in the morning we put to sea again, and held our course north west,
and by west, and west north west along the coast, with the land always in
sight 3.2. and a league and a half distant from it, and at noone past by a
high point. That land of Noua Guinea for the most part reaches north west and
by west, sometimes some what more vvesterly, and sometimes again more
northerly. The 12. we sailed still west northwest, along by the coast with fair
wether, and without sun shine, at noone being under 2. degrees 58. minutes,
with help of the stream, that set us about the west, as it did all along the
coast of Noua Guinea.

The 13. and 14. We sailed along by the aforesay de coast, sometime by high
and then by low land.

The 15. We had the wind, and held our course as before said, along by the
coast, with good wether, afternoon we came to 2. low inhabited Islands, about
half a league from the maine land, which stood full of Cocos trees. We made
toward them, and there found good anchor ground, at 40.30.25. and 20. to 6.
and 5. fathom deep, and there anchored at 13. fathom good ground. The master
rowed with the boat and the Shalop well armed, to the land, thinking to get
some Cocos nuts, which there were upon the land in great abundance: but going
on shore, the Indians lay in a bush right against the place where we came to
land, and watching for us, shot so fiercely at us with their bovves, that they
hurt at least 16. of our men, some in the arm, others in the leg, neck and
hands, and other places. And we shot at them with muskets and slings, but at
last by reason that the Indians shot so thick we were forced to retire, there
we were under. 2 degrees 54. minutes.

The 16. in the morning we sailed in with our ship between both the
Islands, and anchored at 9 fathom, where we had good lying, after noone our
boat and Shalop rowed to the lesser Island, to fetch some Cocos, and burnt 2
or 3. of the Indians houses, whereupon they that dwelt in the other Island
began mightily to cry and make a noise, but durst not come to us, for with our
ordinance we shot along the shore, and into the wood, that the bullets entered
into it with thundering noise, whereat the Indians fled, and durst not once
look out, about evening our men came aboard again, and brought so many Cocos
nurs, that every one of us had three nuts for his part. That night there came
one of the Indians aboard our ship to make peace with us, with him bringing
one of our men's caps with before fell off his head in the skirmish. Those
people are clean naked, their privy members and all.

The 17. in the morning, there came 2 or 3 Canoes toward our ship, and threw
Cocos nuttes into the water making signs to us to fetch them, whereby they
sought to be friends with us, We made signs to them to come aboard, at last
taking better courage, they came close to the ship, and brought us as many
Cocos nuttes and Bananas as we desired, which we drew up by ropes into the
gallery, giving them old nails, rustie knives, and beads in barter, they also
brought us a little green ginger, and yealow roots which are used in steed of
Saffron, bartered also with us some of their bows and arrows, so that at last
we were great friends with them.

The 18. we bartered still for Cocos nuttes and Bananas and some Cassauie and
Papede, which is also to be had in east India. There we saw some Potteysen
which as we thought came from the Spaniardes. Those people were not so
inquisitiue to look into our ship, as others were, for they knew what shooting
with great pieces meant, and called the Island wherein they dwelt, Moa, which lay
most easterly, the other over against it they called Iusou, and the utter most
(being a very high Island) lying about 5 or 6. leagues from Noua Guinia, they
named, Arimoa.

The 19. our men went to the greatest Island to fish, There the Indians showed
us great friendship, and help our men to draw up their nets, and gave them as
many Cocos nuttes as they desired, There we saw a great number of Canoes
coming toward us out of the east, from other Islands lying castward, whereof
some were indifferent great, Therefore we called our fishermen on board, The
Indians that were by us, made signs to us to shoot at those Canoes, and our
men made signs again that they would, if they shot first at us, but they came
peaceably aboard, and brought us as many Cocos nuttes and Bananas as we
desired, so that every man had 50. nuttes and two bunches of Bananas. Those
people use Cassauie for their bread, but it is nothing like to that of the
west Indies, they bake it also in round cakes.

The 20. In the morning we set sail, after we had again bartered for more
victuals, they made signs to us to lie still, and they would bring us more.

The 21. we sailed along by the land West northwest, and at noone were under 1
degree 13. minutes. Then we savv a number of Islandes, whereunto the stream
drove us, and about noone we got to them, and anchored at 13. fathom. That
evening we had much rain, thunder, and lightening.

The 23. in the morning we set sail, with good vveather and a good gale, and
being a little from the land, 6. great Canoes follovved us, (and yet, we savv
no men on land) bringing dried fish, (which we took to be Steenbrasses,)
Cocos nuts, Bananas, Tobacco, and some small fruits like Prunes. There also
came some Indians from on other Island that brought us some victualles, that
also had some Chinay porceline, for we bartred for two dishes whereby we were
persuaded that many Christian ships had bin there, for they wondered not, as
others did, at our ship. They were another kind of people then the former, of a
yealower color, and greater of body, some of them had long hair, some
short, and also used bows and arrows, whereof we had some in barter. They
were very desirous of beads, and iron work, and had green blew, and white
glass rings, sticking in their ears: which we gest they had from the Spaniardes.

The 24 we were under half a degree, with a little gale, and sailed north west,
west and south west, along by a fair great Island, very green and pleasant
to behold, which we called William Schoutens Island, after our masters name,
and the west point thereof, the cape of good Hope.

The 25. we saw much land on larboord lying south southwest from us, some very
high, and some very low.

The 27. we saw three Islands more, the coast reached, Northwest and by west.

The 27. we were under 29. minutes southward of the line, and saw much land
southward from us, some high, and some very low, and past west north west
along by it.

The 28. and 29. the wether was variable, that night we had an earthquake,
which made our men for fear to run out of their cabbins, our ship seeming as
if it stroke against the ground, but we cast out our lead, and found no
ground.

The 30. we sailed in a great bay or hollow place, so that we seemed to be
round about in closed with the land, we did our best to find an opening, but
could not, and therefore sailed northward again, that day it thundered and
lightened so sore, that our ship shook therewith, and sometime seemed to be
on a light fire, wherewith we were in no small fear, and after it, ensued so
great a shower of rain that we never had seen the like before.

The 31 we perceived that we were entered into a place where we had the land
round about us, therefore we held our course north, and that evening past the
Equinoctial line the second time, and being closed by the land, anchored at
12. fathom good ground, about a Cannon shot from an Island, that lay close by
the firm land, but there we saw no men nor any thing growing.

The first of August, we hoysed anchor with great labor, for it lay under a
cliffe, but at last we got it up, we were then 15. minutes northward of the
line, in the evening with the hard stream, we went close to the land and by
reason it was calm, anchored in uneven ground, and not deep.

The 2. it was very calm and we drove with the stream west and west and by
north, with rainie weather.

The 3. we held our course as before, with a calm, and found a bancke, so
far in the sea that we could scarce see the land, in some places being 40.
in an other 20.15. and 12. fathom sandy ground, we anchored at 12. fathom,
because it waxt night, and the master desired to see how the stream went, it
was west southwest. The same day we were under 35. minutes northward of the
line, and savv many Whales, and Tortices. We gest by the height that we were
at the end of the land of Noua Guinea, having sailed along by the coast 280.
leagues that day we saw 2 Islands more westward from us.

The 4. the wind variable, our course was south west, then it rained much with
cloudy weather, there the stream went hard west, that day we savv 7. or 8.
Islands as we thought, and there in the night lay aloof, to keep off from the
land.

The fist in the morning, we drove in a calm, with a variable wind, our
course south and south east, with rainie weather and a little gale, but the
wind being against us, we made toward the land, which the day before we
took to be Islands, but coming to them found no ground, and therefore put out
our Shalop to sound, and found ground at 45. fathom, close by the land. As our
Shalop rowed to land, we saw first 2. and then 3. Canoes more come of from the
land, and made toward our Shalop, and being hard by it, put out a flag of
peace, and our men the like, and then went aboard, the Canoes followed them and
also came aboard, they brought us nothing but a muster or show of Indian
Bonties, and Erties, with some Ryce, Tobacco, and two Paradise brids: we
bartered for one of them that was white and yeallow. We could understand them
reasonable well, for they spoke Tarnata words, and one of them spoke good
Malaian, which language Aris Clawson our Merchant could speak well, some of
them spoke some Spanish, and among them they had a Spanish felt. They wore
fair clothes, about their middles, and some had silk breeches on of diverse
colors, some also had wreaths about their heads, which they say, were Turks
or Moors. They ware gold and silver rings upon their fingers, their hair was
all coal black. They bartred their ware with us for beads, but rather
desired Linen: They were very wary and fearful of us. We asked them what
the name of this country was, but they would not tell us, but by many
circumstances we Judged, and verily believed, that we were at the east end of
Gilolo, on the midlemost point of the land, (for Gilolo reaches out with 3.
points to the east) and that they were men of Tidore, friends to the
Spaniards, as we also found it so to be, which made us all rejoice that after
so many windings and turnings, and troubles endured, we were come to the place
which we knew, and hoped in short time to come among our country men, a thing
which we so long, and so much had hopt for and desired. Then we had a small
gale of wind, and anchored under the land, a Cannon shot from the shore, at
40. fathom, where they brought us Cocos and other fruit to buy, they told us
that we lay not well there, and it was true, for in the evening we had a
good gale and drove through. That night the Canoes went away from us,
promising the next day to bring us home, that day we were the third time right
under the Equinoctial line.

The 6. in the morning, they came again from the land, aboard our ship, and
brought some Tobacco, and porceline and some other things: but we having a
good gale, south south east, and bad lying there, hoyst ananchor to go on our
voyage to the Moluccos, and held our course north, with a good gale to go
north, about the north point of Gilolo.

The 7. it rained, and we savv the north east point of Gilolo, called Moratay,
which lay south east from us.

The 8. about noone we were under 4. degrees 3, minutes northvvard of the
line, that night it rained hard with thunder and lightening, there we found
the stream to go northward.

The 9. and 10. the vvinde was variable, with rainie vveather, and were
under the heigh of 3. degrees 50. minutes.

The 11. in the morning, we saw the land of Gilolo called Moratay, again on
the northeast point of Gilolo, we did the best we could to reach it, but the
stream put us of from the land toward the north, and could not reach it
that day.

The 12. and 13. we were under 2. degrees 58. minutes, with variable winds,
and much rain, and the like, the 14.15. and 16.

The 17. with great labor and much trouble we got under the land, late in the
evening, and drove along by the coast with fair wether, that night we saw many
fires upon the land.

The 18. it was still wether, and we drove along by the land, about noone two
Canoes came to us with a flag of peace, from the Village called Soppy, they
were Tarnataens, with whom we could speak well, and some of them were of
Gammacanor, they showed us that a Pinnace of Amsterdam had lain there three
months to lade Ryce, and that about a month or two before, also an English
ship had been there. How glad we were then when we were so well assured, that
we were come to so good and long desired a place, after so much pain and
trouble that we had endured, with 85. sound men, when we had spent all our
victuals, every man may judge that has proved the like adventure. There we
were under two degrees, 47. minutes, and anchored at 28. fathom, some of
those men stayed that night with us, the next day to bring us to the road of
Soppy.

The 19. we sailed into the bay, and there anchored at 10. fat hom sandy
ground, about a Cannon shot from the shore. That day we bartered for some
Sagovv, some Hens, 2. or 3. Tortoyses, and a little Rice.

The 20. we bartered for a great deal of Sagow and some Ryce, for Linen,
Beads, Knives, Glasses, and Combs. While we were there, a Correcor came
thither to provide Ryce and Sagow for the King of Tarnata, who told us, that
there was at least 20. ships, Hollanders and Englishmen round about the Island
of Tarnata that lay there: and that there was 8. ships at the Manillas, whereof
four were English and four Dutch: There we got good store of fish.

The 21.22.23. and 24. we still bartered for Sagow and Ryce, by the small
measure.

The 23. our men made an end of their wine.

The 25. in the evening, we set sail, after we had laden 4. Tun of Rice, and
good store of Sagovv.

The next day to the 5. of September, we still had contrary and variable
vvindes, with calmes, and sometimes great billovves, and much rain, so that
with great labor and trouble we sailed along that coast, oftentimes turning
and winding to and fro, anchoring diverse times in a day, and setting sail
again, but the great hope that we had, soon to get to Tarnata to our
Countrymen, made all our labor light and easy.

The 5. while we lay before the coast of Gilolo at anchor, our men went out
to fish, and while they were dravving up their net, there came 4. Tarnatans
leaping out of the vvood, each of them with a svvord and target in their
hands, thinking to kill our men, but the Surgion crying out Oran Hollanda, they
presently forbear to assail them, throvving water upon their heads and said,
that they thought our men had been Spaniards, our men brought them aboard our
ship, and gave them some beads, for the which they promised to bring us
that we needed. They told us that they came from Gammacanor, from whence by
their saying, we were as then at least 5. or 6. leagues distant.

The 6. and 7. we still had calmes, and contrary winds, often hoysing our
anchors, and setting sail many times, winding and turning to further our
voyage, but to no effect, so that we were forced to attend the time, with
little furtherance.

The 8. we still lay at anchor, with contrary winds, mean time our chief
Merchant and the Merchant of the Horn, with the Shalop well armed, went to
Gammacanor, thinking there to get some refreshing. The coast from Soppy to
Gammacanor reaches southwest and northeast, with many bays and creekes. There
the stream ran northward.

The 9. and 10. We still lay at anchor with contrary wind, as also the 11.
then our Shalop came again, and had not been at Gammacanor, because it was
too far distant from us, and they were unprovided of victuals, but had been
in a village called Lolola, about 10. leagues distant from the place where our
ship lay, where they only got some Bananas, which were there to be had in
great abundance. The inhabitants told them that the Dutchmen and the Tarnatans
had taken an Island, called Sianno, lying upon the passage of the Manillas, and
that there lay 13. ships in Tarnata.

The 12. our Master and Aris Clawson with 18. men well armed went to Tarnata,
from whence (as we gest) we were distant at least 25. Leagues, and we lay still
at anchor with our ship in a calm.

The 13. the calm still held, and our men going out to fish, there came 3.
Pesants or country people out of the land to them, and brought them 3. hogs,
indifferent great, which they said they had taken with dogs, for the which we
paid them to their contentment.

The 14 about noone, we set sail with an indifferent gale, but yet it was
calm, so that in the same quarter we got but 2. leagues and a half forward,
and that with great labor.

The 15. it blew a little gale, and in that quarter we got about 4 Leagues
further, with fair weather.

The 16. we past by Gammacanor, and saw Tarnata and Tidore, lying close one by
the other upon 2. high hills, south from us, about 12. leagues distant.

The 17. we had a good gale, and did our best to get to Tarnata, that morning
betimes we savv a sail to loofeward from us, which also made toward Tarnata,
being the Morning Sarre of Rotterdam, of 300. Tons burden, having in her 26.
great pieces. At noone our Shalop came from that ship, where she had lain 3.
nights, they being in the Creek of Sabou, found there the Adminall Verhaghen
there, in one of the Admiral Speilberg his ships, by whose men we understood,
that Speilberg being in the Straights of Magelan, (which he past in 2. Months)
had lost his smallest Pinnace, and that in the river of Spirito Santo, on the
coast of Brasilia, he had lost 3. boats with men in them, that he had spoiled
the town of Payta, and had fought with 8. Spanish ships, whereof he had
suncke three, viz. the Admiral, the vice Admiral, and an other, without any
great hurt, only the loss of some men, and got nothing. That he had bin at
Lima, and searched many creekes, where the Spanish ships lay up: and in one,
wherein there was 40. ships, but did nothing, and that he sayld along by the
coast of Noua Spania, through the Manillas to the east Indies being from thence
gone homeward with John Cornelison Meuscheater with 4. ships: their names, the
Amsterdam, the arms of Amsterdam, Zeland, and Midleburgh. They also told us,
that there were 10. ships well furnished at the Manillas, their general being
John Dirickeson Lam of Horn, to set upon the Spanish fleet, that were coming
to Tarnata. We also understood that Peter Bot sailing home with 4. Ships, was
cast away, upon Mauricius Island, with 3. ships, by means of a storm that
cast him upon the cliffes, where many of his men and himself also was drowned,
the 4. ship escaped.

The same evening we anchored before Maleye in Tarnata, at 11. fathom sandy
ground, with great Joy that we were come among our Countrymen: our Master and
the Merchant went presently on shore, to speak with the General Laurence
Real, who was come thither in the place of the deceased General Gerard
Reynsts, where they were well entertained by him, as also by the Admiral
Stephen Verhaghen, and Jasper Ianson Governor of Ambona as likewise of the
whole Counsel of India.

The 18. our Master and the Merchants went on land, and sold our two Shalops,
four great pieces of the Horn, some Lead, two great Cables, nine anchors and
other things, for the which they received a thousand three hundred and fifty
Ryals of eight.

The 19.20.21.22. and 23. we lay at anchor in the same place.

The 24. eleven of our men and four boys prayed our Master William Cornelison
Schouten to discharge them, desiring to stay a while there in India, to serve
the East Indian Company, which our Master granted, at the request of the
General Real.

The 26. we took our leave of the General, who most friendly welcomed and
showed us great favor, accompanying our Master and the Merchant with Ancients
displayed, to our ships, whereof the one was the Morning Star, which the 22.
of September came thither into the road by us, intending to sail to Motir, but
we to Bantam. We took the Merchant of the Star, and one of the Generals men
with us to Bantam, at the Generals entreaty.

The 27. we past by Tidore, there the Morning Star left us, and made toward
Motir.

The 28. we past Motir and Makian. The 29. Caiou, and Bakian, and that day
past the fourth time under the Equinoctial Line.

The 2. of October we sailed by Loga, Combella, and Manipa in Zeira, and the 3.
by Burro.

The 6. we past by Button, and Cabessecabinco, and the seventh by Cabona.

The 8. we past the point of Bugarones, between the south point of Celebes and
Desolaso.

The 13. about evening, we had a sight of the Island of Madura.

The 14. In the morning, we saw Iaua, and that day sailed by Tuban.

The 16. about noone, we came before Iapara, where we anchored in the Road, and
there found the ship called the Holland of Amsterdam, which lay there to lade
Ryce, to carry it to Tarnata. At Iapara there is all kind of victuals to be
had in great abundance, and good cheap. There we bought much Ryce, Arack,
Flesh, Fish, and other victuals, wherewith we meant to sail home.

The 23. we set sail, and the 28. went by Iacatra, where we anchored without
the Island, there we found three ships of Holland. The Horn, the Eagle, and
the Trou, and 3. English ships. The next night, one of our men died, which
was the first man that died that voyage in the Unity, besides 2. more that die
in the Horn, the one John Cornelison Schouten, our masters brother, In the
south sea, by the Dogs Island, and one about the coast of Portingale, so that
until then, there died but 3. men in both the ships, and then we had left 84.
men living, all indifferently well.

The 31. the ship called Bantam, with John Peterson Koeuen of Horn President
of Bantam, for the East India company, came before Iacatra.

The 1. of November, the President John Peterson Koeuen sent for William
Cornelison Schouten our master, and the Merchants to come on land, where being
come, (in the presence of his counsel there assembled) he told them in name of
the east Indian Company, that they must leave their ship and goods their and
deliver it up into his hands: and although our master showed him many reasons,
to persuade the contrary, saying that they did them great wrong, they were
forced to do as the President appointed them, who told them, that if they
thought they did them wrong, that they should right themselves in Holland: and
so our ship and goods was stayed, and attached there. To receive the ship and
all her furniture, the President appointed two masters of ships, and two
Merchants, which was delivered by inuentory unto them, by our master and the
Merchant. This was done upon Monday the first of November, after our reckoning
but upon a Tewsday the second of November, by our countrimens reckoning there.
The reason of the difference of the time fell out thus, as we sailed westward
from our own country, and had with the sun compassed the Globe of the
world, we had one night, or sunsetting less then they: and they that come
out of the west and sail to the east* thereby had one day or sunsetting more
then we, which make a quarter difference, and so as we made our reckoning of
the time then with our selves, and did the like with our countrymen, that week
we lost the Twesdaie, leaping from Monday to wednesdaie, and so had one week
of 6. days.

Our ship being in this manner taken from us, some of our men put themselves
into service with the east Indian company. The rest were put into two ships,
(that were to go home into Holland) called the Amsterdam and the Zeland: their
general, being George van Spielbergher, The master William Cornelison
Schouten, and Jacob le Maire, 10. of our men, went with the general in the
Amsterdam, The masters name John Cornelison May, alias Meuscheater, and Aris
Clawson and the Pilot Claus Peterson with 10. others in the Zeland, the masters
name Cornelis Riemlande of Midleburgh, which set sail from Bantam the 14. of
December.

The 32. our Merchant Jacob le Maire died.

The 1. of January 1617. We lost the sight of the Zeland.

The 24. We were under the Island Mauriciuus at anchor, where we refresht our
selves, and the 30. set sail from ^h^^ce.

The 6. of March, as we ges^, we past the cape, but saw it not.

The 31. We were under the Island of Saint Helena. Where we found the Zeland,
which arrived there certain days before us.

The 6. of April after we had refresht our selves, and taken in fresh water,
both our ships set sail, and the 14. of April saw the Island Ascension.

The 23. we saw 2 ships to loofeward from us under one degree, southward of the
line, but because we could not reach them, we held on our course. The 24. in
the morning, we were the fifth time under the Equinoctial line, and the 28. we
saw the north star, which we had not seen in 20. months before. The 1. of
July we came with the Amsterdam into Zeland, where the day before, the Zeland
likewise was arrived: And so performed our voyage in two years, and eighteen
days.

FINIS.

