A true mirROVR OR GLASE wherein we may behold the woeful state of this our
Realm of England, set forth in a Dialogue or communicacion between Eusebius
and Theophilus.

Matthewe. 12. Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur.

Imprinted. Anno. Domi. M.D.L.VI.

A Dialogue OR COMMVNIcacion between Eusebius, and Theophilus.
EVsebius, what Theophilus God save you, how is your there?


Theophilus. Even better then I am worthy brother Eusebius. I thank you for
that you would inquier.


E. What man why say you so?


T. Because I am evil of my self and yet my Lord rewards me with good
things.


E. Lo now comes to my remembrance things that I have been oftentimes
desirous to talk with you therein. But be ye now at leisure, or whether be
ye going?


T. Surely into ye feldes for to take the air.


E. Never in better season, I will go with you every foot: peradventure ye
may put me from doutes, wherein my head has been often troubled, and of a long
time I have determined to talk with you therein.


T. What things are they ye mean?


E. I will tell you. Ye know well there has been great dyssension as well among
ye learned, as other, about Religion a great while. The one Is called the old
mumsimus, the other the new sumpsimus the one a Catholic, the other a
protestaunt, and the one a papist, the other an heretic, and such like, which
ought not to be me thinks among Christians specially being of one nacyon and
contree, who should love together as brethren, now for that our frendshyp has
been of long continuance and your honestye to me so well known, doutles
brother Theo. I am sorye yt you should be noted to be of any evil opinion, and
not such as I might without danger frequent and use your company for assuredly
there is no man otherwise that I desyer more to be conuersaunt withal then with
you. And now the danger is such, not only toward God, but also to ye
superiors, Ring, Queen and maiestrates that of force I am constrained more
oftener to leave your company, then gladly I would, If I might safly use the
same. And this is my grefe the which If I could I would surely remove. And If
I were able, I would persuade you to conformyte with us in religion In such
wise as we might during our lives continue together our frendshyp unviolated.


T. Your loving kindness and friendship toward me (brother Eusebius) I
thankefullye embrace. And your approved honesty moves me to seake all means
with you likewise to continewe this our wonted frendshippe and familiarity.
But there is a God has created us, unto whom we owe a deuty, which must be
done, notwithstanding all frendshippe or obedience unto man, and whereas you
fear the danger toward God, for mine opinion. If it pleased God I would
there were no more danger otherwise, and then would not I dout the
continuance of our friendship. For as touching mine opinion in religion, I am
right well assured that it is grounded upon the infallible verite of gods
most sacred word or holy scriptures. From the which If I should start back
for ye love of friendship or for fear of me^ it were as much as to deny ye lord
my god, which ye know no good man will do.


E. Yet but hear me Theophi. We do not disalow holy scriptures neither do we
deney the lord but confess both. But we do sift out errors, which light
persons have brought in by misunderstanding the holy Scriptures, and so bring
in again ye true light of the same.


T. In deed so you say but how do you prove it I would feign here?


E. Nay alas brother Theophilus ye know I am not so far learned as to
dispute the matter.


T. surely you are as well able to make an argument as I am able to answer to
the same. For I am no schole man, but for the satisfying of every man's
conscience and for discharge of mine own, I always seake understanding, least
by my to much symplenes or rather negligence, I moughte be deceived, when I
think my self most sure.


E. In that I cannot disco^mend you, but then ye know they have been disputed
withal at full, so largely as they could wish or desire, but nothing can
prevail.


T. I pray you where was that disputatio^s ye speak of?


E. Forsooth they were had in the convocation house, howbeit for that they made
their boast that those men were but of the youngest sort, and yet they did so
well there, how much better was it supposed the au^cyent learned should do?
Upon this report I suppose they provided the disputacions in oxforde where the
beast learned of your side were appointed and disputed: and yet god knows
they were co^uicted and over come: for they were able In manner to make no
repugnaunce.


T. But I pray you brother Euse. were you there at ye hearing of this
disputacions In Oxforde?


E. No verily that I was not.


T. but have you seen the copye of the same that was drawn out by their
notaryes and given to ye sensours for witnessyng of the troth herein?


E. Neither that have I seen In deed, but being at supper among my friends on
a time I heard them talk of it In such wise as I told you before.


T. But I pray you tell me one thing, was not the relacion made by a pressed?


E. Yes doutles that it was, and it was in a priests house, I may say to you,
a canon, one that may dispend four hundredth mark by the year but what the^?
they said it was true.


T. in deed if they said so, yt must needs be true, for they cannot lie, but
yet this much I will say unto you brother Euse. I was there present at the
doing of this gear, and heard al for the most part with mine ears: the which
thing would god you and all honest men had heard and I dare say you would have
lamented the state of those.iii. men which were appointed to answer for their
lives, although otherwise ye mislyke their Judgment in religion. And yet I
cannot tell what God should have wrought In you neither by hearing thereof: for
like as I did know diverse more confyrmed in the faith they had before
received, so heard I of none that by the dysputacio^ were with drawn from the
same: alas good men they could be suffered to do no otherwise, but as the
master will suffer his servant or scholar to speak what he list to hear, and
while he will hear him and no more.


E. What say you man? It was a free disputacion, and they spoke and did what
they would, as touching the order of disputacion: this went the report.


T. Well what soever the report was I will tell you some part of the order
thereof, wherein I will not lie unto you one word: These doctors that came from
london and Cambrige, of which doctor Weston was cheffe, for that he was
proloquutor of the conuocacion house, these men I say came to oxforde this the
frydaye, and the saterdaye following were the.iii. prisoners called forth before
them and appointed to dispute the monday, tuesdaye, and weddensdaye following,
and before that I dare say they knew of no disputacion, and as soon as the
disputacion was appointed, Immediately were they separated and could not
confer nor talk together: their own books that they had labored, and there
commun places that they had gathered, was all taken from them when they came
first to prison, and when they should come forth to dispute they were
brought with bylles and glayues, as if they should have gone to ha^ging: and
there must one of the^ alone answer some times.vi. speaking to him at one
time, and ever would they cry upon him to cut short, for the time was spent.
And when as it came to master Rydleys torn, he had provided his supposition,
thinking to have read it, but they would not suffer him. And yet he alleged
for himself the order of the scoles, and that all that litel time he had
bestowed in devising the same, wherein he minded to have declared the
substance of his assercion of his faith and believe touching that matter then
in question, but he could not be suffered in any wise, and sundry times in his
talk they would take him at advantage, and when he would open his meaning
his tale could not be heard of the audience, but yet there were that noted his
words. Now I pray you what indifferency is this? a man without study,
without books, without conference with other, and almost without hearing shall
dispute for his life? And they so many clappyng, at one time against one poor
man, alas it was a grefe. And yet for all this I warrant you they be not hasty
in puttyng forth the disputations in print, as much as they brag I dare say
they will never put them forth.


E. But is this true that ye have now said in this matter?


E. Yea as true as god lives. And I dare say If ye talk with the doctors
themselves that disputed against them they can deny none of al this that I have
said: well they may color it with some other thing, but assuredly they cannot
alter it, it is so openly known.


E. Well brother Theophilus consider yt when men be in authorite, and have the
governance In their hand, some what they will do. And consider also that in
king Edwardes time your doctors dealte in like case with our learned men, And
therefore blame the^ not though they now show a litell of ye same curtesy again.


T. Nay then mark what I will say unto you brother Eusebius. And tell me
whether the case be like. In king Edwardes time there was appointed a
disputacio^ wherein were.iii. of your learned against one of ours they had
leisure as much as they would axe, they were not taken from their books,
neither put in prison, they might co^ferre with who^ they would, and go
whether they would, they were not so much as checkte for defendyng their
opinion. Another time also I do remember well, that before King Edward died, I
was present at the disputacion In oxford, where one Grene way (a bacheler of
divinity and the vice presyde^t of Corporis Christi College) answered and
his question was, whether Christ's natural body might be in more places then
one.

there was one of the opponentes that openly professed himself to be of a
contrary mind, and so disputed, and yet I never knew so much as one evil
word spoken to him. Note now the tyranny that is used of the one side which
Christ never taught. And mark there great ge^tlenes again of the other side.
And this were enough almost to persuade an honest heart.


E. Surely brother. Theophi. I would Charity might rule this matter, for I
do verily beeleue that if with love and frendeshyp they did gentely commen
together of these matters they should much rather agree then by such proud
disputations or rather scoldyng and brawling one with another. For to what
purpose serves this cankored malice but the one to seek the others
destruction. And while we go about mischeffe to each other, there be that will
destroy us both: and then we have spun a fayer threde.


T. In deed your gathering stands with good reason, and not without good
authoryte of the holy Scriptures. For this says the Lord Jesus: Every
kingdom within it self deuydede shall be destroyed, Math. 12 Luke. 11. Gala. 5.
and every house divided with in it self, shall not stand. And Saint Paul
says also if ye bite one another, take heed lest ye be consumed one of an
other.


E. I pray you brother The. In what place is it ye Christ says Every kingdom
divided within it self shall be destroyed.


E. In the.12. Chapter of Mathes gospel and in the.11. of Luke likewise.


E. Now surely I am affrayed lest those words are to true, and lest we shall
have to much experience of ye same.


T. Well brother Euse. You need not care, for you are a good Catholyke man, and
therefore no harm can happen to you, for the game goes on your side. As for
me ye know I am half suspected and more. And therefore I look when I shall be
called forth cora^nobis and so to ye fire, a cruel death I tell you.


E. Will ye believe me brother Theophi. As god help me I am none of those that
desires the hurt of my neybour, and I tell you truth, I like this religion the
worsse for there cruelty. For undoubtedly If the matter were in my hand there
should none be put to death except he would obstinatly rebel by commocions,
or otherwise moleste a whole commen wealth, as for his conscience let him
discharge that between God and him self, he should chose for me, for any
trouble I would work him, for me thinks it stands not with Charity. 1. Cor.
1^.



T. I mistrust you not brother Euse. I know you to well and like you the better.
And in deed saint Paul says: If I had faith that, I could move mountains out
of there places, If I had not love, I am nothing. And Christ him self says
also: John. 14
by this shall al men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another,
the which love springs from a faith unfeigned in the promise of god, and
causes good works to proceed, as the fruits come of the buddinges of the tree.


E. What be those good works ye mean?


T. Mary calling upon the name of the living god, by diligent, fervent, and
continual prayer, in watchyng the devil, that neither by the lust of this
flesh neither yet by ambicion, and coueteousnes, of this wicked world, or by
any other means, he should overcome us, and subdue us unto sin. And therefore
as we feel our selves prone, and apt to evil, so still to mortify these
members of ours, by fasting, and prayer with such like Godly exercises, to
visete and comfort our nedy neybours and so forth.


E. But I pray you now, do you speak as you think, or else Jest ye with me to
see what I will say?


T. Nay, I speak it with my heart, as truly as God lives.


E. Then have I heard fouell lies among them that would be accounted honest and
well learned. But seeing we have entered so far in the matter I pray you
certyfye me of the truth in this point, whether it be so or no: that I be not
deceived therein, for the satisfying of my conscience and for quieting the same,
for as for me although I be not of ye new learning, yet am I not so addicted to
the old, but that I would be glad to here and reason the matter, to the end I
promise you I might help to bring love among our selves.


T. A godly purpose I assure you, but what are those lies then ye heard of
late, I pray you let us hear them.


E. Nay soft I said not precysely they were lies, but if that be true, which
you say, then are they lies in deed, but say on I pray you, what was that true
tale then:


E. Sir this it was told me, yt you of this new learning, did boast your
selves much of faith and that only faith did justify: but good works ye
cared not for, neither regarded at all, neither prayer nor fasting nor alms
deed will ye allow, gods service ye despise and the ministers thereof with a
thousand like, I cannot well remember all now.


T I durst lay a wager before hand that this also was a Priests tale.


E. Now surely it was so in deed, what a Gods name how are you so well
acquaynted with Priests tales?


T. Yes I know them well and their master also but brother Eusebius this is no
strange thing, for there is no sermon almost in these days but these tales
be in the pulpet as thick as hoppes and many lies more to: the which when I
hear it makes my heart mourn to see their spyte, yt they have no other way
to work their anger upon us but with open lies in an open audience and yet the
shame would redounde to themselves, if there were any shame in them. For the
most part of men do know most certainly that they do lie. If they were of
god as they pretend, or if they meant the preseruacion of a common wealth and
safegarde of their country, they would use another way of persuasion, they
would have charity before their eyes, they would consider the nature of every
man by themselves and do as they would be done unto: and I pray you who can
suffer himself to be complained of to a whole country and to hear false
witness brought against him, and by this means brought to love: no no,
this is not to win their brethren, but ever to provoke myscheffe, and to set
men by ye ears. God be merciful unto us the pulpet was ordained to speak
truth, to preach peace, and to bring unity among ye brethren. And now they
have made it a place to sprede lies, to sow discord, and to set men's hearts
on fire with envy and malice. I am right well assured that if men would deny it,
that the stones of the street would witness that the preachers in King Edwardes
time cried out upon the sins of men, and thretned ye most extreme damnation,
if they repented not and turned not to the Lord in ame^dement of lyffe, and
showed them also a forehand what would come of our wicked living, which
things are come to pass, and therefore did continually exhort them to
repentance with the ninevites, and to call upon the name of the living god in
fasting and sackecloth mourning and weping for the day of gods wrath was at
hand, as we have right well felt and are like to feale more yet. This was not
one man's preaching alone, but al for the most part, and this (I say) If men will
deny the stones of the street will witness the same. And yet al this not
wythstandyng come they into the pulpets and say: these new fellows would
have no good works, neither fasting, nor prayer, but al liberty, liberty,
faith, faith, and nothing else Oh God what Christen heart does not even
break with sorrow, to se such slaunderers maintained in a pulpet: But god is a
righteous lord and for that we would not be warned in time, being so much
called upon, he has justly placed us, with patience therefore we must bear ye
cross til it please him to take it of again, there is no remedy, for if we
once open our mouths to reason the matter with the^ in this case, we must say ye
crow is white or else we go to ye fire without redemption, this is a miserable
case.


E. Ye make me astonyed Theophilus. For how may it be that they should use ye
matter so cruellye, if there were not some great cause?


T. I will tell you Eusebius, I have heard the preachers in King Edwardes time a
mu^ber of the^. And have red their works, and if ever I found one sentence yt
I can remember, yt did discourage any man, and not rather spur forth every
man to ye doing of those good works above rehearsed, let god forsake me, and
show me no more his favor and grace. For although we do attrybute our
iustificacion to only faith, and that by faith only we be justified, we mean
not a dead faith, wtoute works, but a living faith, even ye same faith saint
Paul speaks of to the Galathians, Gala. 5.
which by love is mighty in operacyon as ye tree therefore is known to be
living by his budding and bearing of fruit: so is the iustifiyng faith known
by charity, out of which charity, spri^geth these good works above said
which are the very fruits thereof. But your Catholyke fathers show but litell
or no charity, and therefore it should seem they have but little or no faith.
Eusebius your reason is somewhat pithye, but yet I suppose there is somewhat
else that moves this great contrauersy.


T. In deed it is true, there is another thing yt moves the matter, and yt is
ye devil the author and maintayner of contencion and mischefe, in submittyng
our selves where unto we lose innocence, love, mekenes, and al other virtues,
and instead thereof we find pride, stoutenes, hatred and such like, as for
coueteousnes it over flows the whole world.


Eusebius. But will ye give me leave (brother Theophilus) to say one thing unto
you, although I know you to be such a man, for your honesty, as I would desire
to lead my life wtal for your faithful and true heart is known to the^ with
who^ you have to do, yt which thing chefely I have respect unto, and I do
believe yt god has engrafted his grace in ye man's heart, which deals justly with
men, and lives quietly among his familiars, specially when it is well known yt
he wishes al things to be well. But yet (ye shall not be offended with me for yt
I will say) there were of your sort, which are called the new learning, many
evil me^.


T. It was most true brother Eusebius and can not be denied. For there were in
hell no veryer devils the^ many of the^ were that professed the gospel, for
otherwise there could have been no color of these lies, and slanders that are
now spread, as is said before. For it was Judas yt bare ye pouche, and it was
Judas yt betrayed his master: and many Iudasses in England under ye pretense of
religion robbed both King and realm these iudasses filled their own pouches,
and made themselves rich and noble, and they care not who rule so long as they
may geat and enjoy their possessions.


E. Well brother Theophilus here are no more but you and I, and I dare be bold
herein to tell you my mind. For I know you understand in it as much as I, and
more to, and I dare say you do with as great a gref behold it and sorrow it as any
English heart will do. I hear say ye king of Spain shall at last be crouned
king of England, what say you to that:


T Alas brother Eusebius what should I say to it: If god have determined, who
may wythstande: we must commyt it to his good pleasure and will.


E. But do you not think it a plage?


T. Yes verily and an utter desolacion of English blood.


E. Oh lord what means this?


T. I will tell you brother Euse. The almighty god has from ye beginning
written his will and law, not in tables of stone only, neither in books of
paper and ynke, but also in the hearts of men, as it is written: I write my
laws in their hearts, and I will be their god and they shall be my people. But
lest any man should dream of these laws and feign other in their stead they
were written in tabels of stone, and after in books of paper and ink, so that
to this day they are divided and known from men's laws. And for our better
instruccion herein the only begotten son of God our Lord Jesus Christ has
according to the fathers promise stablyshed and confyrmed a new testament,
wherein he has opened plainly the mysteries of Moses law and the Prophets,
not to break them, as the false Phariseis falsely reported of him, but to
fulfill them in executing this his new testament. The which sound doctrine of
health, the world always spurned at, as they do yet to this day. And
although it were for a time suffered here in England by the providence of
god, and most earnestly preached and published, yet was there that spurned at
it, and many abused it for there liberty for covetous lucre and such like,
many warninges we had for both parties to amend, but it would not be,
wherefore seeing we would not receive him but despise him still as the Jews
did, we shall likewise be destroyed as they were I se no other remedy.


E. God be merciful unto us, but yet I marvel that our nobility suffers it.


T Why man ye must understand that your catholykes now bear the rule, your
prelates of the Church have all the doings of these matters, and ye know they
having none inheritance but for their lives, being without wife and children,
rather then they would be brought down again, as they were in king Edwardes
days they had rather the Turk had the rule and government thereof.


E. I may say to you Theophilus they are shroudly suspected in this matter
and I fear me not without good cause. But yet I marvel of the councillors,
who being put in trust with the government and may let the proceeding hereof,
what should move them to consent thereunto:


T. As I may think my self assured of you as you of me, and may as boldly
speak also my mind to you, as you to me, and although faithful frendeship be
utterly banished this Realm, so that one brother al most cannot trust another,
yet friendship lurketh in corners secretly. And I think my self safe with you
brother Eusebius. Your faythfulnes is to me so well know. I will therefore show
you what I conjecture to be the cause of their agreement, a lamentable case it
is, and with great so row and grefe, must I tell you herein my mind. They be men
that be lovers of themselves, yet they are so blinded with this self love, that
they neither can foresee the miserable state of their country, neither yet
their own destruction, they dream as Pope Julius did, who (as the fabel
tells) commanded Saint Peter to open heaven gates, dreamyng himself to be
Pope still. These men dream that the King of Spain will make them always of
his chief counsel but. etc. They have been of King Harry the eightes counsel,
brought up of mean men the most part. Whereby they should be accounted
noble, I know not. For they excel not in learning and knoweledge, they have
showed no great proves of arms, their love to a common wealth is now
declared. But they be so infected with ambicio^, that look what pleases the
affeccio^ of ye Prince pleases also them. For in King Henryes days they were
sworn to abolishe the popes supremacy with his usurped power, yea and they
prosecuted the matter earnestly as it appeared right well, for many lost their
lives for the same. When King Henry was dead, King Edward his son by the
means of his uncle then Lord protector subverted all the Popes religion, put
down mass and altogether, wherewithal they were well contented, and set
forewarde the matter without any scruple of conscience, I warrante you. And
many goodly laws they let make, as well for the mayntenaunce of that
religion, as also for the preseruacion of a commen wealth, and before King
Edward was fullye dead, they had concluded also with the Duke of
Northumberlande, under pretense of the stablishing of that religion, and other
goodly consideracions as it were to make him King, contrary to al right, and
contrary to all the statutes of parlemente and so would have disheryted the
Queen that now is, against her fathers will, against their own laws, against
all their oaths and promise, and without any just cause, at that time. And all this notwithstanding, when they saw how the game would go: they were
contented to serve the Queen's will, and now have they sworn back again to
the holy father I hear say: now again whereas ye Queen goes about not only
to break her fathers will and al such laws and statutes as were made for the
preseruacion and safegarde of this realm, but is also determined of a self
will to bring England into the subieccion of a foren Prince, they have not
only consented and agreed, but are also chief doers and procurers thereof, for
god has blinded their eyes, and their understanding, so that they cannot see
nor perceive, their own destruction, and yet every child sees and every good
heart mourns at it full heuely.


E. Now surely Theophilus you have spoken as true as the gospel, for if he be
once stablished King, he may without contradiccion furnishe all the fortes in
England with his own men, for I would not think him wise to trust strangers
so much as his own country men: when he has therefore brought ye to pass he
may at all times bring an army either out of flaunders or spain, the ships
being also at his commandment, and through England may he go at his will and
pleasure, who will say him nay: Alas miserable case.


T. Nay nay Eusebius he shall need none army to bring this matter to pass, for
if the Queen live seven years to an end, he will so use the matter that
England shall be easy enough to rule, for mark ye now how fast the gentle men
go to ye tower, yea and some to hanging also. And ye see the gentlemen for the
most part be of this new learning, and therefore ye know under pretense of
religion there will be matters Enough to rid the most part of the nobilite of
England, and all this shall we be made to do within our selves, we shall be
inueigled thus to do one against another by traynes and baits to seake one
another destruction, whereunto many are very pressed, and al to do the Queen a
pleasure. Mark how this gear comes to pass, for the Spaniard has nothing
to do in all this (as we suppose) but rather gets pardons, and shows great
favor to English men, but ye may be sure they have debated this matter in
their heads, and in all this they make the Queen serve their turn, and her
own fancy also. Now when al these heretic gentlemen be dispatched (which wylbe
the greatest part of the nobility of England) then shall there be other
inuencyons had for the rest, which shall be easy enough, for they shall be few.
And think you he will the^ trust English men for the government of his
kyngedome when he has so weakened it, and may take the matter in hand? No for
then peradventure the poor English men may take a joy in their heads when
they once begin to feale the smarte, and an English Lord will be deinte at that
time, and they will begin to love each other, when they see how the game will
go, and so show themselves in their old lykenes, and so make a foul work.
But I warrant you these men which can so compass the matter to bring it so
far forth, will not be over seen in this, of that ye may be sure. And
therefore of go their heads also, let them point upon it, and thus farewell
the glory of England for ever and a day.


E. O Lord whether there be no remedy for England that it might be preserved
from this miserye?


T. Surely there is but one and that is a general repentance with the
Ninevites fasting and praying, most earenestly calling upon the true living
god to have mercy upon us, for his son Christ's sake, and so leave enuieng
and hating each other, and seake love together as it becomes brethren: this
way and none other can I see to escape.


E. Well god be merciful unto us what should I say, I can not tell?


T. Your holy Prelates Eusebius have preached a great while against our pore
ministers, and have laid to their charge that they have been great hinderers of
a common wealth, and have marred altogether by there doctrine, in pullyng down
Abbeys and Colleges, with such like, wherein although they spoke against their
supersticion, and idle life yet was it not redressed by their advise, and
therefore did they continually preach against the coueteous handeling thereof,
and the evil bestowyng of such treasure, ye they feared not to tell them to
their faces of there faults, so openly and playnelye, as all England can
right well witness the same. And yet for all that do not your Prelates cease
to cast them in the teth, as though they might have ruled ye roast, behold ye
fruits of their doctrine say they, for all was coueteousnes, and I can not tell
what, but if ye note well ye fruit of their doctrine, ye shall perceive yt they
have brought another manner of thing to pass, ye is the destruction of us al,
the which thing undoubtedly must needs come to pass, if god do not wonderfully
work for our preseruacion, contrary to al men's expectacion, and contrary also
to our deserving, and that shortly, for it is at hand.


E. Welcome by the grace of god. For every kingdom divided wtin it self
shall be destroyed I have learned yt lesson, and I shall not forget it as long
as I live: but yet I am not fully satisfied of yt matter whereof I ente^ded most
to reason with you, but now ye eue^ing draws on, and peradventure I let you
from your business.


T. In deed mine hour is almost come wherein I promised to mete a friend of
mine. But if it please you to point any time to morrow I will mete you here by
Gods grace. And we will have the matter debated at full.


E. Sir I pray you heartily let it be to morrow after dinner.


T. With a good will, fare ye well


E. and I pray god give you his holy spirit to order and rule your goinges,
that whatsoever ye go about, it may be to the honor and glory of his name,
and to the profit of this comme^ wealth


E. I thank you


T. with all my heart, and I pray god it may so come to pass. Ame^.


The second DIALOGVE OR communicacion between Eusebius and Theophilus.
EVsebius, well met brother Theophilus, you have made good shifte, I thought
to have been hear before you, you went to diner betyme I perceive.


T. Even as I do commonly, when I have no busynes, between nine and ten, me
thinks it is a good hour: for by that means I save a breakefast, which for
such idlers as I am, is most fittest.


E. In deed to say truth it were enough, for the most part of men, if they
could be so contented.


T. Yea brother Eusebius, and a great deal of those two meals in one day,
would be better spente also. I mean of such, as use much banketynge and
costly fare daily in their houses, with such superfluyte, as surely is in mine
opinion to much, and none use it more, then your Prelates of the Church: for
they suppose themselves to fast sufficiently, if they abstain from flesh
frydayes and saterdayes, and such like days as they have appointed: they
think it no matter to banquet other days, and so are all the rest of your
religion persuaded. And yet alas consyderyng the miserable state we stand in
it were mere to mourn, weep, fast, and pray: I mean not frydayes only but
all the days of the weak, to leave our belly chere and to take an other way,
then to banquet and play, setting cock in ye houpe and care not what beecome of
us.


E. Ye have said well Theophilus I promise you, but yet give me leave to say
again your sort of the other side despised so much our superstycyous fast,
that they fasted not at all, and therefore our men were the better in this case
I am sure.


T. I must needs grant Eusebius that a great number were at that point, and I
must confess also that liberty had caused many men to wax wild, the which
would have been tamed, by good laws right well, and were in manner provided.
If Satan had not envied the profit thereof. But yet they say there can be never
a better, whereas there is never a good, but as touching diet, doutlesse I
think there were some good men of both sides, I mean such men as with good
moderacion used gods creatures for there necessity, and not for their wanton
lust. And so likewise in other outward obseruaunces, I suppose there be of both
sides, that mean well, and wyshe well unto all men, and I do not think the
contrary but if there were charity in our hearts, and we could find in our
hearts to love one another, we should agree and prosper well enough, but
Satan has sowed the seade of discord among us, and we cannot love each
other, but with most spite that may be, we persecute one another to
destruction, and this wylbe our own confusion.


E. Yea Theophilus that is in deed a lamentable thing and the greatest grefe to
me, that you being an honest man, and I am I hope not of the worst sort of men,
for my hartye desire is that all moughte be well, this therefore greueth me that
we should be of diverse opinions, and not of one mind specially in religion, and
therefore did I covet to talk with you to the end I moughte if I could bring
you to the same mind I am my self, and to say the truth I understand not so
great contrauersye, but as you said with charity and friendly debating the
matter we shall agree, and so would I wyshe all men to do, for I like not this
crueltye assuredly, and therefore let me understande wherein we vary, we believe
both all the Articles of the Christen faith, what causes the contrauersye
therefore?


T. I will tell you Eusebius, the name of the catholyke church, the holy
church, the universal church, that marreth altogether.


Euse. What man say not so, god forbydde, but Christ should have a church
hear in earth.


T. lo sir how sone ye misunderstande me. I remember now, that when master
Latymer began first to preach, he taught the people to put their hole
confydence in Jesus Christ, and that he only was our redemption and that there
was no health in any other, no not in the blessed virgyn Mary (says he) I will
not say but she was the most excellent woman upon earth, and sauoured
altogether of Christ, as the bag wherein saffron has been smells
altogether of saffro^, yet is not the bag the saffron it self, and so was
not she the saueoure self, though she bare him that was saueour of ye world
to as many as believed in him, this with more Eloquent words did he set forth,
as he was a man passing al other for that purpose, now what said the people of
this? Forsouth that he had despised our lady, and had made her no better then a
saffro^ bag I bring this tale by the way now, not so much for that you
mistoke me in this, as to put you in remembrance of the great folly that is in
many now a days, which when they hear, and peradventure understand not the
matter, yet will they go and tell a whole storye, and ever they will make the
wurste of it, this it is almost in every commen matter between neighbor and
neighbor: there be such a sort of peace breakers, that delight in nothing so
much as in telling of news and thus sets one neighbor against another,
all which increases our damage.


E. But did I then misunderstande you Theophilus: Theo Yea brother Eusebius,
but thanks be to god there can be no hurt in that. I speak all this, for no
other thing but that you should note the great mischeffe that insueth of those
flatterers which gooe flerynge to pick thank, and tell all they hear and
more to, and that to work mischefe, but this is no such matter: for
although you took me that I said that Christ's church or the holy catholyke
church marred altogether yet shall we debate the matter before we go, so that
we shall understand one another, but these men seake no such thing that I
spoke of before.


E. But then I pray you, let me understand your meaning, for so I took it in
deed as for such peace breakers as ye spoke of, I know and could declare
how by: such of a sparcle was made a whole fire, enough to have set a whole
contree on a heat, but let that pass and go forth I pray you.


T. Thus I said Eusebius, that the name of the holy catholyke church, the
universal church, or of Christ's church, if ye will, that does mar
altogether.


Eusebius. Why so? Theophilus, for this cause, that they which pretend to be
Christ's church, are nothing less then Christ's in deed. Eusebius do ye
think so? Theophilus yea and I will prove it so to, that you shall understand
that your self.


Eusebius. say on I pray you, and I will give ear. Theophilus this know ye
first then, that in the.24. Chapter of Saint Mathewes gospel, Christ gave
his disciples this warnyng and said: take heed, for many shall come in my name
and say there are Christ's, be not deceived. etc. Now ye must understand
that Christus is as much to say as anointed, so that many shall come in
Christ's name and say they be the anointed, mark well this warning and take
good head unto it.


E. Well forth yet, I do understand you well this far.


T. Very well then note this also, that as the Lord Jesus gave this warning a
litel before his death, so did Saint Paull also a great while after Christ
had suffered, call the Bishops and elders of Ephesus together, and taking his
leave, as one that should see them no more, gave them also this warning and
said, take heed unto your selves, and to the flock whereof ye have charge: for
after my departing shall enter in among you grievous wolves, Act. ^0.
which shall not spare the flock etc. Mark well now that Christ the Lord, and
his Apostles likewise, how diligently and ernestly they gave us warninge to
take heed and beware of deceauers, and false Prophets, yea as it were almost
their last words, which of all other, for the most part, are to be noted.
and were it not reason we did take heed?


Euse. Yes doutlesse, we must and ought to take heed or else we shall be
deceived. But now say our Preachers that we ought to take heed of you, for
of you were these words spoken.


T. Nay then mark Saint Paul's words again, for he says: after my
departing. etc. And they shall be men that shall rise even of your own selves,
says he. John. 2.
And Saint John in his Epistles says also that even then in his time were
many become Antichrists alredye. And therefore the danger is not now only,
but then and always to be taken head unto. And it is the more danger in that
they shall come in the name of Christ, pretending his authority, and by that
means the rather deceive the good simple man, behold therefore I have told
you before, says the Lord take heed. etc. Eusebius well yet I se not in all
this, but we have as good cause to take heed of you as you of us and more to,
for we are of greatter authorite, and better can we show for our selves then
you.


T. That would I feign understand for therein lies the whole matter.


E. Well sir then harken, first we are come to this point that between us is
strife, whether we catholics be the true church of Christ, and you
protestauntes false Prophets, or else we the false harlottes, and you the true
men.


The. Ye say truth, now for the proof of your authorytye, and that your
catholykes be the true church of Christ, let us hear what you can say,


Eu. Thus I say then, that our church has been of a long continuance, from
Christ's time unto this day, and it has been also universal through out all
Chrystendome, not here or there but through out. And they have always one
consent within them selves, now by these three points do the greateste
learned men give a sure and certain knowledge of the true church unto all men,
that is to wite by antiquite, vniuersalite, and consent, and me thynkes it
sufficient, for it cannot deceive.


Theophilus. Do you think this a sufficient proffe:


Eusebius. Yea doutelesse, what can you say to the contrary?


Theophilus. Mary I say that by this reason ye may prove the Scrybes and
Pharyses to be the true church, and Christ to be a false Prophet, for they
professed Moises law and observed it also better then your Catholics do now
the gospel, and this law ye know was of great antiquity, and so were also many
of their own tradicions, that they had devised beside that law, so that they
had antiquite sufficient, and universal they were thoroweout all Judah and
Jerusalem, as we through Chrystendome: and their consentye may understand by
the death of Christ, whereunto they all consented and agreed.


Eusebius. Yea but ye must understand that our church begane first at
Christ, and so from thence had her antiquity, and from him it began to be
universal, and in him the consent is effectual.


Theophilus. Nay then ye make your matter wursie then before.


Eusebius Do I so?


Theophilus. Yea verily do ye, for tell me, what think you of the church of
the Apostles, was not that a perfect true church?


Eusebius. Yes verily, and so perfect, as I beeleue there has not been a
perfecter.


Theophilus Very well, but I pray you, of what antiquity were their You
grant that Christ was the begynner of that church being here a living man on
earth. And then how could they allege for themselves antiquity. And seeing
they had not your marks, specially antiquity, it should appear by your
reason not to be the true church, or else if ye grant that to be the true
church, and your church and that church have not like probacion, then must
your church be a false church there is no remedy.


Eusebius. Ye play the sophister with me now brother Theophilus


T. Nay truly the reason is so plain that every ploweman may well
understand the same.


E. Well yet if they had not that antiquity, which we have, this makes no
discord among us, for we have antiquity by the reason we have continued so
long in that doctrine, and ordinances, which they delivered unto us, and now
therefore is that same waxen old by time, which then was new begone: and
therefore this is but a cauillacion of sophisters to shyft of an inconueniaunce,
which else would ensewe: and this is the manner of subtyle disputers, as the
most part of your opinion be subtle disputers, and have good heads full of
inuencion, and doutelesse many of them have much learning, I moughte say to
much well inoughe.


Theophilus. That is the common saying of your catholykes now, and yet I
remember within these few years, when they would cry out and say: they
have no learning at all, but only have read an English book, a to penny
book, as for learning they had none. And now again they say, they deceive
all the world by to much learning, this they say, they care not what, so
they be talking. But now whereas you think mine obieccion to be but a
cauillacion, ye must understand that it is a great matter to deceive men in
the pryncypall point of our faith, as to reach us to know the church by a
false mean, as they say by antiquity, whereas ye know the best church had
it not. But then whereas ye urge antiquity now, for that ye have of long
time continued in the doctrine and obseruaunces of the Apostles I deny that,
and put you to your proves, wherein do ye continue in the Apostles doctrine and
obseruaunces.


Eusebius. Forseth in all things that the church teaches, there is nothing
as I think, but the Scripture does teach the same.


Theophilus. Then I pray you tell me in what place of the Scripture do you
find, that we ought to knele down, to crepe, and kiss Images, to sense them,
to deck them, and trime them with such like, or else rather tell me in how many
places of the Scripture we be commanded to the contrary. As in the second
commandment and a thousand places beeside: and like as in that point, so
almost in all the rest I could prove that your catholykes do not only not
follow the doctrine of the holy Scripture but also teach another doctrine
contrary to the same: now if they will yet for all that boast themselves of
Christ, and the Apostles, and yet teach another doctrine contrary to the holy
Scriptures: ought we not to take heed and beware of them.


Eusebius. Well yet tell me this one thing, has not Christ had a Church
hear in earth ever sense his resurreccion, has not the church preached and
continued visible, a known church still in all places, not in corners hear or
there but through out all Christendom, and openly had the rule, and governed
the whole congregation from time to time? And your church began of late
years, was a strange thing not known, but a litell while in a few places of
Germanye and so hear in England, but it is quailed again within short space:
and yet I cannot tell how, if it had been the true church of Christ, it
could not so sone have been overthrown, wherefore if there were nothing else but
this reason, yet is it sufficient to stablysh the consciences of good simple
men. For there can be nothing said unto it.


Theoph. Yes Eusebius if ye list to hearken I will answer you in such wise
as I trust you shall be satisfied.


E. I will hearken gladlye Theophilus, for if ye can answer me to this, I have
no more to say.


Theophilus. Then hear me I pray you, I grant you that Christ has had a
church or congregation hear in earth, which has continually preached his
gospel, his testamente, his holy word from his resurreccion yea from the
beginning unto this day, these have been visible, and known, as John the
Baptyst was known to Herod, Christ was known to the Jews, for John was
behedded, and Christ was crucified, and which of the Apostles escaped that
was not put to death, some hanged, some broiled, some roasted, some one cruel
death and some another, and therefore ye may be sure they were known. And yet
because ye shall not say but even the Apostles hid them selves and fled,
ye read how Saint Paul was let down in a basket over the wall and went
his way, and I pray you how many years after the Apostles were the men of
God vexed and persecuted? And all this was for preaching the gospel of Jesus
Christ. Now whereas ye lay to our charge that our church began but of
late, your church is the more to be suspected for that, which have so long
space kept down the gospel, for we profess none other doctrine then the
Apostles and Martyrs did, which died for it, as ye see how our preachers and
diverse other good brethren are contented to give over their lives likewise for
the same, as the Apostles did. For Christ has taught in diverse places that
we should suffer for his doctrine, but he never taught to kill any for it. The
rule that your Prelates have taken over the churches, has been and yet is like
princes, and not like Apostles: they play the destroyers, but not the
saueours: they follow their master the devil, and not our master Christ. And
therefore let no man think that Christ mayntayneth his church in such
pomp and pride, but rather lays on them the cross, for he says the
servant is not greater then his Lord: if they have persecuted me they shall
also persecute you and so forth. But now your Prelates find out such
balde reasons to persuade the simple to be of their side, and say they, where
are these new fellows become? they be gone, but Christ's church is a visible
church a known church, and not hid in corners. But shows her self
openly. And such like. But I pray you where was their church in King
Edwardes days: If there were no more reasons to prove it a false church but
that same one, it were sufficient to prove them false dissemblers. For where
as Christ's Apostles, disciples, and many Martyrs after that would rather lose
their lives then deny their master or his doctrine: they were contented not
only to subscribe, but also to preach earnestly against that which they now
defend: if ye will have one named, axe the Bishop of London whether he have
not preached against the Pope? Yea and which of them has not? where was
there any of them that would burn his little finger for the maintenance of
their doctrine? And now ye see the other company, having another manner of
hope of the resurreccyon, they come and offer themselves. I tell you truth
hear is a great difference, and if, yet for all this, you will have that
Christ's church, which is so addycted to the world, that for safeguard of
their lives and liuinges, they will say whatsoever they shall: then Christ's
church were wonderfully changed from that it was in the beegynnynge. Weye you
the matter in your conscience brother Eusebius. Yea behold what pleasure they
have in shedding of blood.


Eusebius. Surely ye have laid soore to my charge brother Theophilus, and to
say the truth, their tyranny my stomach does abhor But yet tell me one
thing, if these signs, and tokens be uncertain to know Christ's church, how
do you know the true spouse of Christ? what tokens can you show me whereby
I might assuredly know Christ's church and not be deceived.


Theophilus. I will tell you brother Eusebius, but first call to remembrance,
the warninge that Christ gave us to be ware of false Prophets, and also the
admonycyon of Sayncte Paull to the same end, and the witness of Sayncte John,
who affyrmed that many were come in his time, and in many places of Sayncte
Paull, ye shall see how he complains of them that they went about to
subvert the gospel of Christ and that in the name of Christ. And therefore
to thentente we should not be deceived under the color of holy aunciente
fathers or any such like: Gala. 1.
he gave us this most certain and infallyble rule saying: If we our selves
(mark well his words) if we our selves, or an Angel from heaven preach
unto you a gospel that has not been preached already to you, hold him
accursed. As I said, so I say again (says he) if we or an Angel from
heaven preach unto you another doctrine which has not been by us preached
already, let him be accursed, and so forth. Now tell me Eusebius, If your
catholyke church do preach any doctrine, beside or contrary to the doctrine
of Saynct Paul and the rest of the Apostles, have we not here a plain rule to
refuse them and hold them accursed? And have we not here sufficient
instruccion how to know the perfect true church?


Eusebius. Verily I cannot tell what to say, for ye have almost caughte me in
your net, but yet I will learn more arguments to oppose against you, the
which if you can likewise solute, I will give place, for me thynkes ye mean
well, and I partlye doubt whether in very deed ye have the verity on your
side, the which being certenlye known, I will not be ashamed to confess
mine ignorance. For what should we seake but the glory of Christ?


Theophilus. Would God all English men were like minded, I mean not that
they should strayghte way give place to us, but that they would quietlye be
contented to debate the matter charitably, brotherly and friendly: some there
be that would but they bear not the sweye, and therefore with patience we
must remain and behold what the good will and pleasure of our Lord God is
upon us, for our offenses and sins.


Eusebius. Now surely the sentence is given in every kingedome within it self
divided shall be destroyed.


Theophi. Well the good will of god be don. Except we may deceive his Prophets
by earnest repentance with the Ninevites as is said before, as Jonas was
deceived, else there is no remedy. But yet who so puts his trust in the lord
shall not be confounded: therefore whatsoever become of the rest, happy are they
that put their trust in the lord. Brother Eusebius when your arguments be
ready, let us have them in communicacion. I shall be ready at all times by
Gods grace to hear you. In the mean season I commytte you to god.


E Fare ye well brother


Theo With all my heart.


FINIS.
Dominus mi chi adiutor no timebo quid faciat mihi homo. P.N

The Lords prayer.
Our father which in heaven art,
And make us all one brotherhod:
To call upon thee with one heart,
Our heavenly father and our god:
Grant we pray not with lyppes alone,
But with the heart deep sigthe and groan.
Thy blessed name be sanctified,
Thy heavenly word might us inflame
In holy life for to abide,
To magnify thine holy name.
From all errors defend and keep,
The litell flock of thy pore sheep.
Thy kingdom come even at this hour,
And henceforth everlastingly:
Thine holy ghost into us power,
With all his gifts most plenteously:
From Satan's rage and fylthy band,
Defend us with thy myghtie hand.
Thy will be done with diligence,
Like as in heaven in earth also:
In trouble grant us patience,
And thee to obey in wealth and woe.
Let not flesh, blood or any ill,
Prevail against thy holy will.
Give us this day our daily bread,
And all other good things of thine:
Keep us from war and from bloudesheade,
Also from sickness, dearth and pyne:
That we may live in quietness,
Without all gredy carefulnes.
Forgive us our offenses all,
Reliue our careful conscience:
As we forgive both great and small,
Which unto us have done offense:
Prepare us lord for to serve thee,
In perfect love and unity.
O Lord into temptacion,
Lead us not when the find does rage:
To wythstande his invasion,
Give power and strength in every age:
Arm and make strong thy feable host,
With faith and with the holy ghost.
O Lord from evil deliver us,
The days and times are dangerous.
From everlasting death save us,
And in our last neade comfort us.
A blessed end to us bequeath:
Into thine hands our souls receive.
For thou o Lord art king of kings:
And thou have power over al,
Thy glory shines in all things,
In the wide world universal.
Amen let it be done o Lord,
That we have prayed with one accord,
AMEN.

