A true discourse of the occurrences in the wars of Sauoy, and the winning of
the Forte of Mont-millan: by the most Christian King of France and Navarre
Henry the fourth. Also the number of Cannons and Munition by his Majesty
taken in the said Mont-millan.

Whereunto is annexed, the Oration of Sir Philip Cauriana, Knight: pronounced
to the most Christian Queen Mary de Medicis, at her departure out of Tuscane
to go into France.

Faithfully translated out of French by E. A.



Imprinted at London for Walter Burre, at the sign of the Flower de Luce and
Crown, in Pouies Church-yarde. 1601.

A true discourse of things happened in the army for Sauoy, and in the winning
of the Castle of Mont-millan.
HIs most Christian Majesty, forbearing so far as his honor and the duty of
a Prince that loves peace and the good of his Country could affoorde, was at
the last to his great grief, forced to have recourse to all means convenient
to bring the Duke of Sauoy to good order. The said Duke having taken from the
crown of France, and usurped the Marquizat of Saluces in time of peace, in the
days of the late King Henry the third, his Majesty's predecessor of happy
memory, has not restored the said Marquizate, according to the treaty and
conclusion of peace made at Veruins in the year 1598. between his Majesty
Phillip the second late King of Spain, and the said Duke of Sauoy, neither as
he promised by the last agreement between his Majesty and the said Duke of
Sauoy, made at Paris in February last. A matter that has moved his Majesty
to alter his purpose: declaring to those to whom it may concern, that having
attended the said Dukes resolution, he was lastly enforced to recover the said
Marquizate by force of Arms.

The King therefore willing by valor and in discretion, not only to preserve
that which appertains to the Crown, but also to recover that which aforetime
has been alienated, did thereupon redemaund the Marquizate of Saluces, which
^^d been alienated, as is aforesaid. But the Duke finding it to be one of the
most precious flowers of his garland, referred off the King daily for the
restitution of the same: Whereby his Majesty having expected it a year and a
half, did nevertheless live in hope according to the said Dukes promise, to
have had the said restitution performed by the first day of June last passed.
But the King perceiving that his elemencie engendered so great contempt, sent
his solemn declaration to the said Duke of Sauoy, therein protesting that
himself was no cause of the war or breach of peace, but that full ill
against his will he undertook this war, as knowing very well that it could
not redound but to the said Dukes utter ruin and decay.

The King therefore, considering the premises, did to his great grief (albeit
he came not out of Paris to that intent) bring his army into Bresse and Sauoy,
where it soon showed it self with so many troops, as proved, that the Kings
just title or quarrel carried that which to him did appertain. The towns and
Castles never stood out any or very small force, but yielded: so as the King in
a very short time pierced through the country even to Mont-millan, where upon
his arrival, he seized on the town, as likewise he did sooneafter of
Chamtery, Charbonniers and other places, even to Morienne, which he brought
under his obedience, in which places himself was present, to the great perrill
and danger of his life.

Having thus taken the town of Mont-millan, he caused the Castle to be
summoned to yield, unless that they had rather endure the fury of the
Cannon. Howbeit, since they grew obstinate, the King divided his army to beat
it on every side, and caused his men to raise Bastions, Fortes, Hills, and
Bulwarks with wonderful policy to beat the place.

This done, it seemed, that albeit man's industry could perform no more, yet
all this was but as a Butte for the Cannons of the said Castle to level at:
the place being of all men holden to be inpregnable and almost inaccessible.
But God, who rules the hearts of Kings and Princes, peized the hearts of these
two Princes, whereby the one was found to be replenished with a just quarrel,
whereto he also showed himself favorable, as he promises by his Prophets,
when he finds a heart after his own mind. So that whereas the Duke of
Sauoy, purposed there to have suffered the Frenchmen to have champed on their
bittes, with the discommoditie of the winter season and tempests, the place
happily fell into the kings hands, to the great prejudice of the said Duke of
Sauoy, who now finds himself to be the prey of such mishap as he threatened
to others, therein resembling the Thrush, who pearched upon a twigge spreddeth
her wings, and so is taken of her self: or the Giants that sought to sight
with heaven: for surely this battle of the Giants, does represent and figure
unto no other but these that will rise against their betters, as they did
against Jupiter, according to the words of the Poet.

The Giants men say, would enterprise,
To seize upon heaven, and Jupiter surprise.
Now will I bring unto the French Theater, one of the principal acts of this
tragedy. The King considering how difficult it was by assault to come near
this place, and fearing the loss of the meanest of his Soldiers, sought to
win those in the Castle by composition, whereupon God reading in his heart
his good mind and affection, strengthened him more and more against his
enemies. Many things they do report, that ministered intelligence to the king:
but I do ground my self upon the most certain, and I do believe that the
kings just quarrel delivered him this place, as the lawful daughter of France
built and erected by our Kings: for, as say the ancient Philosophers: All
things must return to their head and foundation, so that as well that, as the
rest, being of France, All shall return to France.

In the end the Lord of Brandy Captain of the said Castle, finding himself
unable to resist the French army, much less the courage of so invincible and
magnanimious a king: withal that he could not hold, as being surprised by the
kings diligence and foresight, who resembled an Alexander or Julius Caesar, who
both enterprised and executed in manner at once: sought to grow to composition
as himself required: whereto the King condiscended, mittigating certain
articles that went beyond the laws of war, which he would not pass.

This composition did first contain a truce for one month: so that incase the
Duke of Sauoy did not come to succor the besieged and raise the siedge from
before the place, the said lord Brandys promised even with hostages, to deliver
the place into the kings hands. The truce drawing to expiration, toward the end
thereof the Duke of Sauoy meaning to appear, was stopped, through the kings
discreet foresight, who sent his army to the passages to stop the said Duke of
Sauoy, from all access. Thus he being repulsed, and unable to bring any
succor, either to raise the siege from before the place, it was yielded under
the most happy success of the most Christian and most magnanimious King,
according to the grant that the Lord of Brandy had obtained from his Majesty.
Heervpon the king, the 16. of Nouemb. 1600. sent in 500. French soldiers,
under the leading of the Lord of Crequy, who was to command in the same. The
Lord of Brandy, according to an article by the King granted in form of
composition, departed: Namely with the life of the said Lord of Brandy and all
his, the Soldiers with the Drum striking up, the Ancient displaide, the Match
lighted, the Bullet in the mouth, the Muskets and Harquebuts charged, with bag
and baggage, so much as to them apperteyned, without search, visitation or
molestation whatsoever, and furnished with so much warlicke provision as they
could well carry with them: leaving to his Majesty's possession, the fairest
and strongest place in all Sauoy, with 80. Canons great and small, 30000.
Bullets, and 500. thousand of Powder. Thus much for the conquest and departure
from the Castle of Mont-millan, a houlde in some men's opinion impossible to be
gotten: yet possible to our great King, being armed with equity and a just
quarrel.

Now therefore, O ye French nation, ye are to lift up your hands to heaven in
sign of joy, and to importunate the same with your petitions and prayers, and
manifould repetition of this word with the Prophet, O Lord preserve the King,
and be his protector.

Now therefore let him not be content only to maintain his estate and people
in peace: but also let him flourish, and as it were shoot forth again the
ancient Laurel branches of his auncesters. Now I say is the time, that thou O
France may boast, that thou have not only a Themistocles, an Alexander, or a
Caesar, but even all three comprised in the sole courage of this great Henry
the fourth. Now is the time that the old proverb may be verified in him. That
nothing is difficult to a valiant mind: Likewise that he has clambered to the
rock of virtue: and that he has purchased the tipe of perfection; that he
has out faced the hazards, and for a long time carried away and houlden the
title of a great King and Captain, whom all the world admireth and fears,
under his clemency, courtesy, valor and benignity. God grant that France may
long enjoy so favorable a sunshine, to beat away the storms that
otherwise are likely to fall thereupon: likewise that his life, his goodness,
and valor, may in his virtue possess the greatest worldly Empires.

Amen.
FINIS.
The Oration of sir Philip Cauriana, Knight, pronounced to the most Christian
Queen Mary de Medicis, at her departure out of Tuscane to go into France. and
dedicated to the Queen.
To the Lady Duchess of Nemours, the Queens Gouernesse.
IT were a matter most absurd, most discreet and famous Princess, to suffer
this brief translation, as it were by hap hazard, to present it self at the
feet of this great Queen, without your favorable safe conduct. Men might
say: What presumptuous doult is this, that dare thus approach to this Majesty,
newly arrived for our tranquillity, and as yet ignorant of the manners and
fashions of this Country? Is she not sufficiently bufied in the receiving of
her deserved honors, done unto her both by great and small, towns and
communalties as she goes? Is not her name sufficiently honored with that high
title which the heavens and her virtue do grant her? What can this man add to
her glory, saving only his particular vows of small efficacy? Pardon me good
Lady, and if it please you to way this my zeal in the ballanc^ of your
singular wisdom, and if you find it over light or of bad assay, send it to
the minte and suppress it: but if it hang in equal peyse, as we say, or that
it be too light of some few grains, do it this favor, to let it pass at how
low a price so ever you shall think good. This benefit shall proceed only
from your favor and courtezie: and by this course you shall stir up the
gallant spirits of France to seek to delight her with some brave and comely
conceit, saying: sith this man for so small industry employed upon another
man's argument was so fauonrably accepted, how much more shall we in giving her
Majesty a far richer gift? yet it is always to be considered, that
Majesty's do limit their contentment not after the value or riches, which they
need not, but as things do delight them. Witness the common example of the
king that accepted the country man's Radishes, who was well rewarded: and the
Gentleman who grounding himself upon the like reasons, looked for a far
greater reward if he presented a better thing, and thereupon presented his
Majesty with a goodly horse and of great value: to whom the king, very well
conceauing his meaning, gave in reward the poor man's Radishes which he had
deerly paid for. Thus I beseech GOD most excellent Princess to keep and
preserve you. Written in the holy year 1600.

Your most humble and most affectionate servant, Chappuys.

To the Queen.
TO the end, most glorious Queen, to represent unto you the truth of that
which was foretold you by the L. Knight Cauriana, in his eloquent and gallant
discourse unto you presented, at your prosperous departure out of Tuscane to
come into this realm, where through Gods grace you are now resident: namely,
to your glory, your fame, and your rare virtues, should hereafter minister
argument and matter to writers: albeit my self be none of the number of those
whose Pen may be worthy, yet has a natural instinct, that should urge us to
honor you, made me the first that should break this Ice. Howbeit to avoid
the title of presumption, in taking more upon me then I am able to perform, I
have thought good only to translate into this language the self same
discourse of Cauriana, to the end that by this means you may the better like
of my zeal, which may minister unto you an entrance to learn (if already you
know it not) the language of your affectionate Frenchmen: besides that,
otherwise I am not able more worthily to celebrate your great virtues and
commendations. The Lord vouchsafe long to preserve you, to the good and quiet
of this estate.

Your most humble and most obedient servant and subject. G. CHAPPVYS.

The Oration of S. Philip Cauriana, Knight: delivered to the most christian
Queen Mary de Medicis, upon her departure out of Tuscane for France.
IS it true, most noble Tuscanes? and is the time come, that we may with sighs
breath out, Ele tenebre nostre altrui fann' Alba? And our darkness breed a
clear morning to others? That this noble Plant, which we have so carefully
cherrished and bred up, should upon the convenient term of her growth, the
glorious proppe and pillar of our whole hope, be transported into a foreign
country? shall the glory of our greatness serve to the glory of the
greatness of others? Or shall we with dry eyes behold so sorrowful and
woeful a departure? Is it true, most Christian Queen, that you can abandon the
goodly land of Tuscane, your native country, to pass into France? shall the
river Arnus, for so many honors famous, in whose arms you have taken your
birth, with her quiet stream, submit her glory, or give place to the ravenous
or impeteous course of the river of Rhosne, that expects you in those parts?
And shall the Tuscane Nymphs, as unfortunate Bees, have spent their time in
framing and beautifying your spirit with virtue, to the end their labors may
serve to delight the taste of others, through the sweetness of your behavior
and royal countenances? Alas, how grievous is our condition! O hard law of
Himene, which estranging young and tender Virgins from the houses of their
parents, and from the sweet presence and cherishings of their mothers, does
oftentimes lead them as banished persons into far countries, differing from
their own, both in laws, manners and language. But proceed and go most
noble Queen, to the place where the heavens have appointed. Sweep bouldly
over the proud Tirrene Sea: for Neptune appeaseth the waves, Aeolus suppresseth
the winds, Juno makes the air clear, and the Sky adorned with favorable
stars, which promise unto you all tranquillity and calmes: and peradueuture
enamoured of you, they all do strive who shall show most fervent zeal to
prosper your voyage of all men desired. Go forward as assured to receive the
honors due to your high birth or royal virtues: for with you do go the graces;
modesty, wisdom, chastity and beauty.

Go forth to the place where you have a new empire provided: for virtue
guides you, and fame goes before you, publishing your name, with a fame of
eternal remembrance, making the day memorable, wherein you did abandon Italy
to pass into France: go forth merry and glad to the place where every man does
expect you with as great zeal and affection, as ever princess was expected.
For out of this famous and royal marriage every one does hope of a famous
issue of some inuinsible Heroes, with eternal peace, not only to the gallant
King of France, but also to all Europe. The valiant Henry does already look
for you, who being the conqueror of so much people, desires in person to yield
up unto you the glory of his victories: to you, I say, who from all eternity
have been destined to be the conqueror of him. Now does he desire to behold,
not your portraiture, but even your self: and transformed into you, for your
sake and your good hap, to undertake more glorious enterprises, and to grow
greater and more famous then himself.

Go your ways therefore, and you shall be assured to behold a most Noble
Kingdom, a most fruitful soil, a most courteous people, a most strong and
valliant nation, and a limmitted liberty of all modestye. Go your ways (I
say) merrilye to the place where they will offer to your name eternal
sacrifices of haughty and singular minds: and where life is more lifelike then
in any place of the world. There shall you ^^de the Indias for wealth, happy
Arabi^ for goodness of air, and Arcadia and Olimpus for pleasures. Oh how
greatly and that justly, will the nymphs of diverse countries envy you that
were not able to divert the magnaminious Henry from your love; as also could
not all the fained cou^tenances of flattery, or the continual subtilties
practiced by diverse to hinder this marriage, that was first concluded in
heaven, and afterward approved and admired by men.

O most valiant king, invincible Prince: you that have so many years most
gloriously been the burden both of Civil and foreign wars, and so
fortunatly labored and swet in your armor: behold, this is that fair Nymph
whom your famous poets, replenished with divine fury, have of long foretold
to be reserved in heaven for you, as the recompense, of your labors, travails
and heroycall virtues: the same who shall quiet your mind: the same that in
whose discretions and fidelity, you shall repose your most inward and secret
cogitations: who being your companion in your kingdom, shall also accompany
you in your fortunes, adding to your glory a new luster or brightness: who by
her fruitfulness shall cure the ancient wounds of your flourishing kingdom
This is that beautiful and rich crown of felicity and contentation, that
was to enuiron the royal head, which for a last ornament has justly deserved
to be joined and referred to both your royal heads.

Happy therefore is that soil that has brought forth so noble a plant:
neither is it any marvel that others do envy her, sith her beauty and grace
by unusual means do strive among them. Blessed was that most religious and
most virtuous Mother, that beautified the world with so worthy a daughter:
and had the heavens permitted her to see that which at this day we do behold,
she would most willingly have departed this life.

Also you the most invincible Heroes, or great Lords of the Imperial blond of
Austrich, that live most happilye in the Elisian fields, behoulding the happy
offspring, the young branch of your most worthy line, who borne and brought up
in Italy, is going to take possession of the French Empire: Behold your glory
shining more eminent then ever heretofore in three princes, in these days
descended out of the heavens, as new Angels, unto the earth: who by their
Empire and consanguinitie do embrace in manner the whole world; the most
virtuous Mary, the most religious Margaret, and the most discreet Isabel, who
reigns in Flanders, as the other in Spain. You glorious and magnimious
father, whom the heavens have forbidden to see your daughter so well beloved
and made much off, at her coming to be mariageable, and so highly married:
look down from the place where thy virtues have placed thee, and behold this
new Queen, of thy glory and fullness of thy felicity: thou shall see that in
virtue she represents thy auncesters, and in her actions, thy greatness: so
that by the just law of nature we do commonly of good seed look to reap good
fruit. Now has the world most virtuous Queen, had so much speech of you,
not only in Italy and Germany, but also in England and Spain, with equal
praise and envy, that your self have been the continual subject of all
discourses holden within these ten years in all Imperial and royal courts,
whenever they mentioned any great marriage: neither does there even at this
day, any one pass the Alps, that part Italy and France, but with great
marvel is inquisitiue, even among the common sort, saying: Is it I pray you
true, that the Princess Mary is so fair, as it is said? Is she so gracious
as the voice goes? And is it true that she shall be our Queen? Oh how happy
for us if this might come to pass: so should we think the loss of our goods
and most precious things, befallen us in these our civil wars almost of
fortye years continuance, to be but small, in regard of the good that we are
to hope for in so beautiful, excellent, and reverent a marriage? and this only,
not a woman, but a goddess, should suffice to recover all our calamities. This
your honorable fame, and this general desire of every man, runs over the
Alps, even unto the uttermost bounds of France: neither is there Painter or
Caruer of Images, but with all industry, as of their Queen, do endeavor to
draw your image and portraiture to the perfection of his skill. There is not so
mean a man, or howsoever poor, but has it in his house: and as in time
passed the Image of Augustus was worshipped in private houses, even so it was
at this day. Truly it is a great matter that in the conceits of infinite
persons, there should be formed first ye Idea of some great matter to come,
from the which by like means the issue should be taken: also that they cannot
possibly be drawn from this first conceit, until the occasion be fulfilled,
which afterward coming to light, discovers the truth of the universal
judgment. The like has happened in you, most virtuous Mary, who being descended
from kings, grafted and allied to great kings, and endued with royal
conditions, after the troublesome decease of King Henry the third, were in the
judgment of all men married to the valient Henry of Bourbon. Such a judgment,
albeit assessed by man, was notwithstanding, the work of God and fatal from
heaven, who having cut off all and so great hindrances, which as the world
knows, seemed insuperable, and crossed your present marriage, have now knit
you in an indissoluble knot, to the invincible king of France. These surely are
miracles, works unexpected: effects whose causes are unknown to us, and
testimonies that God has always a care of kings and Princes. Well may you
think that neither your fathers treasure, neither the nobility of your blood,
neither your great estates, which the king needs not: but the only fame of
your virtues, of your graces, of your Christian pity, and of your beauty, did
induce this great king to ask you in marriage, who had no want of sweet and
flattering Sirens, or store of crafty Cyrces, which in diverse sorts raised love
wars against him, and laid siege to overcome him: yet he firm and constant,
as a rock against the billows and waves of the sea, would never change,
neither will ever alter his mind: much less now, when having seen your
presence to surpass and exceed the report, he shall be forced to rest entangled
in your gracious looks: and his most generous agents, that so labored you for
his wife, shall now reverence you for the chiefest and greatest Queen in
Christendom, as you are, and be content to surrender all their desires to your
present glory. Thus have the heavens always, and in time fit and convenient,
been liberal of their favors to a virtuous and innocent Princess. Yield
therefore perpetual praise to God, and thank the wisdom, and more then
fatherly piety of your uncle Don Ferdinando the great duke toward you.
Commend the goodness and exemplary life of that great Christian rather in deed
the^ name, out of whose marriage yours was divided, as out of great things
greater are formed. For in these young years of your tender age, you were by
them so brought up and trained in virtue and Christian piety, that the most
Christian king, moved and enflamed with the report of your name, craved you in
marriage. Oh happy couple, O most glorious marriages, O memorable conjunction,
and most glorious fruits which we expect from you? I do already behold, neither
am I deceived, a most noble line issuing from you which spredding the French
name over the whole world, shall plant an other Gallo-gretia, an other
Celtiberi^ in the farthest parts of the East: and your selves shall henceforth
be a sufficient ground for all writers, grauers and Painters to employ
themselves in their exercises. You shall minister occasion of speech both
public and private, both in devout and seculer places, and every man still
will talk of your actions, of your manners, and of your iestures: yea many
times will they say: Thus said great Queen Mary, Thus did she. Thus shall you
live immortal in the memory of mortal men, with the true titles of honor and
glory, neither feined nor begged. Go therefore forth, and continue your
journey most Christian Queen, proud of the most worthy troop of so many
Princes, Princesses, and most noble Kntghts and Gentlemen that wait upon you:
of so many souls which accompany you with their vows and prayers unto God for
your prosperous journey and fruitfulness, but far more of Angels, into whose
tuition our good God has committed you. And you most happy Tisi that carriest
so great a Queen, fear thou neither tempests nor rocks, for with her thou
carriest her good fortune. You go into a realm, where ye magnanimous Katherin
your kinswoman by the father, did so gloriously command almost for the space
of forty years, that the name of your most famous family, borne to sway the
greatest Empires, is holden in very great account. You go to a kingdom
established in a Monarchy, and at the same time in Christianity, almost
thirteen hundred years ago. You go to that place where you were expected,
desired, and adored, before ye were known: even you, whose virtues and
religion were heard of before your name. You marie the most gallant warrior
that ever drew sword, who in a long and set order of his predecessors of the
self nation and line is the sixty and fifth. What farther portion of human
felicity do you want? I do already see all the shoares of Prouence covered
with people of all ages and kinds, and of all sorts, kneeling before you and
saluting you as their Queen, not omitting any token of perfect and inward
mirthe and joy, for your coming.

What shall we then do, that have nurssed and brought you up? shall we by our
slacknesse seem to envy Province, or rather all France in their joy? shall we
dislike your contentment and glory? oh! God forbid. Nay rather as in the
beginning of my speech I advised you, most virtuous Tuscan, to have your
recourse to sighs and sobs, and sorrowful lamentations for her departure, so
now, being come again to my self, and having overcome sorrow, I think it
more necessary that we rejoice with her, to whom Italy being but a small
matter, the king of heaven has given the fairest kingdom, together with the
might king Christian to be her spouse and husband, because her glory is our
glory. Fear not that her far journey shall ever blot out of her mind the love
that she bears us, or suppress the memory of the sacrifice of our harrs,
which we have already so long since offered unto her. For such a heavenly
substance as she is, is not subject to times or alterations, as other mortal
creatures are: but being far distant from her country, she will resemble the
Sun, that heatesh more by reflection and reuerberation, then by the direct
beams thereof. And you also, most noble and beautiful Gentlewomen, sith your
sex is by this rather divine then human Marye, at this time mounted so high,
give ye thanks unto God, and sounding forth his glorious name, show some
token of your inward joy, and where your words cannot, let it be supplied
by your affections, minds, and a reverend silence. Print in your hearts her
liuelye Image; seek to imitate her in her virtues and manners: for in so
doing, you shall show no less sign of reverence and love toward her, then
if you should continually celebrate her with Hymns and praises.

Purposely O holy Father Clement the eight, have I forborne to speak of you
until the end of my discourse, to the end my words may remain the more
liuelye printed in the hearts of the Readers. But what shall I say of you: for
you have showed that things acbompted impossible of man, are subject to your
power, wisdom and felicity. In a few words you did both begin and end the
important war of Ferrara, and that without bloodshed. With your weapons and
counsel you have freed the greatest part of Hungary from the tyrrannie and
oppression of the Turks, you have with great dexterity concluded and settled
peace so long desired, and with most men almost dispaired off between the two
most mighty kings of France and Spain. The last you have conjoined in marriage
with the most religious Margarit of Austrich, and now you are conioyning of
this man with the most glorious Mary of Medicis, for from you grew the
beginning, and without you our endeavors were but vain, our hopes vain, yea
they were but dreams and vows. It was you, yea even you, that began this
work, well may we therefore and in truth, name you both in your thoughts and
deeds, most fortunate and happy. But O great Ferdinand, with what full and
convenient reward shall all Italy make you recompense? for among all your
royal actions since your election to the Tuscan Empire, this marriage by you
conceited, discreetly advised, handled, and concluded, is their fullness, their
glory, and their perfection, and with such as can discern the nature of the
present time, and the course of human affairs, your greatness shall for
ever be esteemed the safety of Italy, and the preservation of the christian
commonwealth: so that naming you the father of Italy, they shall attribute unto
you the name and title that to you appertains, and withal cause you at all
times and with all men, to be holden for a most wise and happy Prince, as you
are. Proceed therefore most innocent and most christian Mary on your journey,
laden with as great glory as ever had Princess: and let these be your names
and titles, Chaste, Wise, Religious and Happy: and at all times remember the
order of the Knights of S. Stephan, most affectionate to your name, favor them
with your countenance and felicity, as the most principal workmanship of your
magnanimious grandfather on the father side, and now by your most noble Uncle,
brought to so high a degree, that all places under the sun are now
replenished with the glory of their name: besides that you here see them most
ready to become your faithful shelter in this most happy passage: never
disdain yt unfeignedly and without flattery, they have thought good this day to
celebrate your divine honors.

FINIS.

