A BRIEF EXPOSITION WITH NOTES, UPON THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.

By WILLIAM SCLATER Doctor of Divinity, and Minister of Pitmister in Summerset.

1. Corinthians. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for George Vincent, and are to be sold at
the Cross Keys at Paul's gate. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL JOHN POVVLET Esquire, my very Honorable good Patron,
and to the truly Religious, and right virtuous ELIZABETH his wife, my much
honored Patroness, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
WOrthies, lo to you at last; Saint Paul's Antichrist in such lineaments as
that Apelles his pencell, or coal rather was pleased to shadow him in. Lusted
I say not, vnuailed only, and made more barefaced, to yield his ugly visage to
view of Gods people. How vexes it to see Israel still halting twixt the two
opinions? After demolishing the Idol so long fore done, a fresh pleading for
Baal? Were it not he seems in his consumption, near his abolition, I should
suspect some boding of his new erection. Auertat omen Deus. How much better had
it been never to have known, then knowing to turn back from the holy
Commandment? The latter end of such men, will prove worse then their
beginning.

I promise, and persuade my self better things of you, and such as accompany
salvation: so hereditary seems right Religion to your Honorable family;
having continued therein, descents more then Paul mentions of Timothy. If to
your establishment in the present truth, and furtherance of Faith, in times so
wavering, this poor pains may be auaile-some, I have my desire: and shall
think (thorough your favorable acception) some small part of my great debt of
thankful observance, wherein I acknowledge my self to stand obliged to you,
and yours, tolerably at least, discharged. Faxit Deus.

Withal you have such as this Scripture afforded, doctrinall conclusions many
for information of judgment: exhortations frequent, to excite languishing
affections; comforts not a few, for support of the trembling conscience, rules
to examine our Spiritual estate; characters of gracious virtues; directions
for moral practice. In the close, persuasions to the love and study of peace,
more largely pressed, perhaps of purpose, to work toward union the divisions
of Ruhen occasioned by great thoughts of heart. Sirs, said Moses, ye are
brethren; why strive ye? de lana Caprina, for the breath of the people, so
long, so eagerly, till Religion be neglected; Prayers interrupted; Charity
violated; care of Country forsaken; Iniquity grown impudent, so as to dare
give affront to Authority. Oh that our Saviors advise might prevail, to
keep our salt within our selves, so should we soon have peace one with
another.

For your part, worthy Sir, I have never observed your temper auerse, much
less abhorrent from terms of peace. Desire only you should advance above
the ordinary of peaceable or patient, to become Pacificus; a peacemaker in
Israel. The work were more then generous; truly Honorable; no less then
Princely. The style such have, in our Saviors language, is no less then
Sons of God; Hoc agamus. And the God of peace shall be with us.

Now for the great kindness wherewith you have refreshed my bowels, I must
pray as beggars; the Lord reward it you. As Paul for Onesiphorus, the Lord
grant you, and yours, to find mercy with the Lord at that day. I rest

Pitmister, November 4. 1626. Your thankful, and most obseruant Beneficiary
WILLIAM SCLATER.

The occasion of the Epistle, together with the scope.
1 NOise of continued pressures, and persecutions of this Church for the
Gospel, whereto he desires to afford solace.

2 Reports also of false teachers crept in amongst them, laboring, on fairest
pretenses, to insinuate error about the time of Christ's second coming:
plausibly perhaps by misinference from that ( Nos qui viuimus of the Apostle. 1
These. 4.17.) Against which he would make them cautionate.

3 Information of exorbitancy in some particulars of the Church,
notwithstanding his formonition against idleness, and sleeping of Church
discipline in that behalf. This he excites; that he corrects.

Parts of the Epistle, besides those usual, inscription, salutation,
valediction; you may thus number: 1 Proaeme insinuatiue. cap. 1. ad ver. 5.2
Consolation, inde ad finem. 3 Redargution of error. 1 In judgment. cap. 2. 2
In manners. cap. 3. Other passages there are occasionally, yet aptly and
seasonably interlaced.

AN EXPOSITION upon the second Epistle to the THESSALONIANS.
2 THESE. Cap. 1. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Paul and Siluanus and Timotheus, unto the
Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God our father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Grace unto you and peace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Inscription and salutation is without difference, the same with that in
the former Epistle: See Annotata ibid.

We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet, because
that your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all
toward each other abounds:

So that we glory of you in the Churches of God, for your patience and faith
in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure.


IN the remainder of this first Chapter are three things. 1. Proeme, ver. 4, 5.
2. Consolation from ver. 5, to 11. 3. Incidentally a Petition. verse, 11.12.

The Proeme is, as the former, Insinuatiue: tending to nourish them in
persuasion of the Apostles affectionate love toward them; testified by that
indubitate office and act of love, Thanksgiving to God for their gracious
estate.

In which Gratulation is, first the Act: secondly, the Ground: thirdly, the
Matter of it. De Actu vide Annotata ad 1 These. 1.2, 3.

The ground is debitum, a debt, wherein the Apostle and his associates
acknowledge themselves obliged, to perform this office of thanksgiving:
Accruing 1. from their near conjunction, so near as christian brotherhood
could make them. 2. from Congruence of the Act; we ought: 1 Brethren, 2 as it
is meet.

In thankfulness then there is debitum, by Apostles acknowledgement: herein
will no Saint plead libertatem a debito, nor once dream he supererogates:
holds it not universally for all offices of love to God or man? hear our
Savior: when ye have done all that is commanded, say, we have done but what we
ought, Luke 17.10. It sounds to me, All that ye can, to the utmost extent of
natural or gracious abilities: since all that we can in love to God, we are
commanded, Mar. 12.30. Saint John speaking of the highest act of love to man,
urges it as matter of debt; we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren,
1 John 3.16.

Thus I think. Intensissima charitas cadit sub praecepto: the highest pitch
we can bend Charity unto, falls under precept: whether we love him, vt 1.
bonus sit nobis, or 2. quia benefecit, or 3. quiabonus in se: which is the
utmost pretended aim of single life, and wilful poverty, whole vacation to
the contemplation of the glorious Deity: or, 4. which Saint Bernard thinks
none in state of this life can attain, nor Martyrs themselves completely, till
the day of Resurrection; to love neither selves, nor ought that is ours, but
propter Deum: or if any thing in love may be thought a transcendent to this:
the modus sine modo, as Bernard calls it, non gratuitus impenditur, sed
rependitur debitus.

Congruence of equity, hear from the same Author. 1 John 4.19.
Prior ipse dilexit nos Isai 5.7.15.
tantus and John 3.16.
tantum, and Ephesians. 1.6.
gratis Psalm. 8.4.
tantillos and Romans 5.8.10.
tales.

Melanchthons wonder slighted by the Cardinal, still holds me: that ever
thought of supererogating should enter the heart of man; that ever creature
should think, he yields his whole debt to his Creator: Nedum the vassal,
bought with such a price, plus quam debitum, to such a Redeemer.

Tell me you blessed Spirits of just men now made perfect in heaven, Ever
thought you your best devotions, your longest and most serious vacations to the
contemplation of the Godhead, or any thing thereto auailing, more then your
commanded duty? Me thinks I see them all casting their crowns down to the
ground before the throne, and saying: Worthy art thou O Lord to receive glory
and honor, and power; for thou have created all things and for thy pleasure
they are, and were created, Apoc. 4.11. confer Apoc. 5.12.

There is (...), and (...): though we yield you your virginity, or poverty,
or blind obedience, gifts of perfection, can you forget they Iac. 1.17.
descend from above? use them to their best improuement, can you say of them,
other then David of his substance contributed to the Temple? 1 Chro. 29.14.
of thine own we have given thee: as Isai, Isai 26.12.
thou Lord have wrought all our good works in us: as Austine, God crowning our
good works, crowns not our merits, but his own gifts. And can you think it
a Counsel, no Precept, to use our Talent, though of five, to the best behoof
of our master? Mat. 25.15, 27, 30.

There is, no doubt, a latitude of commanded duty. But within that compass
falls, whatsoever our best abilities extend unto, in love to our God.

Suppose we therefore no precept particular, or peremptory for chastity in
single life; yet to those that have the gift, is not the precept given to
choose it, under reason of that state, that is most furthersome to Gods
service? And grant wilful Poverty no enjoined duty? quis dixerit? yet
preparation of the mind to abdication of goods, when God calls for it, falls
under precept. Can th'Acting be forborne, in case God calls for it? Is it not
sinful, when it wants his Call? Pride I see swelling in most Popish doctrines:
in none more, then this: of works supererogatorie exceeding duty: chalenging
liberty from debt, and obligation to performance.

2 Yet how does this worm of Pride insinuate into our weak services, we
perform to God? In such sort, that for them we are Ready, as proud Jews, to
expostulate with God, and ask, Isai 38.3.
why he regards not? quarrel, if he withhold his blessings; murmr, and
little less then churl at him, if in the least sort he afflict us; yet, said
The Apostle, who has given him first? and Romans 11.35.
what have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.

I like the (...) of faith; and allow to the believer not conscious of
insinceritie, 1 Pet. 3 21.
Saint Peter's (...); I say as Austine, we may exigere Dominum: but its only,
quatenus promittendo se fecit debitorem: what thoughts of other obliging the
Lord to us, by any dignity of our works, arise, I cannot but impute to
damnable pride. Oh consider, 1. the Iac. 3.2.
many sins through oversight, or otherwise passing from us: 2. the blemishes,
no less then Isai 64.6.
menstruous, cleaving to our best performances. 3. The many Nouerints vniuersi,
thou standst bound in to thy God; thou will think it duty, which Saint
Bernard says, apud paucos inuenitur, Magna facere, and inutilem te reputare.

Whence accrues the debt? from precept in this particular, Romanists themselves
confessing, but withal from Congruence, such, as not Paul only, but every
Christian, most of all, Ministers, must acknowledge most equal. We are
Brethren, partakers all of the same Romans 8.15.
spirit of adoption and Regeneration; linked all into Ephesians. 1.22.
one body, whereof Christ is the head: from whom is derived to us our Sonship,
our Coheire-ship both with Christ, and one with another.

Further congruence would you see? 1. View the glory accruing to God, in
rescuing souls out of power of Satan; which Luke 15.10.
1. Angels, though not so nearely linked to us, joy to behold. 2. And, which
more nearely concerns a Minister; thereby, 1 1 Cor. 9 2.
God seals to him his sending: 2 for this augments his glory, Dan. 12.3.

Phil 3.9, 10, 11.
plenty of knowledge and ability of discerning or fullness of fruits of
righteousness appearing in the people. Mat 20.15.
1 Is thine eye evil, because the Lords is good? so good to thy people. 2
Know thou not, Heb 13 17.
thou watchest for their souls, and so as one that must give accounts? 3 Never
read thou the bitter wallings, like to that of Rachel for her children, of
See Ier. 15. and 20. Isai 49. Micah. 7.1.
Prophets and Pastors over their obstmate people? not only from compassion of
their misery, but for grief of their own fruitless Ministry?

De nullo ita sentio Deum mihi propitium, as for this, that my ministry has
no where bin barren: I never travailed, but where I could say, through Gods
great mercy; Isai 8.18.
Lo me and the children which thou have given me. For my part I say as Moses;
Number. 11.29.
would God all the Lords people were Prophets. As Paul, that Act. 26.29.
all who hear me, were as I, much more then I, in Christianity. It should be
my joy, and crown of rejoicing.

Because that your faith grows exceedingly, etc. The matter of Paul's
thanksgiving; the increase of their faith and love, amplified, by the measures;
faith ouer-increaseth. Love ouerfloweth. 2. the issue, Paul's boasting thereof
in the Churches, ver. 4.

In Paul's opinion not beginnings of Grace only, but every increase thereof, is
of God; else, why thanks he God for it? The beginner prosits, Phil. 1.6. hence
Peter styles him, 1 Pet. 5.10.
God of all Grace, because giver of all kinds, of all degrees of Grace:
wherefore its added, he calls and perfects. The whole body increases with the
increase of God, that is, which God ministers, Col. 2.19. See Luke 17.5.

1 Whether only by general influence or concurrence as an universal cause,
or by new spiritual aid, Schoolmen make question.

2 Whether by radicating or making more firm Graces received, or not rather by
adding to the graduall quantity, is a second inquitie.

3 Whether without us, or with us, a third.

To the first, Special aid and excitement is requisite to every act of Grace
received, Phil. 2.13. much more to the acquiring of a new degree.

To the second, Not only by strengthening our inner man; but by increasing
degrees of Grace; as appears both by greater fervor, and more delightsome
exercise both of elicite and imperate Acts: As also by ability to encounter
stronger opposites.

To the third, Not without us, as his instruments: yet so with us, as that both
our endeauours are his sole work, and the blessing or good issue merely from
him, 1 Cor. 15.10. Pelagius is long since dead, I would his heresy but slept
with him; he shall be imprudent who needlessly stirs up memory of it.



He is a rare man, who herein ascribes not something to his own endeauours.

Therefore the Lord pleases to permit his children 1. to decaies and
declinations, such as often breed iealousies of gracious estate, and dreadful
fears of whole Apostasy. 2. Often to Apoc. 2.4.
Pauses and standings at stay, so great, so long, that hardly, or not at all
they perceive their bettering in Grace, by means most potent. Wherefore all
this? but either to chasten, or to prevent our pride and unthankfulness. A
wise man sees the plague, and hides Heb. 5, 12.
himself. Compare the carriage of Paul's gratulation here, with that in the
former Epistle: Coolely me thinks, in comparison, it there runs; we give
thanks to God: Here, as if he had had some Revelation of their sincerity, we
ought always to give thanks: with life and vigor, me seems, it comes off.
The reason, I think, is; that he saw something in them, that might form his
charity to more then half certainty: that is, if I mistake not, the
increase, the abundant increase of their faith and charity.

Certainly its no small token of sincerity in Grace, that its seen to
increase, to increase toward excess. See Romans 1.17. Psalm. 84.7. They go from
strength to strength, John 15.2. are purged to bring forth more fruit: so do
they, according to their months, Ezekiel. 47, 12, more, in their age, Psalm. 92.14.

Let Jesuits quaeree whether faith may be increased in peccatore: For my part,
I am half of the opinion, that no Castaway h^th other faith then Devils,
merely acquisite. Infusions I would feign have peculiar to Gods chosen:
Growth, more then to Dwarses: I allow to no Reprobate in any Grace, that but
looks toward Salvation: except perhaps such as of those Ephemeri Pliny
speaks of, whose birth and (...), and Gray-head saw never more then one
Sunset. But, in faith and charity to grow toward excessive, past question, is
the prerogative of Gods chosen. Yea, even they have their pawses, their
declinations; yet such as occasion their greater growth in Grace.

Paul notes in Hebrews, yet would God it were not our state, to Heb, 5.12.
stick still in Principles: more to be trembled at, that we have, many, left
our first love, Apoc. 2.4.

We may not be peremptory to condemn all of insinceritie, whom these things
befall: Howbeit, their state is discomfortable, and such as may breed their
just jealousy.

As many as desire to make calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 3.18.
Let them grow in grace, and in the acknowledging of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. 1. God for this end has propounded us different measures of glorious
rewards, to be proportioned to our measures of grace. 2. Expects measures of
obedience, answerable to our means. 3. And who knows, what sight of
afflictions he reserues us for?

Faith ouer-increaseth, Love ouerfloweth: (...): the measure of their increase;
over, and abounding. Yet beware you think not they ouergrew their duty:
Virtutis non est nimium, nec bonitatis extremum. As God has ordered the state
of his children in this life, no man shall ever reach to Phil. 3.12.
height of perfection. In these graces of faith and charity, noue shall ever
be able to supererogate, Papists themselves confessing. I wonder, why rather in
Chastity and Humility?

But thus understand the Apostle, willing in this (...), to express something
more then ordinary in their growth. Else, which I rather think, to intimate
they had ouergrowne many their coaetaneos in Grace, and were, in comparison,
ouerflowing. Compare 1 These. 1.7, 8.

They Psalm 92.13.
grow all who are planted in Gods house, yet is not the growth of all equal.
The whole body increases, but after the measure of every part. Ephesians. 4.18. The
little finger grows not to the quantity of an arm, yet has its
proportional increase.

Reasons are 1. more or less frequent and holy use of means, Psalm. 92.13, 14.
item 84.4, 7.

2 Disposition or fitness to receive gracious impressions more or less,
suppose humility, use of gifts, obedience, thankfulness.

3 Chiefly the will of him that distributes, 1 Cor. 12, 11. Ephesians. 4.7. and gives
the increase.

Non-proficiencie on them, whose proceedings are not answerable to your own.
Saint Paul durst not sentence Hebrews to be hypocrites, though they stuck
still in Principles, Notwithstanding their long pawsing, he is persuaded of
them Heb. 6.9.
such things as accompany salvation. I like neither women nor men, who are 2 Timothy 13.7.
ever learning, and never come to knowledge of necessary truth: 1 Pet. 2 2.
Growth ever accompanies gracious endeauours; yet cannot but think charitably
of meanest proficients. Thus think; if thy growth be more, yet is not his
none. Pride not thy self, but be more thankful; and this know, where God Luke
12 48.
commits more, he expects the more.

Your faith ouerincreaseth, and your charity ouerfloweth. These sister graces,
these sideles Comites and inseparabiles sorores, as Bernard calls them, grow,
flourish, and fade together. As Hippocrates his twins, they laugh and weep,
they grow and decay, live and die together.

Mutually, though differently, they are nourishable each to other: faith to
charity, has the respect of a cause; the apprehension and 1 John 4.19.
assurance we have of Gods love to us, 2 Cor. 5.14.
forces, after a sort, to love of God and his children. Charity to faith, as
an evidence.

Would I persuade my self to love of Brethren? thus I discourse; When I was an
Romans 5.10.
enemy, I was reconciled to God by the death of his Son. 1 John 4.11.
If God so loved me, ought not I to love his Children?

Would I strengthen my faith, and persuasion of Gods love to my soul? Thus I
proceed. 1 John 3.14.
They that love the brethren, are translated from death to life. My heart tells
me, I love the Brethren. Thence I infer the conclusion for faith to claspe
closer unto: Therefore I am translated from death to life.

Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, Gal.
5 6.
but faith which works by love. None ever loved Gods child qua talis, into
whose heart the sense of Gods love was not first shed, at least instilled by
the holy Ghost given unto him: feel thou thy love to any of Gods children
languish? know its discomfortable, I mean if Gods Image shining in him allure
not affection. Hellishly evil, if that be the reason of thy hatred or less
loving: yet would thou frame or half force thy heart to his love? Thy faith,
if any, will suggest, how God, the father of that sinner or enemy, when thou
wast an enemy, reconciled thee to himself: how daily Lam. 3.23.
his mercies are renewed, notwithstanding his Psalm. 7.11.
daily prouocations by thy sins. It Is faithlesnesse only that makes
uncharitable.

Does faith faint or waver? Charity puts new life, adds vigor unto it. Tell
me thou who doubtest of Gods love to thy soul, how feel thou thy heart
affected toward them that are Gods? find thou thy self enamoured on the
beauty of Gods Image, shining in his children? does that draw thy affection?
my soul for thine, thou art beloved of God. Its the weakness of thine
understanding, to believe the praemises, and doubt of the conclusion. The great
God of heaven and earth, 1 John 4.12.
No man has seen at any time: his Image he represents to us in his children,
willing thereby to eleuate our affection to himself: assuring us, that he
accepts and esteems that love of his portraiture, as love of himself. O we of
little faith; why doubt we of love to our God, while we love those that are
Gods? or question Gods love to us, whose hearts he has framed to love of his
children?

I doubt not, what ever Papists say, but where faith is, there is charity: nor
Papists themselves, but where charity truly so called is, there is faith. Its
hard to say whether our lack of faith be imputable to lack of charity; or
our want of love, to defect of faith: yet to th'exercise of faith, and Iac 2 18.
euidencing of it, charity is much available. Thus thou may increase it. 1.
1 Pet. 2.17.
Love brotherly fellowship. Ignoti nulla Cupido: nor is any such loadstone of
affection, as society of Gods children. 2. As 1 Pet 4.10.
every man has received the gift, so let him distribute: he shall so
evidence, gain love of Brethren. 3. Eccl. 7.21.
Give not thy heart to every word that men speak: and Mat. 7.3.
why see thou the moats of thy Brother? Love 1 Pet. 4.8.
couers a multitude of sins: Less amiable seems Gods Image, by curious
noticing their naeues and blemishes.

Before we pass to the issue and effect of their growth; th'amplification of
their abundant charity calls for our notice. In it are two things: 1.
Universality. 2. Reciprocation. The charity of every one of you all toward
each other.

An universality so drawn out into singulars, I find not in any other the
Churches to which Paul wrote. Styles they have a^l of Churches, of men
Sanctified, of Believers, of Brethren, etc. Yet so, as by sequels of errors
and faults reproved, we may easily collect the denomination given a potiori
part: And are forced to fly to universal Accommodum, or other distinctions
of realtie and profession, with the like, in explication. Here only is
charity, the life of faith, character of Christianity, ascribed to all and
every. Not one amongst them all, but charity abounded in him.

May we think of this, or any other particular Church visible on earth, its
wholly free from hypocrites? Certainly where faith and charity concur, there
be sincerity. And if these sister Graces were thus abundant in all and every
of the Church at Thessalonica, doubtless there was not an hypocrite amongst
them.

To the question thus. 1. Non implicat: though in Agro, that is, in Mundo,
there is Tares and good Seed; though in Area, that is, in Ecclesia visibili,
there be Chafe and Wheat; yet a select parcel there may be, as a little
Horreum of the Lord, wherein is none but wheat. An Israel God may have on
earth, consisting of none but Nathaniels, John 1.48.
Israelites in deed, in whom is no guile. Non implicat. But who can exemplify?

2. But what if we say Paul's charity guided it self, only by th'imperate,
and exterior acts of faith and charity? Suppose Confession, and Beneficence.
Certainly the gifts he knew not, but by the fruits. And might not these be
performed by Hypocrites? I know no outward Act of faith, or charity but an
Hypocrite may perform; and justly gain from men Reputation of being
fait^full. Prayer and Confession Acts of Faith, cannot Hypocrites perform? My
meaning is; May not an Hypocrite form a Prayer? volubly, yea passionately
pronounce it? so as that to men, though of Paul's spirit, he may seem to have
his infirmity Romans 8.26.
helped by the Spirit of God. May not an Hypocrite endure some fight of
affliction for the faith? why may not ambition of being reputed faithful to
God, persuade in the Church to suffer, as much as vain glory did amongst
Heathens, in love of their Country? And what proud Pharisee cannot give an
Alms? What wise Pharisee cannot conceal his pride? or make choice of honest,
rather then profane, to be his Beadesmen? How wise is hypocrisy grown in our
times? how cautionate to avoid the noticed notes of insinceritie? For my part,
I know not any outward Act or office of piety or charity, but Esau might have
performed, as much as Jacob; Cain, as Abel; Simon Magus, as Simon Peter.

I like Paul's charity, and will endeavor to imitate it; to think he has
faith, whom I see zealous for the word of faith; desirous to drink in, if but
by the ear, the 1 Pet. 2.2.
sincere milk of the word: To judge him merciful, who does works of mercy,
feeds th'hungrie, clothes the naked, etc. ordinately, Christianly charitable,
who prefers in his choice, to do good to the Gal. 6.10.
household of faith. All these shall be to me Israelites indeed, till God
discover their hypocrisy. Howbeit God sees not as man sees; The Lord
pondereth the hearts.

Gal 6.4.
prove thine own work, out of what ground, in what manner, to what end thou
performest it: So shall thou have rejoicing in thy self, and not in another:
Romans 2.29.
praise, not of men, but of God: Opus operatum confers not grace in the
Sacrament, nor euidenceth to thy soul grace to be in it. There is more in
modo, then in opere: God loves Aduerbs, better then Adjectives.

Yet be contented to err in Charity: question no man's faith, that is a
Confessor; nor anies charity, that is an Almoner: thou may lawfully err in
charitable ouerweening, can not but sin, in causeless misdeeming.

Each to other. So ought Christian charity to be rociprocall; interchangeably
to pass from each to other. He that has friends, Pro. 18.24.
2 Cor. 6.13.
must show himself friendly. Saint Paul calls for an (...).

from men, as if he were made to receive all courtesies, bound to return to
none; there should be recursus Gratiarum. Its Lion-like, rather then loue-like,
to have

Omnia te aduorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. Know. 1. Its some comfort to be
beloved of Gods Children, but more a thousand fold 1 John 3.14.
to love them. 2. It is Act. 20 35.
more blessed to give, then to receive. 3. the same Image of God thou may see
in other Saints, which shines in thy self. 4. The member is mean, none so
mean, of which thou may say, 1 Cor. 12.21.
I have no need of thee.

VERSE. 4. So that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God for your
patience and faith, in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure.


The Issue or effect of their gracious growth; that is, Paul's glorying or
boasting of them: where is The Act, we glory. 2. Persons agent with an Emphasis
here applied to the Act; we our selves. 3. Patient or receiving, in prudence
chosen to be Auditors; the Churches of God. 4. The Matter of boasting, their
patience and faith in all their tribulations.

Of the first, We glory. The term sometime signifies exulting joy; sometimes
publishing praise with a kind of vaunting, whether of our selves, or others;
if of others, yet not without some reflection upon our selves: so Paul glories
in this people, holily prides himself in them, as being his workmanship in
Christ Jesus.

Its a little Paradox, to say, there is a good pride; But me thinks, I could
give a Minister leave to vaunt, to half pride himself in the gracious
endowments of his people, conferred by his Ministry.

1. It seals to him his sending, 1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. 2. shall be
augmentation of his glory, Dan. 12.3. All this is little. They are his 1 Cor.
9.1.
workmanship in Christ Jesus, so far as they are gracious. Angels honor is
great, in that God chooses them to be instruments of good to his Church, Heb.
1. vlt. Ministers is more, in that they are selected as means to save the
souls of Gods people: Gabriel, Michael the Archangel have not such honor, to
save themselves, and those that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16. to be (...), 1 Cor.
3.9.
Gods coworkers to the salvation of his people. Saviors of the Saints, What
men, what creatures were ever styled, but Ministers of the Gospel? Obad. ver.
21.

Paul's holy ambition, Romans 15.10. here of his holy boasting. Be ambitious of
winning souls: I bless that ambition. Proud, if you can, of your peoples
gracious endowments and demeanor; glory in the Lord, of the souls you have
saved, God shall make you yet more glorious.

Of the second, We our selves. Its something, at least a not-nothing to
promerit the commendation of men eminent in Grace: most of Ministers renowned
in the Church.

1. Their Judgment is most solid: they, if any, have the Spirit of discerning,
1 Cor. 12.9.

2. Are of all men farthest from flattery, 2 Cor. 5.12.
knowing no man according to the flesh, nor daring to give titles, Job 32.22.

The maine of a Christians aim in this kind is to procure the testimony and
approbation of God, and his own conscience: next to it, to promerit the
commendation of Saints, specially of Saint Ministers.

Pro. 22.1.
above gold or Pearl. 2. The charge is to provide things honest before God and
Romans 12.17.
men: rather before good men, rathest amongst Ministers. 3. Its comfortable to
Psalm. 15.4.
honor Saints. Not to be despised, that we are 2 Cor. 8.18.
honored of Saints, especially of Ministers, whose labors God has blessed to
behoose of his people.

Of the third. In the Churches of God. Of that choice of the Apostle these
Reasons may be given. 1. They 1 Cor. 2.14.
only see the beauty of Grace. To a carnal understanding, how seems the
simplicity of faith? foolishness: to believe upon bare testimony, without
demonstration, or probable argument? Meekness: such as our Savior
prescribes, to Mat 5.39.
turn the other cheek, more then sheepishnesse, to Romans 12.20.21.
do good for evil; to find the enemy at advantage, 1 Samuel 24.20.
and let him go free, how cross is it to carnal policy?

2. Amongst such only, may we expect good issues of such commendation; to be
led on by commended examples to imitation. I like Paul's zeal for his Nation,
desirous to work in them Romans 11.14.
emulation of Gentiles. But think his hope of prevailing small, till toward
the end of the world, till the fullness of Gentiles be come in: more praise his
prudence in this choice, that he chooses to commend them to the Churches of
God.



I like apology for the faith; justification of Christian courses, to any that
shall ask us a Reason of our hope; allow offering of better information to
them that are willing to understand; of reproof and correction, where is hope
to reform. Yet bewail the issues of imprudence in this kind. 1. Exposing
truth, and Spirit of God to scoff, and 1 Pet. 4.14.
blaspemie of Aliens. 2. Weaklings to wavering, thorough strength of cauils and
disabilitie in such tatling Religions, to 1 Pet. 2.15.
silence the ignorance of foolish men, whose tongues they have set on wheels,
to cavil and rail at our Christian faith and holy practice.

Of the fourth. The matter of boasting: your patience and faith; amplified by
the maine opposites of both; multiplicitie of tribulations and persecutions
which they endured.

Patience, understand contented endurance of painful evils. Faith, either
general belief of the promises: or persuasion of Gods love, or confidence in
his mercy.

Tribulations and persecutions some thus distinguish. Persecutions they
conceive, Troubles, which the body of the Church endured. Tribulations, the
personal grieuances of particulars amongst them.

Thus rather I conceive: Persecutions, to be I^^. ^.10.
troubles or afflictions for righteousness sake. Tribulations, any crosses
whatsoever, whether mediately or immediately inflicted of God; as
chastisements, trials, preuentions, etc. Absolons insurrection, Shimei his
railing, were David's tribulations, not his persecutions: that, issuing out of
Absolons ambition of the Kingdom; this, from Shimei his zeal for the house of
Saul: other differences you may conceive in meditation, guided by the Apostle,
Romans 8.35.

The virtues commended, are their Patience, and Faith; two of the most
comfortable supporters under the Cross: and no where more commendably
exercised, then in multiplicitie of afflictions. Job 1.22.
In all this did not Job sin with his mouth, nor charge God foolishly: the
encomium of his patience. Though he kill me, Job 13.15.
yet I will trust in him: the practice of his faith. Psalm 39.2.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it: The
profession of patience. I will yet trust to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living: the practice of unconquerable faith.

Its commendable and comfortable, when Grace bears up it self against
opposition, that argues it substantial and vigorous. Do thou, yet continue
in thine uprightness? the speech in the vtterers intention seemingly of
exprobration: the thing to me seems matter of admiration.

1. I ^^^rue, Afflictions are the matter, the causa sine qua non of (...);
wherefore they are said to Romans 5.3.
work. Yet considering (...) easefull nature, tend they not to exasperate
against prou^ weighing intention of instruments inflicting, are they ^^^bent
Job 1.11.
to overthrow it? especially when, as billows in the Sea, they come one in the
neck of another; what patience, except supernatural, can bear up under them?

2. Belief of promises, how is it shaken by them? Sundry precious promises God
has given us of comfort, joy, and peace in believing. 1 Timothy 4.10.
Godliness has promise of this life and of that to come. Yet often, our portion
of (...) ^^^ties is of the scantest: peace, we rather desire, (...) God
himself writes bitter things against us. I (...) to see David's faith falter:
wonder rather, considering his tentation, that faith at last recouers it self,
and holds fast the Conclusion; yet God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73.1.

Persuasion of Gods love, how hardly retained? when (...) feel him, as David:
1. vexing us with all his stor^^^ 2. giving little or no (...)
sensible comfort to support. 3. no^ till ^eb. 12.11.
after, fruit of our crosses. I can easily believe, our Savior had the Spirit
of Faith not by measure, who being in his sense forsaken of God, yet by faith
held the conclusion, God was M^^. 27.46.
his God, gracious and loving unto him.

Confidence in his mercy, who almost retains in multiplicitie of continued
pressures? mirror of faith, more then of patience Job seems to me, when, in
his deepest misery, he protests to hold fast his confidence: Though he kill
me, yet I will trust in him: that not without cause Paul glories in this people
so patient, so faithful in all their tribulations, and persecutions.

his hand, but his little singer upon us. And in our practice, 2 Cor. 5.7.
contrary to that of the Apostle, we walk by sight, not by faith; scarce ever
trusting the Lord without his pawn; believing no more of his promise or love,
then our fleshly sense apprehends.

Acts 14.22.
commo^^ (...) Gods children, nor of the Romans 8.17.
condition of our (...) And though there may be disparitie in the measur^, as
God is pleased to respect our infirmity; yet is that of the Apostle
universally true. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecutions. I say as
Paul, Heb. 10.35,
ye have need of patience: and 36.
cast not away your confidence: they are principals in the Christian proof
Armor, means of patience. 1. Meditation of our Mic. 7.9.
merit. 2. of 2 Samuel 16.11.
Gods hand in affliction. 3. of the fruit of afflictions. 1. they 2 Samuel 16.12.
make way for blessings. 2. bring Heb. 12 11.
fruit of righteousness. 3. 2 Cor. 4.17.
work our glory.

Helps to faith under the Cross. 1. Persuasion of Gods love. 1. God
protests his Apoc 3.19.
love to them he rebukes. 2. usually proportions 2 Cor. 1.5.
comforts to our tribulations. 3. if we wait, we shall see the fruit. 1.
Affections weaned from the world. 2. Grace languishing Hos. 5.15.
excited. 3. Sin 2 Cor. 12.7.
prevented or mortified.

2. Belief of his promises. 1. Rightly understand how the blessings are
conveyed in the Covenant. Temporals. 1. with limitation to expediencie. 2.
disiunctiuely, either the particulars, or the Mar. 10.30.
equivalent. 3. with exception of the cross, and reservation of power to the
promiser, to Psalm. 89.31, 32.
chasten our misdemeanour. Spirituals. 1. quoad essentiam, non quoad Gradum
eminentiorem. 2. with power reserved to withdraw the exercise; 2 Chro. 32.31.
leave to our selves: abate the fervor, etc. Nothing makes faith more
doubtful or wavering, then misunderstanding of the promises.

2. Consider, how God often brings his purposes to pass, by means most
unlikely, in the eye of flesh: sometimes most opposite to their accomplishment.
3. Meditate ends of permitting to extremities. 1 1 Pet. 4.12.
to try. 2 to manifest Grace of his children. 3 to magnify his 2 Cor. 12.9.
power in their support or rescue.

Confidence in his mercy. 1. Thou have his promise, his oath; Heb. 6.18.
two immutable things wherein its impossible that God should lie. 2. Who ever
perished being innocent, and where has the righteous bin forsaken? Experiments
God has given us in others; experience of his mercy in our selves. Psalm. 77.5.
Remember the days of old. 3. God would by this means loose our hold-fasts on
flesh, and teach us to 2 Cor. 1.9.
rely wholly upon himself. And of Paul's proeme hitherto: the Consolation
follows.

VERSE. 5. Which is a manifest token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye
may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.


TWO grounds of their Comfort are here couched. 1. From what their afflictions
or patience signify or manifest. 2. From the end to which they are subordinate.

1. They are an evidence, or manifestation of Gods just Judgment. (...) some
take appositiue in Recto Casu, referring it to the persons of Thessalonians
afflicted: you suffer, and in suffering are a document, or manifestation of
Gods just Judgment.

Gods just judgment these apprehend the severity of his wrath kept in store
for the wicked. And if any ask, how they in suffering, or their sufferings
manifest Gods severity in punishing the wicked, thus they specify and
express themselves: Reasoning a minori ad maius. If God so severely chasten
the mortified relics of sin in his children; how much sorer vengeance has
he in store, for the children of disobedience? men that give themselves over to
work wickedness with greediness.

Probably they interpret; Inferences of like kind being frequent in Scripture.
If 1 Pet. 4.17.
Judgment begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel
of God. Luke 23.31.
If they have done this to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry?
confer Pro. 11.31. ler. 25.29.

And certainly its true, the sharpness of God toward his children in their
leuiora delicta, argues his extremer severity against the wicked, in their
wilful enormities; able to interpose nothing twixt them and his wrath; nor
blood of Christ, which they have Heb. 10.29.
trampled under their feet; nor spirit of Grace, whom they have despighted: nor
excuse from want of Means, or time of Repentance: nor claim of promise, which
they never had Grace to apprehend; nor have by obedience kept their
restipulation.

That were they not all more then phreneticke, horn mad, never would wicked
men insult over calamities of Gods children; they being the looking-glass,
wherein they may see resplendent their own blacker fate

But against this exposition are these Reasons. 1. Its not said, their persons
or sufferings evidence the rigor or severity, but the justice of Gods
judgment. 2. Nor in truth are the afflictions of Gods children, in property
of speech, paenae vindictae or satisfactoriae; But fatherly tutorings, trials,
preuentions, reducements, etc. 3. Afflictions spoken of, are specially
persecutions, which no man thinks punishments for sin, but troubles for
righteousness. 4. In explication of proceedings in this just judgment of God,
reference there is as well to the glorious recompense of the just, as to the
vengeance of the wicked. Thus I conceive:

(...) well supplied by Master Beza and our translators by Asher; which is: that
is, which afflictions or tolerance of evils, is a manifest token of the just
judgment of God. And look to what follows, you will easily apprehendment,
the general judgment to come: here called (...), the just judgment of God,
as elsewhere in one term, (...): where also is subioyned expression of
particular proceedings, referenced as well to good as bad. Confer locum. Romans
2.5, 6. etc.

That just Judgment I here understand, the Act of Gods distributive Instice,
dispensing recompense according to the quality of every man's person and
demeanor.

Quest. Why called Gods just Judgment? Is there not Justice in the present
Government of the world? in the prosperity of the wicked, afflicted estate of
the righteous?

Resp. God forbid. But what if we apprehend the Epithet given to the last
Judgment, 1. with an (...)? 2. or in regard of the almost no mixture of mercy
with Justice then to be exercised? Certainly in the present dispensations of
Providence, Justice is so exercised, that yet Mercy seems to be predominant.
3. Or because then shall be the fullest declaration of Gods Justice, which
seems in state of this life to be obscured in the present prosperity of the
wicked, and pressures of the righteous. Gods Judgments, said Austine, are
aliquando aperta, aliquando occulta, but semper iusta. The Justice of secretest
dispensations shall then appear to men and Angels. And in this respect
perhaps, is the Judgment of the Great day, called the Just Judgment;
according to the Rule; Things are said to be, when they appear, or begin to
appear such as they are.

The greater difficulty is, how th'Afflictions or tolerance of Saints
manifests the just Judgment to come: how follows th'Argument? Gods children
are now afflicted: therefore there is a just Judgment to come.

Thus usually its resolved. 1. Else were they 1 Cor. 15.19.
of all men most miserable. 2. Else God Heb. 6.10
unmindful of promise to crown their patience. 3. Else unjust, if he not
only defer, but take away the recompense of his Servants; stablished, I say
not upon condign, nor so much as congruent Merits of Saints, but on positive
ordinance of God and merit of his Son: vt verbo dicam. Psalm. 58.11.
Verily there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtless a God that judges the
earth. His Promise, Nature, Office of a Judge oblige him to render it: In this
life its not rendered; therefore there is a just Judgment to come.

Apply we the whole to the Apostles purpose, the Result is this. A mean to
patient and solace our hearts in that seeming ataxie and confusion, that there
be righteous to whom it comes after the work of the wicked, and Contra, is to
cast up our eyes to consider the Justice of the Judgment to come. Then shall
men Mal. 3.18.
return and discern between the righteous and the wicked: as Solomon seeing
like disorder: I said in my heart God shall judge the righteous and the wicked:
for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work. Eccl. 3.16, 17.

Truth is, its one end why the Lord thus orders the state of this world;
thereby to nourish in us persuasion of a Judgment, hope and desire of a life
to come. Lord how lie we sucking at the earth, longer then God is pleased to
remember us with his Rods? And say of Earth, as Peter of his little heaven,
bonum est esse hic: yea more then Peter, faciamus Tabernacula; here let us
pitch our mansion. Not only Ieshurun, when he was full, wantonly kicked with
his heel: but Iedidiah grows lascivious, through abundance of peace.

In all things I admire the wisdom of Providence. In nothing more, then in
Gods so ordering the state of his earth-worme Children, that in nothing they
find perfect tranquillity on earth: I think that they may say as he, Here is
not our Rest. Besides the many evils they are here subject unto; who can show
me the good of which he may say, Its meum? Knowledge mixed with Ignorance; far
off I am sure, from the beatificall vision: faith with doubtings, peace with
trouble, and no less then trouble of Conscience. Wherefore all this? but to
nourish in us persuasion, to evidence there is a future Judgment; a life after
this, wherein we expect the blessedness which stands in fruition of God; the
Crown of Righteousness, which God has promised to all them that love his
appearing.

Jeremy holds the Conclusion; Ier. 12.1.
God is righteous: yet presumes to expostulate. David confesses he waded so
far in the Question, that his Psalm. 73.2.
footsteps had welnigh slipped. Solomon should have had more wit, yet sticks not
to call it Eccles. 8.14.
vanity. We in our fury grow half toward Atheists, and stick not to say,
its Mal. 3.14.
vain to serve God: so live generally, wallowing in evil, scarsely
besprinkling our selves with goodness, as if we thought, there is neither God
nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, Judgment nor Life to come after this.

Gods wisdom in this dispensation of outward things holds me with wonder: his
condescensus, humbling himself to our Infirmity so far, as herein to give
us satisfaction, no less then rauisheth me. Of his tolerance of evil men with
such patience, and loading them with his benefits, these Reasons that Majesty
is pleased to give us.

1 He would Romans 2.4.
lead them to Repentance. 2 Else deprive them of excuse. 3 Or make way to their
heavier damnation. 4 Their Genesis 15.16.
sins are not full. 5 He has use of them, as of his Isai 10.5.12.
Rods, to chasten the disobedience of his children. 6 As Chrysostom, to hammer
out the Crown for his Saints. 7 Would by example teach us, to 2 Timothy 2.24.
bear the evil men patiently. 8 For pregnancie with a good child, respits the
execution of the forlorn Parent; Achaz for Hozekiah.

Besides, sends us to consider his secret and invisible, but fearefullest of
all Judgments; those Spiritual. 1. Blindness of mind. 2 Hardness of heart.
3 Horrors of Conscience: Those Crosses carry all Malefactors to their place of
execution: see that divine Tractate of Plutarch do sera Numinis vindicta, in
Moralibus.

And for the Afflictions of his Children; showing: us. 1 Their Heb. 12.11.
fruit. 2 Giving 1 Cor. 10.
issue vertually with the Temptation. 3 2 Cor. 12.9.
perfecting power in weakness. 4 Fitting them to his Kingdom. 5 Adorning with
heavenly virtues; Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessing with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, which seems the Mar.
10.30.
hundredfold recompense promised to our losses in this life. 6 Stopping
mouths of Reprobate men and Devils, from all quarrel at their glorious
advancement, who have suffered so many things for the name sake of their
Redeemer.

All this notwithstanding, turbulent Nature, till tutored in the Sanctuary,
storms at this Providence. If ever such thoughts arise in us, meditate we the
just Judgment to come: as Solomon, Though a sinner do evil an hundred times,
and his days be prolonged, yet surely, I know it shall be well with them that
fear God, which fear before him, Eccles. 8.12. Upon that hypothesis, truly
said Paul; Afflictions of Gods Children are a manifest token of a just
Judgment to come.

2 If this give us not solace sufficient, consider the second ground of
Comfort: the end to which they are subordinate: that ye may be counted worthy
of the Kingdom for which ye suffer.

The Romish Church is mad upon merit, (...), in their Greek, sounds, to be
made worthy by way of merit. Yet cannot the proudest Linguist in Rome, not he
who boasts he knows more tongues then ever babled at Babel give one instance,
from any Classical Author Divine or Profane, where (...) signifies other then
dignari. In our English to vouchsafe, to account, esteem, or accept as worthy.
Will they, trow ye, here prattle, as in the question of Justification? God
counts none worthy, but those which are worthy, because his Judgment cannot be
deceived? Resp. 1 That is naught to the native signification of the word. 2 and
then farewell all their doctrine of satisfactorie Alms or penance; wherein
none of them dares auow, the satisfaction to be equivalent to the violation of
Gods Majesty: but are all forced to fly to Acceptance. God, forsooth,
accepts it as full satisfaction. As to the point in hand, their own Caietane
renders as we; counted, not made worthy, led by that of the Apostle, Non sunt
condignae passiones huius vitae, etc. And me thinks, when we consider the many
obligations we stand bound in to our maker and Redeemer, we should acknowledge
as Saint John, 1 John 3.16.
Martyrdom it self nothing beyond our debt. 2 Especially, since our fortitude
is Phil. 1.29.
his gift. 3 The Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17.
sufferings so far inferior to the glory. 4 And our defects of faith and
patience so great, as Laurence himself may not dare present to be judged
without mercy.

Let it then be accounted or esteemed worthy; or if making must needs enter the
Gloss, let it be meet and fit only, not worthy by way of merit; at most, but
comparatively, as Noah and Job are, in Austins apprehension, said to be
righteous in their generation; that is, not absolutely, but in comparison to
the wicked in their time. But,

Me thinks it should suffice us to our comfort under the Cross, to know that
God of his Grace is pleased to esteem our momentanie and light afflictions
worthy of that eternal and hyperbolicall weight of Glory. They shall walk
with me in white, for they are Apoc. 3.4.
worthy; trow you by way of merit? Rather say, and thank thy Christ, by
Acceptance. A covenant there is twixt God the father and his Christ, that they
who 2 Timothy 2.12.
suffer with him shall also reign with him: And is propounded to us in Romans
8.17.
form of a Condition. Add, if you will (that Covenant presupposed) that our
sufferings qualify us to the Kingdom, and make us Col. 1.12.
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

Lindan is impudent, when he quarrels at pactum in the question of merit: the
Cardinal following Schoolmen is wiser, confessing no works, without
consideration of pactum, to have exactam meritirationem.

But beside the real meetnesse and fitness our sufferings work in us, while
they purge us from corruption, that we may be fitted to enter, where no
unclean thing shall: God is willing to stop the mouths of wicked men and
devils, propense to quarrel at the distribution of rewards: they shall all be
forced to confess, Gods children are worthy, comparatively to themselves, to
enjoy the Kingdom for which they suffered, many, to the shedding of blood;
all, infamy and reproach, from the mouths of the ungodly.

1 Cor. 4.13.
scumme and of-scouring of the world. When God calls us the Iac. 1.18.
first fruits, and crop of his creatures. What if they cry of us, as of Paul?
there is no Reason, we are not worthy to live: when God for these sufferings
counts us worthy of the kingdom which he has promised. What if 2 Cor. 4.16.
our outer man perish? when our Inner is by Afflictions renewed daily. Has God
this account of me for my light sufferings? and do they fit and prepare me to
his kingdom? I say as Austin, hic ure, hic seca, vt in aeternum parcas; much
more, vt in aeternum corones.

Of the Kingdom of God for which ye even suffer. This kingdom of God, some
conceive the kingdom of Grace: for the conseruing whereof in themselves, or
propagating it to others, they suffer.

Rather the Kingdom of Glory; that eternal beatitude, which stands in the
clear vision and fruition of the Godhead; because its made consequent to the
last Judgment.

The (...) prefixed to (...) I apprehend added (...): ye even suffer. Not
only believe, and in hope to atchieue, as the twelve Tribes, Acts 26.7.
serve God instantly, but even suffer.

Its something to believe, more to labor, yet more to suffer for the Kingdom
of God. To you its given not only to believe, but also, but even Phil. 1.29.
to suffer for the Name sake of Christ. Apostles thought the Lord highly
honored them above the ordinary, when he Acts 5.41.
counted them worthy to suffer rebuke for his Name. I think Schoolmen say
true, there is Aureola Martyrum. superior to that of Virgins. A 2 Timothy 4.8.
crown of righteousness there is to all that love his appearing; but a
crownet upon that crown, belonging to them who suffer extremity for the hope
sake of the resurrection.

Do not all suffer? 2 Timothy 3.12.
Resp. t All, questionless, who will live godly in Christ Jesus; yet not all
in like measure. Not the Saw, as Esaias, nor the Gridiron, as Laurence, nor the
Axe, as John Baptist; nor the Sword, as Paul; nor the Gibbet, as Peter; nor the
Fire, as our home Martyrs. 1 God respects our Infirmity. 2 Has one discipline
for his Tirones, another for his Veterani, his beaten Soldiers. But consider,
the least Reproach augments our glory. Every tear is not noted only, and
kept in the bottle, but made as varnish, to add to our claritie and glorious
splendor. No drop of our blood, but wins us a river of glory: effusion of it,
the whole ocean of Beatitude.

Spain, are we so dejected? as to begin already to halt betwixt the two
opinions, or to resolve of Neutralitie, or Ambidextrie; or to bend our selves
to the prevailing side? suppose the worst. Scorn we the honor, which Apostles
prided themselves in, Martyrs ioyed in, Confessors were ambitions of, to suffer
for Gods Kingdom to the shedding of blood? 2 Have we not heard our Savior
threaten, and promise? Threaten, not to Luk 9.26.
own us for his, who shame him, and are ashamed of him; promise, to Mat 10.32.
acknowledge us his own, who blush not at his shame, nor flinch at his Cross.
3 Can we be ignorant that Martyrdom it self is in casu necessary to be
actually undergone; always absolutely needful to salvation Mat. 10.38, 39.
to be resolved on, to be acted quoad animi praeparationem? 4 Forget we the
consolation, of a 2 Cor. 4.17.
weight of eternal glory promised to be rendered to our light and momentanie
afflictions? 5 Have we seen the Heb 12.1, 2, 3.
Cloud of witnesses, our Savior himself enduring the Cross, despising the
shame, and so entering into his glory, and yet draw we back? 6 What if the
Lord select us out of his Army of Militants to be his Champions, to throw
down or take up the Gauntlet in the quarrel to his Kingdom? 1 Once we are
sure he has promised us 1 Cor 10 13.
support. 2 Gives us no armor for the Ephesians. 6.
back; but Heb. 10.26, 27, 38.
woes thunder, as Canons, upon the back parts of fugitives. 3 Yet honors with
conformity Mat. 5.12.
to Prophets, to his Son in suffering. 4 Far above the ordinary rate of
his Saints, when he calls us to resist unto blood, in striving against sin.

For the which: That (...) may not pass without our short notice. Denotes it
the incentiue of adversaries to persecute? Resp. Well might it, if the Kingdom
of Grace were here signified. Cain for nothing hates Abel more, then for that 1
John 4.12.
his own works were evil, and his Brothers good.

Rather the aim and intention of this people in suffering. And I doubt not,
but its lawful in serving God and suffering for him, to have eye to the
recompense of reward. So had Abraham, Moses, Macabees, our Savior himself,
Heb. 11.10.26.35. and 12.2.

Kingdom which he has promised. Are they presently mercenarie; who, to
encourage their cowardice, behold the Crown? 1 Why then has God propounded it
to our meditation? 2 Was not our Savior above a Servant? far above a
Mercenarie? yet hereby supported he the weakness of his humanity. I say as
Bernard; God should be loved sine intuitu mercedis: yet served he may be
sincerely with an under respect to the Reward, which is himself enjoyed. Thus
of the Grounds of Comfort.

VERSE. 6.7.8. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you;

And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels,

In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Follows the explication of the first member for greater amplification of
Gods childrens comfort; containing lively description of the just Judgment to
come. Considerable therein are. 1 The general Act of God: Recompense. 2 The
proportioning of it to the several persons and conditions of men. 3 The Rule
or Motive; Justice. 4 Time of Retribution, When the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed.

The general, of certain Romans 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.10. Apoc. 22.14.
Retribution according to our works, I pass by, pointing only with the
finger to the places pregnant. The several Recompenses apportioned to each
sort, are worthy our notice. 1 To them that trouble you, Tribulation. Vengeance
God has in store; as for all Impenitents, so most certain and grievous for
the Troublers of his Saints. It was Cyprians observation; that man's cruelty
never raged against Gods Church, but it had subsequent, as an Acoluth, some
Remonstrance of extraordinary vengeance from God: in War, Famine,
Pestilence, or some such like evil Arrows of the Almighty. And who can name
me the persecutor, except penitent, who ever died a dry death! from the days
of Cain, to these of them who walk in his steps. At least, without some
remarkable note of Gods eternal vengeance, in hardness of heart, or desperate
horror, that make way to heauiest damnation. Their souls I doubt not many
fry in Hell; their bodies shall one day be cast again to their souls, to
augment their torment; that as there has been between them Societatas
operarum, so there may be also tormentorum.

Ishmael, whose hands indeed are now restrained from blood, yet hearts boil
with malice against Gods anointed ones: tongues shoot out arrows full of
deadly poison against the Saints. 1 You cannot be ignorant how the Lord has
protested the touch of them to be as the touch of the Zec. 2.8.
Apple of his own Eye, so tender. 2 How our Savior interesseth himself so
far in their persecutions, as to esteem them Acts 9.4.
his own. 3 How you proclaim your selves the Genesis 3.15.
feed of the Serpent. 4 Feel in your selves (if shame would suffer to
confess) emptiness of Grace, horrors and fears sometimes dreadful; yet are
these but the beginnings of sorrows. Oh consider, I beseech you, consider that
great day of Retribution wherein the Lord Christ, persecuted by you in his
members, shall come armed with heauiest vengeance, to be infled on such as
trouble his. As I think to Martyrs belongs the hight of joy and glory: so to
Martyrers of Saints, the depth of hillish torments: For them is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

Tribulation to them that trouble. The paranomasie, or paronymie, I think is
not casual, nor merely point of Rhetorique, but in^ended to point at the
Talio God holds in recompencing. There is in Gods Retributions of evil,
usual(...): Retale in the same kind. God calls, men hear not; They shall Pro.
1.24.28.^
call and cry, and God will not hear. Afflict not the fatherless and widow:
if so, Exo 22.22.24.
your children shall be fatherless, your wives widows, subjected to like
afflictions. Iac. 2.13.
Judgment there shall be merciless to him that will show no mercy: trouble
to the troublers of Saints. See Jude 1.6, 7.

shall Psalm. 109.17, 18, 19.
come to them as the girdle about their loins, so close: And, as oil, so
shall it pierce into their bones. You that are so rigorous, that no moat of
your Brother can escape your censure of insinceritie: Take heed you find not
men only, but Mat. 7 2.
God, as Critical in his Censures.

But why is this interlaced in the Comfort? Is it, may it be any solace to
Saints, to see their persecutors under vengeance?

Ans. Whither, in what sort, with what Cautions, Gods Children may take Comfort
in the destructi^n of the wicked, is an ancient quaeree. David, Psalm. 58.10.
The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. In heaven is heard an
Apo. 19.6, 7. and
Alleluiah at the downfall of Babylon. 18.20.
Holy Apostles and Prophets are excited to rejoice; because God had avenged
them on the Whore. Yet 1. in misery, as it is misery, no Saint rejoices.
But, 2. as thereout results glory of Justice, Power, Truth, to God the auenger
of their obstinacy. 3. As in their own exemption from like obstinacy and
damnation, they see the specialtie of Gods Grace to themselves. 4. As they
observe the Lord interessing himself in their quarrel, and so testifying how
precious the death of Saints is in his sight: herein they find cause of solace
and rejoicing.

2 And to you that are troubled, rest. The word is (...); here rendered usually
refrigerium, Refocillatio; that is, in our English, Refreshment: Answering to
that (...) of the Apostle, Acts 3.19. Interpreted to denote our Cessation and
quiet Resting from trouble.

There Heb. 4.9.
remains then a Rest to the people of God. They shall Isai 57.2.
rest in their beds. They Apoc. 14.13.
rest from their Labors. Of it you may conceive three degrees. 1 From the
hurt, in this life. 2 From the smart or sense, at death. 3 From the touch of
evil, after the Resurrection.

Iac. 5.8.
Patient your hearts, since the coming of our Lord, the day of full Redemption,
of perfect tranquillity draws nigh. There is amongst us a generation, it
seems, of Ishacar. Genesis 49.15.
Rest, they say, is good. It is good, if it be good; but here is not our Rest:
remember what Luc. 16.25.
Abraham said to the Glutton. And how terrible is that threat of our Savior
Apoc. 21.8.
to fearful and unbelievers? of no less then fire and brimstone for ever, to
them that for love of ease, or fear of trouble, have bid farewell to faith,
and fear of God.

With us. Apostles and Prophets, or if there be any more eminent then they, in
the glorious Kingdom of Christ, with them we have our partnership in that
Beatitude: our paritie in this piece of it, Resting from Troubles. They come
from East and West, and sit down with Mat. 8.11.
Abraham, Isaa^ and Jacob, those worthies of Patriarchs in the Kingdom of
heaven. Panam damni, they say in Hell All equally suffer; as much Paganish
Infants, as Christian Rebels or Reuolts: though paena sensus be proportioned to
degrees of sinning. And in heaven all equally have rest from labors, meanest
Christian, as most glorous Martyr: And in this respect the denarius diurnus is
equal. In beatificall vision, some have greater, some less claritie,
according to their diverse measures of sanctity and purity of heart.

counted the skumme and ofscouring of the earth: Though by some of Gods own,
through partiality, ouerlooked; and counted scarce worthy to be set with the
dogs of their flock: yet, 1. God has Iac. 2.5.
chosen us also. 2. And to be rich in faith. 3. And heirs with the mightiest
amongst them of the Kingdom which he has promised. In one part of the Reward
we have our paritie; in all, our partnership with the most eminent among
Saints.

The motive to recompense follows; (...) for (...). Seeing it is a just thing
with God. Q. Is it of Justice, that God rewards the patience of Saints, so as
it is, that he punishes the cruelty of their persecutors?

Ans. Confessedly its true: The recompense of the righteous is often ascribed to
Gods Heb. 6.10. 2 Timothy 4 8.
Justice. But 1. Justice sometime denotes Gods 1 John 1.9.
fidelity: promittendo se fecit debitorem. He should do wrong to himself, to
forget our work and labor of love, which by promise he has bound himself to
reward. Wrong also to us, whom with fair promise he has led on to endure such
hardship in his service. But God is faithful.

2 In respect of Christ's meriting, not so much to himself, as to us with such
a price, Remission of sins, esteem of righteousness, Crown of
righteousness, it is of Justice that our tolerance is rewarded: as Paul
intimates, very Romans 3.26.
pardon of sin to be of Justice in respect of Christ's satisfaction equivalent
to the violation of Gods Majesty; though in respect of us it be of mere Grace.

3 There is (...): rigorous Justice; let no man think his patience or
suffering can at that bar of common pleas challenge reward: vae etiam
laudabili vitae Hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. And there is
(...), moderate Justice; as in a Court of Chancerie, especially when a Church
man sits in it. Such as the Gospel propounds, and according whereto the whole
of Christianity is censured. According to rigorous Justice, the sinners self
should satisfy: According to moderate Justice, a Mediator interposeth, and
his satisfaction is accepted. According to rigorous Justice, nothing but
perfect is tolerated in our works: According to moderate Justice, the weak
endeauours of Gods Children are crowned. Hence say some moderate Papists;
Though there be Justice in Retribution to both kinds; yet not like Justice in
dispensing the Rewards: To evil works, is due eternal punishment out of the
nature of the works. To good works eternal life, only by positive ordinance
of God.

4 Quoad genus, Its of Justice that it should be well with the Righteous: Ill
with the wicked: hitherto there is agreement in generali ratione iusti. That it
should be so ill with the wicked, here is also exacta ratio iusti. But that it
should be so well with men imperfectly righteous, here is apparent mixture of
vnmerited mercy.

giving 1 Cor. 10.13.
issue with the temptation: granting Ez. 9.8.
reviving from our servitude: proportioning 2 Cor. 1.5.
comforts: exciting, manifesting, increasing grace by afflictions: filling us
with Romans 15.13.
joy and peace in believing: that we might taste how sweet the Lord is in this
life, and long to be satisfied with fullness of Joy at his right hand. If this
be too little, his very Justice lies at gage for our refreshment, and full
redemption: should not, shall not the Genesis 18.25.
Judge of all the world do right? Or shall not this make us say Amen to David's
Asseueration? Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; that is as verily
true, as its doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. So says Amen the
faithful and true witness.

1 Ioh. 3.12.
the brood of Caine. Who ledd either with hatred of good men or goodness, or
with fancy of unjust mercy in God, Iac. 5.5, 6.
nourish their hearts as in a day of slaughter, even when they condemn and
kill the Just. Who shall stand before the Lord in the day of his fierce wrath,
and revelation of his just Judgment? least they, who have abused the
bountifulnes, long-suffering and tolerance of God.

No man blames them to think Gods mercy great, for its infinite: rather, for
thinking his mercy not just. That Justice of the merciful God, they may
observe sometimes to break through the veil of mercy, and to wreake it self
upon the troublers of Saints. The just Lord sometimes awaketh as a Giant
refreshed with much wine; as a Lion tearing in pieces when there is none to
help: That by severity on some particulars, he might warn all to repent, and
mind them of the wrath kept in store for the impenitent: some are here
punished, says Saint Augustine, that we may know there is a Providence taking
notice of all; not all, that we may know there is a judgment to come.
Instances; take Sodom, the old world, Angels you will see it is true. 2 Pet.
2.4. ad 10
God knows to deliver his out of temptation; and to reserve the unjust to the
day of Judgment to be punished. Then shall Justice break forth in fury,
thorough the cloud of mercy so long ouershading it: so much the more furious,
by how much the m^re his mercy has binne contemned.

Master, said the Disciples, when shall these things be? When the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven.

till then, is the full Recompense of the righteous, and full vengeance of the
wicked, mercifully, yet justly deferred. Art thou come to torment us Mat. 8.29.
before the time? say Spirits of Air reserved to the Judgment of the great
day: Apoc. 6.10.
How long Lord holy and true? Souls under the Altar.

Not as if Dives now Luke. 16.25.
received no pain, nor Lazarus comfort, But for that neither has yet received
the whole; nor the whole of either, their full retribution. That made Bernard
say; Martyrs glorified in their souls have yet some reflection of love upon
themselves, for their bodies sake remaining under the dominion of death. That
makes me think, damned souls in hell tremble, and are more tormented at
thought of the Judgment to come; because, then their bodies, instruments of
their souls, weapons of sin to fight so stoutly for unrighteousness, shall
be reunited to augmentation of their torture.

Of respiting full recompense of the just, conceive these Reason. 1. That Heb.
11.40.
they without us might not be perfected; Nor we, without after-commers from
Gentiles and Jews, receive complement of our Beatitude. 2. Besides, though
after death we be all extrastatum merendi aut demerendi, for any personal
performances; yet a virtue operative of example, or counsel we leave behind
us; the savor of the good, as of Christ's ointment powered out, Cant. 1.2.
drawing many after us: And the stench of evil, as that of Jeroboam, reaching
to the infection of many a soul yet unborn. This is Gods course; the good is
done before its rewarded: the evil committed, before punished. 3. Corpus quod
corrumpitur aggrauat animam:(...) quasi(...), by means of corruption:
Ergastulum, Carcer Animae. How many deaths have passed in thorough those
windows, by which the soul looks out into the world? How hardly has that
mass of flesh bin haled on to good duties? Sleeping and turning upon the Bed,
as Salomons sluggard, with modo and modo, quae non habent modum. It Is just with
God, to say to it, in our Saviors language, Sleep on now, and take thy rest.
Ly brute, sensles, wormes-meat, till for the better part sake, thou be rowzed
by the last trumpe, out of the sleep of Death: proportionally conceive Reasons
of respiting the full vengeance of the wicked.

Apoc 22.17.
Come: Holy the according prayer of the Evangelist; 20.
Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. I cannot but approve the extaticall
desire of the Apostle, that he might Phil 123.
be dissolved: think it, most what, generally true of all Saints, that they 2 Timothy 48.
love Christ's appearing: would press the exhortation of Saint Peter, to 2 Pet.
3.12.
hasten to the coming of the Lord; yet would persuade all men, patiently to
wait for the appearing of that blessed hope. 1. Fullness of Gentiles is not
yet come in. 2. Restitution of Jews not yet accomplished. 3. Our selves are
reserved to do more good, that we may receive more reward. 4. Virtue of us
runs on in a continual line, till the heavens be rolled up as a scroll, and
that to augment our glory. I marvel not if Paul desired to be 2 Cor. 5.1.
clothed upon with his house from heaven, so rauishing is the taste of that
beatitude, yet doubt not but he daily receives increase of joy unspeakable and
glorious, from the endless good inspired from God through him into us, in the
heavenly doctrine of his writings and blessed example of his life, left us in
record. On which grounds, I exhort all to patient their hearts until the
coming of the Lord: so to long for, as yet they quietly wait for his blessed
appearing.

But Oh death, Oh Judgment, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man
living in his sins; They say commonly, Let all alone till that day. Not all:
take taste a little in horrors of your conscience in life: dreads no l^sse
then astonishing in death: torments insufferable at the separation: yet there
is a day of fuller Retribution coming, when you shall run to the Rocks to
hide you, to the Mountains to cover you from the presence of the Lamb, and
him that sits upon the Throne. These here are but (...). Think of him whose
but soul cried out, I Luc. 16.24.
am horribly tormented in this flame. What shall that torment be, when body and
soul come to be united for torture? Intermissions God gives you in this life:
Respit to bodies till the last day: But woe, woe, woe, unto you, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven. Tropically its put to denote Christ's
coming to Judgment: this revealing of the Lord Jesus being coniunct
therewith: Consider, 1. The Style of Christ's coming; his Revelation. 2. His
Attendants. Angels. 3. The manner of it, in flaming fire. 4. The end, to render
vengeance.

1. What is this revelation of the Lord Jesus? The same, it may be, which Paul
calls (...): his 2 Timothy 4.8.
appearing. Saint John, (...), his 1 Ioh. 3.2.
manifestation; and somebodie some-where, his glorious appearing.

1. Heaven it self, and the great Chasma betwixt it and us, cannot keep from
us his heavenly Mat 28.20.
virtue and influence: Yet must Act 3.21.
contain him till the time that all things shall be restored. That though we
feel his power daily in our protection and support; his gracious operations in
our fowls, in our Sanctification and Comfort: yet an Interstitium there is,
which keeps from us sight of his glorious person, perfect fruition of his
Godhead and Manhood. Then shall that veil be removed, and every man shall be
able to point the finger, and say, Ecce Agnus Dei, that Lion of the Tribe of
Judah: Apoc. 1.7.
Behold he comes with clouds, And every Eye shall see him, even they that
pierced him.

2. Or, what if we think, reference is to the days of his flesh? What time,
though he were Lord and Christ, yet appeared he not so to the eyes of flesh:
His Godhead sometimes peeping out thorough the viele in a miracle, yet mostlie
obscuring it self. 1. Partly, to embolden Satan to the encounter. 2. Partly,
by concealing himself from forlorn Jews, to make way to calling of Gentiles.
3. Partly, to show that his kingdom is not of this world. 4. And, which is not
the least, to magnify and make more glorious the faith of them, who in that
state of abasure discerned him, such as Thomas could not till after his
Resurrection, their Ioh. 20.28.
Lord and their God* Thus pleased our Savior to live in obscurity, while he
was upon earth: yet shall be revealed both Lord and Jesus, when he comes from
heaven in glory with his mighty Angels.

that the Ioh. 3.1.
world knows us not. So God will have it, that the world may be blinded. Yet
Comfort we our selves in this. We are predestined to be Romans 8.29.
conformable to the Image of Christ in affliction and glory, in veiling and
Revealing. We, as the Son and Heir of the great God, have our day when the
Romans 8.19.
Sons of God shall be revealed. When God shall bring our Innocence to light,
and our Righteousness as the Noonday. Yea, when we Col. 3.4.
shall also appear with him in glory. When all the world shall befoole
themselves for thinking our life madness; and Sap. 5.3, 4, 5.
admire how we are accounted, and advanced as the Sons of God.

2. His retinew are Angels; Mighty Angels. Whither as Assistant and approouing
Judges together with Saints, I refer you to Schoolmen for resolution.

Their use and employment then, is, not only to fill up the Glory and
Magnificence of the great Judge; but first, to gather the Mat. 24.31.
Elect from the four winds: secondly to separate the Tares from the wheat:
thirdly to be executioners of Gods wrath upon the wicked, and 13.41.42.
binding up those Tares in sheaues, and casting them into everlasting fire.

Mighty. Common place of the power of Angels, and their might, how far it
reaches in works of Nature, or above Nature, I mean not to enter: who lists,
may see what Schoolmen have to that point questioned and resolved. How mighty
they are, ye may for this purpose see in the discomfiture of Senacharib: when
one Angel in one night slaughtered so many thousands of the Affyrians.

The Reason why their might is here mentioned seems: 1. As to show how fitted
the Lord is to the end of his coming, which is to render vengeance; having at
command so many and mighty Angels; so, 2. To deiect the haughty and proud
conceit of Potentates on earth, here swaying and Psalm. 12.4.
swaggering, as those in the Psalm, as if none were able, or might dare to
give them affront. There shall they meet with a Judge, able with the breath of
his mouth to consume them. Aided, I say not, but attended with Arms, Hosts of
mighty Angels, swift and potent executioners of all his Behests.

Yet more to augment the terror of the Judge, the Modus of his coming is
subioyned: he comes in flaming fire: (...); by an Hebraisme in Igne flammante.

Whither this fire be the old Elementary, or a New created: whither the action
of it be natural or supernatural, with the like niceties of inquiry, consult
with Schoolmen. Generally its resolved to be material, not metaphorical
fire; and that Ignis conflagrationis spoken of by Peter, whereby the 2 Pet.
3.10.
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth with the works therein
shall be burnt up. To what other Use it then serves, who so asks, may thus be
informed. 1. To purge the creature from the dross it has contracted. 2. To be
instrument of vengeance upon the ungodly: the feculent and drossie parts
thereof, as they say, being reserved for torment to the wicked in hell, the
lake that burns with fire and Brimstone for ever.

Why in flaming fire? if any ask, I say he is curious: Yet 1. That is more
terrible to the eye. 2. More piercing through, subtilty of parts. 3. Nearer, in
that respect to the nature of fire in the own Sphere.

The end of his coming, to render vengeance: set out, 1. By the object or
persons to whom; those that know not God etc. 2. The kind or quality, or if
you will so term it, hotnesse of it, everlasting destruction.

To give vengeance: The word signifies wrathful retribution of evil: in
Scripture it often soundes fearful: Expressing those punishments, which God as
a wrathful Judge, in fierce Anger inflicts upon the wicked only:
proportional to those, which men in fury of malice and spite, without mercy,
lay on those who have iniuried them: whence is the distinction of paena
vindictae, and Castigationis amongst our Divines. That never read to fall upon
Gods Children: Corrected they are but Ier. 10.24.
in judgment, in Isa. 27.8.
measure, not in fury, least they should be consumed. Vengeance is kept in
store for the Children of disobedience. In this terrible manner comes the Lords
Jesus to the Judgment of the great day; so attended with his mighty Angels; so
Armed with flaming fire; so fitted and compleately furnished, to render
vengeance to the whole world of the ungodly.

Tremble and sin not: Break off your sins by Righteousness, and your
Iniquities, by mercy to the poor; Lo, let there be an healing of your error.
Why will you provoke the Lord to Anger? Are you stronger then he? Behold him
guarded with millions of mighty Angels. Oh stubbornness of stuble against the
fury of the great Judge; the God, that is in his wrath, Heb. 12.29.
a consuming fire.

Yet say, Lord say, for thy terrors have pierced me; who shall dwell with Isa.
33 14, 15, 16
devouring fire? continual burnings? He that walks righteously, etc.

Now blessed be God, who has provided us wherewith to approach the terror of
that day with comfort, to lift up our heads with joy in that day, so fearful
to the wicked: It is to Gods Children the day of their full Redemption, Luke
21.28.

1. Oh what dung Phil. 3.9.
and dross is Riches, all things to this, to be found in Christ having the
Righteousness of Faith.

2. Repentance from dead works, makes that day, a time of refreshing, Act.
3.19.

3. Faithfulness in our callings makes it a day of Blessing: Luke 12.43.
Blessed is the Servant whom the Lord shall then find so doing.

For whom is this vengeance provided? 1. For them that know not God. Quest. Are
any such? Resp. 1. Notices of a Deity some are borne with us. 2. There is
knowledge of God that may be acquired: I am sure is offered to Psalm. 19.3. Romans
1.20.
all, Jews and Gentiles in contemplation of the creatures. But confused
knowledge is as no knowledge: Distinctest knowledge of God, not being
affectiue, is reputed Ignorance.

Generally Interpreters take it a description of Gentiles: who though they knew
God by his works, yet knew him not by his Word: therefore grew vain in their
discourses, and their foolish heart was full of darkness, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.

I subscribe: yet think the same vengeance, if not greater, kept in store for
Christians: who, in greater light, remain still in darkness. Except perhaps
we may think there are Christian-Pagans in this behalf. Men, I am sure, many
amongst Christians, as grossly ignorant of Gods nature and will, as ever were
Pagans; As if we had amongst Christians; Nominals, and Reals. Truth is, an
Ignorant Christian is but Nomine tenus Christianus, Re paganus. And to such is
heavier vengeance reserved in respect of Ignorance, then for veriest Idiotes
amongst Pagans: Let then Christians under the same crime, be reputed meant in
Paul's description.

Sure it is, Ignorance whither in Christian or Pagan lays open to the
vengeance of the great day, Luke 12.48.

There is Simple nescience; and there is culpable Ignorance: That we conceive
to be bare absence of knowledge in things not reueiled, or commanded to be
known. Mar. 13 32.
Angels know not the day and hour of Judgment: Nor the Son himself, as
Man. The particular Reason of particular Election and Reprobation, Saint Paul
knew not, It was their faultlesse nescience; not their culpable Ignorance.

This, we describe the privation or want of that divine knowledge which ought
to be in us. I mean of things revealed and commanded to be known. A double
light God has granted to the sons of men, whereby to make known himself
unto them. 1. His Works. 2. His Word. Eyes also he has given them, to make
benefit of that light. 1 Sense and Reason. 2 His Spirit and Faith. Those,
vouchsafed to all, Jews and Gentiles. These, tendered to all, and every in the
Church of God.

Ignorance, whether invincible, or negligent, or wilful, neither excuses a
toto, in things revealed and commanded to be known. That made our Savior say.
Ignorants are Luc. 12.48.
beaten though with fewer stripes: eternally damned, though not so much
tormented.

Austin. The utmost advantage simplest Ignorance can do then, is but vt mitius
ardeant.

To rouse us out of it, Meditate; Such 1 Ephesians. 4.18.
Aliens from the life of God. 2 In 2 Timothy 2.26.
snare of the Devil, holden captive of him at his pleasure. 3. No way assured
of their being in Covenant of Grace. For such all have the 1 John 2.27.
unction teaching all things: are John 6.45.
all taught of God: Ier. 31.34.
know him from the least to the greatest.

Means. See 1 Phil. 3.8.
Excellency of knowing Christ; suppose that knowledge Treasure, Prou. 2.4.
thou will dig for it as for silver; search, as for Rubies. 2. Be 1 Cor. 3 18.
a fool in thine own conceit: lay down proud opinion of Natures acuitie in
the mysteries of God. 3 Pro. 8.3^.
Attend at the Gates of wisdom: Prophecy is the key of knowledge. Ier. 3.15.
Pastors are given to feed with knowledge and understanding. Will you, nill
you, you must seek knowledge at their mouths. Mal. 2.17.
Their lips are your storehouse. 4 Psalm. 119.8.
Pray to be illightned.

The second sort lvable to vengeance: those that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Circumscription of Christians according to Interpreters.
Their general style is with Paul, the Ephesians 2.2. and 5, 6
Children of disobedience. They all lie open to that vengeance, yea though
their knowledge were Angelical. Christ is Author of salvation to those only
that obey him. The wrath of God comes, abides upon all the children of
disobedience: in fuller weight for that they saw. John 9.41. and 15.22, 24.
Iac. 4.17.

Reasons are: 1 Their sins grow near the nature of presumptions, of wilful
and malicious sins.

2 Adiuments to obedience have bin more; understanding having presented to
their will, the goodness of Christian duties.

Whither the disobedience be in not doing, or omitting duties prescribed and
known; or in doing evils known to be interdicted, it matters not. Non parcet
pungenti qui minatur and sterili.

Isai 11.9.
inundation of knowledge, prophesied by Isai: would God our practice were in
any good measure answerable. I should then be inclined to think, the body of
our Christendom should be saved. But God has Isai 9.3.
multiplied the Nations, yet not increased the Joy. Contemplatiues we are most
in matter of faith and piety; our Religion is mostly talk and discourse.

Saint Peter exhorts to 2 Pet. 1.5.
join to faith, virtue; to knowledge, practice: not to 8.
be idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior. 1 Consider,
knowledge though an excellent gift, yet is none of the Characteristicall to
discriminate us from Reprobates. (...) is the name of damned Devils, for
excellency of knowledge. And as good Angels, so have they learned by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians 3.10.

2 Not connection only of Graces is to be seen in Gods Children; but
subordination of one to other; of John 13.17.
knowledge, we are sure, to practice. Nothing is revealed of Gods Nature and
will, that we may only know, and delight our selves in the speculation: nor is
any thing in Christianity so merely speculatiue, but its made ground 1 Par.
28.9.
of practice.

3 The rule of Retribution is not our knowledge, but our practice: Every man
receives according to what he has done. Prophets disobedient are dismissed
with Nescio vos. Mat. 7.22, 23.

4 If knowledge be that we labor for, what better means of improuement, then
John 7.17.
conscionable obedience: Hereby grew David wiser then the aged; then his
Teachers, even by keeping Gods precepts, Psalm. 119.99, 100.

5 Conscience roused by Gods wrath is torture no less then racking; yet most,
where knowledge has bin most abundant.

Obey not the Gospel. Gospel then as well as Law, inioynes obedience; contains
not only promises of mercy, but precepts of duty. Mat. 1.15.
Repent and believe, are precepts of the Gospel. Love God above all, Thy
Neighbor as thy self. So not Law only, but Gospel commands thee. This is the
old and new Commandment. Nouum, 1. quia renouatum: 2. Pressed on new grounds;
Such as nor Prophet nor Patriarch ever saw to enforce it. There are Gospel, as
well as Legal Ethics: Moralities all as many Evangelical, as Mosaicall. Truth
is, there is no duty which the Law moral requires, but the Gospel
prescribes, and urges on equal terms of necessity to salvation. Its not
absurd to say, the whole of what the Law prescribes, for the modus and Gradus
of obedience, is in the Gospel also prescribed; these differences observed.

1 The Law allows none, but our own personal obedience, after every lota and
tittle. The Gospel affords performance by a surety.

2 The Law winkes at none, no not least imperfections of obedience: The Gospel
offers more Grace, promising to crown our gracious endeauours.

3 The Law prescribes, but enables not. Therefore is 2 Cor. 3.6.
Letter. The Gospel prescribes and assists: therefore is called Spirit;
because with it goes the Spirit of power, enabling, in acceptable manner, to
perform what is prescribed.

handwriting of ordinances. When yet Mat. 5.17.19.
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it: And Faith does not
abrogate the Law, but rather stablish it, Romans 3.31.

Worse they, who conceive the Gospel a doctrine of carnal liberty. As God an
Idol made all of Mercy, so his Gospel consisting only of promises of
mercy, not at all of precepts of duty. And this, forsooth, is their
Christian liberty under the Gospel: freedom from observing the Law of God.

Liberty Christian proclaimed in the Gospel is 1 From Acts 15.10.
yoke of Ceremonies. 2 From Gal. 3.13.
Curse. 3 Justification. 4 Rigorous exaction. 5 Romans 6.14.
Exasperating power of the Law Moral. Not at all from obedience, of any iota
or title comprised in any precept of the Decalogue.

Therefore in Gospel doctrine observe, 1 As many prescripts of duty, as
promises of mercy. 2 Promises for their performance on Gods part, limited to
condition of our performing the duties. 3 The evidence from which we gather
our title to the promises, is our performance of the duties.

Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. So called, either for that he is the
adaequatum obiectum of it; the whole of Evangelical doctrine having him for
the matter: or, because by him, as the Angel of the Covenant, revealed out of
the bosom of his father. That clause seems interposed, either to dismay the
more from disobedience; or, to show equity in extremest vengeance inflicted
on them, that contemn him which speaks from heaven. See Heb. 2.2, 3. and
12.25.

VERSE. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
or face of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.


SPecification of the vengeance: where are 1. The Hotnesse of it, destruction.
2. The continuance, Everlasting. 3. The worker or mean inflicting, the Face of
the Lord and the Glory of his power.

1. Destruction: understand, not an abolishing of their being. Oh how shall
they wish they had never bin, or had bin bruits, or might cease to be, when the
day of that vengeance comes. Rather of their well-being. Non est vita vinere,
sed been viuere. Nor is it worth the name of being, to be miserable: so
miserable, as to live a dying life, to dye a living death.

2. Everlasting: their misery shall have no end. Their worm dies not; their
fire never goeth^out: the fire is unquenchable and everlasting. Mar. 10.43, 44.
Mat. 3.12. and 25.41, 46.

Reasons, 1. That so in endurance, since it will not be in weight, there may be
proportion betwixt their punishment and sins, wherewith they have violated
that endless Majesty.

2 They sinned in aeterno suo: Its just therefore they should be punished in
aeterno Dei.

3 Their desires to sin were infinite, endless: they would live ever, that
they might sin ever.

4 Their impenitencie is endless: obstinacy of will in evil, is one of the
sinful penalties of the damned.

Millenaries erred through too much piety, and mistake of some Scriptures;
when they promised, some, to very Pagans and Devils; others, to impenitent
Christians, release from their Hell Torments. But fools, may I term them, or
mad men amongst us? who hearing daily, and professing to believe, what we teach
of extremity and eternity of Hell Torments, yet to enjoy the momentanie
pleasures of sin, willingly deprive themselves of that eternal hyperbolicall
weight of Glory; yea desperately plunge body and soul into everlasting pain.
Oh consider you that forget God; if years, as many as there are stars in the
sky; millions of years, as many as there are sands by the Sea shore, might
bring end to the pain, yet there were hope: But when eternity shall be added
to extremity of the Torment, the Recovery is hopeless: Whom should not these
terrors pierce?

3 From the presence of the Lord, etc. At first sound, the words seem to
intimate the good, such are deprived of: the presence of Christ, and fruition
of his Glory: and may be conceived to import that paenam damni, as its called,
their loss and deprivation of eternal beatitude, which they suffer, whosoever
know not God, or disobey the Gospel. But attentively considered, rather
signify the cause, or mean inflicting their vengeance: I he very look or
face of Christ: His power, the glory or excellency of his power easily
procures it. Apoc. 6.15, 16
Hide us, they cry, even Potentates, from the face of the Lamb: so terrible
and full of Majesty shall be his second appearing: with such See Psa 2.9.
ease, ever with his look, shall they be tumbled down together into the
bottom of Hell.

Use.
What means the insolency of the mighty, the gilded Potsheards of the earth,
to look and speak so big? why triumph they over the Impotent? how dare they 1
Cor. 10.22.
provoke the Lord? Are they stronger then he? Have they forgotten who said, he
that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then they? Eccl.
5.8. You that pride your selves in your frown, and call it your glory, that
multitudes tremble at your presence; suffer the thought to put an appall to
your pride, and power, and pomp; that there is a countenance at which Angels
tremble; a power, to which Seraphims stoop; a presence so maiesticall; a face
so full of glory, before which you must stand to be judged, whose very frown
can cast body and soul into hell fire. I say as David, tremble and sin not,
Psalm. 44.

VERSE. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe, (because our Testimony was believed among you) at
that day.


A Repetition and new remembrance of the Time, when this vengeance shall be
inflicted: set out by another concomitant of it; the glorious advancement of
Gods Children. Considerable therein are, 1 The general, Glorification of
Saints. 2 The fountain of it, the Lord Christ, who is glorified in the
glorifying of Saints. 3 The measure; Admired. 4 Persons to whom intended, and
their qualification, Saints, and all that believe: interlined there is in a
parenthesis, application of the Comfort to Thessalonians.

1. There is then a glorious estate reserved for Gods children against the day
of Christ's second appearing. Romans 2.7, 10.
Glory, honor, and immortality to every one that continues in well doing.

Schoolmen will a little fill you with particulars: when they mind you of the
Dotes. 1 Animae; vision, delectation, comprehension, etc. 2 Corporis,
Impassibilitie, subtlety, spirituality, claritie, with the like. Ad 4um did
49.
See them ad 4um distinct. 49.

Their glory here, seems that which presents it self to the eyes of the
wicked; in their 1. Association unto Christ; they also sit on Luc. 22.30.
Thrones. 2 Participation of 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
judicial power over the World, yea Angels; not only by comparison, but by
suffrage of approbation.

What may, if this will not, cause us to digest the infamy and abasures we are
subject unto? Proud nature of man, and vainglorious, how makes it good men
sometimes more love the praise of men, then the glory of God, John 12.43.

Had we Paul's wisdom to look from things temporal to things eternal, from
our present contempt, to our future glory, we should easily resolve to be yet
more vile for the Lord. Gods Spirit in Scripture thus arms us against the
Temptation. 1 Minding us how God, from amongst the basest and most 1 Cor. 1.27,
28.
contemptible of the world, has pleased to make his election to glory. 2
Remembering us of the many more Heb. 12.2.
Indignities, Christ for our sakes endured. 3 Sending us to consi^er our
conformity herein Mat. 5.12.
to Prophets and righteous men, which went before us. 4 Putting us in mind, of
what it euidenceth, the 1 Pet 4.14.
resting of the glorious Spirit of God upon us. 5 Withal, of the high account
God makes of us, honoring us with his protection; interessing himself in our
contempt: dignifying us with the guard of his glorious Angels, and their
ministering unto us. 6 Chiefly of the Glory reserved for us against the life
to come, to which these present abasures do after a sort qualify us.

I beseech you let it prevail to work in us, what Paul exhorts unto, To Heb.
13.13.
go out of the world bearing the reproach of Christ. 1 Examples we have
frequent. Moses prefers in choice the Heb. 11.26.
Rebuke of Christ, before all earthly honor. David resolves to be 2 Samuel 6.22.
more vile for the Lord. Apostles Acts 5.41.
rejoice in such reproach, as in their dignity. 2 As wicked men are so much
the more tormented, by how much more they have magnified themselves; so have
Gods children their portions of Glory, proportioned to their measures of
Abasures here on earth.

2 Yet this take notice of. This Glory how ever ours in fruition, yet is
Christ's originally, and from Christ, ours by communication, Wherefore he is
said to be glorified in his Saints. There is a Personal Glory of the
Mediator: whereof see John 17.5. and there is his Sociall Glory, as I may
term it, resulting to his person, from the Glory which he communicates to
his Children.

Indeed, Coniunct with the Glory of Saints is the Glory of Christ: so nearly,
as that in their glorification himself is glorified.

To which end consider, 1. The union mystical twixt Christ and his Church;
Such as that Christ and his Church are one body Complete. The Church the Ephesians.
1.22.23
fullness of him who fills all in all. 2. Issuing from that union is,
Influence of Grace and Glory into the Church from the Head. 3. Attend the
meritorious procurement of that Glory to us, to be merely from Christ. The
Prince of our Salvation being therefore Heb. 12.10.
consecrated by Afflictions, that the Children might be brought to Glory. 4. As
the managing of all Ioh 5.22.27.
proceedings in the last Judgment, so the Mat 25.31.32. etc.
distribution of glorious Rewards is committed unto Christ. 5. The efficiencie
of it in us, is of Christ by his power and Spirit: for its he who Phil. 3.21.
changes our vile bodies to make them like to his glorious body that not
without cause Paul says, the Lord Christ is glorified in the Glorification of
Saints.



1. Know, there is warranted an under Respect to the reward, to incite us to
faithfulness, Heb. 11.26. and 12.2. 2. And can thou say, there is in thee no
respect to the glory of God? 3. But let this be weighed, that God himself is
our Beatitude; and that in seeking our Beatitude, we s^eke fruition of the
glorious Godhead: that in our glorification, Christ also is glorified; and in
seeking our salvation, we seek the glory of our Savior; So may this Scruple
be sufficiently exempted.

That measure of Zeal for God, and love to men, in Exodus 32.32.
Moses and Romans 9.3.
Paul, to me seems something extaticall: the privilege of a few. Perhaps to
be endeavored by all; yet scarcely to be hoped for by the ordinary Rank of
Gods children, whiles this body, which is corrupted, cloggeth the soul.

And to be admired. The measure of their glory so great as shall fill the
enioyers with wonder at the Grace, beholders with no less then Admiration, at
the power of the bestower. Truly said Paul, Things 1 Cor. 2.9.
prepared for Gods Children are such as neither eye has seen, nor care heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive. See the wicked ravished at
the sight, and expressing their wondering at such change of Estate Wised. 5.5.

And is it not matter of wonder, to see man made of the dust of the earth, his
metal of the basest, now made Mar. 12.25.
like and equal unto Angels? His mind, now so more then sand-blind in the
things of God, then so 1 Cor. 13.12.
barefaced to contemplate the glorious God head. His will, in nature so
opposite to goodness, In grace so wauing and wavering in Resolution, then so
immutably fastened, and by Bernards happy necessity, so linked to holiness,
etc. who among Saints feeling this blessed change, shall not be ravished with
admiration at the power of the Author?

But if we farther consider our no deseruings of so eminent Glory; onr
deseruings of the contrary, together with the preterition so many millions of
men our Equals, if not betters, many, in natural condition; and their
resurrection only to shame and contempt: How shall we be able to satisfy
our selves, in extolling and admiring the rich grace of our God and Savior
Jesus Christ? Whither there shall be in heaven Remembrance of things past on
earth, is not altogether impertinently questioned. Of souls separated the
inquiry is usual, and thus resolved from Gregory: That Remembrance
intellectual there is both of sins and penalties past, as matter to occasion
continual lauding of Gods mercy in deliverance. Niceties pertaining thereto,
whither it be with pleasure or disliking, whither with rational sorrow or
without, I omit. This I doubt not, but the comparing of the miseries they are
freed from, with the Beatitude they then enjoy, augments their joy. The
meditation of their demerits before, and after calling, enlarges their hearts
to magnify and extol the grace of their Redeemer. Their beholding the
confusion and horror cast upon devils, and damned Reprobates, compared with
their own Beatitude; especially with reflection of the mind upon their
equality in state of nature, makes them no less then admire the rich grace of
Christ, in lading them with that transcendent, and hyperbolicall weight of
Glory.

Paul's wisdom in our Afflictions, to 2 Cor. 4.18.
look from things temporal, to things eternal. His art of comparisoning our
present sufferings with our future glory: how would it silence our murmurings?
add courage to our faintings, and no less then joy in our greatest
tribulations. Brutes, as we are, no less sensual and stupid, while we walk
by sense, and not by Faith. Me thinks if we but meditated the Heb. 12.6.
love of God, which they evidence; the 11.
quiet fruit they bring; the power of God 2 Cor. 12.9.
perfitted in our weakness to our own and other men's wonder, the damnation
which they 1 Cor. 11.32.
free us from, when they are sanctified unto us; how should they seem less
then sweet unto us? But when we shall consider the Romans 8.18.
Glory that shall be revealed; The 2 Cor. 4.17.
weight of eternal glory to be rendered for light and momentanie afflictions
of this life, how can we but be ambitious of the cross, as some Primitive
Martyrs were; and wonder at our fainting under fear or sense of afflictions,
for whom glory, no less then wonderful, is prepared against the appearing of
Christ? I say as Paul on like occasion, Consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

4. The last particle remains: The persons to whom this glory, this marvelous
glory belongs. Thus they are pointed out unto us. 1. Saints. 2. And Believers,
such only, and such all.

Two things are here obseruable, 1. The limitation, to Saints and believers
only. 2. The extent, to all that believe: no doubt, but to all Saints.

Saints in Popish language, hear none but who are Canonized: Among whom yet,
who doubts? but may be found some damned Spirits: since in Canonizing the Pope
may err.

Amongst our people, ignorant of Scripture Phrase, none may so be e^^eemed, but
those just men whose spirits are now made perfect in heaven. In the style of
the holy Ghost, All Gods people, but professing sanctity, are so named: though
more strictly, such as by God: Spirit are 2 Cor. 7.1.
purged, though but inchoately, from all filthiness of sl^sh and Spirit; and are
growing toward full holiness in the fear of God. The style is sometimes with
an (...) given to men eximious in Sanctity: yet generally belongs to all Gods
Children.

That to them only belong the Glory that shall be revealed, Scripture
Testimonies are plentiful: hence its called the Col. 1.12.
inheritance of Saints. Wherefore also the Heb. 12.14
unholy and profane are excluded. Reasons of congruence ye may observe reading
the Scriptures quoted. 1 Ioh. 3 3. Apoc. 11.27.


Peter considering the terror of the last day; 2 Pet. 3.8.
What manner men ought we to be in holy conuersations? No measure should
suffice. S. John weighing the purity of the Judge, and the condition of seeing
him with comfort; 1 Ioh. 3.3.
whosoever has this hope, purges himself as God is pure. S. James expressing
imperat Acts of sincere Religion, thus points to us our measure of sanctity:
to keep our selves Iac. 1.27.
unspotted of the world. S. Jude commands to hate the Jude ver. 23.
garment spotted of the flesh. S. Paul allows not Ephesians. 5.3.
naming of any uncleanness without detestation. Nice scrupulousnes about
Ceremonies, and such like trifles, what wise man either loathes not, or
pitieth? And yet cries woe to all that violate, Mat. 5.19.
minima man datorum; approving even precisenes in moralities, so it be guided
by prudence.

As to Saints, so to belieuers is this glory appropried; places a^e
plentiful, see these pregnant, Mar. 16.16. John 3.15, 16, 17, 18. whither
Infid^litie be of more Negation, such as in Pagans, to whom the name of Jesus
has not bin heard: or of evil disposition, as in unbelieving, or misbeleeuing
Christians, it matters little ad poenam damni: Though that of sense be greater
to children of the Church. Mistake not, as if I thought the not knowing, or not
believing in Christ, shall be imputed to a simple Pagan, as a crime to damn
him. Howbeit, had he believed, he had bin saved: not believing he perishes in
his Paganism.

Ans. Pity be it: who allows not Romans 9.2.
condoling their miscarriage? yet neither is God iniust, in not showing them
mercy to salvation, since, 1 that gratuitous. 2 and he Eccl. 7.31.
made them righteous. 3 And they are inexcusably sinful in violating the rules
of natural law, reserved in their Notice. But is God less merciful? Nay
rather more Romans 9.23.
to the vessels of mercy: whom from among so many millions of men and women,
of equal condition in nature, he has selected to magnify his mercy upon.
The mercies of God are better prised by weight, then by number of enioyers.

But we pass to the extent. As to Saints and believers only: so to all
Saints: for (which is more doubtful) to all believers does this heavenly
glory belong.

That to all Saints: these Scriptures are pregnant. The inheritance belongs to
Acts 20.32.
all them that are sanctified. Beatificall vision to all that are Mat. 5.8.
pure in heart: wherefore the sanctied are said to be Ephesians. 4.30.
sealed to the day of Redemption. And the first fruits of the Spirit, is called
the 2 Cor. 1.22.
carnest of our inheritance.

Ergo, nor sanctified. 2 1 Pet. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.4.
Elected we are to sanctification of the Spirit, suppose you to the common
solaces of Reprobates. 3 Or think we Christ's merit and John 17.9.
intercession, by which the Spirit of Sanctificaon is procured, intended to
Reprobates? 4 Not given them, says our Savior; the John 14.17.
world cannot receive him. But de his alibi, the homonymies wherewith
Adversaries have perplexed the question, are elsewhere noted and explained.

Let Gods people make sure to themselves their sanctification, they make sure
their 2 Pet. 1.10.
election, Col. 3.2.
earthly-minded, the more sanctified. (...) quasi (...) or (...). 2 Its
comfortable to see in our selves the 2 Pet. 1.5, 6.
connection of all virtues gracious; to be failing in no gift or fruit of the
Spirit, argues our through, our true sanctification.

3 Especially if these things be in us and abound; 2 Pet. 1.8.
yea if they be but growing, that argues life of grace in us.

4 In exercise of them, constancy and resolution is specially comfortable.

5. Most when the motive is obedience to the commander, 1 Cor. 13.3.
Love of the Inioyner; and the end, that the Author in all things may be
glorified, Mat. 5.16.

The greater question is, whither to all that believe? for even Iac. 2.19.
Devils believe; and we read of 1 Timothy 4.1.
reuolters from faith, whose damnation is as certain, as if damned already in
chains of darkness; how then says the Apostle, this Glory belongs to all
that believe?

Resp. Pardon us a little, to see if Schools may help us in this inquiry. Of
faith, as of other virtues, they make two kinds. The one Acquisite; the other
Infused. Acquisite, such as may be wrought out of power of Nature, by means
attempered to the understanding subsisting within the state of Nature. As when
a man assents to Theological Truths, moved by humane persuasions: as for
reverence or love he bears to the Teacher; or for miracles wrought to avouch
them; or for Reasons and Arguments, potent in the eye of Reason, to work such
persuasion.

Infused, wherein the understanding is elevated above all its Naturals, and
illustrated by so divine power, that it gives credence to things above Reason,
leaning only on the first verity, the truth of God the Reuealer; this being
the thing which makes him assent, because God speaks and testifies it. Infused
its called, either by allusion to the Joel 2.28.
phrase of the holy Ghost; or because its merely from without, there being no
power Natural in man to procure or receive it, save only that which they
term obedientiall: whereby man, as other creatures, is borne to obey Gods
Action, or his working upon him, to be made whatsoever he may be made by divine
power.

Of faith infused, they make two kinds: one formed, as their term is, by
Charity: the other formelesse, separate from Charity, which they call
formelesse, not because it lacks matter or form, or any thing required to the
nature of Faith: for even this Faith, they say, is perfect quoad speciam: and
is true faith in genere Naturae and moris; that is, has the true nature of
Faith, and is a virtuous quality. But formelesse they call it, when separate
from Charity, because it wants what should form it to the nature of a
gratuitous or gracious gift, or fit it to atchieue the superexcedent End,
eternal Beatitude; or as Scots terms are, it wants what should form it to
Acceptabilitie; or as De Iustif. lib. 2. cap 4.
Bellarmine, to make it Actuous and operative.

In all this, setting apart strangeness of Language, and their secret
intention of making Charity enter our Justification, me thinks the sentence is
orthodox, and consonant to Scriptures: faith saving works by love, Gal. 5.6.
And if a man say he has faith, and have no works, Iac. 2.14.
can that faith save him? Thus understand the Apostle. All that believe, I say
not quocunque modo, suppose by faith Acquisite, as devils, and many professed
Christians; or by faith dead, and vnoperatiue; but all that believe with that
faith which works by love; to all such belongs the glory of Gods Kingdom.

Or, what if we call to mind the three internal Acts of Faith? which Thomas
says are all acts of one and the same habit of Faith: 1 To believe God
speaking in his word. 2 To believe that he is God, and a rewarder of them that
seek him. 3 To believe in God; that is, as I interpret, to rest and rely our
selves by confidence and assiance, on God and his Christ, as only Authors of
Righteousness and Salvation. In all such believers will Christ be glorified,
in communicating to them the glory of the Kingdom, which he has promised.
To this purpose Scriptures speak pregnantly, John 3.16, 36. 1 John 5.10, 11,
12, 13. etc.

James, cap. 2. tot. and Augustine.

There be that streiten promises, enlarge precepts; alas, to how much
perplexity of their soul? As if faith required, were of necessity to be, of
all Articles and circumstances thereof, explicit; so firm and steddie at all
times, as never to conflict with Infidelity: to such faith only, in their
opinion, belong the promises. But then said the Prophet in vain, he shall not
quench the Isai 42.3.
smoking flax: Then that is false, that the Gospel requires Truth, not
perfection of faith and other virtues. Then are not 1 John 2.1, 2.
Infants in Grace, Gods children; nor Christ propitiatour for imperfections in
gracious practice. And yet as he is Author of salvation to Heb. 5.9.
all that obey him, though obedience be sometimes interrupted, always
imperfect. So will he be glorified in glorifying all them that believe, I say
not as Abraham only, with Romans 4.21.
fullness of assurance; but as the blind man in the Gospel, Mar. 9.24.
bewailing and praying against Infidelity and doubtings.

(Because our Testimony was believed among you.) This clause included in the
Parenthesis, has apparently this Scope, to apply the general forementioned,
to the comfort of these particulars among believers: q, d. And this I say for
your comfort, because our Testimony, that is the Evangelical doctrine to
which we gave Testimony that it is of God, sound credence and belief among
you. How that general doctrine auailes to their comfort being so qualified,
you easily apprehend, conceiving the discourse on this wise. All that believe
the Gospel shall partake in that marvelous glory. But you have believed the
Gospel; therefore shall have share in that heavenly glory.

But does not the Apostle, in this Application of the general to this
particular people, more then intimate, that generals of promise, or blessing,
or comfort, delivered in Scripture, are intentionally meant to particulars
rightly qualified? Or that Gods spirit speaking in general? As thus, when to
all Saints and believers, he promises the inheritance, speaks he not to me,
in case I be sanctified, and a Believer?

fear the Lord, and depart from evil, though Peter and Paul be not mentioned
in the Command, Is it not therefore meant to Peter and Paul? Belike they are
not bound to obey, save in what is commanded them by name. When its said, you
Deuteronomy. 7.3.4.
shall not join marriage with the daughters of a strange God; is it not all
one, as if he had said, neither thou, nor thou whosoever thou art? When God
threatens the Pro. 23.21.
drunkard to be clothed with rags, the and 6.26.
whoremonger to be brought to a morsel of bread, is it not applicable, in the
intention of the speaker, to every particular engaged in those sins? So when
the promise runs, whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, why say
we, we have no particular word to believe that we are in state of Salvation?
When its meant to every particular believer, and we know, or may know that we
believe. To me, I assure you, it sounds as particular in case of my Faith and
Repentance, as if our Savior himself should say unto me, as to him in the
Gospel, Son thy sins be forgiven thee.

Else, what is the particular word we want to breed particular assurance? A
word perhaps particular to me, to tell me, I believe or Repent. Resp. Is that
the matter? 1. Hitherto it has bin understood of a word testifying Gods Act to
man, in pardoning sins, Justifying the sinner, etc. not of a word testifying
the Act of man. 2. Need I a particular Word of God to tell me I believe? Why
more then to tell me I love, I fear, I hope, etc. when as the soul 1 Cor.
2.11.
knows it own Acts or motions, by its own imbred faculty: themselves
acknowledge in the understanding Actum Reflexum. And why not my Acts virtuous
or gracious, for my comfort, and thankfulness; as well as my vicious Actions,
to breed me terror and Repentance?

Quest. But the rectitude of these Acts, the soundnes of these graces, can my
soul know? Resp. Thy mind informed by the word of God, upon due examination,
may as well know rectitude, as discern the Acts. I may as well know that my
faith rests upon the first verity, as that I believe quocunque modo: for
knows not my mind her motives, as well as her motions? Or, if by imperate
Acts of faith, which infallibly testify presence of true Faith, I would judge,
may I not say I have a word particular to testify truth of my Faith? As when
my Faith Act. 15.9.
purifies my heart, Gal. 5.6.
works by love, have I not a word to testify, that my Faith is unfeigned? As
punctual it is to me, and as particular to testify the soundnes of my Faith:
As if an Angel should say to me as to Cornelius, Act. 10.4.
Thy prayers and Almsdeeds, thy faith and Repentance are come up in
remembrance before God.

Howbeit, from Paul's example, Ministers of the Church have their direction, to
apply the generals of promise and comfort to their people, provided always,
they be qualified to partake them, See Act. 2.39. and 13.38. 2 Samuel 12.13.

Such Application has warrant from example of Prophets and Apostles; from
intention of the promiser; and tends much to comfort of weak consciences:
Considering they know, or may know, their ministers as Gods mouth; And his
instruments Ioh. 20.23.
Authorized to remit sins, and to seal up to them life and salvation.

generale applicatu^ ad hunc and hunc, is it not particular? when in their
foru^ paenitentiale they pronounce the sentence of absolution upon the
penitent. Ego absoluo te, etc. do they give him a particular word for faith to
rest on? or do they require divine Faith, or only humane to be given to
their testimony so particularized? Will they say humane only? Apage: for how
settles that the conscience? Or where is, qui vos audit, me audit? Or how say
they, when they remit, God remits? If divine, then there is a Word of God
particular for it to rest on: and so particular Faith is no longer presumption,
since it has a particular Word of God to build on: as apparently it has, when
general promises are Regularly applied, and by authority delegate from God.

And what is the ods, tell me, betwixt this private absolution, and that
public in our preaching, for the matter of particularitie? When Peter told
believing Jews, that the Act. 2.39.
promises were made to them, was it not all one, as if he had said to every
particular of them believing, to thee and thee?

But in Application of general promises, or comforts, let prudence make us
cautionate so, as first to discern, as far as we may, their qualification. To
you is this Salvation sent: But you must beware of that in the Prophet, Act.
13.41.
Behold ye despisers and wonder, The charge is to Iud. ver. 22.
put difference; to Ier. 15.19.
take away the precious from the vile: for will you Ezech 13.18.19.22.
give life to the souls of them that should not live? or will you slay the
souls of them that should not dye? To kill the hearts of the Righteous, To
strengthen the hands of the wicked: To condemn the just, and to justify the
wicked are both equally abominable, To your comfort I speak it says the
Apostle, because our testimony was believed amongst you.

Our Testimony was believed. Something pertaining to the Nature of Faith,
discriminating it from other habits and Acts of the understanding, might here
be observed. As that it has for the material object, something testified:
for the formal object, the verity and Authority of the Testis. This being the
Reason of assenting, the Real, or supposed truth, and authority of him that
testifies. Intellectus, they say, is of principles, whose light is so clear,
that there needs no medium to induce their entertainment for true. Science,
of Conclusions, by force of a medium necessary and demonstratiue. Faith of
things ineuident in themselves, indemonstrable by Arguments necessary: of
Conclusions or Articles above Reason, in divine faith infused: the assent being
wrought not by argument, or other evidence, but only by authority and verity
of him that testifies. What moves me to assent to the Article of the Trinity?
Only the Testimony of God, who alone knows himself, and the manner of his
own existence. Now whither this Testimony divine be immediate or mediate, it
matters not to the nature of divine Faith, so it be a divine Testimony whereon
we rest. Not only that voice of God from heaven, This is my beloved Son, But
that also of Prophets and Apostles, speaking as they were 2 Pet. 1.21.
inspired by the holy Ghost, is this divine Testimony. Whither that also of the
Church ordinary that now is, is matter of question, but impertinent to this
occasion.

At that day. Return to specification of the Time before mentioned: which
before he had thus periphrased; At the Revelation of the Lord Jesus from
heaven, ver. 7. When he shall come to be glorified in the Saints, ver. 10. I
say, at that day shall tribulation be rendered to them that trouble you; Rest,
to you that are troubled.

I say as the Apostle. Be still and patient your hearts until the coming of
the Lord: So much the rather for that that day draws nigh.

VERSE. 11, 12. Wherefore also we pray ^lwayes for you, that our God would count
you worthy of his calling, and fulfi^ all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and the work of faith with power.

That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and you in him
according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.


ANnexed to the other grounds of Comfort, is this prayer of the Apostle and his
associates, on their behalf. And it is certainly full of comfort, to partake
in the prayers of Saints: wherefore ye may observe it entreated earnestly by
Ephesians. 6.19.
Chiefetaines in the Church: and witness Saint James, It I^c. 5.16.
prevails much, if it be fervent.

Particulars of the text you may number these. 1 Their fact, amplified by
circumstance of time; we pray always, in statis precibus. 2 The occasion or
intention (...). 3 The matter, of three memb rs. First, that God would
vouchsase them his calling. Secondly, fulfill the good pleasure of his
goodness. Thirdly, and the work of faith, etc. 4 The end or issue, that so
the name of the Lord may be glorified.

(...): unto which, that is, that Christ when he comes may be glorified in
glorifying you, we pray: by our prayers desiring to further you, to the
attainment of the Glory prepared for you.

So does no certainty of salvation, whither of the object, or subject
frustrate our devotions: inasmuch as they are means sanctified and prepared,
as well to procure what is prepared. as to ascertaine us the more of our
sharing therein: The soundation of the Lord stands sure; who can, I say not
raze, but shake it? Yet let all the vessels of honor call upon the Lord, and
depart from iniquity: by this means they further execution of the decree; and
hereby know themselves to be vessels of honor prepared to glory, 2 Timothy 2.19,
20. See 2 Pet. 1.10.

Apagesis Athee (...), who think neglect of devotion or sanctity islues
natiuely out of the doctrine touching certainty of Salvation: Whither
certainty insistest thou on? that of the object. Ans. It puts, it implies
devotion, sanctity, for whom he predestinateth, he Romans 8.30.
calls, with a 2 Timothy 1.9.
holy calling, a calling that makes holy; he Ephesians. 1 4.
chooses to be holy: he chooses to salvation to be achieved by
sanctification of the Spirit, and faith of Truth, 2 These. 2.13.

That of the subject? Ans. (...) that a man should be assured of Salvation, and
neglect devotion and sanctification; for hence arises his assurance. Longer
then he knows and exercises Sanctity, he is not, nor can be assured of his
title to Salvation. Longer then he feels the Spirit of Grace and deprecation,
actuous in him in one virtue or another, he cannot be assured of his Election
to glory. I confess there is what may stay the soul from despairing in
particular miscarriages, or in the cessation of sensible operatiuenesse of
Grace, as calling to mind the former testimonies of Grace in the heart.
Howbeit in that state, the assurance is tremulous, the mind pendulous, and not
able firmly to hold persuasion of being in state of Grace, till the blessed
restitution to doing first works be vouchsafed. But hereof alibi.

We pray, etc. that our God. Generals belonging to all three members of the
matter are: That to God. 2 They pray. 3 And in the note of application (our)
seem to apprehend a favor of God to themselves, in case the blessings were
vouchsafed to this people.

It savors of Grace to find pleasance in others gracious estate; to count it
our own benefit from God, that our brethren are enriched with graces that
accompany Salvation. It argues our 1 Cor. 12.26.
fellow-vnion in the body of Christ; our fulfilling the Royal Law of loving
our neighbor Iac. 2.8.
as our selves, when we love him ad idem bonum, eternal beatitude, as Saint
Augustines exposition runs.

though it be with grief that we want, what others enjoy in goodness, so we
grieve not at their enjoying, but for our own want.

But let envy rot their bones on whom it fastens, grief I mean and spite at
other men's gracious estate: for what does it impeach our own? how does it not
rather further it? adding luster to the body mystical, whereof we profess our
selves members. Their censure is by the Apostle, that they Iud. ve. 11.
walk in the way of Cain: he might have said of the devil, with whom they
may expect to have portion in punishment, since they resemble in what is most
diabolical; most abhorrent from gracious disposition. (...).

Vouchsafe you his calling: the matter of his Petition: (...); dignetur,
deigne, vouchsafe, of favor grant you the calling.

What is the Calling. Answ. Sometimes under that term comes the terminus ad
quem of Calling; the thing whereto we are called; so some conceive it here
meant: his calling, that is the glory whereto he has called you: that, in
Paul's term, is the Phil. 3.14.
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. 2 Sometimes it denotes the
Act of Calling; as Romans 8.30. 2 Timothy 1.9.

If we follow the first sense, this Paul means, that the Lord would of
fauourvouchsafe them fruition of heavenly happiness, sharing with Saints in
their inheritance.

Must that be begged of God, as a boon, to Saints, believers, halfe-Martyrs as
were Thessalonians? And when its given, is it but deigned, vouchsafed them of
favor from God? Certainly, it was Paul's opinion, There is no real worthiness
in our persons or actions, or qualities inherent, whereby we may claim
eternal glory. 1 Then why beg we it? 2 Why as a boon and savor vouchsafed?
Why rather is it not exacted as due, ex Regula Iustitiae? Truly said the
Apostle, Eternal life is Romans 6.13.
(...), a free gift of God; there being no obligation accruing from worth of
our works, that should bind him to render it: By promising he has made
himself our debtor; and Christ has merited to us our Crown.

But shall we dare to plead our own worthiness of that weight of Glory?
Consider 1 the Romans 8.18.
infinite disproportions betwixt the best services and that glory. 2 The
imperfection, Isai 64.6.
pollution of our best obedience. 3 The no Job 22.2, 3.
profit we bring to the Rewarder. 4 The many Iac. 3.2.
interruptions of our most constant obedience; thou will say as Bernard;
meritum meum mis^ratio Domini: pray as Paul, when thou have done and suffered
all thou have bin called unto. Lord deigne me, of favor grant me share in the
price of the supernall calling.

But what should hinder to interpret, the Act of calling. Is that it, that they
were already called to faith, efficaciously? so reason some learned
Interpreters.

But calling, we know, is not all perfitted in the first instant of Conversion:
still we have nee^e of Gods call; his inuitement and ^fficatious persuasion, to
bring us more and more out o power of darkness, into the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Else why said Paul? The Ministry is given not only to gather us, but
to Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
perfect us every one according to our measure: he that is washed has still o
need to wash his feet. The branches in the V^ne which John 15.2.
bear fruit, the father purges, that they may bring forth more fruit. Dou^t
you but by the same means* his Spirit, the Word, Afflictions? wherefore
suppose them, us, called into his marvelous light; yet are there not remains
of blindness upon the mind most itlightned? Relics of unholiness, black
affections, works of darkness? Except therefore we know some other mean,
then Gods call, to increase conversion, faith, sanctity: its not absurd that
Paul prays God to call the called: that is to continue his calling and
efficacious persuasion, to settle them in the state of Grace, and to transform
them into his Image from glory to glory.

Vt verbo dicam. I here are amongst other, these ends and auailes of Gods
calling the called. 1 Their settling in their gracious estate; wherefore the
words of the wise are as Eccl. 12.11.
Nails. 2 Their excitement, when they grow loitering or languishing; therefore
they are goades. 3 Their John 13.10.
reuocation, when perhaps (as too often) they step aside, or turn back toward
Egypt. In such mistake of the way, need we not anew the Isay 30.21*
voice behind us, to tell us, here is the way, walk in it? 4 To lead us on to
perfection in Grace; to all which, and more uses, serves Gods vocation or
Caling.

no 1 Cor. 5.7.
dregs of old leaven, though thou be a new lump? Is knowledge so perfect,
faith so firm, sanctity so consummate, that nothing may by ordinary means be
added? (...), thou have heaven upon earth. Else teach me, is thy establishment,
and growth in Grace, wrought by other means, then Grace was begun? or
altogether without means? or without any further Action of God in calling
thee? Thus spoke Paul to people called, These. 5.19, 20.
despise not Prophesyings; least thou quench the Spirit. And they were called,
who Acts 2.42.
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayer. And here, to Thessalonians called to an high measure of
faith and patience, little less then that of Martyrs. The Lord still vouchsafe
you his calling, more and more to translate you from the power of darkness
into the kingdom of his beloved son. Thus resolve. 1 Beginnings, increase of
Grace in this life are both from Gods calling. 2 First and after callings are
both by the same means, word and spirit. 3 He is not called, who despises
farther calling.

The second blessing prayed for, fulfilling all the good pleasure of his
goodness.

1 What is this (...), good pleasure of God. 2 Are there parts of it? all the
good pleasure. 3 Why, of his goodness? 4 What is this fulfilling?

To the first. Gods (...), his good pleasure, Interpreters with one consent
conceive, Gods eternal purpose touching the salvation of his children: which
Paul elsewhere calls the Ephesians. 1.5.
good pleasure of his will. Sermo Romanus, says one, non habet quod hui^
dictioni respondeat. Saint Jerome thinks it a word coined by the Septuaginte;
signifying not only pleasance, but regular pleasance: vbi quid non solum
placuit, sed etiam recte placuit. Nam placent, inquit, and quae non recle
placent. It may be that ((...)) in the composition imports it. To Budaeus, it
sounds a spontaneus, consentient, propense affection. For Grammar signification
I refer the Reader to Illyricus, and such like Theological Lexicographers.
In Scripture you may observe it, when attributed to God, to have a double
signification: as (...) sometime signifies Ephesians. 1.5.
(...), the act of willing; sometimes (...), the 1 These. 4.3.
thing willed: so (...), whiles the Spontaneous, propense and pleasing
inclination of the will of God to the eternal good of men: whiles, the decree
and purpose of God issuing from his complacentia, his pleasance taken in their
spiritual welfare, to promote and procure it. So here it seems taken.

To the second. All the good pleasure. Parts there are, or particulars of Gods
purpose and decree touching the salvation of his Children. Thus you may number
them from Saint Paul. Romans 8.30.
Vocation begun, continued. Justification vouchsafed and continued.
Sanctification begun, continued, increased. Glorification of the Soul at
separation in death. Raising bodies at the last day, and reuniting them to
souls that both may enter fruition of consummate blessedness. All these fall
within compass of Gods good pleasure and decree; and are here prayed, in what
was yet wanting, to be committed to execution.

To the third: of his goodness. Gods goodness sometimes signifies the
eximious pulchritude of his Nature, so eminently above all things amiable, as
that it rauisheth every mind and affection of the reasonable Creature in the
contemplation. Sometimes, his will and selfe-propension to diffuse his
benefits, to do good especially to the sons of men. Its here made the sole
fountain of his decreeing our salvation.

To the fourth. Fulfill: fulfilling understand the performance, committing to
execution, plenatie accomplishment and consummation of his good pleasure and
eternal decree. So that to this Sum amounts Paul's prayer in this particular.
That as God had pleased of his favor to deigne them his holy calling to faith
and obedience, so of like favor, he would vouchsafe to call them more and more
from power of darkness, into the gracious Kingdom of his beloved son: and
still to proceed in execution of his eternal decree of Election, that what,
was yet wanting in their increase of sanctification, confirmation in
Justification, Redemption of Bodies from misery and corruption, might in Gods
seasons be accomplished; that at last they might receive the end of their faith
and hope, the salvation of their souls; the full glorification of both body
and soul in his heavenly kingdom.

But that Gods decree of election and predestination to life, may be furthered
by prayers, and other devotions, and gracious endeauours of Saints, you have
hence fluent. For suppose we Paul prays vainly, or impiously? Thus they
explicate. 1 There is Actus praedestinationis; Call you it, if you please, in
Austines phrase, preparation of Grace and Glory. To procuring hereof, auailes
nothing that man does or can do; its eternal in God. 2 There is executio
ordinis: The committing of what God has from eternity ordained and ordered,
to execution. This, by means appointed, may, must be furthered: since to the
execution, God has also fitted and ordered means for our using; and so
combined and linked together his own intentions, and our gracious endeauours,
that by them, and not without them his intentions are fulfilled. Gregory,
Dialog. l. 1. c. 8.
Ea quae Sancti viri orando efficient, ita praedestinata sunt vt precibus
obtineantur. Wherefore our Savior himself prays, Father, glorify thy Son,
John 17, 5.

2 These. 2.13.
persons to Salvation by Sanctification of the Spirit and faith of truth: puts
in the persons care and abili^ie, to use the means leading to salvation: And
so puts them, that ineuitably they follow in every one predestined; so
combines them, that bu^ by those means none is or can be saved. As Paul to his
fellow Sailers from the mouth of the Angel. Not a hair of your heads shall
perish: And yet, except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be safe, Acts 27.31.

To Gods people I say as Peter. Acts 2.40.
Save your selves from this untoward generation. 2.
He that made thee without thee, will he save thee without thee? The Regenerate
sin not unto death; yet 1 John 5.18.
keep themselves that the evil one touch them not. 1 Such use of means
euidenceth our election, 2 Pet. 1.10. thereby we make it sure to our selves. 2
Is via ad salutem; the way to salvation, Ephesians. 2.10. 2 These. 2.13. Absolute
tie there is none upon God obliging him to the course established: yet
voluntarily has his wisdom limited his power, in the executions thereof,
according to the good pleasure of his will. On us, I am sure, the bond lies, to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.

Of his goodness. Truth is, But Gods goodness and selfepropension to the
eternal good of his chosen, nothing had place of motive to induce the Lord to
purpose our Salvation. The questions are ancient, whither Gods Predestination
has any cause: And whither there may be assigned any merits of Predestination.
Thus is the usual explication, something there was that had reason of a cause
final, the Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
praise of his glorious Grace: Nothing in us, out of God, which had the reason
of a motive, or merit, to induce the Lord to elect or predestinate.

1 In state Natural we were all equal, Jacob and Esau, Peter and Judas, Isaac
and Ishmael: In that corrupt mass, which they say, God predestinating
respecting, cause of Reprobation was equal in all: of Predestination, none
more in one, then in another.

2 As for our state Gracious, it issues wholly from Predestination, as from the
Cause. Hence is our Faith, our Repentance, our Sanctification, and obedience.

To this accord Saint Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, Schoolmen and
Controuersists almost all of any respect in the Church. Par. 1. Art. 23. Con.
Gort. lib. 3.1611.163. Scholast. ad 1. did. 41.
Thomas, Scot, Bellarmine. And if there be any amongst them relishing of any
sound Judgment.

Subtle Arminians pretend they assign to faith, no causalitie in respect of
Election: only faith foreseen is a precedent condition, and something
prerequired to Election. Yet the same men say, that election does niti fidei
praeuisae; and election is ex fide prauisa: obsecro vos deal candide, speak
plain English: had God in Predestinating respect to faith foreseen, as to a
motive inclining him to choose Peter, rather then Judas? why mince you the
matter with the term of a condition prerequired? when as, if it were any way
Ratio eligendi, the Reason inducing to choose this man rather then another, it
had apparently the Nature of a motive to God, causing him to pass his Act of
choosing on this man, rather then another.

In matter of Predestination wisdom of Superiors has justly limited us
Nouices: wherefore I forbear large handling. This only to the question:
Passes the Act of Gods predestination upon Faith, or good use of Grace? had
God predestinating any consideration of Faith? Resp. As of a mean of
salvation, or qualification of them that should be saved, none doubts. As of a
merit, or motive to predestinate, no man, but Pelagian, will affirm.

Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Say not its for thine own righteousness. 1 In Ephesians. 2 3.
Nature, as Adam afforded it, thou wast child of wrath as others. 2 Before
calling, had thy conversation as other Gentiles; Tit. 3.3.
serving the lusts and diverse pleasures. Can thou say any thing but mercy
and special love of God inclined him to call thee? how then to elect thee?

3 Since calling, how Iac. 3.2.
many have bin thy interruptions of holy Courses? faintings of faith,
languishings of devotion. 4 In the best services, I^ai 64.6.
pollutions no less then menstruous. Let these things humble thee so sarie, as
to work confession of thine own indignity. Excite thee to endeavor
comprehending, and thankful acknowledging the infinite love and goodness of
God in thine election; especially seeing so many millions of men and Angels
neglected; thy self, of mere mercy, chosen a vessel of honor.

And the work of faith with power. The t^ird member of the petition: supply
the sentence thus: and fulfill the work of faith.

What is this work of Faith? Ans. Say some learned, faith it self, which is
Gods work in us: the Hebraisme indeed is not unusual, Romans 4.11. the sign of
Circumcision: that is, Circumcision which is a sign. And its true, not only
beginnings of faith, but every increment and addition to the graduall quantity
of it, is Gods work in his Children. You may add, that to the continuance,
exercise, increase of it, is requisite a divine power; since its shaken by so
many potent Adversaries, Satan's winowings, divine temptations, humane
infirmities.

There be that understand Charity and the works thereof. And its true, Gal.
5.6.
faith works by love; and by such works, is the Name of the Lord, Mar. 5.16.
glorified: others, perseverance.

But reflecting upon what Paul has, 1 These. 1.3. where he ascribes to faith,
work; to love, labor; to hope, patience; I am inclined to think, he means
here by the work of faith, some work special and eximious issuing from
faith, as labor from love, patience from hope. The rather, for that to the
persitting hereof, he prays manifestation of divine power and virtue; as if
thereto were r^quired some special hand of God for our support, and enabling
to performance.

Acts, or works of faith you may thus number. 1 Elicit, ipsum Credere Deo,
Deum, in Deum. 2 Imperate, Acts 15 9.
purity, Gal 5.6.
charity, Romans 10.
devotion: Truth is, all virtues, all Actions of all virtues Regular^y
performed issue from Faith; Therefore say Schoolmen, Faith is not only it
self, a virtue, but matter, radix, Auriga omnium virtutum: yet, meethinkes, I
see not in all these what Paul may be thought to call the work of Faith with
such (...); that eximious and Heroical work of Faith, to the complement
whereof, Paul requires manifestation of more then ordinary divine power.

There is leave, and pardon also, I hope, to be given to conjectures, when
they are founded on probability, and are made with humble submission to Church
Judgment. Mistake I? Or does Paul mean that exterior act of Faith, Confession
of the Faith and Name of Christ in days of violent persecution?

Certainly it is an heroical work of Faith, a work of no less then
Heroical Faith, in such times to hold fast the confession of our hope without
wavering. To you its given not only to believe, but Phil. 1.29.
to suffer for the Name sake of Christ: Me seems he makes it something more
excellent then Faith it self, to suffer for Christ's Name; more eximious, I
mean, not only in genere boni, but in genere magni. Suffer affliction
according to the 2 Timothy 1.8.
power of God. Certainly its a divine power that must support in so great a
fight of afflictions.

But is this opus fidei? Ask the Apostle. Through Heb. 11.33.36.37.
Faith they had Trials by cruel mockings; were stoned, sawne asunder, flaine
with the sword. But 1 Job. 5.4.
Faith, nothing could get such victory over the world; But for Confession of
Faith, they had endured none of these hardships.

This then seems that which Paul prays for. That as they had hitherto with
constancy and courage borne up in constant Confession of Christ and his
Gospel, notwithstanding the many Tribulations and persecutions they had
endured; So God would please still by his power to support, and enable with
like constancy to hold fast their Confession, till they came to the complement
of Christian patience and fortitude, Martyrdom it self, and resisting against
sin to the shedding of Blood, in case the Lord should thither call them.

The niceties of inquiry usual amongst Schoolmen, I willingly pretermit; Such
as that is; whether confession of the doctrine of Faith be properly an act of
Faith, or not rather of fortitude? And how an act of Faith, whither Physice or
moraliter? Therein who lusts to busy himself, may see what c Thomas his
Commenters say. 2.^. 2. ae. q. 3 Art. 10.
I take for granted, that its a work and office of Faith, to confess the
known Truth in times of extreme persecutions. Testimonies are frequent: See
Romans 10.10. 2 Corinthians 4 1^. Matthew. 10.

How far we stand bound to the office and performance thereof, is matter of
profitable inquiry. And in these times, though peaceable, yet seeming to
portend our trial, s^mething necessary. Thus is the Resolution for the
general. That being a precept affirmative, though it bind semper, yet it
binds not ad semper: nor is absolutely necessary to Salvation, to be actual
performed save only pro loco and tempore. Suppose when omission of the duty
draws with it neglect of honor due to God; or of edification and furtherance
in Faith to Brethren: 2^. 2 ae. q 3. Art. 2. Scholast. in 3um distinct. 23.
See d Thomas and his Followers? Or thus, the precept touching confession may
two ways be conceived. Negatiuely, binding not to deny. Affirmatively,
binding to confess.

Not to deny the Faith at any time, we are bound in all times upon pain of
damnation. Whither this denial be by words, or deeds, or signs, they are all
coincident. 1. Christ thunders, speaks not to such. He that Luc 9.26.
denies me before men, or is ashamed of me and my Gospel, him will I deny
before my Father which is in heaven. 2. The tears were Mat. 26.75.
bitter wherewith Peter washed away this sin. 3. Church Censures were in all
times severe against such; admitting none therein faulty, to Reconcilement, but
after longsome and heavy penance. 4. No marvel, it being simplicita and ex se
malum, and drawing after it so dangerous consequents.

Now when, or in what case, we are bound to actual and open Confession of
Faith upon pain of damnation (I suppose still the times of violent persecution
is matter of more curious inquiry. Measures and Rules herein some thus
assign.

Such Confession is sometimes an act of Religion: sometimes, of Charity,
sometimes, of Justice. When it falls to be an act of Religion, as where
without it the honor due to God and his Truth should fall to the ground, then
it is duty to confess. When an act of Charity, either by courage to win an
Alien, or to confirm a weakeling, or to prevent Apostasy of the wavering,
then a necessary duty to confess. When an act of Justice in respect of the
person a man susteines, or office he bears, suppose of a Teacher or Pastor in
the Church, then also absolutely necessary. Howbeit, for our guidance to
discern, when Religion, Charity or Justice requires it, they leave us to the
dictate of Prudence.

We maze our selves sometimes in following Schoolmen. They are often more witty
in raising doubts, then judicious in assoyling them.

These generals of direction are doubtless sound. But when we are referred to
dictamen prudentiae for Application, how are the simple still left unsatisfied.?

We have a more sure word of Prophets and Apostles; we shall do well to
attend thereto. That one Text of Peter, as to my apprehension it sounds,
speaks more fully to guide us, then all the voluminous writings of their
Angelical and Seraphicall Doctors. Thus you read it. 1. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give answer, or 2. Apology to every one that, 3. Asks
you a Reason of the hope that is in you. The Rules are three. 1. That secundum
Animi praeparationem, the precept of Confession always binds all: as that of
Martyrdom: so that we must be ready, and resolved at all times to make
confession of Faith, when God shall call us thereto, yea, though death stand
present to devour us. This is that our Savior calls h taking up our Cross
daily; this, as some interpret, Paul's 1 Cor 13.31
dying daily; his carrying his soul in his hand, ready to offer it unto God,
wh^nsoeuer he should require it. And this is in confesso. 2. But when is the
actual performance necessary? Resp. When Luke 9 23.
our Confession puts on the nature of an Apology, or necessary defense and
justification of the Truth, exagita^ed by oppositions and calumnies of the
Adversary, or endangered to suppression by violence of persecution, then say
the Lord calls thee to confess the Faith: Then think a woe belonging, I say
not only to the denyer, but even to the betrayer of the Faith.

3. Especially if there be (...); one 1. That of Authority interrogates, or 2.
Of necessity beggs of thee an opening of thine understanding and credulity in
the mystery of Christ. Ne sim longior.

May it not be lawful to conceal our Faith in times of danger? Answ. Look
back to what has bin said touching the manner of Obligation to actual
confession, thou will see it lawful at times to conceal thy Faith, as well as
other truths. Cyprian in his last Epistle written immediately before his
Martyrdom, for direction of his people, thus. Apprehensus inquit. and traditus
loqui debet. Siquide^ magis in nobis dominus posit is in illa Hora loquitur,
qui nos confiteri magis voluit, quam profiteri. Acutely, yet soundly
distinguishing betwixt profession and confession. To profess, that is,
vltroneously to utter a man's secret credulity in times of danger, no man is
simply bound: to confess, that is, to make true answer to demands of
Authority in that case made, is no doubt a duty. Yet there be judicious, who
allow us in this case,: simulationem cautelae, by example of Samuel, and
Jeremy: provided always, it exceed not bounds of warrantable and honest
Cautelousnesse: for then it degenerates to cursed dissimulation, and is
interpretatiue a denial. Saint Cyprian tells of some, who loath to deny, but
lother to die, procured or accepted from the Magistrates libels or scrolles
testimonial of their abnegation: he calls them libellos commaculatos. These,
though not directly denying Christ, yet are put to their penance, for their
willing seeming to deny him: and merito. Like is to be thought of all
Complementings with Idolaters, or other Aliens in their signs of profession,
or but outward society in their immolations, etc. yea, though the heart retain
Faith, and the mouth never denied it.

Is it not lawful to fly in times of persecution? Answ. Tertullian wrote a
whole Treatise to prove it simply unlawful. Better a great deal his Scholar
Saint Cyprian allows it in case, and with limits persuades it. What those
limits are, the Reader may find largely and iudiciously expressed in Saint
Augustines 180. Epistle, Eum Consule.

Is it warrantable vltroneously to offer our selves to Martyrdom? Resp.
Examples are not infrequent in the Primitive Church; yet did Saint Cyprian
dissuade it to his people. Prudently: for why tempt we God? Why presume we of
our own strength? Saint Peter by such occasion ex egregio praesumptore Creber
Negator effectus est. And multitudes of such foole-hardies, Lib. 6. cap. 30.
Eusebius records to have fallen to abnegation. I like fortitude tempered with
prudence and humility. Those voluntary confessions mentioned in story, had no
doubt, their special heroical instinct. Till we be assured of the like, let
us not attempt to imitate their practice. Howbeit, that Confession is an office
and work of Faith, in Casu necessary, we have before shown.

Care to depart from evil. Their love to God, I judge of, by obedience; their
Faith, by works of Charity, mercy, fortitude, etc. Let them swear by a
thousand Gods that they fear the living and true God, while I see them Psalm.
14.1.
corrupt and abominable in their doings, I say as David, Psalm. 36.1.
there is no fear of God before their eyes. Let them boast, if they will, of
Abraham's (...) in Faith, yet while I see them Pro. 3.5.
lean to their own wisdom, and choose means unsanctified to provide for
Temporalities, I say in my heart, there is in such men no Faith or dependence
upon God.

Priscilian is long since dead: yet li^es his Heresy among^t men pretendedly
most Orthodox. Thus did he dogmatizare. That Christians might lie to secret
Christianity: and, Christ may, must be denied, that the Christian might be
concealed from the notice and malice of enemies to Christianity. The half have
not heard of Priscillian, who walk in his way. In forraging Merchants, who
count gain godliness, I wonder not at it. Religion, all things with them are
venall. This only amazeth me; That in men pretending Israelitisme, as sincere
as Nathaniels, the sentence should seem plausible, the Resolution be fixed, to
complement with Antichrist in his Idolatry, reserving Faith pure, and entire to
their Christ. But suppose you, he said in vain, Show me thy Faith by thy
Iac. 2.18.
works: Or he, with the mouth Romans 10.10.
Confession is made to salvation. Where this opus fidei is not resolved to be
performed, you may boldly say, there is no truth of Faith.

I spare speech of Nicodemites (they must go current amongst such Christians
for zealous Protestants) who only conceal, and shrink from manifesting their
profession, for a few of Ishmaels persecutions. Howbeit to such this let me
say: He that is Luke 9.26.
ashamed of Christ, and his Gospel, especially in these days of peace, Christ
will shame to own for his, before his Father, and holy Angels. And can you
suppose him an Israelite indeed, whom an Ishmalite can scoff out of the coat
of his Religion? Or think him Heb. 13.13.
gone out of the world, who has not learned to bear the Reproach of Christ?

To Gods people, I say as Paul, Remember him who under Pontius Pilate witnessed
a good 1 Timothy 6.13.
confession: who for our sakes Heb. 12.2.
endured the Cross, despised the shame; and has tied us to the condition of
Romans 8.17.
suffering with him, as many as desire to reign with him. Think with our
selves, 1. What is it a persecutor can do? Luke 12 4.
kill the body? It must die. Why fear we to make a virtue of that necessity?
2. We have a Heb. 12.1.
clowd of witnesses gone before us. 3. Are assured, not only of our crown,
but of our Crownet, our eminence of glory among the Saints.

Means to arm us to the Resolution. 1. Consider he is faithful who has
promised to 1 Cor. 10.13.
give issue with the temptation, to 2 Cor. 12.9.
perfect power in weakness. That promise we have seen exemplified. The Angel
of Philadelphia had but Apoc 3.8.
a little strength, yet denied not his Name.

2. Its something to forecast the utmost of our danger: expectat^on mitigates
the extremity, when it comes: yet prudence I commend to all Gods people in
their premeditation and resolution: for the general thus. Pitch thy purpose
rather to die, then to deny thy Savior; and hope the Lord will enable thee to
performance.

Weakelings in faith many, and jealous of their strength, have bin found, with
greatest courage to have endured Martyrdom. Howbeit, I advise no man to be
ouerparticular in his premeditation; that were to lead himself into
Temptation. As in things delectable, particulars affect more to allure, then
generals: so in things terrible, particulars more affright to dismay, then the
general. To dwell upon the thought of fire, or saw, or gridyron, etc. may
amaze our weakness, more by much, I dare say, then thought and purpose of the
general, with humble prayer of Assistance from God to support us.

That the Name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you and you in him, etc.

The end, whither of Paul's praying? Or of fulfilling Gods purpose? Or of
perfiting the work of Faith? Some, or all?

Or what is this glory of Christ and us? That, in this life amongst men? Or
rather in our glorification in heaven? To this I rather incline, comparing ver.
10. So falls into o^r second notice the Reciprocal Coincidence of Christ's
glory with our glorification and Salvation. Such as neither can be, nor almost
be conceived without the other.

So that, if I should persuade a man to seek the glory of Christ, I would
persuade him to nothing more seriously, then to labor for the salvation of his
soul; there being nothing whereby a man can procure more glory to him, then by
working out his own salvation. Caietan is acute in his Scholie, yet expresses
not his meaning. Its not said, that Christ or Jesus, but that the Name of Jesus
may be glorified. Glorious is that Name made, when indeed he becomes a
Savior to us.

Why macerate we our selves with iealousies of sincerity, for that in our piety
we aim at our salvation. 1. Is it for nothing the Reward is so often propounded
to our view for excitement? 2. Think we Heb. 11.26.
Moses or 10.
Abraham mere Mercenaries, who wrought with such intention? 3. Ceased our
Savior to be holy, harmless, separate from sinners, when to support his
humanity he eyed the joy that was set before him? Heb. 12.2.

Whither the love or service of charity may be, in a sense, mercenary, I
refer the Learned to what Schools have disputed. This little touch from
Thomas take with you. Its one thing to love God, another to do him service.
May I love God to the end he may give me eternal life? Answ. They say no: for
that were to subordinate the Creator to the creature; and to make mine own
benefit, my chief good.

May I serve God for life eternal? Or having respect thereto, as the end of my
service? Answ. I may. Because such service is the way to eternal life; and the
mean ordained to atcheiue it.

Howbeit, punctually if we will speak to the question, for exempting
scrupulous ^calousie; Its not so much inquired, how lawful such respect to my
self is: As, whither, supposing such party reference of love and service of
God to my self, there may be concluded a nullity of sincerity? Resp. I suppose
not. More then a nullity of ingenuity in my fear, because some seruility is
mixed with it. What if fear of punishment be, at times, my strongest
hold-backe from doing evil? Is therefore no fear, but slavish in me? Yes,
even filial also. And what if my love to GOD, be in part concupiscentiall?
And the motions thereof reflect upon my self? Lack I therefore all love of
Amity? M xtures there are of all Graces with their defects, in state of this
life. Its well we mourn for defects, and endeavor to purge our hearts of
self love.

According to the Grace of our God, etc. Denotes that (...) the measure,
proportion, or Rule according whereto Glory is given? Ans. Rather the motive.
See 2 Timothy 1.9. Not according to works, but according to his purpose and
Grace; that is, not moved by our works, but by his purpose and Grace. Tit.
3.5. he saved us, not for works of righteousness, but according to his
mercy: (...) is there the same with (...).

Grace I deny not sometimes to signify (...), the gifts of Grace in us. But
Adversaries themselves confessing, here rather denotes the free beneficence and
vnmerited favor of God toward us. And there cannot, I suppose, one instance
be given in all the Scripture, where, when (...) is made Gods motive to
confer any his blessings, it signifies any gift in us Natural or gratuitous:
But only his free favor, vnmerited bounty, self propensitie to do good unto
us: sounding always the same that (...): The mercy, benignity, goodness and
bounty of God.

Of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. The styles may both without wresting be
applied to our Savior. q.d. according to the Grace of Jesus Christ which is
our God and Lord: as Thomas couples them, John 20.28. My Lord and my God.
Howeuer, the place is pregnant against Arians, for the divinity of Christ:
since his Lordship is absolute and independent; and from his Grace issues our
glory. If otherwise we apply them distinctly, God, to the father; Lord, to
Christ; the understanding is not difficult. The term God, is sometimes used
essentially, and so denotes the whole deity. John 4.24 Sometimes personally,
as when some other of the divine persons is distinctly mentioned; then usually
it denotes the father, first person in Trinity. See 2 Cor. 13.13. To both is
Grace assigned; to God the father, as the giver; to Christ, as the meritorious
procurer. But is our glory of Grace; when all the good pleasure of Gods
goodness, in our sanctification, and perseverance is fulfilled? yea, when the
highest work of faith, confession to Martyrdom, is perfitted in us? It was
Paul's opinion doubtless, that the glorious reward of our best services, the
crown of Martyrdom it self, is a reward of favor, not of debt. Aeternall
life is (...), the free gift of God. Romans 6.23. And non si^nt condignae
passiones huius vitae, of the Glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18.

These few principles remember, and hold fast; that thou may preserve unto
God entire and vnimpeached, the glory of his Grace in thy Salvation.

1 All the services or good works we do, or possibly can do, are due deb^ to
God: not only debito decentiae or morali: but ne^^ssitatis and praecepti
Because we are commanded to love God, with all the heart, mind, soul,
strength, Mar. 12.^0.

2 Whatsoever in our services, is less then the integrity of our strength
natural and gracious, according to the state of Innocence, is a sinful
defect.

3 The rewarding of our best Scruices, is an Act of liberality, free bounty,
and mercy, not of Justice.

4 Obligation is none upon God to reward, but only his gracious covenant and
promises. Promittendo se fecit debitorem; other tie there is none upon God, to
crown our Services. Even Thomas could say, he is debtor to himself in respect
of his promise and ordinance, rather then to us. And, facta promissione tenetur
Deus ad praemiandum; sed ex fidelitate quia mentiri non potest, non ex
Iustitia. And of this first Chapter, thus far.

AN EXPOSITION upon the second Epistle to the THESSALONIANS.
2. THESE. Chap. 2. Ver. 1.2. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by gathering together unto him,

That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.


THe second material part of the Epistle, spent in Redargution of error in
Judgment touching the time of Christ's second coming.

Wherein are 1. Caveat, ver. 1, 2. 2. Confutation, ver. 3. 3. Comfort, ver. 13.
4. Means of prevention, ver. 15.

In the Caveat are 1. The Modus, 2. The matter of it.

The manner of carriage is with greatest, 1. Meekness; We beseech you, 2.
Love, Brethren. 3. Earnestness, such as wherein the Apostle scarce satisfies
himself. 1. Obtesting and almost adiuring them to cautionatenesse, ver. 1. 2.
Iterating it, ver. 3. with greatest particularity, Let no man by any means.

Those parcills of the Modus, ^is meekness and love, condescending from
authority he had to command, unto petitioning them for their own good, I
willingly pretermit: wishing only my Brethren or Fathers in the Ministry to
put on bowels of compassion to win to the truth, rather then in Stoic sternnes
and Rigorous Austerity, to attempt, forcing the people to reformation of
Judgment or manners. God was not in the thunder, nor in the Earthquake,
appearing to Elias, but in 1. Reg. 19.12.
the still Wind. To Adam he appeared in the Gen 3.8.
cool of the day Over Israel, that stiff-necked people, he set Moses the Number.
12.3.
meekest man on earth: Judgment may be convinced by Reason, cannot be forced
to assent by violence, no not to most necessary truths. Will may be allured,
cannot be enforced to goodness.

Gregory's temper I like well, Legatur did. 45. cap. disciplina.
miscenda est leniras cum seueritate, sit amor, sed non emolliens; sit rigor
sed non exasperans; And Austins best advised thoughts best please ^^ce; that
conviction go before coaction in matter of Faith Chrysostom had rather be
countable to God for a nimium of mercy, then for overplus of severity: said not
Paul 2 Timothy 2.25.
the same in his Canon? What one separatist, or but vnconfortant, has the
contrary course won? And not rather exasperated to farther alienation?

2. The earnestness of the Apostle applied to the matter I choose rather to
insist on expressed it is in two things: 1. That he contents not himself to
beseech, but to obtest, and that by what is, or should be most preualent with
us; the coming of Christ. 2. Iterating the caution in all the particulars.

(...) Its not as elsewhere, Romans 12.1.
(...), but (...): for the coming sake of our Lord Jesus, etc. since he comes
for our good, to take vengeance on them that trouble us, and to gather us
together unto himself, to participate his own glory, I beseech you let this
meditation move you to Caution.

The ground of the obtestation, and the certain truth of it, I supposed by the
Apostle to be in confesso amongst this people, I dwell not on: but refer the
Reader to what is already extant in 1 These. 4.16. Scriptures testifying truth
of both, and particulars so many as are meet for us to know, view in the Marg.
1. Instruments of our assembling unto him are Mat. 24.31.
Angels. 2. Ends. 1. Our Romans 14.12.
account. 2. 2 Cor. 5 10.
Receiving according to what is done in our bodies. 3. Romans 2.5.
Declaration of Gods Justice in admitting us to salvation. 4. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Justifying and clearing our integrity to the face of men and devils with the
like.

Profits flowing from the meditation: 1. It much solaceth our necessary, and
sometimes enforced separation from the society of Gods children, a corasiue
biting, as any, to a gracious disposition; to remember, that a day shall come,
when we shall all be gathered together; and linked inseparably to enjoy the
mutual society each of other. Who is there amongst you fearing God, who
desires not, if it were possible, to enjoy the perpetual presence and
conversation of all that fear God? The Lord has otherwise disposed the state
of this life. 1 That we may know, heaven is not on earth. 2. That the yet
aliens in every quarter of the world, may be woune by the example of dispersed
Saints. 3. At least made inexcusable before God, if neither by their holy
example, nor godly admonitions, nor means of salvation, for his Saints sake
vouchsafed unto them, they will be ledd to Repentance. Howbeit he has
appointed a day, wherein the Elect shall be gathered together from the sour
winds; And then shall be, as a Mat. 25.32.
separation of goats from sheep, so a blessed union, and indissoluble
conjunction in most heavenly Heb. 12.12.13.
society, of Elect men and Angels.

2. Instructs to 2 Pet. 3.11.
care and study of sanctity, no less then angelical; proportional, as the
capacity of the creature is, to that 1 Ioh. 3.3.
of God himself: fools or worse they; who knowing they must stand before a
God of pure eyes, think they may be too nice, ouer-precise in matter of
morality.

3. Excites to 1. Careful Mat. 25. 1 Per 4.10.
use of gifts received. 2 2 Cor 5.10.11
Faithful employment of our selves in our vocations; since we know we are then
summoned to our Mat. 25.
Accounts; and have heard the Judge himself pronounce him Luc. 12.43.
blessed, whom, when he comes, he shall find so doing.

3. Matter of the caution. 1. General; not soon moved from your mind, etc.
2. Particular; as if the coming were instant. 3. Item also he gives against
the means, Spirit, Word, Epistle.

Compa^e if you please Paul's earnestness in his caution, with the quality or
degree of the error, against which its intended. The maine Article of Christ's
coming is not called into question amongst this people: in the circumstance
only is the attempt to corrupt their judgment; yet with what earnestness
does Paul press the caution?

As if it concerned us, almost upon peril of our souls, to preserve judgment
sound in matters of Faith, even such as but aloof touch the Foundation. Hence
is the charge to Timothy, conveyed in much passion; O Timothy 1 Timothy 6.20.
serua depositum; the substance yea circumstances of Evangelical doctrine: our
Savior cries woe to them that Mat. 5.19.
break or teach breach of the minima mandatorum. And Paul wishes Gal. 5.12.
cut off them that troubled the Church, but with Gal. 5.9.
little leaven in the Article of Justification.

1. Certainly every piece and parcel of Truth is precious, it tends in the
degree to persect, Ioh. 17.17.
to sanctify the understanding; least errors are maculae, though not vulnera
intellectus.

2. And know you not, says Saint Paul, Gal. 5.9.
a little leaven leauens the whole lump? (...): such speech 2 Timothy 2.17, 18
frets as a Gangrene, and will increase to more ungodliness: of them which
denied not the Resurrection, but affirmed it past already.

Modus? Whither it be Sacramentaliter, and spiritualiter only, or Modo
substantiae; Whither by Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation, What matters
it to dispute? Who, but fools, are not indifferent to resolve? Oh foolish, yet
holy Martyrs, that to this error opposed even to the shedding of blood.

In the Article of Justification; so all be resolved to Christ; what folly is
it to tumble our selves in inquiring after the manner of Application, or
efficacy of his meritorious Passion? Whither by it imputed to us we stand
just in GODS sight; or, Whither it avail by procuring to us the gift of
Charity, and other infused virtues, to formallize us internally to Justice, in
Chaos antiquum confundimur: for ought I see, the more implicit our Faith is,
the better: A few maine generals let us hold; for distinctnesse in knowledge
and Faith, though vouchsafed us in the means, let that be referred to our
scientia oblectans.

But 1. Have we forgotten who said; though keeping the foundation we may be
saved, yet by 1 Cor. 3.15.
building hay or stubble we suffer loss? So far impair the fullness of our
reward? 2. Are these inferior truths amongst the things revealed? Then they
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
belong to us; woefully unthankful he who ouer-slights them. 3. Such
wantonness in playing with precious truth, occasions the Lord to permit us to
grosser errors. 4. The error here mentioned overthrows not the maine, yet
with what earnestness does Paul Caution against it?

VERSE. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at
hand.


THe greater matter of the Caveat. (...), to be moved from your mind. It
likes Master Beza best to interpret after the proper signification of (...); In
his apprehension it sounds, putting beside their mind or right wits; as if
some dementia should seize them when once they gave way to unsound doctrine;
instances he gives many in ancient and latter Heretics, and their Sectaries:
so enchanted and madded when once thoroughly possessed with error, that except
furious obstinacy be Reason, there seemed left nothing of Reasonable creatures
in them. Indeed Saint Paul sticks not to impute Gal. 3.1.
demencie to seduced Galathians, and conceits a kind of Witcheraft and strong
enchantment to possess them. To Timothy mentioning such, he says they 2 Timothy 2.8.9.
(...); In his loss, imputes no less then (...), amentiam, madness or loss
of wits unto them.

Gods Judgments are sometimes open, sometimes secret, always just: strong was
the infatuation cast upon Gentiles for Romans 1.28.
detayning truth natural in unrighteousness. If Christians to whom the light
of Gods glorious Gospel, has shined, yet grow to maintain errors, be
stricken with blindness of mind, possessed with a spirit of giddiness, I
wonder not. But singularity is dangerous, the next step to madness. Mind it,
Brethren, you that itch after novelties, least you loose your minds, when once
that spiritus vertiginis spoken of in the Prophet, has possessed you.

But why not (...) Tropically for (...)? Sentence or Judgment: the trope is
not infrequent. We have 1 Cor. 2.16.
the mind of Christ; that is, his sentence and judgment by himself declared
unto us. Be knit together in the same 1 Cor. 11.10. (...).
mind, and in the same Judgment; the latter added (...): that Paul's meaning
may be this; be not soon moved from your mind; be not easily altered from
that sentence you have entertained: touching the time of Christ's second
coming; no small matter should shake or cause to wave or waver their judgment
so well before informed, (...); perhaps here signifies the same that (...).

The evil Paul cautions against, is leuity or instability of Judgment in
matter of Faith: far be it from us. Ob.
To be Ephesians. 4.14.
wherried about wethercock-like with every blast of vain doctrine is childish:
Its good that the heart be Heb. 13.9.
stablished: to hold fast the confession of our Faith Heb. 10.23.
without any so much as wavering.

1. Truth is but one in re qualibet; though errors be various and manisold;
Gal. 1.7.
It is not another Gospel, to which you are transported: And when our wild
wits have tired themselves in wandering, to that ancient and first truth they
must retire, if ever we will find Ier. 6.16.
rest to our souls.

And how can we think to escape? If we shall Heb. 2.3.4.
despise so great salvation, 1. Preached by the Lord, 2. Testified by Apostles,
3. Confirmed by miracles, 4. Attended with gifts of the holy Ghost? Is it not
to despise, to 2 Timothy 4.1.
turn away our ears from the truth; and to attend to Fables?

That scabies scalpenda, the skiruy 2 Timothy 4.3.
itch of the ears how has it infected our Auditors? That scarce any thing can
now please, but what savors of nouelty. And herein who so is not palpably
Heretical, be he never so extrauagant, shall be a Prophet for this people,
who so illiterate but may make a faction? So odd, but may draw Disciples after
him? I would this evil staid among our virgin vulgus only that are yet to
choose their Religion. The oaks of Bashan, the tall Cedars of Lebanon, are
become as Reeds, so shaken with every blast of vain doctrine; so ready to be
transported to another Gospel. I spare particularizing: only I say, vetera
vera; the old Ier. 6.16.
way is the good way.

Lord that our giddy brains were once settled. 1. 'Twill never be, so long as
we have men's persons in admiration; never till we have learned to give Faith
her solefooting on that most sure word of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.19

2. Never, till we study to live, rather then to dispute; to practice, rather
then to contemplate, Ioh. 13.17. Mat. 7.24.25.

3. Never, till we have received the love, as well as the knowledge of the
Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Pro. 23.23.

4. Never, till we have experimented, and felt the power of Gods Word in our
souls, This is (...) and (...).
Phil. 1.9.

Nor be troubled. (...): the word imports such perturbation as arises from See
Mat. 24. Marc. 13.
rumor, or relation of something terrible. And not unlikely, the publishers of
this error rung in their ears, the terror of the Judge, the strictnes of
accounts; vnbowelled hell it self the more to affright. Whence grew the
perturbation and anxious unquiet of their minds.

That clause of the admonition, to me seems an implicit Reason, dissuading
leuitie and unsettledness in matter of Faith and Religion; because it breeds
disturbance, anxietie and trouble of mind, restless, no less often times then
perplexed, so that of a man unsettled in that kind, may be said, as of them in
Esaias: They Isa. 57.20.21. Iac. 1.
are never at rest; but are as the raging sea tossed of the winds: they do
but Gal. 1.7. and 5.12.
trouble you that bring in another Gospel: the word is (...). S. John
mentioning the Locusts set-rising out of the bottomless pit, Antichristian
Teachers, uses another word, implying Apoc. 9.5.
torture no less then that of the rack; such horrible torture should they
plunge seduced consciences into, while they taught to seek Righteousness,
satisfaction to Gods justice by their own good works or voluntary passions.

I beseech you, brethren, by the peace of God which passes all understanding,
be ware how you attend to the chirping of such locusts; suffering your selves
to be transported to another Gospel. If ever from principles of Popish
Doctrine, Conscience be settled in sound peace, say, God has not spoken by me.
With me its an under rule to judge of doctrines pretented to be Evangelical:
Tends it, in the Nature of it, to pacification of the distressed Conscience?
else it is not Evangelical, Romans 5.5.
says not the Apostle the same? universally I think as Jeremy; y that is
only the good way wherein I may find the sweetness of holy rest to my soul.

Neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Epistle as from us. Item against the
means of their vnsetling and seducement; pretenses of Authority no less then
divine and Apostolical: three in number, the Ancient colors of most
Heretics.

The first is, Spirit; that is, as I conceive, pretense of See 1 Ioh. 4.1.
instincts, inspirations, Revelations immediate and extraordinary from the
spirit of God. They Mic. 2.11.
walk in the Spirit, yet lie falsely, says Micah. Montanus had his Paraclete,
beside his Prophetisses Prisca and Maximilla. Simon Magus, his Helene: cursed
Moamed calls the dead fits of his falling sickness, his exstasie and rauishment
at the appearance of the Angel Gabriel. At promulgation of his ordinances, his
Dove inured to fetch food from out his Ear, is pretended no less then the
holy Ghost; sent whisperingly to imitate what he should enact for the people.
Heathenish Politicians had like pretenses, to win credit to their Laws. Numa
Pompilius receives his, from the Goddess Aegeria. Lycurgus his, from Apollo,
etc.

Impudency of Heretics is seldom less then blasphemous, what blasphemy
greater then to father doctrines of devils, upon the God of truth? Spirits of
Error, to be styled Gods Spirit of Truth?

Against all such fanaticall Enthusiasts and Enthusiasmes, the Lord has made
us cautionate. The quaere is common, how we may discern a pretended, from a
true Prophet. Resp. Time was when was place for such inquiry; when God was
pleased by such means extraordinary to instruct his people: for my part, a
piaculum I hold it, to expect in these days Ministers of Apoc. 22.18.
Prophetical Spirit, revelation any above the ordinary. Let Papists boast, as
they will, of their lumen Propheticum: Prophecy now none is to me Ier. 6.16.
known, but what in that term the Scripture intends, 1 These. 5.20.
interpreting Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures.

Of old these were the rules: 1 Was it matter of prediction, they pretended in
their Prophetical instinct? Deuteronomy. 18.22.
Events must try it.

2 Matter of Doctrine. Isai 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; if they spoke not according to this word,
there was no light in them. Though with signs and wonders they should confirm
their Doctrine, yet if it Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
led to other gods, Israel must not attend. Is it another Gospel (...), but
different, not contrariant to that already received? though Isai or Elias, Paul
or Peter, Gal. 1 8.
yea g an Angel from heaven should publish it, Tertullian.
we must hold him accursed. Adoro Scripturae plentitudinem.

The second is (...): out of the diverse signification of the word, diverse are
the rendrings and interpretations, (...).

1 Some interpret, Arithmeticall computation or supputations, such as men
following the vanity of Astrologers, used in calculating, as it were, the end
of the world; as Tullie speaks of the Mathematicians great year. Not much
unlike that of the great Rabbine Elias; Duo millia Inane; Duo millia Lex; Duo
millia Christus: postea finis. tricae.

2 Some Argumentation, Reasonings and discourses taken from the natural
condition of the Creature; now aged and selfely inclined to a dissolution:
probably enough they proceed for the maine. Who but observes in the main parts
of the world, in all particular kinds of Creatures decay of vigor? Terra
effaeta, says Tullie, through age. Ptolomie in his time observed the Sun to
be come nearer the earth by many degrees, as it were to comfort with his more
heat, through more nighnesse, the cold old age of the earth. The strength of
men, what is it to that of them of old; their scantling of life, what to that
before, or after the flood? how few reach to David's term? (...), says
Damascene; and howsoever some privilege of perpetuity may be allowed to
celestial bodies, yet for sublunarie Creatures, undergoing so many, so
continual mutations, and through mutations, enfeeblings; Reason it self would
easily find out something more then probability, whereout to conclude
certainly of their final wasting: that they stand so long inexhausted is not
so much out of their own strength, but as Saint Peter observes; by the word of
God supporting them. The heavens and earth that now are, are kept in store 2
Pet 3.7.
by the word of God, reserved to fire unto the Judgment of the Great day.

3. Rathest thus: word or speech; because it follows, as from us. It more then
seems; these false Teachers pretended they had heard it from Paul's mouth;
whither equiuocating they built themselves on that Nos qui viuimus, 1 These.
4.15. misinterpreted; or, which I rather think, by impudent fiction they
fathered their error upon Paul, as they had heard him teaching in other
Churches; or, as falsely they might boast, privately imparting it, as some
secret to themselves: how ever, Its but the trick of an Heretic to fly from
verbum Scriptum, to verbum Iraditum: I mean, where the doctrine is urged as
matter of necessary faith: belike Apostles had forgotten the charge of their
Master, to Mat. 10.27.
publish on the house tops, what they had heard in secret when they must
whisper in secret the abstruser points of knowledge, to the more perfect;
conceiling them from all notice of the vulgar. Saint Austin makes mention of
the Deuterosis Iudaeorum, Cont. Aduers. leg. and prophet. lib. 2. cap. 11.
which to them was a second Mishne, equalled with Moses his written
Deuteronomie. Unwritten traditions (who doubts but pretended from Moses or some
other great Prophet? which they equalled with the Scriptures of the Law and
Prophets. Quid nostri? The written word is but partialis Regula; supply it
must have from Tradition: No nay; for where else shall we find Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Images, Sacrament, Relics? etc.

Thus I judge: 1 Ever since the Church had a word written, she had in that
written word a perfect rule of faith and practice; perfect I mean protempore.
The quaere is usual all whither Articles of faith were increased in process
of time. And is thus resolved: they were not increased noua addendo, but
implicita explicando. Does any doubt whether Moses related fully what was
prescribed to Adam or Abraham to be believed?

2 The Gospel which the Apostles preached, they did afterward by the will of
God deliver us in their writings, Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1.
to be the foundation and pillar of faith: perfectly and fully, trow we? Adoro
Scripturae plenitudinem, says Tertullian. Scriptum esse do^eat Hermogenis
^fficina: Si non est Scriptum, timeat vae illud, Vide Apoc. 22.18. In cap. 2.
Aggaei.
adijcientibus, vel detrahentibus destinatum. Saint Hierome. Quae absque
autoritate and testimonijs Scripturarum, quasi traditione Apostolica sponte
reperiunt, at que confingunt, percutit gladius Dei.

3 Can we imagine the Apostles, inserting in their writings paticulars many,
comparatively to those of necessary faith, of no such consequence for
knowledge, would pretermit any thing concerning us in the maine? Credat Iudaeus
Apella.

4 But who can imagine their writings and Traditions are contrariant? Ends of
committing the word to writing, see largely in Theophylact, Kemnitius, and
others Ancient and Modern; and tell me how well this Fancy sorts with them.

Nor by Epistle as from us. The third is letter. Means he the former Epistle
sent to this Church, corrupted by audacious gloss of these false Teachers?
Rather some other forged by them, and fathered upon the Apostle: why else in
the close is the Apostle so careful to Characterize his Epistles? doubtless
that the forgerie, if any, might thereby be discovered.

Such forgerie is no new thing in Heretics and other Impostors. Apostles yet
suruiuing, they published under their Names Evangelical stories: Ambrose on
Luke mentions the counterfeit Gospels of Thomas, Bartholomew, Paul, whose
Authors he supposes those many mentioned by Luke to have attempted, but
without success, the narrations that concerned our Savior. Aftertimes were
not free from like Impostures: But as any man gained to himself reputation of
learning and sanctity in the Church, so was his Name prefixed to the Pamphlets
of seducing Teachers, to gain them Authority: out of this shop came that
book of Hermes, commonly styled Pastor: and those many counterfeit Fathers,
whose Authority is sacred amongst our Romanists. Truth is, scarcely any of the
Fathers, but their names have bin made Panders to their superstition: that
where their indubitate writings steed them not, counterfeit additions may
procure them patronage.

What think you? Is not the cause deplored, which but by such base shifts
cannot be supported? Have ye no written word for purgatory prayer for the
dead, in all the indubitate Scriptures of Prophets and Apostles? but ye must
fly to the Apocrypha, Tradition, apparitians of the dead, etc. for their
foundation. 'Twill ever be true which Tertullian said of Heretics, they are
Lucifugae Scripturarum. I say as Basil, Infidelitatis Argumentum fuerit, Sermon.
de fidci Consessione. lib. 3. cont. lit. petilian. cap. 6.
and signum superbiae certissimum, si quis eorum quae scripta sunt, aliquid
velit reijcere, aut little quae non scripta introducere; as Saint Augustine. Si
quis sieve de Christo, sieve de eius Ecclesia, sieve de quacunque alia re, quae
pertinet ad fidem, vitamque nostram, non dicam si nos, sed quod Paulus adiecit,
si Angelus de Colo vobis annunciauerit preterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus
and Euangelicis accepistis, Anathema sit. But of the general matter of the
Caveat, and Item against the means of seducement hitherto: follows the
particular error.

As if the day of the Lord were at hand. Is that an error? said not Peter the
same? 1 Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things draws nigh: And Paul, the 1 Cor. 10.11.
ends of the world are come upon us.

Resp. 1 Some thus. Its not far off if ye compare the utmost endurance with
eternity; A 2 Pet. 1.8.
thousand years is as one day; millions of years; the perpetuity of time
scarce a point, a moment in eternity; yet may it be far off after the
measure of Time. 2 Comparatively night to the times foregoing Christ's coming
in the flesh, not simply nigh.

3 (...): Appropinquat, it draws nigh; that is Saint Peter's term; yet not
(...); inslat, not instantly to fall upon the men then living; as if they
should not taste of death till they saw the Lord Christ coming in his glory;
which seems the conceit these meant to fasten on them.

4 But why presume they to determine of times and seasons which God has
reserved in his own power? nigh therefore so nigh? What may we imagine Satan's
aim in venting such an error in the Church? seemingly so disaduantagious to
his Kingdom? The hearing of a Judgment to come strikes Foelix with Acts 24 25.
trembling. The terrible sound of the last trumpe which Hierome so continually
sembled to himself, Omnia tuta timco.
how did it make him fear where he was most secure.

Resp. 1 Amongst libertines it occasions greater indulgence to the flesh, as
men willing to glut themselves with the pleasures of sin, because their time
is but short, Isai 22.12. 2 Any error in Gods children as an error pleases
the father of lies, the seducer of the Brethren; such especially as may tend to
work their perplexity. 3 The maine is this: admit but one lie into Scriptures
or Scripture doctrine, August.
the Authority, the truth of all falls to the ground. The delay of Christ's
coming bred in those mockers 2 Pet. 3.4.
scoffing denial of the maine Article: that mill Artifex foresees his issue.
Let it once be entertained as taught in Scripture, or by divine Revelation, or
by Apostolical tradition, that Christ shall come in a time prefixed, the event
not answering; how is all faith of all Truths taught, shaken and overthrown?
Saint Augustine to Heschius a man inclining to some such opinion out of an
honest desire, remembers this text of the Apostle; prohibiting to give credence
to them who taught the day of the Lord was so instantly to come: upon this
Reason is the prohibition; Ne forte cum transisset tempus, August. ep 80.
quo eum credebant esse venturum, and venisse non cernerent, etiam caetera
fallaciter sibi promitti arbitrantes, and d^ ipsa mercede fidci desperarent.

We are not, at least ought not be, ignorant of Satan's wiles. 2 Cor. 2.11.
See how cunningly he contriues errors intended to be conveyed into the Church:
in this particular view his coming. 1 Approach it has as near as an error
may have to the truth taught by the Apostles. (...) says Peter; appropinquat:
(...), Instat, say these false teachers: (...), possedit me, in the text of the
Septuagint; change but a letter (pronunciation will hide that too) read (...),
yea have the full heresy of Arius; that Christ is a mere Creature.

2 Seemingly it tends as much as any thing to mortification and devotion; what
more then the thought of Christ's night approaching to judgment? be but a
little erroneous about that Article he will be the first shall broach it: how
excellent is the regular use of fasting? means of mortification: quickner of
devotion; fast with opinion of satisfaction and merit, he prefers fasting
before Epicurisme, like think of Prayer, Contemplation, etc.

Ambrose observes, that the little addition to the prohibition of the tree of
knowledge, made, whither by Adam or Eve, gave hint to the Devil, to entangle
the woman in opinion of Gods envying them their good? ye shall not Genesis 2.17.
eat thereof, is all the Lord said; nor Genesis 3.3.
touch it is the cautionate addition: how is the Devil aduantaged to fasten
the opinion, that for some special good in that fruit, the Lord is so strict
in interdicting it. Its reported of Ioab, that when his Teacher taught him to
corrupt the text but in the vowelling, he slew him without ransom; the charge
was to destroy zecher, the memorial of Amalech; he read it zachar, the males
of Amalech: for this he slew him. The violent expressions were irregular; else
his zeal commendable. The charge is strict, not to add, nor alter, nor
diminish; not to turn aside, no not to the right hand.

VERSE. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the
son of perdition.
THe iteration of the Caveat; where least he had not spoken home enough, in the
particulars mentioned, he enlarges to all men, or means whatsoever tending to
seducement.

The term expressing the evil cautioned against is changed; before let them
not shake or waver you, and so disquiet you; here, not deceive or mislead you
from the tract of truth. There is a devilish method, an ordinary progress in
misleading Gods people; I am deceived if Paul meant not here to express it. 1
The judgment is unsettled, and brought into wavering, by plausible oppugning
the truths received. 2 Then follows naturally anxietie, and restless
disturbance of the Conscience, through fears and doubtings: no marvel, when
the mind affoords it no certainty, whereout to frame the discourse for
comfort. 3 In this case, work the poor soul you may like wax; fitted it is
to fasten on any thing true or false, that may but seem to promise comfort:
Sirs, Acts 16 30.
what shall I do to be saved? q d. prescribe what you will I am ready to
entertain, to execute it, so be I may purchase tranquillity of mind: happy is
he, to whom, in that case, God sends his Job 33.23.
Interpreter, that one of a thousand to declare his Righteousness. And a
thousand to one, but if he meet with an Heretic but palliating the cure, he
lies down in his grave with that Heresy or superstition, which he then first
drank in.

The Children of this world are wiser in their generation, Luc. 16 8.
then the Children of light. Those Locusts of the bottomless pit, have ad
vnguem, this (...). Entertain their discourse, the first bout is, about
Religion in general, whither theirs or ours be the true: next whither the
Church must be judged of by religion and doctrine, or not rather Faith and
Religion by the Church: plausibly they plead the Church must guide us to Faith:
not Faith to the Church. That gained, as its easily from the unlearned, into a
wild wilderensse they send you to seek your Faith; which is the true Church?
where was yours before Luther? and thunderclaps of swelling words: then follow
their Universality, Antiquity, Succession, glory of Miracles, with the like,
amazing the minds of the heedelesse and simple. Thus having set them in a
mammering, these Locusts turn to Scorpions; urging the necessity of joining
themselves to the Church, wherein they may be informed of the true faith, and
right manner of worship: show misery of them that are out of the Church; their
misery in so long withholding themselves from Communion of the Roman
Synagogue; till at last Conscience apprehending the teriour, is filled with
anxietie and anguish; knowing naturally the necessity of Religion. In that
case let superstition or heresy prescribe it pilgrimage, abdication of goods,
forsaking Country, building of Monasteries, etc any thing is entertained that
may seem satisfactorie for former aberrations. By this Act, have they robbed
Parents of Children, Husbands of Wives; Cloystered Kings and Emperors; wrought
wonders of the Almighty; 1 Samuel 28.
cast contempt upon Princes, raised their Beggarselues from the dunghill, till
they now sit with Princes, and inherit the throne of glory.

I say as Paul, Ephesians. 4.14, 15
Be not henceforth Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. But following the truth in love, let us grow up into
him in all things which is the head. As Peter, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
Knowing these things aforehand, take heed we be not led away with the
impostures of the wicked and fall from our own steadfastness; But grow in
Grace, and while means continue, in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. To him for our hither stablishment in the present truth, be
glory for ever. Amen.

Let no man deceive you by any means.) Deceive. 1. Seduce, or out you of the
way of truth, or mislead you to error. Think it spoken to us; and a little
more nearely concerning us inasmuch as these are the last times; wherein the
Seducer of the Brethren, and the false Prophet, Apoc. 12.12
knowing their time but short, busily bestirre themselves: that may be one
motive. 1 Through remains of ignorance and love of novelty, we are inclinable
to error, more then to Truth. 2 Pro. 23.23.
Truth is precious, Error dangerous. 3 And if we Heb. 10.26, 27.
sin willingly, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, what
remains but fearful expectation of vengeance and violent fire to devour.

There is, 1 Temerarium. 2 There is Erroneum. 3 And there is Haereticum. There
is a graduall order between them.

1 Temerarius they call opinions or auouchments, published without sufficient
evidence of Authorit^e or Reason to support them; wherein, though perhaps there
may be Truth, yet there is not evidence sufficient to convince, or to induce a
wise man to belief or auouchment. Exemp. That there is an Hierarchy of
Angels, so ordered as the Pseud-Areopagite has framed it, perhaps is true; yet
of him that intrudes into what he has not seen, nor God revealed, may we not
say as Paul, Col. 2.18.
he is rashly puffed up in his foolish mind. That to every man from his birth
is assigned his Custos Angelus, as Hierome and other learned opine, perhaps is
true; yet he, shall be rash, who so peremptorily asserts it: for where is the
evidence?

2 Erroneous adds to Temerarious apparent falsitie of opinion; such as
overthrows no foundation, razeth no Article. Exemp. that there are more then
two Sacraments of the New Testament, whether three, or five, or seven, as
opinions are varied, is not heretical to avouch: yet aptly more then
Temerarious; no less then erroneous to think or affirm.

3 Heretical, denotes notorious falsitie in matter of necessary faith;
especially when pertinacie appears in the auouchment. Exemp. That Christ is a
mere creature, as Arius; That there is no resurrection, nor Angel, nor
Spirit, as Sadduces avouched, is not a simple error, but implies heretical
prauitie. Rashness inclines to Error, Error to Heresy.

No man, by any means. Sometimes. 1 The man leads into error. 2 Sometimes the
means or manner of conueiance.

1 The man through realtie or opinion of learning, or sanctity, or both.
Reverence and authority of Peter was such in the Church, that his fact seemed
a Law: wherefore Paul charge him to have Gal. 2.13.14. Exemplo non verbo Hier.
constrained the Gentiles to be circumcised; yea, Barnabas himself is carried
away with their dissimulation: and with us how many Errors are borne and
carried with the bare names of men; such, as with whom their admirers will
choose to err, rather then with others to think Truth. Yet said Paul, 1 the
best know but 1 Cor. 13.9.
in part. 2 are but in part sanctified. 3 Suppose them to hold the foundation,
yet may they build 1 Cor. 3.12.15
hay or stubble, so that teacher and hearer may suffer detriment.

2 The means; three usual amongst false Teachers Paul mentioned. 1
Revelation. 2 Tradition. 3 Counterfeit Scriptures; yet knowing means might be
multiplied, he enlarges his Caution, that, nor these, nor any of any sort
should be given way unto. Amongst those other ye may number, 1 Perverting of
Authentic Scriptures. 2 Miracles. 3 Apparition of the dead, with the like.
The chief means now in use amongst our Adversaries; whose Purgatory, Prayer
for dead, Invocation of Saints departed, etc. have no other ground then obscure
passages of Scripture depraved, or fained Miracles, or fond apparitions of the
dead. Against these, and a thousand the like, our Savior has made us
cautionate; limiting us to Luke 16.29.
Moses and Prophets; aduising to examine Deuteronomy. 13.2, 3.
Miracles by Doctrine. Gal. 1.8.
Anathematizing Angels introducing another Gospel.

As means available to prevent seducement, think of these. 1 Store you
withknowledge of Scriptures; Colos. 3.16.
let that word dwell plentifully in you: you know who said, Mat. 22.29.
ye err not knowing the Scriptures.

2 Beware of wanton curiosity Deuteronomy 29 29.
in searching beyond Revelations; Rom 12 3.
be wise to sobriety.

3 Make not Reason a Mistress to Faith; she is a good handmaid while a
handmaid: but Sarah made Hagar insolent.

4 Let not knowledge 1 Cor. 8 1.
puff thee; for 1 Cor. 4 7.
who discriminates thee? Thy Ignorance, if thou could see it, is more then
thy Knowledge.

5 Admit not least declining from the Scripture; change not (...) into (...),
yet.

6 Adhere not to the letter against the true meaning of Scripture, that is not
words, but meaning.

7 Fly error in manners; they make way to errors in judgment: yea 2 These.
2.11, 12
to strong delusion.

8 Be not rash or headlong in resolving beyond evidence. Temerarious makes way
to Erroneous.

9 In dubijs, resolve not without your guides. There are at whose Mal. 2.7.
mouths you must seek the Law. And of Paul's Caution hitherto: follows the
Confutation.

For that day shall not come except there be a departure first, and that man
of sin be revealed, etc.

2. The Confutation of the error from two necessary Antecedents of Christ's
coming. 1. General Apostasy. 2. Revelation of Antichrist. Thus in form.
That day shall not come till after the great Apostasy and discovery of
Antichrist. Neither of these yet are nor shall be within the time limited by
false Teachers. Ergo the end not yet.

That day shall not come; A supplement to the Text, yet no condemned addition
to the Word of God; since from scope and principal intention of the Apostle,
fluently inferred; selfely forcing it self into the understanding of the
Reader. De ciuit. dei lib. 20. c. 19.
Except there be a departure: S. Austins rendering by Refuga as impertinent I
pretermit: though the trope be usual to say scelus pro scelesto.

1. Apostasy in general signifies any defect or revolt from him to whom we owe
or have performed subjection.

2. Of what sort, and from whom is this Apostasy? Resp. S. Hierome and other
ancients many conceited it a civil defection from the Roman Empire. Nisi
inquit, venerit discessio primum, vt omnes Gentes quae Romano imperio
subiacent, recedant ab eis. and mox: Nisi, inquit, Hieron. Epist. ad Algasiam
quest 11.
fuerit Romanum Imperium desolatum, and Antichristus precesserit, non veniet
Christus. The sentence is true; but the exposition impertinent. For 1 stands or
falls the Church with the Empire? 2 Was this the sin which God should punish
by giving the raines to Antichrist? Defection from the Empire? 3 Or were
Christians to be Authors of such civil defection? 4 The sin specified as
cause of Antichrists reign and cursed efficacy in delusion, is not 2 These
2.10.
receiving love of the truth, etc. 5 I am deceived if Scripture any where use
the term to signify any other then a spiritual or Ecclesiastical defection
from God, Heb. 3.12. Isai 1.5. From Faith 1 Timothy 4.1. From Religion, Acts
21.21. We have consent of best expositors amongst Romanists: of Saint Austin
better advised. Estius ad locum. de Ciuitate. dei. l^b. 20. cap. 19.
-- Refugam vtique a Domino Deo: The defection then is spiritual. Concerning
it see these particulars. 1 What it is.

To Thomas it sounds retrocessionem a Deo: a going back or departure from God,
with whom we have had some real appearing, or graduall conjunction: to whom we
have performed or professed subjection.

Three things especially there are that knit us unto God, and whereby we
testify subjection unto him. 1 Faith. 2 Religion. 3 Obedience. 1. Persidia. 2.
Ab ordine. 3 Inobedientiae.
Accordingly they make three sorts of Apostasy: 1 From Faith. 2 From Religion.
3 From Obedience. The terms I keep, willingly varying in explication.

1 From Faith: as when a man forsakes the true doctrine of Faith, whereof he
has bin informed; and which he has entertained into his judgment and
profession, and falls to Paganism, Iudaisme, Heresy. See 1 Timothy 4.1.

2 From Religion: as when he forsakes the worship of the true God, and falls to
worship Idols; as Achaz: or from the true manner of worshipping the true God;
as the ten Tribes under Jeroboam.

3 From Obedience: as when a man falls from moral practice to viciousness of
life, whereof see Mat. 12.45. 2 Pet. 2.21. of whether, or whether of all, the
Apostle must be understood, if any inquire, thus let him think, they usually
go together; in what order, some other occasion may fitlier manifest. Though
commonly Interpreters limit to Apostasy from Faith, and purity of Religion.

3 Means the Apostle of some particular persons, Churches, Provinces? Resp.
Rather of an universal Apostasy of the multitude, and mayor part of the
Christian world: for otherwise revolt of particular persons, and Churches, was
not strange in 1 John 2 19.
Apostles times: when that here spoken of is intended to be 1 Timothy 4.1.
notorious: and something 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.
remote from the notice and sight of the generation then living: more nearly
coasting Luc. 18.8.
upon the time of Christ's second coming. And hitherto is Consent.

4 But what is this Faith and Religion from which the revolt shall be? Popish
Expositors many interpret of the Romish Faith, and Religion: and of the
Obedience supposed due to the Bishop of that See, as to the Vicar of Christ,
Saint Peter's successor. Worshipped might he be.

Resp. But show us, I pray, what Scripture has tied us to the Faith and
Religion of Rome, as it is Romana? Must we absurdly think the Church in
Scripture, to sound nothing but the Church of Rome? Faith and Religion, denote
the Faith and Religion of Rome? Apagite.

2 What, when the Romish Church proves Apostaticall? are we then tied to the
Faith and Religion of Rome? will you say its impossible, for the Mat. 16.18.
promise and y prayer of Christ? Resp. The Church to which the promise is made,
is the Church Catholic of the Elect: the Faith of Peter prayed for, is not
fides quae Creditur; but qua Creditur, the gift of Faith in Peter and all Gods
Children.

And that the Romish Church may prove Apostaticall, does not the Apostle more
then intimate? Romans 11.20. Be not high minded, but fear, was no empty
scarcrow: an intimation rather of possibility and likelihood of their
abiection: z Luc. 22.32.
if Papists themselves may be believed in the question of perseverance. Such
Caueats to other of Gods people, more then intimate their possible Apostasy:
at least as they generally apprehend them.

3 What when the great Antichrist has erected his Episcopal See upon that
(...): and has begun to the Kings of the earth in the cup of damnable errors,
and doctrines of Devils? Are we then bound to adhaere to the Faith and Religion
of Rome? or shall it not be our wisdom to come out of that Babylon? Apoc.
18.4.

4 Their Apostasy de facto, I spare to insist on. Be pleased to compare the
Doctrine of the Tridentine Counsel touching faith and worship, with that
extant in Paul's Epistle to the Romans; thou will be ready to swear, the City
that once was faithful, is now become an harlot: that Bethel is become
Beth-Auen.

As to the testimonies of fathers, produced to evidence the prerogative of that
Church: read what that thrice reverend Doctor Whitaker of blessed memory, has
fully answered: this only added: 1 set apart you must the testimonies which
Popes give of themselves: for what Court allows a man's own Testimony in his
own Cause? 2 Believe not the Epistles Decretall to be theirs, on whom they are
fathered: Bishops of those times were not so unlettered, so vntutored, as in
every page to do Priscian violence. Not so besotted, as to send letters to
the dead: nor, you must think, so Prophetical, as to allege for testimony
the sayings of men yet unborn.

As to other Fathers of Greek and Latin Church, they must be confessed to
speak many things encomiastically of the Roman Church in their times: cause
they had then sufficient, it being yet mostly orthodoxe. Yet what seems in
their writings to sound, as they would now have the Bells to ring, think, and
you shall not err, they spoke rather from voluntary reverence, then from
opinion of necessary obligation.

Apostasy, understand from the Faith Catholic taught in Scriptures; that is,
verbum fidei.

Religion, what is in the written word prescribed: All other think Mat 15.9.
vain, taught by the precepts of men. When Paul said, they should depart from
the faith; meant he from the faith of Rome? or rather meant he Rome, as other
Churches, yea more then many, should depart from faith Catholic See 1 Timothy
4.1.3. thou will think he pointed finger specially to Rome, so suitable are
their doctrines to those of Devils there mentioned. Ly^onus in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And thus does Lyra expound this Text. Nisi venerit discessio primum; Exponunt
aliqui de discessione a Romano Imperio: alij de discessu a Romana Ecclesia, a
quaiam diu est quod recessit Graecia: mihi videtur melius intelligendum, de
recessu a fide Catholica.

5. Is it past? Resp. Why doubt we? have we read Scriptures? observed the
doctrine of Faith there taught? the rule, Matter, Manner of worship there
prescribed? The whole world once groaned to see it self become Arian. It might
much more, to have seen it self become wholly Antichristian.

6. When began it? Where was it? Who Authors of it? Resp. 1. Fond men: must
circumstances needs be punctually shown, else is it not? Read what to this
point that learned Doctor Field has noted. 2. The declinings from pure
doctrine and Religion, Lib. 3. cap. 14.
and how in every Age of the Church they were increased, see in the Centurie
Writers. 3. Antichristianisme, Paul styles a mystery of iniquity; secretly it
insinuates it self into the Church: they 1 Timothy 4.2.
speak lies in Hypocrisy. 4. Can any man tell me, when Justification by
works, doctrine of merit, satisfaction, supererogation; free keeping the Law
to justification, free will, etc. were generally entertained in the Church. Can
you tell me when worshipping God in an Image, Adoration of the Eucharist,
veneration of Relics, Prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, etc. or if
there be any other point of Faith or worship wherein we dissent from the
Tridentine Faith and Religion; can any tell me, when, or where these were
generally entertained amongst the teachers, and people of the christian world?
Then there was this apostasy. When were these dogmatized and decretalls
stablished for catholic doctrine? Then was this apostasy set in the vigor.
No Papist but seems learned in this Chronology; had he will or wit to exact
them according to the ancient Faith taught by Prophets and Apostles; he would
see it more needful to reform his long error, then curiously to enquire
after impertinent circumstances.

But that there is, or shall be such an universal Apostasy of the Christian
world from Christ to Antichrist, Papists themselves confess. Of whom I would
for my learning, how in that time, universality shall be a note of the true
Church? When all the world shall run after Antichrist; and the Nations be
made drunk with the wine of the Whoores Fornications; must I then join to the
more part, the prevailing side? If you will by notes guide us to the Church,
let them yet be inseparable; so is not universality, as your selves must
confess.

not Romans 11.20.
to be high-minded but fear. How cautionate and humble should it make us all,
even 1 Cor. 10.12.
him that thinks he stands firmest? Vain Jews in their profaneness,
secured themselves by the Ier. 7.4, 9, 12.
Temple; forgetting what the Lord had done to Shilo. And we, who justify Jews
in our profane unthankfulness and disobedience, yet promise our selves
continuance of his word; yet have seen what is befalne the Churches of Asia;
what was the state of the Christian world, those many Ages wherein Antichrist
stood in his strength. I must needs say, I fear not greatly farther revolt to
Antichrist; Now are the days of his consumption; he now lies in his bed of
languishing: but take heed we fall not to Atheism or Paganism. Certainly
thither bends the whole world; Even they that profess to know God, yet in
their works deny him; and where is the greatest form of Godliness, yet may
be observed denial of the power thereof. What greater passage of Apostasy,
either to unbelief, or misbeliefe?

If you observe, In departure from God the order seems retrograde to that of
coming to him. In coming to God we begin at Heb. 11.6.
Faith; proceed to Act. 9.11.
Devotion; are perfitted in obedience. In departure from God the beginnings are
at disobediences; proceedings, to indeuotion: end in unbelief or misbeliefe.
Hymenaeus and Alexander first put away good 1 Timothy 1.19.
conscience, then made shipwreck of Faith. Solomon first See 1 Reg. 11. tot.
luxurious; thereby slakes devotion, tolerating the Idolatry of his strange
wives; its not long, ere he ioynes in the worship of their Idols. The method of
impostors is noted by Saint Peter; they promise 2 Pet. 2.18, 19.
liberty, and through lusts and much wantonness so they beguile the simple. I
say as Paul, Heb. 12.13.15.
make straight steps to your feet, least that which is halting be turned out
of the way, least your selves fall from the Grace of GOD. Read 2 Peter 1.4 to
10.11.

First, Intends the Apostle this firstnes, or precedence of Apostasy, to the
day of Christ? Or not also to the Revelation of Antichrist? Resp. That it shall
foregoe the coming of Christ, and is so intended by the Apostle is evident; it
being a party Argument, proouing Christ's coming not to be instant, because
this Apostasy was not yet complete. In likelihood also its meant an
antecedent to Antichrists discovery, and highest advancement into his Throne,
or chair of Pestilence; because that loosing the raines to Antichrist is to
punish men's not 2 These. 2.10.
receiving the love of the Truth; And the fault is presupposed to punishment.

If any shall say, Antichrist is the Author and procurer of this Apostasy;
therefore must needs precede, or be coniunct with it. Resp. Antichrist veiled
is worker of this Apostasy; and so is in being with or before it: yet does it
precede Antichrist revealed: this Apostasy is before the Revelation of the man
of sin. Howbeit, confirmation and increase of apostasy shall be wrought by him
when he is advanced into his Throne. Aduantaged he shall then be to procure
it. 1. By errors already entertained, wherein prescription shall steed him. 2.
By authority such as at which monarchies shall tremble.

And that man of sin be revealed. The second necessary antecedent to
Christ's coming is the revealing, or discovery of that man of sin; which not
yet accomplished in Paul's time, proved, there was then no such instant
nighnesse of the day of the Lord.

As touching the man of sin, Agreement is on all sides, that he is intended by
Paul, the great Antichrist, various opinions touching him we read in Fathers,
ad Nauseam vsq. 1. Papists thus propound him: a singular or individual person.
2. Professed adversary to Christ. 3. By Nation a Jew of the Tribe of Dan. 4.
Erecting his Kingdom in Jerusalem. 5. Seducer of Jews, not Christians; his
rising reign and fall, they limit to three years and half, immediately
connexed with the end of the world. Large confutation of these dreams, I
purpose not; extant you have it in the writings of many reverend Divines.
Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Dounham, Master Brightman and others, to whom I refer
you. Only what this Scripture occasions to be spoken for or against, expect
from me according to my measure; of him five things ye may note from the
Apostle. 1. His description. 2. Revelation. 3. Rising to his reign. 4.
Consumption. 5. Abolishment.

1. His description by properties or adjuncts many, intended by the Apostle to
this end; that, in whom we see concurrence of them all, in that height they are
here propounded, we might not doubt to point the finger at him and say, Ecce
Anti christus ille. We follow the words: his first propriety or part of his
style; (...). Take the Article (...), must it needs denote a singular
indiuiduum? and why not a Kingdom, a kind, a whole made up of successiue
parts, as our opinion is? Forsooth, the Article forces to a particular person;
(...). Its Epiphanius his rule. Articles contract the signification to one
certain thing; so that (...) signifies man at large; but (...) always a
singular or indiuiduum of man.

Resp. Yet Procius thus: vbi Plato dicit (...), scribit(...). Examples are
frequent. Christ committed not himself unto them; for he knew them all; and
needed not that any man should testify (...): that is, I trow, not in this or
that particular only; but in every man. Compare, Luke 4.4. Mar. 2.27. Apoc.
22.11. Romans 1.17, etc. The Lion, the Bear, etc. in Daniel, denote they
particular Kings? Or not rather Kingdoms? Kings many lineally succeeding each
other?

And that such a line and succession of men is intended by the Apostle appears
by these Reasons. 1. Conceived he was, and after a sort animated in Apostles
days. The spirit of that Antichrist of which you have heard, that it is
coming; and 1 Ioh 4.3.
now is it in the world already. 2. But a part of his Reign, is of a Apoc. 20.
thousand years continuance. 3. The greatness of things to be wrought by him,
whither we number them the same that Papists, or whither as Scripture,
requires much more then the age of a man. Read our divines they give you full
satisfaction.

1. What is his Revealing? 2. Is he yet discovered? 3. When revealed? 4. Where
may we find him?

Resp. To the first, Popish Interpreters conceive a discovery of him so evident
and clear, as of Christ at his coming; as if every eye should see him, and be
able to discern him as he is.

But say sadly? Suppose you all shall be able to discern him to be that
Antichrist? 1. How then are Kings and Nations made Apoc. 17.2. and 18.3.
drunk with the wine of his fornications? 2. How then a mystery of iniquity,
which title the Whore discovered Apoc. 17.5.
carries in her forehead? 3. Thus conceive; discovered, he means in such
sort, that who have eyes may see, and discern him. The blind see not the
Sun shining in his brightness; not through defect of light, but for want of
Eyesight.

2. Is he yet Revealed? Resp. Nor borne, say Papists. Gods Spirit in Scripture
has given us Bellarmine de part. Romans lib. 3. cap. 4.
six certain signs of Antichrists coming, two preceding. 1. The Preaching of
the Gospel in all the world. 2. The desolation of the Roman Empire: two
concomitant. 1. The preaching of Enoch and Elias. 2. Persecution by Antichrist
so great and notorious, that all public service of God shall cease. Two
subsequent. 1. The destruction of Antichrist after three years and a half of
his Reign. 2. The end of the world: these none of them yet in being, prove
pregnantly that Antichrist yet unborn.

Large answer to these trifles of Argument learned may better fetch from our
divines, then expect from me. In favor of the people to whose use I intend
these labors, this breniac I propound.

To the first, Mat. 24.15. Resp. 1. The universal preaching of the Gospel is
nor there, nor any where else made a sign or antecedent of Antichrist; (...);
then is the end, says our Savior; therefore then Antichrist? basely they beg
the question, that make the end of the world contigious to antichrists rising
or fall, 2. How full of homonimy is every piece of the argument. The end is
there of the Temple and City, not of the world; if Chrysostom or Saint Luke
may be credited, Luke 21.20. Antichrist belike was to be before the
destruction of Jerusalem: indeed so you might better have colored your
conceits of his Nation, and Temple; and removed him farther from your Rome. 3.
But has not the Gospel bin preached universally in the sense of our Savior? I
doubt not, but while the City and Temple stood: from Jerusalem to Romans 15.19.
Illyricum, one Paul had filled all with the Gospel of Christ: suppose you the
rest of the Apostles idle? See Romans 1.8. and 10.18. Col. 1.6.23. besides what
your own Stapleton reports of Thomas from Syluester and Chrysologus: as if in
preaching he had reached to the very Indians and the lowest Antipodes. 4. But
suppose you, our Saviors preaching is meant in such measure, as to be
preualent to found Churches in every Nation? Rom 10.18.
The sound and Rumor of him went out into all Lands, sufficiently to deprive
them of excuse. 5. Nor need we wonder if in the lands by our men lately
discovered, there be found no monuments of Christian Faith and Religion; when
in as few centuries of years after the flood we find, except in Abraham's
family, extinct all the Religion taught by Noah to his posterity.

To the second, The desolation of the Roman Empire, 2 These. 2.6.7. Resp. Full
answer falls fittest in explicating the sixth and seventh verse: where expect it.

To the third, The preaching of Henoch and Elias, who are supposed yet to live
upon the earth, and to live for this, to oppose themselves to Antichrist, to
preserve the Elect from his seducement and to c^nuert the Jews, Mal, 4.5, 6.
Ecclus. 48. and 44. Mat. 17.11. Apoc. 11.3. Resp. 1. In none of these
Scriptures that are of undoubted Authority is any mention of Enoch. 2. Nor at
all of Antichrist or their opposing him. 3. What Malachi speak of Elias and
his coming, our Savior interprets of Mat. 11.14. and 17.11, 12. Luke 1.17.
John Baptist, who came in the Spirit and power of Elias; And when the
Cardiuall has tired himself in wresting, yet must he be forced to yield, the
Prophet spoke of Elias mystical or symbolicall, not proper or personal;
except he will mannerly as he does, oppose to our Saviors interpretation, and
the Mat. 17.13.
Apostles true apprehension: them if we follow, we shall find Malachi to mean
Elias Compare Luke 1.17. and Mat. 11.14.
mystical, a Harbinger to Christ's first coming in the flesh, not personal,
to attend or oppose Antichrist at the end of the world. 4. Or suppose it meant
of Christ's second coming, and the conversion of Jews; yet. 1. Where is
Henoch? And why not this Elias mystical, as John Baptist the foreunner of
Christ's coming in the flesh? Deuoting those Ministers more or fewer, whom God
shall raise up his instruments for calling of Jews? 5. But what is all this to
Antichrist? whose fall precedes the calling of Jews, wherein the Elias
mentioned has his employment. To that of the two witnesses, Apoc. 11.3. What
necessity to interpret of Henoch and Elias? Why not, as Homil. in Apoc. 8^.
Augustine, of the two Testaments? In this Revelation, wherein there are verba
tot sacramenta, allegorical expositions may not be deemed strange? 6. Or why
not, of that small, yet competent number of Ministers, raised in all times to
oppose unto Antichrist? There is left probability that its meant of Henoch,
and Elias; whose privilege it was, Heb. 11.5.
not to see death; a goodly privilege to be taken from the malice of their
times, that they might be reserved for the more cruel Rage of Antichrist: and
was this so notable a crown of Henochs Faith and Walking with God, Heb. 11.5.

To the fourth, Persecution so violent and notorious that al public Service
of God shall cease, Mat. 24.21. Apoc. 20.7 Dan, 12.11. Resp. That peerless
persecution mentioned by the Evangelist, is by Saint Lukes exposition the
necessity and tribulation Jews were to endure at the siege and surprisall of
Jerusalem by Titus and Vespatian; See Luke 21. and compare circumstances in
Matthew; together with what Josephus reports of the accomplishment; thou will
be forced to say, its meant of Jews of those times, not possibly intended to
Jews or Christians from Antichrist. 2. Yet none denies but persecution by
Antichrist should be, has bin extreme: But 1. of souls rather then of bodies,
when they are starued for want of knowledge; Apoc. 9.5.6.10. Artic. 40.
racked by tortures of Conscience, transmitted by Cartloads to Hell, by him to
whom no man says, cur ita facis. 2. Of bodies of Saints also, if we will
ponder cruelty, rather then number Martyrs: in vain does the Cardinal from
Hierom and Eusebius cite the multitude of Saints Massacred by Domitian, etc.
for how should Antichrist match them in multitude? When the names left are so
few, and the whole world performs vassalage unto him? Yet upon the Saints
falling under their tyranny, what Phalaris, has exceeded his cruelty? Read
our Martyrologies.

As touching the issue or effect of his persecution, Cessation of public
worship. Resp. 1. If thereby he means lawful and prescribed worship, I
contradict not: Antichrist brings it with him: for many years together, what
but bauling and mere Bablisme was heard in our Temples? What seen, but
horrible superstition and Idolatry, in worshipping of Images, invocation of
Saints, adoration of Hosts, etc? Whereto if any showed himself opposite, or
unwilling, sauadge cruelty was esteemed lenity in his torture. The place of
Daniel at first view disclaimeth their gloss.

To the fifth and sixth. The Reign of Antichrist to endure only for three years
and half at the ending of the world within some days. Resp. Except a few
faces and names of men, what has this dream to support it? I confess I have
no heart to do, what is done by others, suffer me therefore to referte you to
divines forecited. In my Conscience I think, their learned thus speaking,
speak against their own conscience: for, 1. Can they think a man so base in
his birth as they suppose Antichrist, should in so few years suppreste the
whole Church? Subdue Rome it self, erect his Temple in Jerusalem, expel the
Turk? What, All this in the space of three years and a half? of Alexanders
exploits and victories great things are written; yet equal they not in speed,
the one half of what this Leopard must work. 2. Why am I long? The praise and
crown of Saints is, that they had not worshipped the beast, nor his Image, nor
received his Character in forehead or hand, during the space of the thousand
years, Apoc. 20.4. whereof? But of his reign; the misery of the world, that
they lay dead under him that whole time lasting, ver, 5. A dream therefore,
that his whole Age is but of three years and half.

As to the immediate succeeding of the worlds end to the fall of Antichrist,
and that within 45 days, quid attinet mulia? Resp. 1. Its a little piece of my
Faith, that after Antichrists ruin, shall follow 1. The calling of Jews. 2.
The destruction of Gog and Magog. 3. The Reign of the Church flourishing on
earth for some hundreds of years, howsoever we presume the thousand years to
denote an indeterminate space of time. 2. But out upon impious curiosity; when
the Act. 1.7.
Father has reserved times and seasons in his own power; Mat. 24.36. Mar.
13.32.
the Son professes he knew neither day nor hour of his coming; shall man
presume to point out the day? 1. Suppose my skill so good, as to calculate the
precise time of Antichrist entering his reign; day of his Ruin I have learned
from Rome; might I not also know the exact day of Christ's second coming? 2.
There shall be that shall see Antichrist in his Throue, Papists themselves
confessing; they then shall be more of Gods privy Counsel, then the son of
his own bosom; knowing the self day of Christ's second appearing: O ye
heavens be astonished at this. But such must be the pride of Antichrist. What
has bin said in answer, suffices to evidence that Antichrist has bin already
revealed.

3 When? is the next question. Bellar. de pont. Romans lib. 3. cap.
Resp. pretty play the Cardinal makes with the variety of opinions touching
his time amongst our Divines. Thus ye may reconcile all: some speak of his
Conception; some of his sharp throes in the womb of his Romish mother; some
of his birth; some of his ascending the throne: some of his higher advancement;
and there are that denote with the finger his very (...), the top and vigor of
his pride.

1 2. These. 2.7.
Conceived in the Apostles time, yea then animated. 1 John 4.3.
The spirit of that Antichrist was then in the world. 2. Striving to see light
(abortiue would he had bin;) within a few Centuries after the Apostles; what
time ambition of superiority, no less then Papacy, showed it self in some
Saint Bishops of that See. 3 Borne under Constantine, what time the voice was
heard from heaven; Platina in vita Syluest.
Seminatum est venenum in Ecclesia. 4 Set in his throne, and revealed, if
Gregory may be judge, what time Phocas that parricide, granted to Boniface the
third, Platina. Sigebert. Ivo. Blonetas.
style of Bishop Oecumenicall; to the Romish Church, handship over all other
Churches. 5 Yet higher advanced, when increased with temporal dominion, and
fully possessed of both swords. 6 At his top, and near his first fall, what
time by the counsel of Lateran he is decreed superior to general Councels,
Anno 1516.

5 Where may we find him? Resp. Where the Carrion is, thither will the
Vultures be g^thered together. Where? but in that,

Seeds summa Petri quae pastoralis^on^ris
Facta Caput mundi, quicquid non possidet armis,
Relligione tenet.
Let this be our Rule; where we find concurren^e of all these properties
mentioned by the Apostle, there is that Antichrist. And if they all suite not
to the Papacy, as a coat cut out for that body, freely I confess my self
stiffly erroneous in that little piece of my Faith. View them in their order.

1 That man of sin. Allusion perhaps is to that so frequent in Old Testament,
Asher Belial. 1 Samuel 2.12. 1 Reg. 21.10. and rendering of it. Save that the
Article taken (...), points him out, the first born amongst the sons of
Belial; a primate no less then superlatiue, amongst them; which perhaps gave
occasion to some Ancients, to deem him the great Devil himself, or a Devil
Incarnate. Saint Hierome thus explicates, Homo in quo fons omnium poccatorum
est. Hieron. Epist. ad Algatiam.
Aquinas, omnium Hominum pessimus, vt Christus omnium optimus. Ours thus, a man
whose very composition is of sinfulness: notoriously, peerelesly vicious not
only in his own person, but as another Jeroboam, making Israel to sin.

Sancte, Sancte, Sancte, May we find such a miscreant amongst our holy
Fathers at Rome; whose style is, as inscription on the high Priests forehead,
Holiness. Its pity to wrong sanctity.

A man so peerelesly vicious; me seems must be as Paul describes, Gentiles,
Romans 1.29.
full of ali unrighteousness. 2 Scrupling no sin, nor degree of sin. 3
Clamantia peccata must be to him leuiora delicta. 4 Intended to the highest
pitch, that kind, degree, or circumstance may bend them unto. Saint Paul is
too nice, and professes puritan, when he reckons 1 Cor. 16.9, 10
fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, covetous, extortioners, among the damned
crew: propitius sit Papae Deus, if in these only he be tainted. Let not the
Laws Curse touch him, except he be found 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
unholy, profane, murtherous, parricide, Sodomite, perjured. Nor he reputed
the man of sin, except he be found amongst Bishops Christian, as Ahab amongst
Kings of Israel, a 1 Reg. 21.25.
nonesuch, that has sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord.

1 Lie their own Chroniclers, or were their Popes many such? 1 Necromancers,
in express league with the Devil; purposely sacrificing unto him. 2 Masters
of that hellish Art to others; Siluester the second, Gregory the seventh. 3
Poysoners, and otherwise murtherous, of all that stood in their way to the
Popedom; one Hildebrand in thirteen years thus cruelly made away Clement the
second, Damasus the second, Leo the ninth, Benedict the tenth, Nicolas the
second, Alexander the second. 4 Profane even to horror. Benn^ Vspregensis.
Matthew. Paristensis.
Hildebrand is angry at his breaden. God, for that he answers not how the good
Emperor Henry the fourth might be destroyed, throws him into the fire. 5
Luxurious, to Incest, Sodomie, bestalitie, John the twelfth: but why rake I in
this dunghill? when Bellarmine confesses these and many others amongst Popes
to have bin so tainted as Stories describe them.

That now me thinks, if a man might be so bold with him as John Baptist with
our Savior, to ask, Mat. 1^.3.
Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? like answer should
be returned, Go and tell what you have heard and seen; Devils worshipped, God
contemned, Religion profaned, Superstition hallowed, beastiall lust practiced,
Marriage scoffed at as unholy, Treason, Rebellion, bloodshed, cruelty,
parricide not committed only, but defended meritorious; parum probi Homines,
says the Cardinal these were; beast he so mincing their horrid hellishnesse;
yet welfare Platina that calls them monstra and portanta Hominum. Worthiest of
all Christians that ever I read of to be styled Antichrist; since so without
peer a man of sin.

chief Shepherd, Bishop of our souls? It was wont to be said, Gods spirit
dwells not in the soul that is subject to sin. Gentiles for less sins were
Romans 1.28.
given up to a reprobate mind: delusion 2 These. 2.11.
strong delusion sent as punishment on all them that had pleasure in
unrighteousness, the privilege of this monster is in depth of vassalage under
Satan to be infallibly guided by Gods Spirit. I say as Paul; If any will yet
be so ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.38.
let him be ignorant: for my part, I resolve, as Jacob; into their secret Genesis
49 6.
let not my soul come; my glory be thou not joined with their assembly.

2 His second property, a son of perdition: or if they will, that son of
perdition. 1 Actiuely some take it, and thus explicate the Hebraisme, a
destroying son; one that as a wild Boar makes havoc of the Lords Vineyard;
spoil of the Church of God: so, cruelty is his ensign. Saint John indeed
styles him Apoc. 9.11.
(...); and somewhere calls the false Prophet, the beast; I am sure has clad
that whore of Babylon Apoc 17.4. Ver. 6.
in Scarlet, to denote her bloody sins: her drunkenness, Canniball like, with
the blood of Saints.

Will this Scarlet suit the whore, or the beast of Rome she rides? witness be
all History: What bloody war has bin in Christendom since that whore
bestrod the Beast, whereto she was not the son of Bichri: if stories should
hold their peace, the stones of Paris, and our Gunpowder treason would speak:
I say nothing of blood of souls, which yet cries louder then the blood of
Abel.

Thus I have learnd, the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then
peaceable, Iac. 3.17.
Gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits; here is a
Religion, whose foundation is like that of new built Josh. 6.16.
Ieri^h^, laid in blood; continued, enlarged by blood; nor pure, nor peaceable;
shall I think it to proceed from that God of pure eyes, the father of mercies,
and God of all consolation? and passiuely I rather take it: the allusion is, to
what our Savior spoke of Ioh. 17.12.
Judas, whose successor he se^m^s, who is here described unto us: and so the
speech sounds a man devoted, destinied to destruction: 1 of body, Apoc. 18.2. 2
of soul, Apoc. 19.20 Me^test he should, whose Apoc 9 11.
original is from the bottomless pit, his proper element.

Once disputing the question whither the Pope were Antichrist, I was thus
pressed: then, 1 every Pope damned: 2 then possible for us to say of some man
living, he is a reprobate, the child of hell. Resp. Thus was the answer: 1 Non
sequitur, for why not God rescue out of the mouth of the Bear, as the
shepherd, a piece of a leg, or an ear? Papacy is a l^rge body: there may
sit in that See, some bewailing and desiring to reform iniquities of it, as
Caelestine. 2 And why not know, when the knower of secrets reueales, that some
particulars are reprobates. 1 Knew not Disciples so much of Judas? 2 the Church
Primitive of Julian? 3 We of all known 1 John 5.16.
Apostataes? 3 Nor yet of this or that particular, may we so conclude; since who
knows whether God may grant Regressum in viam? 4 But take him a man personally
with these properties endowed, what lets to say, that Apoc. 19.20.
beast and false Prophet shall be cast into hell.

praecipitia? who venture body and soul to the issue of this son of
perdition? men are ventrous of souls more then of any thing; yet under the Sun
is not a Pearl so precious. Bernard. lib. meditat.
O Anima insignita Dei imagine, docorata similitudine, redempta Christi
sanguine, despensata side, dotata spiritu, deputata cum Angelis, Capax
beatitudinis, Haeres bonitatis, particeps Rationis; quid tibi cum Carne, says
Saint Bernard: quid tibi cum Diabolo? with this son of perdition? Can he not
save his own soul from the hand of hell, yet hopest thou, following him in
faith, and worship to compass heaven? have we not heard our Savior? if Mat.
15.14.
blind follow blind, both fall into the pit. Miserere animae tuae bonum
faciens. And think the Lord merciful in monishing thee of his issue: he
speaks in effect as Peter, Act. 2.40.
Save thy self from this untoward, this damned generation.

3 Third property: (...), etc. who opposes, or is an adversary, or opposite?
To whom? Resp. Our English last and best Translation, seems to couple it with
(...): his opposition and exaltation respects all that is called God. That Is
true, how ever we interpret, whither true God, or Idols, or Magistrates. But
why not apart considered, as Ancients conceived?

An opposite or adversary, another Satan. To whom? Res. I doubt not but to
Christ: conceive it a nominal definition of Antichrist, expressing his nature:
an opposite to Christ. Hence is the observation not acute only, but solid: Non
(...), Hilar.
non (...), but (...): as if his opposing should be not so much to his nature,
or person, as to his unction and function.

2 But apert think we, and ex professo? Resp. So conceive Papists, not without
suffrage of some Ancients. But when we find him 1 to have the Apoc. 13.11.
horns of the Lamb. 2 To speak lies in 1 Timothy 4.2.
hypocrisy. 3 2 Pet. 2.1.
Privily to bring in damnable heresies. 4 The whole world of earthly Christians
not following only, or reuerencing, or honoring, or adoring, but admiring
after him, can we suppose him a professed adversary? 5 When Paul tells us, its
a mystery of iniquity, wherein he works. 6 Saint John describes him a Apoc.
16.13.
false Prophet, whose habit is Mat 7.14. Greg. in Job. l. 12. cap. 20. Hilar.
contr. Aurentium.
sheep clothing: Saint Gregory, that he shall saine piety to draw to
iniquity. Saint Hilarie, that under the cloak of the Gospel he shall be
contrary to Christ, yet shall we think him a professed adversary? Its wisdom,
the Apoc. 13.18.
wisdom peculiar to Saints to discern him; therefore no open enemy: yet an
Adversary; and by David's rule, so much the more dangerous, by how much the more
secret, and pretending friendship.

3 Wherein stands this opposition? How shows he enmity to Christ? Resp. They
are frigid, who limit to his life, and moral behavior in his conversation
upon earth: Remember his name; he is Antichristus, opposite to Christ, as
Christ; that is, as the anoin^ed Priest, Prophet, king of the Church: who so in
these things i^ found his eminent, emulous, or opposite, let him be deemed that
Antichrist; what ever shows of amity he pretends to that person whom we call
Christ.

4 May such one be found in Rome? Resp. Else no where in the world, taking in
the Mod^s of his opposition, which is, though hostlie, yet under color of
love. Conceive him opposite to Christ's, 1. Sufficiency. 2. Propriety. 3.
Efficacy in his offices. 1. Sufficiency in all they thus oppose. 1. Of
Priesthood, when they t^ach his Heb. 10.14.
own once offering of himself not to perfect them that are sanctified. We, by
our own voluntary actions or sufferings, must expect venial sins; procure
release of pains temporary. 2. Of Kingdom; while neither Laws of spiritual
Regiment are found complete, or competent in his Authentiques: Except
continual supplement be made of laws directing and binding Conscience, by
his supposed Vicar upon Earth: Nor protection sufficient from ghostly
Adversaries in all the complete Armor by Christ prescribed, nor assistance of
spirit promised: except help be had from crossings, blessings, holy water and
such like self devised playgames for the de^ell. 3. Of Prophecy, when word
written is taught to be imperfect; orders of Ministry by him left incompetent,
etc.

2. Propriety; for Rome affoords us a new High Priest of the New Testament;
Mediators of intercession so innumerable as Angels and Spirits of men made
perfect in heaven. Sacrificers of the body of Christ to propitiate for quick
and dead, as many as Locusts were seen assending out of the bottomless pit;
and the rest that concerns his Priesthood prosecute in your Meditation.

2. In his Kingdom: for in Rome we have the universal Monarch of the Church;
to whom is given all power in heaven and earth; that has plenitude of power,
to kill and save alive; to send souls by Cartloades to hell, and no man may
say to him, why do thou so? etc.

3. In his Prophecy: for the Pope Authentiques Scriptures at his pleasure;
makes Canonical, what he pleases; Cancels at pleasure; interprets by a spirit
infallible and unerring, so that his sense of Scripture must without
examination, be admitted, etc.

All this, if you will believe him, by Authority delegate from Christ, and in
ordine ad Deum; with reference to God; that so still the iniquity of Papacy
may work in a mystery.

3. Efficacy. When Scriptures, wherein laws of this King, doctrines of this
Prophet, merits of this Priest are recorded, are kept from notice of the
people: chiefly when they are taught to Acts 4.12.
seek salvation, at least in part, in another name; and to Ier. 17.5.
make flesh their Arm, to which God has denounced a curse; that so far as
this Epithere may lead us to know Antichrist, we discern him in Rome.

Cor. 6.14*
What fellowship has Christ with Beliall? Christians with Antichristians? Is
not the yoke unequal? May Policy warrant us leagues of amity with
Antichrist? The Lord to Iehosaphat: would thou love them that hate me? If
any hatred of men be Psalm. 139.22.
perfect, as DAVID intimates: If any enmity to any enemies of our God
warrantable, most this; wherein we are carried toward this opposite of our
CHRIST: this Satan, Adversary to God and all goodness. Of this zeal and fire
of holy Jealousy, I pray: O Lord increase it in us.

4. Fourth property denoting his pride no less then Luciferian. Exalts
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.

That little variety of reading found in the original, (...), or (...); let no
man stumble at: whither we read every one or every thing that is called God,
the sense is the same; and the pride noted, all as intolerable: diversity of
expositions arises from the homonymie, under this name God, come 1. 1. These.
1.9.
The living and true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 2. Idols, which
braynsicke superstition of man has advanced into Gods seat; when they are 1.
Cor. 8, 4. and Gal. 4.8.
nothing in the world, nor have ought of that divinity, which man's madness
has deified them with all. 3. There are (...), many that are 1. Cor. 8.5.
called Gods, as Psalm. 82.6.
Magistrates* whom that one True God has graced with his own Name, to win
the more reverence to that Authority, which as his Viceroyes on earth they
exercise: of whither would the Apostle be understood? The Cardinal and his
Sectaries, interpret of the true God, and Idols. De Pontis. To. lib. 3. cap. 14.
^e nonsolum Deum, sed etiam solum se Deum esse dicit; and oppugnabit omnes
alios Deos, id est, tam Deum verum, quam etiam Deos falsos, and omnia Idola. So
is their gloss. But ore think they and professione tenus, or opere only? 1.
The Whore, his Paramour, is made Apoc. 17.5.
mother of all spiritual fornication. 2. Himself sits in Templo Dei* non suo.
3. Is and professes Prophet; questionless of some God, not his own. 4. Shall
Christians, or even Jews, so in multitudes Apoc 13.3.
admire after a professed Atheist. or Antichrist? when Domitian grew to the
arrogancy, of being saluted God, Sueton in Domitiano.
how did Heathenisme it self scoff and disdain him? yet read what style he
has from his flatterrers? Extrauagant. de may. and obedient^a.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Else where, Clement in proem. in Gloss.
Dominus Deus noster Papa. Again, To Extrauagant in Joan. 22. cap. Cum inter
in Glossa.
believe that our Lord God the Pope could not determine as he has determined,
should be deemed heretical: O mouths of blasphemy!

2. Its marvel if in their own foreheads may not be found written Names of
like Blasphemy. Innocent the Third, may seem modest in impiety. Innocent 3.
Ser. 2. de Consecrat. Pont.
Now then ye see, who is this servant whom the Lord has set over his
household; surely, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Successor of Peter, the Christ
of the Lord, the God of Pharao. Inter Deum and hominem medius constitutes,
^itra Deum, sed vltra homines: minor Deo, sed mayor homine: qui de omnibus
iudicat and a nemine iudicatur. Pope Nicholas proving the Pope exempt from all
secular power: thus Reasons. God cannot be judged of men. Distinct. 96. cap.
Satis Michaeli.
The Pope is God by testimony of Constantine. Ergo. Pope Sixtus, Council. tom.
1. in purgal. Syrdi.
Quicunque accusat papam nunquam ci remittetur, quia qui peccat in Spiritum
Sanctum, non remittetur ei nec in hac vita nec in futura. I marvel at Gods
mercy if ever that Blasphemy were forgiven him.

3. In facts Authority no less then divine, more then divine assigned,
arrogated, exercised: deposing Kings, disposing Kingdoms, sometimes with that
in Solomon arrogantly uttered, per me Reges Regnant; binding where God loses;
Loosing where he binds; dispensing with laws of God; positive says
Bellarmine; yea natural; as examples have bin frequent. God himself say
Schoolmen, dispenceth not with moral precepts. The Pope does de facto; may
do de Iure; Cause. 15. q. 6. c. Authoritat^m in Glossam.
his Canonists so advise him: else how should he advice himself, or be
advanced above the true God. Siat ergo Antichristus.

Let us examine the second Branch for Idols, and his advancement above them; if
first we mind you of Bellarmines Sylogisme.

Thus it must be for this member of doctrine. Antichrist shall oppugn both the
true God and dols. The Pope opposes neither true God nor Idols. Is that the
Minor? Or, the true God not Idols. Credo. How much better had the Argument
proceeded, if thus; Idols, but not the true God. But then how should Antichrist
be such an Antithcos, as the Mayor shapes him?

But in sober sadness tell, how must the Minor be understood? Does he oppose
neither true God nor Idols? Belike he is an Israelite after the rate of them in
Elias time, 1 Reg 18.21.
halting twixt two opinions; not resolved whither JEHOVAH or Baal be God: or as
the Samaritan colonies, willing to keep favor with both; he 2 Reg. 17.33.
fears the Lord and serves Idols also; vtrumuis.

Else how? Does he oppose the true God, not Idols? The more impious wretch, the
veryer Antichrist, and Antitheist he. Idols, and not the true God? So have you
the the sum; its a note of Antichrist to oppugn Idols.

Thus frame the Argument you acquit the Pope of Antichristianisme. Antichrist
oppugneth Idols, See Apoc. 13.14.18. etc.

The Pope does not oppugn Idols. Hoc credo. Ergo,

The Pope is not Antichrist. Thus Bellarmine.

Yet now I mind it, there is a remarkable Story of Boniface the Fourth, next
successor of him to whom Phocas granted the style of Oecumenicall Bishop. Thus
its extant in Sigibert, Bed. hist. Angl. lib. 2^. regino. l. 4.
Bid, Regino and others, about the year of Christ 609. Did this Boniface by
suite obtain of Phocas Parricide of Mauricius, the gift of the great Pantheon,
the Temple of all Gentilish Idols, demolished them all from the great high
thundering Jupiter, to the pettiest of the gods, minorum Gentium: here, by
Bellarmines Argument, he played the stark Antichrist; at one blow demolishing
all Gentilish Idols in their great Pantheon.

Presently he consecrates and turns it the Temple of Saint Mary and all
Martyrs; wherein they all with their Images were full devoutly adored. In this
fact he is quit of Antichristianisme; for now as zealously as ever did Jew or
Pagan, he worships Idols, and causes the Nations to adore them. Pater omnium
fornicationum and abominationum Terrae. Therefore he is no Antichrist to
speak of.

But viewing the Text, me thinks nor true God, nor Idols are here intended;
but terrestres dij, rather Magistrates, whither inferior, or imperial; above
all which Antichrist must advance himself: and as I apprehend, the Apostle
points us to two degrees of his pride and usurpation: The first, Respecting
Men, in this Branch: Secondly, God, in what follows: Over them he insults,
on them tramples; him he imitates, and emulates only. Besides that difference
of demeanor which the Text more then intimates, These Reasons induce to that
interpretation. 1. (...) seems a style to diminuent, for Paul to express the
true God by: which yet suites well to Magistrates as the very phrase is
applied, 1 Cor. 8.1. 2. Besides (...) had more fully expressed the intention,
had it binne of the true God. 3. And why (...) or (...)? Though there be many
that are called Gods, yet to us there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8.5. That the
sense may be this. In his pride so arrogant and intollerably ambitious, that
he shall advance himself, above all Magistrates, and their Authority on
earth; Not that only, that is inferior, but that also which is Augustus like,
universally monarchical, no less then Imperial.

Did ever Popish pride aspire to such height? That Seruus seruorum Dei, brooks
he the style of Rex Regum and Dominus Dominantium? Resp. 1. His facts full of
Luciferian ambition, known stories will fill you withal. To speak of Kings
of Italy, France, England, and translating their Kingdoms, often attempted,
sometimes executed, were to make his pride seem ouermoderate; these were but
Dij minorum gentium.

What say you when Emperors must wait at his Ga^e, and pray and pay too to
be admitted to his presence? When they must think it their grace to hold his
stirrup; and bear the check for ill hostlership in mistaking the right? When
their favor is counted high, to kiss his feet; and wrath of that holiness is
implacable, for that he hears not the sweet Busse cry smacke? Vah Lucifer.
That one demeanor of his toward Frederick Barbarossa, proclaims him, in
pride, The great devil Incarnate.

Creeping comes the Emperor to that beast Alexander the Third, naucler. gene.
al. 40. Chronicon colonic^se. Sabellicus.
and kisseth his feet to obtain absolution from a sentence of
excommunication: would you think it? He sets his foot on the neck of the
Emperor now prostrate before him; and, as well became the Vicar of Hell,
applies to himself in that fact, Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and Basiliske,
the Lion and Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. How does natural
affection curb Heroical spirits? How did papal pride, in this Monster,
exceed it self? But these may seem insolences personal, and but in
ceremony of deportment. What say you to deposing of Kings, of Emperors, or if
any thing may be in Magistracy a transcendent to them? Facts read frequent in
the Cardinal, not related only, but justified as done de Iure and pleaded as
evidences to prove, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8
that the Pope has supreme power temporal on earth, though not directly, yet
in ordine ad Deum and all spiritualia. So far then as this property may advance
the Pope, he has best right of all miscreants, to be that Antichrist.

lofty looks of the proud may be brought low.

Who is there amongst the Lords anointed ones, whose heart the Lord has
inclined to be instrument of his vengeance upon the Whore? His God be with him.
And if hereto the offering of the people be not willing, unworthy they to see
the peace of the Church.

But, trow you, she hopes or meditates, anew to procure England to carry the
Saddle? Oh papae Asina; shall it ever be again the style of England? If so,
I Will say, the devil rides us.

So that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God.

2. The second degree of his pride, respecting God: in two Branches; 1.
Imitation, or as you may conceive it, pretensed representation of God. 2.
Aemulation, for he bears himself as God, emulating his actions and authority:
or if you will you may thus particularize there is noted. 1. R^gimen. 2. Locus
Regiminis. 3. Authoritas. 4. Modus regendi.

1. Sits; sedere, for Cathedratica potestate praesidere as the use of the
word is frequent in Greek and Latin Authors; and Scripture is not abhorrent,
Estius ad locum.
See Acts 18.11. Mat. 22.1. As if The Apostle meant withal to point us to his
profession and quality of life, a Bishop or professed Teacher and Governor of
the Church he should be; to which accords, that in Saint John, his style is,
Star and false Prophet.

2. His Cathedra, seeds Episcopalis, his See is noted, the Temple of God:
(...); in Templum; so is, the original: which has given occasion of diverse
Rendrings and expositions. Saint Augustine; In Templum, De Ciuit. dei lib. 20.
cap. 19.
quasi ipse sit Templum Dei, quod est Ecclesia, as if he were the Church.
Seipsum Ecclesiam vendicabit, and vicem Ecclesiae geret: which, if it were the
Sense, would lead us by the hand to dubbe the Pope Antichrist. For, Truth is,
howsoever the Name of the Church be often pretended, as the sole infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, Judge of Controversies, etc. Yet in th'vpshot, all is
resolved ad Papam; nor people, nor Pastors, nor Fathers, nor Councels, are that
Church, except they have the suffrage of the Pope: wherefore even to Authority
of Councels, the answer must be rested in: They wanted Popes Authority, first
to congregate them: secondly, to guide them by presence of himself or Legates:
thirdly, to approve them by his suffrage.

But thus rather conceive The Apostle, willing to denote the place of his
Regiment; the Enallage of the preposition (...) for (...) is not infrequent in
Scripture, Mat. 2.23. (...), 1. in the City Nazareth. Mar. 1.9. (...). and.
Cap. 2.1. (...): so that the sense is apert this; in the Temple of God.

What that is, is the doubt: says the Cardinal, the Temple at Jerusalem: and
before, the Temple of Solomon. Contra, what, 1 that of old built by Solomon,
repaired by Ezra and Nehemiah: beautified by Herod? Its ruined, not a stone
left upon a stone, nor is hope of reedifying, Mat. 23.38. 2 some other to be
reared out of the ruins thereof by Antichrist? But would the Apostle call
that, the Temple of God? the devil he would. Its Augustines Argument against
that opinion. Aug. qua supra.


Thus rather, Hieron. ad Algasiam. q. 11.
in the Temple of God; that is, in the Church of God: so Augustine, Hierome,
Hilarie, Chrysostom, and the Cardinal wilfully forgot himself when he said,
that in the Scripture of the new Testament, by the Temple of God is never meant
the Church of Christians, but perpetually the Temple at Jerusalem. What say we
to these Scriptures? 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God: and mox, The Temple of God is holy, which ye are: See also 2 Cor. 6.16.
Apoc. 3.22. the result of sense is this: he sits in the Church of God, as in
his Episcopal See.

The Cardinals Inference from that Gloss is perilous. Therefore 1 upon our
supposing the Pope to be that Antichrist, the Roman is the true Church, since
his See is in the Church. 2 And by consequent all aliens from that Church are
out of the true Church.

Thus if you will. The Sea of Antichrist is by Paul called the Church of God.

The Popes See, to wit, the Romish Church is the Sea of Antichrist, as we say.
Ergo, the Popes See is called the Church of God.

Resp. Concedo omnia; or shall your Conclusion be? Is the Church of God:
Apertly then are four terms: but ad Rem. 1 have you not need of some, that
had the Apoc. 3.1.
name to live, who yet were dead? of some, who called themselves Jews, and
Apoc. 2.9.
were not so, but the Synagogue of Satan.

Ob. 1 Yea, but after our gloss, Paul calls his See the Church of God. Sol. 1
May we not conceive him to speak of it, as it was in his Time? When Romans 1.8.
the faith of Rome was published with praise in the whole world: distingue
Tempora, the then Isai 1.21.
faithful City, may now be a harlot; mother, as she is, of all fornications:
that quondam Bethel, may now be Hos. 4.15.
Bethauen. 2 or what if the denomination be a potiori part; for the Sanctae
Reliquiae sake, that should be preserved in the time and place of Antichrists
kingdom. As under Iezabel, were in Israel Romans 11.4.
reserved thousands that bowed not the knee to Baal: so under Antichrist, where
and while he reigns, there is a Remnant according to the election of Grace. 3
Or what if so styled Contradistincte ad Ethnicos? in respect of those few
rudera Ecclesiae, that are yet to be seen amongst them.

Neither yet will it follow, if that Church be brought ad rudera, then the
whole Church is ruined; for may not Apoc. 3.11.
another take their Crown? have ye not read of letting out the Isai 5.
vineyard to other Mat. 21.41.
husbandmen? of Gods kingdom translated to another people? of which other
Church if we be members, are we not members of that one Church wherein we may
expect salvation? What if Rome were become heaps, an habitation of all
unclean birds? What if no one Romish Catholic left on earth, Ergo the Church
ruined? Psalm. 2. Dabo tibi Gentes, etc. 1 Timothy 3.15.


But what say you to these Arguments. The Church is the pillar and ground of
Truth: 1 Supporter and publisher of all Truths necessary. The Church of Rome is
not so, since it believes and teaches lies, 2 These. 2. Ergo, is not the true
Church. 2 The true Church keeps conjugal chastity to Christ; is not
Idolatrous. Church of Rome keeps not conjugal chastity to Christ, but is
Idolatrous: Ergo, is not the true Church of Christ: haec obiter; we proceed in
exposition.

3 As God: usurping and pretending Authority no less then divine: a tanquam
of God, whose great Vicegerent and Vicar General on earth he pretends
himself.

Suits this to the Papacy? hear their own Advocates, Idem est dominium Dei
and Papae: August^^ Ambonitaxus q. 45. and 35.
Gods dominion and the Popes is all one: as the Jurisdiction of the delegant
and delegate is one, especially where the delegation is plenary, total,
without any reservation made: as that wretch presumes it in the Pope:
answerable are all his deportments, as we have seen before, and shall
particularize in the next clause.

We have then thus far traced Antichrist by Paul's direction: that at length
we find him, a Bishop Cathedrated in the Church, with universality of power
and Jurisdiction.

Turkey? sits that Dragon in the Church, as Bishop? is his Iniquity carried in
a mystery? bears he himself a tanquam of God, in such couerture of
carriage, as is here intended of Antichrist? quid multa? Compare with Paul's
description, Saint John's delineating him in his Revelation, you will find it
true: there is no greater identitie betwixt Homo and Animal rationale, then
betwixt Rome and that Babylon, betwixt the Pope and that Antichrist. Except in
so many terms Gods Spirit should have said the Bishop of Rome is that
Antichrist, which had bin crossing to the intended strong delusion, more
punctually he could not have spoken. Wherefore my counsel is; wrong not the
holy Father, give the Devil his due. Let the Pope be that Antichrist: he will
be, spite of the Devil and the Dragon: Maugre the Turk and his Moamed.

Showing himself that he is God: the second degree of his pride respecting
God; proud emulation of God, tending to win him opinion of power no less then
divine: or, if you will, his carriage of himself in his chair of pestilence.

The Cardinal and others would have it, vaunting, professing, proclaiming
himself God, yea the only God. What? and yet shall the world admire after
him? see supra. And me thinks the speech runs too coolely, to endure the
gloss; showing himself that he is God, q.d. vnum e multis, rather then the
only God: for here, I am sure, we lack the Emphaticall Article.

Oecumenius well. Non ait dicens, sed ostendens; hoc est, operibus, signis ac
miraculis nitens ostendere quod sit Deus: his Intrusions on Gods prerogatives
royal is rather in facts, then words profession. Number sic Papa? Resp. What say
you 1 to his forcing laws upon the Conscience, Gods peculiar consistory? the
very style of Ius Ecclesiasticum is with their Canonists, ius diuinum: this is
little. 2 Dispensing with laws Moral and Natural, which is more, if Thomas
may be believed, then God himself does or may do. 3 Indulgence to sin in
time to come, as leases for years, granted. 4 Delivering souls from hell
after death. 5 Sainting at pleasure, and transmitting into heaven in such
multitudes, as its to be doubted, amongst the many mansions, there is no room
left for the Canonizer. Certainly, could he justify such power to be in him, I
would say, he had proved (...), that he is God.

One thing I am sure of, the concurrence of all these Antichristian properties
in the Pope, have bred in me Scientialem Assensum, that he is that Antichrist.
I say not as he, Tamscio Papam esse Antichristum illum, quam Iesum esse
Christum illum: for this by Gods mercy, I know not only by faith, but by
experience in my soul; yet thus strong is my evidence, that if an Angel from
heaven should teach me otherwise, I would not believe him.

VERSE. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was with you, I told you these things?


THe close of what belongs to the description of Antichrist, and the two
necessary Antecedents to Christ's second coming. Carried as best Interpreters
conceive, so as to check them for oblivion.

Remember ye not? q.d. you ought to have remembered: Doubtless its the blame
of Gods people, not to keep in memory what is taught them by their Pastors.
Mary's commendation; Luc. 2.19.
she kept the sayings in her heart. David's, that he Psalm 119.11.
hid them, as some treasure, in his heart, that he might not sin against God,
To this end tended Number. 15.38, 39
Phylactaries amongst Jews; and the prescript of Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9.
writing on door posts, and continual talking of the Law, given to Jews. God
has given us ears to hear, minds to know, memories, as storehouses, wherein
to treasure up what we have heard. A Christian should be as our Saviors wise
Scribe, able to bring out of his Mat. 13.52.
storehouse things new and old.

Amos his Amos 8.11.
famine, our Nausea is the same. Happy is the man, who in that time, is able
from the old store, to supply himself with direction and consolation.

Helps available to confirm memory of heavenly doctrine. 1. Once know price
of it: I never knew man so old that he forgot where he laid his Gold. Oh that
Psalm. 119 72.
David's mind were in us. 2 Frequent meditation, Ruminating helps digestion in
those that are clean. 3 Conference. 4 Pens, though sometimes mistaking, often
marring the text with the gloss, I simply blame not, rather encourage to use.
Take heed yet, that your knowledge dwell not more in your books, then in your
brains. 5 Cloy not memory with over various remembrances of things Secular,
vnum est necessarium. Luke 10.41, 42.
Mary chose the better part: if Martha grumble, remember her check; and think
it true which Bernard has; Its Foelix Domus, vbi Martha conqueritur de Maria.

VERSE. 6, 7, 8. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in
his time.

For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now lets,
will let, until he be taken out of the way.

And then shall that wicked be revealed.


THE words have this scope: as to check them for their wavering after their
information by the Apostle and knowledge received, so withal to prove the
minor belonging to the antecedent of Christ's coming, the revelation of
Antichrist. That he was not yet revealed appears, because the impediment of
his Revelation was yet in the being of an impediment. And because it might be
quaered; Is he not yet in the world? (...) he answers; he is in the world, but
secretly, and in fieri; manifested not yet, nor likely to be: whereof are two
Reasons: 1 God, that sweetly sorts all things to their seasons, had allotted to
Antichrist his season of revealing. 2 And the revelation must not be till the
impediment be removed. This the sum and series of the text.

To (...) to Chrysostom sounds (...); to Oecumenius (...); that which
hinders his revealing or discovery. What that is for realtie is the first
question. I willingly forbear the various conjectures amongst Interpreters,
least I grow over voluminous.

1 General consent of Expositors old and new, Protestant and Popish, is that
its meant the Roman Empire. If any ask why not specified by the Apostle, Saint
Augustine, Hierome, etc. answer, least thereby rage of those then persecuting
Emperors and their people, who promised themselves eternity of Imperial rule,
might be exasperated against Christians: probably.

2 Means he the heathenish or the Christian Empire? Resp. Perhaps or without
perhaps both. While the Heathenish prevailed, was no place for Church-mens
ambition; those were days of persecution. And while the Christian knew their
strength, they easily bare not insolency of Christian Bishops.

3 Is it now removed? Bellarm de de Rom ponti. lib. 3. cap. 5.
In no wise says the Cardinal; for though he have now nor palace nor
territory in Rome or Italy, though not so many Kingdoms as they of old, yet
still remains the succession of Emperor to Emperor in the same power and
dignity; still the Name of Roman Emperors. Whence is the Inference; therefore
Antichrist not yet come, because yet no whole desolation of the Empire.

Resp. Quid audio? A Roman Emperor without territory, palace or dominion in
Rome? that is to say, an Emperor without rule; Roman without possession, or
any interest in Rome. The name and title makes not an Emperor; but the power
of government and co^ction, and that more then Regal, over Kings and
Provinces. 2 And is the ancient dignity and power of the Roman Emperor, to
obtain precedence only, and such like ceremonious complements? vt verbo
expediam. Consider 1 what the Turk in the East has taken from it. 2 How many
Kingdoms Christian have wrought to themselves an immunity, and are now become
absolute Monarchies in themselves, without any reference to the Empire. 3 How
even in Germany, where the Name remains; he is 1 precario, such and at the
Popes pleasure. 2 Titular only without sovereignty, tribute, homage, or ought
else, except ceremonious complements. 4 Specially how in Rome and Italy,
possession and right is wholly seized by the Pope, you will be forced to
confess an omnimodous desolation of the Roman Empire, except perhaps empty
names and ceremonies make up the nature of Imperial sovereignty. If this then
be the let of Antichrists discovery intended by Paul, which only hindered his
Revelation; and if with remouall of this impediment the discovery of that
lawless one be so coniunct, as Paul's (...) intimate; what should hinder us to
conclude, both that he is revealed; and that out of the ruins of that Empire,
he has had his immediate spring, and raising to his now magnificence?

The witty and learned conjectures of the late interpreter of the Revelation,
touching this impediment, though full of probability, and of some avail to
expedite difficulties, I willingly silence; who lists may Read him, not
without much pleasure and contentment, ad Apoc. cap. 17.

4. Follows the discovery of Antichrist immediately upon the decay of the
Empire? Resp. Paul (then) says Caietane, aptly signifies that before it, he
shall not be reveled; but upon no certainty affirms, that immediately
thereupon this discovery should follow.

But if, 1. This was the only thing that hindered him from appearing, who had
so long striuen to see the sun, then immediately upon the remouall thereof
was he manifest. 2. The end of that obstacle intended by providence, was that
he might be revealed in his season.

The time of remouall therefore was the (...), the Article and point of Time
wherein he was revealed. So that who can inform himself sufficiently, what
time the Regiment of Rome was relinquished by Emperors, and seized by that
Bishop; to the full satisfies himself for the time of his first discovery:
for my part I willingly use and profess mine (...). Its not the best light
which the cauel critic in his (...) on the Revelation, brings to this
intricate question, consule.

But that the impediment is removed, and that wicked one discovered is a
little Article of my Faith.

Faxit Deus ne non and nostri.

drawn to adore and admire the beast. But for us, after so clear revelation
of the Truth: such liberty of searching Scriptures vouchsafed us of God; after
accomplishment of all predictions concerning Antichrist: 1 Apostasy from
Faith. 2 Havoc made of Saints: 3 Insulting over Sovereignty. 4 Remouall of
Impediment, etc. running into our sense; for us to halt twixt the two opinions,
to study reconcilement, to resolve of admitting his Character, what is it
less then to profess half Atheists and wilfully to renounce our own
salvation? Just were it with the Lord to permit us to strong delusion that we
may be damned: to make our damnation so much more intolerable then that of
blind forefathers, by how much the more gracious the Lord has bin to us, in
the more means of knowledge, and clear discovery of the man of sin. I say
as Paul, Gal. 5.1.
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not
again entangled in that yoke of bondage.

For the mystery of iniquity does already work. (...): the objection this;
Is he not in the world already? if so, then may the day of the Lord be as nigh,
as we are borne in hand. Subject: 1 concession, he is in the world, at least
in fieri. 2 distinction: secretly, and as in mystery, but not revealed; which
is that manner of his being in the world, which must precede the coming of
Christ; and that he is not so openly in the world, is proved; for (...) will
let till he be taken out of the way. That once achieved, then shall that
wicked be revealed, till then it may not be expected.

In the words are two things: 1 The style of Antichristianisme, otherwise
called Popery. 2 The n^w Antiquity of it.

1 The style it has, is a mystery of iniquity, or iniquity in a mystery:
expect not so much as mention of the various expositions: for quorsum? but to
cloy the Reader.

Mysterium commonly sounds a Religious secret, not obuious to capacity of
every understanding, rather requiring some extraordinary afflatus to the
conceiving of it; as mysteriu^ Christi, Ephesians. ^.4. and the mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. and the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, Mat, 13.11.
things in their own nature abstruse, and which without divine revelation we
conceive not.

Sometimes things apert in themselves, and running into sense have that style,
when the reason only of the thing is secret: so Reiection of Jews a mystery,
Romans 11.25. sometimes, things have that appellation, for the couerture of
carriage in the allegorical expression: as Ephesians. 5.32.

To whither acception of the word, is the allusion here? Resp. To first and
third, if to any; though perhaps the reason of the appellation be, only the
couerture and secrecy of carriage, and conueiance into the Church.

Yet ye read some where of Aoc. 2.24.
depths of profoundest learning, as they call them, which yet are but the
depths of Satan: homo-(...), mysteries, but of iniquity; such will Popery
store you withal: orders of Angels and their several ranks and
subordinations, which poor Protestants apprehend not, because Gods spirit has
not revealed them in Scripture, these know exactly: their language and manner
of expressing the conceptions of their understandings, each to other, ye
cannot learn but from their mystical, Angelical, Seraphicall Doctors. How a
body Natural may be without dimensions, Accidents subsist without a subject,
and such like deep mysteries of absurdity, you can learn from none but their
Teachers; nor in truth shall ever rationally conceive; nisi credideritis non
intelligetis: you must captiuate your thoughts to the obedience of Antichrist;
for I tell you these are great mysteries in their Iniquity.

But Carriage of their grossest errors, you shall find so covert, and no
less then mystical, that except we have wits exercised to discern betwixt
good and evil, we shall hardly descrie them. That Christ is only Author of
righteousness and salvation; the only name given under heaven by which we
must be saved: they constantly proclaim, Where is the mystery? he saues, but
in and by us; having merited that we might merit, and purchase our own
righteousness and salvation.

That Christ is very man borne of the Virgin; retains the same nature entire
now glorified without any elevation to a divine being, is their doctrine with
great feruencie taught against Vbiquitaries and elder Heretics: yet so is his
body elevated above the condition of a natural body, that it may be in many
places at once; has lost dimensions, circumscription, or if there be any other
property more proper to a body Natural.

Anathema they cry to Pelagius, and all his Sectaries, maintaining free will
in nature ad spiritualia: yet pry into the mystery, ye shall find them
half, or more Pelagian. God excites and persuades, changes not the condition
of the will, nor infuseth an ability which before was absent, to believe or
repent: the will excited by a secret, though languishing, native power, applies
it self to Gods excitement, and accepts his persuasion: Mysterium iniquitatis
in Doctrina

See it in their cultus: fairest pretenses it has of virtue, sanctity,
devotion: 1 Acts of Religion, the same that God prescribes or allows; but
mischief on the mystery, baned with infinite superstitions, Prayer, Alms,
Fasting, Works of satisfaction acceptable to Gods Justice.

2 Pretenses of sanctify and other virtue in all their abominable Idolatry:
in Images adoring the Deity: they are good Remembrances, prevent distractions,
excite devotions. By Saints, as mediators of impetration, conueying their
petitions to God: the pride is intolerable for a sinful man to go himself
boldly to the throne of Grace: Infinite I might be in discovering the mystery
of their iniquity.

I say as Paul, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you: store you with clearest and
distinctest knowledge: think not its ouerly and confused understanding may
secure you, you have to deal with mystical iniquity.

Warily, and with warrant of calling adventure on their conference and
writings; easily thou may be puzzled in this mystery, as they carry it.

A mystery is Popery; but of iniquity:(...): Beza renders it illegality. The
term is the same c^osen by Gods Spirit to express the general Nature of
sin, 1 Ioh. 5. signifying privation or want of that rectitude, which the Law
requires in our Nature and actions. But is it all iniquity, or sin that is
carried in that mystery? Resp. Take view of their doctrined practices, in
devotion to God, Carriage to men, to our selves; Mentior, if thou find them
not all in matter, manner, or native issues, merely and out of measure
sinful: praying to Saints, is it not Idolatrous: worshipping God in an Image,
is it not superstitious? Adoration of Hosts, is it less then abomination?
What seems most holy amongst them, is their practice of pretended
Mortification: as they prescribe and practice it, the soarce of all sin;
sin as thou will, as often as thou will, keep thy Tall^e of prayers, fast,
pilgrim as the Priest enioynes; satisfaction is made sufficient to Gods
justice; and quid ni peccemus; and as Mountebankes, drink of deadly poison,
having the Antidote so at hand? Apoc. 17.5.
Infronte mysterium; meretrix magna, matter omnium fornica^ionum and
abominationum Terrae: Mysterium iniquitatis.

Does already work: Whither you render agit or agitur or operatur, or
peragitur, the issue is one. The meaning is, it was then in brewing. If you will
say, as Papists themselves expound, in Antecessoribus Haereticis, I repugne
not: Let them boast of such progenitors. I confess we cannot tracke them in
every point of their Faith and Religion, in Apostles writings; Rome was not all
built on a day; by degrees it had proceedings to that height whereto its now
grown. Howbeit that Antichristianisme is ancient, as Apostles, in the maine
foundations of it, this Scripture is pregnant. Saint John accords; the 1 Ioh.
4 3.
spirit of that Antichrist is now in the world: Idle trow you? The busiest of
all infernal Spirits: that man is not justified by Faith only, but by works
of the Law; was taught (...): that faith is the beginning of Justification,
works the consummation, there were then that taught; and Galatians believed.
Paul indeed Gal. 3.1.
befooles them for it; yet so ancient is that Article of Popery.

That by Col. 2.18.
Angels we must commend our suits to God, as mediators of Impetration, in Paul's
time was broached in the Church of Colosse; they should abase the Majesty of
the Son of God to make him master of Requests, to prefer petitions of
sinful men unto his Father. It savors of more Humility, to employ Angels in
that Mediation. Indeed Paul tells the Colossians, giving way to such Religion
and Humility, may without reuocation of such wicked error, deprive them of
their reward. Idem.
Howbeit, so ancient is that point of Popery.

In Paul's time, were these Ordinances delivered to observe. Col. 2.21.
Touch not, Taste not, Handle not. Touch not a woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. Taste not
meat: Handle not money; meddle not with Secular contracts. Indeed Paul in a
refractarie spirit of singularity, I warrant you, blames Colossians, as half
Traitors to their Christian liberty, in submitting to such Ordinances; tells
them they are Col. 2.22.23.
vain obseruances, no better then Will Worship: shows only of Wisdom: yet
so ancient are those points of Popery.

But was affectation of Primacie in Churchmen so ancient? then have we the
heart of Popery. Saint John mentions Diotrephes, perhaps with some injury to
Peter's chair, to have 3. Ioh. 9.
affected preeminence; primacie in such sort, that St. John himself must
crouch, and be contented to have his letters slighted. Indeed he threatens him
somewhat shrewdly and calls him Prat^r. Yet so ancient is that pillar of the
Papacy. Ver. 10.


Tertullian. Quod primum verum; falsum quod posterius. Jeremy accords it: the
old way is the good way* Ier. 6.16. For my part I should put all questions of
Faith and Religion to that issue: what is found truly most ancient, should be
acknowledged most true. So be it, as our Savior, we count that eldest, which
was from the beginning; and may think that nouellous, of which may be said,
Non fuit sic ab initio. Yet its true, there is an ancientie of Error; within a
day, its as old as Truth, Revealed to man: For the devil was a liar, a
manslayer from the beginning; think not as the Manichees and Archontici, of
his own being; but of man's existence, intentionaliter, of his being sinful,
actually. And Papists much disaduantaged themselves, when they made fathers
errors th'hi^h^st original of their Prescription. They are but yesterdaies
men in comparison to Simon Magus, and such like coaetanei of Apostles. Bel^eue
us no more, if we suite them not with Patriarchs, such as Tertullian calls
Philosophers, whose heads were Gray, long ere their favoring fathers were
borne: but branded, I confess, for heretical prauitie. I wish our people so
wise as to make Scriptures the Rule of their faith; to think of errors,
strengthened by custom never so ancient, as Cyprian: Consuetudo sine veritate,
vetustas erroris est. Only he which lets will let, until he be taken out of
the way. Will let, is not found in the original, but the (...), is frequent, as
Mr. Beza notes; and without strayning supplied: see 2. Cor. 1.6. and 2.10. and
5.13. The Other strains of Master Beza and other Neotericks, about the varied
signification of (...), as impertinent, I omit. (...): that is, till he be
removed and taken away: compare 1. Cor. 5.2. and Col. 2.14. Whither removed?
has been already treated.

And then shall that wicked be revealed: then immediately, vt supra: His
Epithet deserves our notice, and will lead us by the hand where to find him.
(...): that is, that lawless one, whom no laws of God or man may keep within
bounds of duty. Gratian in his Decrees sorts us with variety of laws of God
and man. Public, private; positive, of Nature, and Nations, Customarie;
written, unwritten; Civil, Canonical. Of them all, the conclusion after some
debate is; they are subject to Popes Interpretation, dispensation: many to
abrogation. He is the 1 Cor. 2.15.
spiritual man who judges all things, all men, himself is judged of none;
and though he send, plures animarum Currus ad Tartara, no man may dare say; Why
do thou so: See supra, citata ex Innocentio 30. Tibi soli peccani, is their
Motto.

Some favoring, flattering rather the eminence of Princes, have made it
questionable, whither they be bound by their own laws, and laws of their
country; never did any question, whither highest Monarch were subject to the
laws of God, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Kings must learn to fear the Lord; to kiss the
Son, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. he is Rex Regum and Dominus Dominantium.

Here is a good fellow, as the Luke 18.2.
unrighteous Judge, nor reuerencing man, nor fearing God: at pleasure
dispensing, yea, cancelling the laws of God, for, by his own Traditions.

Psalm. 2.3.
break the bonds of Gods laws asunder, and castaway those cords from them:
who is David or the Son of Iesse? Is scarce worth the name of Rebellion. That
of Pharaoh, is to be trembled at, Exodus 5.2.
who is JEHOVAH, that I should obey his voice; that only suites his holiness.
And of his description and Revelation thus far.

VERSE. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy
with the brightness of his coming.


HIs destruction follows; The mention inserted to prevent the ouer-discomfort
of Gods Children. The degrees of it are two: 1. Consumption. 2. Abolishment.
Amplifications of Both; By 1. Author, the Lord. 2. Means, 1. Of consumption,
the Spirit of his mouth. 2. Abolishment; brightness of his coming.

That there shall be an utter destruction, and ruining of Antichrist, and his
Kingdom, we hence learn not without much solace: compare Apoc. 14.17.18.
Whence you may inform your selves who this Antichrist is, what his kingdom,
where his throne: no other then Rome, etc. What the instruments; who the chief
worker of his overthrow, etc. And all that his pride, or our infirmity may
object, prevented; for strong is the Lord God who judges her, Apoc. 18.8.

Aeternae Romae is to Saint Hierom and Prosper the name of Blasphemy written on
the forehead of the Beast, Hierom. ad Algas. q. 11. Prosp. ds. prouid. and
praedest cap. 7.
Apoc. 13.1. No nay, but Rome must be the Church, against which the gates of
hell prevail not; perpetually it must endure to the end of the world. Oh
fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the Scriptures has spoken; to
dream of perpetuity of that Synagogue of satan, which the Lord has begun to
demolish, threatened utterly to abolish. Can you observe her already in her
comsumption, and with a, proh dolor, bewail the daily defection of Kingdoms
and Nations from her? and yet dream of her perpetuity? Estius in 2 These. 2.4.
But thus must they be blinded, whom God will have deluded.



holy seed, if any amongst them, Apoc. 18.4.
come out of her, that they be not longer partakers of her sins, and receive
of her plagues.

Degrees of destruction. 1 Consumption; a lingering wasting of him and his
kingdom. See Psalm. 78.7, 8. Iezabel this Queen of whoredoms is not at once
cast out of the window: first, Apoc. 2.22.
into her bed of languishing.

Why not at once destroyed? Resp. With Romans 9.22.
much patience God bears the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. These
Reasons are of it.

God knows to use evil things well: 1 Antichrist, Isai 10.5.12.
as Ashur, his rod to scourge his Church. 2 His instrument of their trial. See
Apoc. 6.10, 11. means of their crown.

2 Slay them not, least my people forget it, Psalm. 59.11, 13.

3 The holy Apoc. 18.4.
remnant, by sight of his languishing, rescued out of the Jaws of death.

4 That by these beginnings of sorrows themselves, if possible, might be
brought to repentence: see Apoc. 2.21.

5 There is a secret insinuation of spiritual Judgment furthered hereby;
while they through indignation at the wrath, and wan hope to recover, grow more
obdurate in evil.

6 Their last vengeance aggrauated by this occasion; because those Job. 36.13.
hypocrites call not, no not when God bids them.

The means of his consuming: the breath of the Lords mouth: that some
interpret, the bare command of Christ, without any ministry of man: others
metaphorically to denote, how easily the Lord shall work it; solo flatu oris,
if he but blow upon him he is consumed. Rather thus says Caietane, Spiritu
Sermonis Euangelici etc. the preaching of the Gospel; called by the Prophet,
the rod of his mouth, the spirit of his lips, Isai 11.4. Agreeing whereto is
that of Saint John's Angel, having the eternal Gospel to preach; and thereby
to reduce the profane and superstitious world bewitched by Antichrist, to the
true fear and pure worship of God: see Apoc. 14, 6, 7. Events accord it. Not
with sword or spear, but with this 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
weapon of our warfare, has the Lord demolished the strong holds of
Antichrist; those high things exalted against the obedience of Christ. Read
History of Luther in Sleiden.

Congruitie of the instrument you easily discern, when you consider the maine
pillars of Popish Religion to be 1 Ignorance, and 2 Error; easily, as mists,
vanishing, when but the beams of Truths light appear to the world.

Mat. 7.6.
holy and pearls, must not be hazarded to contempt of swine: difficult and
obscure; the 2 Pet. 3.16.
unlearned and unstable may pervert them to their own destruction. But out
upon those blasphemies, they are hellish; the Scriptures a nose of wax, a
Lesbian Rule, a dumb Judge, Inkie Divinity: Spoke Peter thus, your pretended
predecessor in the Popedom? 2 Pet. 1. Truth is, you know it well, 1 Samuel 5.3,
4.
the Arc and Dagon, light and darkness have as good concord, as Popish Faith
and the Gospel. Hence is, the locking up of Scriptures in an unknown tongue;
enclosing Interpretation to Rome, verifying that; Haeretici Lucifugae
Scripturarum: chiefly Antichrist. Wonder you? hence came his (...), his
irrecouerable consumption, whereof he yet languisheth.

As many as long for the prosperity of Sion, the downfall of Babylon, pray 1
that the 2 These. 3.1.
word of God may have free passage and be glorified. 2 That Ephesians 6.9.
utterance may be given us instantly to preach the eternal Gospel with 1 Cor.
2.4.
evidence of the Spirit and power. 3 That daily God Mat. 9.38.
would thrust forth laborers into his harvest: that if it may be, we living
may bear our part in the Apoc. 19.1, 2, 3
Halleluiah of Saints at the fall of Babylon.

And shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. The second degree of
his destruction; abolishment or utter ruin; at least eneruating in such sort,
as he is lest without power and efficacy. Understand it of his person, place,
authority, etc. see Apoc. 17.18, 19. whither of his doctrine and Religion also,
so that none shall be left embracing or professing it, is another question
where with I meddle not.

The mean of his utter overthrow; the brightness of Christ's coming: But
denotes it the mean, or not rather the time of his overthrow? Resp. Both. When
he comes in his brightness, and not till then, shall this abolishment be: by
it also as the mean of atchieuement: the phrase of speech is the same, and of
the same general signification with the former; which apertly denotes the
mean of his consumption. But means he thereby the day of Christ's second
appearing? Resp. So runs the whole stream of Divines Protestant and Popish.
Which yet, with hartiest reverence to the learning and sanctity of our Sages,
Let me crave leave to question. Is this abolishment of Antichrist mentioned by
Paul, the same thing with the downfall of Babylon? Apoc. 18. then, under
correction, this brightness of Christ's coming cannot be the precise day of
Judgment: for after it must follow, calling of Jews, destruction of Gog and
Magog: and some Halcyon days of the Church on earth: how many, who knows? The
quere was occasioned me by a learned Jesuit, Estius ad locu^.
commenting upon the place; whose inclinable resolution upon like reason, is
this; that this coming of the Lord is not to be taken in atomo, but extensely
and with some latitude: so as under it may be comprised, the anteriour and
foregoing signs: like as in his coming in the flesh, is comprehended also the
coming and preaching of John Baptist his forerunner: to this purpose the
professor and Chancellor of Doway. A critic Scholiast upon the Revelation we
have, whose learning and industry who so vnderualues, knows not what belongs
to either, pardon him his curious applications, he has confessedly done the
office of a solid Interpreter. Thus he; There is a spiritual, and there is a
corporal or personal coming of Christ. This place is not to be understood of
his coming in person to the general judgment. But of his manifestation of
his presence in the Church, by effects of power, justice, grace and mercy; at
the appearance whereof Popery shall vanish, and melt as dew before the Sun;
and his very Throne quake, when time of his Judgment comes, as Mountains
tossed to and fro with the violence of an Earthquake, plane itasentio.

And say as the Spirit and Bride; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Their sins,
me seems, are at the height; Lord why ^a^riest thou?

But that Popery should be of long standing in the Church, the Apostle thus
intimates: follows it, Therefore the true Religion? Resp. Some hundreds of
years continued Arianisme in the Church, and greatly prevailed, so that the
whole world, says Hierom, groaned to see it self become Arian. Was it
therefore the Truth? Those Heretics were they the Church? Except for that
Liberius sometime subscribed thereto, no Papist will affirm it. Mat. 13.30.
Tares must grow with the wheat till the harvest: that perpetuity will never
Transubstantiate Tares into wheat. These Reasons are of Gods dispensation in
that kind. 1. There shall still be some to be deluded. 2. Ever such occasion
to exercise his children, and 1 Cor. 11.17.
to make their sincerity known.

tempora saecularia may carry it, likely to be of so long continuance; I am
sure more Catholic, that is, universally entertained, then Truth of doctrine
or life: As our Savior, John 5.39.
Search Scriptures; as Esaias, so I say; To the Isai 8.20.
law and Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them. And of the destruction also of Antichrist thus far.

VERSE. 9, 10. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders,

And with all deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because
they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved.


WHat connection this section has with the former text, and what scope, is
somewhat doubtful? perhaps the Apostle anticipates what Gods childrens
infirmity, or Antichristians security might object against what is foretold
of his destruction. Ob. Antichrist so fortified and supported to be destroyed?
Sub. Yes, even Antichrist, notwithstanding all the supplies he has from hell
and the strong man armed there: when a stronger then he comes: And Apoc.
18.8.
strong is the Lord that judges him. 2 Else, which I rather think, the
Apostle desires to discover him to Gods people in his very rising, by the
manner and means of his advancement: that so he might prevent their
seducement, and make them more cautionate. Howeuer,

The sum of the text is this: A discovery of the advancement of Antichrist
into his throne; set out by 1 the manner, (...): 2 Means; power, signs,
wonders. 3 Persons, or subjects in which he preuailes, them that perish.

Whose coming; that is, advancement and first raising into his kingdom; (...)
whither that (...) denote proportion only; or generally the means, which is
after specified, I leave to the Reader farther to be examined: if proportion,
this seems the sense; after the working of Satan; that is, according to the
rate and course which Satan holds, when he aduanceth; if the means, the
general only is first set down, particulars are after specified.

But hence we have it fluent, that Popery has ever had a great friend of the
Devil; he is the first raiser, maine supporter of that state: thereto bends
(...), the best of ficacie, most actuous liuelyhood of his operation. To the
Apoc. 9.11.
Star of that Church Satan delivers the key of the bottomless pit; makes
him the great Steward of his house. Joseph in Egypt never had more command,
then in Hell this Antichrist: fumes presently are exhaled so thick that they
darken the Sun it self; and in those fumes, locusts sans number and
monstrous to vex and torment the earth withal, that if the God of this world
could not 2 Cor. 4.4.
blind the eyes of their mind; yet he might vex their Conscience, and so
traduce them to the side of Antichrist Worthily did Rome forfeit her privilege
to Latheran Churches, because they understood it not to the full. Mat. 16.18.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church: that once belonged to
Rome while she was faithful: now is translated to other Churches who better
know to prize the prerogative. Shall not prevail: ah fools and blind:
unworthy of such favor: yours, if any, is greater; shall not shake, nor move
against you: quietly you may pass to Hell, as Israel into Canaan, no Dog,
not Cerberus himself wagging tongue against you. More then that; the Gates of
Hell, that is, all the power and policy of the Devil are sworn yours, to
advance and support you: happy Rome; miserable Protestants, but that the Lord
on high is mightier.

If that (...) denote proportion, semblable you shall find the Popes
advancement to the course of Satan: by 1 Ignorance, the Prince of Darkness:
see also 2 Cor. 4. Number sic Christus. 2 Pompa saeculi. Apoc. 13.4.16. Non sic
Christus. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. 3 Bloody c^ueltie. Apoc. 13.15. and 17.6. So not
Phil. 1 13, 14. Tertul. in Apol.
Christ. Semen est sanguis Christianorum. 4 Humoring voluptuousness of
sensual nature. 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. Christ not so; But by the holy conversation
of his children prepares aliens to conversion. 1 Pet. 2.12. and 3.1.

Apoc. 17.
before he has described the Sternsman, a man of sin, a child of perdition:
his faith and Religion a mystery of Iniquity: if this be too little, he here
minds us of the first founder and maine supporter of that state, the devil
and Satanas: its good which the devil hates: evil, that he favors:
Extremely, Hellishly evil, which he so much favors, as with all his might and
maine to advance and support. The good Lord give you eyes to see, hearts to
consider, that if any of you be entangled in the least favorable inclination
to Popery, ye may be rescued out of the snare of the Devil: if any yet not
snared, he may be watchful against the entanglement.

Ephesians. 6.11, 12.
Put upon you the whole Armor of God: for in wrestling with Popery, you
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, etc.

With all power, and signs, and lying wonders. The means of his advancement:
(...), Caiatane expounds secular pomp: All power, that is, power of all sorts,
riches, honor, dominion, etc. that herein he may appear (...): an opposite to
Christ, of whom the Prophet, Behold thy King comes meekely, sitting on an
Ass, etc. And such the pomp of Popery. Read Bernard ad Eugenium.

But were it not (...) singular, why might we not suppose it to signify the
same thing, with (...) and (...)? places of Scripture are many: see Heb. 2.4. 2
Cor. 12.12. and alibi: And yet that (...), me thinks is equiuolent: and
compare Romans 15.19. you may imagine here (...): thus ye tead there (...), in
the power signs and wonders. Conceive not, as idle Schoolmen and postillers,
real difference betwixt them, such as to diuersifie them into several
species: the thing is the same, the names only several: powers, they are
called by Metonymie of the efficient, because they issue from power
extraordinary: Signs, for their use, because they served to signify and
seal up the truth of doctrine to which they were applied: wonders, for their
effect, because they bred in the beholders marvel, sometimes no less then
astonishing.

1. What is a miracle? 2. Can Antichrist, can Satan work it? Resp. The name is
sometimes used largely, sometimes stricktly, largely taken, it sounds to
Augusl. de vtilitat. Cred. ad Hanoratum. c. 16
Austin, any work whatsoever hard and vnufuall, exceeding the expectation or
ability of the beholder, and breeding him wonder* The Latin name extends it
self to all such unusual accidents or acts; miraculum a mirando; because,
thorough ignorance of causes, beholders wonder. So to the simple, Eclipse of
the Sun seems an half miracle, such wonder it breeds in him; which the
Astronomer beholds and foretells without wonder.

Stricktly, they denote works extraordinary running into the sense, exceeding
the ability of all second causes: of these Thomas observes three kinds or
degrees rather.

1. Some such as by created virtue, such as he signifies under the name of
nature, can never be produced; as to stop the Sun in his course and Josh.
10.12, 13.
make him stand still; as under Ioshuah, or to, Isai 38.8.
make him go back; the sign to Hezekiah.

2. Others, which nature can work, but not in that order that they are
wrought: as, that man or other Animals should live, see, hear, walk, as a
work of nature, but to live after death, to see after John 9.
blindness, etc. this is a work no less then miraculous.

3. A third sort, when what are usual works of Nature, are produced without
the principles and helps of Nature, suppose when a fever curable by Nature, is
cured with the word or touch of our Savior, without any help of medicine, See
Thom. Cont. Gent. lib. 3. cap. 101.102, etc.

2. Can Antichrist, Satan, any creature work a miracle? Resp. Mira they may;
miracula they cannot, if ye take them in strickt sense. 1. Its Gods Psalm. 86.
and 135
prerogative royal, Ps. 72.18. 2. They are divine Testimonies, Heb. 2.4.3.
Signs of Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.12.4. Believe me for the works sake, Ioh. 10.38
Reasons Philosophically Theological, See in Thomas; qua supra.

3. What is then to be thought of these signs and wonders which Antichrist
works by help of Satan? Resp. What? But as Paul styles them: that they are
(...): wonders of falsehood; not only in respect of their end, because they
tend to confirm error; but in respect of their form; wanting what should
constitute them in the essence and nature of miracles, properly so called.
Sometimes the 1. Sense is deceived; as in those wrought by Pharao his
Magitians. 2. Sometimes the fantasy deluded. 3. Sometimes, Augustine de
Ciuitat. Dei.
secret works of nature offered to sense of ignorant beholders: the Lamp in
Venus Temple burning so many years, to Pliny was no other, but the stone
Asphestus set on fire. 4. Sometimes things active applied to passive, and so
effects wonderful produced. Philosopher is none amongst men, so exact as the
devil.

What through the acuity of understanding Natural, and notices of nature
received in Creation, reserved since his fall; and what through observation and
experience of so many hundreds, some thousands of years since his first being;
he is, to our wonder, skillful in the whole course of nature; And by that skill
produces strange and extraordinary effects. Not all prestigious and illusorie,
but true in genere Rerum, things being such as they are seen; yet false all
genere miraculoru^ properly so called, for such are works exceeding the order
of whole Nature; or of Nature universally taken; beyond whose ability devils,
yea, good Angels ascend not.

4 Had Romanists any advancement into the Throne by this means? Resp. Such,
and so great, that by Bellarmine and others, its made note of the Church; Read
him also in the question of Antichrist, what pretty tales he tells of
Syluesters Miracles curing Constantine of his Leprosy. Stories or Legends
rather, are full of lying both wonders, and reports of wonders,, to confirm
their worship of Relics, prayer for the dead, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, etc. Greatest Controuersists, when Scriptures, Fathers, Traditions
fail, fly to miracles, for confirmation of doctrine. That chiefly is
remarkable in story; that about the time of Gregory the great, what time
Antichrist grew toward clearest Revelation and was now to be installed and
entitled Oecumenicall Bishop; Miracles of all sorts began to be multiplied.
Read Gregory's Dialogues, and what Paulus Diaconus and other, following fables,
report of all sorts of wonders, for confirmation of all sorts of Popish error
and superstition. I will not deny but the things reported were, many of them,
true in genere Rerum; I dare half swear, they were all false in genere
Miraculorum, that were pretended wrought for confirmation of Popery.

Whither and when the gift of Miracles ceased in the Church might here not
impertinently be enquired: but the volume grows biggish.

Gloria Miraculorum: so was Antichrist to be advanced into his Throne, so the
people to be besotted who received his Character. Not but that Miracles, truly
so called, are testimonies of Truth, vt supra. But that the maruels they brag
of, are mira only, if true, not miracula. And many of them false lying
reports, mere fables and no better. Such that of Syluesters curing
Constantines Leprosy, in his ministering Baptism to him at Rome; when its well
known, his Baptism was not at Rome; but by a little superstition deferred till
the end of his life: fables a thousand I could fill you withal of Miracles,
and little less then miraculous apparitions of Saints and Angels: for
confirmation of purgatory, prayer to Saints, for dead, and such like Popish
trash. Thomas of Aquine is supposed to be gratulated by the blessed Virgin for
his pains taken to clear her birth from original sin, with her own voice
from heaven, Been de me scripsisti Thoma. Saint Bernard devout in superstition
in veneration of her, was once saluted by her Image, miraculously giving him
the time of the day, Good morrow Bernard. But well considering what David
speaks of Idols, they have mouths and speak not: he is bold to mind her,
That her Ladyship had forgotten her self; for it was not permitted to women to
speak in the Church: sexcenta sunt huinsmodi.

Contra istos mirabilarios, against these miracle-mongers Christ and his
Prophets have made us cautionate; while they mind us, they may teach truth
John 10.41.
that do no miracles; John did no miracle; yet all he spoke of Christ was
true: and they may be See Deuteronomy. 13. Mat. 24.24.
Impostors who give signs and wonders. The Devil himself cannot work a
miracle; his power, though great, yet is not infinite: yet suppose him to give
a sign and wonder, which I am not able ito discriminate from a true miracle:
In weakness perhaps might say, as Pharaoes Magitians, Digitus Dei est hic: yet
if he misled me from verity of doctrine or life, taught me in Scripture,
whither Devil of Hell, or Gal 1 8.
Angel of Heaven, I should hold him accursed. Spero, obsecro and vos, qui
credente mundo ipse non credit, magnum est ipse prodigium. To doctrine taught
in our Churches belong Heb. 2 4.
miracles of Christ and his Apostles.

And with all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness. The second means of his
advancement; deceitfulness, all kinds of falsehood and cousenage: (...): take
here to denote iniustitiam vniuersalem: whither it be qualitas efficientis, or
finis, is doubtful: if efficientis, This the meaning; with all tricks of
cousenage, imposture, and legerdemaine, that wickedness it self can devise or
exercise, faigning apparitions of Angels and Spirits: forging decrees of
Councils, corrupting Fathers, sembling, dissembling piety; swearing,
forswearing dummodo ob Rem; fawning flattering, bribing, threatening, forcing,
using pro re nata ca: Time would fail me to reckon up all their (...); their
methods and Arts of cousenage and imposture, whereby they have raised and still
support their state: Achitoph^l, Machiauil, cursed Moamed himself may seem
honest in policy, in comparison of Romish Clergy. Be wise as Serpents,
pleases; be it as the old Serpent the Devil. Innocent as Doves, as their
practice shows, deserves the obiliske, the veru of their Index expurgatorius:
by such wicked policy has Popery advanced it self.

If it denote the end, or issue of their deceitfulness, this is the meaning;
deceit leading to unrighteousness; via vitae, the way tending to life; via
Iusti^iae, the way tending to righteousness: so (...); the outpath leading to
wickedness, making the people as themselves; injurious to God, unjust to men,
cruel to themselves. Their doctrines dissenting from our Churches, all such 1
either in the matter: 2 or in their annexa and native sequeles: as to any
judicious man seriously viewing them will appear. Concording are the lives of
their deluded sectaries.

Rome? Robbing God of his honor, Christ of his Mediation, Princes of
Sovereignty, of life; Parents of Children for Religion: that teaches
violation of faith, though with oath plighted to Heretics: tolerates, half
ligitimates fornication; in some case Incestuous marriage, etc. The wisdom
from above is Iac. 3.17.
pure, full of mercy and good fruits. The doctrine of Gods Grace teaches to
Tit. 2.11, 12.
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: instructs to piety, justice, temperance:
a Religion ye have here, as a circle whose circumference is fraud; whose
center, nothing but unrighteousness: what may, if this will not, work our
abhorrence from it? If that may not prevail, attend yet seriously what is
subioyned.

In them that perish: The subject or persons on whom it fastens; such as
perish: understand it exclusiuely, only such as perish. Periphrasis
Reproborum, not infrequent in Scriptures: See 2 Cor. 2.15. and 2 Cor. 4.3. and
alibi. So styled because their perishing is certain and inevitable. Jude v. 4.
(...). And that doctrine is now entering execution; they being, as I may say,
in the Act of perishing.

It should seem then they are only castawayes, men destined to damnation, who
are seduced by this Antichrist: see Apoc. 13.8. and 14.9, 10, Reasons are
evident. 1 Their Errors of Judgment are in the fundamentals of Faith: they
hold not the head Col. 2.19. 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. 2 In Religion, against the heart
and life of pure worship; abominable Idolatric. 3 The seduced mostly
vnreclaimable; so strong is the delusion sent upon them. Apoc. 14.9, 10.

May we dare to say so of Papists? Resp. Had we the (...) that becomes Gods
Ministers, we should dare, seeing therein we follow the spirit of God leading
us, and putting the speech into our mouths: why strengthen we the hands of the
wicked that he cares not to return, by promising him life? Ezech. 13.22.

Once falling on a wandering Star (they call such travelers) who had
forraged France, Italy, it seems to seek his Religion: I heard him thus
bewray his inclination to Popery: and his reason to prefer it in his choice,
forsooth: that a man may be saved holding the faith and Religion of Rome, our
selves confess: That any can be saved in our heresy, as they term it,
Papists confidently deny. Thus were the answers: 1 That argues not they had
more veri^ie, but we more Charity. 2. But who, Judicious amongst us, ever
taught, that a Papist universally joining in the tridentine faith and religion
can be saved? nisi forte detur Regressus in viam. 1 They are pointed out such
whose Names are not written in the Lambs book of life. 2 The lies they
believe, such as damn, verse. 11, 12. 3 And I demand; Are they Schismatiques
only? or rather heretics, or both? then why are we meal mouthed? why fear
we to say, living and dying Papists, they cannot be saved.

Yet in this peremptorinesse its good to be advised. 1 There are differences of
Errors Papal; not all in the foundation: their opinion of Number and
efficacy of Sacraments; of several orders in the Angelical and
Ecclesiastique Hierarchy, etc. are all erroneous; yet not heretical.

2 In modo tentionis, difference is obseruable: in some, misled with error of
Times, the assent is tremulous, not peremptory, perhaps resolution holden to
change sentence, when better reason shall sway them: It may be also, care and
endeavor of better information, with propense inclination to the adverse
doctrine; of such, for their propension to Truth in general, my charity is
hopeful.

3 But there are who universally join in all errors of faith and Religion
taught in that Church; of such, except God give them Repentance, what lets to
say? they are in remediless peril of eternal damnation: see Apoc. 14* 9, 10,
11.

terror of the Lord prevail with us. The noise of damnation is fearful:
except to men of reprobate minds, dreadful; more then that of Thunder. I
beseech you, as you tender your poor souls, bought with the precious blood of
Christ, made to be immortal, called to enjoy the glorious Deity, beware, how
in your hearts you turn back to the Egypt of Popery, hear them not that
say, salvation is to be found in the Church of Rome; Christ is the Savior of
his Ephesians 5.23.
body; are limbs of Antichrist members of Christ?

Object. What then became of forefathers? What of so many nations yet under
that bondage? Conclude we all under remediless peril of damnation?

Resp. There is a kind people, says Austin, curious to know other men's lives,
careless to reform their own. Et Nos, charitably cautionate for others
salvation; take heed, least not prodigal of our own. Ordinate charity begins
at home. How God deals with others in justice, or mercy, humanity may
incline me something to enquire; howbeit wisdom advises, to have principal
eye to my self. Hos. 4.15.
Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin. And if others
will serve Idols, yet I am of Ioshuahs mind, I and my house will serve the
Lord. Josh. 24.15.

2 Quaero and ego: what became of Gentiles, nations all, except Israel, till
times of new Testament? God Act. 14.16.
suffered them all to walk in their own ways; yet now admonishes all to
turn from those vanities, to serve the living and true God.

3 Yet, as no man says of those nations, particulars were all damned: some
Proselites were of Gentiles admitted into Jewish Church; others, I doubt not,
many chosen vessels of mercy: so in depth of Popish heresy, were many in all
times found, in maine foundations Orthodoxe, and opposite to the prevailing
faction. On which foundation, though they built hay and stubble, yet with that
loss, 1. Cor. 3 15.
their souls were saved.

4 That also is remarkable; Popish errors were not all from the beginning, in
that height, whereto they are now grown; nor urging to assent so strict and
peremptory, as since the Trent Council. Liberty there was in the maine, that
concerns the heart of Faith and Religion, to opine; to dissent from judgment
generally received; which liberty also many used; I doubt not, but with
comfort to their souls.

5 Gods judgments are sometimes open, sometimes secret, always just. 1 Romans
11.35.
Who has given him first? 2 That any of Adams posterity are saved, is of his,
mere mercy; If others perish, there is no injustice. But that they perished,
that lived and died in vassalage unto that Antichrist, Saint Paul warrants me
to assent.

Justly, because they received not the love of the truth. The sin noted as
cause of their damnation: has two branches. 1 Want of love to the truth of the
Gospel. 2 Rejecting that grace of God tendered to their souls. They received
not the love of the truth.

There is, 1 Knowledge. 2 Faith. 3 Love of the truth. There may be knowledge,
where is not faith; faith where is not love of the truth.

Those reuolts were Heb 6 4.
enlightened: knew the way of truth. Saint Peter ads more: they were 2. Pet.
2.18.20.21.
clean escaped from them that are entangled in error; having obtained
sanitie, and rectitude of judgment in matter of faith.

More then that; some kind 1. Tim. 1.19. and 4.1.
of faith they aspire unto; firm persuasion of the truth of Evangelical
doctrine. Yea, some perhaps retain it, while they perish.

Their maime is in their affection. 1 They love not the truth. 2 Yea reject,
not truth, but love of truth tendered to their souls. Thus I conceive: the
Lord sending his word to the Church, not only tenders it to their ears; but
enlightens the understanding of many worst men, to know: presents to the mind
the amiable excellency of the mysteries therein contained; shows the goodness
brought home to the soul of every faithful and obedient receiver. Mic. 2.7.
Are not my words good, to him that walks uprightly? I ask your judgment.
The old way is the good way, therein you shall Ier. 6.16.
find rest to your souls. The Ioh. 8 32.
truth shall make you free: thus does the Lord woo the affections, laboring
to enamour them of his truth. Happy is he who, as Genesis 9.27.
Iaphet, is allured: he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. Justly they perish,
who, against themselves, Luke 7 32.
despise the counsel of God, and Act. 13* 46.
put from them so great salvation; they judge themselves unworthy everlasting
life.

But is knowledge or love of truth tendered to all perishing under Antichrist?

Resp. And I demand, as Paul of Jews, Romans 10.18.
have they not heard? No doubt their sound went out into all lands, and their
words unto the ends of the world. 1 If the quere be of them firstly seduced by
Antichrist, they all were children of the Church. 2 As to succeeding
generations, the seed of the wicked, walking in the steps of their fathers
error* and superstition, thus far was tender made them of grace.

1 Faith explicit was required of rudest Laickes in depth of Popery,
Credendorum: so far as the letter of the Creed might lead them. Faciendorum,
prescribed in the Decalogue. Petendorum, comprised in the Lords prayer.
Recipiendorum, tendered in the Sacraments. Besides of what in solemn
festiuities of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. Was
represented to their memory and meditation. And, if credit may be given to
Popish relation, Pastors enjoined to explicate to the people, these heads of
Christian faith and religion. In which explications also, you may observe
generals to be mostly Orthodoxe; particular glosses, inferences, or
concealements, only erroneous.

Though God suffered them, as Gentiles, to walk in their own ways,
nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in times of grossest
ignorance. Raising up in all ages some from amongst themselves, to oppose
corruptions of prevailing faction. Neither were these things done in a corner:
but the whole Church was filled with the tumult; providence so disposing, that
the sound of his truth might ring in the ears of besotted people: Besides
suffering of Martires, whose bonds and passions were Phil. 1.1^.
famous in the very Popes Palace, and in all places, that occasion might be
given to all of inquiring the cause.

3 And of late the mountain of the Lord has been again erected on the top
of the mountains; Churches famous many in all quarters founded; Act. 24.14.
Worshipping God after that manner, which these call heresy; yet teaching no
other thing then Moses, Prophets and Apostles have spoken. And doubt you, but
the people are bound thither to resort? see famous example of those in the ten
tribes, whose hearts God touched, in the general deprauation of religion under
Jeroboam. 2. Chron. 11.14.16.

4 But for the people of our Churches, daily reuolting to Rome, how has God
long wooed them to entertain into their love his precious truth? and they
would not: that they of all men most justly perish, so palpable is their
reiection; I say not of truth only, but of love of truth tendered to their
souls.

But of such despisers of truth is compacted the body of the Romish Synagogue.
Amongst the many Centones of reuolters to Popery, name me the man who ever
euidenced zeal for the maintenance, and propagation of the doctrine taught in
our Churches; opposed not rather the proceedings; triumphed not in the disgrace
of the Gospel, and made a mock of the counsel of those poor, that
entertained it, and set their hearts to seek after the Lord. I have known
many; some, a little familiarly. Amongst all to me known, I cannot mind one,
in whom I ever saw life or power of godliness: but epicures, sensualists,
unclean, profane persons; or if there be almost any other worse thing,
contrary to wholesome doctrine which is according to godliness, men, not only
themselves practicing such things, Romans 1.32.
but pleasing themselves, and rejoicing in them that do them

Resp. 1 Yet Thomas could mind them, that in that of Moamed, is preualence no
less, through the fitting it has had to voluptuousness of sensual nature. 2
And whom, but sensuallists, and carnal gospellers, have they prevailed
withal? What one man (name him, if they can) heartily affected to our
Religion, and truly loving it? Oh marvelous efficacy of Popish doctrine,
traducing men from profaneness to superstition, from godless contempt of
piety, to impious idolatry, making their Proselites Mat. 23.15.
twofold more the children of Hell: or rather: Oh just judgment of God,
giving over men not Romans 1.28.
regarding the knowledge of God, to a reprobate mind, men not receiving the
love of truth, to belief of lies, and pertinacious adhering to doctrines of
Devils.

2 But if therefore these perish because they received not the love of the
truth, Lord, I think, what shall become of this faithless and crooked
generation? to whom the light of Gods truth has so long and clearly shined,
and yet John 3.19.
they love darkness rather then light. Evidences of the crime take these. 1
Their nauseating the plenty of this Manna: so corn fed they profess
themselves with this bread of life. How ioyed they in the tidings of the
misnoised inhibition of preaching? When, God knows, purpose was never to
inhibit plenty, but to regulate order and manner of preaching; that neither
Heb. 5.13.
babes might want their milk, and strong men growing to the itch of ears,
might be restrained to wholesome Doctrine, every one taught, as Mark 4 33.
they are able to hear.

2 Indifferency of most in their affection to the remoouall or retaining,
carelessness, whither Jehovah, or Baal were entertained for the God of Israel.
Known unto God are all his ways from the beginning; sweetly does providence
sway in the delinquencies of his children, guiding all to his own best ends.
But in the rumor of our entering league of amity with a daughter of that
Religion, how brake out Hypocrisy of many to discovery of it self: resolution
uttered, profession made by many to change with the times, study in many, of
honest minds, to reconcile, as their style was, the seeming differences twixt
the two Religions. Rare the man that kept his resolution with Ioshuah: that
vowed to suffer loss, I say not of life; but of the infamous goods of fortune,
for the cause of the Gospel.

3 It was Salomons advise to Prou. 23.23.
buy the truth, and not to sell it: Iudes, to Iud ver. 3.
strive for the faith once given to Saints: herein how defective were even
pillars of the Church, that though the tax were opprobrious no less then
slanderous, to charge them as Jeremy Jews, to Iere 9.3.
bend their tongues, as their bows, for lies; yet willingly they may bear the
blame, of Iere. 9.3.
not being more valiant for the cause of truth.

Causes of it these: 1 The little or no feeling of the power thereof, in their
souls: had they 1. Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
tasted how sweet the Lord is in his word, the hungry infant would not more
long for the milk, nor more hardly be drawn, in extremest hunger, from the
breast, then they from the sincere milk of the word.

2 Conscience not discharged of the guilt of sin, flies the arraignement.
Affection besotted of the pleasures of sin, reiects what would withdraw them,
though with assurance of beatitude, they love darkness, rather then light
because their John 3.19.
deeds are evil.

3 There is in the truth, as in Mat. 5.13.
salt, holesomenesse, but joined with tartness: the two witnesses Apoc. 11.10.
vex them that dwell upon the earth. No marvel if they joy and solace
themselves in their disgrace.

That they might be saved. Quest. Had they been saved, if they had admitted
love of truth? Resp. Who doubts? upon that Hypothesis. Tire and Sidon had Mat.
11.21.23.
repented, in case means of Capernaites had been vouchsafed them.

Quest. But could they receive it? Resp. Why are we curious? God puts not into
any, auersenesse from any goodness. In the tender of grace and iniunction of
duties, respects them as he first made them. Expects they should render him the
good dispositions and abilities, and pliablenesse to his instructions he gave
in their first creation. Justly, since he Eccles. 7.29.
made them righteous at the first, and they have sought them many inventions.
Arminius too sawcily forces on God necessity and obligation to restoring of
abilities lost by man's wilfulness; too grossly denies ability to every thing
enjoined, or to be enjoined, given unto Adam. But why meddle we with those
intricacies.

Fluently we have it from the Apostle, that love of truth is amongst those
virtues which accompany salvation. Therefore Jeremy pleades it as part of his
righteousness; claims thereby interest to blessings conveyed in covenant of
Grace. Thy Iere. 15.16.
words were found with me, and I did eat them: and thy word was unto me the
joy and rejoicing of my heart. See Job 23.12. Psalm. 119.

And who so considers: 1 Romans 8.7.
Enmity of depraved nature against the Law of God: 2 That this love issues
from the 1. Pet. 2.3.
comforts our consciences have tasted; the power of it our souls have
experimented 1. Cor. 10.5.
in subduing the high thoughts to obedience of Christ, and the blessed Psalm.
19.7.
change it has wrought, easily acknowledges the gift supernatural; far
above, what nature elevated to her highest pitch, if subsisting within bounds
of nature, can possibly reach unto.

its Mat. 13.46. Psalm. 119.72.
valued at, is above that of Gold and Silver. 2 The soul that tastes it, Pro. 2
4.
searches for it as for Silver; withal the might gets this understanding. 3
Psalm. 84 and 42.
Mournes for depriuall, as Rachel for her children. 4 Is in a measure
satisfied, never Psalm. 84.2. 1. Pet. 2.2.3.
sated with the pleasures of it. 5 A Romans 10.15.
beauty it sees in the very feet of them that preach it; loves the ground they
go on. 6 Hates as Hell the adulteraters, Gal. 2.5.
opposes to every opposite of the truth, and proceedings of it.

You that love your souls, fasten on them this love of truth. 1 If depth of
learning, profound mysteries be it that your minds affect, lo here what 1
Pet. 1.12.
Angels themselves love to pry into, rejoice to Ephesians. 3.10.
learn in the Church.

2 Pleasing to the understanding is the knowledge of truth. Verum is bonum
intellectus, the half happiness and perfection of the understanding. Here see
such as no science else reueales: God is he knows, and reueales, his own
being, and manner of existence. The true means of reconciling man to God; and
what all the wits of the World in vain turmoiled and puzzled themselves to
find out, the way and mean of true tranquillity.

3 Oh Psalm. 34.8.
taste and see how gracious the Lord is; experiment a while the power of this
truth: What wonders will it work in thy soul, may it there sway? Those
turbulent (...), passions of sensuality, which wisdom of moral heathens
labored vainly to captiuate to right reason, this shall 2 Cor. 10 5.
subdue, the miserable bondage under sin and Satan, whereunder who groans
not? This John 8.32. and 17.9.
truth shall free thee from.

4 And if (...), true tranquillity of mind, Phil. 4.7.
pacification of conscience be that we long for, behold it published, conuyed,
wrought by the Gospel of peace, the word of faith, teaches to us wherewith we
1. John 3.19.
may assure our hearts, in the very terror of the last day.

5 And this is that Romans 1.16.
power of God to salvation, the word of salvation, of life; Revealing, working
the John 17.3.
knowledge of God in Christ, leading to the beatificall vision, the fruition of
the glorious Godhead. If these amiable fruits sway us not, Oh yet let the
terror of the Lord move us, thus its specified.

VERSE. 11.12. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie.

That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.


THE words seem intended to farther explication of the miserable estate of men
seduced by Antichrist for not receiving the love of truth. And for the maine,
to work in us the more fear of slighting such grace of God offered in the
Gospel. The argument, drawn from the punishment dreadful, and to be trembled
at, wherewith God plagues such as regard not the Gospel, the word of truth. For
this, God shall send them strong delusion, etc.

Particulars considerable are: 1 The judgment. 2 The inflicter. 3 The issue. 4
The cause meritorious.

1 The judgment is strong delusion to believe a lie. Greek, (...), which some
interpret, Efficacissimam quandam deceptionis vim. Others, Vim intus efficacem
and operatricem. Our English, strong delusion: Whether (...) actiuely denote
imposture, or passiuely, the fruit of such deception, Error, is not curiously
to be disputed: The words to my apprehension sound, strongest impressions of
error fastened upon their minds, by that great Imposture, the instrument of
the Lords vengeance. Conceive it to imply two things. 1 Infatuation and
besottednesse, so great as that errors palpable, and such as may be selt, are
entertained for truth. 2 Pertinacie and stiffness in adhearing to them,
incorrigible, that no persuasion, nor affright from God or man can reclaim
them from.

De primo: Infatuation, Have you ever read the Lord describing the sottish
dotage of idolatrous Jews? He Esaias 44.
burns part thereof in the fire: with part thereof he eats flesh; he
rosteth roast and is satisfied, he warmeth himself, etc. And the residue
thereof he makes a god; even his graven Image: he falls down to it, and
worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, deliver me for thou art my god.
And none considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge or understanding
to say, I have burnt part thereof in the fire; I have baked bread upon the
coals thereof, I have roasted flesh, and eaten thereof: And shall I make the
residue an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? A deceived
heart has turned him aside, etc.

No whit less is Popish infatuation. Semble to your selves a Papist prostrate
before his breaden god. He knows it the Bakers composition; sees, touches,
tastes it bread, cannot be ignorant, it goes out at the draught. Yet adores and
prays unto it, saying, deliver me, for thou art my God. So has God Isai
44.18.
shut their eyes, that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot
understand. Like may be observed in many other their absurd opinions, contrary
to sense, reason, all sound Authority.

See it in that grand gull, mother of all infatuation to the people: 1 As an
article of faith it must be holden, that the Pope cannot err dogmatice; in
matter of faith propounded to the people to be believed, though in life he may
be a devil incarnate, in his study and private judgment, an heretic; yet
in his public, decisions pronounced e Cathedra, he is, as Prophets and
Apostles, of unerring spirit. Such virtue has that chair had, ever since the
days of Pope Ioane.

2 Next, that to the Pope so resolving, the people owe caecam fidem, as
regulars to superiors, blind obedience: what is, if this be not, strong
infatuation?

2 Pertinacie and incorrigible stiffness, parallel to that of hardened Jews,
whom neither fulfilling of Prophecies, nor power of Christ's miracles, nor
evidence of truth, nor sanctity of his life, nor blushing of heaven, nor
quaking of earth, nor renting of temple, nor any thing could bring from
persuasion of the Messiahs temporal kingdom, nor win to embracing of Jesus
for the Christ of the Lord. No less is stiffenesse of error in the vassals of
Antichrist. May we say in Papists? Whom neither evidence of Scripture, nor
suffrage of Fathers, nor consent of Councils, nor blood of Martyrs, nor sword
of Magistrate, nor discovery of Antichrist, nor consumption of his kingdom,
nor, I am persuaded, ruin of that Babylon, can win from palpablest error.

that if he turned, he would sure turn Puritan; Sic vitant stulti vitia. And
why? In them only of all the party adverse to Popery, he had observed some
conscience; because some suffering for their profession: the rest he observed
(slanderously I hope) Time seruers. In Religion, as Cushi in policy, 2. Sam.
16.18.
whom the Lord and this people and the men of Judah shall choose, his will I
be. Oh woe is me, that ever it should be heard in Gath, or published in the
streets of Ascalon: I hope, I perswad my self better things of many. That
delusion should prevail more with Papists, then clear revelation of the truth
with us whose style is, Protestants. But to the point. 1 Not all stiffenesse is
constancy; there is pertinacy in error; witness those Priscillianists and
Donatists of Austins time, who chose rather to leave life, then to correct
their heresy, which gave him occasion to remember from Cyprian, Not the
punishment, but the cause was it that made the Martyr. 2 And consider, 1 how
potently shame of seeming inconstant, preuailes with many, through ambition and
vainglory, to perish in their error. 2 How fitted to humor of nature that
whole Religion is, 1 giving it share in the glory of Salvation: 2 loosing those
strict bonds of Sanctity, wherewith truth binds: 3 how deeply fastened in
their minds that Principle is; Its of necessity to salvation to live and dye
in the Romish faith, in subjection to the Bishop of that See. What will not
love of Beatitude do? Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for
his life; much more for his soul. That no man should stagger, because they are
settled upon their Lees; the delusion is strong which is sent upon them.

obsecro per Iesum, beware how you be carried away with the error of the
wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness: least the Lord give you up to
like infatuation, and pertinacie in Error. There may be observed in many, that
infidelis fiducia, Bernard speaks of; to complement with the Times, in hope to
keep the mind free from taint of error; in confidence of at least, Timely
Reuocation. But, 1 have thou a promise of return? 2 and not rather dreadful
threats of permitting to final Apostasy? 3 Its easy to headlong thy self,
as the Devil tempted Christ, from the pinnacle of the Temple. But can thou
then without miracle, stay thy self from irrecouerable falling? It goes as a
Judgment on their souls, who thus run into error, to be given up to
pertinacie: stiffenesse therein so stiff, as can never be altered. Errare
possum, says Saint Austin, meaning, through ignorance: Haereticus esse nolo;
pertinacious, he means, in error. But if we sin willingly after we have
received the knowledge of the Truth: what less b 2 Pet. 3.17.
c Heb. 10.26.
judgment may we expect, then strongest delusion? sottishest infatuation,
pertinacie incorrigible?

2 The inflicter of the Judgment, God; God shall send them strong delusion:
like phrases see frequent, Isai 6.10. and 44. Exodus 9.3. does God lead into
error, or confirm therein? Resp. Efficaciter mean you? Absit! he neither
deuiseth the error, nor propounds it to be believed: he is God of Truth; lover
of it: Error of John 8.44.
lies, have another father.

2 Nor inclines he the mind to assent, or the will to embrace it. God is not
Author of that, whereof he is vltor. Fulgentius.

But when he is said to harden, to blind, to deceive, understand it thus: As a
just Judge 1 he gives liberty to Satan and his instruments to attempt, to
impresse it. Its said, the Lord was angry with Israel, 2 Samuel 24.1.
he moved David to say, Go number Israel and Judah: yet elsewhere its said, 1
Chro. 21.1. Acts 14.16.
Satan stood up against Israel, and he provoked David to number Israel. g God
permissiue; Satan efficaciter: or,

2 Denies or withholds Grace which should hinder their giving way to error: or,

3 Withdrawes Grace given, which only hinders prevailing of Satan, or
inclination of nature to such error or pertinacie therein. Schools thus. God
concurs to evil; not positive, but privative: not efficienter, but
deficienter: his Acts in these panae mirabiles, as Caietane terms them, which
are so Gods punishments, that they are also man's sins, are three. 1 2 Chro.
32.31.
Desertion, leaving to our selves. 2 Romans 1.24.26, 28.
Tradition: delivery of us over to the power of Satan, and swing of our own
corrupt inclinations. 3 And which results of both, voluntary Acts 14.16.
permission: not hindering the errors or sins, which except he hinder, will
be. Thus and no otherwise sends God delusion. And thus has God his singer in
these spiritual Judgments: these sinful penalties, or penal sins.

Do we provoke the Lord to Anger? are we stronger then he? Behold what
variety of plagues he has in store for the children of disobedience: plagues
for body, for soul, which are the most dreadful: thus number them. 1
desperate horror. 2 Hardness of heart. 3 Blindness of mind. 4 Obstinacy in
error, in evil. At these tremble: they are in their height, plagues peculiar
to reprobates, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. Its fearful when
God permits a man to error, damnable in the merit: much more to be trembled
at, when he intercludes all possibility, or hope for return out of error.
Amongst other causes that's a principal, rejecting love of Truth.

3 The issues of the Judgment, 1 Belief of lies. 2 And which follows it,
eternal damnation.

De primo. To believe a lie: where are two things. 1 Their Act, believing. 2
The matter or object, a lie: whereof first, It presents to us in shortest
compendium description of Antichristian faith, and Religion; reduced to a word;
its in plain English, a lie. Take it as Nomen speciei. A Religion, a doctrine
compacted of leasing. They speak 1 Timothy 4.2.
lies in hypocrisy: particularize where they dissent from us.

Its a lie that God loves to be suited unto by Saints and Angels mediators:
his charge is; Psalm. 50.15.
Call on me; his encouragment, to go Heb. 4.16. and
boldly to Throne of Grace; to draw 10.22.
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith; nor has he ordained us
any other mediator of 1 John. 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
Intercession, but the same that is of Redemption, even the man Christ Jesus;
the high Priest Heb. 2.17, 18. and 4.15.
sensible of our infirmities; compassionate far above the measure of men and
Angels.

A lie, that our works are meritorious being done in Grace. The stains of our
righteousness, are no less then Isal 64.5.
menstruous: by the Prophets confession; and he speaks, says Bernard, non
minus vere quam humiliter.

A lie too palpable, that man may supererogate, exceed what in duty he owes
unto God. When Mar. 12.30.
all in our power is commanded; and in doing what is commanded we do Luke
17.10.
but duty: nay, when in Iac. 9.2.
many things we sin all: in our best performances, are defective in the
degree and measure of doing.

A lie against Sense, Scripture, all sound authority that Baptism takes away
all whatsouer has proper reason and nature of sin. When still in experience
remain Gal 5.17.
propensions to evil; and Paul's style of Concupiscence is, still sin;
somewhere the sinning sin: not only because punishment of sin, and cause
of sin; but because it self is sin, as Saint Austins sentence is.

A lie that souls pass hence to pains of Purgatory: when Scripture
avouches, they are Luc. 16.23, 25.
in Refrigerio; receive comfort, Apoc. 14.13.
and rest from labors.

A lie too derogatorie to the perfection and fullness of Christ's once offering
himself, that thereby mortal sins only are expiated; and commutation only
of eternal into temporal punishment, merited by his passion; when the 1 John
1 9.
blood of the son of God purges from all sins; that one oblation Heb.
10.14.
perfits for ever them that are sanctified: and his being made curse for us,
has redeemed us from the whole Gal. 3.13.
curse of the Law. I spare farther particularizing.

But why have they taught their tongues to speak lies? Or why has Satan
filled their hearts to lie unto the holy Ghost. Me thinks I may dare say, In
many their Assertions, their lying is, as Austin describes it in strictest
sense, a going against their own minds, in uttering untruths: the more
abhorrent let it make us, from their doctrines of Devils.

2 Their behavior toward these lies, is to believe them. Believing implies
two things: 1 Firmness of Assent. 2 Setlednesse of adherence: de primo, There
are four degrees by which the mind proceeds to Assent of Faith. 1
Doubtfulnesse, when the mind hangs in aequilibrio, in even poi^e, without
propension to either part; as in Israelites, 1 Reg 18.21.
halting betwixt two opinions.

2 Suspicion or conjecture, when it begins tremblingly to incline rather to one
part then the other; supposing perhaps, possibility of truth in the Article
propounded; as in Agrippa, Acts 26 28.
Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

Opinion, when the Assent is for the time somewhat * Rom 7.8, 9.11.13.
settled, from apprehension of probability in the proposition opined; yet not
without fear, least the contradictory be more true. As in Temporaries, Mat.
13.21.

4 Faith, wherein is firmness of Assent and persuasion that the doctrine
taught is undoubtedly true. And of this nature, is that which is here made
issue of strong delusion.

2 Whereto if be added Resolved adherence, ye have the full and entire
general nature of faith. And its applicable as well to falsehood as to truth;
whence, faith, according to the double object, is made twofold: 1 False faith,
when the matter or thing believed is false; then be the persuasion never so
firm, yet the faith is false, though not in the act, yet in the object. 2 True
Faith, when the object is true; and the assent and adherence firm and
vnwauering.

The misery of Papists here pointed is, that they believe a lie. A misery
indeed, when God gives over a man to be falsified in his Faith: 1 Into what
Acts 26.9. John 16.2.
enormities of sinful practice, does blind zeal for supposed truth, transport
many? 2 What wonderful 1 Reg. 18.28.
pains take such to go to Hell?

Once fasten the persuasion, that its lawful or meritorious to murder
Heretics, they spare not Kings, the Lords anointed. Settle them in belief,
that Faith plight to Heretics needs not be kept: swearing, forswearing is
not scrupled, dummodo ob Rem. Quid multa: I do not think Papists sin all as
Paul's monisht Heretics; Tit. 3.10.
(...): rather as Paul's self before Conversion; Acts 26.9.
thinking they ought to do, what they do against the cause of truth. But such
are the fruits of falsified faith.

de fide? Are Churches, Councels, Popes Authentic, of self credit? or must
Faith be resolved vltimate to them? To the Isai 8.20.
Law and Testimony Search Scriptures, though Acts 17.11.
Apostles, Gal. 1.8.
Angels teach you. The foolish will believe every thing; But the prudent
considers his steps. 3. Be not wise in your own eyes, but fear the Lord and
depart from evil. Pride, security, sensuality, hazard to misbeliefe: of such
condition and quality have bin antique Heretics.

That they all might be damned, etc. 2 The penal issue; damnation. (...), for
(...); judged for condemned frequent in Scripture, John 3.17. and alibi passim:
shows it their issue or Gods intention? Resp. You may without error think it
spoken intentionaliter, and not only consecutiue. God intends punishment of
sin, and not only orders a connection betwixt them. Howsoever, it should
seem Antichristian errors, Popish misbeliefe is such as shall damn their
sectaries, except perhaps God give 2 Timothy 2.25.26.
Repentance to come out of the snare of the Devil: Saint Peter calls them 2
Pet. 2 1.
damnable heresies: the words may be rendered damning or destroying heresies,
(...). Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1.
Doctrines of Devils.

Are any such taught and believed of Romanists? Resp. What think you of
Justification in part by works of the Law? Is it not a damned, a damning lie?
who so is in this Article but so erroneous, if Paul say true, he is fallen from
Gal. 5.4.
Grace, and Christ shall profit him nothing. What of congruent merits afforded
by nature? of freedom and power native in the will excited, to apply and
determine it self to Gods gracious persuasion? Is it not more then half
Pelagianisme? what of expiating sins of quick and dead by pretended unbloody
offering of Christ in their Masses? I spare mention of errors in practice:
whose grounds yet doctrined are no less then heretical: to commit
fornication, is not heresy, but unchastity. But to doctrine, that its lawful
to commit fornication, is to doctrine heresy; to believe it, is to believe the
damned heresy of Apoc. 2.15.
Nieolaitans. To worship God in an Image is not heresy but Idolatry. But to
teach or believe, that God must, may so be worshipped, is to teach and believe
no less then destroying herefie. To murder Kings supposed heretical or
Tyrannous, is not heresy, but Sacrilegious cruelty. But to teach or believe it
lawful or meritorious to do violence to the Lords anointed, is cursedly
heretical, etc.

besides all their other sins; nor revoke their errors: for my part I
believe Saint Paul, their errors in faith are such as shall damn them. Saint
John, that the Apoc 19 20.
Beast and false Prophet with all their impenitent sectaries shall be cast into
the Lake of fire.

I advise as Saint John, Apoc. 18.4.2
Come out of her, keep out of her al ye the Lords people that love your
souls; Save your selves from that untoward, that cursed generation. If Papists
may be saved, we have needlessly separated: if they hold the head, the
foundation in such sort and degree as to be capable of salvation, Antichrist
may be as Christ, a Jesus to Gods people. Their end, if Paul say true, is
damnation.

4 The cause is evident, and the crime's of that high nature, that Justice of
God in inflicting such vengeance, is easily discerned: for 1 they believe not
the Truth. 2 Have pleasure in unrighteousness.

De primo: who believed not the Truth. Truth to which belief is denied,
understand not every Truth. What if a man held as Anaxagoras, that the Snow is
black; could he not be induced to believe it white: or as Copernicus, that the
heavens stand still without motion; the earth moves, and were refractary to all
contrary persuasion. Heretics or Infidels you might call such in Philosophy;
howbeit diseredence of such truths does not prejudice any in his salvation.
Truth understand as Paul interprets the Gospel: the word of truth which is the
Col 1 5.
Gospel, Ephesians. 1.13. so styled either (...) as the most excellent, eximious,
comfortable truth God ever revealed to man; else in opposition to those
shadowie resemblances wherein God presented Christ's merits and benefits to the
faith of Jews; in Sacrifices and other Ceremonies; whereas to us nakedly he
has afforded the realtie and truth of what they foreshadowed; see John 1.17.
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.

Infidelity is of two sorts: 1 of pure Negation; such in Pagans and Turks to
whom God never yet vouchsafed the word or means of faith. 2 of evil
disposition, when the price is put into the hands of fools to get knowledge,
but they have no heart: the doctrine of faith vouchsafed, but credence denied
unto it. Such in children of the Church, whereof apertly this Scripture must be
understood.

There are two kinds or degrees of it. 1 Total respecting the whole word of
God, all Articles of faith. 2 Partial; where part of the Gospel, some
Articles of faith, or something belonging to every Article is believed; howbeit
toward some points, or the full sentence of some one or more men are
incredulous. Example. That faith in Christ was necessary to salvation, false
Apostles amongst Jews denied not. But that it alone, or the object of it,
Christ's merit, entered our Justification or made it perfect without works of
the Law, they believed not, were therefore in part Infidels, etc.

But is infidelity in any sort chargeable on Papists. Behold, they confess to
believe the whole word of God in old and new Testament. The three Creeds they
admit entire into their faith: how then may we charge infidelity on them?

Resp. Two things I commend to every one desirous herein to expedite himself.
1 As in an oath imposed, the form is to speak Truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. So in faith its required that Truth, whole truth,
nothing but truth be believed. If any thing but the truth be believed, they are
falsified in their faith; vt supra, they believe a lie: If the whole Truth be
not believed, they are culpable so far of Infidelity. How Papists are falsified
in their faith, so as they are chargeable with damned heresy, we have shown
before: how they are Infidels notwithstanding their professed belief of all
Articles of the Creed you may thus conceive: inasmuch as they believe not all
Articles in their full sense taken. Thus in a word. 1 The all sufficiency of
Christ's meritorious passion they believe not. 2 Nor his propriety
incommunicable in his office of mediation. Exemp. That Christ suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, went down to hell, Papists
believe: but did not, do not Jews so? who doubts but they believe the
general history of Christ's passion as it is articled in our Creed, recorded in
the Gospel; yet are Jews Infidels in those very Articles. Why? they believe
nor cause nor avail of his passion; which is the life of Evangelical truth
couched in those Articles: the cause, Romans 4.25.
our sins, not his own; the avail, our Heb. 9.12.
Redemption and Justification.

Yet its true, both cause and avail Papists in a sort believe, that he died an
Innocent, for the Nocent, to expiate our sins; Where then is their
Infidelity? that in suffering he intended expiation of all sins mortal and
venial; discharged us of all guilt, and obligation to all punishment temporal
and eternal, they stiffely deny; our selves must satisfy for venial sins;
procure discharge from temporal punishments by our own voluntary passions,
and penous good works.

That Christ is mediator of Intercession and Redemption Papists believe;
herein are orthodoxe in faith: that he is the 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. John 2.1, 2.
sole meritorous mediator of Intercession and impetration, they believe not;
herein they are Infidels. Saints and Angels meritoriously intercede for us,
that is the lie of their faith: sic de Reliquis.

2 Next let be cousidered; the general acknowledgement of Scripture and all
doctrines contained in Scripture to be of God, acquits not of particular
Infidelity: for what if heretical sense be forced upon the letter? and in that
false sense be believed; there is a lie under that faith; there is infidelity,
if to Scriptures in right sense taken credence be denied. Exemp. That the Text
in John, Father, Word, and Spirit are 1. John 5.7.
one, is Gods word, no Antitrinitary denies: but that oneness is by consent
of will puts the lie in their faith: not by identitie of Essence, is their
Infidelity: that faith justifies in the sight of God Papists deny not: But as
a quality principal in us, and as the beginning and first step to justice,
which they imagine inherent in us; that's the lie in their faith. That as an
instrument apprehending and applying the righteousness of Christ, for which we
are accounted righteous, by which alone we stand just in Gods sight; this they
believe not; in this they are Infidels.

3 Lastly, let that be weighed, that in the points which orthodoxly they
profess to believe, the formal object of their faith is not veritas prima:
but the testimony of the Church; humane faith makes not a Christian, he is no
better then an Infidel in respect of divine faith, who has no higher reason
then humane Authority or Reason of his believing. Sum up all, the result in
this; who so denies credence to any part of Truth couched in any Article, is in
that respect an Infidel: who so belieues the letter of Scripture, not
believing the sentence flowing from right Interpretation, is so far an
Infidel: who so belieues the Gospel only, because the Church testifies it to
be Gospel, not because the Author revealing it gives such Testimony, is never
a whit less then an Infidel: Such are Papists; Ergo Infidels; that is,
culpable of partial Infidelity.

My hearts desire and prayer to God for Papists is, that they may be saved: my
hope, that many yet Papists, shall be saved. Howbeit, of them which live and
dye Papists, I must profess my charity cannot be so charitable as to think
they shall be saved. 1 They are falsified in their faith, believe lies, no
less then damnable heresies. 2 They are without faith, in the points which are
the very heart and soul of the Gospel. The good Lord give them eyes to see,
hearts to bewail and forsake their heresy, their infidelity: that so they may
come out of snare of the devil, fly from the wrath to come.

2 Their second sin making liable to damnation; is taking pleasure in
unrighteousness. Theophilacts interpreter renders, qui oblectati sunt in
iniustitia. The word signifies a willing, pleasing, selfe-propention, not
without much contentment: unrighteousness, take as before to denote vniuer
salem iniustitiam, sin and wickedness; such should the sectaries of
Antichrist be, men finding pleasance, taking delight in their own and others
viciousness. A vice or degree of viciousness incompatible with Grace. Solomon
notes it the property of the wicked to Pro. 10.23.
rejoice in doing evil, to delight in the frowardness of the wicked: Saint
Paul makes it Romans 1.32.
more heinous then doing evil: Saint Bernard to Eugenius noting the several
steps whereby men descend to the depth and bottom of desperate contempt,
ranks this in the middle: when a man first enters into a course of sinning,
especially against conscience, he finds his first fact a burden intolerable: 2
let him iterate it, of intolerable it becomes grauy only, frequent it, of
grave, its made 3 leave: custom it, it proves 4 insensible: 5 not long ere its
made delectable. 6 The taste of pleasure makes it desirable. 7 That excusable.
8 By and by desensible: 9 Till at last it becomes gloriabile; matter of
boasting, to which what can be added in the measure of sinfulness:

Is it chargeable on Papists? Resp. On no Christians more; I spare mention of
their exulting in their own impieties and Idolatries: perhaps the people
think they ought so to serve God: But who ever knew Papist other then
practiser, abettor, triumpher in the vilest pollutions of that day of rest
which God has sanctified to himself from the beginning? And what joy is it to
see or hear the exorbitancies of men of the contrary Religion? what David with
Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of waters bewailed, Lot 2 Pet 2.8.
vexed his soul from day to day to behold and hear; partly for the dishonor
of God, partly through compassion of the sinners misery: these joy in with the
joy of harvest, or such as they are affected withal, that divide the spoil.
But out upon filthiness of fornication, the companion of Popish Idolatry: was
ever Papist known to scruple this sin? not to extenuate it as venial? not
to excuse it as a trick of youth? to joy and glory therein as in a point of
manhood? But scatter, Lord scatter our cruel enemies that delight in blood:
strong must the infatuation be, to no less then extinction of the light of
nature; from which issues rejoicing in massacres of Christians, and in spilling
of blood; wherein yet the scarlet Whore and her Sectaries joy even to laughter,
and as Cannibals, find sweetness in no liquor inebriating more then in blood.

He that Mark 16.16.
belieues not shall be damned: and Luke 13.3.5.
except ye repent ye shall all perish: or what think we? is false faith,
saving; is faithlesnesse toward any necessary Evangelical truth, capable of
salvation? may impenitents hope for salvation? or is it penitence to delight in
sin? or rather, as 2. Cor. 7.
Gregory, Comissa flere, flenda non committere. Thus I conclude: When
Heretics, Infidels, Impenitents are saved, then shall Papists also be
partakers of salvation. In hac fide viuo; spero, moriar. And of Antichrist thus
far: as also of the two first maine parts of the Chapter, Cau^at and
Confutation of Error, follows the Comfort occasionally subioyned.

VERSE. 13, 14. But we are bound to give God thanks always for you Brethren,
Beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth.

Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ.


TExt apparently intended to prevent the discomfort and fear of Gods people,
likely to arise from meditating: 1 heavy wrath falling upon sectaries of
Antichrist: 2 And potency of Antichrist to entangle in the Snare. The ground of
Comfort is their election: form the comfortable Argument thus, if you please;
those whom God has chosen to salvation shall not be seduced by Antichrist: God
has chosen you to salvation; Ergo, fear not seducement by Antichrist.

The mayor has not only amplification, but, as I conceive, implicit proof,
from means which Election to salvation puts in all the vessels of honor to
prepare them to glory: they are 1 sanctification of the Spirit, and 2 faith of
Truth. Graces opposite to the quality of Antichrists sectaries They are all 1
falsified in their faith: 2 faithless toward Truth: 3 such as find pleasure
in unrighteousness: and by consequent not elect to salvation. Thus you may
conceive the frame: Men sanctified by the Spirit, and believing the Truth are
out of gunshot of seducement by Antichrist: since he preuailes only with men
faithless and unsanctified. But all the elect are sanctified, and believe the
Truth: Ergo,

The minor whither of the principal or of the prosyllogisme, has proof ver.
14. They are called to sanctity and faith, Ergo, elected; or ergo, sanctified
and faithful: supposing the calling to be effectual.

Out of the text in gross arise these documents. 1 How careful a Minister in
prudence should be to anticipate the fears and discomforts of Gods children,
arising or likely to issue from mention of things so frightfull. Speak to the
heart of Jerusalem: Jude ver. 22.
put difference: comfort the feeble minded: so is the charge; such the practice
of the Luke 12.32.
great Shepherd of the sheep, of his holy Apostles and Prophets; especially
when judgments spiritual that coast upon certain damnation are mentioned:
see Heb. 6.9. and 10.39. 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. 1 John 5.16, 18.

Reasons: 1 this part of the 2 Timothy 2.15.
Right cutting of the word; sharing to every one his own portion.

2 Necessity in respect of Gods children, in whose cares the noise of things so
frightfull is as the sound of thunder: partly 1 through conscience of merits to
share in like Judgments: 2 partly through fear of own infirmity and natural
mutability. 3 Remembrance or sight of many eminent in gifts become Apostles. 4
Weak apprehension and assurance of Gods love and their own sharing in
election. 5 Dwelling too much on thought of potent Adversaries, weak measure
of Grace. 6 Forgetfulness, or not considering the potency of their supporter,
with the like.

3 And its not our least inducement, that hereby they are occasioned and
excited to glorify the grace of God, in exempting them from that fearful
condition.

James and John, the Mar. 3.17.
sons of thunder to be doubled upon Ministers; so not secure only, but
senseless are most grown of spiritual misery and danger. Howbeit there be
that mourn in Sion, that tremble at the word of God; for such is requisite the
temper and spirit of Barnabas the Act. 5.36.
son of consolation: promiscuous promulgation of terror or comfort sorts not
with that prudence God requires in his Ministers.

Next, you may notice the maine ground of comfort, Election; so often in like
case applied: see 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 8.30. Luke 12.32.

Most fitly to seal up solid comfort to Gods children: since they easily
apprehend that 2 Timothy 2.19.
foundation sure; that decree immutable, and of infallible accomplishment.

ad Populum: when yet 1 Gods Spirit is plentiful in publishing this part of
Gods counsel to the people. 2 Nothing more 1 deiects man's pride, or 2 extols
glory of Gods Grace in our salvation. 3 Nothing is greater incentiue to
Sanctity: 4 nor filles the new soul with more solid comfort. Prudence in
publishing none but allows; But they are over wise who wholly conceal it.

Nor do they less err and hinder comfort of Gods people, who make the
knowledge of it impossible in state of this life; for then how comforts it? Its
not the decree, but our apprehension of own sharing in that grace, that yields
comfort to the soul: what, when the Mayor is assented to, the Elect shall not
be seduced, except I may assume, I am elected, how feels my soul the comfort?
But de bis alibi.

The general of the ground for comfort is this; the Elect are out of gunshot
of seducement by Antichrist and other heretics: compare, 2. Tim. 2.17.19.
Apo. 13.8. Mat. 24.24. 1 Against such gates of hell prevail not. Mat. 16.18. 2
Such sin not unto death: Yet thus understand.

1 In matters of inferior nature they may be mistaken; building hay and stuble
upon the foundation. 1. Corinthians. 3.12.15.

2 In fundamentals also err for a time; but herein if they mistake, sooner or
later God reduces: See promise, Phil. 3.15. John 16.13. Finaliter, they err
not in truths of necessary faith.

Peter, 2 Pet. 3.10.
give diligence to make calling and election sure, that ye may have comfort to
hold fast the hope set before you; 2 Timothy 2.19.20. etc.
The foundation stands sure: But have eye to the seal, it leaves this stamp
or impression; they depart from iniquity, purge themselves from these, who are
vessels of honor prepared to glory. Thus of generals from the body and scope of
the text: particulars you may thus number.

1 Besides the manner of propounding with 1 thanksgiving to God, and
acknowledgement of obligation to that duty whereof before? There is, 1 The
blessing, Election. 2 The author, God. 3 The time, from the beginning. 4 The
motive, Love. 5 The means of execution, sanctification and Faith. To which you
may add: 6 The evidence, effectual Vocation. verse 14.

Q. What is election? Resp. The general notion of the word in common
apprehension, is the selecting, assuming, culling out of some, with refusal of
others; as when its said of David, he went and 1 Samuel 17.
choose him five smooth stones out of the brook, who but apprehends implied a
refusal of the rest.

In all election and choice which God makes amongst men, ye shall observe the
like, whither it be: 1 Ad munus. Or, 2 Ad media salutis. Or, 3 Ad salutem. De
primo: As in the choice of David to succeed Saul in the Kingdom, when his
brethren were presented unto Samuel by their father Iesse, of Eliah tendered to
Samuel, says the Lord, I have refused him; of the rest, the Lord has not
chosen these. 1. Sam. 16.7, 8, 9, 10.

David to scoffing Michal, it was before the Lord which chose me before thy
father, and before all his house. 1. Sam. 6.21. compare 1. Chron. 28.4.5.

De secundo: The choice of people to the external means of salvation, Word,
and Sacraments, as all visible Churches and every particular of them are
chosen, is not apparent like preferring one people before another,
Relinquishing and passing by others? Can a choice be conceited without it? The
Lord has Psalm. 135.4.
chosen Jacob to himself and Israel for his own possession: dealt he so with
Psa. 147.19, 20.
other nations? Had they the knowledge of his Laws? Where then is the Romans 3
1, 2.
preferment of the Jew?

De tertio: Election to salvation, what plainer then that of Paul, Romans 9. I
have loved, that is, in love chosen Jacob. What of Esau, I have hated him, that
is, at least not chosen, or refused him.

Arminius and his Sectaries, so blunted and obtuse to absurdity, when they
conceit a general election, though conditional, of all and every man to
salvation. But tired with Antichrist, I have promised my back abstinence from
Arminius.

Arminius. 1 Robs God of the Ephesians. 1.5, 6. Romans 9.
glory of his rich Grace, which he aimed at in particular election. 2 And casts
a blunt upon that thanks the vessels of mercy do, or should render to their
God. Our Savior willing to excite his Disciples to thankfulness unto God,
shows the Mat. 11 25. and 13.16, 17.
preferment they had in his favors: See also Psalm. 147.19, 20.

Kindliest comes it off from that soul, that sees the specialtie of Gods
favor toward it; and meditates the many millions of equal condition in
nature, passed by in the decree of election, and left to perish in their
sins. So let us use it.

2 Is it of a certain number of men? And are the particulars unchangeably
determined of. Resp. Why are these questions revived? Its ruled long since,
that the number of the predestinate is certain, materialiter aut formaliter:
and that not only in praescientia, as if God only foreknew how many, and who
should be saved: but in praedestinatione also; because the persons are ordained
to everlasting life. Act. 13.48. (...): those very men and no others. And what
else means that phrase so often used in Scripture, of writing their Luke
10.20. Phil. 4.3. Apoc. 20.15.
names in the book of life?



Quest. Is it of infallible accomplishment? So that all the elect shall
undoubtedly be saved? Resp. Fond dotards; Gods counsels shall stand: does the
Lord say, and shall he not do it? That 2 Timothy 2.19.
foundation stands sure. Mat. 24 24.
Is it possible to deceive the elect? Then notwithstanding the fathers pleasure
to give the Kingdom, the little flock Luke 12.
must fear. 2 Then Paul's comforts so frequent from this ground, are miserable
comforts: himself, as Jobs friends, a miserable comforter: See 2. Tim. 2.19.
Romans 8.30. Et alibi passim. Men so Scholasticall cannot be ignorant, what Scot
says to the question taken in sensu composito. Scot in pri. did. 40.
On this foundation let all Gods children build themselves for comfort. Mat.
7.24.
builds on the Rock; the purpose according to election stands. Romans 9.11. And
the election obtaines. Romans 11.7. Notes thus number. 1 Connection of all graces
tending to make up the new man complete. 2 Especially when they grow toward
abounding. 3 Are vigorous, and operative, not suffering to be idle and
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior. By these we may make
calling and election sure to our selves; and so be assured we shall never
fall, or fail of our hope of immortality: See 2. Pet. 1.4, 5, ad 11.

What the good is to fruition whereof we are chosen, is noticed, salvation,
that sounds preservation, or deliverance: From what? If any ask; not so much
from misery, or danger temporal, though therein Gods chosen have a
specialtie; 1. Tim. 4.8. as from those that concern our 1 Pet. 1.9.
souls. As the Angel giving notation of the name Jesus to be imposed on the
Messiah, explicates, from our Mat. 1.21.
sins, the guilt, reign, punishment eternal of our sins, from 1 These. 1^
vlt.
the wrath to come: And which is also implied, advancement to a state of
blessedness and immortality, to Acts 13.48.
eternal life; the blessed Mat. 5.8.
Vision and fruition of the glorious Godhead, to 1 Pet. 1.4.
a crown, an inheritance incorruptible, vnderfiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for us. To this blessed and glorious estate has God chosen
and ordained us.

Iac. 2.5.
rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised, is not the
preferment greater? Should not this digest poverty, pain, abasure, all
misery earth can fasten on us? Pieuish earthly mindedness of sensual nature,
how storms it at dispensations of providence; that in these transitory
things, worst men have often preferment before Gods children? Thus calm that
grumbling of flesh: it has pleased Gods goodness, for after this life to
prepare good things for his children, which wicked share not in; evils for the
wicked, which his children taste not of: These temporals he makes common to good
and bad, that neither the good things should over eagerly be desired, which
evil men are seen to enjoy; nor evil things too cowardly declined, which
best men are most pressed withal. See riches, etc. reserved for Eccles. 5.13.
hurt to the owners, becoming instruments of injustice, fuel to inflame
corruption, thus think, like nature is in thee; and thou will say God is
gracious in keeping from like temptations. 2 Next see your calling, not 1 Cor.
1.26.27
many mighty, not many noble, are chosen to eternal life; in that choice thou
have preferment. 3 And Mat. 16.26.
what shall it profit to win the whole world, and loose the soul? Oh blessed
be God, will thy soul say, who has Ephesians. 1.3.
blessed me in all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; and, though in
temporalties preferred miscreants before me, yet chosen me to salvation, from
which Monarchs many are rejected.

2 The chooser, God, who alone has disposer of Psalm. 84.11.
grace and glory, (...), power and dominion over the Mass, to make one vessel
to honor, another to dishonor.

Rom 9 20.
the clay say to the potter, why have thou made me thus? That any are chosen,
is of his grace, that thou a sinner rejected, is no injustice. 2 And Romans 11.35.
who has given him first? Ask thou why this man rather then thy self or
another? He is an absolute Lord. Friend he does thee Mar. 20.15.
no wrong, may he not do with his own, what seems him best? Say thou he
is partial? Respecter of persons? Resp. Its gratuitous, not debt, that is here
conferred.

How dares dust and ashes intromit so far into this counsel of God, as to
prescribe to his wisdom, Paul Rom 11.33.
(...); Plotius thus; in what I conceive, I adore him, in what I comprehend
not, I admire him. Be willing to be ignorant, of what God secreted. God shall
lighten things hidden in darkness: fondly do we anticipate.

Much does the meditation confirm hope of enjoying the happiness purposed to
us, Number. 23.19.
God is not as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man, that he
should repent: The gifts and calling of God are without Romans 11.29.
repentance.

3 The time, from the beginning, that is, say some, of the creation, but elder
by much is that decree. This grace given before 2 Timothy 1.9.
the worlds were, God chose before the Ephesians. 1.4.
foundation of the world, (...), though terms properly belonging to time, yet
are sometimes transsumed to denote what is pertinent to eternity, that which
was 1 John 1.1.
from the beginning of the word of life, sends us beyond the beginning, to
meditate eternity of Christ's existence and generation. Idly does that self
conceited dunce critic, urge the (...), when he would prove reprobation to
be ordered in time after the fall: Forsooth Jude says, (...), Jude 4.
of old foreordained to this judgment. 1 And why not election fancied to be in
time, because (...)? 2 Dan. 9.7.
Antiquus dierum, denotes it not Gods eternity? And why not (...) of old, that
is from eternity, which is elder then time. 3 Is election before time? Then
reprobation. Who so chooses, refuses also; and when his choice is, then is
his refusal. See supra.

Paul from a like circumstance, and far inferior concludes, that election is
not ex operibus, but ex vocante. For Romans 9.11.
ere the children were borne, before they had done good or evil, it was said,
I have loved Jacob. What when it passes on us, before the worlds? In
eternity? May we not much more infer? Therefore not of works, or faith, or
good use of freewill?

Object. But some of these fell under prescience. Resp. 1 And why may we not
so clude the Apostles argument in case of Jacob? There also had prescience
place. 2 Prescience is Gods practicke knowledge, and presupposes ordinance,
the act of his will, as being in nature before it, according to our manner of
apprehending. Things are not because foreseen; but are foreseen because they
shall be. 3 From ordinance, not from prescience issues existence of all things,
that deserve the name of things, having any solid entitie: good things
especially, and more especially things morally good, most gratuitous, which fit
us to the superexcedent end: so that to ascribe causalitie of the ordinance to
the foresight of faith, sanctity, good use of free will, is utterly to inuert
right order; when from this ordinance as the cause, issues faith, charity,
other sanctity; and not e contra.

4 The motive; beloved of God. That part of the style most interpreters,
conceive to imply the cause antecedent, or inwardly moving God to choose; that
is his love. Truth is in the assertion: thence said, I have Romans 9 13.
loved Jacob, that is, in love chosen him. Hence is election ever ascribed to
mercy, kindness, love, grace; that is, gratuitous, free, vnmerited favor:
and to say truth, what else could move him?

1 No obligation of the Creator to the creature, whose very being, especially
in so high a degree as man, is merely from him. 2 Goodness none could be
foreseen in the creature, that was to be evil; and Romans 9.21.
was so presented to Gods view, what time his election passed upon it. 3
Election finds us not good, Ephesians. 1.4.
but makes us so.

Arminius and others, seeking in the vessels of mercy the procatarcticke cause
of election: my fingers itch at them, but the back aches, only consider how
crossing to the whole counsel of God, and his project in man's salvation, that
proud dream is, His aim is so to manage our salvation, that 1 man may have
no cause Romans 3.27.
to glory. 2 The Ephesians. 1.6.
glory of grace, and mercy be exalted. Therefore decrees he to permit the
fall, Rom 11. 32.
to shut up all under unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all.

disobedient, etc. Tit* 3.3.
serving lusts, and diverse pleasures. Secondly, in calling, how not only God
Romans 9.20, 21
slightfull and refractary, thou may remember thy self to have been in thy
calling. Thirdly, since calling, how many have been Iac. 3 1.
interruptions of obedience, how weak and full of Isai 64.6.
blemishes the best performances. And thus think; First, God saw thee such,
what time he past choice on thee. Secondly, and if when thou were, nothing but
Tit. 3.4.5. 2 Timothy 1.9.
love could move God to call; how much less to elect when thou were not.

5 The means of execution, ordered to the end, through sanctification of the
spirit, and faith of truth.

Are these intended, merits of election, or rather means of salvation?
Merits I mean largely, whatsoever has causalitie, or is a motive to induce
the Lord to choose.

Resp. Thus I conceive, these gifts and their exercise to fall under the same
ordinance of God with our salvation, as means destined, and so conducing to
that end; how then causes moving to elect? He has chosen us to be holy.
Ephesians. 1.4. To be faithful. 1. Cor. 7.25. Vt essemus, non quia eramus aut
futuri erimus, is Saint Augustines gloss. 2 What sanctity is that which
mooues? 1 That of nature? It affordes none. Quis dabit mundum ex immundo
conceptum semine? 2 That of grace? Whither the measure incident to this life?
Or that perfect in the life to come? 1 That of this life imperfect: Isai. 64.6.
nor could it be foreseen otherwise then it was to be. 2 The holiness of
another life? We are then extra statum merendi and demerendi: as being in
termino quiescentiae, where we receive and enjoy rewards; procure not reward,
or ought tending thereto. 3 These all Mat. 11.25. Exodus 1.4.
flow from election as their cause. And for sanctity Arminians consent, it had
no causalitie in respect of election, yet for faith foreseen are peremptory,
that on it rests election, and is ex fide praeuisa.

And why I wonder faith rather then charity, or other sanctity? 1 Is it more
excellent? Not, says the Apostle. 1. Cor. 13.13. 2 More perfect as it is in
us? Nor that. Luke 17.5. Mar. 9.24.

3 Next, is not it also part of sanctity? A prime ingredient? Especially
apprehended as they conceit it, respected as a quality or act in us, and so
auailing to election, justification, salvation: for that it iustifies, or
saues, as an instrument, and by virtue of the object it apprehends, Christ's
righteousness, they believe not.

4 Else how? pleased it God out of his freedom, to respect it more then other
gracious qualities, and to assign it motive to election? Audio. Indeed, in
justification it auailes more then charity, hope, penitence, any other holy
quality or action. Accordingly its fitted to do, what its appointed unto,
more then any other part of sanctity; that is, to Romans 5.17.
receive the gift of righteousness, for, and by which we stand just in Gods
sight. But that the Lord has assigned it causalitie, in respect of election,
where find we? Rather an effect and fruit of election, therefore no cause, or
reason, or condition of it.

Take them therefore here mentioned, and meant means of salvation, not merits,
or so much as conditi^^s of election. And thence learn, that howsoever the
decree of election flow not from means, yet implies it means congruent, and
has execution thereby. See Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, etc.

1 Wherefore observe necessity of them absolute to the obtaining salvation.
Hebr. 12.14. Mark. 16.16. Luke 13.3.5.

2 The decree is not only of the end, but also the means; elect to be holy,
predestined to the adoption: Ephesians. 1.4, 5. and not only to the inheritance.

3 Knowledge of the decree suspended on the means. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2. Tim. 2.21.

4 Vessels of mercy though for the time aliens from the life of God, yet in
the day of visitation, called with a holy calling, 2. Tim. 1.9. and so made
meet to partake in the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1.

Use.
if I be predestinate, I shall be saved, though I neglect, scoff at
sanctity. Reduce it, thou shall easily see a contradiction in the terms; the
predestinate unsanctified, or the unsanctified of the elect shall be saved.
There are none such, finaliter tales, it implies to say it. God elects to
holiness, and not only to salvation; to salvation, but by sanctification of
the spirit.

More, to see men professing knowledge of the decree and order of it, assurance
of their own personal election, yet to walk after the flesh. By our study
of sanctity we know our election. 2. Tim. 2.21. 2. Pet. 1.10. They lie to God
and men, who profess to know their own election, while they are Tit. 1.16.
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate; yea from any good
work, abhorrent, of any holy gift, destitute; to any known sin, addicted.

The means specified, are first, sanctification. Secondly, justification,
implied in faith. The order seems inuerted, but thus conceive: sanctification,
though posteriour in order of nature, yet is first in evidence, and our
knowledge; truth of faith, title to justification, being not known of us,
till we feel the power of Gods Spirit sanctifying.

That sanctity is a mean, Scriptures are plentiful. See Heb. 12.14. 1. Pet.
1.2.

Congruitie you will easily discern, if you consider: 1 The 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
caller, and chooser is holy. 2 The habitation so holy, that it Apoc 21.27.
admits no unclean thing to enter. 3 To damn devils for unholiness, to save
men though unholy, how had it lien open to exception and quarrel of damned
spirits.

There is sanctity, first, 1 Cor. 7.14.
civil. So children borne in unequal wedlock, to Theophylact, are called
holy, id est, legitimate, not spurious. 2 Faederall; so Number. 16.3.
all Gods people holy, all of the Church visible. 3 Sacramental; so Apostataes
Heb. 10.29.
sanctified with the blood of Christ, the Sacrament of it, Baptism. 4
Opinatiue, of Phariasicall hypocrites in their own, and other men's opinion,
holy. 5 Real, and true, called here the Sanctification of the spirit;
understand not ours, but Gods; as Romans 1.4. This the mark of election, mean
of salvation.

The nature of it is in two things: 1 Purging our hearts from those vicious
propensions natural; 2 Cor. 7.1.
from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit. 2 Planting in us as seeds of
virtuous life, holy qualities, and inclinations; Gal. 5.22.
fruits of the spirit, as Paul styles them.

This habitual holiness: according are their acts and exercise, for they 2
Pet. 1.8.
suffer us not to be idle and unfruitful. 1 A constant care and endeavor to
Iac. 1.27.
keep our selves unspotted of the world. 2 1 Pet. 1.9.
Showing forth the virtues of him that has called us, in being zealous of
every good work, or as Paul to Titus, expresses it; Tit. 2, 12.
denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts; walking godly, justly, soberly in
this present evil world: this they call actual holiness. Beginnings only
are here vouchsafed; the Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 11 22.
first fruits and earnest of the spirit. Consummation we expect according to
Gods promise in the 2 Pet. 3.13.
new heavens, and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; its comfortable
if we find truth, though we want perfection of holiness.

Notes of it thus number, and so make election sure. 1 It goes over the whole
man, the 1 These. 5.23.
whole spirit, soul, body, sanctified throughout, else no part truly
sanctified. As the leprosy derived from the first Adam, has defiled the
whole; so the purification procured by the second Adam, extends to the whole
man.

2 The more humble, the more holy: Matthew. 1 1.
suspect the gifts that 1 Cor. 8.1.
puff up, and cause to swell; the exercise, which naught Mat. 6.1.5.
but vain glory draws out.

3 The more sensible of defects, the more holy; with graces of sanctification
grows up and increases sight, and sense of wants: wherefore the more perfect,
the more Phil. 3.12.13.
acknowledging imperfection.

4 Its much to Phil. 3 7, 8. Psalm. 4 6. Colos. 3 2.
undervalue all earthly blessings, to fruits of the spirit, the kingdom of
grace and regeneration: who but Gods spirit, can so far eleuate man above
himself? the rest see supra.

And faith or belief of truth: the second mean ordered to the atainement of
salvation. Nature of it, and what the truth mentioned is, has been before
explicated; that it is a mean necessary to salvation, Scriptures are
pregnant. Mar. 16.16. Romans 10.10. Apoc. 21.8. Act. 15.9.

Whether sufficient, and so a mark of election if any ask. Resp. Not, severed
from sanctification; can that faith save him? Iac. 2. Saint Paul intends it not.

This rule remember, when gifts common are made evidences of salvation
understand them copulatiuely, so that they have connection with other graces.
See 1. John 4.15. and 5.5. Else as Halensis explicates, intel^ectuall virtues,
faith, knowledge, are then saving, when they are affectiue; have influence upon
the affection, command and draw the will: See 1. Ioh. 2.3. Gal. 5.6.

2 Consider it, gradu eminenti, though thou understand it general faith, so
its mark of salvation: gift peculiar to Gods children, who only feel the
converting, and confuting power of the word, and have to their (...) joined.
Phil. 1.9.

3 Take it cum exercitio and efficatia in artibus elicitis aut Imperatis, so a
mark of election; when it Gal. 5.6.
works by love, Act. 15.9.
purifieth the heart, emboldens to confession, Romans 10.13.14.
excites to devotion, etc.

4 Propositions of the Gospel propounded in terms general, are intentionally
particular, and so to be understood: he believes not as the Gospel requires
it self to be believed, who only belieues Christ gave himself a price of
Redemption for sinners; except as Paul he believe; Christ loved him, and gave
himself for him. Galat. 2.20. Who so belieues the Gospel as true to him, and
particularizeth the general to his own person, he only belieues modo
competenti. And thus is belief of truth a mark of election; it being
impossible for any reprobate, or devil thus applicatiuely to believe, because
they want evidence, Romans 8.16.
testimony of spirit, whereout it issues.

Christ's righteousness. 2 Ephesians. 6.16.
Quenching the fiery darts of the devil. 3 1 Ioh. 5.4.5.
Conquering the world. 4 Euidencing election. 5 Making acceptable our weak
services, etc. More then any grace assaulted by Satan, in Gods children; which
is not the lest evidence of the excellency of it, the greater should be our
care to nourish it.

Means are first, meditations of Gods Romans 4.21.
faithfulness and power. Secondly, observation of Gods merciful dealing with
others. Thirdly, registring, our 2 Cor. 11.10.
own experiences. Fourthly, use of Word, Sacraments, Prayer and other devotion.

VERSE. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ.


THE second ground of comfort is their vocation; a consequent and fruit of
election, yea evidence of it when its efficacious; amplified first by the
mean, or instrument, our Gospel. Secondly, the issue and last term, obtaining
glory.

(...), to the which thing, whither to salvation, or sanctification and faith,
is no matter of curious inquiry; refer it you may to the whole term of
election, to sanctification, faith: so to the state of salvation. 1 1 Ioh. 3.3.
Inchoate fruition of it. 2 Title and Romans 8.24. Romans 5.2.
certain hope of consummate beatitude, for so it follows, to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Intended it is to fill up their comfort in assurance of election, and perhaps,
anticipates what ignorance, or infirmity might object: That the elect are
secured from final seducement we easily believe; but are we elected? Resp.
Doubt not, for God has called you, and thereby given evidence that he has
chose you to Salvation.

Its a certain truth, efficacious calling, is vndoubtful evidence of
election. See Romans 8.30. 2 Timothy 1.8, 9. 2 Pet. 1.10. Those whom he
predestined, he called, all and only; with that calling, which Saint
Augustine out of Paul calls, the calling secundum propositum, perhaps
intimating, that the rest are outwardly called, obiter only, for the elect
sake, with whom they live intermingled: hence in calling, he is said to save
us; to set us after a sort in possession of salvation, understand it, when he
calls us vocatione sancta, that is, as I interpret, sanctifican^e, making us
holy: therefore Peter bids make calling and election sure, first calling, from
it thou may easily ascend to assurance of election.

Calling implies two things; 1. Inuitement to partake the grace of God offered
in the Gospel, forms of it ye have every where in Scripture. Isai 55.1.
Hoe, every one that thirsts, come and buy without money: Pro. 1.22.23.
Oh ye foolish, how long will you love foolishness? Oh turn you at my
correction, I will power out my soul unto you, this by the ministry of man.
And who doubts but in many castawayes, there is a secret according persuasion
of Gods spirit, to embrace grace offered: I Apoc. 3.19 20.
stand at the door and knock, Isai 30 21.
here is the way, walk in it. Farthered also many times by first benefits.
Secondly, corrections, outward, inward, but all in vain to them in whom the
seed of election is not: That made our Savior say, many are called, few
chosen; invited he means, but not prevailed withal, so, as to be brought
out of the power of darkness.

2 Preualence, and efficacious persuasion of the heart, which in some degrees
ye may observe to have place in castawayes. 1 They Heb. 6.4.
are illightened, brought to knowledge. 2 To 1 Timothy 1.19.
general faith. 3 To a Heb. 6.5.
taste of the good word of God, whence issues Mat 13.20.
receiving it with joy. 4 Feeling powers of the world to come. So that 5 there
is in them velleitus, Number. 23 10.
a willingness, somewhat feign to be saved. 6 Outward 2 Pet. 2.18.20.
reformation for the time. 7 Seeking and striving to enter, yet without
success. Luke 13.24.

What then is that work of calling, that seals to us our election? Resp. When
the heart is so prevailed withal, that its made what its invited to be, Romans
4.17.
enabled to do what its exhorted to do. Ps. 27.8. My heart answered, thy face
Lord will I seek: Romans 6.17.
ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine into the which you were
delivered. The phrase seems purposely chosen, to express the efficacy of
divine doctrine, in the hearts of his children; as if they were cast into it,
as into a mould, and came forth, bearing the stamp and figure of it: See 2
Cor. 3.18.

Paul describes it, Spirit and Life, enabling to be, and do what it
prescribes, leaving impressions of holiness, mercy, love, and such like
heavenly properties as it self breathes, thou may rest assured of thy
Calling and Election. Blessed is that soul, that discernes impressions of the
Word and Spirit of God in it self: Its sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians.
4.30.

Instrument of vocation; our Gospel: understand not an Evangelical story
written by Paul and his Associates, as by Matthew and the rest; But their
preaching of the Gospel: their publishing the glad tidings of remission of
sins, reconciliation with God, salvation purchased by Christ to all
believers. The Gospel is, 1 Gods, as the Author and sender of it. 2 Christ's,
as the matter; and next reuealer of it out of the bosom of his Father: He is
the Angel of the Covenant. 3 Paul's, as 1 Cor. 4.1.
a dispenser, amongst others, of the mysteries it contains. Our Gospel; that
is tropically, our preaching of the Gospel.

That the instrument and mean of their, of our vocation; two things commended
to our notice: 1 the matter or quality of the doctrine whereby our effectual
calling is wrought; its Gospel. 2 The Act conversant about it, or the manner
of propounding it, when its powerful to our calling; that's preaching.

Of the first, that its Gospel, and not Law, Scriptures plentifully witness.
1 That's the Romans 1.16, 17.
power of God to salvation; for it only reueales the righteousness of God;
the means of reconcilement unto him; therefore styled the 2 Cor. 5.19.
word of reconciliation. 2 That 2 Cor. 3.6, 9.
Spirit, not Letter; the ministration of the Spirit; the ministry by which the
Spirit gives life and ability to do what it prescribes.

Howbeit, in the conversion of a sinner, there is use of the Law, and that
ministry of condemnation: 1 to humble the soul swelling with conceit of
righteousness, by Romans 3.20.
conuincing it of sin. 2 To make it Romans 7.9.
sensible of misery to which for sin its liable. 3 That so it may be our Gal.
3.24.
Schoolmaster to Christ: preparatiue therefore it is to conversion: yet as
Moses brought only to the borders of the promised land, Ioshuah set them in
possession. So the Law prepares us a people to Christ, the Gospel makes us so,
John 1.17.

Of the second: In what manner propounded? Resp. Preached unto us. What call we
preaching? Resp. Not every telling a fair tale in a pulpit; or singing a piece
of descant upon a Text: But the 1 opening and interpreting of the doctrine of
the Gospel: and 2 the applying of it to the state and use of the hearers.
Compare these Scriptures, Neh. 8.8. Luke 24.27, 32. Job 33.23. 2 Timothy 4.2. 1
Cor. 14.24, 25. Whither this be done publicly e suggestu in the Congregation,
or in private Conference; de Scripto or memoriter: with a set Text or without,
matters not to the nature of preaching.

But that this is the mean ordinary of vocation, the mean ordinary sine quo
non, Scriptures are plentiful, Romans 10.14, 17. How shall they hear to believe
without a preacher? 1 Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe. Hence the charge so strict, to Timothy delivered with
solemnest adiuration, to preach the word, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. and woe to us, to whom
the dispensation is committed, if we preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. see also
Ezech. 3.18. and 34.2.

But is not reading the Scriptures to the people preaching? Resp. In large
sense it is (...), a public proclaiming of the word of God. But shall we say
that preaching which in strict sense Scripture so calls? for shame, when Paul
bids Timothy preach the word, means he, read it distinctly? see his own
explication, and drawing that whole into parts, 2 Timothy 4.2. when he commands to
study to show himself approved, a workman that needs not be ashamed: meant he
reading distinctly? 2 Timothy 2.15. rather right dividing the word. When Christ
ascended on high, and gave Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
gifts to men, fitting them to the work of the ministry in their several
degrees, was this amongst their habiliments?

Mistake not as if I would vilify public Reading: I know it Gods ordinance,
useful and efficacious to the ends whereto its assigned: And have so far
expressed my judgment in my rude notes on the former Epistle. Howbeit would
have no man, in love of his ignorance, or ouerloue of ease, so far mistaken,
as to think he has done the whole of that worthy, that 1* Tim 3.1. and 5.17,
18.
toylesome work of the ministry, when he has read fair service unto the
people. Nor be so erroneous against sense, as to think reading that kind of
preaching, which Scripture makes instrument of effectual calling.

Of Gods selecting it and separating it to this use, other Reason we can give
none save his (...), 1 Cor. 1.21. Howbeit, Congruence you may observe 1 Cor.
14.25. 2 Timothy 4 2. and 2.15.

And would you please seriously to view, and compare Congregations wanting this
means, with those to which God has granted constant preaching of his Truth,
the greatest Antipreacher shall be forced to see as great odds, as betwixt
Sodom and Sion in her beauty, betwixt ignorance and knowledge, betwixt
ciuility and sanctity, betwixt corruption and grace, betwixt the sons of God,
and the children of Belial,

Paul with solemnest adiuration charge upon Timothy, to 2 Timothy 4.2.
preach the word to be instant in season out of season: 1 the 3.
itch of the ears has infected the people: that's little. 2 Acts 20.29.
Wolves enter or insideate not sparing the flock. 3 We watch for their souls
as those that Heb. 13.17.
shall give account. 4 Blood of souls cries louder, then that of Abel, which
yet God threatens to Ezech. 3.18.
require of us, in case of our negligence. 5 1 Cor. 9.16. Ezech. 34.2.
Woes are many to rouse us; with all comfortable promises many to animate and
encourage: 1 the Mat 28.10.
Lord shall be with us, to protect our persons, to bless our ministry: 2
whatsoever our issue is, yet are we to God a 2 Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor: 3 though we labor in vain, yet our Isai 49.4.
reward is with the Lord, and our work with our God 4 If blessing added, such
as we expect, that's 1 1 Cor. 9.2.
seal to our sending: 2 Means of our far Dan. 12.3.
more glorious reward.

Paul, 1 These. 5.20.
Despise not Prophecy; slight not this ordinance, without which, where its
granted, Pro. 29 18.
none are saved: Oh the subtlety of Satan to alienate minds of people from
this mean of their salvation; forsooth none worse then those that run after
Sermons. Take heed I beseech you, ye be not entangled in crime little less
then that of blasphemy: if perhaps you impute the notorious lewdness of
hypocrites, to Gods ordinance, as cause of it. 1 Thus I think I may say of
such people, as Jeremy of his figs; the Ier 24 3.
good none better, the evil none worse. 2 But this by accident only, and by
secret judgment of God; not by native efficacy of the ordinance.

How Romans 10 and 16 Act. 10. and 16.
beautiful have feet of Ministers bin to gracious eyes of ancient Saints?
Times are changed: But who so professes conversion, yea but confirmation and
growth in Grace by our Ministry, and yet delights in disgrace of our person is,
publishes to all men rightly judging, his no sound feeling the saving power of
our Ministry.

2 The issue and term of calling, obtaining the glory of our Lord lesus
Christ: understand it the same in kind whereto Christ's humanity is advanced,
reserving to him only his privilege in the measure. 1 Clear vision of God;
perfect renouation of the 2 Cor. 3.18.
image of God, into which we are now translated from glory to glory. 2 Our
bodies made Phil. 3.21.
like to his glorious body, immortal, in passible, spiritual, clad with
glorious clarity and splendour. 3 Our whole persons advanced to be his 2 Cor.
6.2, 3.
Assessours in the judgment of Men and Angels. Such honor have all Gods
Saints: such glory does Gods calling lead us unto, Phil. 3.14.

Heb. 13.13.
to go out of the world, bearing the reproach of Christ: Its 2 Timothy 2.11, 12
a faithful saying, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: and
to be trembled at that is subioyned, if we deny him, he will deny us. And Romans
8.17.
heirs we are of God, coheires with Christ; yet hac lege, if we suffer with
him, that we may be also glorified with him. And of the comfort thus far:
follow the means prescribed for prevention of such error.

VERSE. 15. Therefore, Brethren stand fast and hold the Traditions which ye have
bin taught, whither by word or our Epistle.


THe means are two: 1 Constant cleaving to Apostolical doctrine. 2 Prayer to
God, ver. 16, 17. 3 The illation of the exhortation from former grounds may not
be slighted.

Therefore stand fast: wherefore? because God has chosen and called you, and
secured you from final seducement: How flows the inference? 1 Whither because
God requires our endeauours to fulfill his Counsels? that's certain truth.
Though the Lords foundation stand sure, yet they 2 Timothy 2.19, 21
must depart from iniquity, and purge themselves from errors of judgment and
life. Though we know we shall appear with Christ in glory, yet must we 1 John
3.3.
purge our selves as he is pure: though the Regenerate sins not to death, yet
he 1 John 5.18.
keeps himself that the evil one touch him not.

2 Else would the Apostle terrify from negligence, by minding them of so great
Grace of God bestowed upon them? As else where he minds Gods people of Heb.
10.25, 26* etc.
fearful and irrecouerable state of Reuolters from Grace? that I think not,
because he is more then opinioned of their Election and Calling; and desires to
rid them of fear of Apostasy.

3 Or rathest does he encourage and hearten them with hope certain of
attainment? Certainly, there is no such incentiue to constancy in Christian
courses, as is the certain assurance of salvation: Who so runs as Paul, not
as upon 1 Cor. 9.26.
uncertainties, he runs with greatest cheerfulness and alacrity.

1 The love of Christ, whither wherewith he loves us, or wherewith we love him,
has in it, in Paul's apprehension, virtue little less then 2 Cor. 5.14.
compulsory.

2 The taste and experience we have had of the sweet beginning, of eternal
life in peace of Conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 8.23.
first fruits of the Spirit, how does it ravish affection? and make it long and
strive for the complement and consummation?

3 And what so much duls affection, or languisheth endeavor, as does
desperation or doubtfulnesse? Bernard. desperatio and dubietas.

Its acquired by study of sanctity. 2 Confirmed and increased by constancy and
growth in sanctity. 3 Yea, it self most inflames affection with love of God
and care to please him. But we proceed to the Means prescribed to prevent
seducement.

1 Stand fast and hold the Traditions, etc. the exhortation as of some Captain
to his Soldiers; stand your ground; hold fast this principal weapon of your
warfare, the sword of the Spirit: compare 1 Cor. 16.13. Ephesians. 6.14.

What are these Traditions? Resp. Things delivered to be kept; doctrines
especially which they had bin taught.

Traditions they thus difference by their matter: 1 some are de fide or merely
doctrinall: 2 some de moribus, Ethicall, as you may term them, tending to
inform a Christians life for moral practice. 3 Some Rituall, of external
rite and ceremony either in the worship of God, or in the external policy of
the Church: see 1 Cor. 11. and 14. Here, as Bellarmine, those de fide and
moribus rathest understood. Which Paul yet distinguishes by several manner of
delivery: 1 some were taught by lively voice of Paul, or other Pastors: 2 some
by his Epistle: both must be kept and holden mordicus.

Popish inference hence is this; that there are matters of necessary faith and
practice which are not contained in the written word of God?

Yet Paul assures Timothy: 1 the Scriptures are able to make him 2 Timothy 3.15, 17
wise to salvation: 2 to furnish the man of God, the Minister, to every good
work of his calling. 3 Wherefore we are limited Isai 8.20.
to Law and Testimony. 4 Wherefore also amongst fathers, the Argument is of
force, Its not written, therefore not matter of necessary faith or practice,
Scriptum doceat Hermogenis officina, aut timeat vae illud, etc. Tertullian.
Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem

In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura continentur ea omnia quae
continent fidem moresque viuendi. Austin. and alibi. Credo quod etiam hinc
diuinorum Eloquiorum clarissima Authoritas esset, si homo illud sine dispendio
promissae salutis ignorare non posset. Caetera vide supra, Contents of
Scripture you must understand, not only what is expressed in so many letters
and syllables, but whatsoever may thence by manifest and necessary consequence
be deduced: sweetly Lib. 5. de Theologid.
Nazianzen, Quaedam and sunt and dicuntur in Scripturis, quaedam vero sunt in
Scripturis tametsi non dicuntur. As that the father is unbegotten, is not
expressed in so many syllables in Scripture, yet is collected from what is
written.

Thus inform your selves: 1 Where generals are delivered, there are all
particulars comprised in those generals intentionally delivered; because
generals comprehend their particulars.

2 Where principles and causes are delivered, there effects are also intended;
as being vertually contained in their principles.

3 Where one equal is taught, all of like reason is taught, quia parium par
ratio: and where is par ratio, there is par lex: where is like reason, there is
like law. So take contents of Scripture, no instance of any point of necessary
or but convenient faith and practice, can be given, but what is delivered in
the written word.

As to this Scripture to children it will appear to afford no Argument for
their conclusion; for what when its yielded they must hold fast not only what
Paul wrote in his Epistles, but those things also which he taught them by
lively voice? follows it thence, that something of necessary faith taught in
no Scripture? Resp. What if those other things taught by word were contained in
other Scriptures: then though as well written as not written in these Epistles,
yet no other thing then was written, Act. 26.22. Testifying and saying nothing
else but what Prophets and Moses spoke should come to pass.

Else how? Paul taught many things which he wrote not. Resp. Who doubts? as
other Apostles and Prophets: but as Augustine, what they taught and wrote not,
belonged rather ad vbertatem Cognitionis, then ad Authoritatem Religionis.

Object. But these of necessary observation? Resp. I yield it, yet follows not
the general conclusion: therefore something necessary not contained in any
Scripture. Paul's Epistles to Thessalonians, are not all Paul's Epistles; much
less all Scripture. There is Moses, Prophets, Evangelists, and other holy men,
that wrote as they were 2 Pet. 1.21.
inspired by the holy Ghost: in any of whose writings if Paul's dictates were
contained, it suffices to show inualidity of the inference.

The paralogisme is too childish to deceive wise men, q.d. something of
necessary faith was taught by James which is not contained in his Epistle; as
the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection of our Savior. Ergo, No Scripture
contains these necessary Articles of faith: or, Ergo, something is of
necessary faith which is not comprised in James his Epistle: which who doubts?
and yet stands the conclusion firm. Nothing is of necessary faith or practice,
but what is contained in Scriptures universally taken: we return to Paul's
purpose, and heed his advise as most necessary and anaileable to prevent
seducement by Antichrist and other Heretics; to keep us close, without
sweruing, to Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine: that is a 2 Pet. 1.19.
most sure word, there while we hold us, we are safe: compare 1 Timothy 6.3, 4,
20, 21. 2 Timo. 1.13, 14. and 3.14, 15. Titus 3.9. Galat. 1.8, 9.

True, but this doctrine was in part tradita only, not written. Resp. 1 Then
was Irenaeus and other ancients deceived; whose sentence is, that they worte
the materials of what they preached, and left them so to be rule of faith. 2
Yet who so could assure me of any thing taught by Paul, which he wrote not, I
should not deny it greatest reverence and credit. Beatius est dare quam
accipere, though I read not in Evangelical story, yet I reverence as Christ's
speech, because Luke has recorded it. And that prophecy of Enoch mentioned by
Saint Jude, I doubt not to have been his prophecy. But as to the Cardinals
rules to try Apostolical traditions, I find them uncertain. For how will he
assure me, That any the points betwixt us controuersed, and pretended to have
foundation upon Apostolical tradition, were vniuerfally received by the whole
Church? When all ages have afforded men most Orthodoxe, that have otherwise
believed and practiced. Once I am sure, what they wrote, is theirs; what else
they spoke, no authority can ascertaine me. 3 The rule is certain; they
delivered nothing doctrinall to be received, that is contrariant to what they
wrote; for did not the same spirit guide their tongue, that their pen? What
now? When I find direct, or consequentiall repugnancie, and contradiction,
twixt their pretended traditions, and writings? Must I think such traditions
Apostolical? Heed what is delivered by Apostles and Prophets; since upon no
certainetie thou can be resolved, except by their writings, what they deliver
to be observed, there to hold thee fast without declining, in all matter of
faith, and moral practice.

his iniquity in mystery. But whiles men thought to mend by adding to written
prescripts, and ouercredulously gave way to titles Apostolical; withal grew
wanton and luxuriant in glossing and inferring from the sacred text, mixing
withal their Philosophical conceits, and language over hyperbolicall,
unwittingly they hatched that Cockatrice egg, whereout has issued the Serpent
of Papisme. In every age inclinations of doctrine, are well observed by the
century-writers; out of which rags of Fathers heedlesse opinions, they have
patcht us up their Popery.

Apoe 11.3.
two witnesses to Prophecy in sackcloth. And learning of higher strain, then
what simplicity of Scriptures affords, to be much affected by professed
divines. Fathers, who save he that knows them not, but reuerenceth? But its
strange, when Saint Paul must be forced to accord with Saint Augustine, else
scarcely be deemed Authentic. Harsh, when liberty is not permitted, with
reason and salua reuerentia, to dissent from their opinions. Saint Augustine
desired not to be so read, nor did himself so read others. Too too shameful,
when Aristotle and Plato must not illustrate only, or explicate, but affront
Saint Paul. Of all I most wonder, how the Barbarism of Schoolmen has
regained reputation of highest learning: and their mysteries seen higher, then
those Paul 2 Cor. 12.4.
heard in the third heaven; their Sectaries more learned, then he that, as
Acts 18.24.
Apollos, is mightiest in Scriptures.

Mine error, if yet an error, i will confess. Much precious time I have spent
in them, led thereto by these reasons. 1 The high esteem I saw them in, with
men whose learning and sanctity, I could not but reverence. 2 Next, their
promise, of enabling rationally to conceive highest mysteries, of Theology; at
least to defend them, as more rational then their contradictories. 3 I found
them in Moralities, exact, and distinct, far above the ordinary rate of our
Divines. 4 Why should a Papist in School language be a Barbarian to me, as I
to him in the language of Canaan. 5 Competently I seemed enabled to discern
betwixt good and evil. 6 Conuersed in them, not vt transfuga, but vt
explorator: especially willing to see the harmony, like that of harp and
harrow, twixt themselves, and Controuersists of this time. 7 Yet ever with this
mind, to subject them to highest censure: making Scripture my gnomen and
canon, after which to exact them. Herein what I have erred, Lord pardon me;
but sure, it was far from me to make them Lords of my faith, or of my reason.
Nouices, and Neophites only I monish, to bewarre of their enchantments; lest
their minds be corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel. 2 Cor. 11.3.

of 2 Timothy 4.3.
itching after novelties, and turning their ears from wholesome doctrine.
Where will you find it, but in Scriptures? What when they tell you of fabulous
traditions, pretensed revelations, miracles, and apparitions of Angels, and men
deceased? Shall any mislead you from the written doctrine? Gal. 1.8, 9. Deuteronomy.
13.1, 2, 3. Luke 16.31. Oh fools and blind: 1 Here is 2 Pet. 1.19.
(...), whereon your souls may build. 2 Here is Romans 14.4.
comfort solid, and what affords Ier. 6.16.
rest to the soul. 3 P Psalm 119 9. Isai 8.
Direction perfect for guiding the whole life; what else seek we? Yet how wild
and wanton are our hears grown? He is no body now, that tells what Peter, and
Paul, Moses, and Prophets have spoken. Who so can bring to their Athenian
ears, things strange and unheard off, though never so impertinent; who so will
walk in the Spirit, and lie falsely, he shall be a Prophet for this people.
So gat Antichrist footing amongst our forefathers; and if ever by a
postliminium, he recover his possession amongst us, by this means it will be.
Hold fast the traditions, you have extant in Apostles, and Prophets writings:
before them, Popery falls, as Dagon before the Arc.

VERSE. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace.

Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.


THE second part of the prescript, for prevention of seducement, prayer unto
God. The carriage seems to present it as a voluntary act of Paul's love, on
behalf of this people. The intention bends it farther, to the form of a
prescript: and is so to be apprehended, in as much as Paul on this occasion,
falls to his devotion. In his example, he prescribes what is most convenient
for them, to procure their establishment.

Certainly it is a principal amongst our complete Armor, auailing to our
standing in the evil day: Ephesians. 6.18.
Praying always with all manner prayers and supplications in the Spirit,
watching thereunto with all perseverance; as if it gave life, and strength to
the whole of our (...). See Luke 17.1, 2.5. Psalm. 51.12.

1 Not only the first infusion of grace is of God, but to every act and
exercise of grace received, is necessary nouum auxilium.

2 The giver of grace, the same is the perfecter, confirmer, stablisher of it.
1 Pet. 5.10. 1 Cor. 1.8.

3 What feathers are we, left to our selves, when the least blast of temptation
takes us? 1 Chronicles. 35.31. Mat. 26.74. Gal. 1.6.

4 When we would do good, evil is most present with us. Romans 7.21.

5 Not only Iehoshuah, but we all have Satan standing at our right hand to
resist us: Zach. 3.1. The Lord rebuke him, had need be our prayer, ver. 2.
else whither fall we? Luke 22.32.

of our wind shaken vulgus, to hear the protestations and vowed resolutions
of my people; rather to die for Christ, then to deny him. Howbeit, me thought
I wanted the elevation and ascent of the mind unto God. Oh my dear brethren,
first, think of the little Romans 7.18.
hold fast goodness has in our nature; the no nourishment, more then God is
pleased to supply. Secondly, weigh how Adam, and Jude 6.
Angels, greater in power and dignity, fell, left to themselves. Thirdly,
consider how the Mat. 26.74.
Rock of faith failed; of an egregious presumer, becoming a frequent denier
of his Master. Fourthly, how soon Galat. 1.6.
Galatians were transported, to another Gospel. Fifthly, mind who said, its a
blessed thing, to Pro. 28.14.
fear always our own infirmity. Sixthly, how soon David Psalm 30.6, 7.
was troubled, when he but fancied, he should never be moved. Pray rather as
David, hold thou me up and I shall be safe; and Lord Psalm. 51.12.
stablish me with thy free spirit. Humble devotion preuailes, rather then
proud presumption. See 2 Corinthians. 12. To it God gives answer; my grace is
sufficient for thee, and 2 Cor. 12.9.
I will perfect my power in weakness. To the rest, thus, let him that thinks
he stands, of all men, take heed least he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.

Particulars obserueable in the prayer, are first the persons to whom its
directed. Secondly, the grounds of assurance for audience Thirdly, the
blessings prayed for.

1 Persons; the Lord Jesus Christ, and God our Father. In Athanasius his time,
the inference was found; Christ is prayed unto as the Father, therefore God
equal with the father. With good leave of Papists it may pass current, if to
him, as donour of grace, the prayer be preferred. 1 His style is, Romans 9.5.
God over all, blessed for ever. 2 His properties the fame with those of the
Father, Apoc. 2.23.
ommiscience, searching the heart and reins; omnipotency, infinite wisdom,
etc, 3 Works the same, John 13.
creation, Heb 12, 3.
sustentation, John 5.17.
government of the creature.

Hold the conclusion firm against Arians. 1 It assures thee of the Heb. 9.14.
1 John 17.
all sufficient value of the price paid for thy redemption. 2 That he is able
to save, and set in possession of the purchased inheritance, maugre all the
spite, craft, power of hell.

2 The grounds of assurance for audience: 1 Gods fatherly love. 2 The
testimonies of his love already given, comfort, and hope; more perswasiue to
work assurance of obtaining, more are extant in holy writ. 1 Power we cannot
but presuppose in God, and Ephesians. 3 20.
ability to do abundantly over and above all that we can ask or think. All
the doubt is of his will: What more swayes it then love? Whose very nature is,
velle Amato bonum. See Mat. 7.9, 10, 11. Specially what our Savior has. John
6.26, 27. Where a little hyprobolically he seems to exclude the necessity of
his intercession, to impetration; and minds us of the f^lse propension that is
in the Father, to grant whatsoever we pray for.

James his item; Iam. 1.6, 7.
to ask in faith, nothing doubting? 2 Or how have certain and firm hope of
obtaining? When the doubtful or disputant about certainetie of obtaining, may
not think to obtain any thing of God. 3 And how dare they call God Father,
who know not they have Romans 8.15.
received the Spirit of adoption? 4 And has God 1 Ioh. 5.14, 15.
promised in vain? Or Mat. 7.7, 8.
precepted us in vain, to ask with assurance of audience.

They say this certainetie quels devotion, inhibits care of sanctity. See
supra. For my part, I know none ever prayed with Heb 5.7.
more feruency of Spirit, then our Savior. None that was ever more Heb 7.26.
holy, harmless, separate from sinners. Nor any, that was more assured of
Gods love.

Wherefore, my advise is to every man desirous to be fervent, and hopeful in
devotion; labor for assurance of Gods love. Its not assurance, but
doubtfulnesse, that quenches, or quels devotion,

he hates nothing that he has made, does good for nature sake his
workmanship, to good and bad. But there is a special love, and assurance of
it required in him, that will pray with assurance to be heard. Testimonies
thereof are, not outward blessings, Eccles. 9.1.
none knows this love by any thing that is before him. But gifts there are
that testify it, two here specified. 1 Comfort. 2 Hope. Which John 15.17.
none receive, but the people of his love. Particular explication expect anon,
I apply now to the Apostles purpose.

Noticing these and like gifts of the spirit, as pledges of obtaining more, or
in more abundance, the blessings we pray for. Hence called the 2 Cor. 1.22.
Arrha, or Arrhabo, earnest penny of Gods contract, testifying that he is
voluntarily bound to give more, if we ask more of him. Wherefore Saints are
not ashamed to promise themselves more, because the Lord has already done so
great things for their souls. See 2 Cor. 1.10. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. 1 Samuel 17.37.
Nor to encourage us to ask more, even therefore because the Lord has already
been so liberal to us.

1 God is not as man, that the fountains of his bounty should be exhausted.

2 Nor as the son of man, to Iam. 1.5.
vpbraid us with courtesies already conferred.

3 His bonum is sui diffusiuum; and delights to have it self extorted by
importunate prayer, that indeed he requires. 1 That he may be acknowledged
Author of gifts. 2 That he may see us fitted and disposed to receive. 3 That
he may reap thanks as a tribute, from those that are his beneficiaries. But
ask what thou want, thou may be assured to receive; shall I say? Though
thou have already received much; nay, therefore be encouraged to ask more,
because thou have experimented the Lord so liberal in bestowing.

Ezra 9.8, 10.
over modest, through conscience of unthankfulness, and Iam. 32.10. 1 Chronicles.
priuitie of no worth in it self to obtain. Oh rouse up your selves, you
beloved of the Lord, and know 1 the Lords delight, is to do good to the sons
of men. 2 You are Apoc. 3.4.
worthy by acceptance in Christ. 3 There is in our God a self propension, to
deal bountifully with us. 4 What inclines him rather to pity our indigence,
then to exact our worthiness. 5 And have you forgotten the consolation, Heb.
4.15, 16.
our high Priest has experimented our sorrows, and now appears at his
Fathers right hand, making continual intercession for us. Thus think, the
favors already bestowed, are pledges of more: provided always we be 1 not
unthankful for what is received. 2 Nor proud, of what is gratuitously
conferred. 3 Nor slothful to do him service, or to use our talent to the
glory of the bestower, and benefit of our brethren.

The gifts instanced in, and noticed as means to assure us to be heard, are 1
Comfort. 2 Hope. Both amplified. 1 By several Epithites; Comfort everlasting,
Hope good, 2 By common fountain, Grace.

Comfort; understand the lighting, or easing the heart of that sorrow, or
fear, where with its surcharged. Here specially, disburthening the soul of
that anguish, or fear arising from conscience of sin. It has for the
harbinger, poverty of spirit, mourning for sin, and liablenesse to wrath:
See Mat. 5.4. Isai 57.15. and 61.3.

2 Instrument, the Interpreter, that one of a thousand to declare unto the
weary soul Gods righteousness. Job 33.23.

3 Sound evidences whereby its brought home to the soul. 1 Performance of
conditions, Faith, and Repentance. 2 Consequents. 1 Cheerfulness, and Psalm.
119.
Alacrity in Gods service. 2 Courage, and sometimes no less then joy in
tribulation.

The style it has, is everlasting. See John 14.14. The comforter abides with
us for ever.

How? When its often interrupted, and Gods children groan under the burden of
grief, or fear.

Resp. 1 In Causis, though not in our sense, because of our infirmity. See
Psalm. 77.10. Those cause are, 1 Gods Mal. 3.6.
unchangeable love. 2 Heb. 8.6.
New covenant stablished on better promises. 3 Christ's merit, and 1 John 2.1.
intercession.

2 Quantum ex part Dei, it bides with us; the interruptions which befell us,
issues from our own default. 1 Churling at Gods hand in our afflictions. Job
6. etc. 2 Securely. Psalm 30.6, 7. 3 Scandalous sins. Psalm. 51.12.

3 Yet I say not but God remoues sensible comfort. 1 For trial of faith, who
but belieues what he feels? Then is faith glorious, when against, or above
sense, it rests on naked promise of God. See Matthew. 27.46. Job 13.15. 2
Sometimes for prevention. See 2 Cor. 12.7. most usually for chastisement.

4 As we are said to be already saved, that is, eternally saved from our sins,
and after a sort, now set in possession of salvation; because we have now
beginnings of eternal life and Romans 8.24.
hope that makes not ashamed of the consummation; so now to have received
everlasting Luke 16.
consolation. 1 In the beginnings. 2 In assured hope of consummation. In end of
life expecting all Apoc. 21.4.
tears to be wiped from our eyes, and to enter into the joy of our Master:
For which cause, perhaps, the mention of hope is subioyned.

The second gift issuing from Gods love, and assuring us of audience, is hope.
They consider and handle it two ways. 1 As a passion, where they deliver us
the general notion of it. 2 As a virtue Theological.

As a passion, so they point us to: 1 The general office or act of it, that
is, expectation. Heb. 11.10. 2 The object, which is thus circumscribed. 1 Its
bonum: evil things we fear, or grieve at, hope not for. 2 Bonum absens: for
what a man sees, or enioyes, why does he yet hope for? Romans 8.24. 3 Arduum:
not without difficulty obtained. Things easily compassed, are as already
enjoyed, no branch of fortitude spends it self in the acquiring. 4 Possibile:
for who, but a fool, hopes for things of mere imposibilitie?

As a virtue Theological, so its described, the firm, or certain expectation
of future beatitude, arising from grace and precedent good works.

Too narrowly; for we hope also for: 1 Deliverance out of temptation. 2
Sustentation in temptation. 3 Perseverance. 4 Growth and confirmation in grace.
Yea, 1 Timothy 4.8.
blessing of this life, so far as they are expedient, since these also are
conveyed in the promise. Thus rather extend the nature of it; firm expectation
of all good things, God has promised, and not yet exhibited.

1 Cor. 2.9.
that neither eye has seen, nor care heard, nor have they entered into man's
heart to conceive. So surpassing is their goodness; all things that 2 Pet. 1.3.
concern life and Godliness.

2 Certainetie of obtaining; Christian hope Romans 5.5.
makes not ashamed. Founded on 1 Fidelity. 2 Power of God. 3 Merit, and
intercession of Christ.

3 Regularitie, it expects: 1 Only things promised. 2 So, and no otherwise,
then they are promised. 1 Temporal things limitatiue. 1 If expedient. 2 With
exception of the cross. 3 Reservation of power to the promiser, to chasten
particular disobedience. 4 Distinctiuely, either in the particular, or in the
equivalent; by way of commutation, and compensation with spiritual.

2 Spiritual blessings after the rate of distribution in this life. 1 Rather
quoad essentiam, then gradum perfectionis. 2 In competencie for final
victory, not in perfection.

3 Providing always, John 1.33.
gracious qualification, or disposition, and use of means to partake them.

Nathaniel, and Israelite indeed. The rest are all either first, hopeless, or
secondly, ouerhoping. That, because aliens from the covenants of promise. 2
This, for that without evidence, and due qualification, they fondly expect the
promise.

Heb. 6.19.
This hope hold fast as the Anchor of our Souls, amids all stormy gusts of
temptation. Means to establish it: 1 Those two immutable things, wherein its
Heb. 6.18.
impossible for God to lie. His promise, if that be too little, his oath. 2 2
Cor. 1.20.
The ratifying of them in the blood of Christ, and his continual appearing
before God for us. 3 The Romans 4.18.
power of God, enough to make us above hope, to believe under hope. 4 His
dealings with his other Saints, for they are 1 Timothy 1.16.
exemplarie, so we resemble in behavior. 5 Recording Gods dealings with 2 Timothy 4.17.18.
our selves in former times. 6 Provided always, we perform vnalterably our
restipulation.

The common fountain out of which they issue, is Grace; that is, free favor,
vnmerited benevolence. The common spring of all spiritual blessings to us.
Dupliciter gratis, says Bernard, they come unto us. 1 Sine merito. 2 Sine
labor nostro, another dupliciter you may add. 1 Contra meritum. 2 Vltra vires.

1 He is found of them that seek not after him. Romans 10.20. Yea, of them that
contradict him. ver. 21.

2 We were in times past disobedient, serving the lusts, and diverse pleasures;
therefore Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.
not of works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his own
purpose, and grace he saved us.

3 And had we not by such courses merited perpetual adoration, and shutting
up under unbelief?

4 When we were of no strength, Christ, which is our hope, and comfort, died
for us. See Romans 5.6, 8.

1 Cor. 4.7.
what have thou, that thou have not thus freely received?

Swell not with contempt of brethren, either wanting, or inferior in their
measures. For first are we in nature Romans 3.6.
better then they? Secondly, and 1 Cor. 4.7.
who, or what is that discriminateth thee.

Use freely to the glory of the bestower; though thou receive no recompense
from men, nor present sensible comfort from God: Mat. 10.8.
Gatis accepisti, gratis da.

Despair not of obtaining, though thou want merits, strength, strenuous will
to obtain. There is in God, what selfely inclines him to give, without, and
against merit: without our labor, beyond our ability; rich grace, free
bounty, etc.

VERSE. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.


THE blessing prayed for, as necessary to prevent seducement. 1 Comfort. 2
Stablishment.

Comfort, what it is, see supra. Sometimes sorrow oppresses. Oppressit me,
Isai 38.14.
Domine succurre mihi; her comfort is refreshing, Matthew. 11.28. reviving. Isai
57.15. (...). Speak to the heart of Jerusalem. Isai 40.2. Sometimes fear
surchargeth, comfort is then encouragement; (...), the exciting of our fainting
and languishing spirits.

Quest. How prayed for, when already given.

Resp. 1 To be continued. 2 Increased.

Necessity of it, and prayer for it, to our perseverance easily appears. 1
Perpetuity of pressures and temptations, as waves in the sea, following one in
the neck of another. 2 Heb. 12.4.
Posibilitie of greater. 3 Own readiness, to multiply our own fears, and
sorrows. 4 Fearful issues of withdrawing it. 1 2 Cor. 2.7.
Swallowing up of sorrow. 2 Slow pace in goodness. 3 Dullness of spirit in
performance. 5 Little or no encouragement to goodness the times afford us.

The Father of mercies, and God of all consolation, grant it unto us. The
rather considering the season, presently dolorous, likely to be more.
Considering our sins, these are but (...), the beginnings of sorrows.

This yet comforts. 1 God has promised not to leave us comfortless. 2 To 1
Cor. 10.13.
give issue with the temptation. 3 To 2 Cor. 1.5.
cause comforts abound as our afflictions. 4 And has plentifully exemplified
it, in the cloud of witnesses, that have gone before us.

Only let us not be wanting to our selves. 1 Store you with knowledge, and
meditation of Scriptures, Psalm. 119.50.
that shall be our comfort in our trouble. 2 Amend what is a miss; who Ion.
3.9.
knows whither the Lord may return, and lea^^^^ blessing behind. 3 Ezech.
9.4.
Mourn for what thou can not mend; the abominations done amongst us. Perhaps
thou shall find Zeph. 2, 3.
a hiding place, in the day of Gods wrath. 4 Be 2 Chro. 6.29.
sensible of the plague, and so power out thy soul unto God. 5 Pro. 24.17.
Insult not over others misery, rather commiserate, solace it.

The second blessing prayed for, is establishment; amplified by the matter, in
every good word, and work.

Stablish you, Saint Peter in like pray^r adds, 1 Per. 5.10.
strengthen, settle you; as a foundation is settled, to be immovable. Whither
he thought all little enough to work our establishment; or, that the greatest
measure of this grace from God, were but enough to our confirmation.

Necessity of the blessing, and prayer for it appears by; 1 Natural Gal. 1.6.
mutabilitie, no less then Ephesians. 4* 14.
leuitie. 2 Violence of assaulters to deiect us from our station. 1 Ephesians. 6.12*
Principalities and powers. 2 Persecutours. 3 Heretics. 4 Temptations by view
of Psalm. 73.3* 13.
prosperity of contrary courses. 2 Yea, our own prosperous estate. 3
Frequent examples of multitude, yea, of wise and prudent running another
course. 4 Paucitie of companions. These with the like, press on us prayer for
support and establishment.

Pro. 28.14.
Fear thine own infirmity; beware of over confidence: let foul falls of
Neh. 13, 26.
great Saints make thee watchful. None have ever proved more cowardly in times
of trial then confident presumers. 2 Cast not thy self into temptation; that
were to Mat. 4.7.
tempt God. Shun no affliction which God calls thee to suffer; yet run not
upon the pikes. God has promised to keep us in vijs, Nunquid in precipitijs?
Bern.
3 What ever thy present strength may seem, use means of confirmation; Heb.
10.25.
forsake not assemblies, etc.

Matter wherein he prays for their establishment. 1 Every good word; that
understand, not so much good speech, or language; though that also be a great
and rare grace of God, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6.
to have our speech poudered with salt, and always gracious.

But good word, is here good doctrine; as Peter, stablished in the present
truth. 2 Pet. 1.12. Paul seems to interpret, the words of faith, good
doctrine. 1 Timothy 4.6.

To goodness of doctrine concur. 1 Conformity to the Idea, and (...), of
knowledge, Tit. 1.9. and 1 Timothy 6.3.
the analogy and rule of faith.

2 1 Timothy 1.4.
Usefulness for spiritual edification. Genealogies and such like nicities,
reject as vain; they breed rather questions, then godly edifying.

John 17.17.
Holiness, all divine trueths hither tend.

1 Timothy 1.10. 2 Timothy 4.
Wholesome, or healing of 1 errors in judgment. 2 Wounds of conscience. 3
Disordered affections.

In every such doctrine the Lord stablish you, these you may say they are good
doctrines, herein you may find rest to your souls.

mentior, if they be not holden amongst many, as the maine grounds of the
Gospel; such as wherewith the substance of Religion must be thought to stand
or fall. Why are we so long children in understanding? When shall we once
learn that the Psalm. 45.13.
beauty of the Church is within; her vesture of diverse colors? When to
prefer in our study, and approbation, substance rather then circumstance?

And good work: the second thing wherein Paul prays they may be established.
In every good work; says Papists this difference: some are morally, some
gratuitously, or meritoriously good. I that have learned to think and speak
according to Scriptures, and know no works, no not gracious, meritorious, will
thus explicate: 1 Premising a difference twixt moral works of Heathens, and
good works of Christians. Those I know formally evil, though materially good;
these materially, and in part formally good, and 1 Pet 2.5.
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Those little other then Romans 14.23.
sins, because not done in faith; and tendered to Gods fight, without any
thing to cover their blemishes, or make them acceptable: these stained with
sin in respect of defects, in measure of performance, yet presented to God as
pure. 1 God willingly Number. 23.21.
conniuing at weaknesses while the heart is upright. And 2 ex pacto Mat 10.42.
capable of reward.

2 Next I presuppose the Apostle to speak to Christians, men in the faith,
whom he desires to remember the end of their redemption, which is, to be
constantly Tit 2 14. and 3.8, 14.
zealous of good works; and so to proceed to explicate their Nature.

1 In actions of such men, I have learned to require a double goodness; 1 One
genericall; 2 The other ex circumstantia. Genericall goodness, when the act
for the matter or substance of it, is congruent to that perfect rule of
righteousness, the Law of God. He has showed thee, O man, Mic. 6.8.
what is good, even what the Lord requires of thee. They talk of works of
counsel and advise, which they suppose in excellency to exceed such as are
commanded. Yet 1 its their own rule, vbi mayor obligatio, mayor acceptatio
quia 1 Samuel 15.22.
melior est obedientia quam victima. 2 And these works which they suppose to
be of counsel, are never good, nor so much as lawful, save when
circumstances determine them to be necessary, necessitate precepti.

2 Goodness arising from circumstances, when due circumstances of doing are
observed. Suppose first motive. 1 Love of God. 2 View of precept, or conscience
of the command.

Modus, when in Rom 6.17. Ephesians. 6.6.
sincerity and singleness of heart, without gross hypocrisy, they are
tendered unto God.

Mat. 5.16.
God may thereby be glorified.

To which when other circumstances of time, place, person, etc. be added: you
have a work morally good, be circumstantionatum, as Papists confess: as I, a
work acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, when done (as these circumstances
suppose it) by a man in faith.

The law I confess requires to every work it crowns, allows, aliquid vltra?
Non only. 1 Rem, and 2 modum, 3 but mensuram and gradum perfectionis. But Romans
6.14.
we are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Infinite variety are such good works in. They dream who fancy no works
good but those of mercy, visito, poto, cibo, etc. So many commandments, so
many good works; so many several duties enjoined in every commandment, so
many several sorts of good works; which yet Paul has reduced to these three
heads: works 1 of Tit. 2.12.
Piety. 2 Justice. 3 Sobriety; comprising under justice those of mercy,
whereto also Popish common-placemen refer mercy and the works thereof as to
their head.

Mat. 26.41.
Nature is a holdbacke, a draw-backe. 2 Isai 49 4.
Encouragements are few from men. 3 Yet Mat. 10.42.
reward is great in heaven. 4 Commodity much on earth. 1 Simple aliens 1 Pet.
2.1.
preparatiuely won. 2 Tit. 2.5.
Blasphemers mouths stopped. 3 Gospel adorned. 4 2 Pet. 1.10, 11.
Election and calling assured. 5 Yea plentiful entrance into Gods Kingdom
procured. Yet hac lege, that we Gal. 6.9.
be not weary of well doing, for then 2 John 8. Gal. 3.3.
we loose all that we have wrought.

I conclude with that of the Apostle. Therefore my bethren, be ye steadfast and
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; 1 Cor. 15, 58.
forasmuch as you know how that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. So I
proceed to the third maine part of the Epistle.

AN EXPOSITION upon the second Epistle to the THESSALONIANS.
2 THESE. Chap. 3. Ver. 1, 2. Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that the word of
the Lord may have free course, and be glorified as it is with you:

And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men
have not faith.


THE third part of the Epistle, spent in Redargution of error in practice:
suppose 1 sleeping of Church discipline toward the inordinate. 2 The continued
neglect of Paul's ordinance, touching personal labor. To reprehension whereof,
because the carriage of it is somewhat tart and peremptory. The Apostles
passage, as to me it seems, is, by prefacing somewhat insinuatiuely; premising
testimonies and signs of love, three in number: 1 that he desires the help
and comfort of their prayers: 2 rests confidently persuaded of their obedience.
3 Prays God for them: every of these, a Testimony of Paul's love continued: but
of them as manifestations of love, in the loose.

Of the first, his craving aid of their prayers: verse. 1, 2. how it euidenceth
Paul's love and good opinion of them, notwithstanding their exorbitancy, you may
easily conceive; weighing, how it presupposes, Paul knew how little grace the
prayer of the wicked has with God; and how his ears are open to prayers of
righteous only.

The words considered in themselves, have the form of a prescript: wherein is
1 the duty: 2 the matter of it. The duty, pray for us: whereof see Annotata
ad 1 These. 5.25. this only annexed.

Why is Paul so every where instant with the people to afford him See 2 Cor.
1.11 Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col 4 3. Heb. 13.18. Romans 15.30.
aid of their prayers? Might he not presume his own devotion preualent enough
with God? somewhere ye have him in the tone and phrase of beggars, importuning
the people for it. I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake,
and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your
prayers to God for me.

Resp. 1. Perhaps, or without perhaps its true, Job 42.8.
other Saints prayers sometimes obtain for us what our own do not. 2 It
cannot be that the prayers of many should be despised. 3 The good and welfare
of Ministers, is the Heb. 13.18.
benefit of the people; their prayers God requires to obtain it. 4 The tribute
of thanks come home more plentiful 2 Cor. 1.11.
from many.

Eccl. 4.9, 10.
Vae soli: Two are better then one: as in other things, so in devotion. Iam.
5.16.
Single prayers are as the single hairs of Sampson, every one having the
strength of a man: The prayers of many, of whole Congregations, as Sampsons
whole bush; able to overcome the host of heaven, almost to bind the Almighty.
Proud Scorner let his name be, whosoever despises this help of own weakness.

2 The matter of the duty, of two members: 1 respecting their Ministry,
verse. 1. 2 their persons, verse. 2.

Their Ministry: 1 that the word of God may run; have free course: that is,
may have speedy and vnhindered passage and propagation: sometimes its called,
the Acts 6.7.
growing; sometimes, the Acts 13.49.
spreading or carrying abroad: sometimes the Acts 12.24.
multiplying of the word of God. Not that it self, in it self, is multiplied;
but in subiecto: as Act. 6.7.

Reasons of the duty: 1 hereby is Gods Kingdom enlarged: 2 Satan's demolished:
3 our consummate blessedness hastened.

Necessity: 1 opposites many to proceedings of Truth; as James and Iambres to
Moses. 2 Persecutions of all sorts, from all sorts of people raised. 3
Timorousness of Predicants occasioned thereby. 4 Reproach of the word. 5 Ill
lives of those that preach and profess it. These, and the like impediments,
meets the Gospel withal; that were there not a divine virtue to break
through all, it had stopped in Sion, whence it first began course.

Faith once given to Saints: opposites else it has as many, as ever any age
afforded; witness the insurrections of multitudes, when once the 1 Cor. 16.9.
effectual door is set open; besides the swarms of Apoc 9.3.
Locusts afresh chirping amongst us: And, which without grief I mention not,
the many exorbitancies of men preaching, and professing the Truth. All these
exact our prayers for vnhindered passage.

You may add in your meditation, the miserable estate of many congregations in
this Kingdom, dispersed, shall I say? without a Shepherd; or famisht with the
Idol Shepherd. Amongst whom, besides confused notices and rumors of one
Jesus and his death, is scarce to be found any other knowledge of Jesus Christ
and him crucified. If any bowels be in us, they will yearne at their misery,
and Mat. 9 36.
pray God to send them Ier. 3.15.
Pastors after his own heart, to feed them with knowledge and understanding.

And there are of that John 10 16.
other fold, which our Savior speaks of, sheep, as I hope, many, whom the
Lord will bring home. Romans 11.25.
The fullness of the Gentiles is not yet come in. Nations many, to whom the
name of Jesus has not yet bin known: vainly, I think, we hope for Jews
restoring, till Indian Churches be collected; at least the Gospel preached
unto them for a Testimony against them: fallor? or does our nauseating of the
Gospel, the sower Grapes of our vintage, and the turbulent state of our
Christendom, pretend the translating of the Gospel from us to them? In that
presage of our depriuall, Lord grant our Repentance may make me a false
Prophet: Howbeit that to them also the door of faith may be opened, the
Gospel conveyed, the word of God run, should be a Christians prayer.

And be glorified: the second parcill of the petition on behalf of our
Ministry: the Glory of the word of God. I conceive, not so much what results
from holy lives of professors and predicants, though that may also be implied;
as the 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and 3.6.
mighty and powerful efficacy of it in bringing men to the obedience of faith.
Saint Luke somewhere calls it the potent Acts 19 20.
preualence of it. Saint Paul, the Col. 1.6.
fructifying of it in the hearts of the hearers. And so had it bin glorified
amongst this people, 1 These. 2.13. As if Paul meant to press upon our devotion,
to crave of God, not only the spreading of the knowledge of the Gospel, but
manifesting the power of it in the conversion of as many in every kingdom and
Nation as belong to his Election.

The name of the Lord is by nothing more Acts 19.18.
glorified then by the Salvation of his people. 2 Comfort and joy is multiplied
upon our souls in the report or beholding, if yet there be grace in us. 3 The
blessed end of this miserable world wherewith is coniunct the consummation of
our happiness, to which also we profess to hasten, is hereby furthered.

Isai 49.4.
fruitful: 2 yet who doubts but a 2 Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor unto God: 3 And there is often a secret unseen Romans 11.4, 5.
remnant, a Isai 6.13.
Tenth unknown which returns: 4 Times and seasons of blessing God keeps in
his own power. But see if the default rest not on other people; that they are
defective in their duty, to aid Ministers with their prayers for blessing and
success of their gracious endeavors.

2 Else by their unreformed lives working greater alienation of minds from the
Gospel, in men already estranged from the life of God. Certainly I have long
observed such censors, though seemingly transported with the zeal of Elias,
yet none of the greatest ornaments to the Gospel. There is a way for you to
glorify the glorious Gospel: 1 1 Pet. 2.12.
Live as it prescribes, and you profess: 2 pray God to prosper it in our
mouths; you may see it glorious in the salvation of those misdeemed forlorn
souls, when once the day of Gods gracious visitation comes.

As it is amongst you. The exemplification of that glorious power of the
Gospel in themselves he minds them of; whither to make hopeful of obtaining
like blessing from God on others, though presently aliens, from their own
experience? Certainly to such end he elsewhere minds Gods people of the
strange Tit. 3.3, 4.5.
change Gods grace has wrought in them: or not rather to form their affection
to such piety, as to desire other men's sharing with them in the saving power
and benefits of the Gospel? Grace may be emulous, is not envious, Easily,
willingly, fainely beteemes another, any other, all others share with it in the
common salvation. Ambrose.
Its after a sort naturallized in every good man, to desire consorts, as many
as may be, in goodness. Moses to Ioshuah. Enuiest thou for my sake? Now Numb.
11.29.
would God all the Lords people were Prophets. Paul, Acts 26.29.
I could wish that not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both
almost and altogether as I am in Christianity: elsewhere, that 1 Cor. 7.7.
all men were as I in my peculiar privileges.

According see gracious endeavors of Gods Saints. David, oh Psalm. 34.8.
taste and see how gracious the Lord is: Psa. 66.16.
Come ye children hearken to me, I le tell you what the Lord has done for my
soul. Who doubts? but minding to draw them to experiment like bounty. Compare
Act. 11.20, 21. etc. Ioh. 1.42, 45. as if in the new birth after their opinion,
the proverb held; Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter: see Zech. 8
21. Isai 2.3.

2 Cor. 1.22.
earnest of our inheritance, as their more: 2 their more, is 1 Cor. 12.7.
ours in the use and benefit. 3 Not much Grace, but much Mat. 25.23, 26.
use of Grace in doing service to God and our brethren, is that which augments
our reward. 4 And where is that 1 Cor. 12.26.
sympathy of members, rejoicing when any one is had in honor? while I have
place amongst the Sheep at the right hand of the Judge; why do I envy to
Apostles their Thrones of more eminence?

VERSE. 2. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable, and evil men, etc.


THe second material part of the prescript concerning our persons: wherein is
1 the blessing to be prayed for; deliverance from, etc. 2 The reason of
prescribing. For all men have not Faith.

And that we, etc. To our persons then, and not to our calling only, belong
the loving and reverent regards of our people. So is the change every where; 1
These. 5.13.
Have them in singular love: see also 1 Cor. 16.10. The ground of such
reverence and love, are our gifts and calling: howbeit the function interesseth
the person, and entituleth it to all due respects from the people: see 1 Cor.
4.1. and 2 Cor. 5.20.

Thomas or Scot; more then metaphysicall in abstractions. Our gifts and calling
men contemplate as Platoei Ideas; them forsooth they reverence; our persons yet
so contemptible, as scarce worthy to be set with the dogs of their flock. 1
Not so Cornelius, nor Lydia, nor Jailer, nor Aquila and Priscilla, nor any that
have felt want, or tasted power and comfort of our ministry. In such men's
eyes, Romans 10.15.
our feet are beautiful. 2 As to the want of that experience, so to the
infirmity of our persons, may such contempt be imputed: wherein yet Gods
wisdom is obseruable; therefore putting the 2 Cor. 4.7.
treasures in earthen vessels, that the power might be known to be of God. Not
many mighty, nor many Noble, according to the flesh, are vouchsafed this high
calling, to be Gods Instruments and coworkmen to the salvation of his people: 1
God would so prove the obedience of his people: 2 bring down the high looks
of the proud: 3 solace and recompense our outward abasures.

And yet they say, Daniel was son of Nobles, Isaias of the blood royal,
Melchisedecke King of Salem, the son of God, high Priest of our Profession. And
amongst us some of generous, of noble descent, who have learned of David, to
count it more honor to be doore-keepers in Gods house, then to reign in the
Tents of ungodliness; and highlier esteem the reproach of Priesthood, then
all the treasures of Egypt. Amongst earthwormes only holds the rule, Dat
census honores.

The blessing to be prayed for; deliverance from unreasonable and evil men.
Those, some interpret the unbelieving among Jews, as they are in like case
specified by the Apostle, Romans 15.31. (...), those are to them after the
Grammar Etymon, men of no settled abode; vagring or vagabund Jews: story
accords, how every where they pursued the Apostle, and wrought him no small
danger. But what lets to extend it also to false brethren, professing
Christianity? Cer^es the Apostle mentions his perils created by them, as well
as from his own Countrymen, 2 Cor. 11.26. Enemies no doubt, as absurd, and
troublesome as any Iudaea afforded: so much the more dangerous, by how much the
more domestique, and intimous to the household of faith.

Deliverance he means, from their malice and treachery: But, if this were the
lot of Apostles and Evangelists to be pestered, and perilled from such, what
strange thing is it if betide us. Our Savior foretold it as the common lot of
all Ministers. Prophets and men of God in all times, experimented it. Jeremy
somewhere Iac. 15.10.
bewailes it; somewhere and 18.20 21.
plaints of it, not without imprecation upon the Authors. Ezechiel dwells among
Ezech. 2.6.
briars and thorns amids Lions and Scorpions: see 2 Timothy 2.

Reasons are some, common to us with other Christians: 1 the Genesis 3.15.
enemitie unreconcilable betwixt the two seeds; exasperated by the Se^pent to
rage, against Ministers. 2 We 1 Pet. 4. Ier. 15.19.
run not with them to the same excess of Riot.

3 There is in our Ministry something that exasperates: 1 Mat. 6.17, 18.
open and plain rebuke: 2 denunciation of judgment against exorbitants. But
holds it in Ecclesia constituta, where orthodox faith is professed: where
Magistrates are nursing fathers of the Church? Resp. 1. Not there as
legitimated or countenanced. Yet 2 there also, as in Abraham's family, which
Paul makes Gal. 4.29.
measure of our state to the end of the world. 1 Romans 9.6.
All are not Israel, that are of Israel. 2 And in Churches most reformed are
found of this rank of absurd and lewd men; some almost of Elimas his pitch,
Acts 13.10
Enemies to all goodness.

1 These. 3.3.
moved with afflictions of Ministers, so as to question either truth of their
doctrine, or warrantablenesse of calling, or sincerity of their hearts, nor so
much as imprudence or indiscretion in their carriage, as from this ground: you
know or may know 1 We are thereunto ordained. 2 That it has bin lot of most
faithful and wisest of Prophets and Apostles: 3 Causes also you see evident,
corrupt hearts of hearers.

Mat. 5.12.
sorted to Apostles and Prophets, conformed to the Image of our Savior, the
Great Shepherd of the Sheep.

Mat. 10.16. 2 Timothy 4.15.
prudence and circumspection in all our deportments. Prudence, I mean not
surceasing seasonable performance of duty, which cost Jeremy so Ier. 20.9.
much unrest: but 1 cautionatenesse, of laying open our selves to just quarrels
of the contentions: 2 of Mat. 7.6.
casting our pearls to swine: 3 of John 2.24.
committing our selves to ouerinward familiarity of such as have not approved
themselves faithful.

The quality of men thus maliciously bent against Ministers, especially
deserves our notice: (...).

(...): Absurd fellows, compact of mere incongruities; solecising continually
in opinion, speech, action, whole life. Our English renders unreasonable;
whither they mean them, men whom no reason will satisfy; or as Peter and Jude
describes them, mere sensualists, bruits, led with humor or sense against all
reason; 2 Pet 2.12.
speaking evil, says Peter, of things they understand not: as Jude, what they
Iud ver. 10.
know naturally, therein corrupting themselves. Saint Paul somewhere says of
them they are 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
(...); and imputes to them no less then frantic demency: Such usually are
the opposites of soundest Ministers. Jeremy heavily bemones himself of such
Adversaries; himself a man that had no dealings with any Ier. 15.10.
yet cursed of every one. The siluer-Smith at Ephesus made a head of such good
fellows; voicing it as strongly as their Captain against the Apostle, yet,
for the more part, Acts 19.32.
not knowing why they were come together. A great Politician was he amongst
this absurd Crew, who could say, this Acts 28.22.
way is every where spoken against. Wiser Reasons of opposing can few give,
that make insurrection against their Ministers.

Their second style is (...); we may interpret after the Grammar Etymon; men
desirous of trouble, procuring it to others, of iangling disposition; whose
life is, as of Salamanders, in the fire of contention; perhaps led with that
rule, Neuters are worst men in contentions, they love to be in the brawle; but
by their good will always siding to the worser part.

Or whither, after common use of the word, we understand them men of vicious
life, notorious lewdness, such you shall find usually adversaries to the
ministry. In long observation, I have fearce noted any, if but of civil
deportment, that willingly would be seen in such quar^els. Indeed we read of
certain Act. 13.50.
devout women stirred up against Paul; but, who doubts? that devotion was mere
superstition.

Paul's Canon was, Let no accusation be received against a Presbyter, under 1 Timothy 5.19.
two or three witnesses; and those he means Legates. Another runs thus;
Schismatici non sunt audiendi contra Episcopos. And why, I wonder, (...) and
(...), every absurd and lewd companion against a grave Minister? Dispoream, if
upon examination, they be found other, that quarrel at Clasicall Preachers.
Lord, that the Sages of our Church would seriously think of it; our steeresmen
pity their poor brethren, who climb the Masts, and draw the poope; bear
burden and heat of the day: how should they do their duty with joy, and the
people be framed to conform in Religion?

Paul, if Gods Spirit can judge, you are but absurd fools, lewd miscreants,
whosoever maliciously oppose to your Ministers, or seek to entangle them in
the snare.

For all men have not faith. The Reason of prescribing this petition on behalf
of their persons, q.d. And marvel not we desire your prayer for deliverance;
for all have not faith, to restrain them from maligning the Doctrine, and
Teachers of faith.

Faith; means he the moral virtue, fidelity: That Mat. 23.23.
acception of the word is not infrequent in Scripture; and thither bends the
Antithesis, But God is faithful. Rather, since the stream runs that way, the
virtue Theological; yet withal, suppose the other implied, q. d. All are not
faithfully or indeed that which they pretend, and show for in faith. For that
he would be understood of men in the Church professing faith, I make no
question. 1 Idle had it bin in the Apostle to mind this people of Pagans and
such like, that they wanted faith; selfely they knew it: 2 Nor could their
fear and discomfort, which in the Anti^hesis he anticipates, arise from any
other, then children of the Church professing to believe,

Infidelity is not all amongst Pagans: faithlesnesse is as much in the
children of the Church: in many professing to believe; many John 2.23.24, 25.
believed in the name of Christ when they saw his Miracles; yet did not our
Savior commit himself unto them. Durst not our Savior betrust himself with
believers? A thousand lives he might have put into their hands, had they
indeed believed in him. But he, who saw what was in them, discovered
infidelity lurking under the vizar of professed faith.

Want of imperate Acts of faith evidence it: thus number them: 1 Act. 15.9.
purity of heart and life: 2 Gal 5.6.
love of God, his ordinances and children: 3 Devotion. 4 2 Cor. 4.13.
Confession. 5 Iam. 2.14, 15, etc.
Works of Charity and Mercy* etc. where these are not, be bold to say there
is no truth of faith, be vaunts never so confident of Abraham's (...). Saint
Augustine wrote comfortably de perseuerantia sanctorum; de Apostasia sanctorum.
Stuffed with Examples, of many supposed to have revolted from faith. But it
would be enquired, whither these who 1 John 2.29.
went out from us, were ever truly of us. whither these, who revolted from
faith, had ever any more then the show of faith: in Scripture men bear names
of what they show, and are not. Quest. Then what loose they? Resp. That which
they seemed to have: the show of faith, piety, Luke 8.18.
sanctity, they carried in the Church. I say not all Scriptures, or instances
may thus be explaned: yet doubtless many.

Acts 17.28. and
being, living, moving, for sense and reason, for 14.17.
food and raiment, for rain and fruitful seasons, I cannot but bless God,
and admire his goodness. Lord Psalm. 8.4.
what is man that thou art so mindful of him? yet these are common to me with
heathen, many with Bruits. For means of salvation, and 1 John 5.20.
mind to know him, my heart is more enlarged to praise his mercy; yet these
are common to me with hypocrites in the Church. But that he has blessed the
means to my soul, to work true faith, and repentance unfeigned, now thanks
be to God for his unspeakable gift: who can express the noble acts of the
Lord, or show forth all his doings? once I know 1 my merits no more then
others; my demerits, happily, as great as others. 2 The same means of faith
vouchsafed to the faithful, but blessed unto me to make me faithful. 3
Impediments in me and opposites to faith, as strong as in another: 1
blessedness of mind, to conceive the mysteries of his kingdom: 2 pride of
reason, scorning to subscribe to anies Ipse dixit, to rest on naked authority,
bare testimony of God himself; expecting argument and demonstration to
evidence conclusions Theological, yea articles of faith. But blessed be God,
who has subdued these high thoughts to the obedience of Christ; when thousands
of others are shut up under unbelief.

For all men have not faith. Perhaps Paul meant to point them to the fountain
of this lewdness and absurdity, in procuring the unjust vexation of himself
and his Associates; that is, want of faith; The source as of most sins, so
chiefly, of persecuting the Ministry: had they faith, but as the grain of
Mustard Seed, they could never grow so lewd or absurd to molest the instruments
of their believing. Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. Did men believe? had they ever 1 Pet. 2.3.
tasted how gracious the Lord is, they would never vex the Ministers of God 1
Cor. 3.5.
by whom they believe. Rather Romans 6.4.
lay down their own necks for their safety and preservation.

Faithless, Infidels, and no better they shall ever be to me, whom I see
maliciously bent against the persons of their faithful Pastors.

VERSE. 3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you and keep you from
evil.


THE words seem intended to prevent the fear might arise in this people, from
meditating their own danger in the Apostles; as also the intermingling of
false brethren, faithless believers with the Churches of God. Though that be
true, you as I, may justly expect vexations and perils from such; yet be not
dismayed: God is faithful, who will stablish you, and keep you from evil.

In which comfortable speech of the Apostle, two things to be observed. 1 The
Blessings, as arguments of comfort, propounded. 2 Next the ground of the
blessings; Gods fidelity.

The blessings two, both acts of the Lord toward his children. 1 Stablishment;
that understand their firm settling in gracious goodness, so as immovably to
persist therein without defection: compare 1 Cor. 1.8. Act. 11.23. Ephesians. 3.16,
17. and that excellent parabolicall expression of it, Mat. 7.25.

2 Cautelously understand it: 1 Shakings and wauerings in the very purpose may
befall us by violent blasts of temptations, Psalm. 73.2, 13.

2 Intermissions of the exercise of grace may betide us: yet semen manet, 1
John 3.9.

3 Particular falls we are not exempted from; not Peter himself, a rock for
firmness, yet from prolapsion, whole falling away, 1 John 5.18.

3 Thus its conveyed: 1 Comforts are proportioned to the measure of
Afflictions, 2 Cor. 1.5. Romans 5.5. 2 The sweetness tasted in gracious courses
glues us fast to goodness. 3 And the Lord adds continually to the graduall
quantity of our gifts, Mal. 1.6.

4 Persons to whom the blessing belongs, you shall observe thus qualified: 1
None more Pro. 28.14.
timorous of their own infirmity: 2 nor more watchful against occasions of
reuolting: 3 nor more 1 John 5.18.
careful to use sanctified means of confirmation.

Preservation from evil. Quest. of pain? or fault? Resp. (...), sometimes
denotes evil of penalty, as well as of sin; (...), never but evil of fault:
whither he means masculinely that evil one, the devil, as 1 John 5.18 Ephesians
6.16. Mat. 13.28. or rather evil work, as 2 Timothy 4 18. is no matter of
curious inquiry: this latter I rather think. Nor need we anxiously dispute,
whither from the wickedness of others, that is the mischievous plots devised
by their malignity to ensnare us; or from our personal wickedness: though
hereto I rather incline; see Genesis 20.6. q.d. The Lord shall so put his fear
into your hearts that you shall never depart from him, Ier. 32.40.

Resp. Not so, Gal 6.1. Luc. 22.32. yet not led into temptation. 2. That in no
particular we shall sin? Resp. Nor that, Iam. 4.1. Eccl. 7.22. but that we
shall not sin unto death, 1 John 5.18. The evil ne touches us not tactu
qualitatiuo: so as to alter us from our gracious disposition and propension to
goodness. Caietan.

Cor. 10.13.

2 We Apoc. 3.10.
taken from the temptation, as Henoch, least the malice of the times should
change his mind.

3 Power given sufficient to support and overcome, where tempted, 2 Cor. 12.9.
data resistendi virtute.

4 Sanctity of affection is given, and abhorrence from admitting thought of
foul sins; sanitate affectionis.

5 Occasion and opportunity withholden, Occasionis subtractione.
where temptation has prevailed to procure consent and purpose. Legantur
suauissimae Bernardi elegantiae de triplici misericordia and quatuor
miserationibus. Item de fragmentis Septem misericordiarum, Sermon. 3.

6 And where we sall, the Lord raises that we perish not: 1 either our own 2 Samuel 24.10.
heart smites us: 2 or some outward Psa. 119.67.71
affliction reclaimes us: 3 or some 2 Samuel 12.
Nathan sent to rowze us.

1 John 5.18.
keep themselves, using all holy means of preservation: Psalm. 19.13.
prayer, 1 Cor. 9.27.
humiliation, etc. 2 Are watchful, none more, against occasions. 3 Specially
against their own sin, that whereto they are by nature or ill custom most
inclinable, Psalm. 18.23. And of the blessings themselves, and particulars
belonging to explication of their nature, thus far.

The ground and foundation of them, showing certainty of their performance to
us, is Gods fidelity. That understand the Lords constancy and truth in
performing his promise and covenant. As if our establishment in grace and
preservation from damning sins, were among the blessings conuaied in the
Covenant of grace. Nothing is more plain. See 1 Cor 1.8, 9. 1 These. 5.23, 24.
Ier. 32.40. 1 Ioh. 5.18. John 17.15.

Amongst the Heb. 8.6.
better promises whereupon the new Covenant whereof Christ is mediator, is
established, you may number these eminent. 1 Remission of sins. 2 Ezech 36.27.
Enabling in acceptable manner to perform our restipulation: 3 Ier. 32.40.
Confirmation therein: 4 Mat. 16.18.
Restraining the powers of Hell from effecting our overthrow. 5 Gods own Pet.
1.5.
safe guarding us to the possession of the purchased inheritance, etc.

That me thinks, amongst the many impertinent questions raised in this curious
age, none is more idely moved, then that of Saints perseverance. Doubtest thou,
whither God called according to his purpose shall persist in their gracious
estate? Turn Atheist, and make quaere too whether God be faithful who has
promised; or of his power, whither he be able to do it. But Controversies I
meddle no more with, they are too tyresome: I could else mind you of their
incongruous explications, and absurd euasions: as that they suppose vessels of
wrath for the time justified and sanctified: when yet Paul makes these graces
peculiar to the predestinate, and as several to them, as glorification, Romans
8.30. 2 Next, that they distinguish total, and final relapsing in the
question referred to the elect; into whom they imagine whole loss of these
favors may fall for the time, as when sin mortal feizeth them; yet the
loss to be in such recouerable, that so the purpose according to election may
stand. When yet by Paul's rule whosoever falls totally, falls finally, and its
impossible he should be renewed to repentance, Heb. 6 4, 6. see 1 John 5.18.

his promise and oath, Heb. 6.18.
those two immutable things, wherein its impossible for God to lie: 2 Nor can
we be ignorant, how Ephesians. 3.20.
able he is to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask and think:
that he John 10.29.
is stronger then all who has given us to Christ; that we 1 Pett. 5.
are guarded by that Almighty power through faith to salvation.

For sin and shame, why, are we faithless? Are they mighty that oppose?
Resp. Yet the Lord above is mightier: Greater is he that is in us, then he that
is in the world, 1 John 4.4. John 10.29. 1 Pet. 1.5.

Are temptations violent? Res. Yet 2 Pet. 2.9.
knows God how to deliver: has promised support, 2 Cor. 12.9. and 1 Cor.
10.13. And in those that have yet befalne us, we have experimented it: Is the
Lords hand shortened?

Strength small? Resp. The greater shall be the glory of our supporter. 2 Cor.
12.9. Its all one to the Lord to help with much or with no power, 2 Chr.
14.11. the little strength we have, God shall make victorious, Apoc. 3.8.

Obedience interrupted? Resp. Blame thine own inuigilancy: churl not at him,
who by permitting to fears and iealousies, chastens it: yet cast not away thy
confidence, Psalm. 4.10. August. ad Romans 8.28.
Care shall spring afresh; thou shall rise more vigilant, circumspect, zealous
to make amends for former aberrations: the joint where its broken, when well
set, grows stronger: see also 1 John 2.2.

Decaies in measure of fervor? Resp. Bewail it, and hereafter shun the
occasions. But there is who heales such breaches, and has ordained wherewith
to Ephesians. 4.12.
repair them: when pride, and contempt of weaker brethren, and presumptuous
confidence are chastened, and humility again succeeds, the Lord shall restore
thy measures as at the first; cause thee to do thy first works, and make them
more at the last then aforetimes.

Small feelings of favor? Resp. Walk we by sense? why not rather 2 Cor. 5.7.
by faith? as Psalm. 22.1.
Christ, and David his type, against sense holding the conclusion, God is their
God: who but believes what he feels? Its the speech and proof of glorious
faith, Though he kill me, yet I Will trust in him, Job 13.15.

That nothing might be wanting to our comfort, in holding fast the hope that is
set before us, God has couenanted not only for the blessings, but for the
conditions that concern us; to cause us to walk in his statutes, to support,
to restore, to pardon, without all nay from Satan and our own weakness, to set
us in possession of the purchased inheritance.

The Lord is faithful. But Atheists none deliberately question it. Its his
perpetual style: the faithful God which keeps covenant, and mercy, Deuteronomy.
7.9. Dan. 9 4. Not a word goes out of his mouth but exactly is performed: see
Ios. 21.45. and 23.14. 2 Chro. 6.14, 15. 2 Kin. 10.10. Circumstances exactly
kept: compare Genesis 15.13. and Exo. 12.41. As his mercy extends not to good
only but to the froward, so often his faithfulness to them that deal
perfidiously in the covenant: see Romans 3.3, 4. moral virtues of men are all in
God eminentor: our faithfulness, and other virtue, what are they but rays of
that Sun? Explication we need here rather then proof.

2 Pet. 3.4.
Whence is the promise of his coming? Resp. Pieuisn Atheist: I must he needs
acquaint thee with the Acts 1.7.
times? in an hour thou Luke 12.46.
think not of, he shall come to take venge^nce of such Scoffers. 2 And where
is thy Reason? vanished, I suppose, with thy Religion. Else thou would see the
inference absurd: he yet comes not, therefore will never come.

Where the performance of those promises of 1 Timothy 4.8.
this life, and that to come made unto godliness? Resp. Take them with their
intended modus, exactly they are performed. 1 Temporalties not promised
absolutely, but with limitation to expediency; with Mar. 10.30.
exception of the Cross, and reservation of power to the promiser to Psalm.
89.31, 32.
chasten delinquencies of his children: 2 performance not intended always
after the letter, but in the equivalent: disiunctiuely understand those
promises, either the particulars, or something Mar. 10.30.
better; if not peace, yet patience; if not wealth, yet contentment: so God
breaks not promise, but changes in melius: see supra.

Romans 4.18, 19. and 12.
Abraham, whose children we are, while we walk in his steps: the eye of faith
sees farther then the means; in spite of cross means, holds firm
expectation of the promise.

There are four degrees of Confidence: 1 where are means competent and
sufficient: 2 where means weak, and in eye of reason disproportioned to the
effect. 3 Where are no means. 4 Where means are opposite, and strongly
repugnant to the promise. Give me that faith that rests on naked promise of
God; and thinks it potent to break thorough all impediments.

Next in prudence weight, 1 the promiser has reserved in his own power times
and seasons: 2 choice of means: 3 chooses often unlikeliest means: 4 performs
sometimes without means: 5 sometimes by means extraordinary: 6 and whiles
against means.

faithful and true God ownes, not perfidious children.

Man's fidelity has a twofold relation: 1 to God. Not only God binds himself
to us, by promise becoming our debtor; but we to God have couenanted, vowed
obedience. Lord how ready are we, failing of what we seek, to charge God
foolishly? when either 1 we mistook the quality or manner of the promise: 2
else, a thousand to one failed in our restipulation.

2 To man; and binds Psalm. 15 4.
with loss to support credit of fidelity. Oh tell it not in Gath that our
Christians are as Ieremies Jews: Ier. 9 4, 5.
Every brother will supplant; every man deceive his neighbor: when shall that
golden age return, that the Argument may again proceed? Sacerdos est; non
fallet: Christianus est; non mentietur.

VERSE. 4. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, if you both do,
and will do the things which we command you.


THE second evidence of Paul's love, confident persuasion of their constant
obedience: for its charity that thinks not evil; belieues all good things of
him it embraces: yet withal, conceive the words have connection with the
former: this, as I apprehend; they specify reason of Paul's applying former
comfort unto them: their due qualification: what that is, if you ask; Its
their obedience to their Pastors commanding according to God.

So that in the words are two things obseruable: 1 due qualification is
required in all them to whom these privileges of Gods favor belong. The rule
of the Law here also holds; priuilegium transit cum persona: wherefore in your
reading observe with mention of these blessed privileges usually connexed
either 1 limitation, 2 Timothy 2. or 2 condition, Acts 2.38, 39. 3 or description
of persons capable, Gal. 6.4 or exclusion of others, Apoc. 21.7, 8.

Dolosas versatur in generalibus: We I know not how sophisticate, and gull our
selves with only supposed universalities. Christ died for all: propitiats for
the sins of the 1 John 2.3.
whole world. I am persuaded that death it self saues not so many in the
Church, as the mistake of the sentence occasionally damnes. For all, think
you, without exception?

What for unbelievers and impenitents? if you would heed it, you shall find
many sometimes denotes all; and all only Rom 5.19.
many. And the world for whose sins Christ propitiated, is not the world that
lies in wickedness, but mundus credentium, the world of believers, as Saint
Austin long since interpreted. Christ is Author of salvation to them Heb. 5.9.
that obey him; gave himself a price of Redemption for many: even so many
only as believe in his Name, John 1.12.

2 The special qualification here insisted on, is doing, constant doing of
what is commanded, whither immediately or mediately God: if that trouble any,
that Paul after blames them for not observing his ordinance, and thence grow
doubtful how he professes persuasion of their present and future obedience:
Thus he may satisfy himself.

1 Howsoever there were some amongst them, if not refractarie, yet neglecting;
yet the many or more part heedfully observed the Apostles iniunction: 2 or,
though in some particulars they were blameworthy for inobedience, yet in the
maine they were universally regardfull of what was enjoined. 3 Or, though their
present doing was in particulars defective, yet confident he was for the
future, upon new admonition, they would supply what was yet wanting.

But obedience he points us unto as the necessary qualification of them, who
shall partake the promises: see Mat. 7.24. Iam. 1.25. Heb. 5.9. The Nature of
it thus conceive. Its 1 doing what is commanded: 2 therefore because it is
commanded; or as some specify, intuita preceptus: or as Saint Peter's phrase
is, for 1 Pet 2.19.
conscience of God. To which if you add that its universal in all things
commanded. 2 And constant, if not without interruption, yet without whole
giving over, or surceasing the course; ye have what characterizeth you 1 Pet.
1.14.
to adoption, and euidenceth your interest to the privileges of Gods people.

Deuteronomie 5.29.

What a face of religion and devotion put they on in Ezechiel? They sit before
thee Ezech. 33.31.
even as my people, so complementing with the Lord and his Church. Faces, only
these are in piety.

2 Go thou near and hear all that the Lord our God Deuteronomy. 5.27.28.
shall say, and speak then unto us, whatsoever the Lord shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it. They have well said, all that they
have spoken. But o that there were such a heart. Deuteronomy. 5.27.29. Voices these
are, as Nightingales, praeterea nihil.

3 To, thou art unto them, as one that has a very lovely song, of one that
Ezech. 33.32.
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument. So tickles it the
ears in the hearing, yet vanishes all with the sound. Asses, to think ares
only make a Christian. See Iam. 1. Romans 2.

4 The earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the sea. Lord, that our obedience were in any proportion answerable; how should
the Lord delight in doing us good. But were our braine-pan as large, as the
long bil^-birds, and fraught with profoundest knowledge, what should all avail
us, without obedience, except to aggrauate our condemnation? John. 13.17. 1
John 2.3. John 9. Iam. 4. vlt. Priuilegia they say are paucorum; if obedieuce
be the qualification, these blessed privileges belong not to many, no not
children of the Church.

Especially, if ye shall notice, how even this qualification is further
qualified. Three particulars, you may therein note: 1 That its presumed to be
perpetuated, for the future. See Romans 2.7. Gal. 4.18. and 6.9.

Yet 1 pardon we must pray all for interruptions in our course; its well if
we can say as Paul, velle adiacet. Romans 7.18. And if with full purpose of
heart, we cleave unto God, Acts 11.23. endeavoring in all things, at all
times, to keep a good conscience. Acts 24.16. Heb. 13.18.

2 Slakings there befall us sometimes of firmness in the purpose, and
languishings in the endeavor. There was a man dear unto God, a man after his
own heart; that had almost changed his resolution. Psalm. 73.2. Yet almost was
between. But a man deliberately, and wholly failing in his purpose, and
endeauour^ of constant obedience; I find not one amongst the many thousands of
Israelites indeed.

Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah, how shall I entreat thee? For
your Hos. 6.4.
goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew so goes it away. Atque
vtinam ne in memore pelio, Gal. 5.7.
ye did run well: for a while ye seemed to rejoice in the light, who has let
you still to obey the truth; this is not the persuasion of him that called
you: but I spare you.

Into four ranks, we may range all the children of the Church. 1 Some that
neither do, nor will do: See Ier. 6.16. and 18.12. Their speech is not more
desperate, then their state. 2 There are, who say they will do, but do not,
procrastinatores. And yet (...) the present moment is only ours, to be
reputed the only season of salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2. Hebr. 3.13. 3 Some that do,
but will not, (...). Matthew. 13.21. they loose what they have wrought: 2 John.
8. And better they had never known, or set foot in the way of righteousness.
2 Peter 2.21. 4 Hope for salvation is of them only, who do, and will do.
Romans ^.7.

I say as our Savior, remember Lots wise. Luke 17.32. 1 If ever ye 1 Pet. 2.3.
have tasted how gracious the Lord is, that sweetness ruminated will animate
to perseverance. 2 Succor thine own weakness, with meditation of the Heb
12.2.
reward. 3 Dull languishing of flesh, rouse with that affright of the Apostles.
Heb. 10.26. 2 Peter 2.20, 21. 4 And thus think also, why shall I loose, what I
have wrought? Eze. 3.20. Gal. 3.4. 2 John 8.

2 As its perpetuated to all time, so enlarged to all injunctions; quae is here
equivalent to quemque. The vow of Israel, Exodus 19.8. well pleased the Lord:
Deuteronomy. 5.28. but oh that there were such a heart. It must be, if ever we think
to enjoy our God, to share in these privileges of his people. See Psalm. 119.6.
James 2.10. Matthew. 5.19. Luke 1.6.

As Naaman, so must Christians; 2 King 5.18.
Lord be merciful unto me in this, our obedience is crossed what with
reservation. Mar. 6.20.
Herod in many things obeyes the Baptist, but must be borne with for Herodias.
The refuse of the cattle, the rascal people Saul destroys, but 1 Samuel
15.9.21, 20.
the best and fatlings, are reserved for Sacrifice. Hypocrite; for meant he,
trow you, to sacrifice Agag? Mutato nomine de te narratur, not tabula, but
historia. We also have our fatlings of sins; our fatlings from disobedience.
Herein the Lord must be merciful unto us: we resolve to be cruel to our
selves; forgetting the wise man's counsel, Miserere animae tuae bonum faciens.
These rules let us remember.

1 On pain of damnation, the charge lies on us to stretch our obedience, as
far as our knowledge. John 13.17. Luke 12.47. In some particulars, latet quod
iustus est. Yet for such, Number. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 30.
ignorances were sacrifices offered; and David prays, Psalm. 19.12.
cleansing for secret sins: both intimate our sins of invincible ignorance
to be damnable in the merit; how much more think you our sins of knowledge.
Yet pardon may be hoped for ignorances; not so for habited, or customarie
sins of knowledge.

2 Willing ignorance, is quoad rectum, knowledge interpretatiue. What thou
may know to be duty, and wilt not, God interprets thee to know: the
omissions he will impute, and punish as omissions of knowledge. Wherein we
love to sin, therein we love also to be ignorant: loath are we to hear what
may convince; wrangling against apparent demonstrations, to hold our
conclusion. But blessed be the obedient ear, the humble and teachable spirit.

3 Which we command you, he means, I warrant you, Secundum Deum. But
intimates, that our obedience must be extended to the commands of Gods
Ministers, and not only to the Lords immediate impun^tions. Gods Romans 13.4.
Ministers understand after Paul's phrase; Maiestrates civil, and
Ecclesiastical, whom the Lord has invested in power of jurisdiction.

Their regular injunctions, you may observe to be in a threefold difference:
some that are so theirs, that they are first the Lords, in express terms
prescribed by him; as in those prohibitions of murder, adultery, theft,
prescripts of sanctifying the Sabath, etc. Of these says Paul, 1 Cor. 7.10.
Dominus, non ego. 2 Some, whose general principles, are immediately the Lords.
Yet determinations of particulars are from men, by apparent deductions from
those grounds: of these the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.12.
Ego non Dominus, and yet thinks he has therein Gods spirit to direct him:
The speech is remarkable. 1 Cor. 14.37. The Prophet and spiritual man, must
acknowledge the things which Paul. writes, to be the commandments of the Lord.
Moderately, you must understand, because congruent to the principles by him
delivered. 1 Else how should, I say not the spiritual man, but the Prophet,
know what the Lord immediately revealed to the Apostle? 2 Nor is it probable,
that what Paul speaks for matter of order, and decency in the assemblies, was
immediately, and expressly delivered him by speech, or revelation from the
Lord. For, why? When they have such apparent, and easy deduction from general
principles. Revelations are not multiplied unnecessarily: yet such Paul styles
the Commandments of the Lord. 3 A third sort, which occasion only, or
accident causes to be prescribed: deduction whereof from general principles,
save only in case of that occasion, or accident, the acutest shall not see. As
when Act. 15.20.
abstinence from blood, and strangled is enjoined, after abrogation of
Leuiticall Law. Who can show me ground of equity out of which; such abstinence
is directly deducible? Marry, inasmuch as the use grew accidentally scandalous,
necessary was the iniunction of abstinence: for its lex charitatis, to neglect
use of my Christian liberty, where is peril to offend my weak brother: like
must be thought of all prescripts of Maiestrates, for public good, for order
or decorum, whose acting is not repugnant to the Law of God, though perhaps we
see not that public good, nor order, nor decorum: yet lies the bond upon
conscience therein to submit our selves, as Peter's phrase is, 1 Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake, because he has commanded obedience to the Maiestrate.

as Zachary and Elizabeth Luke 1.6.
walk in all the immediate commandments, and ordinances of God without
reproof, yet to injunctions of Gods Ministers, are too too refractary. As to
ciuell ordinances for common good, so to Ecclesiastique ceremonies, in
themselves lawful, specially opposite: for where has God commanded them?

Resp. 1 And I ask, where has God forbidden them? 2 Has he not commanded in
things lawful to obey the Maiestrate? 3 They are Gods commandments, not only
which in so many words are prescribed, but what are from general grounds
deduced. 4 Yea occasion and accident makes indifferent things, otherwise
arbitrary, yet in that case Act 15.28.
necessary, especially where authority interposeth to inioyne. 5 And what if
we see not oratur, decorum, edification, public good in the observance? Are
they wanting therefore? Why are we curious? Are the things lawful in
themselves? There must our inquiry stay. So thought Iam. 25.18, 19.
Rechabites; whom for obedience so seemingly blind, the Lord commended and
blessed.

We are both to be, or to be deemed men vnqualified to partake Gods promises.
Its obedience that qualifies, obedience to not only what God immediately
prescribes, but to whatsoever his Ministers inioyne according to God. Will you
say? If Apostles? Resp. 1 Siluanus and Timothee were not Apostles. 2 And the
charge is extended to all whosoever has the oversight of us. Heb. 13.17.

VERSE. 5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ.


THe third testimony of Paul's love, his prayer to God for them: yet conceit
not here dissolatus scopus. Reference is of this prayer, as of former
testimonies, to the maine of their comfort. And as I conceive, points them to
the means of their establishment, and preservation, means then which none are
more potent: 1 Love of God. 2 Patience of Christ: which because they are out of
the compass of natures power, Paul prays to be given them.

In the prayer it self two things obseruable: 1 The general matter direction,
or setting straight their auerse and crooked hearts. 2 Whereto, if you ask; to
the 1 love of God, and 2 patience of Christ, means most available to their
establishment, and preservation.

The Lord direct your hearts to the love of God; 1 as if the heart of man in
nature, were auerse from the love of God; 2 and as if in the regenerate
remained some part of natural auersenesse from it.

De primo: Romans 1.30.
Haters of God, we read more then once in Scripture; perhaps conceiting it the
style of some extrauagants in nature. That may well be, in the measures and
notorious expressions; howbeit, presents us with what every man's nature
inclines unto.

It has been questioned, whither hatred of God the chief good, be possibly
incident into man's nature.

Resp. Nothing presented and apprehended under the notion, and reason of
goodness, can be hated; (...) the name of drawing all things to it, the
definition, to be what all men, all things desire. Howbeit, the chief good
apprehended as evil, may, under the fancied notion of evil, be hated; as the
greatest evil is loved, presenting it self under the notion of good.

The greater question is, whither nature afford not some love of God, nature, I
mean, fallen, vneleuated above it self, and unaltered by grace.

Resp. A question harder then at first sight it seems, and which has, as much
as many, vexed Schoolmen. For my part, I easily side with them, which hold,
that God is not, nor can be loved above all, neither intensiue, nor
appretiatiue, neither as Author of nature, nor as giver of supernatural
beatitude, without grace supernatural.

The reason is pregnant, because such measure of love to God, endures no
inordinate motion, or action against the Law of God. Which rectitude, if we
place in nature, we frustrate grace, and directly contradict the Apostle. Romans
8.7.

But whither there may not be in nature some motion, or affection of love to
God, a little other then concupiscentiall, is not so easily resolved.

Bernard thus specifies degrees of loving God by their several motives, or, as
they term them, formal reasons. 1 When we love God vt bonus sit nobis, that
he may do us good; this love is merely concupiscentiall, or as you may style
it, mercenary; the so lover intends his own benefit only, and more loves
himself then God. 2 When we love God quia bonus fuit, because he has done
us good, and heaped his benefits upon us, this issues from gratitude. 3 When we
love God quia bonus in se, contemplating the amiable excellences which dwell in
the Deity. May not some of these fall into nature?

1 There is a merit of love Act. 17.27 28. and 14.17, 18.
palpable by nature. 2 Nature may easily be wrought to confess debitum, a
debt, and obligation of loving.

3 There is, or may be wrought upon nature, knowledge of Gods not only
existence, but lovely attributes; Romans 1.20.
Power, Wisdom, justice, Mercy, Goodness, etc. Can a moral naturalist
feriously contemplating them, choose but be enamoured of them, and desire to
enjoy him whose essence, at least endowments, he apprehends so excellent?
querae. Or may not a man so loving God, be acknowledged to love him a little
more then concupiscentially?

4 Hope of God, and desire to enjoy him some report of some Heathens. Ens
entium miserere mei; If it were the speech of Aristotle dying, and his speech
directed, not to the creature, but to him, whom else where he confesses
superior to all transcendents, was much; and no small evidence of such love as
we enquire of.

Marry, if the question be of that dilation, or love of God, which they call
charitatiuam, whereby God is loved for himself above all, and our neighbor
for God, that's doubtless fructus spiritus, non naturae: the Gal 5.22. 2 Timothy
3.4.
fruit of the spirit, not of nature; its lover of pleasures more then of God.
And of charity so strictly taken, would the Apostle be understood.



2 But are remains of it in the regenerate? Resp. 1 Else Paul had never prayed
God, to continue more and more to rectify the hearts of this people thereto,
whom he so every where acknowledges eximious in grace. 2 These. 1.
2 And, witness the many 2 Cor. 10.5.
extrauagant thoughts desires, purposes, exorbitants attempts, and actions so
contrariant to the Law of God; some of the Romans 8.7.
wisdom of flesh remains in the most sanctified. 3 Besides our doubtings of
Gods love, 1 John 4.18.
fears to approach him; preferring our profits and pleasure; to his service
lothnesse to part Mat. 9.43.
with our right hands, and right eyes, our things less dear then then they,
though they cause us to offend; all these proclaim us fuller of self love,
then of love to our God.

4 And why should we fancy perfection of love, where is such 1 Cor. 13.9.
imperfection of knowledge and obedience? 5 Or think our hearts more perfectly
rectified in love, then in fear, hope, faith, or other virtue and holy
affection? Whose mixtures with their contraries, and fightings against them, we
daily experiment.

Bernards mind; charitatis affectualis initium quidam progressumque, etc.
Beginnings, and proceedings of affections charity, we receive in this life;
perfection and consummation therein, we maintain to be the privilege of the
life to come.

1 Pet. 5.9.
the Apostle makes ground of comfort. The same afflictions are accomplished in
your brethren, which are in the world. And why not, this same kind of solace?
The same imperfections are in your brethren, that are in the world; in all
Saints that ever have been, are, or shall be to the end of the world. Pro.
20.9.
Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am clean from my sin? From my
sin in all measures? Behold, we conflict all with doubtings, with distrust,
with despair, with secutitie: and, not, trow you, with self love? Its well
that we conflict, and maintain the combat, though with some foiles; its sign
we fight on Gods side, there is hope certain, we shall at last be
conquerours. I say as the Apostle, comfort your selves one another, even with
these things.

Ephesians. 3.17.
rooted and grounded in love, the rather for that its so available to
perseverance. Much water Cant. 8.7.
cannot quench love, Obser.
neither can the floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his
house for love, it would utterly be contemned. See Apoc. 12.11. Heb. 11.35.

Polycarpe urged by the Proconfull to spare his age, by blaspheming Christ;
these fourscore and six years have I served him, and he never hurt me in any
thing, how can I curse, or speak evil of my King, who has saved me.

1 Thus thou may kindle it; is there any eximious virtue that can draw thy
affection? Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, Goodness, etc. Behold them all
eminently, or rather essentially in God.

2 Thus inflame it: labor to Ephesians. 3.18, 19
comprehend with all Saints, the height, depth, breadth, and length of Gods
love in Christ. Circumstances of amplification, see at large. Romans 5.6, 7.
Iugatur Bernardus de diligendo deo.

3 Especially discern thine own sharing in Gods fatherly affection; there is
not nor can be any motion of love to God, till we feel his love shed abroad
in our hearts, by the holy Ghost given unto us. See 1 Ioh. 4.19. Gal. 2.20. 2
Cor. 5.14.

The second virtue prayed for, as available to perseverance, is patience of
Christ. Our English renders, patient waiting for Christ: whereof see Annotata
ad 1 These 1. vlt. Yet why not patience of Christ? as Apoc. 1.9. Either
obiectiue, because for Christ's sake: or exemplariter; or per excellentiam.

1 The nature of the virtue in general, thus conceive. Patience is the
contented endurance of penal, or painful evils.

1 The general, is tolerance, or endurance, the virtue being a branch of
fortitude. 2 The object rather painful, Hierome.
then sinful evils. Neminem volo patiemem esse in causa laesae fidei. Moses
the Number. 12.3.
mirror of meekness, knows Exodus 32.19, 26, 27.
no patience in Isreal's idolatry. 3 Contentedness makes up to the full, the
difference specificall. See Mic. 7.9.
Degrees of Christian patience, you may thus number. 1. Its something, when the
heart is silent, not suffering thoughts of murmuring, or repining at Gods hand
to arise, or harbor there. Psalm. 39.2. Job 1.

2 More, to discern, and acknowledge a goodness in our afflictions. Psalm
119.71.

3 Yet more, willingly to bear the punishment of our sin, or trial of our
grace. Mic. 7.9.

4 The highest degree, which Saint James seems to call the perfect work of
patience, is, to rejoice in tribulation. See Iam. 1.2, 4. Act. 5.41.

The veil it has to perseverance in goodness; Paul and our Savior points us
unto. Hebr. 10.36. and 12.1. Luke 8.15. and 21.19. And in all experience it
has been found true, most have stumbled at the cross, thorough defect of
this branch of fortitude.

1 What thorough love of ease; mostly we are of Issachars tribe. 2 What
thorough giving raines to fleshly reason, to prescribe unto providence, courses
of equity, Mal. 3.16. Psalm. 73.3 To which may be added, that we usually
measure goodness by sense; know no good, but what is good to nature. Psalm 4.6.
4 And that in afflictions, we transcend not state of this life, nor have
wisdom to consider, the goodness laid up in store for us against the world
to come. Psalm. 31.19. 2 Cor. 4.18. That, not without cause, Paul prays
increase of patience, as necessary to establishment.

Means to work and increase it. 1 What ever our crosses are, or may be.
Justly we are in them: how follows not the resolution? Willingly to bear
Gods chastisement, since we have so sinned against him. Mic. 7.9.

2 Comparison to this end is marvelous available.

1 Of our sufferings for Christ, with Heb. 12.2.
his suffering for us.

2 Of our momentany afflictions in this life, with the endless torments of
Hell deserved by our sins; from which by 1 Cor. 11.32.
these, as means, we are freed. 3 Of our suffering with our Romans 8.18.
glory that shall be revealed. 4 Of our selves under the Croffe, with men left
to perish in their sins, thorough lack of afflictions. See 2 Timothy 3.13. Hos.
4.14. Pro. 1.32. 5 Of our selves, with our selves; our selves afflicted, with
our selves at ease; how languishing in devotion? How ventrously exorbitant? How
secure, and forgetful of our God, does prosperity make us? See Psame 30.6.
and 119.67. 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, etc.

3 Consideration of what they evidence patiently borne.

1 Gods Heb. 12.6.7.
fatherly love and care of us. 2 His glorious 1 Pet 4.14.
spirits resting upon us. 3 Our John 15.19.
taking out of the world.

4 Meditation of their singular effects. 1 2 Cor 12.7.
Perverting sins. 2 Reducing from sin. 3 Psalm 119 67.
Mortifying it in our members. 4 Making known grace secret. 5 Hos. 5 15.
Quickening grace languishing. 6 Job 1. tot.
Justifying our sincerity. 7 2 Cor. 4.17.
Working our glory.

If that other rendering better please, the patient waiting for Christ, with
whose coming is coniunct the recompense of our labors, it also has its
avail to our establishment. See Iam. 5.7, 8. Hebr. 10, 36, 37.

Means to further it: meditate 1 the reward is gratuitous; Romans 11 35.
who has given him first? 2 Great and glorious, far above the Romans 8.18.
proportion of all our service or sufferings. 3 In measure, 1 Cor. 4.
such as may Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 1.22. Rom 14.17.
support, and solace us in our bitterest passions, in this life vouchsafed, in
our sanctification, peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost. 4 And the
Iam. 5.7.
Lord is at hand; Apoc. 22.12.
behold he comes quickly, and his reward is with him. The fullness indeed is
referued till the final consummation; howbeit, the soul of every Saint, this
short life ended, enters into the joy of their Master. Apoc. 14.13. 5 Ends also
of differring would be weighed: whereof see Heb. 11. vlt, Apoc. 6.11. 2 Pet.
3.9. And of Paul's preface to his tart and perempto^rie proceeding thus far.

Like holy Oratorie, I would feign commend to my brethren of the Ministry;
prudently to insinuate, and wind themselves into the good opinion of the
people, howsoever extrauagant: that, where the 1 Cor. 4.21.
rod must be used, rather then the spirit of meekness, yet they may perceive
our loving affection. Better, to the very relish of prudent delinquents, are
the Pro. 27.6.
stripes of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy. David prays for reproof,
yet would have it Psalm. 141.5.
friendly; then its precious oil, sovereign balsome in the fruit, and in his
wise esteem.

Esau, his body, in a Ministers mind? All rough riged, especially to brethren.
Its said indeed, Leuit. 19.17.
plain and open rebuke is an office of love: Yet wise men know, acts of love
may be so carried, as to become acts of hatred and extremest despite; as in
2 Samuel 16.7, 8.
Shimei to David. 1 There is a modus, as well as a matter, and that principally
forms the action. 2 Nor suffices it to pretend, or to exercise works of
love, except there be expressions of kind affection, in the manner of
carriage. Thus has been Paul's preface.

VERSE. 6. Now we command you, brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye which draw your selves, from every brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the tradition which he received of us.


THe maine material of the chapter follows. Spent it is in an implicit
reproof of error in manners; direct prescript of reformation. The faults to
be reformed are first the sleeping of Church discipline toward the
inordinate, ad verse 11. Secondly, inordinate walking in neglect of manuell
labor, notwithstanding, the canon stablished amongst them: ad verse 16.

De primo: For what concerns the Churches carriage toward the disorderly,
particulars obseruable in the prescript. Are 1 the matter, or the office and
duty, withdrawing or separation. 2 The form or manner of prescribing, with
peremptory command, and greatest gravity. We command in the Name, etc. 3 The
enforcement, v. 7. and sequentibus.

Now we command you brethren in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Reflect, if
you please upon 1 These. 5.14. Ye shall observe the Apostles cooler carriage
toward the delinquents; we exhort, or beseech you to admonish. Here
peremptorily, we command to withdraw. Reasons of difference probable, conceive
these: 1 To a friendy admonition, the propension is easy; punishment so hard,
as to separate from brethren, seems harsh. See 1 Cor. 5.

To that, the saftest exhortation inclines; to this, except vehemence, nothing
persuades a friendly censure.

As to the difference of censures, in respect of the delinquents. Thus think
reasons might be: 1 Our Saviors order in leuioribus delictis, is Mat. 18.15,
16.
first admonish; till contumacie be evident, proceed not to extremity. 2 And
perhaps tofore they were presumed to sin, but of supine neglect; after
admonition, rather of refractary contempt.

But in such order its seemly for Ecclesiastique censures to proceed.
Incongruous it seems to Bernard, vt ante Judea faciat, quam minetur; nedum
admoneat: specially in faults of lighter nature. Yet contumacie justly
exasperates, and prouokes to wholesome severity: It argues not violation
only, but contempt of authority, and comely order.

We command you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, by 1 Cor. 5.4.
authority of the Lord Christ, committed to us by him; as if Christ himself
commanded by us.

Clearly we have hence, that to Apostles, and other primitive Ministers of the
Church, was committed power of jurisdiction over the Church and people of God.
The power of the keys is committed Mat 16.19. John 20.23.
to Peter, and his fellow Apostles; authority to bind and loose, to remit and
punish, not only in the inner court, or the forum conscientiae; but in foro
externo, by a judicial kind of proceeding. Hence obedience prescribed to
people toward Ministers. Hebr. 13.17, etc.

Remains it still in the Church? Resp. Who doubts? When 1 commission is, for
substance, the same to succeeding Ministers. 2 And usefulness and necessity,
the same to all ages.

Trow you, where the civil Magistrate is Christian? Resp. Quieti^^? as under
Constantine, Theodosius, etc. See Zanchius in Isaium, as he is extant in
Miscellan part. 2.

Church power, they thus distinguish: 1 there is potestas Ministerij; their
authority Mat. 28.19.
to teach publicly, and administer Sacraments. 2 Potestas ordinis; 1 Timothy
5.22. Tit. 1.5.
to ordain Ministers, and make Laws for external government. 3 Potestas
(...), or censura, to 1 Timothy 5.10^.
administer censures less or greater, according to the quality of offenses.

These stirring questions was happily calmed, whither the people, either plebs,
or optimates, have to intermedle in the power of censure, or order, etc. I
willingly forbear. This only, so far as my little understanding in
Scripture was ever able to guide me, I could never find any whit more
committed to people in them, then in that other, of ministering Word and
Sacraments. Nor find I use of it in the Primitive Church, save only by way of
Indulgence.

dij minorum gentium; more by much, then from the now supreme Majesty on
earth, or ancient Emperors. The envy, superiors invested in power of
jurisdiction, are subject unto, from men but of mean rank amongst the people;
how gladly would they derive all power from them, to themselves? and utterly
banish, what they would seem to advance, Church censures out of the Church?
Yet hears it amongst many of them, a part of the Gospel, the Kingdom of
Christ, etc.

Its so belike, when its managed by the people; not when ministered by clearkes;
to whom yet alone our Savior committed power of the keys. These few
conclusions meditate: 1 Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is by our Savior
conferred upon Mat. 16.19. 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3.
his Ministers; the managing thereof, made several to them. Ergo.

2 Contempt of it, when its regularly used, is no other then contempt of Christ.

3 Mat. 18.18.
Ratification it has in the Court of Heaven, and woe to him that despises.

Withdraw your selves from every brother, etc. The duty enjoined, separatiua,
or sequestring themselves from society. 2 Of whom if you ask? Of every
brother walking disorderly. 3 Where is subioyned definition, or explication of
inordinate walking; not walking after the tradition, or ordinance by Apostle,
and his associates stablished in that Church.

De primo: What this separation, or withdrawing enjoined, is, is in a sort
amongst interpreters questioned. Amongst our Donations and Anabaptists, as
other things, bayard like, resolved to be from society in sumis.

Interpreters thus; would Paul be understood of excommunion?

Resp. Probably not, whither by Excommunication we mean, exclusion a sacris,
or giving up to Satan. 1 The phrase sorts not thereto; withdraw your selves; in
Excommunication its thus, put away from among you that wicked person, 1 Corinthians. 5.13. 2 And what then is that (...) verse 14. which he prescribes to
their disobedience, after new monition by this Epistle? Rather a priuato
consortio, which, though in large sense it may be styled Excommunication, for
that society with Gods children in private life, is part of the communion of
Saints; yet, in property of speech, is not so. See Caietane, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact ad locum.

Means he as donations thought, corporal separation from all society with
men aptly, evil supposing them tolerated in the Church of God? So our Brownist
brethren, as they would be styled, of the separation.

Resp. Sweetly, and to purpose Saint Cyprian de lapsis. Etsi videntur in
Ecclesiae esse zizania, non tamen impediri debet aut fides aut charitas nostra,
vt quoniam zizania esse in Ecclesia semper cernimus, ipsi de Ecclesia
recedamus. Nobis tantummodo laborandum est, vt frumentum esse possimus, vt cum
caeperit frumentum dominicis horreis condi, fructum pro opere nostro and labor
capiamus. See Saint Augustine especially against Parmenian, lib. 3. cap. 18.
and 3. cap. 3. Item contra cresconium. lib. 3. cap. 50. and 81. Item against
Parmenian. lib. 2. cap. 1. especially de verbis Domini sermon. 18.

Thus briefly conceive. 1 Society in evil thou may not hold, no, not with
best men; Ephesians. 5.7, 11. rather reprove them. This to Saint Augustine is, Isai
52.11.
coming out from amongst them, touching no unclean thing. See him de verb.
Dom. ser. 18. in fine.

2 Society in goodness, specially in Sauris, in the service of God hold with
the worst men; thou have Christ's warrant, Mat. 23.1, 2. His, and his Saints
example; frequenting Sacrifices and other services of the Temple, when teachers
and people, were mostly over grown with Libertineisme, and superstition. 1
With what comfort slight I Gods precept, Heb. 10.25. 1 These. 5.20. for the
presence of wicked? 2 Why rob I my soul of the comfort of his ordinances, for
that profane men usurp their use? 3 Is this to defile my self, to be partner
with the adulterer in his adulteries, to do the duty which God hathinioyned me?

3 Civil commerce thou may have with them without See 1 Cor. 5.10. As
Abraham with the children of Heth. Genesis 23.

4 Necessary offices of humanity, withhold not from a brother, Gal. 6.10.
or stranger; feed their hunger, cloth their nakedness; they cease not to be
men, or neighbors, by being evil men.

5 Yet if any, that is called a 1 Coi. 5.11.
brother, be scandalously, and contumaciously exorbitant, with such hold no
familiarity, to such show not a friendly countenance: from their friendly
familiarity, withdraw thy self; this the Apostle he enioynes thee. Yea,
though perhaps Church discipline sleep toward them. See precept 1 Cor. 5.11.
2 Ioh. 10.

These reasons are of it: 1 Thou partakest in guilt of his offense, so far as
thou but showest approbation. 2 John 10. 2 Hazardest thy self to 1 Cor. 5.6.
infection. 3 To Apoc. 18.4.
wrath. 4 The delinquent to obstinate impenitencie. 5 Blemishest thy own fame.
6 Quantum in te, encouragest others to like exorbitancy. 7 See Saints regularly
scruplous, and abstenious in this kind. Psalm. 26.4. Ier. 15.17.



Confessedly there is fault amongst us, but it would be considered; 1 Whither
in governors, to whom censures belong, or not rather in them, whose duty is
to inform. 2 Whither in the constitution of the Church, or merely in the
execution. Why are personal faults made faults of the Church? And may we not
observe like conniuence, partiality, and corruption in civil Maiestrates?

But in this, which touches nearest clamorous plaintiues, how may the people
be excused? Who to their inwardest familiarity, little less then amity,
promiscuously admit the vile as the precious, the profane as the holy. Lack we
Church censures to inhibit us their familiarity? Herein we are nostri iuris;
none forces us their private society; whereby 1 we harden them in their
lewdness; and doubtless, 2 bring on our selves partnership in their guilt, by
this degree of approbation. 3 Take heed least not also some infection, and
taint of their vices. Hereof see more ad ver. 14.

2 Persons liable to this punishment, are thus circumscribed: 1 Brethren. 2
Walking inordinately.

From every brother; he means every man professing, Christian and member of
the Church; from every such man, of what rank, or quality soever, withdraw,
if he walk disorderly.

From such rather then from Pagans: Saint Paul permits to go with an 1 Cor.
10.27.
vnbelieuer, inuiting to a banquet; at no hand allows 1 Cor. 5.11.
to eat with a scandalous brother.

1 The kindness that 2 Timothy 2. Tim. 3.
melts an ignorant alien, and allures him to goodness, makes more 1 Cor. 5.
obstinate a seeing brother. 2 Scandalous infirmities of brethren, bring
blemish, and Romans 2.24.
blasphemy upon the Gospel, more then enormities of Pagans, or professed
Idolaters. 3 Chiefly Paul's reason swayes. Church censures stretch not in any
degree to them that are without; 1 Cor. 5.12.
do we not judge them that are within?

them withal. Yet the God we serve, is most terribble Psalm. 89.7.
in the assembly of his Saint; so carries himself in his government, as to
procure himself most aw, and dread from those that Leuit. 10.3.
come nearest unto him; bears with more patience, the outrages of vessels of
wrath, then the infirm faultings of vessels of mercy. Not because he less
loves his own; but because he more dearly afects them, and has more tender
care of their souls. By Paul's rule we should herein resemble.

Walking disorderly: If any would know what that is, he thus explicates;
disorderly, not according to the tradition, or moral Canon which he received
of us. Specification of the matter is made ver. 10.

So heinous in Paul's esteem is violation of wholesome Church ordinances, as
that contumacy therein deserves censure little less then Excommunication. Will
he not be ordered by the Church? Mat. 18.17.
Let him be to thee, as a Heathen, or Publican. Who Mat 10.
so despises you, whither teaching, or commanding according to God, despises
me. Confessed it is, where the Church commands, what Christ in so many terms
commands. But Saint Paul stretches farther; and calls them commandments of
the Lord, which are by just consequence derived from principles of Scripture.
See him 1 Cor. 14.37. As some Interpreters open the canon of manual labor
here prescribed, to have deduction. ex Genesis 3.19. Where yet perhaps, the Lord
does not so much prescribe, as punish.

These cautions are usual in attending such prescript: 1 If not impious. Hos.
5.11. Matthew. 15.5. 2 Have not annexed opinion, or intention of worship. Col.
2.22, 23. 3 Be of things necessary, and useful at least for the time. Acts
15.28, 29. Such bind contemptuous carriage toward such Church ordinances, is
no small violation of conscience.

Paul commands Gal. 5.1.13.
to stand fast therein; yet withal advises we turn it not into license,
abusing it as occasion to the flesh. Saint Peter confesses we are free, and
would have us so bear our selves; yet minds us, not to use our liberty as 1
Pet. 2.16.
cloak of naughtiness. We are still servants of God, and owe him obedience
according to every his moral commands; wherefore his advise is, Verse 13.
to submit to every humane ordinance, for the Lords sake; certainly, its true,
very precepts of men, our superiors in things lawful, bind conscience,
though not virtute propria, yet aliena, id est Dei.

I spare to particularize; persuade rather submission to civil, and
Ecclesiastique ordinances; I mean, where Maiestrate and Church are known
Orthodoxe. 1 Why think we they mean Popishly, who profess and teach to
detest Popery, and acknowledge it the mystery of iniquity? 2 How do we
sillily call all Idolatrous, that is in use amongst Idolaters? When Paul
warrants to 1 Cor. 10.25, 26, 27, 28.
eat Idolothites, so be, nor we eat them as Idolothites, nor 1 Cor. 8.7.
know any weak, thorough scrupulous surmise, offended.

I beseech you consider: 1 How peremptory, and frequent the charge is, Romans
13.1, etc. 1 Pet. 2.13, etc.
to submit. 2 How ill it hears, no less Jude ver. 8. 2 Pet. 2.10.
then heretical, to despise dominion. 3 How vain ianglings about
indifferents, has opened mouths of enemies to traduce our Gospel. 4 Hazarded
to loss of better ordinances.

VERSE. 7, 8. For your selves know how ye ought to follow us; for we behaved not
our selves disorderly.

Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught; but wrought with labor, and
travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you.


prescriber; where is subioyned explication of Paul's exemplary practice.

1 You know; 2 how ye ought to follow us. You, not only innocent, but
delinquents know, and are convinced of the duty, etc. So does Paul amplify
their sin; circumstances they are, both which add much to the degree of the
transgression. 1 Knowledge. See James 4. vlt. John 9.41. and 15.22, 24. Luke
12.47. Romans 1.21, 32. 2 Wilfully, and half presumptuously, such are
interperted to sin.

1 Cor. 8.1.
Knowledge puffs. No reason it should; increasing our obligation to duty,
adding to the degree of every sinful act, or omission.

Take heed we be not 2 Pet. 1.8.
idle or unfruitful, in the knowledge of duty. 1 We shall sin Ioh. 15.22.
excuselesse. 2 Tit. 3.11.
Damned of our selves. 3. Have punishment Luke 12 47.
greater. 4 More, not only wast conscience, and for the present stupifie it:
but make it raging when once fear, or wrath shall awake it.

To follow us. As knowledge of duty, so examples therein aggrauate our
neglect. Noah's faith and obedience in building the Arc, Heb. 11.7.
condemned the faithless and impenitent World. See Matthew. 12.41, 42. What
color or pretense have such for disobedience? To Whom God has given eyes to
see, guides to go before them, in difficultest parts of duty.

Remarkable in all things is the wisdom of divine providence, view it in
this particular. Scattering abroad his Saints, in such sort, that in the most
extrauagant congregations of people, over whom his name is called, there want
not more, or fewer of his Saints, shining as lights in the way of life. That
either by light of their Phil. 2 15.16.
example, they may be guided to piety; else have their Heb 11.
condemnation more just and heany. Vae mundo a scandalis, vae, vae, vae, ab
exemplis bonis. 1 Factibile ostenditur quod suadetur: manner, means of
atchiuing duties prescribed.

For we behaved not our selves disorderly. The explication of the example. 1
General. 2 With application to the particular duty enjoined in the Canon. 3
Where also are specified ends of Paul's submitting himself to the Ordinance.

De primo: We behaved not, etc. So if not necessary, yet available it is, the
prescriber to exemplify his prescripts in his own practice. Give me a
Lawgiver, a teacher exemplary: Such an one exhibits himself, the Exodus ^0 11.
great Lawgiver. Such Ioh. 13 15.
Christ, his Iac. 5.10.
Prophets and Apostles. Prescript is the same to 1 Timothy 4.12.
Ministers, all Philip. 2.15, 16
Christians; especially Superiors. 1 Pharisaicall it hears, to Mat. 23.4.
lay burdens heavy on others shoulders, and not to move our own fingers to
help forward the carriage. 2 And how seems it all but fabula, that we teach
de inferno de caelo, when our selves are seen faulting in those duties, which
we press upon others, under pain of damnation, or with promise of eternal
reward?

take Gods Name in vain; the Land Ier. 23.10.
mournes because of oaths; to be lamented, that the Lawmakers, are known
many, so over familiar with the Name of God, as to contemn it. Suppose ye,
they of all men, shall Romans 2.3.
escape the judgment of God? Who likes not the urging of Paul's canon, on us
country drones, to 2 Timothy 4 2.
preach the world with instance? How do we bless those our fathers of the
Church, who excite us by their example? But is not the dispensation committed
to all? How shall they escape the 1 Cor. 9.16.
woe belonging to non-preaching, who punish others neglects, and yet feed
themselves only, Ezech. 34.
and not the flock? 2.


Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught. The application of the example
to the particular prescribed, carried in that form, which Rhetoricians call
(...).

Question, Had it been for naught if Paul had not wrought with his hands,
laboring only in the Word and doctrine.

Resp. 1 The spiritual things we sow, 1 Cor. 9.11.
are they not equivalent to your best carnals? your gold that perishes? 2 And
in the work of the Ministry, is (...), 1 Timothy 5.17.
labor toylesome, tiresome, Isai 49.4.
enfeebling. Physicians accord that mind labors, more feeble spirits animal
and natural; more wast natural heat and moisture, then toil of the body.
Divines can mind you, how the more spiritual faculties, had greatest wound by
original sin; especially when they are bent to spiritual things in serious
meditation, opposition they find from malignant spirits, so strong, and often so
violent, that they seldom bear up, without some wound in the encounter, that
if either pretium, or opera may be though equivalent to our maintenance, on
free cost we eat not any our heareres bread, but buy it, many, at dearest rate.

How then says Paul (...), if without manual labor?

Resp. Commonly he is apprehended to speak (...), according to the opinion of
earthly minded people. What thorough I their vnderpricing spiritual blessings,
through earthly mindedness. 2 And what for not considering their conueiance,
linked by ordinance, to our Ministry; which is their ignorance, or
infidelity. 3 And what thorough little experience in mental labors,
especially for spiritual things, generally the voice of the people is, our
living comes in easily, we sweat not for it; and what give, or do we for all
they pay us?

Whereto the answer is ready from the Apostle: 1 We 1 Cor. 9 11. Gal. 3.2.
sow you spiritual things; reach to you, as Gods hands, the graces of his
spirit, the 1 Timothy 4.16.
salvation of your souls. 2 Heb. 13.17.
Watch for your souls, as they that shall give accounts. 3 Spend, sacrifice
our selves many, upon the service of your faith, Philip. 2.17.

How soon would this error vanish? If men were either so happy as to 1 feel
Job. 33 22.
misery of want. 2 To 1 Pet 2 3.
taste sweetness of grace. 3 Or so wise as to consider, that by us, as 1 Cor.
3.5.9.
Gods co workers, they receive whatsoever they are, or have in grace? And how
without us they are l naked, Pro. 29.18.
and lie open to Gods wrath, and eternal destruction.

As to our labor, to spare speech of what Gods spirit 1 Cor. 3.9. 1 Timothy 5 18.
resembles it by, would they please but to experiment a little, in what seems
easiest in our task; informing the mind, with distinct notice of the mystery
of godliness; or fastening it, as ^s their Ephesians. 6.4.
duty, in their ignorant families, they would change their mind and say,
husbandry were a playgame, a recreation to the toil of a faithful Minister.
To conclude; where, tell me, have you seen a painful Pastor, not too
maturely made old? Though by natural temper, choicest temperance, and manner
of education framed to greatest vigor, sitted to extend life to the utmost
term of nature.

Our Savior in his prime and slower of age, little past thirty, is deemed by
jews a man toward Ioh. 8.57.
fifty; such shows of over age, had care and pains to win sou^es, as some
opine, cast upon him.

But what lets to conceive the Apostle speaking (...), and as the thing was?
That his meaning may be; he bought at dearest rate, in the eye of flesh it
self, wherewith to sustain himself; if opera, hardy labor of the hardest
may be thought equivalent to price, or to things which for price pass in
exchange from man to man. For so himself adds the explication (...); but
wrought with labor and travel night and day. Like was his practice in some
other Churches, though on other occasions and to other ends. See Act. 20.33,
34. 2 Cor. 11.12.

Binds the example us? Or do they well who press it upon Monkish predicants,
from Paul's example?

Ans. Apish imitation of Saints has filled the world with superstition, with
errors, some no less then heretical. With what caution we should heed
examples of Saints, has been treated in the former Epistle, wither I remit
the reader. Disparities b^twixt Paul and us, you may observe these. 1 His
extraordinary instincts and inspirations, added to his over measure of gifts
acquired by industry, aduantaged, advanced him to facility of performing his
Apostolic function in teaching, (who doubts? but) often without study, and
premeditation, so that other his necessary, or occasional imploiments brought
not, by distractions, impediment to his preaching, or other ministerial
offices.

Of us, to our enabling to the work, is required attendance to private 1 Timothy
4.16.
reading and meditation; dwelling upon, and being in these things, a day, or
hour otherwise spent, may give us just occasion to say as he, Amici perdidimus
diem: and with that day, part of our full furnishing to the work of the
Ministry. Except we be employed in some thing coniunct with, and subordinate
to the maine; or when perhaps necessity, and infirmity of body, or mind,
forces to remit and loosen the over bent spirits.

2 Nor is it with our Churches, as was with this of Thessalonica; that we
should fear at this day ouercharging our people. Scantingly, it should seem,
the Lord had distributed to these poor Artisans (as learned deem them) the
good things of this life; which small portion also lay open, and was liable
daily to be preyed upon by violent rapine of persecutours. Whereas God has
pleased to seat us in another Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey; where
we sit, mostly all, under our own vine and figtree; eating the fat, and
drinking the sweet; sated, shall I say? Surfetted rather with the plenty of
all Gods gracious blessings. That we, of all Churches, may seem unworthiest
of the Corn, if we shall offer to put the 1 Timothy 5.18.
muzzle on the ox his mouth, which treads it out.

Howbeit, where exacting of due maintenance, is indeed a burden to the Church,
let art, or industry, or own possessions, or other imploiments supply our
necessities; incline to part with right, rather then to be ouerpressing in
exacting it: compassion teaches it; and so far urges the example of the
Apostle.

VERSE. 9. Not for that we have not power, but that we might make our selves an
example, unto you to follow us.


THE second end of Paul's providing for himself by manual labor, that he
might make himself a pattern to this people; and by his own performance of
what he prescribed, win the people to obedience. To explicating whereof, the
passage is by (...).

Object. Perhaps reason of such forbearance to exact maintenance, etc. was want
of right to demand.

Sol. Not so, power we have, and lawful authority to ask and receive it.
That therefore is not reason of not urging to yield it; but that we might make
our selves an example.

Not that we have not power: (...): just, right title; lawful authority. Qu.
To be burdensome, think you? Resp. He means to take maintenance from his
Auditors; which 1 either for that it seems burdensome to earthly minds; or 2
for that, in extreme poverty of the Church, its really so, he styles pressure
or burden.

Quest. But when its so really burdensome, has he power or right to claim
it? Resp. Right dies not, or decaies by disability of the debtour, the Sea 1
Cor. 9.5.15. Collat.
use of right cease for the time according to the rules of (...) and mercy:
see Isai 58.

But that Ministers have power and authority to claim maintenance from their
people, we have clearelly from this Text. Quest. On what Law founded? Resp: Of
Nature, Nations, Moses, Christ: see 1 Cor. 9. a verse. 4. ad 15.

ad placitum to be measured out by our Auditors: As if it had no foundation in
Justice, but merely in Charity: Libere dico and reclamante mundo pronuncio, as
Hierome in another case speaks, clearer prescript affords no Justice for any
title, then for Ministers to their maintenance; that is, to their Tithes.

The more unjust are they who detain it; and Col. 4.25.
who so does the wrong, shall bear the wrong that he does.

But that we might make our selves an example, etc. (...), as 1 Timothy 4.12.
when applied to denote what tends to exemplary, it signifies the liueliest
expression and, as I may term it, effigiation of that virtue or virtuous
practice which we desire to exemplify.

To the Nature of such an example in virtue or virtuous practice concur three
things: 1 eminence in the virtue: 2 precedence: 3 liueliest expression of what
we desire to commend to other men's imitation: An honor whereof Paul was, every
Minister and other prescriber should be a little ambitious. See 1 Timothy 4.12. 1
Pet. 5.3.

1 Its a hallowing of the name of God; a means to procure him glory, Mat.
5.16. 2 Forcible above prescript, to win aliens; by this, without the word,
they are won preparatiue, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. 3 Allures, nothing more, men of
gracious inclination to resemble, to equal, to outgoe precedents in goodness,
2 Cor. 9.2. Grace being ever accompanied with holy emulation, and striving to
equal, excel others. 4 Not only our personal goodness is taken notice of
to be rewarded; but whatsoever good thing others have bin occasioned to do, by
our example or other excitement, that also is set on our score: See Dan. 12.3.

Paul's spirit were in us; that Moses prayer might prevail with God, that his
not vrim only, but Deuteronomy 33.8.
Thummim might be upon his holy ones; that Lawgiuers might become as he, in
their practice living or walking Laws.

But how have we mostly all given occasion, to have Mercuries statue our
fittest Emblem? Read with best attention, Romans 2.21, 22. etc. ad finem.

To you to follow, or imitate us. Paul's maine intention in typing or linying
out in his own practice, what he prescribed bed to others. Coward let be his
style who seconds not his Captain in the dangerousest adventure: unworthy the
name of a Christian, whosoever follows not such wayguides in virtuous
practice. Its the duty and honor people owe to their Pastors, to walk in
the steps of their virtuous conversation: see 1 Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17. Heb.
13.7. Iac. 5.10.

Imitation implies three things: 1 Factum, semblable or rather real acting of
what we pretend to imitate. Not to commemorate, or encomiastically to declaime
of Abraham's faith or obedience, but to Romans 4.12.
walk in his steps, is to imitate Abraham: see Ioh. 13.15. Laudamus veteres,
est nostris vtimur Annis.

2 Studium or propositum imitande Casually or by natural propension may a man
fall on Saints practice; as children sometimes on fathers gestures or gange of
body: Sic ille oculos, sic ora ferebat: yet say we not such imitate, though
they resemble; because their aim is not to express their Actions.

3 Conformitas ad exemplar: which is the life of imitation: and wherein
especially is required prudence in the follower, least he turn Ape in
imitation. Giddie was that Ideat, because (...), when he pretended Gideon for
pattern in demolishing Images: for had he like calling, or instinct? like eye
must be had to other circumstances of time, place, manner, motive, occasion,
end, in those actions of Saints which we pretend to imitate: the least swaruing
from our pattern disables our imitation. More what concerns this duty of
imitation, and discretion therein, Read at leisure in those notes on the former
Epistle, ad cap. 1. ver. 6, 7.

VERSE. 10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any
man would not work, neither should he eat.


WHither any, or what the reference is, which this verse has to the former
Scripture, is a little difficult to discern. Err I? or is it alleged to
prove their knowledge of duty charged on them? verse. 7. q. d. You cannot be
ignorant of the duty; for you may remember, what charge we gave you in
presence.

In the text it self a part considered, we have Paul's sanction, or ordinance
for manual labor, enforced by penalty, provided for willing, or wilful
loiterers.

1 The maine intention is to urge to labor. 2 The penalty of neglect; Idlers
must not eat. To which add as appertinences; 1 The generality of the
iniunction collected from extent of the penalty siquis. 2 Description of
delinquents whom the penalty touches, not those who cannot, but such as will
not work.

Labor here enjoined you must understand manual; by interpretation of the
Apostle himself. 1 These. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.28.

2. Is the ordinance universally binding, for all persons, times, place, states
of the Church? Resp. 1. For labor and industrious employment in some honest
vocation, it binds all in all times and states. The Church of no time may
afford hiuing for drones: whither to manual labor, is another quaere.

Consent goes thus far. 1. Manual labor is amongst those Acts or offices,
which are precepted not propter se, as simply good and necessary, in like sort
as worship of God and honoring parents. 2. Rather propter aliud; and therefore
binds not all men in all times and states; but only in casu; suppose when the
ends of such labor cannot be otherwise achieved.

3. Those ends suppose to be, 1 Supplying our own wants, and necessities of
such as depend on our Care, 1 These 4.11. 1 Tlm. 5.8. 2 Easing the Church or
Commonwealth of unnecessary charge, 1 Timothy 5.16. 3 To preserve body in health
and vigor.

4. And, which is spiritual, to avoid the legions of sins that wait on
lazy idleness. But where, without labor of the hands, these ends, with the
like, may all be attained, the iniunction binds not. Ratio; who so lives out
of the Reason of the Law, lives out of the stroke and censure of the Law.

Thus therefore conceive, the ordinance for that kind of labor, personal or
particular to that Church in state now of distress; binding us no farther,
then ends of labor forementioned, and like state may enforce it.

How then concerns it us of these times? Resp. 1. Many, many are amongst us,
whose liuely-hood and necessary maintenance depends on manual labor: whose
calling and abilities bind them to such employment: who but by it, cannot
further the weal public: doubts any man, whither the iniunction binds them?
The Reason of the Law touches them, therefore the Law it self.

2. But to the general of labor, and industrious employing our selves in some
honest calling, whereby we may further common good, equity of this inunction,
and other passages of Scripture binded al of all sorts, times, and estates:
quid statis hic otiosi? Mat. 20.6.
Idlers, the Lord of the Vineyard bears not. And to all of any office is the
charge given, Romans 12.7.
to wait on that office: to a Minister is not enjoined manual labor,
prohibited rather, as both an indecorum for the person he sustaines, and a
means of Act. 6.2.
distraction, and hinderance to his laboring in 1 Timothy 5.17.
the word and doctrine; yet Ezech. 34.2.
woe to the idle shepherd, as heavy as to any that are at ease in Sion. Like
think of Superior Magistrates, etc.

Withal let this be considered: preparation to a Calling, is (...) to a
calling: as when a man lives, as young Prophets of Iuric, in Schools of
Prophets, though yet not exercising prophecy, he is presumed to live in Rank;
neither without calling, nor idly in his station: but what follows not under
one of these, lies under Censure of the Apostle, and is violation of his Canon.

Paul's sanction touches Popish Monks and Friars mendicant; that were picked
wresting the Apostles sentence. Indeed now I mind it, Erasmus said of Luther,
Estius ad locum.
he meddled with two perilous things, when he touched the Popes Crown, and
his Monks bellies.

But why savors it so strong of heretical prauitie, to impleade them guilty
of breaking Paul's Canon? if Socrates said true, Monachus qui manibus non
laborat, similis est praedoni.

Ob. Their labor is in prayer, watching hearing Confessions, contemplation,
etc. Resp. While distenti and crepantes they cry out, haec quanta patimur,
etc. But feign I would know for my learning, where God has warranted to any
man on earth, abled for employment in particular functions, to spend his whole
time in devotion and Contemplation? Where he teaches the performance of these
general offices of the Christian calling, to exempt any such man from
employment in particular vocation or office tending to public good? Valiant
Euchitae; Contemplation is good, sweet above honey; but vita Coeli, Non Terrae;
except fruits issue by writing, or other courfes beneficial to Community.
See S. Augustine de opere Monachorum.

But out upon our vagrants sturdie Beggars, the burdens of the earth, scorn
of heaven, shame of our Commonwealth. I persuade my self the worst of
infernal Spirits have not less sense of piety, have more sense Iac. 2.19.
Deity, then our Canting Vagrants, drowzily, deadly in this behalf dormit,
stertit Reipublicae disciplina. When may we hope to awake it? When most are
minded, these are amongst the poor, commended to our merciful relief; and as
chearefully deal their bread to them in the r^fulnesse, as to the paynfullest
Artisan or truest labourer, in his hunger. Erasmus mentions a kind of mercy
meetest for such; It Is, in this language, miserecordia puniens. Surely the whip
is more their due, then food; Bridewell to entertain them, fitter then an
Almes-house. Should such out, by Paul's Rule? Live, after monition, by our
wholesome statute?

Nor yet dwells idleness all sub dio; nor all lodges or lowzeth it self
under Beggars Bush: entertainenment it finds, alas how sumptuous, in sieled
houses. Semble to your selves a while the life of young and Elder Gallants of
our Gentry; and tell me, if you seem not to be Moses his Exodus 32.6.
Idolaters, or Paul's 1 Cor. 15.32.
Epicures, revived in them: men, whose whole life is eating, drinking,
snorting, sporting, or if any thing may be more Epicureal or Bestial then this:
or if you can discern other in them, then Ezechiel mentions of Sodomites,
Ezech. 16.49.
Pride, fulness of Bread, abundance of Idleness; would God not also much of their
Bestiality: Deuteronomy. 32.6.
do you thus requite the Lord, Oh people foolish and unwise? Is this the
thanks you render him, the service you do him, for all that rich bounty
powered out upon you? Potentes potentur tormenta patientur, But I spare you.

The penalty of wilful neglecting the labor enjoined, with the appertinencies
follow. Let not such eat: he means of the common charge of the Church; that
if naught else, yet hunger and necessity may drive them to labor. And yet
remember, Nature may not be deserted in extreme necessity: but out of that
Case, they nourish Idleness, who succor the Idler.

The life of Law is penality, when duly executed, wherefore the great
Lawgiver to his own Israel, uses such enforcements, See Exodus 21. and 22,
etc.

1. Refractaries every state and kingdom affords, whom, but penalty, nothing
restraines; scarce does penalty executed reform. 2. Yet the Treacle is made of
such Vipers, for preserving others, All Israel shall hear and fear, and do no
more presumptuously. 3. Seruility is much in men of best inclination: They are
not all always led by that Spirit of Ingenuity, Psalm. 51.12.
Rules for their enacting: 1. That they be proportioned to quality and measure
of the offense. Draco his severity is deemed over rigorous, providing death for
least offenses: our lenity, in some enormities, is no less blame^ble: whiles
Adultery laughes at the sheet, or secures it self of Redeeming that shame with
the purse.

2. As offenses grow, though but in circumstances so ought penalties to be
augmented: See Numbers 15, 30, 32, 35.

For exception; 1. That it be done Deuteronomy. 1.17.
(...); impartially. 2. Not following private passions; which turns iustest
punishment often into vengeance.

The question I meddle not with, whither submission to the penalty free
Conscience from guilt of sin, in violating wholesome Constitutions: who so
affirm, had need build on better Reasons, then supposed equiualence of
satisfaction for damage done to community, by bearing the penalty.

Maxima peccandi illecebra est impunitatis spes. There is no greater
encouragement, entisement to sin then hope of impunitie. Licentious we are
grown out of measure, most live by that occasion; lentitude, rather then
lenity of Magistrates: that now wisest begin to think, as that sage Politician
spoke by occasion of Neruaes remissness in government. Its better to live where
nothing, then in this state where all things are lawful.

We hear daily clamorous outcries of Separatists and others, for, I know not
what, tolerations of evil men: yet faults not the Church in her Constitutions:
what evil man or practice do they legitimate, or but tolerate? Yer
confessedly there is fault amoghst us, that penalties are not more strictly
executed. How may we fear, least the Lord lay to his hand, while his deputies
are so remiss? See, is not wrath already gone out from the Lord? Oh that some
Phinehas would stand forth Psalm 106.30.
to execute Judgment, before the Lords wrath break forth to devour us.

These Reasons, me thinks, should excite us. 1. With such fear or seucrity
thou may save a soul, and Iud^ ver. 23.
respect it, out of the fire: such blessing God gave to that sternnes toward 1
Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 2. Collat.
the incestuous person. 2. Or if the delinquents be incorrigible, yet others
seeing their punishment may fear to do presumptuously: Deuteronomy 13.11.
when otherwise, thorough Conniuence, the example is as 1 Cor. 5.6.
leaven, as a 2 Timothy 2.17.
Gangrene, increasing to more ungodliness. 3. And why, since this may
propitiate the divine Majesty, and Number. 25.7, 8.
cease the Plague, mercileslie expose we the body to destruction? Which, with
loss of some incurable members, may be preserved. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things: Conscience, in this.

The persons whom the penalty touches are next pointed at. Any, of any rank
or quality, that will not work. That clause deserves our notice. Not want of
ability, but lack of will to work, is stricken at in the penalty: for what
when feebleness by age, or sickness; or other impotencie by casualty betides
us? Suppose you Paul warrants to shut up bowels of Compassion to such? God
forbid: where then is place for visito, poto, cibo and such like works of
mercy, omission whereof Mat. 25.41.42.
excludes from heaven? Or why add we affliction to those whom God has wounded?
Yea, what if in greatest strength, there want means of employment? Is it not
equivalent to other impotencie? Such want not will, but means to be employed:
Are therefore capable of the common relief.

Nabal had his 1 Samuel 25.10, 11.
pretended equity, denying to David relief in his necessity. Curre-megients,
who scarcely know any other sentence of Scripture, yet to save their peace, the
crummes that fall from their table, have this of Paul in their mouths; work
for your living: S. Paul sa th, he that labors not, must not cate. This to the
feeblest amongst the Aged and Impotent; to the most decrepit and crookt with
years: yet said not Paul, he that does not, but he that will not work, must
not eat. Not laboring, may issue from impotency and want of means to be
employed: if so, it interesseth them to our Relief.

I wish such would consider; 1. Poor are their Neh. 6.5.
own flesh. 2. Left amongst us to be Mat. 14.7.
matter of our liberality and mercy. 3. Their Job 31.20.
loins may bless us. 4. Their thankful devotions make way to our Luke 16.9.
receiving into everlasting Tabernacles. 5. And themselves Heb* 13 3.
are yet in the flesh, know not what may be their own lot. 6. Have cause to
fear their own impouerishment; for, who so spares Pro. 11.24.
more then is meet, is not likely only, but sure to come to poverty. And of
the first material part of the Chapter, check of Churches tolerating
Loyterers, thus far, follows the correption of the delinquents themselves.

VERSE. 11, 12. For we hear that there are some among you which walk
disorderly, not working at all, but are busybodies.

Now them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
with quietness they work and eat their own bread.


THE passage to this member seems thus. The Apostle willingly preoccupates
what he saw likely to be demanded: whereto tends, what means, or occasions all
this earnest urging upon us, censure of the inordinate? Resp. Marvel not at
it: for we hear, notwithstanding our foremonition, that there are still among
you, who walk disorderly, etc.

Particulars in the Text are, 1. The crime charged upon them; disorderly
walking; specified for evidence to be; 1. Not working at all. 2. and which
usually accompanies neglect of our own business, busy meddling with what
concerns us not. 2. The evidence, on which he proceeds to charge them;
hearsay. 3. Prescript and urging to amendment, ver. 13.

For we hear there are some among you, etc. May a Minister or Church
Magistrate proceed upon heresy to tax crimes in the people? With what
cautions? In what manner? Resp. So did Paul more then one. See 1 Cor. 1.10. and
11.18. With what Caution? 1. His informers were fide digni, such as had won
to themselves opinion, and half renown of sanctity in the Church. See 1 Cor.
1.11. Its unsafe, foolish to believe every thing, every man; especially where
the blemish redounds to the whole Congregation; there are Hosh. 4.8.
that live on the sins of the people; delight in the infamy of the Church. 2.
Prudently they carried their information: making choice of Paul, in whom was
Authority to correct and reform the things amiss: a good evidence they sought
amendment, not shame of the delinquents 3. Charitable they show themselves in
relating the Crime: It was Schisms, 1 Cor. 11.18. their style is (...), 1 Cor.
1.11.
Contentions; a less evil: charity loves not to think, or make the worst of
other evils.

2. His Modus in proceeding: 1. He charge not the crime upon the whole
Church; he says not all, nor most of you; but (...) some among you; loquitur
quam sieri potest parcissime. 2. Particularizeth no man, but speaks
indefinitely; some, whither to occasion the Church to observe all; or rather to
advantage the delinquents to amend their amiss, before that from Paul's mouth
they should know their own names.

3. Though he order them to censure, upon Hypothesis of their incorrigiblenes;
yet first with greatest gravity, meekness and love he nourishes them, selfely
to correct their errors.

Modus.

2. The Crime general is, walking disorderly: whereof See ver. 6. Item
Annotata ad 1 These. 5.14. Specified it is in two particulars. 1. Not working
according to the iniunction; whereof See ver. 10. 2 Curiosity, the Native fruit
of Idleness: so Paul notes it, 1 Timothy 5.13. making it muliebre vitium. But who
maruels to see Idlers become effeminate? How does it euirate, vn-man men? and
bring upon them mollitiem no less then womanish?

Properties of it thus number. 1. Busy inquisition into every man's secretest
actions. 2. 1 Pet. 4.15.
Putting the finger into every man's business. 3. Wherefore usually, they are
the firebrarnds of contention, and vnneighbourly quarrels. 4. Trifling tatlers
above measure, 1 Timothy 5.13. 5 Secretaries after the rate of Apostles; what you
tell them in secret they publish on the house tops, and in the Marketplace.
Caetera vide apud Plutarchum, in moralibus.

Its morbus Epidemicus: how may we stop, or hope to cure it? While wise men
cherish it in themselves, and are hardly brought to notice it as a fault: And
yet Saint Peter gives 1 Pet. 4.15.
Caveat against it, as strict, as against theft, murder or other maleficia;
not as if it were equal to them in the kind of evil, but perhaps because it
so easily insinuates it self, so pleasingly creepes upon us, that but with
strictest caution we keep it not out.

1. Tantumne abs re tua otij est, aliena vt cures, and quae ad te nihil
attinent? Who so minds his own task so large as it is, to heed his own
ways, to see to those of his own household, to know his own sins, to mend
his own life, sindes remedy against it. 2. Others evils hurt us not. Gal. 6.5.
Every man bears his own burden: is countable for Romans 14.12.
himself unto God. 3. Note it ever to hear ill in Scripture; taxed as
Hypocritae vitium, Mat. 7.3.
why see thou, etc. 4. Draws with it too foul neglect of our selves, till
we be ouergrowne in iniquity, Mat. 7.4, 5. 5. Lays open to like curiosity,
and uncharitable censure of other men. 6. Occasions God himself to be the
extremer in marking what we do amiss, See Mat. 7.2.
VERSE. 12. Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own bread.


THe prescript, urging to amendment, wherein is 1. Officium, the Office or act
enjoined together with the Modus. To work with quietness. 2. The manner of
iniunction, with peremptory and grauest command. We Command; and meekest yet
most serious obtestation, and beseech you by our Lord Jesus Christ; q.d. by the
love you bear him. 3. Ratio, that so the bread you eat, may be your own.

We command and entreat, or exhort you, Brethren, etc. What is wanting to give
us edge to the duty? Here is 1. Prescript. 2. Iniunction. 3. Exhortation. 4
Argument.

1. Prescript, informs the Judgment; directs what is to be done. 2.
Iniunction or mandate peremptory, presses, urges Conscience. 3. Exhortation
or entreatie, swayes affection. 4. Reason preuailes with all, that are
Reasonable.
Blind we are all in the things of God; many in maine moralities. Gracious is
the Lawgiver, that shows thee oh (...) what is good, yet are few so happy as
by bare demonstration of duty, to be swayed to obedience: if any be, they are
sure guided by the Psalm. 51.12.
ingenuous and free spirit of God. But precept must be upon precept, iniunction
peremptory upon iniunction, ere Conscience in many apprehend necessity of
performance. There are whose Consciences are urged by iniunction; yet are not
affections allowed to love and prosecute the duty: Here has exhortation and
entreaty their place. And there are whose affections are also inclinable, yet
are of curious understanding, that must see Reason ere they give command for
practice.

Lord what is man that thou so regardest him? But when Gods Spirit so far
descends, as in all things, after a sort, to humor us, take heed we despise
not such duties. If God but prescribed the sanctification of the Sabbath, a
Lawe-giuer, as he is Iac. 4.12.
able to save and destroy, were it not sufficient to press us to the duty? But
when he shall so far condescend to our backewardnesse, to press it upon
Conscience with a special See Exodus 20.9, 10, 11.
Memento; by his example lead us, by Reasons so plentiful persuade us, take
heed how, under pretense of Relaxation from man, we pollute his holy day: sic
de Reliquis, where Gods Spirit pleases to be so importunately urgent, there
chiefly tremble to slight the duty.

What, may we conceive the Reason of Paul's so instant and importunate pressing
the duty of labor? Urging it with such serious instance and vehemence, again
and again, and a third time, as it he could never satisfy himself in
pressing it.

Resp. 1. The state of this Church now in such streits, as dissipation of it
might justly be feared, except by his mean it were supported. 2. The auersenes
of some amongst them, from the duty. 3. Perhaps also the important necessity
of the duty in it self considered.

Such strength our Church yet feels not, nor fears; howbeit 1 Auersenes,
abhorrence from labor, toylesome may be observed in most: we are mostly all
of Issachars Tribe: therefore usually choose callings of greatest ease; in
works of calling Christian and particular, make choice to be employed in what
is most easefull: that may be the Reason, why many prefer hearing, before
all other works of Religion. 2. Necessity lies also on us, Ephesians 4.28.
precept peremptory: medi^ also; since without it we can call nothing our own
not the bread we eat; have holy or warrantable use of naught we enjoy; and
how hateful to God is Ier. 48.10.
negligent doing his work, any work even of calling?

How may we rowze our sluggish nature? Meditate 1. The blessings which
accompany sedulous industry; Gods blessing goes with it in temporalties, See
Pro. 10.4. and 13.4. and 14.23. 2. His curse is upon sloathfulnesse, that
brings Pro. 10 4.
to pouetty. 3. That preuents temptations, at least blunts edge of them. 4.
This encourages, aduantageth the tempter: is Mother and Nurse, good God, of
how many fowlest finnes, See Ezech. 16.49.

And eat their own bread: Reason pressing the duty: But is any such bread,
that we may call our own? Pestilent Anabaptists are all for community; some of
them for such as Plato warranted, wives not exempted: and wiser then they, give
distinction of dominions, no other original, then positive laws of men. I have
neither lust nor leisure to enter the question; nor think I it pertinent to
this Text: this only; Thou shall not steal, is a Law moral, natural. Why
doubt we whether by like Law we may call something our own? Else what is
theft, or where is it? Usually its described vsurpatio Rei alienae inuito
Domino. 2. Confessed it is by all judicious, that Dominium not only in Res,
but in personas, has approbation from Law moral, Exodus 20.10.17. Approbation?
And why not also institution? But manum de tabula. I had almost fallen on
confutation of Schoolemens fond Reasons.

Own bread seems here opposed alieno, not theirs, 1. Either because due to
others, viz. to impotent, if understood of what they received by way of relief
from the treasure: 2. Else, because by no title civil; nor descent, nor price,
nor labor, etc. theirs.

How ever, as Solomon advised Pro. 5.15.17.
to drink water of our own cisterne, so Paul to eat Bread of our own just
acquiring.

Divines note a double property; one spiritual, which we have in Christ, 1
Cor. 3.23. Another civil, whether by hereditary descent, or civil contract,
or gift, or industry. Ciuiliter meum it must be that we eat, and such as by
some just title we may claim to be our own.

Miserum est, said the Poet, aliena viuere quadra: though never so liberally
and generously conferted upon us. Impious, alieno viuere pane in Paul's sense;
such as by no just title we can call our own. What is that living other then
unjust, rapinous, and otherwise injurious?

Solomon, drink waters of thine own Cisterne; more then Solomon, Neh. 8.10.
eat the fat, drink the sweet; but with Salomons caution, let them be thine,
thine own only; by no other means yet, by thy labor and industry, that so
thou may rejoice in the work of thine own hands.

VERSE. 13. But ye Brethren be not weary of well doing, etc.


Aprolexticall Apostrophe to the people orderly demeaning themselves, after the
Canon for labor; having nature of a caution, whose sum is this; that
howsoever exorbitants behaved themselves, they yet should continue in weldoing.

What this weldoing is, is questionable: whither beneficence, and relieuing of
these inordinate? Resp. 1. Except in case of extreme necessity, its not
weldoing to give relief to loyterers. 2. And where the charge general is,
that such should not eat, suppose you the Caveat is to yield them maintenance
from common Treasure?

Thus rather; weldoing understand continuing in labor, notwithstanding the
loytering of these exorbitants.

Let not others exorbitancie make you irregular. Though though Israel play the
Harlot, Hosh 4.15.
yet let not Judah sin.

Gods people may not run with the stream, 2 Pet. 3.17.
be carried away with the error of the wicked, See Josh. 24.15. 2 Pet. 2.8.
Genesis 7.1.

1. They are taken out of the world, Gal. 1.4. 2. Tit 2 14.
Gods peculiar, 1 Pet. 2 9.
a holy Nation to show forth virtues of him that has called. 3. Compare 2 Cor.
6.14, etc. Ephesians 5.11.

praecipitia.

Yet has the Lord labored to make us cautionate: 1 Charging not to follow
multitudes to evil, Exodus 23. 2 Minding us of their issue, Mat. 7, 13.
monishing that they lie in that evil one, 1 Ioh. 5.19. Exemplifying his wrath
upon whole Countries, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
worlds of ungodly men, millions of reuolting Angels.

2. Though he tell us of great men, they are not always wise: of Aged, that
they understand not Judgment, Job 32.9. Professes to hide these things from
wise and prudent, and to reveal them to babes and sucklings, Mat. 11.25. 1
Cor. 1.26.

3. Though doctrinally he deliver it, best men are but in part sanctified, 1
Cor. 13.9. Romans 7, 15, etc. prescribes us our quatenus in imitating the most
holy, 1 Cor. 11.1. permits chief of his Saints to fowlest delinquences.

Potent is the temptation, so that good men sometimes miscarry in it. Barnabas
himself is misled with Peter's dissimulation, Gal. 2.13.

Thus thou may be armed against it. 1 Making thy line of life, not facta
hominum, but praecepta Dei. 2 Considering the best are but in part sanctified;
and therefore may suffer humani aliquid, Iac. 3.1. Ec. 7.22. 3. Thinking
nothing warrant for Conscience in practice, but what will hold plea at the
Bar of Gods Judgment.

The duty, Be not weary of well-doing. Think it spoken to us. The word by Heb.
12.3.
Apostles interpretation implies two things; chief branches of that Acedia,
which School men from Gregory a number to sins Capital.

1. Tedious yrkesomenesse, or tirednesse in Gods service, charged on Israel as
their loathsome sin, Mal. 1.13. Am. 8.5. for which Gods fury threatens to
break out against them, vtinam ne non and nostrum.

Causes out of which it issues, you may observe these, 1 Lack of love to our
God, who yet has done so great things for us: the Mat. 11.30.
yoke is easy, the burden light; but Amanti, is Bernards gloss.
Commandments are not grievous to love, 1 Ioh. 5.3.4.

2. We consider not, nor taste the 1 Pet. 2.3.
sweetness found in holy duties. Good God, what Gal. 6.16.
peace bring they to the Conscience, thorough 2 Pet. 1.10.
assurance of Calling? What ornament to the soul? Restoring in it the decayed
Image of God. Oh taste and see how Gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34.8.

3. Are lead too much by sense and carnality; esteeming nothing good, but what
is good to sense, and yield pleasance to sensuality: See Psalm. 4.6. Mal. 3.14,
15. Had we David's Spirit, the bitterest of all services would be honeysweet,
accompanied with the light of Gods favorable countenance. Psalm. 4 6, 7.

Is it incident into a child of God? Resp. S. Paul had never else said of
Philippians, their care sprang afresh, Philip. 4.10. yet with this difference.
1 Its not usual toward all goodness universally, but in particulars. 2 Is
striuen against and bewailed. 3 Recovery is of first love, to do first works.
4 They rise again timoratiores, sollicitiores, feruentiores, as it were to
make amends for former languishings.

Preuentions or Remedies of it available are these. 1 Ever meditate,
contemplate the goodness that is in holy duties. Psalm. 133.1.
Ecce quam bonum and quaam iucundum, is applicable to all services we do to
our God.

2. Be frequent in doing, that thou may habituate thy self in goodness: who
so works or habitu, works with delight.

3. Let that be weighed, that we hazard and lay open our selves to the whip,
to Gods severe correction, Hosh. 5.15. The Lord will not suffer grace to rust
in his Children.

4. Despise not Prophecy, 1 These. 5 19, 20. forsake not Assemblies, Heb.
10.25. The words of the wise are as Goades, Ec. 12.11.

5. Pray God to quicken what languisheth, and is ready to die.

6. Consider 1 What it euidenceth; our little or no relish of gracious goodness,
1 Pet. 2.3. 2 What it causes: depriuall of favors already received, Amos 8.

The second thing it denotes, is fainting and whole giving over, Heb. 12.3. one
well calls it inperseuerantiam. Its sometimes in bono particulari, sometimes
universally: then to be trembled at. 1 We loose what we have wrought, 2 Ioh. 8.
or suffered, Gal. 3.4. 2 Proclaim our selves to have bin but hypocrites,
having form only of godliness: Its not of hypocrisy to be but temporary,
Mat. 13.21. Hosh. 6.4. 3 The devil reentring brings with him more, and worse
then himself, Mat. 12.45. vicious thou then growest above the ordinary rate
of nature 4 Recovery, after such whole relapsing, is impossible, Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. and 10.26.

May it fall into Gods children? Resp. Absit: 1 the better Covenant assures of
perseverance, Ier. 32 40. 2 promise of God is to confirm, 1 Cor. 1.8. to
perfect, Phil. 11.6. to safeguard by his power to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. 3
Christ intercedes, reigns at his fathers right hand, that nothing may
separate, Romans 8.34, 35.

Why then caveat given them against it? Resp. 1 to mind of natural
mutability; for by grace we stand, Romans 11.20. 2 Cautions are means sanctified
to prevent it: 1 our own endeauours are required to our establishment, 1 John
5.18. 2 which, these items and exhortations, without missing, kindle, and
cherish in us.

1 Timothy 4 1.
recidiuation: now seems the autumn of the Gentilish Church; wherein trees
fullest of sap, have many cast their fruits, almost lost their leaves; God
grant the root keep life, that care of Gods service may spring afresh; else,
what bodes it? but that we shall become fuel for the fire unquenchable.

Obsecro per Iesum. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Take heed least you also be carried away with the error of the wicked, and
fall from your own steadfastness. Especially let him 1 Cor. 10.12.
who thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. Behold Adam kept not his
standing in innocence; Angels greater in power and strength then we, yet kept
not their first estate. I say not but we have better promises in the new
covenant; But its good to fear our own infirmity, perilous to rely on our
own strength; mutable more then the wind, is man in himself, especially from
good to evil.

Preuentions profitable meditate these: 1 presume not of thine own strength to
begin or continue weldoing, least the Lord leave thee to thy self, as 2 Chro.
32 31.
Ezechias, as Mat. 26.35, 70, 72, 74.
Peter; till thou have learnd that the way of man is not in himself, that its
God who works both will and deed.

2 Pride not thy self in thy best doings: Luke 17.10.
Is it more, is it so much as duty? is not all stained with Isai 64.6.
fowlest blemishes? and who is he and 26.12.
that works all our good works in us? Take heed least the Lord permit thee
to evil, till thou have learnd to be vile in thine own eyes; to acknowledge
him author of Iam. 1.17.
every good gift, of every act and exercise of gracious qualities.

3 Rejoice not, nor insult over the fall of others, least the Lord see it and
it displease him: through infidelity they were broken off, and by faith thou
stand; Romans 11.20.
be not high minded, but fear; thou also may be tempted, Gal. 6.1.

4 Set before thine eyes the fearful estate of them who have revolted from
holy courses; if not that terror, nothing will work thy caution, Heb. 10.26.
etc.

5 Consider the fruits present; the 2. Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
glorious reward to come, least thou be wearied, and faint in thy mind, Heb.
12.3.

6 Dote not upon the acceptance or approbation of men: for wherein is it to be
esteemed? Thus think: though thou labor in vain in respect of men, yet is
thy reward with the Lord, and thy work with thy God, Isai 49.4.

7 Hasten not to the reward: its good to trust and to wait: in due time we
shall reap if we faint not, Gal. 6.9.

VERSE. 14, 15. If any man obey not our sayings by this Epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a Brother.


AFter caveat given to regulars, he returns to the inordinate: giving new
order for their censure, in case they continued refractarie after new warning
given by this Epistle: where is 1 the punishment of two branches: 1 note him: 2
company not with him.

2 Mitigation of the punishment; or rule of moderation correctiuely annexed,
that through mistake they ran not to extremity, ver. 15.

If any man, of what rank or quality soever, now obey* not, Note him.
Impartially he requires Church Censures to proceed against all contumaciously
exorbitant: see 1 Cor. 5.11. a like siquis. To Timothy the charge is given
with solemnest obtestation, little less then adiuring, 1 Timothy 5.21. So Ambrose
bare himself to Theodosius the Emperor; who, not only submitted to the
censure, but ever honored, admired the Bishops carriage.

Amos 7.10, 13
Amos may not come at Bethel, his words are too heavy. Nathan is too plain to
be a great man's Chaplain; they love to be quiet in their sins. Censures are
grown timorous to approach Nobles or Gentry. That horrible and filthy thing
is committed in the Land. The Propets prophecy lies; the Priests receive
gifts, and the people delight to have it so: And what will ye do in the end
thereof? The happiness of greatness seems this only; as the great favorite
at Rome, peccandi licentia Faelices appellantur: As the Israelites into Canaan,
so pass these to their Hell, no dog opening mouth, or wagging tongue against
them: yet was there as great as the greatest, whose prayer was, Let the
righteous smite me friendly and reprove me; who esteemed it as precious, as the
soueraignest balsome, Psalm. 141.5.

1 Why Ezech. 13.22.
strengthen we the hands of the wicked, that he cannot return from his
wickedness? 2 Why hazard we the vulgus to infection, impenitency? Saw you ever
greatness fall alone? 3 mind that of the ancient Hulderike: how shall their
souls at last clamor and curse us? when they feel the torments, which
wholesome severity might have kept them from.

Obey not our sayings by this Epistle: so I think must be the reference, and
not to (...): q. d. If to this new monition by this Epistle they bare
themselves refractary, then spare not, but note them.

Contumacie in smallest sins is more then a little heinous, makes liable to
seuerest Censure: see Mat. 18.17. compare Number. 15.30. ad 37. 1 Arguing contempt
of Authority, Numb. 15.31. 2 Desperate obstinacy in the offender.

prose respondeant: this only consider: though the sins be little, yet
should the sinner be contumacious? The lazing of these loyterers is not numbered
amongst mortals: nor sets the delinquent in state of enmity with God, verse. 15.
yet contumacie therein, Paul orders to be censured with some kind, and degree
of Excommunication.

Errare possum, said Saint Austine, Haereticus esse nolo. Eccl. 7.22. yet far
be it, that our hearts should be Ecel. 8.11.
set in us to do evil: obfirmed against all monitions, reproves, censures
tending to reform us; that argues us desperately contumacious.

Evidences of it: 1 to despise admonition, Prou. 12.1. 2 more to hate the
reprouer, Prou. 9.7, 8. 3 yet more, to be exasperated by admonitions to become
more vile; Sodomites, Genesis 19.7, 8, 9. 4 height of it, when God afflicts, and
we Ier. 5.3.
sorrow not, nor Amo. 4.6. etc.
amend; but Isai 1.5.
increase our reuolting.

There grows up with it, 1 stupifaction of Conscience: 2 obstinacy of Will: 3
infatuation of Judgment, Isai 5.20. Romans 1.28.

The punishment: (...): Note that man: some rather render notice, or signify
him: the word signifies both, Note him with a brand of infamy; or notice him
as infamous to the Church, that all may avoid him.

Consent of best Interpreters is; that such noting, signifying, or noticing him
to the Church, is the same at least in some degree with Excommunication: Saint
Austine so judges lib. 3. Cont. Epist. parmen. cap. 4. Theophylact also ad
locum. But whether of like nature and extent with our greater or less
Excommunication, in both which is exclusion from communion in Sacris, is not
aptly resolved. Is it perhaps Caietanes middle betwixt the two; their debarring
the Temple, Table, conversation of the faithful? Quaere: for I resolve not:
Estius his reasons sway me to think the greater Excommunication, or giving up
to Satan, is not meant: for Saint Paul allows them not to be accounted enemies;
nor were their sin, though joined with a little stiff contumacy, so
enormious as to promerit it. Nor the less, as now it is in use with us: for
therein is no interdict of Society. Perhaps then its some other degree of such
Censure now grown out of use: implying their public noticing or pointing at
by name in the Congregation, by the Governors of the Church, that they were
such as from whose society the people must abstain. See Pro. 15.5
And this may be the note of Infamy set upon them: iudicent docti.

And have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. The second kind or
degree of punishment added to their public designement by the pastors,
concerns the people for execution: have no company with him, after such
public denouncing him unmeet for it: And is amplified by the end, or
possible fruit, that he may be ashamed. As touching the kind or degree of
Society here interdicted us, has bin treated ad ver. 6. And is here explicated
in the very term chosen to express it. (...). Be not mingled with him. If I
be not deceived, he means in such inward and intimous familiarity, as is
betwixt a man and his friend: quid hoc ad Sacra?

But notice it a punishment more then a little grievous to be secluded from
familiar Society with Gods Children: here if any where it has place of
Solomon, Eccles. 4.9, 10
va soli; when a man lives as an outcast from amongst Gods people. What a
benefit did David esteem it? that Psalm. 142.9.
the righteous should resort unto his company; and not without cause: so many
comfortable blessings accompany it: so many advantages to our bettering in
goodness: 1 walk with the wise, thou shall be wise, Pro. 13.20. with the holy
thou shall learn holiness; their example will allure, excite, inflame thee to
holy emulation: 2 their lips will feed thee, with counsel, exhortation,
instruction, Prou. 10.21. so is their speech gracious mostly always, fit to
minister grace to the hearer, Ephesians 4.29. Did not our hearts burn in us, when he
talked with us in the way and opened to us the Scriptures? Luke 24.32. 3 How
bridles it passions, not yet so well mastered, corruptions not fully mortified,
desiting, (Lord, how often? how eagerly,) to break out and vent themselves? the
awe of such presence much restraines them. Nunquam ad te accedo, quin discedam
doctior, said he in the orator. Not shall thou to such company, but thou shall
depart Sanctior: opportunities are there ever obuious, to receive or do some
good: penal therefore it must needs be deemed, to be secluded.

Absint. Far be they all from Gods children: why do we thus wilfully
detriment, punish our selves, depriving our selves of so many holy helps
toward heaven: Can 1 Cor. 12.21.
the head say to the foot, the eminentest to the meanest Saint, I have no need
of thee? Saint Paul, a great Apostle, thought yet he might be edified by
peoples mutual faith, Romans 1.12. More let us tremble to merit exclusion, by 1
Scandalousnesse: 2 or other Ephesians. 4.30.
grieuing the holy spirit of God in the hearts of his Saints.

The end or islue of such punishment, that he may be ashamed. This, though not
virtue, yet virtuous affection, God has appropried to the nature of man; other
creatures, as they have no sense or apprehension of what is turpe, and matter
of reproach, so nor touch, nor tincture of shame: the use of it in man's nature,
is to be a bridle to sensualitle; monitor, to keep decorum, etc.

Kinds of it, the son of Sirach notes two, Eccles. 4.21. 1 there is a shame
that brings finne; such as our Savior points at, when we are ashamed to
confess him or his Gospel; or when its restraint from any good duty: as if
there were turpitude in virtue, which is our glory.

2 And there is a shame that brings worship and honor: as what restraines
from evil; or but signifies our apprehension of turpitude in the evils
committed: It gives hope of correction and amendment: as the Philosopher,
Erubuit, salua res est.

Its both a preparatiue to repentance, and a consequent and sign of it.
Arguing the mind and judgment so far reformed, that it now sees turpitude in
sin, and inclines to detest and fly from it: wherefore also its here put
transumptiue t to denote repentance.

That it accompanies Repentance to shame at evil, at least to account it
shameful: see Ier. 31.9. Rom 6.21. And as to me it seems, more kindly
testifies it, then sorrow or grief for sin; which issues often out of fear,
or sense of wrath; rather then, as shame, out of turpitude apprehended in sin.

Ier. 3.3.
whores forehead, the Isai 48.4.
brow of Brass complained of in the Prophets, is the temper, the complexion of
this generation: fowlest sins, and more then bestiall, that Saints and moral
heathens would blush to name: how many glory in and make matter of boasting?
Their drunkenness Hos. 4.18.
stinkes in the nostrils of God and men; and yet they Isai 5.22.
vaunt it as point of manhood. Ier. 5.7, 8.
Assembling by companies into harlots houses, they shame at no more, then Horse
or Mule that have no understanding: were they ashamed when they had committed
these abomination? They were not ashamed, neither could they have any shame.
And shall not I visit for these things says the Lord? should not my soul be
avenged of such a Nation as this!

Such impudency you shall observe to issue, from 1 fearful insaluation of
judgment; no less, then what Paul styles the Romans 1.
reprobate mind, Isai expresses and cries woe unto, under the name, of Isai 5.
calling good evil, and evil good.

2 Else from violent and boystrous affections, so bewitched with the pleasures
of sin, that blindely they carry a man, to Hosh. 4.2.
break through shame, fear, confidence, or whatsoever stands in their way to
binder from their Idol.

3 Or from commonnesse of the sin, and custom received amongst the people,
with whom they dwell: In Sodom it was no shame to lay the Sodunite; so had old
and young, people and Princes made in where of fashion. And amongst us, how many
sins, monstrous in a gracious eye, are grown into fashion? into esteem of
habitiments necessary to make up the complete Gallant? And matter of blemish
and imputation its grown not to do as the company; not to run with the
luxurious to the same excess of riot.

4 Or, which is not the least strength of this impudence, adds steel to the
brass of the bow, promiscuous admitting to the society of the ciuillest;
welcome entertainment, and chearefullest countenance shown to such
miscreants, from men in authority, even such as profess to know and fear
God: when may we hope to see in such faces the color of virtue, whose vices
find such friendly countenance from us?

That not without cause Paul orders these inordinate to be excluded from
company of Gods people: It was in his judgment fittest to work in them
penitent shame: fitness thus judge of: 1 Man is by nature Animal politicum, a
sociable creature. They are not more perfect, but more extrauagant, who affect
lone-nesse. Aues praedariae flock not together; they love to fly alone. And
in long experience we have found it true: Those Solitaries of the Romish
Church, under pretense of more sanctity and contempt of the world, have but
gaped after the prey; are grown the fatter, by not dividing the spoil. But,
except such seeming Saints, or some barbarous (...), every man's (...) carries
him to society. What now? when manners grow so intolerable, that every man
shuns his conversation; how is he occasioned, to iuquire into the cause? to be
loathsome to himself, whom none vouchsaseth company, or courteous greeting.

2 Add hereto that natural ambition, that mere Swains are affected withal;
to be counted somebody in the neighborhood where they live: fearful and
desperate have issues of scorn been, in men, as we would deem them, scarce
sensible of contempt.

3 But in the Church, where they are all Psalm. 15.4.
honored that fear the Lord; none contemptible, but whom vice makes vile:
where we have tasted benefits of society of Saints, participated honorable
esteem, while our courses were holy; here to become an outcast, a scorn of
such men; how couers it the face with shame and confusion, pierces deep the
heart, where is any live spark of seed of Grace?

Job 24.15.
adulterers waited for the twie-light, and bemantled themselves with
darkness: That drunkenness and Reuelling might be but 1 These. 5.7.
night-workes: The sun at noone no witness of such abominations. But now they
Isal. 3.9.
declare their sins as Sodom and hide them not: what marvel? While seeming
fanctitie give them countenance; scarce any is so holy, as to withold their
God speed. See Annotata ad ver. 6.

Yet count him not as an enemy; but admonish him as a Brother.

The Rule of moderation in the punishment. Count him not as an enemy; to God,
or goodness, or the Christian name; as if in our Saviors language he had
said; let him not, for all this, be to thee as an heathen or Publican: which
makes me think, Paul's noting or notizing them to the Congregation, is not
Excommunication Complete.

Yet count him not as an Enemy. Not? When stiffely, after new monition, he
continues inordinate? In no case. As if Paul meant to teach us that paradoxe;
There may be Grace where is not thorough Reformation, where appears
stiffenesse more then a little, in continuing some delinquences. Asa and
Iehoshaphat are numbered amongst the Righteous; yet stood the high places in use
all their days. Of Asa and his Reign thus speaks the Scripture. 1 King.
15.14.
They put not down the high places. Nevertheless Asas Heart was upright with
the Lord all his days. Thus understand me to mean thorough reformation: not
only of the degrees, which no man in this life reaches unto; but of the parts
of duty: some parts of duty may fall to be omitted, some sins continued, and
yet grace renewing be in the heart. 1 There are sins in themselves, that are
not so to us; in our knowledge and apprehension: may not ignorances stand with
Grace? Who then is Gracious? In many particulars, latet quod iustum est: Austin.
there are Psalm. 19.12.
secret, that is, unknown sins which Gracious David prays to be cleansed
from. 2 Where our ignorance lies, may there not be stifnes in continuing the
sins, without impeachment of our gracious estate? 3 Where means of conviction
are affoorded, but the mind not inlightenend to discern strength of Reasons,
Is it not possible, think you, there may be grace, though the sin continued?
This Rule I walk by; where I see obedience extended to the latitude of
knowledge; and honest purpose, to correct what God shall hereafter euict to be
sinful, to that man I allow the opinion of Gracious

minima mandatoru^: of him, who in greater is inuincibly ignorant, and so
sins, while Judgment is sound in fundamentals of Faith, practice reformed in
substantials of undoubted moralities, I will hope as Paul, God will in Phil.
3.15.
time Reveal; In the interim afford him my suffrage to be an Israelite indeed.

But admonish him as a Brother. The second Branch of the Rule. Where is, 1
Actus: Admonish him. 2 Modus, as a Brother. Although for my part, I think
Saint Paul's (...) here to denote Ioh. 11.14.
verity, not similitude; or rather to be taken rationally; because a Brother;
yet by inference falls in the Modus; for if a Brother, why not so to be used
in admonition?

1 Actus: Admonish him: who has leisure, may consult to this point Thom. 2a 2
a q. 33.
Thomas and other Schoolmen; somewhat voluminously, yet profitably handling
the duty and circumstances; under the title of Brotherly correption.

Thus they describe it; Charitable minding the Brother to amend his life.
Terms of Scripture at three, expressing so many degrees of it. 1 (...);
minding, Tit. 3.1.
Remembrancing, putting in mind of duty, without any so much as tartnes in
proceeding. 2 2 Cor. 2.6.
(...) or (...); a paenous kind of warning joined with reprehension. 3 (...); 1 Timothy 5.1.
Obiurgation, or tart chiding, and without some acrimonie of speech, and terms
of Rebuke or Reproach. They well advise, and sutablie to the Apostle, that with
chastening or chiding reprehensions people may not meddle; that being
appropried to those in authority.

2 Whereof? The general is of mending their amiss: particulars available
that way are; 1 If we mind them that their fact is sinful; there be that sin
of ignorance, cause them to know their transgression; show them their sins,
Isai. 58.1. 2 Timothy 2.25.

2 Of the greatness of their sin according to the kind, degree, or
circumstances of it. Its natural to most, to little their sins; thence issues
little regard to avoid or amend them. 3 Of the peril or hurtfulnes of sin;
the stain, guilt, punishment that follow it.

3 Whom concerns it to perform? Resp. Leuit. 19.17. Iam. 5.19.
Every grown or understanding Christian. Whither he be in charity or not,
matters not in respect of obligation to the duty, though much to the Regular
performance.

We live me thinks, under a general deluge of iniquity; likely, for ought I
see, to increase to more ungodliness; what thorough impunity in Magistrates,
timorousness of Ministers, and what for neglects of people: who, whither out
of opinion that its proper to ministers, or through want of zeal for God, or
compassion to their Brethren, or thorough Am. 5.13.
prudence, because the time is evil, are grown too silent and remiss in this
duty.

Yet 1 is the mandate peremptory: 2 omission censured, hating of our Brother,
Leuit. 19.17. 3 and where are our bowels of compassion to the souls of our
Brethren? Jude ver. 23.4. Is it nothing that our Savior says? Thou have won
a Brother, Mat. 18.15. more to me it sounds, then thou have won a world.
Nothing? That thou sauest a soul? Couerest a multitude of sins? Iac. 5.20. 5
Nothing, that by omission we participate guilt of their sins? Are guilty of
blood of souls? Qui proximi mala conspiciunt and silentio praetereunt, quasi
conspectis vulneribus vsum medicaminis subtrahunt. 6 If none of these move, yet
let our own peril touch us: One Achan sins, all Josh. 7.
Israel fly: wherefore? Says Austin, their eye was not on their Brethren to
prevent their meddling with the cursed thing. And for this, says the same
Author, August. in de Ciuitat. Dei
Christians also taste violence of Goths and vandales, for that they were not
monitors to heathens to amend their Idolatry.

4 Whom must we admonish? Is the next question. Resp. Every Brother, that is
child of the Church; that is out of question. But think you those also that
are without? Resp. Lot was monitor to Sodomites; and, me thinks, the precept
holds for aliens, turn and cause others to turn, Ezech. 18.30. especially if
cohabiting with us, 1 Cor. 7.16.

But may Inferiors meddle with Superiors? Resp. If they be Brethren, why not?
Keeping their duetifull respects of observance. Job.
Job despised not the judgment of his servant contending with him. Naaman
listens to his servants counsel, 2 Reg. 5.13, 14.

Yet are there some, whom we are inhibited to deal with all. 1 Known
Apostates: for them, John warrants 1 Ioh. 5.16.
not to pray; nor them, any wise, to admonish. 2 Pertinacious heretics
already monished, and yet refractarie, reject, Tit. 3.10. 3 Mat. 7.6.
Scorners, men set down in that chair of Pestilence deal not withal; what
shall thou purchase to thy self? but a blot, hatred, and unnecessary peril.

What to those pearls of sacred admonitions? But Swinish contempt: See Pro.
9.7. Mat. 7.6.

It were wisdom, if men could temper that, which they term their zeal in
this behalf; I mean, spare monishing, where is just cause to fear their own
certain danger, or scoffing scorn of holy admonitions.

Whereof? Resp. Of their sins that they may amend them. L. But think you of
their venials, their lighter offenses? Resp. Yes, even of them. 1 They hurt
with their multitude; hoc facit sentina, quod fluctus irruens. And though they
hurt not as thunderbolts, yet as hailestones. 2 They make way to greater; as
little thieues open the windows or doors to stouter villains. 3 Besides that
there are some connexed with mortals, and strongly incline thereto; suppose
wanton looks or speeches to the Act of whoredom. 4. And we are not ignorant
of 2 Cor. 2.11.
Satan's wiles; of the Heb. 3.13.
deccitfulnes of sin. Nemo repent fit pessimus.

Yet especially of greater: 1 They more hurt by wasting Conscience. 2
Conviction of conscience is easier; and humiliation, the end of monition, more
probably attained.

What of private offenses? Fall they also under our censure? Resp. Of these is
that of our Savior to be understood, if Mat. 18.15.
thy Brother sin against thee; i.e. either hurting thy person or fame etc. or
te solumsciente; Tell him of it. 1 Private sins sometimes draw down public
vengeance, Josh. 7.2 Hurt the soul of the delinquent, exposing it to peril of
obduration, and other vengeance from God; though it damage not others by
example, nor the Church by scandale.

Howbeit the rule is, that the monition Ibidem.
be private; least in laboring to salve his conscience, thou bring hurt to thy
Brothers fame. Except perhaps the sin be pernicious to community; or the
damage meant in it to another person, exceed the detriment may come to the
sinners fame: then is allowed cautionate publication. Thus far of the Act or
duty, with the several circumstances pertinent thereto: the Modus follows.

1 The general is; that it be charitably performed; for we deal with a
Brother: and must express love no less then brotherly virtues subordinate to
be exercised in this duty are, 1 Verity and justice: whose precepts are
these: 1 That it be crimefull, at least some way sinful, we blame, for why
Isai. 5.20.
speak we evil of good? What God has Act. 10.15.
cleansed, why call we cominon or unclean?

2 Let the crime be evident; some constant there must be of it, more then
suspicion, or Rumor: else we admonish not, but accuse and slander our
Biethren.

In both respects, are faultings. Our fancy or prejudice sometimes multiplies
sins; makes more then ever God made: and over credulous we are most in peiorem
partem: whereof though the accused may make good use, by watching to prevent
the sins charged on him; ye faults the monitor as a false Accuser.

2 Prudence; whose Rules are these: 1 The Jude v. 22, 23.
temper of the delinquent; must be considered, and thereto carriage of the
monition fitted; we otherwise handle nettles, then thorns: and contra.

2 Quality and degree of the sin must be weighed; not to deal with Mat. 7 4.
beams, as with moates; nec contra.

3 State and condition of persons must be distinguished. That Reverence 1 Timothy
5.1. etc.
to Age or other dignity be not forgotten: Christianity makes not unmannerly;
nor allows to be so.

4 Opportunity of time and place, much aduantageth the prevailing of
admonition. Learn herein prudence of a woman, Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37.

Discretion, some indiscreetely call an Idol. Sure she is a Queen in
Ethickes: virtue it self cease to be virtuous, when in her actions she
lackes this guide.

3 Meekness: to calm our own passions; and not to exasperate others: was
Shimei a monitor? A Rayler rather, 2 Samuel 6.7. etc.

4 Compassion, Tangat memoriam communis Infirmitas: piercing above measure are
the expressions of it.

Thus think 1 Seeds of all sins are in thee. 2 Either thou Tit. 3.2, 3.
have bin tempted. 3 Or Gal. 6.1.
may be tempted; so need compassion as much as thy now delinquent Brother.

VERSE. 16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means.


PAul, you may perceive, grows toward his close; so thick and threefold he
falls upon his devotion. Howbeit this (...) or rather passionate prayer, if I
mistake not, has reference to the former duty: implying Caution against that,
whether mischief, or inconvenience, usually consequent to admonitions. Except
prudence bear the greater sway, ending in heart burnings, discontents, and no
less then notorious violations of peace. What through pride of heart, and
choleriquenes of the galled Conscience in the delinquent; and what thorough
imprudence, or show of wrath in the Reprouer, they seldom part, or after meet,
but they strike a heat.

My Brethren, these things ought not so to be; I Gal. 4.16.
Am I therefore an enemy because I tell you the truth? But as 1 Reg. 21.20.
Achab, none should think so. 2 Does he hate the patient, that persecutes the
fever. 3 Oh where is David's spirit, who counted it precious Psalm. 141.5.
balm? Yet see, as if simple monicion to keep peace inviolable, had bin to no
avail, God is prayed unto, himself to interpose for preservation of peace.

Particulars in the prayer are 1 The blessing prayed for; Peace. 2 The Author,
The Lord; The Lord himself. 3 The necessity or difficulty or excellency of
the blessing (who can tell whether?) In the form of the petition, The Lord
himself, Always, by all means.

De 1o There is peace the virtue, or fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And there
is peace the blessing; The Lord shall give unto his people the blessing of
peace, Psalm. 29.11. Whether means the Apostle? One, or both? Truth is, they
are subordinate.

In vain we shall expect other then tumultuous conversation, till God give us
peaceable spirits: And in the mountain of the Lord shall be Isai. 11.6.7.8, 9
peace, that the lamb may dwell secretly with the Lion, and the young child
play upon the hole of the Aspe, where God has once mastered our turbulent
affections.

Suppose it meant of peace the virtue; are not virtuous inclinations gracious
blessings of God? As to me they seem, the prime of his blessings: to be Mat.
5.3, etc.
poor in Spirit, pure in heart, meek, merciful, etc. are styled so many
beatitudes; say Schoolmen truly, they are beat^tudo dispositiua; so many
dispositions to perfect blessedness. 2 Evidence our title to consummate
beatitude. 3 Are pledges, 2 Cor. 1.22.
earnest of it. 4 Bring Gal. 6.16.
peace to the Conscience, fill the soul with joy unspeakable and glorious. 5
Are appropried to the vessels of mercy, that shall be heirs of salvation.

there be wicked, to whom it comes after the work of the Righteous: Righteous,
to whom it befalls after the work of the wicked: what then? Are therefore the
proud blessed? Or Gods Children miserable? 1 Them see permitted to fowlest
evils; those we call evils of fault. 2 Pro. 1.32.
Stayne with their ease; Ec. 5, 12. and
baned with their wealth; 8.11.
obfirmed in evil. 3 Forlorn of all virtuous goodness, which only steedes
in the day of wrath, Pro. 11.4. These, afflicted indeed, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
but 1 not forsaken: 2 17.
renewed in the Inner man: 3 and mark but their end, its peace: In their Pro.
14.32.
death is hope, comfort, such as Numb. 23.10.
Balaam wishes to partake: and in the interim, adorned with virtues; Iac. 2.5.
Rich in faith; blessed in all Ephesians. 11.3.
spiritual blessings that concern life and godliness; that even now we may
Mal. 3.18.
discern twixt him that serves God, and him that serves him not; while God
casts only the Refuse of his blessings upon the wicked; reserues his prime
favors, virtuous Inclinations, to the Children of his Love.

Amongst these, reckon it as none of the meanest, to be of a peaceable Spirit:
This virtuous blessing, a blessed virtue: characterizing us Mat. 5.9.
Gods Children, whose style it is, frequent as any, to be the God of Peace.

There are pacati: as Haemor and Shechem give Testimony of Jacob and his
Retinew; Bernard.
The men are Genesis 34.21.
peaceable amongst us. No steeresmen in contentions; yet when exasperated by
wrongs, going forth too hastily to contentions; there is Leo dormiens.

2. Patientes; whom injuries provoke not to breach of peace. Why 1 Cor. 6.7.
rather suffer ye not wrong?

3. Pacifici; Ambitious, after a sort, to compose quarrels; yielding,
persuading to any thing Reasonable, rather then peace to be violated in the
mountain of Gods holiness: such Act. 7.26.
Moses; Genesis 13.8, 9.
Abraham. These shall be called the sons of God; noticed of all men, to bear
the Image of the God of peace.

We are Brethren; why strive we? Especially about trifles; indifferent Church
Ceremonies; so long, till we have made our selves a reproach, a prey almost to
railing adversaries; till our Gospel is defamed, as if it were not the Gospel
of peace: our God blasphemed, as if he were Author 1 Cor. 14.33.
of Confusion, not of peace.

2. About temporalls, things of this life, so long, so eagerly, till we have
ruined families of Antientest honor; raised Lawyers from the dunghill, that
they now inherit the seat of glory, and sit with the Princes of the people.

Should difference of Judgment, especially in adiaphoris, work disunion of
affections? Romans 14.5.
one man esteems a day above another: Another counts all days alike:
moderately he spoke, and as a lover of peace, who said, Abundet quisque sensu
suo. Nor urge, nor oppose them so, as to break the peace of the Church.

And for these (...), the bones of so dogged Contentions; Is there not a 1 Cor.
6.5, 6.
wise man amongst us, who can vmpire in trifles of them? But Brother goes to
Law with Brother? It Is well not under Infidels; they would sure more detest the
faith of the Church. Yet why so ouerprise we these infamous goods, as for them
to violate precious peace? I say as Nehemiah; Come, I beseech you, come, let us
join hands and hearts to Neh. 2.17.
build the walls of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.

But rather, I presume, you apprehend Paul to mean the blessing of peace. That
Saint Bernard thus tripleth: There is peace, 1 internal, betwixt God and the
conscience; betwixt rectified reason and appetite; betwixt affection, and
affection in Gods children. 2 External, betwixt a man and his neighbor. 3
Eternal in the Heavens, where is the most perfect tranquillity of order:
where we are set out of touch, or reach even of the Devils wrangling.

But peace Paul means external, twixt a man and his neighbor. That 1
sometimes, soundes freedom from hostility, rest from the tumults of war.
Iud. 5. vlt. 2 Sometimes, immunitie from persecutions. Acts 9.31. 3 And here,
tranquillity, quiet conversation in Christian society, free from vain
ianglings, unbrotherly discords and dissensions. As Mar. 9.50. and alibi passim.

^^nite our hearts to fear him; to love, and live at peace one with another.
Thorough the great mercy of the Lord of peace, we have been long free from the
miseries of bloody wars: the blessing David prayed for to Psalm. 122.7.
Jerusalem, we have enjoyed it seems ad nauseam vsque: till now the people
are ready to cry ad arma, alarm. So long has peace been within our walls,
and plenteousnesse within our palaces. And as for persecution, the name is
scarcely heard amongst us, sithence Tempora Mariana; that now we are grown
touchie, and tender of reproach, and churl, if the Lord call us to suffer even
rebuke for his name. Yet, as if we were made of wrangling metal, had our
life, as Salamanders in the fire of contention, so dote we about questions, and
strife of words in the Church; so eagerly pursue we petiest rights,
reuengefully prosecute triflingest wrongs: that we set Church and Commonwealth
all in a combustion.

He knew the hearts and temper of his countrymen, Llboyde apud Maginum in
cambria.
the Cambro-Britannus, who thus writes of them. That they are naturally
propense to brawles, sometimes of the bloudiest. And now, sithence they have
been forced to brake their swords into sithes, their spears or welch-hookes
into mattockes, to give vent to the wrangling humor, they spend their time,
and state in persecuting Law suites. And we, Britans of the other race, are
grown all Camber, Camber: quite changed from the temper of our peaceable
forefathers. That now, writtes walk for words; and but sub paena, we tread
not down one grass of our neighbors. Tempora, tempora.

Church stories record, how under bloody persecutions, Bishops and other
Christians merited the style of the sons of peace: so unanimously they strove
for the faith once given to Saints, resisting against sin to the shedding of
their best blood. After when under Constantine the Churches had rest round
about, then fell in domestique Contentions, first about matter of faith; as in
that pestilent heresy of Arrius. These calmed, about primacie, and
praeeminence, and such like trash; till at last purity of faith, and worship
was well-nigh lost, in almost the whole Church. And we, who have seen issues
of such contentions, wanton, it should seem, with outward peace, are mad
upon questions, wrangle about trifles, as about the heart and life of our faith.

Per viscera Jesus nostri obsecro, obtestor, Romans 14.19.
Let us follow the things that concern peace, and wherewith we may edify one
another. That will never be, till we have learned:

1 To walk by Phil. 3.16.
one Rule; That which the Lord has appointed, the only Canon and measure of
Faith. While Thomas with his Saint Aristotle and Saint Denis must vmpire it in
Religion; Reason must be judge of Faith, in vain we look for ought but
endless questions in the Church. (...).

2 While we are Iac. 3.1.
so many Masters; every one will be a Master in Israel, to judge what is order
and decorum, marvel not if the Church be filled with contention; Oh that the
meekness of wisdom were in us; Phil. 2.3.
Every man to think another better then himself.

3 Saint Hierom would have no man patient, in causa laesae fidei; yet is it in
Paul's Counsel and practice, in things indifferent to be indifferently minded;
to 1 Cor. 9.12.
become all unto all. Ambrose his moderation, what wise man but approues in
external Rites, to fit himself to that Church; God shall call or occasion him
to live in. Turpis est omnis pars, quae vniuerso non congruit suo.

As to civil contentions, we may then hope to have them calmed; when men have
learned, 1 Pro. 17.1.
Undervalue their pence, to their peace. 2 To pacify the Iac 4.1.
lusts which war in their members. 3 To think it their Pro. 19.11.
glory, to pass by an offense. 4 To be humble and lowly; since Pro. 13.10.
only by pride men make contentions. But why prescribe we? When Paul thought
prescripts so little available; And, instead of exhorting, prays God himself
to interpose for preservation of peace.

The God of peace himself give you peace. Surely its he that makes men to be
of one mind in a house; Its the Psalm. 29 11.
Lord, who gives unto his people the blessing of peace.

But why that (...) Emphaticall prefixed? It sounds, me thinks, as if the
Lord must bow the heavens and come down, himself in person interpose to
settle us in peace. Is our nature so abhorrent from peace? Or what is it? View
man as nature sends him out into the world, thou see him naked, and, more
then any creature, unarmed; as if his maker meant him for some Picture of
Peace. Yet behold him in his Inwards so depraved since the fall, that Tigres,
or wood Bears, are scarce so fierce as he: the first sins vented by the
sons of Adam, were See Genesis 4. and 6
wrath, hatred, envy, violence, etc. sins all opposite enemies to peace: the
last that are mortified, seem the same contentious humors; wherefore to all
the Churches Paul writes unto, are caucats frequentest, against affections of
that Nature.

And unto this, the devils steering especially toward the breach of peace;
nothing so much aduantaging or advancing his Kingdom, as the discords and
dissentions of Brethren: thus steals he Truth, Devotion, Sanctity, Charity,
and all out of the Church, while we are hotly contending about Goats wool:
perhaps that is Reason, Paul prays Gods immediate manifesting himself in
working our peace.

But usually, the more difficult, the more necessary and excellent. Thence,
perhaps, it is, Paul so enlarges his petition to all means and Times: that
other Reading by (...), is generally rejected. But means* you must think, he
means lawful, and holy; for so elsewhere he specifies, it must be peace
with holiness, Hebrews 12.14.

Always by all means: Scarce any duty is found in this sort enforced, as is
the endeavor of peace. Heb. 12.14.
(...), follow after peace, pursue it running from you, and that with all men.
Love we life? Said the Psalmist. Psalm 34.12.14
Seek peace and ensue it. Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, (that shows it difficult) as much as in you is, have peace
with all men. And here, always by all means: where I see enforcements so
emphaticall, me thinks I apprehend some excellency or usefulness
extraordinary in the duty exhorted unto; else, some more then ordinary
abhorrence from it, from nature or ill custom: at least, some special spite,
in Satan, laboring to hinder us in it: where Paul with a Ephesians. 6.16.
(...) presses care to keep Faith, I apprehend, by his teaching, special
usefulness of it in the spiritual combat. When Peter, 1 Pet 4 8.
Charity, with like Emphasis, I conceive, excellency usefulness of it in the
whole life of a Christian; spightishest insidiations of Satan, to rob us of
it: like think I of the bressing of peace, and endeauours to preserve it for
like enforcements.

not ignorant of Satan's wiles: while thus we vilify and vnderprize such
blessings, the Lord is proved to remove them from us. God grant we see not
such issues. Are we sated with the word? We may live to see Am 8.5.11, 12
a Famine of it: weary of the sweet blessing of peace? We may, as our Neighbor
Churches, taste the miseries of War. Auertat omen Deus. But let us learn to
set better price upon blessings so precious. I close with that of David,
paraphrased by Bernard; Psalm. 133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is; Brethren to dwell together in
unity: there are some things good, which are not pleasant: some pleasant, which
are not good; some neither good, nor pleasant. In this, meet goodness and
pleasance more then ordinary. Now the Lord of peace himself give us peace
always by all meanes^: and of the maine materials of the Epistle, thus far:
follow the usual appertinences.

1 The valediction, in this verse. 2 The salutation in those following.

1 The valediction, carried in terms usual with us in our bidding farewell.
The Lord be with you all; as if all welfare stood in this, that the Lord is
with us: particulars are, 1 The blessing wished them; The Lord be with you. 2
The extent of it in Paul's desire; with you all.

De 1o The phrase of speech in Scripture denotes principally three things, 1
Gods favor; and, what goes with it, his siding with us, Romans 8.31. If God be
with us, who can be against us? 2 His Assistance He went about doing good, etc.
for God was with him, Act. 10.38. See also 1 Chronicles. 11.9. 3 Protection: they
sold Joseph into Egypt; But God was with him, and delivered him, Act. 7.9, 10.
and Iac. 1.29.

1 If Gods favor be understood, the (...) seems Epitome of the high Priests
blessing; Numb. 6.25. sounds much what like that of Joseph to his Brother
Benjamin. The Lord be Gracious unto thee my Son, Genesis 43.29.

Seriously it has bin inquired by men, you must think, abounding with
leisure; which is the greatest blessing God ever bestowed on man. Some,
preferring Creation in that excellent form, with those eximious endowments,
conferred on man in Innocence: Some, Redemption by the blood of Christ,
whereby he is advanced, to far better and more firm estate; whereupon they
bless the fault, which occasionad him such a Redeemer. In these curiosities,
if I might interpose, thus I should resolve; of all blessings, this is the
prime; that God has set his love on man, conferred his grace and free favor
on him: from this issued Election, Creation, Redemption, or if any blessing
spiritual may be thought more precious then these.

Consequents of it are these. 1 None can be against us, Rom 8.31. Think not,
he means in their affection, to oppose, or work our annoyance, but to hurt
us; as Peter explicates, who is it that 1 Pet. 3.13.
shall hurt or harm you? if you follow that which is good.

2 It brings with it, friendship of all the friends of God, Saints, and holy
Angels; that made Elisha say to his man, there are 2 Reg. 6.26.
more with us, then those that are against us; hoasts of Angels, to fight our
quarrels, to minister for the good of all them who shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 11.14.

3 In a word, he lackes nothing, who has God to be his friend. Solomon had his
style Iedidiah; that is, beloved of the Lord, for the Lord loved him, 2 Samuel
12.25. his favor is, But ask and have, 1 King. 3.5. Ask, what I shall give
thee.

There be many that say, who will show us any good? I say, and pray as David.
Lord Psalm. 4.6.
lift up the light of thy countenance upon me; give me thy favor, thou give
me all: see Psalm. 63.3.

2 Assistance, Acts 10.38* that is, 1 either aiding or succouring our
infirmiti^s: 2 else enabling to necessary performances. It has oppressed me,
Lord succor me.i. relieve, support, aid my infirmity: see Romans 8.26. In our
pressures by affliction, specially necessary.

We know not what fight of afflictions God reserues us for: But 1 we are yet in
the flesh, Heb. 13.3. 2 have seen Judgment begun at the house of God, 1 Pet.
4.17. The Cities plagued over which Gods name was called: and may we hope to
escape? Ier. 25.29. 3 our sins are ripe for vengeance. 4 Second Causes
pregnant, and ready to be delivered. Blessed is the man, whom the Lord assists;
whom he supports in the hour of temptation.

2 Else, enabling to do the duties of general or particular calling, 2 Timothy
4.17. the Lord assisted, and enabled me.

Necessity appears: 1 Naturally, and of our selves, we are impotent, 1 Cor.
2.14. 2 Cor. 3.5. 2 Opposition we find from Satan, Zech. 3.1. 3 Reluctation
from our own flesh, Romans 7.21, 23. means qualifying to this favor of God: 1
sensible acknowledgement of our own inabilities: 2 using means sanctified.
The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, Psalm. 145.18.

3 Protection, as Acts 7.9, 10. that afforded; either 1 by safeguarding us from
the touch or annoyance of evil; as when temptations violent are kept from us,
1 Cor. 10.13. or we taken from them, Apoc. 3.10. Isai 57.1. 2 Reg. 22.10. 2 Or
sustaining us in the evils, 2 Cor. 12.9. 3 Or by delivering us from their
peril or pressure, 2 Timothy 4.18. Ier. 45.

Necessity judge of: by 1 delicacy and tenderness natural: 2 fearful falls
of great Saints, in case of desertion, Mat. 26.74. 3 peril of withdrawing,
Heb. 10.^8.

Disposition requisite: precisest keeping Gods ways; the promise of protection
is to us, in Psalm. 91.11.
vijs, not in precipitijs.

Suppose; when we either 1 run wilfully upon our own peril, casting our
selves into temptation: 2 nor neglect Mat. 4.5.7.
means lawful, for prevention or deliverance. 3 Nor use unlawful, to avoid
danger. Then shall the Lord be with us: so is the (...).

2 The persons to whom he wishes so well, All without difference. So
impartial is he, should we in our love and welwishing affection to the people
of God: so is the charge, Iam. 2.1. so teaches us the wisdom that is from
above, Iam. 3.17.

Distinguish ye twixt specialtie of love, and partiality. Specialtie of love,
conceive preferring one before another, in the measure of our love and
welwishing affection. Our Savior had his Ioh. 21.20.
favorite: God himself, his Iac. 2.23.
friend: see annotata ad 1 These. 5.13.

Partiality, here understand, enclosing to some, with excluding others. Love
should be to all Saints, Col. 1.4. 1 The 1 Cor. 12.15, 21.
meanest member is a member: 2 Useful in its kind. 3 And this noticeth that
we love Gods children, Mat. 10.42.
qua tales, when all that are such, are entertained into our love.



The Greekish Christians at Jerusalem observed, it seems, some Acts 6.2.
slighting of their widows in the daily Ministration. Saint James in his time
noted, thence grew to murmuring, Acts 6.11. contempt of poorer Saints, for
poverty sake, Iam. 2.

Saints Paul's caveat noticeth Romans 14.3.
contempt of weaker Christians, amongst the strong: misdeemings uncharitable in
weak ones toward the strong. Nor are we, in our times, free from the fault.

I say as James, My brethren these things ought not so to be. All Nations are
now concorporate, Ephesians. 3.6. Poor God has chosen, to be rich in faith,
heirs with us of the Kingdom which he has promised: left them amongst us, as
matter of our Mark. 14.7.
Compassion and liberality.

Weak there must be, that stronger may afford them support. Stronger there
shall be, for succor of the weak. In admirable wisdom has God tempered the
body mystical, so as all the members may have help mutual, must needs have
use one of another. Wherefore Iam. 2.5.
but to knit us together in the nearer bond of love: see 1 Cor. 12. tot. he
loves no Saint for sanctity sake, who loves not all: So is the valediction:
the salutation remains. For even Religion allows civil courtesy: nor are
Apostles so precise but to keep complement: thus you read it.

VERSE. 17, 18. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which is the
token in every Epistle, so I write.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.


IN it are three things: I the maine matter or (...), verse. 18.2 the form or
manner, with mine own hands. 3 specification of the end or use, of conueyance
in that manner, to be the sign of every Epistle.

The matter or (...) ye may observe to be for substance the same, in all Paul's
Epistles: specification of the form, common to this with the first sent to
Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.21.
and that to Collosse, Col. 4.18. peculiar to this is, the signification of the
end he aimed at, in choosing that form of subscribing: that is, to
characterize his Epistles, that they might be discerned from counterfeits, if
any, by impudent fiction or forgerie of false Teachers, should be fathered upon
him.

Where, if the quaere be, what, in the salutation, is intended the sign or
character of distinction? thus you may conceive. Not the (...), or matter
alone: for 1 its not much different that Peter has in his close, 1 Pet. 5.14.
2 and how easily had that bin imitated by false Apostles? Rather Paul's style,
or character, or, as we term it, his hand, fashioning the (...), in such
figure of literal characters, as hardly or not at all could be framed by
counterfeits. It should seem the learned Scribes of those times, were not so
skillful in that devilish Art of forgerie, as now are the basest amongst our
mechanicke Scriueners: whither learnd they it of the devil? or the devil of
them?

But, audaciousnesse of Heretics has never bin less then impudence: what
forehead, but frontlesse, durst have attempted, fathering their fictions on
Apostles yet suruiuing.

Beza; fained to bewail his opposition to Popery in his death; and to
confess himself therein to have bin erroneous: while yet he lived to make
answer to their slander. No less that of the thrice reverend Bishop of London,
whose soul is now with God; the rather, I dare say, for that he was known
living and dying to hate Popery with an unfeigned, a perfect hatred. So more
then knauiter impudent have bin false Teachers in all Times.

Touching the (...) or fausta apprecatio, ye may consult with Interpreters all,
so many as have gone thorough with exposition of any Saint Paul's Epistles. For
my part, I contradict not any: only propound to the judgment and inquiry of
the learned; whither it be remission of sins, justification, the grace of
adoption and regeneration, which properly comes under this term? I deny not
but these are favors of God purchased to us by Christ. Yet what if we may
find the Apostle himself enlarging the exposition, and explaining his meaning?

Err I? or did he mean the specification of that general, or whole of the
grace of Christ; by those particulars of the Love of God the Father, and
communion of the holy spirit? 2 Cor. 13.13. It Is no new thing in Scripture, by
such copulatiues to explicate: And they are principals, and as I may term
them, Spring-fauours purchased to the Church by the obedience of our blessed
Savior. To him for that grace purchased to the Church, be all honor and glory
in all Churches of the Saints for ever and ever, Amen.

FJNJS.
CHristian Reader, the many literal and punctual faults, together with those
that violate Rules of Orthographie, impute rather to others have or ill speed,
then to my ignorance or incircumspection. Mistakes perverting sense, or making
the Author absurd, be pleased to correct with thy pen, before thou read.
PAge 2. l 32. for ought, aught, and sic deincept, p. 5 l. 31. perfits. p. 8.
l. 6. (...) p. 11. l. 2. styles, and sic deinceps. l. 15. for be, is. l. 20.
is. p. 13. lovely. p. 16. l. 32. work it. p. 22. l. 17. merum. p 29. l. 17
inflicted l. 29. Hellish p. 39. l. 6. for hotnesse, what^es. Item. 45.8.50.21.
preterition of. 63.13.15. (...) 68.1. for relation, resolution. 72.33.
simpliciter. 75.25. elicit. 81.7. by our gathe^ing. 82.37. dele l. 84.27. for
indeed, judged. 86.5. for greater, general. 19. they were. Ibidem for loss
loose. 88.22. restlesnes. 27. seen rising. 89.22. for imitate, intimate. 91.4.
certertie. 90.26. (...) 93.16. apparitions. ^5.6. for coming, cunning. 9. for
in, is. 11. for yet, ye. 97.7. swelling words then follow of universality. 12.
for act, art. 98.33. for aptly, apertly, and sic sape deincept. 102.26. to
denote. 104.29. full keeping. 38. decretally. 105.10. know how. 26. for
passage, presage. 109.16. contiguous. 17 homonumie. 110.27. denoting. 34. quot
verba. 111.32. Baalisme. 112.3. some few days. 113.25. for handship, headship.
114^ I Will confess. 6. for Asher, Anshe. 115.8. dele is. 26. portenta. 116.25.
but passiuely. 31. dele, proper element. 117.16. despousata. 119.1. for expect,
expiate. 17. ascending. 18. dele, and. 121.35 for fame, iure. 36. for advice,
advance. 37. si^ ergo. 123.12. second. 124.24. for all. ad. 28. for oh, vah.
125.25. venditabit. 127.1. for need, read. 129.9. wordy. 131.2^. (...) 133.9
for aptly, apertly. 23. for best, left. for cauell, novel. 134.32. for new,
now Antiquity. 135 19. homo(...) 137.38. (...) 139.27. Epither. 142.8. for
bid^, binds. 146.28. Lutheran. 14^.36. for as, is. 149 38. in genere. 151.3.
differred. 37. for qualitas, genetiuus. 152.6. for using, poisoning. 14.
obeliske. 153.12. for. doctrine, decree. 156.3. for assent, assert. 159.3^.
in^imous. and sic deinceps. 160.28. for instructions, injunctions. 161.31. for
is, as. 166.8. for of, and lies. 167.8. for hope, open. 171.8. papisme. 27.
dele, he. 173.38. for pats. that's. 178.4. for Apostles, Apostates. 36. for new,
weary. 180.14. In the choice. 183.11. dispose. 30. has secreted. 186.11.
eramus. 190.7. for confuting, comforting. 192.21. velleitas. 195.26. infidiat.
201.30. delivered. 206.6. more, none. 209.2. befall. 4. for securely,
security. 210.19. di^^unctiuely, 211.20. for adoration, obduration. 214.5.
(...) 13. of these. 214.27. for says, such. 28. for this, thus. 215.8. dele,
to. 32. for be, and been. 36. crowns. or. 222.28. nice. 32. for rent, rout.
223.29. vaguing. 224.4. if it. 226.10. legales. 13. dispeream. 228.13.
faithless. 15. for blessedness, blindenes. 230.5. Argument. 231.31. Gods
called. 233.^4. eminenter. 37. for whence, where. 235.16. for if, that. 236.3.
dolosus 21. by God. 237.1. intuit^^ pr^^cepti. 21. for To, Lo 238.20. nemore.
239.7. quaecunque. 13. for must, most. 14. for crossed, most. 21. fatting from.
17. iustum. 34. for rectum, reatum. 240.24. for moder^^ely, mediatly. 241.14,
and 25. Magistrate. and sic deinceps. 30. for oratur, order. 36. for both,
loath. 242.9. dissolutas scopas, vlt. has the name. 244.13. for dilation,
dilectation. 245.8. for profit, perfect. 11. for affections, affectuous. 19 for
fame, some. 246.11. legatur. 247.7. the Avail. 248.5. for perverting,
preventing. 249.1. Rough and vrgid. 20. manual. 250.11. Iudex feriat. 33. Quid
in? 251.3 those. for was, now. 27. dele ergo. 33. separation 252.3 and 19
donatians. 4 for samis, sacris 20. for aptly, apertly. 253.1. sacris. 255.24
for open, opine 263.38. lineing. 264.12. Ast. 23. Idiot (...) 267.1. for
follows, falls. 5 wicked 16. for haec, heu 268.3. for out, eat. 10. for be.
see Moses 33. for the, then ^riacle. 269.10 for exception, execution 25 for
strength, straites 32. of preceyt. 276.35. for meum, nostrum. 277 15 if by no.
20. proleptical 284.25 for aptly, apertly 288.1. strengthener 291.4. for and,
not without. 293.38. constat. 295.17. for as, an 296.2. for secretly, securely.
22. for stayne, slain. 37. is a virtuous. 298 37. Britans. 299.4. prosecuting
300.2 yet is it Paul's. 9. to vnderualye. 301.14. (...) 104.24. we neither. 30.
should we be. 301.34. for proved, provoked. 269.21. for most li^e, mostly 38.
for respect, rescue. 271.32. for heresy, hearesay. 272.25. for nourishes,
monisheth. 275.21. for his, this.


