AN OTHER meditation of the same Hieronimus Sauanorola, upon the.lxxx. Psalm
of David. Qui regis Israel, intend.
Thou that haste Israel in thy governance, thou that leadest Joseph as he were
a sheep, have regard unto us. FOr as much as we know thee, Lord, by works
brought to pass through thy power: then do we say that thou art bente to
dispose and order things, when as thou doste bring them to their full end and
parfytnes. Contrarywyse if thou suffer them to fall from their parfyt end,
then do we plainly pronounce that thy government is withdrawn.

Considering therefore how that all the world is (as touching true and
ghostly worshipping of thee) in great danger, both because the most part
lies in darcknes of mystrust or infidelity, or also because ye faithful forte
is almost holly corrupted: so that now a days this may be truly spoken. They
have al swarued out of the right way, they are all become unprofitable, none
there is that does good, no not so much as one: Flee to thee for so cour, not
doutyng, but maruelynge, and humbly besechyng that thou will not be like as men
which when they are earnestly set on things that they love well, they take no
head or very little up on other whom they have not in so great store. Thou
therefore, O Lord, which art ruler of Israel, that is to say, of them that
beholds the in life everlasting, to whose governance thou semest much to
give thy self: take also regard unto our aid and mayntenaunce. For in that
heavenly region where as thy blysfull saints does se thee after a marvelous
order and exceeding glory of the inhabitauntes, it appears unto them as if
thou were so occupied in preserving and keeping them: that thou might be
thought to have utterly forgotten us, amongst whom all things are troubled,
confounded, and put out of right order. For which cause we hertelye pray
thee, that haste dominion over heaven and earth in quietness: do not so
attend only to the blessed company there above, that thou will leave
dysamayde and comfortless thy faithful assembly here beneth.

Wherefore have regard unto our help and furtheraunce, O Lord, that haste
Israel in thy governance: have regard, good Lord, that leadest Joseph even
like as a sheep is led.

For by Joseph which betokens increase, what is mente but thy faithful and
devout people? Albeit a young forte of people, whom thou begotte in thine
old age, that is, in this our last and unfortunable time: which abides
heinous persewynges and reuengynges of his brethren, and is nyrnamed of them a
dreamer. This Joseph as he grows from day to day in more grievous combrau^ce
and trouble, so do thou lead him thorough fire and water, even as a meke or
gentle sheep unto the shambles being continuallye tamed and brought low: so
that by fetters and prisons he may pass forth unto that kingdom, and those
pastures which are fresh and floryshyng for ever and ever. Whereupon thou that
in these wise leadest like a sheep Joseph, art mysdemed of the unfaithful to
pass nothing of our matters: and therefore be present, Lord, and ready to
relief and defend us, that the wicked ianglers mouths may be stopped. For
we do not crave gold, nor riches, nor yet prontotions of this world: but we
covet thy light, we earnestly desire to know thee.

Thou that syttest upon Cherubim, be opened and set before the eyes of
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasse. Therubim betokens plenteousnesse of
knowledge, Ephraim bringynge for the fruit, Benjamin the son of thy right
hand, Manasse forgytfulnesse. Thou therefore that syttest and art at rest in
thy self from each work that thou haste ordained, and art fastened in the
seat of thy everlasting mansyon, and do continue in the heyghte of thy
Majesty's trone: as the King, as the Lord, as the Judge and master of all:
thou (I say) that syttest upon Therubim, that is, upon the plenteousnes of
knowledge, far surmountynge and passing all knowledge and all understanding,
for that thou art undoubtedly a secret God and unsearchable: be opened and
appear (I beseech thee hartelye) unto Ephraim, that is to say, unto thy
people which now brings for the fruit to thy honor, so that they may
know the fully and parfectlye. For who so knows thee: he loves thee, he
forgets his own self, he loves thee better then himself, and does
wonderfully profit the congregation. Be reueyled also before Benjamin, that is,
before all thy chosen and marked forte abiding here, or else where, which no
doubt even for thy very choice and appoyntement are made worthy to be called
the children of thy right hand: so that thy people may increase, and that
thy chyldreu sparsed abroad may comme together, and that there may be one
sheep house and one shepeherde.

Open thy self also to Manasse, to all the Infidelles, whom thou semest to
have cast out of remembrance, because they have forgotten thee, for so much
as thou haste so long wythdrawen from them the food of life. Show thy self
at the last unto all the world, that men may comme out of darkness and the
shadow of death into light, and may set strayghte their steps into the
way of peace. But if the stubbourne sect will uneaths be amended, and if the
nombre of those fools be excedyng great.

Raise up thy power, and come, that thou may make us safe. Lo, the rich
oppresses the poor, the rulers despoyleth the simple flock, the ungodly
perseweth the ryghteous without any petie: thy faithful fyndeth few
fatherlye helpers they have no maynteyners.

Full many a one (alas) is drawn to hell, thorough the evil ensamples of
priests and the cleargye, which is clean without hope of recouerye toward
amendment. There are a passing meany of noisome Phariseis, a great rabble of
harmefull hypocrites, with whose poisoned exhortacions and lessons the whole
world is infected. They will not hear the words of truth, no man may
correct them: whereby thy faithful dare not ones lift up their head.

What do thou, O Lord? Why sleapest thou? Wherefore do thou wytholde thy
might? Stir up thy power, I humblye beseech thee, and comme. Thou that art
every where, with thy scourges and with thy strength stryke these false and
myschieuous deprauers of thy word, destroy these craftye and malicious
accusers of thy servants, condemn these obstinate and deuelyshe despysers
of thy grace. I do not say this, I do not wyshe it, I do not ask this, as and
I were delyted to se them punyshed: but that thou may save us thine elected
and chosen, seruyng thee continually, loving thee above all these things,
evermore obeynge thy decrees and commandments. Thou aunswerest me perchance
in this wise. Yt I shall cast in my swearde of vengeance, if I shall send
pestilence among them, if I shall pyne them with honger: thynkest thou then,
that thou thy self can continue in so much and so grievous trouble?

O good God do thou turn us, and show us thy face, and we shall then be in
sauegarde. For why, we are frail and feeble, nor we trust not in our own
virtue or power: for that we are not sufficient so much as to ymagine any
thing of our self, as of our own abylytie, but our suffisaunce is of God.
For this mortal flesh is bourdenouse unto the mind, and this earthlye
dwelling holds down the wit coveting to conte^plate sundry matters.
Wherefore do thou convert us o God. Turn us to the from earthly thoughts to
heavenly things, turn unto the our dyssobedient and rebellious will and
arbytryme^t: and to us ones turned show thy countenance, yt we may know
the: declare thy power, that we may fear the: utter thy wisdom, that we may
honor the: show forth thy goodenesse, that we may love the: show thy self
ones show thy selue again, sheue thy self contynually, that we may pass
thorough trouble with a gladsome chere: and so shall we be saffe. For if thou
preserve us, we shall be in sauegarde: if you take away thy hand, we can not
be saved. Why taryest thou Lord? Why doste thou not favorably hear my
request?

Lord God of might, how long art thou angrye with thy seruante prayeng unto
the. Full often have I asked the, right long have I desired the, many a time
have I beseched the. Wherefore the^ doste thou not lysten unto me gracyously?
Wherefore do thou make such delay? Why? art thou yet to dyspleased? With me
for my sins? If you do at count and reken my fautes Lord, Lord who shall
be able to abide the? Therefore o Lord that haste power to do al things, o God
that rulest all things unto whom they which vpholdeth the world done
obeysaunce, whom high poures, whom the heuens and their dominions do
reuere^tly fear: Lord God of might, how long will thou be angrye with thy
servant prayeng unto thee? where is thy entyre love? Where is thy strength?
Where is thy manifold mercy? What? Ar they refrayned and kept away over us?
We will cry unto the both night and day, knowing verily that if so be thou
will make a cariaunce, yet wol thou at the last ge^tylly hear our
importunate suit.

Thou shall feed us with bread of tears, and shalt give us drink of tears
by measure. I hope (I say) that I shall be herd, for that thou haste evermore
loved troth. Deny thy self thou can not. For thou haste promised: Ask,
and it shall be given ye: seek, and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened
unto you. Albeit first thou shall feed us with bread of tears, with bitter
bread, with pleasant bread. For tears ar both sour, and sweet. Sour, for
the absence of goodness: sweet, for ye certaynte of fyndyng out goodness.
Bitter they been, for because that trust which is driven of and delayed
greueth the poor soul: pleasau^te they are, for the presence of thy
sweetness, which stirrest us up to pray, and causest us to call upon the we
unspeakable sighs. And thou salt give us drink of the cup that is in thy
hand full of the sweetness of pure wine. For why, thy comforting shall revive
our spyrites and quicken our minds, even according to the heap of the greafes
and anguyues in our heart Drynk therefore shall thou give us in the tears of
troubles, which washes the face of our conscience, which clearith our
understanding, which moystureth our heart with devotion, and yeldeth us the
savor of love and charity. Than thy good tears ar sweet tears Doutlesse,
which has been food to us day and night. Hear us therefore thou shall, but
before that shall thou feed us and give us drynk in trears: not more the we ca^
bear, but in measure, after the lymytyng of the troth. For thou will not let
us be tempted more then we can bear, but thou will make also this profit to
come of thy prouinge, that we shall be the better able to suffer. Thou shalt
feed us, I say, with tears, not always, but a certain time which thou haste
put in thine own power, Now lo, when that same time appointed is ones comme:
then shall our weping and waylyng have ane end, then shall thy anger cease, then
shall our prayers be accepted. Thou shalt turn us to the, thou shalt show
the light of thy countenance, thou shalt raise thy might, thou shall make
us saffe and sound, and thou shall be reveled and opened before Efraim,
Benjamin, and Manasse: and thou shalt enlarge thy church, and take regard to
the governance there of. The mean while, we shall possede our souls in our
sufferaunce. For why,

Thou haste set us to be with said of our neighbors, and our enemies have
mocked us, In the mean season as thy children do thou chastyse us: that we
may be cleansed, that we lay not our heart unto riches, that we follow not
worldely praise, that thy truth may the more comme to light: and for these
causes haste thou set our neighbors to replye and speak against us. And who
been our neighbors, but theys disse^blers: which ar nether hot nor cold,
which in their outward behauy our done appear as they were Christians Lord
(they will say) I thank ye for yt I am not as the commen sort of men ar
unrighteous, rauyshers lecherouse, yea even as this Publicane is: I fast twyse
in a weke, I give in alms the tenth part of all that I have: and yet for all
this, they be not inwardly true Christians. They are therefore our neighbors,
because they seem to be like us in their works: but they are not of our
householde, because they have not lowlynesse, they have not love and charity.

Why the^ after what facyon have thou set these neutralles to wythsaye and
strive against us: but for because thou haste lightened us in the way of
truth, and haste showed us thy countenance. By that light have we espied
then and perceived that they be painted graves which without appears gaye and
gorgyous, but within they be full of dead men's bones and al vncleanlynesse.
Wherefore lest simple folk and other Christyans should perysh, thorough their
sayengs and ensamples: we have toide them boldly, and given them this warnyng:
beware of the Pharisees leuyn, which is hypocrisye or a feigned pretense of
holiness. Cerymonyes, customs, or vsages shall not save you: we have disclosed
and plainly set out to every man's syghte their scrupulous conscience. We have
reproved and rebuked them, saying: you be they, that make your self parfecte
and ryghteous before men, but God knows your hearts: for what so ever is
loftye before men, is abomynatio^ before God. Hereupon ryseth ragyng envy,
herupon grows great malice he reupon springs and increases debate and
controuersye. For they set more by men's glory, the^ Gods glory. Therefore
go they romyng up and down the cite, they run hither and thither, they
hau^te wome^s howses, they grudge at us, they sclaunder us, they speak against
us, they persewe us. And so it is comme to pass, that our enemies has mocked
us. Our enemies ar manifest and open sinners, the friends and lovers of this
world, proud, covetous, ryattous, cursyng, man quaylers, and adversaries of
Christ his cross. These (I say) not willing to hear our words, yea rather
thy words o lord, but fleyng away from them persuaded and brought in to a
wrong beleff by those hypocrites, has scorned us, and disdaynefully despised
us, as and we were idyoths or fools. And what is the cause, that our neighbors
has contraryed and wythsayed us, and that our enemies has deryed us? wherefore
done our neybours more the^ our enemies? Why? Are not the Pharisees our enemies?
yes truly they been our enemies, and yt our deadly enemies: yet ar they wyly
and crafty, yet ar they secret and very close. For they do bear us in hand
that they be our friends, they say that they love us well, they falsely
pretend that they speak for the truth sake, and not for hatered of us: so
that these hypocrytes hurt us more, than open enemies. They are called
therefore neighbors, because they make them self our friends, and yet
nevertheless are mutteryng against us. Whereas our enemies does ^^emye laugh
at us. yea and our enemies would not scorn us, if these felows were not busye
in talking against us. yea our enemies might be turned to repentance, if
these medlers did not let them. To be breue our enemies would becomme our
friends, and defenders of the truth, if thy church had no such Pharisaical
wythsayers. Great is the battayl, dangerous is the strife, douteful is the
vyctorie. Wherefore,

Lord God of might, turn us unto the, show us thy countenance, and we shall
be saffe enough. God that gyuest strength unto the power above to fight with
out dread against the old dragon, and boldly to achiue all hard enterprises:
God of might turn us from the fond love of our self unto the parfyt love of
ye whereby we may be knytte unto the, and stycke to the: for so shall we be
afraid of nothing, but fight out thy battle with a full confidence. For
thou art our strength and our stay, our succoure, and our defense. Therefore
Therefore show the light of thy countenance, set out thy truth. Make thy
light evident and plain: that these hypocrites do not deceive us, that they
wrappe not our hearts in darkness, that we may avoid and escape their
snares, and may walk in the way of truth. And so if thou deliver us, if
thou lyghten us, if thou fight for us, we shall be saffe. Go to Lord, do so
Lord: arise, awake, comme, and tarry no le^ger. Where be thy manyfolde mercyes
showed in old time, Lord? Remember thine own labors, do not set light by
thine own pains, do not despise the works of thine own hands.

Thou haste, removed thy pineyarde out of Egypt, thou haste cast out the
heathen, and haste grafted it. Thy vyneyarde is thy church. Wherefore is it
cleped a vineyard? Because it yeldeth wine which does make men's minds in a
manner dronke^ with love of heavenly things, which does refresh and make glad
our hearts. A good vineyarde, a vyneyarde of the best, that turns into wine
what so ever is laid about the rote thereof.

If a man will put unto the root here of water, dou^ge, or any other thing:
it changes into wine al to gyther, what soever it be that it draws unto it
self. For it never brings forth other water or dunge, or any thing, but
wine. So all that is offered unto the Church, that is to say, unto the
faithful soul of man: be it mockage, or persecutyon, or gold, or
commendation, or cursyng: it turns al to charity, to patience, to lowlynesse,
and other virtues. This vineyarde, these faithful men nothing coveting,
nothing fearing in this world haste thou removed out of Egypt, that is to
wete, out of darkness. For they were in lack of light for ignorance, and in
the darkness of sin: they knew not their end, they could not tell whither
to go. Thy light haste thou sent them, and out of darkness haste thou
brought them. But the heathen (that is) wicked souls and froward men,
without reason, without law, without lernyng did malycyously pursue them, and
did destroy thy vineyard. They were eue^ like stoones very hard strykers,
hurting the fete of them that walked therein, marring the branches, and utterly
letting the fruit of the vineyarde.

Thou haste therefore cast owre the heathen: thou haste killed the
bloodesuckars and murderers of thy witnesses: thou haste brought to confusyon
the maumettes and idolles, thou haste given to the devil heretics and them
that be^ obstinate in their own fantasies: thou haste gathered the stones
together, and cast them for the, and made them to be far from thy vineyarde,
and they are sonke down into the depthe. Thou haste grafted it in thy holy
mownte, in thy faith, in the parfectnesse of thy justice, in thy Christ. It
has passed thorough the red see, it has passed thorough fire and water: for
diverse troubles has it not given over, it is saffe enough.

Thou haste ben the guide of the journey in her eye sight: thou haste planted
the roots of her, and she has filled the earth. A strong, a wise, a gentle,
a great guide. For why, God is a mighty Lord, and a mighty King above al
Kings. Who than would not follow such a guide? But after what manner haste
thou ben her leader? Thou haste come down, thou haste apeared in flesh and the
facyon of a man: for her, haste thou suffered persecutions, wythsayenges,
cursings, scorninges tormentrie, yea and death of the cross. To thy father
did thou pass forth by the way of thy passion, and thou made a
proclamation: Who so will comme after me, must deny him self, and must take
his cross, and follow me. A graunde captain, a difficulte way. But who will
be afraid, having such a guide that will not lyngar behind a man, but go
before him? Thou therefore (o Lord) haste ben not a lurking captain, but open
and manifest: al men might behold the. Guide of her journey haste thou ben en
her eye sight.

For openly werte thou nailed upon the cross betwyexte two thieves. And because
the vyneyarde is but feeble, for that the vynetre it self is but a weak manner
of wood: thou haste strengthened it, and haste set the roots thereof. No
fleshly man, nor aungel has planted it: but thou with thine hands, with thy
wisdom, with thy power, with thy bounteousnes haste set the roots of her
love, of her charity, of her good affection. Thou haste planted this vineyarde
(I say) in a good ground, in the ground of living creatures, in thy wounds,
in thy cross, in thy godhed: and therefore has it yielded fruit, it has
brought forth pleasant wine, wine of the best, such wine as wol ravish a
man's mind: with manifold branches is it increases, so that it has filled
the holle earth. It has filled (I say) the earth with virtues, with heavenly
gifts, with grace, light, and the knowledge of God. Not with the Philosophers
cunninge, which when as they knew God, they did not esteem him and glorify
him as God, nor yet rendered thanks unto him: but they vanished awayne in their
conceytes and thoughts, their folysh hearts was darkened and blinded. For they
naming and counting them self to be wise men, becamme very idyotes and fools.
So is it not with thy vineyarde, o Lord. And why? Mary,

The shadow of it has covered the hills, ye vynes thereof has ouerspred the
Cedre trees of God. Which is the shadow? The old testament going before the
truth of the Gospel, even as our shadou goes before our body, when the
sun comes after: but when the sun comes before our face, tha^ does not
the shadow go before but comes after, and we se it not. Semblably the Law (as
it were a shadow) went before the truth and grace which is by Jesus Christ,
because the sun of ryghteousnes did then follow, that he might afterward come,
and apeare, and show his face to us. Wherefore he came, and opened the truth,
and set it before our eyes: now, lo the shadow follows and comes after our
back. We therefore do flee away from it, and do go toward the sun. The
shadow of the Law, and of sacrifyses is ouerpassed, because the sun of
ryghtousnes Christ our God is come. The shadow of it therefore, that is to
say, the Law and the dark teaching of the Prophets covered the mowntaynes.
Who ar the mountains? Men steadfast in faith, high in parfectnes of justice
and contemplacyon of heavenly things. Certesse, the Patriarchs and Prophets,
not the Philosophers and Orators, which ben the mountains of pride. This
vineyarde than proceeded from the unsearchable and heavenly light of the
Patriarchs and Prophets.

And the shadow hereof has covered the hills, that is to say, Bisshoppes,
Patriarchs, and prophets: which having plentieth of knowledge in the Law, and
being replenyshed with spirit of Prophecye did cover thy vineyarde, and
mayntayn it. Thou did come (Lord) unto thy tyllers of this yard, and they
killed yt, and did cast ye out of it. Houbeit you the^ worthily destroye^g those
naughty occupyars, haste let forth thy vineyarde to be hired of other
husbands which has done the fruits thereof (that is to say) has turned ye
shadow of the Law into light. The carnal sense have they drawn unto a
spiritual understanding, that when they be weary they might sytte under the
shadow thereof, and be cooled from fervent heat: yea the shadow of it is
becomme light, for that the very Law it self spiritually taken and
understood is made the Gospel: under whose shadow which is the light the
weary soul resting thus does singe and say: Under his shade have I sit whom I
lo^ged for, his fruit is sweet and pleasant to my throat, And again. The
breathe of our mouth, is Christ. The Lord was taken in our treaspace, unto
whom we said, In thy couerte shall we live among the gentiles. Then did he
multiplye the vinebraunches among the Heathen. For the Gentiles camme to
Christ, to the tyller, to the vinetre, to the vineyarde: the branches were
multiplied, they did grow for the a great nombre, and not without a cause were
made even as vyneyardes, and the vines thereof were lifted up on high. Yea they
covered the Cedre trees of God. Which are the Cedre trees of God? Undoubtedly his
Apostles, his Evangelists, the teachers of his congregation. Wherefore the
chosen children out of the Gentiles camme to them, they took them by the
hand, and said: With you will we go, for we have herd that God is with you.
Than were the Cedre trees glad, they bowed down themselves, and said: Clyme
up, clymme up over us, take us: for we will hear, we will hold you up, we will
lift you from the ground. So the Gentiles went up by faith, and were builded
upon the fou^dacion of the Apostles and Prophets, even Christ Jesus himself
being the high corner fronne. These vines therefore has ouerspredde the Cedre
trees of God. O happy vineyarde, o blessed branches, which have not followed
the wisdom of folish Philosophers: but that heavenly sapience of the mountains
and Cedre trees (that is) of the Prophets and Apostles, the light unspeakable,
the way of truth that leads you truly unto your right country. But how
large is this vineyarde? Is it the land of Iewry alone? Is God only the Jews
their God? Doutelesse from the sun rysyng unto the sun setting, Lord,
great is thy name among the people.

The has streched out her branches even to the sea, her long spreading
reaches unto the river. The Cedre trees of Libane reioysed, they cried and
lyfted up their voice.

Their sound went forth in to all the world, and their words unto the
uttermost borders of the whole world. The sea herd, and swelled, and the
earth was troubled. The floodes of the sea roose. Marvelous ar the surges of
the sea, maruelons is the Lord in high places. Troubled were the mountains:
proud princes, presses, scrybes and Pharisees. The kings of the earth stood
by, and the rulers camme to gyther against the Lord, and against his Christ.
But God thundered from heaven, and the highest gave his voice. The voice of the
Lord in a power, the voice of the Lord in a magnificence. Stones did listen,
and forthwyth trembled trees of the woods: the hard hearted and unfruitful
Heathens did lysten, and forthwith were they turned into branches of the
vinetre. The sea beheld, and ran a way, Iordane the river turned backward
again. But the Gentiles euerywhere camme unto the vine, they fastened
themself to it by faith and love: they increased greatly even to the end of
the world, to the mountains and the sea: whereas tyrauntes and froward people
were stryken, cast down into hell, and overwhelmed with the sea. Contrarywyse
our vineyard has spredde forth her branches even unto the sea, that is, unto
the fardest part of land. The sea therefore compasses this vineyarde, beats
upon it, but the whaues be broken against it.

But what worthed of the countreye of Jews? It was hardened, it was dried up,
it yielded no fruit. Thou haste cut of therefore such branches (oheue^ly
tyller) and haste thrown them in to the fire. Why, ar all the branches
destroyed and lost? God for bid. For yet the leauinges been saved. Many
branches of Jews according to thy will and appointment, has continued in ye
vinetre, and has yielded parfecte fruit The vineyarde growed, ane stretched
forth her vynes even unto the river. What means this, Lord unto the river?
Why, is there in all the world but one flode? Is the world shut up or
enclosed by some see, or any river? No verily: but like as when the Prophet is
named, David is mente thereby for his excellence, and Paul when the Apostle is
named: so in this place whereas is mentioned a river generally, understand thou
it of Iordane, which was hallowed and sanctified of my son: for it alone
has that preemynence.

What means then unto the river, but unto the river Iordane? That is, unto
the people of the Hebrews did she spredde forth her branches. Think not than
the people of the Hebrews to be al to gyther expelled. For that stonne which
they in their buyldyng refused, is made the hedde corner sto^ne. Therefore bygge
was the church then o Lord, bygge (I say) in worthynesse: great in truth,
great in parfecte nesse of virtues, great in charity, great in the nombre of
wonderful works, large also in spreading forth, great it was: for because a
great Lord art thou that did grafte it, that did give it increase:
because thou did enlarge it, because thou (Lord Jesus) werte the guide of
her journey. Thou did labor in it, thou did travail, thou did
watch: thou did dest consecrate her with thine own blood, and with the blood
of thy martyrs or witnesses. Where than ar thy pains becomme? where is the
sweat? where is thy blood? What haste thou done Lord God? what haste thou
done, o my savior?

Wherefore haste thou thrown down the wall of the Vinyarde? and wherefore do
every man that passes by the way gather the grapes? Why haste thou done this,
good Lord? what is the effect? The custody of Angels haste thou put from
it: they did keep away thieves, they did defend it. Where is that sure ward
now a days? Where ar the Prophets? Where ar the Apostles? the teachers, the
heardemen compassing this vineyarde, dryuing out wicked spyrites, banyshing
heretics, correcti^g un gracious persons, and preserving the weak and
vnparfecte? Which is the wall? The custodye of Angels, the defense of
shepardes, the holy doctrine of preachers. Where is this wall? It is destroyed?
Why, who has pulled it down? Thou Lord, which haste taken away thy good
preachers, which haste gathered thy shepardes in to heaven, which haste taken
away thy messengers. Wherefore haste thou thrown down the wall of this
vineyarde? Haste thou so done, for that she may fulfill her naughtynes, for
that her wickedness may be accomplyshed to the intent to punysh her, and so to
renew her? But what has she left undone? What sin is there that may not be
found in her? Verily (Lord) look how that her wickedness is brought to the full
swing. And now does each body that goes by the way pluck her grapes. Not
the true orderers of the vineyarde, not the true tyllars gathers her fruits:
not al good, nor yet a few good, nor yet some good and some evil, no not so
much as one good, but eueryche one that comes by the way plucketh her
grapes. None but they which keeps not thy ordinance, yea which knows not
the way of God, open sinners, of an evil report ar chosen unto the ministry
of the altar: to those ar benefices given: they do gather the fruits of the
vineyarde for them self, and not for the: they do not regard thy poor
people: they do not feed the hungrye: they clothe not the naked, they harber
not the stranger: they defend not the wydow and the fatherles child: they
done eat the lamb out of the flock, and the calfe from the midst of the
heard: they do singe after the noise of shaulmes and organes: they supposed
they had the instruments of song even like David: chaunting in quiers,
praysyng God with their lyppes, and being far from God in their heart: drynkyng
wine in cups of gold and silver, and dressed with very sweet and sauery
oynteme^tes: and yet has no compassion upon ye rough punishment of Joseph,
they take no manner pity upon the nedy and poor body. These therefore that
passes by thy way, gathers up the grapes of thy vineyarde. But what shall I
say, o Lord? For all they also which passes by their own way, does pluck
the fruit of the vineyarde. For they walking by their own way, and seeing the
wall of the vineyarde destroyed, has ouerpassed their way. They made not a
straight journey, but leaving their own way turned their feet into thy
vineyard, that they might pluck her grapes and take away her fruits: not
spiritual, but temporal fruits. What is it, that thou tellest me? This I say,
o Lord. The rich robbes of this world walking by ye way of their sins,
seking by right and wrong for riches, dignytes promotions and pleasures of
this world has gone aside out of their way. They ceased to follow these
worldely goods, for such substance and honor did they labor no more: they
turned themself to thy vineyarde, to ecclesiastical auau^cement, to the riches
of the church: that wall which did put back the unworthy is broken down and
destroyed, yea and they have entered in that passes by their own way, and
have taken away the fruits. What say thou? This, I mean: To day in the
commen route of men, and to morrow in the room of a Bishop:

To day in a tolebothe, and to morrow a chanon in the quier: To day a
soldier, and to morrow a priest. They passed by their own way, and went a
side to thy vineyarde: not to the entente to til it for the, but to gather the
grapes there of for themself. This also I speak with tears: There have entered
in evil spyrites, and five naughty men (that is to say) the hedde, and the
members: and plucking the gostely fruits of this vineyarde have cast them
forth, trodde them under feet, hid them, destroyed the^: the tyllars and
workers have they stryke with the sword, and thrown them out of the
vineyarde: the best branches have they cut of: finally with mischeuous
perswasyons, threateninges, persecutyo^s, and evil ensamples they go about to
bring to naught what so ever goodness is found in the vineiarde. Wherefore then
haste thou, Lord, destroyed the wall of it?

What profit, what fruit thereof ensues? For because of that does every man
that passes by the way pull the grapes of yt. But would God only men, or
wicked spyrites going by the way did gather the grapes of it, and not also
very beasts did enter in to it. But lo a naughty beast has gone in to it,
and has destroyed it even from the rote.

A Boore out of the wood has broken the bands of it: and a singular wild
beast has devoured it. This boore is a swyn, a fylthie swyn, a proud swyn, a
cruel swyn: not tamed at home, but wild out of yt wood: an exceeding wa^to^
clarke, a lecherous priest, which is no man, but a beast, but an vncle^ly
swyn: he aprocheth to thy altar, he has layn ye hole night in his beastlynes,
indirt, in do^ge, and in ye morning presumes to touch thy sacraments. This
proud swyne can not be tamed, will not be corrected, and lets scorn to hear
ye words of truth: he speaks arroga^tly, he aryseth against who so
rebukes him, he byteth, he teareth fiersly, he spares no words, he curses,
he blasphemeth in the despite of God. He is a hog, he is cruel, he is a
beast, not a man: he persecuteth men: he is no domestical nor of the
householde, no not so much as newly grafted in: he comes not out of the
Lords house, but from the wood, from the company of beasts, from the
multitude of wild beasts, from the wilderness of sinners. He knows not
God, he is ignoraunte in the sacraments, he understands not his own office:
he only loves dyrth, he embraces donge, he is delyted with blood. Why then
what has this boore done o Lord God? He has rooted up thy vineyarde, he
has put it out of thy bonds, out of thy precepts and co^mandementes, out of
thy instructyons and teachinges of the primative fathers, out of thy laws has
he set it: he has replenyshed it with dirthe and do^ge, with excessive
pleasures and vnclea nelynes, with gluttony and dronckardye. The tyllars has
he slain, the young children has he killed, the women has he desloured, the
branches has he drawn to the ground, the vynes has he plucked up by the
root, and has torn alto gyther with his tethe: with his pride has he trod
the trees under his feet, and cast them forth of the vineyarde. This boore
coming out of the wood has broken the bonds of it, and a singular wild
beast has devoured it. Lo what pride is here? He will needs be singular, he
will have no superior, he will have no peace, he looks not to have fellows, but
servants and subjects: he coueteth to possess al singularly, he seeks
evermore to ascend, he is delyted with a singularite, he regards not Christ
his charity: he will not be a ministre, nor sheparde, nor father, nor mother,
nor partaker of tribulacyon, nor every man's servant to the entente for to
win every man: but a lord, but a wolf, but a cruel and a sturdye ruler to
destroy the vineyarde, to pluck up the roots, utterly to waste it, holly to
eat it, and bring it to naught. Is not also this wild boore and syngulare
beast an evil Prince, a proud tyraunte, al together unclean, al together
cruel? Which comes out of the wild wood of beasts, from ministers like
himfelfe, filthy, ryottous, arroga^te, cruel that are beasts and no men.
Which hates the worshypping of God, banysheth holy men out of the cite,
persecuteth the good, punysheth the wise, detesteth and can not abide the
truth, rejoices in lies, is delyted with flatering tales, drives away
concord, norisheth debate, breaks matrimony, puts virtues to exyle,
commends vrces, chaseth away chastyte, enhaunseth ungracious persons,
finally causes al noughtynes to be at the full flynge. He has burste the
bands of the vineyarde, for that he has stand by every way that is not
good, and has not behated the contrary trade to virtue and honestye. Is not
this boore percase and singular wild beast also the devil? A foul spyrite, a
cruel mankyller, puffed up with pride, that said: Into heaven will I clyme,
above the sterres of the firmament will I exalte my scate, I will be like unto
the highest. He also has fed de upon the vineyarde, has eaten the branches,
has swalowed the vines and has incorporat it with himself: he is beco^me ye
head of myschief, and they his members: and Christ his vineyarde, is becomme
the deuylls vineyard, for that a syngular wyld beast has devoured it, Alas
alas alas Lord God, where is the vineyarde which thou did translate out of
Egypt, out of which thou did cast the Heathen, which thou did set
with thine own hands, whose journey thou did guide, which replenished the
earth with virtues, whose shadow covered the mountains, and the vines, and
the cedre trees of God, which did stretche out her branches eue^ unto ye
see, and her spredding boughs unto ye river. Where been her virtues? where are
ye gifts of ye holy ghost? where ar the graces freely bestowed? where is her
love? where is her hope? where is her faith? Art not thou God, with whom there
is no change? Art not thou he, that is to say. God which did dest work
mercy with our fathers? Are not we the workemnashyp of thy hands? Does not
Christ co^tinew for evermore? Haste not thou also suffered for us? Haste thou
forgotten us o Lord? Thou Lord art our father, and Abraham knew us not, nor
yet Israel.

Thou Lord art our father, and our re demer, thy name has been from the be
gynnyng. Wherefore then haste thou turned thy face from us? We have sinned, we
have done amysse, we have committed naughtynes. Lord deal not with us after
our sins, another reward us according to our iniquyties. Lord remember not
our old fautes, let thy mercy preuente us anonne, for we are very nedy and
poor. No, nor yet our fathers were found ryghteous: but sinners, worshippers
of idols, murderers, cursers, covetous, proud and hye minds not obedient to
their pare^tes, folysh, and blasphemyng thy name.

Yet haste thou delte with them even according to thy great mercy. For they
posseded not the earth in their sword, nether their own power saved them:
but thy right hand, and thy power, and the lyghtenyng of thy countenance,
because thou werte pleased in them. Go to therefore, and deal with us after thy
great mercy, and turn not away thy face from us.

God of might be thou turned, look back from heaven and behold, and visit
this vinciarde. God of powers that art a pure act, a power infynyte, the
power of powers, governing al things, doing al things, quickening al things,
creating the poures of al things, ges, gyuyng them strength, drawing them to
their work, going before them turn us (o Lord) unto the, and we shall be
turned: go thou before us, draw us after the, give strength to our virtues,
and make us lively. Why do thou not look upon us? Why haste thou turned thy
back? Show us thy countenance. Be turned God of poures unto us, and then
shall we be turned unto the. For to be converted unto the, to think upon the,
to love the, it is thy gift. Look back from heaven: for thou art gone far
hense, thou haste ascended even up in to heaven: thou art departed from us,
yet look upon us from heaven, although thou will not comme down to ye earth,
although our sins does otherwise deserve: regard us, send us thy light from
above, from the deserte of compassions, from the Christ, from the place where
as thy blessed saints prays for us. See how we are made desolate and
comfortles, behold and take pity upon our shame and reproach: our heritage is
traunslated unto strangers, our houses unto forynars. Where is Jerusalem?
Where is the holy land, wherein thou did work so many miracles? Where is
thy grave? Ar thy not in the hands of infydels? Behold Lord with the eyes of
thy mercy the hole world, and the fullness thereof: not the fullness of
graces, but plentyeth of sins, plentieth of ignorance, plentieth of
wretchedness. Behold thy vineyarde, thy church, the common welthe, thy
Christian people, behold and have pity upon them. And visyt this vineyarde.
For yet to has it roots, yet there lives some branches: it began from the
beginning of the world, and never failed, nor never shall fail. For thou haste
promised: Lo with you am I al days even unto the worlds end. Then well may
it be diminyshed, but utterly fail it can not.

Now this vineyarde is the self same, that thou did plant. There is one
spirit, one faith, one baptime or fulleni^g, one God and Lord of all, which is
al together in all things. Visyte therefore this vineyarde, for thy visitatyon
shall keep her spyryte: visyte herwith thy grace, with thy presence, with thy
holy spyrite. Visyte it also with thy wande, and with thy staff. For thy wa^de
and thy staff shall comfort it. Visyte it with a scourge, that she may be
chastised and purged: for the season of pluckyng away things superfluous will
comme. Throw forth the stones, make fagottes of the wythered branches and
dry sticks to be burned. Raise her up, cut of the refuse, set under stays
and proppes, make the ground rank and ple^tiful, build the wall, and vysyte
this vineyarde, like as thou haste al ready visyted the earth, and inebryate it.
Visyt her, I say:

And make her parfecte, whom thy right hand has planted, and that upon the
son of man whom thou haste made strong for thyself. Do not only visyt her,
but also make her parfecte. For she is very vnparfecte. She would luye well, but
she nolde suffer evil. She has ensamples set before her eyes, she has the
Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs, and all the saints of God: yea she has
the very only begotten son: them would she follow, well would she do for to
get their glory, but aduersytes would she not abide. She is very vnparfyte. Make
her parfecte, o Lord: Send for the thy spirit, and then shall she be made
parfecte. Peter before the coming of the holy ghost said: yea if I must
needs be put to death with the, I will not deny the. Nevertheless for as much
as he was vnparfecte, at the voice of one poor maid he denied the Christ.
The holy Ghost camme, and fulfilled him with grace: and then he feared not
kings of the earth, for that thou made him parfecte: tha^ did he bring
forth fruit, than did he turn an exceeding sort of people to the faith, than
did he build churches and temples for the holy ghost to dwell in.

Wherefore make her parfect: and then will she bring forth fruit, and will
stretche out her branches thorough ye world. For yet is she afraid, yet dare
she not speak, yet she fears princes and rulers. Make her parfecte, whom
thy right hand has planted: not her, who^ me thy left hand has planted.
For there ar some Christianes, as certain pristes by name, not in very deed:
unto whom thou haste given the riches of this world, and multiplied their
temporal goods, but of thy spiritual Goods have they none. These therefore ar
the vineyard, which thy left hand has planted. I desire the not to increase
this vineyarde, or to make it parfecte: but that which thy right hand has
planted, which bears branches (that is to say) the faithful, to whom thou
have given thy grace, and thy gostly gifts: which ar thine elected. Among
whom every one says: His left hand under my hedde, and his right hand
shall embrace me. Make therefore this vineyarde parfecte, make her parfecte (I
say) upon the son of man, whom thou have confirmed for thy self. Who is
this son of man? For we are the sons of men, because we have a father and a
mother here in the world. But Christ is the son of man, for yt he is the
son of a maid: which in heaven has a father with out a mother, and in earth
a mother without a father. This son of man therefore haste thou made steadfast
in the hearts of me^ne: and haste also confirmed him for thyselfe (yt is) to
thy honor and glory. The land of Iewrye fought against him, and thou made
him sure unto the: tyrauntes has fought against him, and thou made him
sure unto the: heretykes has fought against him, and thou made him sure
unto the: Philosophers, logitians, and the wise me of this world has fought
against him, and thou made him sure unto ye: false brethren has fought
against him, and thou made him sure unto the: the devil, and the hole world
fought against him, and prevailed not, but thou haste made ye son of man
fast and sure in me^nes hearts to thy honor and glory. Therefore make parfecte
this vineyard upon him: so yt she by faith and love planted and rooted upon
Christ may come to parfectnesse, and out of that read earth, out of that
entyer zeal of Christ his charity, out of the merits of his passion may
bring forth very good wine rauyshyng man's hearts. Albeit for that she is
vnparfecte, for that she is fallen, for that the world is against her, this
seems impossible in the eyes of men: yet Lord nothing is impossible, nor
nothing hard unto the. Thou openest thy hand, and fyllest every lively
creature with blessing. Al things looks that thou should give them food in
season. When thou gyuest them, they will gather: when thou openest thy hand, al
things shall be filled with goodness. But when thou turnest away thy
countenance, they shall be troubled: thou shalt take away their spirit, and
they shall faynte, and be returned into their duste. How much more then, when
thou rebukest, shall al stoppes be taken away, and al destroyers be destroyed?

They kyndled with fire, and dygged up at the rebuke of thy countenance shall
perysh. For the kindled and half burned stycks, and vynes dygged up, and
unfruitful trees disparsed thorough the vineyarde, and the young branches
cou^founded, does mar the living vynes and lets them to bring forth
fruit.

Them therefore kindled and dygged up rebuke with thy countenance, with that
countenance whereof is spoken: But the Lords countenance is over al evil
doers: and forthwith the unfruitful trees shall perish: they (I mean) which
nether enters themself in to the kingdom of heaven, nor yet sufferet other
to enter. So that these kinled trees ar unclean sinners, fyred with the heat
of carnal lust, and turned in to coals: walking in darkness, and knowing not
whyther they go. For the fire has sytte over them, and they have not soene thy
son. This wood kindled with fire ar couetouse men and gredy in the desire of
monye, inflamed with the inordinat fire of auaryce, which never says enough
enough, or who who. These trees kindled with fire are men proud, desyrons of
honor, and envious men: which burns like as fire brandes, and ar incended
with couetyng of al things. This fire has wasted al virtues, has raised al
wanton lusts, is the cause of al ungraciousness. For pride is the foundation of
al naughtynes, and vehement desire of wilful appetite is the root of al
unhappiness: yt for the turning away from God, this for the turning unto
creatures. Now who ar the trees dygged up. but Hypocrites nohter hot nor
cold, which outwardly certesse seems not to be burned with the fire of lust,
or pride, or couetyse: yet inwardely ar they dry because they are dygged up,
they have no roots in the earth of the lyung trees, in the charity of Christ,
in the grace of God. Wherefore even as a tree, if it has roots in the earth, it
brings forth fruits at the heat of the sun: but if it has no roots in
the earth, but in the air, it wythereth away at the heat of the sun.
Semblably a man if he has the roots of faith and love in Christ, coming to
the auitre, to the sacraments of the church and godly duties, to hear Gods
word, to the reading of scriptures, to prayer: brings forth marvelous and
wonderful fruit and profit. But if his only study be for things
apparteynyng to his own self, and is rooted in his own love, in the air, in
the spyrite of arrogance: always about what so ever he goes he wythereth more
and more, and is made worse and worse. Hypocrytes therefore ar trees dygged up,
ar dry trees, ar fyrewoode: but certesse the very trees that are dygged up been
also kindled, and the trees kindled ar also as the trees dygged up. For
manifest and open syners ar dygged up, and plucked away, and rooted out from
the grace of God: and those Hypocrytes ar kindled with the fire of the love of
them self, of pride, of ambytyon, of couetyse, of pryuye or secret lust or
pleasure.

Thus al theyse Lord God dysparsed thorough the vineyarde, and heaped to
gyther will not suffer it to bring forth fruits: because the yonglynges and
simple folk ar ceduced and overthrown with their evil ensamples and
exhortatio^s. Rebuke the^ therefore rebuke them roughly, for that they are
styffe-necked: rebuke the^ with the sword, pestylence, and hongre. Thoroughe
the reprofe of thy countenance shall they perysh, and shall be cast out of the
vineyarde: the branches shall be lyfted up, other vynes shall be put thereto:
they shall grow and fructyfye: they shall extend their ofspryng even unto the sea, and shall reach unto the river. Why sleapest thou Lord? Arise Lord, and

Let thy power be showed upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son
of man whom thou haste made sure for thine own self. Comme Lord, do not
thou tarry. O God give thy judgment to the King, and thy justice to the
Kings son. For he is the man of thy right hand, which sytteth at thy right
hand. But which is thy right hand? For thou art inuisyble and with out any
body. Where is then thy right, or thy left hand? Thy glory is thy right
hand. Namely therefore of Christ was it spoken, that he sytteth at thy right
hand, because he reioyseth in better felicite above al domynyon, and power,
and strength, and above every name that is recyted not only in this world,
but also in the world to comme. And what is thy hand, but thy power? If thou
then haste a right hand, why haste thou not lykewysse a left hand? For power
haste thou to punish, and to gloryfye. For the Lord does quicken and mortifye,
does co^uey to hell and recarye, does bring low and exalte. Power therefore to
punish is thy left hand, power to gloryfye is thy right hand. Let thy hand
therefore, let thy power comme upon thy man of the right hand. How so? Has not
he had power given him from the beginning? For even he said to his dyscyples.
Al power in heaven and in earth is given unto me. How can thou then say: let
thy hand comme upon the man of the right hand? Given him it is, but it
appears not: bring to pass therefore that it may appear. Beastely and
carnal men does perceive and see how that thy servants ar mocked, despised,
sclaundered, and ar evermore in trouble and aduersyte, and then do they say.

Faith is not true, purueyau^ce of God is there none, deceived ar the
Christians, and so do they blaspheme thy name. To be breue they see proud
men, unrighteous, covetous, blasphemers, lecherous, and ungracious men to go
forward, and to have no adverse chance: so that they say. Other there is no
God, or else he does not regard mortal men's matters, other else he is
unjust and unequal. Thou then haste power, and doste contynually exercise thy
judgments, but they do not apeare always, and for that cause does me^ speak
in thy despite and reproach. Let thy hand therefore be made to apeare upon the
man of thy right hand.

Grant him judgment that may apeare. Bid him exercise the power that he
has in the sight of men.

For thou haste ordained him judge of the quick and the dead. Let thy hand
therefore comme upon him. Which hand? the right, or the left hand? Let thy
left, and also the right hand comme upon him: The left upon the evil, the
right hand upon the good. Let thy judgment apeare, and let thy mercy apeare,
that men may leave of cursynge and blasphemynge. Doutlesse thy left hand is
weaker than the right, because thou doste execute judgment with mercy, and
art loathe for to punish. But thy right hand is strong, for that thou art a
large and a lyberal gyuer. Thou openest thy hand, even thy right hand, and
fyllest every living creature with blessing. Let it come therefore upon ye man of
thy right hand Let thy left hand be to punish the wicked, that they may be
scourged, and so converted. And if they will not be turned unto the, that they
may be clean put out of thy vineyarde, and may be punished in the fire of
hell for ever. For why do they occupye the earth in vain? But let thy right
hand be upon the man of thy right hand to coneforte thy faithful, that in a
plenteous blessing they may be filled with the grace of the holy ghost, that
the wall of the vineyarde may be builded up to hold out them that passes by
the way: and not to suffer the boore of the wood, and a syngular wild beast
to enter in: to the entente that the vinebraunches may grow and bring forth
fruit. Yea is it not (trow ye) profitable, that both thy hands also be upon
the man of thy right hand for thy faithful? Yes undoubtedly.

For thy left hand, thy hand holding the scourge, thy hand that is wont to
stryke will cause them to tarry at the right hand. For the rod in the schools
keeps the child in awe, the wa^de makes him to learn. For as yet are we young
children: because as long as we are in this mortal lyffe, we are infantes, we
had need of the rod, we are fed with milk. But when that shall come, which
is parfecte, the prepertyes of a yonglyng shall we lay apart for all together:
and tha^ shall the scourge leave of. Thy scourge therefore is good and wholesome,
let thy scourge therefore comme, let it comme soon, let the power quickly comme
upon the son of thy right hand: that the good may be purged, yt ye just
may be made parfecte, that the evil may be expelled, that the destroyers of
the vineyarde may perysh. And upon the son of man let the vinebraunches be
grafted, whom thou have made sure to thy self, whom thou haste confyrmed in
the congregation to thy honor. For yet is he not hollye gone from the church.
Yet haste thou many servants, algates they be pryuye and secret, in whose
hearts thou haste confirmed thy Christ to thy glory: and let them, when as
the destroyers of the vineyarde ar driven out, go forth to their work even
until night. Comme therefore, o Lord, and couple us to thy tyllars, whom thou
haste prepared unto thy work. We are thy servants.

And we do not depart from thee: thou shall quicken us and upon thy name will
we call. We can not be without the. For in the have we our living, our mouyng,
and our being. And therefore do not we depart from the, seeing that thou haste
the words of everlasting lyffe. To whom shall we go? There is no God besyd the
Lord. For who has worked such wonderful maruayles, as thou haste done? Al
things that thou lysted haste thou made in heaven and in earth, in the sea and
in all places be they never so deep or bottomless. Although the world cry
out, men grudge, and the wicked persecute us: although the elements every one
make insurrection, yea although hell would break lose and be raised against us:
yet depart we not from the, no creature can sequestre us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. We do not trust in our own strenght, we
go not forth in our own virtues: but thou shall make vslyuely. Plenteously
shalt thou grant us thy grace, thou shall give us virtues, in our trouble
shalt thou send us a specyal aid whereby we shall be provoked to the
feruentnesse of charity. And upon thy name will we call. Thy name is thy
goodness: For none is good, but God alone. Thou alone therefore art good, to
yt alone this name does well accord. So then thy name (yt is to say) ye matter
of thy name, the thing sygnifyed by thy name: thy goodness (I mean) and thy
mercy shall we call upon, that it may help us and socoure us. Orels surely to
call upon thy name is to frame and facyon in our mind a conceyte or
apprehensyon of thy goodness: for it is a name only conceived in mind: so
that the conceyuing of thy goodenesse is thy name. Not every co^ceyt or thoucht
is thy name, which called upon saves a man, as it is written: Who so ever
calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saffe: but the conceyuyng of thy
goodness, which thorough fayeth brasteth forth in to love, and that by the gift
of grace far beyond the course of nature: this, I say, is thy name. What is
it then to call upon thy name, but inwardlye by faith to conceive thy
goodenesse, and to love it above al things. For a name is a voice sumwhat
betokenyng. What is it then to call upon any man's name, but to pronounce a voice
that betokens him? So that to call upon the name of God with our lyppes and
tongue, is to bring forth a voice that sygnifieth him. Likewise where there is
also a name only comprysed in mind and understanding: to call upon thy name
with our heart and mind, is to frame a thought or conceyte representyng and
layeng the before our eyes. Yet not every manner thynking of the is enough, but
that apprehendyng of thee saves: which is formed by the virtue of faith, that
works by love. Wherefore we will call upon thy name with our heart, we will call with
our lips and tunge: that from thy bounteousnes called upon the aid may
descend unto us well disposed and prepared, which have thorough thy grace
inwardly received thy name. Give us therefore strenght and virtue, whereby al
earthly desire utterly laid away we may be turned unto the even with all our
very heart, that in our troubles we fail not for feblenesse.

God of might convert us, and show thy face, and we shall be saffe, Certesse
thou art God of might, which haste chosen the vile and weak things of the
world, and therwyth have confounded all stout and strong things. For what is
weaker the^ ye cross? What is more folysh? What is more cursed? Lo thorough
thy infynyte power and might this gretest infirmyte is made for us the gretest
strenght and defense. This most vnskylful folyshnes is made for men most
profounds wisdom. This high and extreme cursyng is made for us an heavenly
blessyng and most parfecte justice. O the wonderful depenesse of the riches
of God his might, and his wisdom, and his bonteousnes. For that which is ye
weak thing of God, is stronger tha^ me^ and yt which is the folysh thing of
God, is wyser than men. Make us (o Lord) to understand this thy infynyte
power thy unsearchable wisdom, thy in estymable goodness: that we may know
there is no other God beside the Lord, and may be turned unto the. Convert us
God of might, and show thy countenance. Show thy Christ, thy crucyfied: by
whom we have known thy power, thy wisdom, and thy bonyte. What God has at
any time don such things, as has thy son our Lord Jesus Christ crucified
for us? He conquered the hole world without sword, he has thrown down all the
other Gods, tyrauntes has he destroyed, every where in heaven and in earth
has he triumphed for vaynquissyng his enemies, he has lyghtened the world by
his cross, he has taught how to live well, he has given and prescrybed the
doctrine or way to live verteously, so as no better can be ymagyned. He has
drawn to his love al kinds of men, which renouncyng and leauyng gold,
silver, and all the vanytes of this world, yea and themselves to: has also
gladly for his sake and cherefully suffered kinds of tormentryes most
spytefully devised even till they were martyred and cruelly done to death.

Who ever herd of such things? Or who has seen the like? In very deed Lord
Jesus, thou art a great God, the son of the highest God, the king of glory,
the God of might: and there is no God but thou Lord, which with the father and
holy ghost art one God blessed above al things. Show us therefore thy face.
In thy syghte was the earth moved, in the syghte, of the God of Jacob: which
turned a stonne in to a standing poole, and a rock in to sprynges of waters.
Lord show thy face, and we shall be saffe. For our fathers also were made
saffe, because thou did show them thy countenance, wherefore they praise
the and say: Not unto us Lord, not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name give the glory, for thy mercy and thy trouthes sake. Show thy
countenance therefore o Lord, that the rejected or wicked may perysh, for as
much as death shall go before thy face. Show thy countenance that thine
elected or chosen may serve the in love: and the^ shall we be saffe and whole,
then shall the world be renewed and adorned with virtues and with thy grace.
The^ shall the good be glad and rejoice excedyngly, then shall thy people dwell
in peace, and continually day and night give praise unto the. Which with thy
son, and the holy ghost lyuest and reygnest blessed God for ever and ever
world without end. Amen.


