Adams Garden.

A MEDITATION OF thankfulness and praises unto the Lord, for the return and
restore of Adam and his posterity: planted as flowers in a garden, and
published by a Gentleman, long exercised, and happily trained in the school
of Gods afflictions.

Abacuck 2.4. Behold, says the Lord, he that exalts himself, his mind is
not upright: but the gentle and meek is blessed, and he shall inherit the
earth. Matthew. 5.5.

Esaiah 1.18.19. Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: If thou
consent and obey, thou shall eat the good things of the land.

Esaiah 40.30.31. Bu^ even the young men, that put confidence in their ow^e
strength; those shall faint and be weary, even the young men shall stumble and
fall.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Haueland. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RENOWNED, George, Earl of Downbarre: Lord Howme of
Berwicke: Lord Norham: Lord-High-Treasurer of Scotland: One of the Lords
Lieutenants of the middle shires of great Britain: Lord-Gouernour of the Town
and Garrison of Berwicke: Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy counsel in both
Kingdoms:
Thomas Sauile wishes all true Honor and Magnanimity of mind, in the course
of his Rule and Estate; which may be a perpetual peace unto his desires.
MAy it please your Lord-ship, I was bold (of late) to present you a little
pamphlet of my writing; which you did please so very favorably to accept
(with declaration of your happy delight in such things) as has encouraged me
to rippe up all my faculties, and deepest comprehensions, to offer your
Lord-ship a further view, of such my poor blasted gatherings, as may sort to
the same end with the former. Very great surely, is the love and service I
owe your most Honorable self, and ever must: For whether I regard, the
wonderful degrees of your Honorable, gentle (and not vainelie exalted mind)
in speeches, and affoorded graces by countenance and acceptance; or that which
is much more, your open hand and purse unto my fainting estate (a favor which
I protest, I never tasted from any other Nobleman of the world:) for my good
Lord, it is well known till of late years, that my times have been disposed
and spent in giving and not taking. I must therefore and do deuote my self,
to love and admire your Lord-ship before the rest. Be pleased therefore (my
beneficial Lord) to receive this poor pawn of my resigned affections; and
take view how strange preparations the Lord quilteth upon the orphaned, such as
he does correct; even to make them find light in darkness, and much
confidence of reioicing in their forsaken and abandoned estate. I am bold to
put upon your Lord-ship, the broydure of not being vainelie exalted; a true
note of your wisdom, and that you know your self, state and calling, (and
whatsoever in this mortality) fading, even in Kings and Monarchs of the earth,
the period uncertain of dissolution: otherwise, if the Lord should afford you
all the works of his hands, in full fruition, and withdraw his countenance and
presence from you; all you enjoy in the world, shall be found but comfortless
comforts, when the change (which certainly does attend all mortality) shall
be designed. It is the heart that the Lord respects and accepts; and being
resigned and ankored in his will, he will love and establish the proceedings
thereof, for his very own delight in what alteration or change soever: So
that what sickness, trouble, grief or cross, may befall you, they shall but
be as his messengers, to bring you a seal and assurance of his fatherly
indulgence and care; and that he will have your heart himself in keeping
(be^^use with him there is no change at all) and so will build you up, unto
that assurance of hopeful expectation, wherein you shall find prepared, all
peace, patience, perseverance, and what in the world may be most desired, for
the type of euer-during felicity: which the Lord in all his favorable
enlargements give you. And so I pray pardon.

A gentleman long trained in her late Majesty's services, under that ever
famous Lord-Treasurer Burleigh:

Now your Lord-ships faithful servant Thomas Sauile.

To the Christian Reader.
MY kind gentle Reader, we say in the enterprises terprises and preuailings of
Arms, such a Captain did such a service, where not the commander, hut the
Soldiers did the atchieue. I now in this book infer Adams return, by a
contrary divert; where not Adams progeny but Adam alone made the breach, by
open offense; yet the penalty sorteth upon all his attainted posterity by
propagation and line of blood: and as his guilt is theirs, so his return
descends unto them, as the soldiers be sharers in the Captains
preuailings. This exercise therefore I call Adams Garden, because it proceeds
from the restored Army of his peculiar quarter, by the happy second Adam,
even by his renewing affordings, who is the Creator, Restorer, and Repairer of
the whole attaindor. It is not needless, but (alas) very needful, that men
should dwell in deep cogitation thereof, and still exercise their thoughts in
the wonderful dispersed storm of such a penalty, to the end the Crown of so
bountiful received enlargement, might more sensibly settle in their hard and
unprepared faculties. Oh that same Censure of a Father, touching fruition of
our perishing delights: Oh, I say, that it might be as truly verified upon
our often meditation of Adams happy return, by dwelling in the gardens of our
open acknowledgements for the Lords exceeding patience, to pardon, call, and
enforce our fathers happy repair! His words be these: Facile enim cor
humanum, omnibus quae frequentat, adhaeret ad^^, vt vix aut nunquam sine amore
valcant possideri. So I wish that our frequent dwelling in thankful care and
obedience might once beget the settled zeal and stable wrestling strife of love
and admiration in us, for so high shrined a state and prerogative, by restoring
and pardoning. But woeful, and strong, and resisting, is that received nature,
and combat from our first stirpe, for vanishing things; and too too sl^^ to
subscribe the sighings of the spirit and gronings of grace in us, to enjoy the
birth of a more holy renewment. Our desires be called the birth of the soul,
and the creations of God, which shall not perish. But how should we assure our
selves hereof? being still dull, dead, and so slow, to strive for our crown:
we have all the encouragement that a graceless froward creature can require:
we have God to prepare our hearts and hear us: Psalm. 10. ver. 17. we have
Jesus Christ to receive and embrace us: Matt. 11. ver. 28. we have the
Comforter to lead us aright: Ioh. 14. to ask and present our desines, from his
own unspeakable sighings and gronings; because we know not what to ask as
we ought: Whereupon another Father calls our prayers, Arma cael^sti^: qu^^
stare nos faciunt, et fortiter perseuerare: h^^^^^nt manimenta spiritualia and
tela diuina: because our pr^^^^s be not ours, but the vehement desires of the
spirit. As for us; Quod postulamus, idem ipse donat, qui dat vt postulemus.
Alack, that we have no more conscience, to hold fast and enjoy the Lords
gentleness and familiarity with us. What are we, if he please to depart from
us, and leave us to an accusing conscience? nay, what is the greatest Menarch
in the world? Oh heavy state well known unto many! and in mercy something
unto the author heerof. If the Lord do set up but one of our sins to pursue
us, nay but one of our cogitations to accuse us, and depart from us; we shall
find such a flame of burning, unrest, and torment in our thoughts, as to
beseech him return again and help us, and take from us all those worldly
priorities and shrined vanities of our abundance,, which have seduced and
snared our faculties, in very eminent and high degrees of consuming torments:
But men be secure, and by fullness and immunities, their disease is grown so
remediless, as hardly to believe there can be any such misery in
mortality. But I choose rather to lament their estate, then convince their
presumptuous opinions; and therefore will cut off, and leave all redress unto
him that is both able and willing, to work for his own; and will call in his
time those that be appointed, by what motion, change, or cross soever may
please him best. To this gentle merciful Lord, I do recommend thee patient
Reader, and this my poor labor, as a service to superionrs; my love to equals
and familiars; and a compassionate well wishing unto all that love the coming
of the Lamb, even the Lord Jesus.

The Contents of the book in general.
The former book of Adams return, does consist of open acknowledgements,
unfolding the secret still living presumption and inherent leprosy in his
posterity: which (to avoid distaste) the Author acts in his own rebellious
self, resembling David's penetentiall, and sorrowing Psalms of humiliation.

This garden does by open show, enlarge and demonstrate, such exercises and
renewed effects of the happy return, as the writer did receive from the
second Adam, and the Lord pleased to afford unto him from cogitation and
admiration of so happy a change:

Resembling David's illumination and cheered estate of thankfulness, in his
Psalms of consolation.

Gather flowers of each row some,
And make a posie' against Master come:
And he will smile upon thy choice,
And thank thee with a gentle voice.
Ablessed thing to make him smile,
Who never here in his exile,
For thirty years did one smile show:
Let him now see thy Lilies grow.
ADAMS GARDEN.
I. OH my most merciful Lord, who have enforced my return, after my running
away from thee, even by the call of thy tender compassions, whereby I was
wonderfully affrighted and confounded, out of mine own guilty wounded
conscience, for disobaying thy word; and thereby losing thy freely bestowed
glorious garden upon me: and now at the last, do exercise me in my desires
of thankful obedience, for so great a favor and deliverance received; to
plant and present (for thy delight) even a new second Garden, (far exceeding
that of Eden) out of the choice of thine own created flowers in my very
sinful heart, where thou have pleased to leave, some little sparks of the
first creation.

II. Good Lord help me, to plant, to square, and frame every quarter; in
such seemly sort and proportion, as being furnished with variety of thy
sweet and fragrant created flowers, I may please thee, and undergo my
calling, to dig and delue still, by penalty from the first Adam, and may be
acceptable and delightful unto thee, in and by the second Adam; even to make
an habitation, where thou and the Lamb may please to dine, and sup, and even
dwell still.

III. Nothing is hid from thee, thou read in the tables of my heart, and
well see how my compunction, and sorrow for abusing thy favors, even load
and press me down: yet herein be pleased, to enlarge my cheer and
confidence, that much greater is the glory of my return and repair, then was
the fruition of Eden to Adam.

IV. For therein, as woefully appears, I had power to lose, both garden and
blessing; and indeed was no more but a priueledged creature for a time, made of
clay, dust, and the basest earth; but now thou have otherwise bewtified and
shrined me, by thy love unto me.

V. And of thy free mercy and gracious bounty, now have given me a dignity,
prioritie, and privilege; whereby I am not only set free, from satan's
subduings, the worlds snarings, and deaths wou^dings, (to hinder my now happy
calling and progress) but am in those combats of theirs, made an open
co^queror over the^ al: for thou have affoorded me a dignity, far exceeding
my first Creation: So that I cannot be moved, though I be shaken and tossed,
to try my victory over them: for what conquest, without opposition and
combat?

VI. Now I can lose my kindred and garden no more: Now I can fall finally no
more: I can lose my union with Christ Jesus no more, nor be separated from him
any more: So true it is, that whom thou calledst, thou have justified and
glorified: whereby, I am in thee so highly advanced; as not only to be Lord
of all the works of thy hand; but conqueror of all enmity arising against thy
blessed will: yea, even of that proposed enmity, which must continue till
there be no more time.

VII. So that, not only his descending and death is mine; but his Rising and
Ascending also: yea his very righteousness, is mine by imputation; whereby I
am able to satisfy the whole law, out of my own crucified flesh, in and by
him who loves me. Who or what shall I fear now? since all the world
trembles at his voice, who speaks and rules, out of my very flesh.

VIII. O merciful Lord, bow down and hear my cry and sighs, for obedience
and humility, that the knowledge of this happy union, make me not bold, but
only in the causes of thy glory, against that devouring Satan, that I may
once deal large spoils, from that conquest which thou will give me over him,
even for thy names sake, and in favor of this thy new reconcilement and
covenant, which thou have made betwixt thy Christ and my sinful soul.

IX. For alas, he smarteth when I draw penalty upon me by disobedience: In
all my troubles he greeueth with me and is troubled with me. For so long as
this union lasts (which is forever) that Christ Jesus is my head and I his
member, how can it be, but he endures my misery even with me.

X. Oh wonderful and unspeakable bounty! a secret hid from many. He has
not only made me Lord over the whole earth, but by his consecration has
communicated his glorious and passible spirit, to be wounded for my
declinings. Oh hearts of men and women, where be they? Oh, that love of Marie
was great and sweet: Tell me, says she, where they have laid him, that I may
fetch him. Oh seeking, Oh hungry, Oh bedroughted zeal, to drink deep in the
fountain of his unspeakable kindness! Marie, says he, Rabbonie, says she:
Oh harmony! indeed sweet harmony: Seek thou my face: I will seek thy face
O Lord. Ps. 27

XI. O Lord increase my faith, that once I may be swallowed up, by sense and
sweet power of thy saving health; let it convince and mollify my stony and
drowsy heart, by thy help O Lord; and let even shame drive me into
admiration of thy exceeding compassions. For, have thou not O Lord, made thy
self my most merciful father? Christ Jesus my happy Redeemer? The Holy
Ghost my ever present Comforter? The Angels my ministering spirits? All thy
creatures my servants? The earth my soiourning place? and the heavens for my
home? What could thou have done more to thy friend? and yet I live at a
woeful enmity with thee, and by open frailties am even envious of thy glory.

XII. Oh how truly (though most unworthily) may I say again and again, all
the works of Gods hands be mine, and I am Christ's, and Christ is Gods, to the
everlasting glorious admiration of his grace and goodness? and yet I sin
still, provoke him still, and even crucify the Lamb still, and make the
Comforter weep still: For to dwell in my former disobedience, what else is it,
but even to call Christ again unto death, and even fight against his
Resurrection?

XIII. Alas for pity, that neither the experience of his goodness will hold
me in obedience, nor the fear of his greatness rouse me from security.
Return O Lord and be mighty in me, for thy names sake: Let thy face shine
upon me, let thy presence breath life and strength into me, that I may bring
glory unto thy name, in making known by the moderate and holy use of this my
life, that it is another life I look and attend for; in regard whereef I
desire to be stripped of all those impediments (how delightful soever unto
nature) that may debar and stop my near familiarity, with thee most merciful
Lord, and the gentle Jesus, by the ministry of the Comforter.

XIV. Oh that I could find the state of my happiness, by reason of thy
promises, and be more deeply touched therewith, and sing with Ezekias: The
Lord has said it, and the Lord has done it. He has knitte the care of his
people, even unto the glory of his name; and for my encouragement and comfort,
professed, that as he will not give his glory and name to be polluted; no
more will he forget to show mercy unto his people, even unto me.

XV. Renew me therefore O Lord for this thy names sake, and establish a right
and stable judgment in me of this thy mercy: and when thou have renewed me,
do not then I beseech thee forsake me; but put a bridle in my mouth to the end
I may by abstinence, keep my self in modesty and fear, over my evil heart;
and free me from surfetings and vain persuasions, which prick me forward to
voluptuousnes, that in a godly care to serve thee, still admiring thy face,
which beholds me continually in all my ways, I may zealoushe set spurs to
the flanks of my slothful and impure negligence, to awake and rouse me from
secure sleeping and sitting in thy displeasure, with this careless and
unreformed world.

XVI. Appease therefore all countenance of thy Judgments (for passed offenses)
O merciful Lord; and now be pleased that I deal with thee upon a new
covenant, to seal up the certainty of my interest in thy promises, even in a
devoted and resigned preparation unto thy will. I confess that I have deserved
most justly, to be totallie and finally cast away, and raced out of the
Record of the living: But seeing J have a long while called upon thy goodness;
even for thy exceeding gentleness, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver me from all
those evils which do enuiron me: For behold (my gracious Lord) I do (thou
know) lead my life in a most pitiful manner, for that I cannot serve thee
as I would: I desire nothing but to please thee; and on the contrary, my
wicked nature lusts continually to grieve thee. This I call and feel a most
miserable life, my gracious Lord, which receive mercifully into thy pity,
and redress compassionatelie of thy grace, even when it may best please thee,
for all thy mercies sake.

XVII. O merciful Lord, who have vouchsafed to unseal the eyes of my
understanding, to see the mystery of my Redemption and Return: make me O Lord
to taste the fruits thereof, which (flourishing upon the tree of the cross)
shall with the force thereof, quicken and give life unto my fainting dead
soul. Preserve and warrant me for ever from the ruin, which has so
miserably brought together the race of mankind, and ouerflowed them by
disobedience.

XVIII. Establish in my heart, O Lord my God, an habitation for thy holy
Spirit; to the end I never hereafter, breath or utter forth any thing but
tending to thy praises; and let thy will be always printed in my mind, and
thy glory graven upon my lips, that my lips being opened my mouth may show
forth thy praise.

XIX. I do humbly thank thee my merciful Lord, for my Election, Calling,
Creation, Redemption, Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification,
Preservation, Glorification, Resurrection, Righteousness: But most especially,
for that most ancient love of thine, wherein thou have continually watched
over me, gathered me with thine arm, and carried me in thy bosom, in such
exceeding love and care; as when I had bestowed all my days in open
disobedience, and was utterly undone by my frail delights; even then in a
very moment, thou brokest the heavens and scatteredst the clouds to come down
and pluck me out of the mouth of the devouring Dragon, taking me by the hand,
and giving me this large time of repentance, to the end I should declare thy
name unto my brethren.

XX. Nay, my merciful Lord, more then this, thou have not only seen my
unrighteousness, and been patient even to be provoked by me, but have covered
my open offenses from the eyes of men, and kept me reputed as unspotted and
blameless in the world, when many a time for my wilfulnes in many things thou
might have infl^cted an open and fearful penalty upon me: Thus most
graciously preventing in thy unspeakable favor that the blemishes of my
frail youth, should not scandal or defame thy calling, and the most humbly
desired Return of my Age.

XXI. It is verily true indeed that I have sinned most vnwoo^tedly and
audaciously: I lay open unto thee and the whole world the very bottom of my
heart: Thou know my whole life, I have sinned in the sight of Heaven and
Earth, I will never stand in defense or plead excuse before thee, For my grace
and pardon is in thy hand only, and I look for peace and redress only from
thee.

XXII. For thou have granted unto me, behold a token of thy own blood sealed
in the image of my flesh; which for my Redemption thou have imprinted in the
weakness of my substance: So that now thou requirest nothing but obedience
and love; and alas I grieve thee day by day, blaspheme thee day by day, and
even weary my self in the ways of darkness and shadow of death. And what have
I gained by all those my careless actions, and proceedings whereof I am now
ashamed?

XXIII. Truly O Lord, I gain even this, to give open sentence against my
self for abusing thy mercies, and account my self that untimely fruit that
shameth the tree that bore it, and the earth which nursed it, and the heavens
which ripened it. Therefore O Lord I will take up my Cross in penalty, and
where others look for their fruit after the budding and blooming times, I will
look for mine after the fall of leaf: for after the leaf of this body shall
be gathered, I hope that my soul shall budde in a new fruit and be clothed
again with the Verdure of Immortality.

XXIIII. Behold therefore O Lord, that the open acknowledgement of my sin, I
presently bear upon my head and as men who fetch water at a well doc put the
mouth of the bucket down, and close it up; so will I my gracious Lord keep
silence unto thee. For he that will ascend must first fall down, and to kiss
the heavens, he must first kiss the earth, and he that will have a Crown with
God must be first beaten and wronged with men.

XXV. And now my most gracious God, to the end I may appear so honorably
apparelled as such a magnificence deserves to see immortality, I beseech thee
throw down the huge mountain of my sins, and bury them in the center of
the earth, and separate me for ever from mine iniquities, which at this present
I do repudiate, and swear a perpetual divorce between them and my soul.

XXVI. Thou know most merciful Lord, and have taught me to know, that the
humble and just man is the very tutor of nature, restrayning and moderating all
natural appetites by stability and wisdom. And since I would thus prevail
against nature, will thou not, (O Lord) which understand the bottomless
pit of Hell, will thou not hear my poor fainting desires, which by sighing
reaches and beats the heavens, and wherewith I have long entreated thee?
Shall all the world hear me but thy self alone? Oh no my God, thou have too
long stretched out thine arm now to re^ect me, when J ask nothing but to
glorify thee.

XXVII. Alas my sweet Lord, I have settled my whole power and strength upon the
love and obedience of thy countenance, which I have so many times provoked: and
if thou please not to assist me in this service, alas what manner of fight
shall I ^e able to make against the strong enemies of my soul? O p ttifull
pitiful will be my preuailings; nay my assured backslidings. Say therefore
unto my soul, I will not fail thee, I hold thee by thy right hand, and thou
shall never be forsaken.

XXVIII. Thou know, O Lord, men have had me in great reregard, and lo how
now I am desputed and befoiled with their scorn and contempt: for in stead of
sorrowing with me they have coniured against me, and do add sorrow unto my
heaviness, and make me a laughing stock and a matter of derision, saying, verily
he can never rife. Again, He called upon God very much indeed, and see what he
has gained. But I will be still; for the days be evil, and my silence shall
speak unto thee by continual desires, sighs and groanings.

XXIX. Yet do I not for all this lose my hope; no no my good God, for thy
power is infinite, and thy mercy unmeasurable, which will spread it self even as
a roabe over such as trust in thee, and the Lamb shall know the roabe by thy
righteousness thereof, and shall say, thou art mine O despised Jacob, O thou
Castaway Sion, whom no man regards: I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine, fear not, thou shall not perish, though they fall on every side of thee.

XXX. Hereupon, merciful Lord, I gather courage and assurance that thou have
not lifted thy self upon so high and eminent a place to dismay thy servants,
but that they might see thy ouerruling power and hand of their propitiation
far beyond the touch and control of man, yea of al Monarchs, for the better
assurance and confidence of thy servants, for their rejoicing and hope by the
priority and preheminency of their election: for they must follow the lamb and
see his face, that their joy may be full.

XXXI. O thou most merciful Lord which do not remember wrongs, have seen
the dangers which by violent sway of sin I have cast my self into,
forgetting all thy mercies, provoking thy glorious face, traducing the
Redeemer, and greeuing the Comforter: O return and make have O Lord for my
recuring and cleansing from this huge provocation, even for thy gentleness, and
because thou have spared me thus long, and now beginnest to touch my heart.

XXXII. I did never so soon think to confess my sins, but thou presently
gave pardon: I did never so soon return unto thee as thou wast ready to
offer thy self unto me: I did never make open or secret acknowledgement of my
deserved penalties, but thou did remit them presently: I have taken the rods
to have scourged my self, when thou have plucked them out of my hand: I did
think thou would have proclaimed wars, and behold open peace and pardon
brought me, with charge and trust to trim up and keep the mansion of my
soul hereafter for thee, and to fear nothing but sanctify thy name in my
heart; for thou will be a refuge unto me, therefore I fear not all changes.

XXXIII. Oh what an acceptable sacrifice before thee is a broken and contrite
heart, that out of the voice of a just man passes above the heavens, and the
sweet sighing comforter presents the same before thee. This humble
acknowledgement from a wounded heart in the sinner will thou never reject,
because thou find in this state the grieved image of the lamb, from which
thou can never turn thy face.

XXXIIII. And further, merciful Lord, my hope receives good relief, because
the Saints (which are the holy men and women living) have prayed, do pray and
will pray for me; those are they which do beseech thee for me. Oh it is time
that they do attend thee for me, since impiety of my heart has so blinded my
senses by evil thoughts, that my soul cannot lift up her self toward
heaven, nor stretch out her hand unto thee, who art only both able and willing
to deliver and ransom the Captives that sit in darkness and deep discourage.

XXXV. Therefore have thou provided that such as thou vouchsafest to come near
unto thee by faith and holiness of life, may pray and beseech thee, that thou
would satisfy my soul, and purge my thoughts so preserving and warranting
me forever from that ruin and calamity which has so miserably imbondaged and
pinioned together the race of transgressors, and holden them in irksome
slavery, as chained and designed to a great and irksome Captivity.

XXXVI. As for my self, who am mine own Capital enemy, I have never had
skill or will to pray for my trespasses, but even wandered in dreadful
expectation under a heavy burden: yet herein I am somewhat cheered, that by
this experience of my estate thou have let me see what a black and foul
conscience I have, and have mollified my heart that I might lodge contrition in
my soul, to obtain grace and favor with thee, that in thine own time,
merciful Lord, thou will please to purge and wash it.

XXXVII. Thou O my good God which have been from all eternities, art never
changed, whereupon it is that we be not confounded, but art ever one and the
same, without any shadow of change: for age and time which consume al things,
serve for no other purpose but to confirm thine euerlastingnesse: and men
seem to remain here upon earth, for no other cause, but to behold thy
incomprehensible greatness; unchangeable on the one side, and their certain
dissolution, approaching out of their mortality on the other side.

XXXVIII. For a man changes not his shirt so often, but the earth changes her
inhabitants more often; yet thou my God art even the same at this day that thou
were at the first, which the heavens and earth continually sing unto thee; and
that neither time past, present, or to come, shall ever change thee.

XXXIX. Keep me therefore O Lord in a stable and sober exercise of my faith
and assurance, that I do not waver or shrink in the storms of my mortality,
neither despair at any time, by sense of apparances, or smart of feelings. For
he which despaireth for his sin (unless thou please to design that afflicto^
by desertion, to give experience of faith thereby) he even does give over his
soul as already condemned, and is like that abominable usurer, who having
sustained some loss in his goods, by and by bereaueth himself of his life
also: Make thou therefore strong steps for my faith O Lord, that I never
dishonor thy name, by the deceitful sleights of my senses, but even stand
fast armed with thy promises for ever.

XL. And so prepare me unto the chastisements of my peace (these same sweet
healing potions and appliances) that the smart thereof never drive me from
thee; but even rather as the lashes light upon me, I may kiss the rod and say
it is too little, for I have deserved much more, but that of thine own
indulgence and pity thou sparest me: Give me therefore O Lord to learn
obedience by thy stripes; and most welcome and sweet even shall be unto me
thy afflictions, yea, even the changes of my afflictions, the lot of thy
children.

XLI Thus instructing and nurtring me in thy own most holy school of
discipline, let me feel O Lord thy will, to take more rule and soueraignety
over my will, then it has done in former times, that I may taste and experience
that pleasure, which he feels that is delivered from the bond of captivity,
and set at liberty out of prisonne and thraldom wherein his enemies had long
held him chained.

XLII For thou have already done very much for my soul O Lord; thou have
taken and held me fast by the hand in all my dangers, and set me gently
again in the way of thy will, with greater compassion then ever Paul did
embrace Eutychus, and madst me understand thy will and purpose: Nay thou have
done more then that, for me thinks thou have both opened mine eyes and the
heavens all at once, that I should see the mightiness of thy glory, as I do
at this present sensibly feel the goodness of thy grace.

XLIII Thou have O Lord made me se, I say, the mightiness of that thy power,
whereunto no mortal man can attain without thee: for alas, should I poor
silly worm think, that I am more then I am, to go to seek for that in the
heavens which I cannot well see at my feet? the eyes of my body be duskie and
mistie, and the eyes of my soul be much worse: but thou the merciful Lord,
delightest to bring light forth of darkness for manifestation of thy power,
even thy blessed power.

XLIV. And men's thoughts are marvelous uncertain and wavering; for the
earthly and corruptible body, dulleth and makes idle our spirits, and tieth
and binds our senses fast to the earth: so that without thee my gentle Lord,
I can hope for no light here below, to know or discern any thing aright: But
Christ Jesus is the way, the truth life and light, whose renewed obedience is
still fragrant in thy presence; even he is my light and portion for ever.

XLV. And by him most merciful Lord, thou do supply my wants, and leadest
me by the hand to see the counsels of thy eternal wisdom, and have heaued
and violently moved my soul to make it capable, and sensibly to feel thy
light and commiseration.

XLVI. Wherefore O Lord touching my enemies and those who have wrongfully
oppressed me, and closed me in much obscurity and blemish of estate; I do
humbly and with all my very heart entreat thee for them, that thou please not
to blow upon them the wind and blast of thy curse; but tarry sweet Lord, if so
it seem good to thee, to see if thy patience will bring them to do their
duties: nay rather draw them O Lord, to repent their causlesse wrongs
orphanings and violent outrage that they have committed against me.

XLVII. And as for me, though I be covered over with their wounds, and
defamed with their injurious dealings; yet had I rather have them subject unto
thy mercy, then once to feel thy judgment; and desire of thee, if thou think
good, that their unmercifulness unto me, might rather serve to try me
withal, then for their condemnation.

XLVIII. Thou know O Lord my desires, and take view of them out of my most
secret priuities and thoughts, and that I never called on thee for vengeance
for my received wrong: No no, the feelings of thy mercies unto my unworthy
self, make me deeply desire to be far from thinking of others smarts
offered unto me. Indeed most merciful Lord, my vows do importune nothing but
thy mercies, and my thoughts are addressed unto nothing but unto peace, and
reconciled brotherly fellowship.

XLIX. The very end of all my desires O Lord (if thou please I report it) is,
that I may pass my days in serving thee faithfully, and that thou would
grant me thy holy house to dwell in, even in the congregation of thine own
chosen wife and spouse the church; and that all the while I am separated from
thee, and a great way off from thy heavenly tabernacle, tied unto the earth by
reason of the counter poise of this my body, I might unite and tie all my
thoughts unto thee, and conform my self wholly unto thy most righteous will.

L. Oh blessed habitation, that is able to cover me from all worldly
passions, from all the lusts of the flesh and assaults of Satan; for there O
Lord thou art present with me, and come down from the heavens to keep
company with me; and fillest me with thy self that I might be fenced
against sin, and this my carnal will, and converted into a heavenly,
living, and quickening spirit.

LI. That I may once feel effectually thy marvelous works, comprehend thy
mercies, and conceive of thy power and almightines: Reveal therefore unto thy
servant this thy will, and lay it up in my heart, that I may there keep it
most dearly, and in the midst of thy church may set up an altar unto thee,
even in my mouth, for an offering, under the veil of thy most holy word.

LII. And to this end O Lord, I beseech thee help me continually: for as
mine infirmity strives commonly against me, so also have I need of
continual help on every side: Therefore good Lord when thou have comforted
me, do still exercise me and be with me, I beseech thee, and tarry with
me; knead, mould, and frame this lump of earth, even as thou will, to thine
own service and worship.

LIII. And now my most merciful Lord, having pleased thee, so as thou art
reconciled with me, and I with all mine heart resigned unto thee, even to do
thy will: what shall I need to fear, seeing all the world does dread and fall
down before thee? that defendest thy servants, and have assured me to watch
still over me even night and day, and keep me under the shadow of thine
own wings: thou will give the angels charge over me, that I hurt not my foot
nor faint in my way, nor be weary in my journey unto thy holy hill.

LIIII. Thou art the mighty defender of the poor and orphaned; and who is
able to resist thy power? Thy forces O Lord are not armies of men, but Legions
of Angels: thy ministers are not only Princes and Captains, but thundrings,
lightnings, and storms: thy wrath is not blows and hurts, but Earthquakes,
swallowing v^ of Cities and drowning of Countries; so triumphant, victorious,
and glorious, art thou in all thy ways.

LV. But my Lord, because thou do hold back this thy redressing hand of
power and majesty; comfort me still with a sure hope that thou will not
forsake me, and give me such a measure of faith, as may lead me unto the haven
of thy promises, and therein compact me as a stone well squared for the
masters building, sited upon Mount Zion, which shall never be removed.

LVI. And me thinks thou say unto me continually, tarry a little, for the
time is not yet come that I have appointed, and in the mean while trust thou
assuredly unto my promises, and look whatsoever wrong, disgrace or affliction,
thou shall bear, I will be with thee, and give thee strength to ouercom it:
thou having learned that all things work together for the best, to them that
love me. I have not laid thee in the fire to burn and consume thee, but to
fine thee, and make thee orient in my sight, even as the Diamond, by much and
often rubbing is more beautiful.

LVII. Hereby my courage (O Lord) increases, when I see my self thus
seconded by thee; and this thy favor and gentleness, does more embolden me
unto patience, then all the applause of the people, does him that fights a
combat, when he is most strong and lusty in fight, and sees the victory
already by his fainting adversary.

LVIII. Certainly, I know the conscience of an innocent man, that is founded
and grounded upon thy grace (my Lord) is more stable and sure then all the
greatest rocks, and cannot be shaken or moved by any wrong, or inflicted
violence whatsoever: No no, that man's inocencie is not to be wounded, with any,
or all the practices of the ungodly, who are forced in the end to retire all
wearied, fainting and gasping for breath.

LIX. O Lord their woeful plight! they lie groueling upon their bellies; they
bray, grinne, and mutine with very anger, bereaved of all power; for thou have
broken, both their arms, teeth, and their jaws; and what not? So that the
only weapon left them, is even a will to continue in evil: A thing so
hateful unto thy divine nature and majesty. O Ephraims God! that thou
should take all their iniuties as done unto thy self, and so in thy justice
throw the mountains upon them, utterly to root out the memory, of such an
unmerciful, scoffing brood, from amongst men.

LX. O Lord what a love is this, when a father shall not spare his own only
son, but give him to be slain and tortured, to redeem the misery of his
slave! wherefore, O most loving holy one of old; seeing that thou have pleased
to frame and train me up with thine own hand, bought me with thy blood, and
purified me by thy mercy; forgive even now all my presumptuous offenses,
cancel the handwriting of evidence against me, purge my conscience that it
accuse me not; and since I desire to forsake all the world to enjoy thee, thy
presence, and promises; I do beseech thee reject me never, for then will the
wicked say, Where is his God, and the promise of his coming? and many other
prejudicial blasphemous speeches, against thy name.

LXI. O Lord I have long since, and even now do sacrifice my heart, consecrate
my affections, and deuote my thoughts unto thee, violently plucking them out
of the bottom of that evil heart of mine; so that my only desire now is to
serve thee faithfully with all my whole strength, my soul and spirit, and to
love my neighbor as my very self. But as it is not possible to write any
thing upon writing tables, unless that be rubbed out, which was written
before: Right so, (my merciful God) unless thou purge and wash this same old
besoiled contagion of my heart, it is not possible to engraue thy word and will
in it.

LXII. Pluck up therefore by the roots those customary pollutions of my
wicked unclean course, and according to thy gracious promises, Make me hear
of joy and gladness of heart by earnest of thy spirit: Assuring me that my
request stands among the Angels, tendered by the gronings of the comforter in
the name of the Redeemer, and shall have a gracious answer. Hear therefore O
Lord, my groans and sighs, which do testify thy goodness, and do publish
thy mercies. Increase my strength and courage, that I may strain my cries and
even mount up unto thee; and graciously incline unto the same, that out of a
changed heart, I may sing a new song of praises unto thee.

LXIII. Satisfy me O Lord I beseech thee in casting down all my sins under
thy feet, that no eye may be able to see them by piercing through the same:
for I do not only blush to think upon them, but even hate my self for
committing them: The remembrance thereof grieueth me; the times that I took
very vngratiously therein, be as a very vomit unto my soul, and my thoughts
are sore wounded with the heavy representation thereof.

LXIIII. Pardon and deliver me therefore, merciful Lord, who through frailty
have yielded my self unto the bondage of sin, and with the only twincke of
thine eye my manacles shall fly from my wrests. For when I poor sinner shall
once fall down and lift up my thoughts heavy and sad before thee, thou do
pity me, hear and accomplish all my desires, and make me enjoy whatsoever
J ask: For what is thy delight? But to fill the hungry with good things.

LXV. But herein I fail woefully, not for that thou changest thine ancient
pity and purpose, but because I my self do keep no covenant with thee. No
no, I do not that which I might very well do, to keep in the sweet warm
work of grace begun in my heart, and affoorded unto me: whereupon thou
mercifully Lord, art even forced to let me feel the want of the comfort I had,
and so J mournefullie and with bashfulnes return unto thee, as the tiewant of
the school does to be histed at upon his return.

LXVI. For alas, my most merciful Lord, as I have said before, so again and
again I testify: It is my self that am an open enemy to my self, by my
frail wandering, vanities and unstable heart, that in thy very care thou take
me up and correctest me in the open school, by disgrace thereof seeking to
work compunction, filial fear and a more faithful return unto thee my very
sweet heart, and to thy holy school. But alas I am still weak and wavering,
so that if thou should hear my request and forgive me when I ask pardone,
without correction; alas let all men judge what this is else but to pray thee
give me leave to continue in sin still Alas my Lord, my holy one, thou
know with what grief I set down this censure upon my self and others; but
I dare not but do it faithfully, because I write unto thee in the spirit of
the second righteous Adam, and ^aue unto thee all redress and pity, even in
the shade of death: for thou will do it in time unto such as are grieved with
their frailties.

LXVII. And therefore my merciful Lord let not me be shaken with the rods of
thy school and academy: but give me to rejoice in all the stripes of my
strayings, yea even in the changes of my changes, which will keep me sweet
and acceptable, by the often scowring and purging of that inherent corruption,
which is diffused and dispersed through my very marrowe.

LXVIII. For otherwise running astray still in a sinful secure dangerous peace
of my affections(such as the world only has) I shall grow like a puddle,
infected with many foul stremes and stinkes, in thy sacred nostrels: afflict
me therefore my gentle Lord, hold me fast behind and before, and lay thy hand
upon me, even with all my very heart; for that which thy afflictions take
from me, is nothing but my vanities, and works of sin and Satan: for the
nakeder I am before thee, the more beautiful ever, my gracious Lord.

LXIX. So that whatsoever thou laiest upon me, it is only to make easy the
way unto thy holy hill, thereto receive sanctification and holy moderation in
all my conversation: for thou know both the days and lives of all those
that depend upon thee, and wilt guide them in thy way, and give unto them
whatsoever is needful: they shall lack no good thing, but possess all peace,
plenty and joy in their days.

LXX. For I know that all thy afflictions, as those same happy rods of thy
school, they are ever in thy own most merciful hands, and measured in all
pitiful moderation, both in quantity, quality, and continuance of time: for
quantity, thou propinest to each of thy poor wounded servants, a cup and
portion convenient for his brusing and incurable disease, whereunto no man can
apply a plaster but only thou the Lord alone. And as for quality; physic
must be a little bitter or else it is of no worth; yet therefore do thou
temper it with the blood of the immaculate lam be, the most happy Redeemer of
the world, to make it both settle, nourish, and heal the poor wounded
creature.

LXXI. And as for time, thou give but days of trial and affliction, and
hours of tentation according to thy good pleasure: and even in this small
enduring, never any Goldsmith did so watch over his gold in the fire that it
wasted not, as thou tendest upon thy children, that in due season thou might
draw them out. O that same sweet zealous rebuke of the Lord Jesus unto Satan!
Is not this a brand taken out of the fire? the Lord rebuke thee Satan, even the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.

LXXII. Thou have merciful Lord made it known unto me, that thy servant
Iaacob wrestled with thee, no longer then unto the dawning of the day; and that
thereby I may be assured my troubles have an appointed time for rest, that
weeping may abide in the evening, but joy comes in the morning: though
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego be cast into the fire, an Angel of thine own
presence shall go with them, and relieve them in due time: So that neither
fire nor floodes shall harm thy afflicted ones, whom thou have called by their
names.

LXXIII. For whatsoever thou most merciful Lord, do exercise thy children
withal, it is but to make them know that t^eir blessedness is prepared in an
other place, and laid up for them from eternity; And no man shall take them
out of the Lambs hands; for thou Lord who gave them unto him art greater
then all; and therefore in those same very times, that thou go away and
leauest them to sorrow, yet they shall possess the inheritance whose riches is
infinite: An inheritance which being divided amongst all the children, will
continue sound and whole for ever and ever, whose parts shall be as great as
the whole inheritance.

LXXIV. Make us strong therefore O Lord, and in admiration of such a high and
precious price, to scorn all the vain things in the world; all the
countenances of men, and the uttermost rage of persecuting tyrants: For let
Peter, who denied thee by occasion of a weak woman, have thy presence with
him, and he will auowe boldly, the crucified Lamb before those who put him to
death; so Lord show us the light of thy countenance, and no alteration shall
dismaie us.

LXXV. Oh what a spectacle have thou made for mine eyes to behold! nay, I am
now so assured of thy mercies, and comforted by reason of the care I see thou
have of me; as, though I should see the greatest Army that possibly may be
prepared, yet would I not be afraid, but stand still upon the unchangeable
written word, and my own happy experience of thy truth, power, and promises,
which are ever yea, and amen.

LXXVI. O Lord cover me under the grace and favor of Christ Jesus; make his
mercies my buckler and my shield, that I may learn and follow his steps, and
hope in nothing but thy gracious goodness, springing afresh out of his
continually renewed and fragrant obedience, still orient in thy glorious face;
that I may be ever zealous of his will, whereby the dropping and sweating
faintings of my afflictions, may prepare and establish me, in the whole
accomplishment of my sanctification.

LXXVII. For the knowledge and obedience of thy will, my Lord, is all my very
whole desire, and the thing which must lead me, and guide me, through the
windings and turnings of the labyrinth of this mortallitie; for this same very
obedience of thy will, is the very pathway unto everlasting life, which I so
incessantly gape and wish for.

LXXVIII. Reveal unto me therefore this thy will, and lay it up in my soul,
that I may there keep it most dearly, and in the midst of the congregation,
I may speak of thy goodness and righteousness by an open changed and renewed
conversation; rendering all holy acknowledgements of thanks and praises unto
thy name, and thereby bring many children unto thee, to which only end I
desire to live.

LXXJX. I know O Lord, that death is the penalty of original sin and
disobedience: but since I am now planting a garden for thy delight, for thou
say, thy heart shall rejoice when my mouth speaks righteous things: spare
me therefore my God, suffer me not to go down all below, but even at the
mouth of darkness and death, pluck me out of danger; and merciful Lord be
content, with my humble abashed and melting heart, without imposing penalty
for my deserved thraldom.

LXXX. Hear therefore O Lord my sighs, and take in good part my broken voice,
which testifies thy everlasting and unchangeable mercies: and since thine ear
is never shut unto those that call upon thee sincerely, and seek thy face
mourninglie, incline the same thy amiable face and countenance unto me: for
all sorts of felicities follow thy presence continualie; afford the same unto
me my dear God, even unto this wounded heart of mine, and say and speak peace
unto me: behold, I am ready to seek thy face.

LXXXI. O Lord, thou have promised this mercy of thine, and how often have
thou from thy pity sustained me, when I have spoken never a word unto thee?
by hearing my secret thoughts or rather the sighing desires of the spirit,
calling upon thee for grace and strength that I might be delivered: How many
perils have I passed, when I did not so much as regard thee, in the violent
rage and sway of my miserable youth, even by thine own gentleness and care
over me?

LXXXII. For since thou art that uncreated word, which has made all things
which do a part of thy will, and thy will is a part of thy self: does it not
represent it self unto me as thy face, in such beautiful and excellent
lineaments of divinity in the heavens and earth, as shine most brightlie in
every part thereof, especialie in the places of thy pure worship?

LXXXIII. Alas what day, time, or instant of my life, should I cease to be
wail and sorrow for my sins, which have so much estranged me from thy
grace, favor, and familiarity, which the humble and meek sort have with
thee their God? whose arms are displaied still, and ever calling, Come, see
and taste your rest, and be weary of your fruitles toiles: and when ever thou
please to depart, to take view of our sorrow and seeking care after thee;
thou do still by the extent of thy wings, by a secret instinct of grace, to
follow thee with our eyes, calling come, come, and see.

LXXXIV. O Lord my God, which from the beginning have reached out this careful
hand of thine unto the afflicted, which have always gathered into thy arms
the oppressed, and comforted the just unjustly vexed; grant me O Lord both
strength and courage, that I may take my spirits again unto me, which are
half in a dead sleep and slumber, by the continual distractions and
unprofitable cogitations, which my long exile and banishment from my country
(where I was able to have done thee some little service, and show love unto my
neighbors) has made usual unto me.

LXXXV. Grant merciful Lord, that I may be cheered to glorify thee with all
my heart and spirit, and strangle by the strength of thy voice, the
blasphemies and unrest of the wicked, who go about to defame thine honor, and
make a net for my soul, by speaking evil of thy equal, righteous, and most
gentle yoke; and not being able to reach unto thee, yet go about violently
to rush upon those thy poor afflicted ones, who desire to live peaceably, and
serve thee faithfully.

LXXXVI. Oh what ransom shall I offer unto thee for my election (whereby I
have assurance of a more quiet peaceable dwelling hereafter.) Alas, I confess
to my great grief I have not one good work, neither clean thought, but all
adulterated and defiled with inherent unrighteousness, concupiscence, ignorance,
and with the contagion of a long audaucious provocation, by open transgression
in thy glorious presence: Shall I offer unto thee the treasures of the earth?
no, hell is full of them. No no my merciful Lord, I faithfully believe thou
thy self wilt be the price of my redemption: Thou will deliver thine own
body, to ransom thy servant.

LXXXVII. Thou will put upon thee and cloth thy self with the dolours of
death, to give me the state of immortallitie; for certainerie whereof, thou
sustainedst thy hell here, thy fathers wrath, agonies and bloody sweat,
that! might appear in thy presence blameless and without spot, to the praise
of thy everlasting grace, for evermore Amen.


