Cornelius Shilander his Chirurgerie.

Containing A brief Method for the curing of Wounds and Ulcers.

With An easy manner of drawing Oil out of Wound -- Herbs, Turpentine,
Guiacum and Wax.

Translated out of Latin into English, and published for the benefit of all
those that are studious in the Art.

By S. Hobbes.

printer's or publisher's device SEMPER ^AD^^
CB.


Imprinted at London by R. Iohnes for Cutbert Burbie, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the Royal Exchange. 1596.

To the Reader.
HEre have thou gentle Reader, a brief and compendious method of Chirurgerie,
compiled by a most excellent Doctor, in manner of a Dialogue, wherein thou may
learn with ease the curation both of Wounds and Ulcers, the virtue and
operation of diverse Herbs, with their preparations for Oil, with extracting
of diverse Oils, most necessary and profitable for all true and faithful
professors in the Art of Surgery. And although it was not meant at the
first, to be published unto the view of the world, but only for mine own
private practice; yet when I remembered that saying of Cicero, that we are not
only borne to profit our selves, but our country, parents, and friends. I
therefore thought it good to publish it for the benefit of every one that is
desirous of the Art. And the rather moved thereunto, because I see many that
are professors, and allowed in their practice, and yet are scarce able to
define of a simple Wound of which sort the world is too full, and poor
patientes buy their practice at too dear a price: But I leave them to be more
careful both in study and practice. And shall request thee (gentle Reader)
that whereas this book is not altogether without imperfections and blemishes,
yet if thou courteously and friendly accept of it at this time, it may cause
the same hereafter for thy further commodity to be scoured, and better amended.

Farewell.

A brief and easy Practice of Surgery of Cornelius Shilander.
The first Lecture. Of the Definition of Chirurgerie, and the operation of a
Chirurgian.
Doctor. Go to Chirurgian, tell me what is Chirurgerie?


Chirurgian. Chirurgerie is a right orderly taking away of affectes besides
Nature, by incision or setting together, and also a healing of Wounds and
Ulcers.


Doctor. Right: but why say you by incision and joining together.


Chirurgian. In this Art, there are two parts, Synthesis and Analysis: that
is, Composition, and Resolution. By Composition Limbs disioynted are settled
into their former seat. But by Analysis or Resolution things that were joined
are divided as comes to pass in Apostumes and ruptured or bursten Bones.


Doctor. I perceive you do briefly touch the two principal parts of
Chirurgerie: but further, how does the Chirurgian cure or heal, where Nature
of Hipocrates is said to be the Physician or healer of diseases:


Chirurgian. That comes to pass in a diverse kind of cause: For Nature alone
is the efficient cause of curing, and the Chirurgian is the ministering or
keeping cause, for he ministers Medicines: and to the end Nature may better
accomplish her operation, he preserves her from the injury or hurt of the
air.


Doctor. I know Appollo waters, but Nature it is that gives the increase: But
what is this Methodicall or right orderly taking away, whereof you make
mention?


Surgeon. That first we digest the matter of the Wounds or Ulcers: And
secondarilie, that we mundifie or cleanse the same being digested or concocted.


Doctor. Wherefore, I pray you?


Chirurgian. Because it behooves to Medicine to move things that are ripe or
concocted: not also the raw and undigested, as it is contained in the
Aphorism.


Doctor. How shall we at length euacuate or void out the matter digested?


Chirurgian. By Unguents or Emplaisters on the more declining or lower part:
For those things that you must draw forth, ought to be derived or drawn
whether they shall seem most chiefly to incline.


Doctor. Is this then the perfect method of Chirurgians?


Chirurgian. Not at all: but of each ones own Method, we shall speak in their
proper Lectures.


The second Lecture. Of the Difference of Wounds, and of their curing.
Doctor. WHat is a Wound?


Chirurgian. A Wound is a Solution of the continuitie, bloody and fresh or new,
viz. lately made.


Doctor. What is the cause of the solution of continuitie?


Chirurgian. Incision or cutting, which is made with a sword, knife, or such
like weapon. Sometimes contusion or bruising, which is made by things blunt, as
is a stone, club, timber, etc. And also perforation, boaring or thrusting,
which is done with weapons, as a Dart, Lance, or other like sharp pointed
thing.


Doctor. Is not the method of curing all these alike.


Chirurgian. Yes truly.


Doctor. I pray you show it.


Chirurgian The wound being offered to cure, the blood is not forthwith to be
stopped, but suffered to issue forth by little and little, till the boiling
heat of the blood caused of anger, or some great trouble of mind, be quieted or
calmed.


Doctor. Think you then that the untimely stopping of the blood may breed
annoyance?


Chirurgian. Yes marie: for by Wounds are things hurtful purged out, even in a
manner, as by Phlebotomy or cutting of a vain.


Doctor. In the mean time whiles the blood issues out from the wounded
person, what must be given him being angered or sorely moved.


Chirurgian. Those things that are wont to quench the hotnesse and Ebulation
of the blood, such as are accustomed of the Physicians to be prescribed.


Doctor. And what is that?


Chirurgian. The Gum of Elennium decocted in Rhennish wine.


Doctor. Truly that Gum is marueillous, for it digesteth, mundifieth, and
incarnates, and that specially in wounds of the head.


Chirurgian. So it is that in many green Wounds, Chirurgians are found that
use this alone, to whom all things succeed according to their desire.


Doctor. I pray you let me hear the composition of Emplastrum Sticticum, as
you make it.


Chirurgian. It is compounded in this manner. Empl. Sticticum.
Recip. Ol. Oliuarum.. vj. Cera.. j. s^. Quib. liquefactis. ij. Add
Liturgirii. ij. Amoniaci. An. s^. Bdellii. An. s^. Galbani. An. ij. Opoponacis.
An. ij. Aristolochi rot. An. ij. Calaminaris. An. ij. Mirrhae. An. ij. Thuris.
An. ij. Ol. Laurinii.. ij. Resina abietis. j.


Let them be boiled to a Consistance, But note,
the Amoniac. Bdell. Galbanum, and Oppon. being brayed, ought first to be
steiped in Vinigre for a natural day, and after being dissolved at a soft
fire, must be strained out.


Doctor. Very well: That Emplast. (so God love me) is marvelous both for all
Wounds and Ulcers.


Chirurgian. Without doubt it is most effectual: But note, the wound is to be
dressed every day twice: to wit, the twelfth hour after the applying.


Doctor. Why so?


Chirurgian The virtue thereof vanishes away, if it stick any longer to the
Wound.


Doctor. How shall we incarnate the Wound?


Chirurgian. By the only applying of this Emplaster, the effect whereof is
wonderful, as well in incarnating, as in digesting and in mundifying.


The third Lecture Of stitching of the lips of Wounds.
Doctor. IS stitching in wounds unprofitable then.


Chirurgian. If the lips may by Emplasters be united, it is unprofitable, if
not it is profitable.


Doctor Give the reason therefore.


Chirurgian. A Chirurgian should be a follower or Contersector of Nature, but
he follows not Nature, while he stitcheth together the utter surface with a
thredded needle: Note.
for she begins her glewing or joining of parts together at the inner
parts, and so proceeds leasurerly, till she be come to the extremity or
outmost part of the wound.


Doctor. Is not this manner of curing observed of our greene-wound Chirurgians?


Chirurgian. No indeed: for they stitch together the utter parts, and leave a
concauitie or hollow place, wherein the blood contained is corrupted, for one
Wound they make ten: whereupon if any of the Sinews be hurt with the needle,
good God, what grief and what bitter pain ensues.


Doctor. Cure they not rightly then?


Chirurgian. They cure rightly in sooth: but it would more prosperously
succeed, if they used sticeicke plasters.


Doctor. I would feign hear of you their method in curing.


Chirurgian. Being called to a person that is hurt, they by and by with a thread
draw together the lips of the Wound, an Orifice left beneath, whereby
excrements may be purged: the white of an Egg beaten they take, on a light
stuff, they put it on, leaving it so for a day natural.


Doctor. Right: For this stops the flux of blood, asswageth the pain, and
keeps back Apostemation and Inflammation: But these matters finished, does
all the cause want peril?


Chirurgian. No indeed: Howbeit if the same happens without pricking of the
Sinew, if Fevers, Spasmes, or other accidents do not spring of untimely
stopping the blood, the chief part of the labor is taken away.


Doctor I believe verily he that has well begun has half done: but how
proceed you the next day after?


Chirurgian. The next day, they gently anoint the wound it self with a
feather, dipped in Gum Elenium, and then they lay on Basilicon Magistrale,
described of John de Vigo.


Doctor. The Gum of Elenium Mathiolus says is a most excellent medicine in the
fracture of the Cranium or Brain pan, which like fire, not only
conglutinateth, but also mundifieth and is incarnatiue.


Chirurgian. Also the Unguent Basilicon Magistrale, artificially spread, has
a wonderful virtue digestestiue, with mundifying and asswaging pain, so that
amongst all other Unguents it deserves the prize.


Doctor. Does it so: I pray you then give us the description of it.


Surgeon. Recip. Ol. Ros. iij. Unguent. Basilicon. Magistral.
Ol. Mastichs. j. Pinguid. Vituli, An. ij. Et Poreines An. ij. Foli. Plantag,
an. p. j. Foli. Periclym, an. p. j. Foli. Betonice, an. p. j. Foli. Pimpinel,
an. p. j. Foli. Pilosel. an. p. j. Foli. and Anthos. an. p. j.


A Ciath is a measure of wine containing j. vj j. of oil j s^, of honey ij s^.
Let them all be beaten together, and boiled with a Ciath of Wine to the
consumption: and to the straining thereof, add of Gum Elenium, s^. Resinae
piri, s^. Liturgiri Auri, j. and Argenti, j. Minii, v.


Let them boil again till they get a black color, and let there be added,
Refinae Abietis, ij. Cera alb. ^. s.


And let there be made a soft Cerote.


Doctor. But what if Inflammation come in the mean season!


Chirurgian. What then? afterward they have wherewith they may take the same
away.


Doctor. What is that?


Chirurgian. A defensive with Oil of Roses alone, or Oil of Roses with Bole
Armoniak, or of Vinigre, with a double potion or quantity of water.


The fourth Lecture. Of contused Wounds, and the method of curing them.
Doctor. IN Wounds coming of Contusion or bruising, is the way of proceeding
all one and the same?


Chirurgian. Not altogether: for least any filth of stone or Wood stick in
them, they are first to be washed with cenuenient liquor.


Doctor. With what liquor.


Chirurgian. With the decoction of Wine, of Mirrhe, and then further, the way
of curing is all one with the former, the lips joined together, the Wound is
to be emplastred with the white of an Egg: the next day after, it is gently
to be anointed with the Eum of Elenium. And thereupon Basilicon Magistrale is
to be applied, as we have said.


Doctor. What if contusion or bruising chances without a wound?


Chirurgian. Take the White of an Egg vehemently beaten with Oil of Myrtle,
and with the powder of the same. An. j. on a light stuff moystned in Vinigre
and Water, and squised in the hand: take them and apply them to the part
infected, and by Gods grace it will vinish away.


Doctor What if the Contusion does continue?


Chirurg. Use often the same medicine, and you shall attain your desire: I use
Wax dissolved only, and it falls out well.


The fifth Lecture. Of deep wounds by thrusting in.
Doctor. BY what method are Wounds cured wherein weapons thrust do stick
still.


Chirurgian. Before all things the weapons are to be drawn out, and if to
the deepnesse of the Wound there fall out a straight Orific. the Wound must be
enlarged, and the cure begun, as is said, with Gum Elenium and Basilicon
Magistrale.


Doctor. What if the Wound may not be enlarged?


Chirurgian. Then we use a lotion of Wine, Mirrhe, and salt boiled which
iniected with a Syring, purges out the corrupt matter, but the member ought to
be placed downward, to the end it may the more easily issue out.


Doctor I understand: but how may you draw out weapons, that are hoooked or
forked, without endamaging the veins and Artiers.


Chirurgian. Drawing forth is by drawing to, that belongs to weapons of round
and long making, or is done by thrusting from or pushing further: by this
means weapons with barbed heads are drawn out, for when they cannot be
drawn back, they must needs be thrust out on the contrary side.


Doctor. What if they may not be thrust out?


Chirurg. The Wound then must suddenly be made wider: For in cases to make
delay is nothing safe, or we must use an hollow and round instrument, which may
contain in it self the foresaid barbes divided before from the flesh.


Doctor. All things devised wittily enough: But if the weapons stick in the
bones, how must a man work.


Chirurgian. Let the place be opened with a three cornered incision, and let
the Tripan be so set to, that in the compass of the Arrowe the bone it self
may be bored with deep boaring: For most easily then with instruments they
with the bone together will be plucked out.


Doctor. Truly I confess this to be true, so the Weapon be not in some more
noble part of the body: But if by reason of the Veins, and Artiers, and
Sinews, the Wound may not be enlarged, or Tripan used, what should be done
then?


Chirurgian. In this and their like, a man must proceed with disgestiues
Resolutiues and Attractiues, I will persuade no man to believe this, except he
have seen it by experience
or he must use charming words, whereby without much business all kind of
weapons are with two fingers drawn out of the wound.


Doctor Do you believe that.


Chirurgian. I would not believe it, unless I had seen it.


The sixth Lecture. Of Wounds of the Sinews, and the easy Method of curing
them.
Doctor GOd grant that with so few words you may determine touching the
pricking of Sinews, or Wounds of the sinews, to the which Crampes, Fevers,
and such like, not without peril of the Patients do ensue.


Chirurgian. I will dispatch in few words if you please.


Doctor. It pleases me marueillous well.


Chirurgian. The blood after it has moderately issued out of the Wound, as is
above said, must be stayed, either by stitching, with the application of an
Egg, or Sticticke Emplaster: An Orific. left in the lower part, by which way
the excrements may be purged out.


Doctor. It Is true in all such cures that offers it self first.


Chirurgian After that, a Defensive is to be laid on the higher part of the
wound, of Oil of Roses, and Myrtle, An. j. Oil of Cammomill, s^. Bole
Armoniack, j. and Cera quod satis est.


Doctor. These also are common with other Wou^^s.


Chirurgian. The day next following we shall anoint the lips of the wound
with Resin of Fur, putting thereupon the emplaster Stictick, or the Emplaster
described of Vigo, in the chapter of the wounds of the Sinews.


Doctor. That disgesteth passing well, asswageth pain, and with an attractiue
force cleanses the wound it self.


Chirurgian. If in such manner of wounds there be great boiling out of impure
superfluities with pain, the opening of Veins, and appeasing of the pain,
are also needful.


Doctor. Is any thing more to be done?


Chirurgian. The due situation of the member is no less necessary, for if the
hurt has happened in the upper part of the hand or finger: a table is to be
framed, that the Member may be left spread or stretched out: But if in the lower
part, let the hand be half clenched and drawn together a little, for so the
Sinews shall the more easily cleave together or close.


Doctor. Give us Vigoes Emplaster in prickings of the Nerves.


Surgeon. Recip. Ol. Rosarum an. j Violarum, an. j Chammomil, Emplastru^ pro
punctura Neruotum.
an. j Sepi Vitulini. iij. Anpung. Porc. j. Pinguid. Gall. an. s^ Medul. crur.
vittul. an. s^ Limbricor. loto in vino, j. Butyri recentis, vj. Mucilag.
Altheum. l s^.


Let them boil at a s^ft fire to the consumption of the Mucilage. Add to the
straining, Litargiri aur. an. x. and Argent. an. x. Minii. iij. Cum Cera
sufficienti.


Let a Cerote be made, adding in the end of the seething Resina Abietis, x.
Masticis, s^. and let them boil again once about.


The seventh Lecture. Of Wounds of the Head, and the particular cure of them.
Doctor. MVst nothing peculiar be observed in Wounds of the head.


Chirurgian If it be without hurt of the Skull, we Emplaster it with the White
of an Egg, and the next day do annoint the lips (as is said before) with
applying the plaster of Gum Elenium, or of Betonie,


Doctor. What if the Skull be broken?


Chirurgian. If that be done without solution of the flesh, so that inwardly
there be no rough sharpness of the bones, we use resolving and drying
medicines, whereby the moisture of blood between the skul and Dura matter may be
resolved and dried up.


Doctor. Not without cause verily: for blood poured or issued out of the
vessels, as the veins at length putrifieth, and corrodeth or fretteth the
nigher parts, therefore of dissoluing it, consideration must first be had, but
wherewith is that brought to pass.


Chirurg. With Emplasters that we apply to the head shaven, or pouders which we
give them to drink with waters proper for that purpose.


Doctor And what manner Emplaster is that?


Chirurgian. It is an Emplaster of Vigo, which is compounded thus Recip.
Furfuris exsiccati and Triturati. l s^. A plaster to dissolve congealed blood
Farina Fabarum. viij. Rosarum and Mirtilorum. An. j. Cammomill. and Mileloti,
an. M. j. Stecados. Squinanti, An. p. j. Coriandri. Anissi. an. vi. Betonica.
Periclemini, Anethi, An. M. s^. Absinthi. M. ij.


All these being brayed with branne and soap sufficient, and a small quantity
of sweet smelling wine: Let them boil to thickness, adding in the end of the
seething, Olei Chamomeli, An. ij s^. Anethi, Rosarum. An. ij s^. Myrthini. An.
ij s^. Croci, j. Cera alb. ij.


Let them boil again a gallop, and be stirred with a stick while it shall be
warm: add thereto Calami Aromatici x.


Doctor. Declare now the powder that has the power to dissolve the inward
congeled clods of blood.


Chirurg. Recip. Rheabarb. electi. ij. A powder to dissolve congealed blood
Mumiae. Syncer, s^. Lacce Rubr. Sperm. Ceti. An. j. Boli Armen. an. s^ Ter.
sigill. an. s^ Radic. Hirundinaria, iij.


Make a fine powder, and let it be given with Aqua Tilia.


Doctor. Must we not use the Tripan then sometimes.


Chirurgian. Yes use it, but in two cases only.


Doctor. What I pray you?


Chirurgian. While the pricking of Dura matter. by the Asperities of the skull
is felt, or while a piece of the bone sticks between the skull and Dura matter.
For whereas these may not be concocted by the aid neither of Nature, nor of
medicine, the administering of the Tripan is requisite.


Doctor. When must it be Tripaned?


Chirurgian Sometimes the first day, sometimes the second, and sometimes the
third, according as the accidents are grievous or light.


Doctor. You say true: But the Skull opened, what harm shall the Dura matter.
suffer of the injury of the air.


Chirurgian. That this may be avoided, we apply the Tripan in an hot place,
closed upon every side, and the Asperities or sharp pricking scalles so soon
as may be we take away. Then hot honey of Ros. poured in, with Cotton we fill
the empty place and live thereupon put, we stop up the wound, and in the end
with the Unguent of Gum Elenium, and Emplaster of Betonie thereon set, we heal
the grief.


Doctor. What, is the cure finished so?


Chirurgian. Doubtless so that the Ligature be daily renewed, and due order
of diet observed, the member being saved from Flegmon or inflammatios of blood.


The eight Lecture. Of Wounds piercing the breast.
Doctor TOuching Wounds of the breast what think you?


Chirurgian. In this the way of curing is like the former, so as they pierce
not.


Doctor No: I speak of piercing Wounds.


Chirurgian. These are dangerous, yet if they admit or abide cure this way it
shall be done: Let the wounded party lie groueling on the bed, to the end by
little and little may issue from the region of the stomach to the outer
parts, such superfluous stuff as ought to be expelled, neither is the blood
forthwith to be stopped, so as the flux be not too great.


Doctor What then afterward?


Chirurgian. A fine Flamula dipped in Gum of Elenium, or the Resin of Fur,
with a little of the marrow of a Calfe, and Cumfry roots is to be put in, and
the white of an Egg is to be laid thereon, (as we said before) or the Stictick
Plaster described of us.


Doctor. What if the blood be not well purged out of the breast?


Chirurgian. To dissolve the same, use our powder that we described before of,
Rheabarb, ij. Mumia, s^ Lacca Rubre, ana j Spermatis Ceti. ana j Boli Armeni.
an. s^ Terra sigillat an. s^


With Aqua Tilia, for in this case it claims the prerogative to it self.


Doctor. But what if the wound cannot be consolidated, or closed with these
remedies?


Chirurgian. We shall then use decoctions of Wound herbs, which consolidateth.


Doctor. Describe us such a decoction, that in a perilous case we may succor
hurt persons.


Chirurgian. Recip. Consolida mayor, An. M. j A Decoction consolidatiue
and Mediae, An. M. j Sanicula, An. M. j Betonica, An. M. j Ophioglossi, An. M.
s^ Agrimoniae, An. M. s^ Rhabarbari, s^ Mumia sincere, ij Spermatis Ceti j


Let it be sod in wine in a double vessel well stopped, whereof let the diseased
drink a Ciath morning and evening.


Doctor. Well said: besides conglutination, it also dissolueth congealed blood,
but what if the cough troubles the party?


Chirurgian. The cure thereof here we omit, it suffiseth here briefly to have
comprehended Chirurgicall administrations alone, other things are also needful
ofttimes, as bloodletting, purging, and other matters which should be sought for
of the Pharmacenticke or curatiue part.


The ninth Lecture Of Wounds of the Intestines and belly.
Doctor. NOw of the Wounds of the Intestines and belly.


Chirurgian. The cure of Wounds of the belly without hurt of the Intestines or
guts is easy, for their way of curing is al one with the former.


Doctor. How do ye know the Guts to be wounded?


Chirurgian. For that the ordure does often void out, and the guts strent out
with the Call.


Doctor. The guts hurt, is there any hope of health?


Chirurgian. If a small Gut be hurt, or if through the back part of the Gut
comes, where the store of sinews is, it is deadly: but if the great guts
be wounded, because they consist of fleshy substance, a man must hope well of
the wounded person.


Doctor. How do you know whether the small or great guts be hurt?


Chirurgian. Of the place, for the small guts are set above the Nauill, and
the greater guts beneath.


Doctor With what method then are the wounds of the guts to be cured?


Chirurgian Let the Guts first washed with wine of Mirrhe, be brought into
their usual place, and being first stitched with a thread, that stitch that
Skinners use, let the portion of the Call fallen out, on what part of the
belly it is, be made equal in a sound place: Let it be bound with some thread
for that purpose, then let it be cut off half a fingers breadth from the knot,
and being seared close with a hot glowing iron, and so set in again, part of
the thread left out: then let the Mirach and Peritonium be also bound together.


Doctor. How ought that to be done?


Chirurgian. In the first stitching let the Mirac with Peritonium be thrust
through with the needle: on the other part the Mirac alone. In the third stitch
let the Mirac also be stitcht alone. In the fourth stitch the Mirac and
Peritonium. In the sixth the Mirac alone, and that by enterchangeable course
ought to be done, sometimes by bath, and sometimes by the one.


Doctor. Is it so? what after that?


Chirurgian The white of an Egg, without putting in of any Tent, is to be
applied, for the thread hanging out supplyeth the turn thereof.


Doctor What must be done the day following?


Chirurgian It is to be anointed with the Resin of Fur, or Gum of Elenium,
with the applying of Vnguentum Basilicon Magistrale, and sometimes a wound
decoction is to be used.


The tenth Lecture. Of Wound-Hearbes, and manner of extracting oils out of the
same Herbs.
Doctor. WHat are the Herbs whereof Wound drinks are at this day compounded?


Chirurgian. Pyrola sanicula. Phioglossum consolida. Mayor, media, and Minor
Regalis. Saracenica, Limonium. Mumia, Spcrma ceti, Vinca, prouinca Serpentina.
Centaurea, Hypericon, Betonica, Aristolochia, Persicaria, Balsamina, Herba
carpentaria. Flos S. Jacob, Millifolium. Perfoliata Prunella. Numularia saluia.
Cum aliis.



Doctor. Give us some composition of these.


Chirurgian. Recip. Pyrola. M. ij. Ciclaminis, an. M j Saniculae, an. M j
Alchimilla. M. s^


Let them sees in Rhennish Wine, according to Ante. And of the same (being
strained) let the hurt person drink thereof morning and evening.


Doctor. While we use these decoctions must nothing be bound upon the Wound?


Chirurgian. Yes mary: the herbs sodden are strayned, and with a little salt
are applied to the Wound.


Doctor. Are there other potions otherwise compounded?


Chirurgian. There are many: for of these simples each man at his own
discretion may devise himself decoctions, which he may use with great success.


Doctor. You express all things so briefly and plainly, that nothing can be
more. But there are others which in steed of these decoctions, do exstract
Oils out of the said Simples. Tell I pray you how that may be done.


Chirurgian. Diverse men work diversely: but I will briefly declare unto you,
that which herein is easy to done. They that extract Oils out of flowers, do
first dry the Flowers in the wind, and after they are dried: In each pound of
Oil of Olives they put v. handful of flowers therein mixed together in a
Stillitorie well stopped for two natural days, are digested in Balneo Neptuni
with a soft fire: namely, in the first degree. After these days they take it
out of the vessel and strain it, and if it cannot quite be strained, they
wring it out with a press, as we were wont to do while we press Oil out of
Almonds.


BALNEVM NEPTVNI. Doctor. At this first steiping of the Flowers in the Balneum,
will the Oil be perfect, or must this steiping be renewed?


Chirurg. It must needs be renewed, but with other Flowers dried in the wind,
for these must again be steiped in the Oil, strained and pressed out, for two
days space, and bee^ put (as before) in Balneum Neptuni, not above the first
degree of heat, and then be pressed out and strained.


Doctor Does this second infusion of flowers suffice then?


Chirurgian It suffiseth not: it must be repeated the lhird time in the same
manner altogether as we have spoken of. But after the second day, the oil that
is pressed out must be set in a glass Body well stopped, and in a Balneo Neptuni
more hot, where it must remain so long till the dregs be separate from the
Oil, and the Oil appear clear.


Doctor. So thy Neptune love me, thou vtterest all those matters with an easy
method, that if Peracelsus had performed the same, in good sooth there would be
many, who leaving the gross bodies, would compose their medicinces of Oils
and Spirittes of the Bodies.


Surgeon. You say true: but the Oil whereof we have remembered is not
perfect yet, unless also another working be added


Doctor. Of what manner I pray you?


Chirurgian. This Oil purged from his dregs, the Phlegm: that is, the watery
moisture, which when it is severed, it ought to be reserved in a glass, and in
a cold place, that also must be done with the help of Neptune.


Doctor. How say you? in a cold place: It should be placed in the sun rather,
whose heat is said to be vital.


Chirurgian. Away with that, that must be done in no wise, for so the oil
should get a rank savor: contrariwise, if it be put in a cold place, it will
be most fragrant, and will breath forth the sent of the flowers steipt therein.


Doctor. Are Oils then in like sort composed out of Herbs?


Chirurgian. I indeed: but that they must first of all be bruised together, and
be chopped very small, and therefore who so understands that has gone before,
shall easily extract Oils out of Herbs and Roots.


Doctor. Very well: there rests nothing but that Chirurgians so do make
their Oils that they help the wounded, for so shall they purchase themselves
a name, and exercise this Art with honor.


The eleventh Lecture. Of the manner of compounding of the spirit of Turpentine.
Doctor. WHat think you of the spirit of Turpentine, is it not of greater
power then the Oils of the aforesaid Herbs?


Chirurgian Yes surely, it is of miraculous faculty. So that if any man had
the true Spirit, it were no hard matter for him to cure all sorts of Wounds
in very short time.


Doctor Think you then the true Oil thereof is seldom found?


Chirurgian. Very many boste that they have it, but hitherto I have found no
man, whole Oil was not corrupt of Vulcan or the fire.


Doctor But Alchimists there are, that dream of nothing but Oil.


Chirurgian. I fear me, they loose their Oil and their time and labor, for
Vulcan uses their Furnace over hot, meet rather to mollify iron, then to
these kind of natural works.


Doctor But tell me, I pray you, how you distill Oil out of Turpentine, which
is the most excellent medicin against wounds For I covet to hear, if you it
remember those things you have learned.


Chirurgian. I will verily show you, and that most gladly; They that distill
oil out of Turpentine, do first mingle vi. l. of Turpentine with iij. cups
of water in a brazen vessel, or a brazen Cucurbita with a crooked Limbeck. And
before the Distillation they besmeare the joints with Lutum sapientiae, to let
expiration or breathing out: Which done, they distill with a slow or soft
fire: and immediately the Spirit with the water by drop-meale runs out of
the Limbecke into the Vial set underneath, and after that they see nothing more
distilled by the help of Vulcan, they open the Cucurbita, and do let the
Turpentine cool.


Doctor What then afterward?


Chirurgian After that the Turpentine is cooled, they take it out of the
Cucurbita, and they repeat the same afresh with vi. l. of Turpentine, and iij.
cups of water: And do distill it as before, and that so often, until they have
such store of Spirits as they wished.


Doctor. What avails it, or what use have the Spirits mixed with the water?


Chirurgian. None, and therefore they ought to be separate from the water,
that any may know their natural force.


Doctor. How great store of Spirits do come forth in distillation of vj. l.
of Tupentine and three cups of water.


Chirurgian. A pound with one third part of a pound, more or less according as
the Turpentine is pure or impure.


Doctor. You have all at your fingers ends, and nothing is hid from you:
proceed we then to the composition of Oil of Turpentine.


The twelfth Lecture. Of the manner of distilling Oil of Turpentine.
Doctor. GO to now, in what sort is Oil of Turpentine made


Chirurgian. We take viij. l. or ix. l. of this Turpentine from whence the
Spirits are severed, and in the vessel spoken of even now, we continually
stir it with a Splattor whiles it melts through the heat of Vulcan, until
all the water be vapoured out and does no more ascend.


Doctor. Be there no signs whereby we know that the Turpentine has boiled
enough before distillation?


Chirurgian. There are verily: while in boiling it is hard no more to knack, it
is a most certain sign that all the water is consumed.


Doctor. What is to be done after that?


Chirurgian. The Li^^^eck is to be set in by and by, and the joints well to be
luted with Luto sapient.


Doctor Whereof is this Lutum sapient. composed?


Chirurgian. There are sundry compositions for sundry operations, but here it
suffiseth to take clay, with meal and whites of Eggs.


Doctor. After that the joints are luted with Lutum sapient, as they term
it, how must we proceed further?


Chirurgian. First, I reduce Vulcan to the first degree of heat, for being more
vehement, it hinders our operations.


Doctor. When Vulcan is so fitted to your intention, do you go on to distill
without delay?


Chirurg. Yes mary: and within an hour and a half the distillation will be
finished. Howbeit, least the time deceive you, sometime you must let it work so
long, until that which distilleth shall appear green: for tha is the sign
of perfect operation. and that no more Oil remains in the body of the
Turpentine.


Doctor All well done: Our Vulcan grant that much profit to the commodity of
the Weal public you may procure your self thereby, and that your Ople may be
of so great efficacy in healing wounds, that with it alone you may cure all
whatsoever.


The Practice of Cornelius Shilander touching Ulcers. THE SECOND PART.
The first Lecture Concerning Humors and Qualities whereof Ulcers have their
original.
Doctor. Go to, tell what is an Ulcer.


Chirurgian. An Ulcer is a solution of the contiuitie, matterie and festering,
but more properly in Latin containing Pus and sanies: For in an Ulcer is a
thin matter, termed Sanies, and a thick, which is called Sordis or Pus.


Doctor. And what is the beginning of this malady?


Chirurgian. The Mineral of impurities, which by their saltishnesse,
sharpness, sweetness, sowrnesse, does corrode the skin, through which, as
an Emunctorie or cleansing place it is expelled.


Doctor. Come they not then of Blood, Choler, Melancholy, or Phlegm.


Chirurgian. Not so, for these parts of the body framed by Nature, that are
authors of no evil, but only do covet what is good and perfect.


Doctor. You say well that they are parts: but the hot and cold qualities of
these parts are the causes of Ulcers. Note.



Doctor. Nay verily: these qualities are only the effects of impurities: for
Choler, does not because it is hot, erode or fret the members, otherwise it
should so do always, since it is at no time not hot, but because the impuritie
of Choler prevails in sharpness, which imprinteth in the members an heat
unnatural.


Doctor What is it then that does work?


Chirurgian. Even that which is saltish, bitter, tart and sweet: these are such
as have some force, as says Hippocrates, which while they exceed in a man,
they bring forth effects besides Nature, the hotnesses, coldnesses, drinesses,
and moystnesses are of no effecacie.


Doctor. What here I hitherto, it has been believed that Ulcers proceeded from
the distemper of humors or elements.


Chirurgian. I confess indeed that it is commonly said, but this distemper
has wrought great mischief to Philosophy, and bewitched the eyes of many,
who supposing to have caught the Kernel, got the rindes and shales.


Doctor. Are there not then four humors in man?


Chirurgian. Yes in sooth, there are, yea, and many more.


Doctor. How many therefore?


Chirurgian. So many as be sorts of colors: there is an humor white, dunne,
yellowe, black, read, green, blew, purple, etc.


Doctor. Then you seem to deride the fourefolde differences of humors?


Chirurgian. Why not deride it?


Doctor Why not deride it? It Is a point of rashness to hold opinion one jot
against the Philosophers decrees.


Chirurg. Not at all: Plato is my friend, so is Aristotle: but the truth is
more my friend.


Doctor. Did the Philosophers err then in the quaternitie of Elements, and
their mixture?


Chirurgian. I, indeed.


Doctor. How so?


Chirurgian. It is repugnant to holy Scriptures, which is the true
Philosophy: God (says Moses) shope man of the mold of the earth: that is, of
water and earth mixed together.


Doctor. Does that then come to pass without the admixtion of air and fire.


Chirurgian. Who doubts it? Aristotle's air is found no where, and Fire is an
accident, and not a substance.


Doctor. Tush man, what is that you say?


Chirurgian. It Is easy to be conceived, if one knows that a fire-cole which
we call Fire, differs from a dead cole, as they term it, not on fire only
accide^tally, like as iron glowing hot, from that which is cold and glowes
not. Bodies also are resolved into water and earth alone, For the vapor and
exhallation ascend, and the gross earth, abides in the botome of the Cucurbita.


Doctor. Truly spoken indeed: but it is the part of Philosophers to consider
those things: For a Chirurgian it is enough to know Choler, Phlegm, Blood, and
Melancholy, with their heating and cooling qualities,


Chirurgian. It is not to the end a man may have the nature of an Ulcer
thoroughly known, because a man is compounded only of water and earth, and
with them alone is nourished, it is behoofull to know the differences of earths
and waters, for according to the diversities of these, diverse Ulcers spring in
man.


Doctor. Unfold to us the original beginnings of Ulcers, for I understand not
how that comes.


Chirurgian. We feed on bread, herbs and flesh, we drink water, Ale, or
Beer, and wine. It is certain that in these watery or earthy, impurities,
lurk that which for their unlikeness of Nature cannot be altered into our
bodies: Whiles therefore the pure cannot by the benefit of Nature be severed
from the impure, Note.
there is made an interchangeable commixture of both. Mallows with Nettles,
and Arsnick with Violettes is mingled, which tempered of mutual mixture so
long, do remit or slake their egrenesse, till they shall be severed.


Doctor. What?


Chirurgian This earthie or watery impuritie, free from the mixture of purity
is exalted by reason of its saltishnes, sharpnes sweetness, or sowrnesse
corrodeth the flesh and skin, and breeds calidities, humidities, and other
accidents.


Doctor. Very well: but if Ulcers be engendered of water and earth, how becomes
their difference so manifold?


Chirurgian. Because the difference of earthes and waters is manifold: for the
water and earth of the Nettle is one, of Arsnicke another, of Pepper another,
and so of the rest: of which some are saltish corrasiue, other some are sharp
pricking. etc.


Doctor. Is water with earth then the Genus or general thing from which Ulcers
are derived, and in which they are contained?


Chirurgian. Assuredly, and nothing more rrue, though it be against the common
opinion of Philosophers.


Doctor You utter Paradoxes, written of none, so far as I know.


Chirurgian. I acknowledge the^ to be Paradoxes, but such as ought of none not
be allowed, even as Tartar lies in sweet wine in form resolved, which in
process of time is congealed, or as it were, Note.
curded, and cleaues to the vessels sides. So in man are found impurities,
which in digested times being congealed or festered, do breed in the flesh
Ulcers agreeable to their Nature.


Doctor A fair Similie.


The second Lecture. Of the Method to be kept in Ulcers.
Doctor PRoceed we now to the method to be kept in Ulcers?


Chirurgian. Here like as in wounds we proceed with disgestiues and
Mundificatiues.


Doctor. What kind of method is this then?


Chirurgian. The purging and due manner of diet being let pass, which must be
sought of the curatine and dietarie part: First, we shall digest the matter,
till Pus appears equally white: then we shall mundifie the matter sufficiently
concocted, Exsiccatiues that may dry up the humiditie in the Ulcer not
neglected. These doings finished, Nature her self will procreate flesh, and
bring Ulcers to consolidation, so that by the Chirurgian she be rightly kept
from the injury of the air: that is, be bound with Emplasters that may
preserve her.


Doctor. You say well: for the Chirurgian is Natures Gardien or keeper, but
when any Ulcer is offered to cure, shall we forthwith digest the matter?


Chirurgian. Yes: so it be simple: that is, so as no Pain, or Flegmon, or
Tuwer, or Apostume, or Callositie, or Flux of blood or corruption of the bone
be joined withal: otherwise while it is compoundes, the said accidents are
first away to be taken, then after, a man may proceed further by the method
we have declared.


Doctor By what means may these be removed quite?


Chirurgian Dolor or pain by medicines, Anodinae asswaging it, Flegmon by the
unguent of Rosh, Callousnes and corruption of the bone by Cantiers, after Vigo:
Flure of blood by Croco Martis, Tumor, or swelling by Vnguentum Agrippinum,
with Oil of Tartor: of Apostume we shall speak hereafter.


Doctor. In how many differences are Vlces found?


Chirurgian. In manifold: for so many Ulcers there be, as be diversities of
impurities: and impurities either have the action and property of Arsnick, and
become pestilent Ulcers, with mighty inflammation, or have the property of
Alom, and become corrosiue, or have the Nettles property, and become sharp and
biting: or have the property of Popie and Mandrag or of other vegitables and
Mineralles, and become Ulcers: which for the diversity of impurities, do alot
to themselves diverse names.


Doctor. Assuredly your speeches are far more probable then theirs that ascribe
all these matters to Choler, melancholy or Phlegm, and that will raeher borrow
these names from the utter tokens, that is, from the colors, then from the
inward properties.


The third Lecture. Of Remedies that are used in the curation of Ulcers.
Doctor. HItherto you have spoken of the general method, now declare with
what remedies Ulcers are cured.


Chirurgian. Commonly after digestiod we use Vnguentum Egyptiacum, which in
every filthy, putrified, virulent, A method for curing Ulcers.
and hollow Ulcers, by experience we have learned to be of very great force.
rolling it on with Unguent. de Mynio, Basilicon, or de Lytargiro.


Doctor Were it not better to use Praecipitat. so much magnified of Vigo?


Chirurgian. I must approve also the use of this powder well prepared: for it
mundifieth Vlceration without pains, it corrects the malignitie, it makes
the subtle matter gross, and brings it to good digestion.


Doctor. I pray you give us the description of Vnguentum Egiptiacum.


Chirurgian. Recip. Aqua Plantag. Vini Granatorum. Mellis Licii. Ana. ij.
Floris Acris, Aluis Rocsa, An. x.


Let all boil to a Consistance.


Doctor Let me hear how in Ulcers these kind of powders or Unguents do
pierce to the inmost parts.


Chirurg. If mixed with Barbers Lie and Mel Rosarum, they be iniected with a
Syring, as Vigo teaches.


Doctor And what must be done after mundification?


Surgeon. Then we take of Aquar. Hordei. l j. Mel Rosarum, iij. Sarcolla,
ij. Mirrha, Thuris, An. j Vini o doris, vj.


Let these be voyled to the consumption of the third part, it is good to
comfort and incarnate the place.


Doctor What remedy is there for superfluous and proud flesh?


Chirurgian The powder of burnt Allome, setting on Splegiants, whereon they put
the Emplasters.


Doctor. Are all Ulcers then cured with these remedies?


Chirurgian. No: there are certain inueterate Ulcers that are named Chirons or
Telephis: Ulcers there are also of harder consolidation, representing the
nature of Mercury, which ought to be cured with other remedies.


Doctor With what remedies I pray you?


Chirugian With Oil of Mercury, Oil of Antimonie, or Oil of Sulphur.


Doctor. Let us leave these remedies to Alchumists, and show us those that we
may prepare withou difficulty.


Chirurgian. Most gladly: and if you be not content with one, I will give you
more.

Recipe Serpentaria vtriusque. An. M. ij. Aristolocia acutae. an. l s^.
Consolida ponticae. an. l s^.


Contundantur, and cum Terebinth. l i. and s^. and Olei Oliuarum iiij. frat
Vnguentum. With this Unguent all affectes of the skin, even Phagacdena it self
is cured.

Another.
Recip. Succi Chelidoni, l j* Alocs Epat. ij. Mumia, j Viridis Aeris. j Almis
Vsti. ij.


Terantur Subt. quae terenda sunt, and cum Succo digerantur in calore per dies
octo. Post vlcera panis in co madefactis ligentur.

Another.
Recip. Argenti viui, s^. Mortif. s^. Cerusa ij Euphorbie. ij. Saxiphragie, An.
j Litargirii, An. j Sandalorum, An. j Anxvngia por. q. s,
Another.
Recip. Virid. earis. s^. Almis Vsti. ij Henrici rubei vt vocant. vj Terebinth.
distill. l. j. misce.
Another.
Recip. Salis Armoniaci, iij Salis communis. s^.


Buliant in aqua, post add gumi Attramentum iij. and liquescunt simul and
indurietem excoquantur huius portiuncula in aqua dissoluatur qua Hulcus
abluatur.


Doctor. Are these most excellent remedies?


Chirurgian. They are, and yet there are more excellent in account, which are
not rashly to be published to all, for all kind of Ulcers may be cured with
potions.


Doctor. You are a marueillous Artsman: you will not communicate your secrets
to others, that you may be rich your self I know.


Chirurgian. Truly you have rightly aimed.


Doctor But I pray tell me what avails in the procuring of a Cycatrise?


Chirurgian. Ad cicat. Pruocat.
Let the place be first washed with the water of Plantin, Rosh, or Roch Alome,
with a little Mel Rosarum: Afterward use of the medicine which is made ex
Minii. j olei Rosarum and Mirthini, An, js^. This is of Vigos description.


The fourth Lecture. Of the manner of curing Fistulaes.
Doctor. NOw it remains that we entreat of Fistulaes.


Chirurgian. It is so: know therefore that the Fistula is a deep and hollow
Ulcer, indurated with a strict and narrow Orific, Methodes ad Fistulas curandas.
which requires exercise or handy operation, and not the Physicians help.


Doctor. Have you any experiments against the Fistula?


Chirurg. Truly I have, and that good store.


Doctor Then teach me with what remedies this evil is taken away?


Chirurgian. I will show you what things are required of the Chirurgian, but
know that such things as are delivered of Vigo, belong to Physicians, and not
so much to Chirurgians for, this business may be dispatched without incision.


Doctor Then what remedies must we use?


Chirurgian. Decoctions and reasonable diet, which take away the cause, whereof
Fistulaes do proceed, for I have seen many well cured by these means only.


Doctor. Ought there not any Emplaisters to be applied?


Chirurgian. Yes: Unguent de Tutia, drawn on Leather, or on linen cloth,
which also must be often in the day wiped.


Doctor. What Decoction, and what Diet shall it be which the Patient is to use?


Chirurg. It is not here to be spoken of, for these and such like are to be
sought for in the other part of medicine, namely to such as belong to Physic
and diet.


Doctor You still keep your old custom, you conceal that which are said to
be ignorant to the Logicians: but tell me, may not the Fistula be cured by
Topycall Remedy.


Chirurgian. It may, as some affirm, but I have no experience thereof.


Doctor. What is your experience?


Chirurgian Recip. Olei Martis, Ol. Vitrioli. an. j Olei Mercurii, j s^.


Misce his Plinnaceoli infundantur, and post infusionem exsiccati, Fistula
imponantur calositatem enim statim auferint.


Doctor I demand not these Chimicall things, which are^ not to be gotten
without great cost, tell me some other.


Chirurgian Recip. Oleii Laterini, iij. Olei Terebinth. l. s^. Olei
Gariophilorum. j s^. Thuris Masticis. an. s^ Mirrha, an. s^ Mumia. iij.


Distillentur, and Oleum inde distillatum per siringam. quotidie bis
iniiciatur, and cauicas vino vel aqua salis subinde eluatur.


Doctor Thy remedies are hard to be prepared.


Chirugian Therefore those remedies are best to be used, which in this evil
are infallible.


The fifth Lecture. Of Scabbes.
Doctor NOw sir, let us to the Scabbes, what kind of remedies have you against
the same?


Chirurgian. Reci. Succi, Chelidonie, Fume terra Boraginis scabiosa, Lapacii
acuta. an. iij


Cum feari aceti and Anxungia vetteri misceantur, with the which the part
infected is to be anointed.


Doctor. Be all kind of Scabbes to be cured by this kind of remedy?


Chirurgian. Yes truly they are: unless they proceed of the French Pox, for
those scabbes will not give place to so light medicines.


Doctor What think you of Unguents against scabbes, set down of Vigo in his
Antidatorie?


Chirurgian. For that they are compounded of Quicksiluer, they are not to be
used, but rejected, for they are not applied without hurt to such bodies where
they are used.


Doctor. Do you know any other Unguent, which is not compounded of ioyces,
which I may come by in the winter time


Chirurgian. I do; Recip. Butyri recentis. Anxungia, s^. Litargirii, an. j
Cesusa, an. j Zinziberis, j Sulphuris. s^. Helebori nigri, Puluersat. iij
Aceti, j s^.


Misceantur and coquantur ad forinum Vngnent.


The sixth Lecture. Of burning with Fire, Oil, Butter, etc.
Doctor. HOw are those burnings cured, which comes of fire, milk, Oil,
butter, and such like.


Chirurgian. Butyri recentis, liquifacti calid. quantum sufficit, aqua
infundatur and agitetur, donce niuis instar albescat and tandem aqua
abiiciatur, and seruetur ad vsum in formam unguent. With this lineame^t thou
shall often anoint the part infected, and always be careful to keep the place
moist with Butter, neither shall ye suffer the part infected to dry, before
the heat be extinguished.


Doctor. Have you any other like to this?


Chirurgian. I have: Recip. Corticis Tiliae interiores in aqua fontana
macerentur, and fiat vnguentum. Let this be continually applied unto the burnt
place: but if the place through burning be exulcerate, proceed according as we
have spoken before of Ulcers.


Doctor. Truly this method of yours is very easy,


The seventh Lecture. Of the preparation of the Oil of Guiacum that is, of the
holy wood.
Doctor. LEt us come I pray you to the Oil of holy wood, which as it is said,
has a marvelous faculty in Ulcers.


Chirurgian. I am content, for that cannot be omitted without great offense,
which we know to do much good in a common weal.


Doctor. Do you suppose that this Oil is the best Antidote to heal Ulcers?


Chirurgian, This ought not to be doubted of any man, and chiefly to those
Ulcers which have their original of the Spanish, or if you had rather, of the
French Pox.


Doctor. Hitherto I had thought that that disease could not be cured without
Quicksiluer, which being by a certain property begotten to himself, all men
say it is a remedy in such a sickness.


Chirurgian. That is least of all true: For the Oil of holy wood is more
effectuous, and he is helped more easily, so that it be well prepared of the
Chimists, and the natural color not eqanged into a fiery, by reason of an
immoderate heat.


Doctor. And are there certain degrees of fire to be kept in distillation
because we must not run hither and thither.


Chirurgian. There are truly: for otherwise his nature that is distilled should
be corrupted: for as all things are not hot in the same degrees, but either
dry, cold, or moist, so likewise diverse degrees of fire are to be observed in
distillations, for that both the nature of the herb, and the diversities of
the operation requires it.


Doctor. Truly I would hear of you the whole matter, for it seems to me
that no man ought to be ignorant of the work


Chirugian You say true: but the handling hereof would require a great volume,
if we should set it down according to the worthiness thereof: here it
suffiseth us to show in what degree the fire ought to be kept, whiles we draw
the oil out of the wood Guiacum, or holy wood.


Doctor Well said: For he which does declare any thing particularly, it is
more easily understood of the Reader, then he which does it generally,
especially in such variety of distillations, and degrees thereof: Go to
therefore, tell me how the Oil of this wood is called holy, is it because of
his efficacy.


Chirurgian. Truly it is: But the better to get this oil it is needful to
have a large great retorte well luted with clay, called the Lute of wisdom,
the Guiacum ought to be turned small, and in light pieces, and also a vessel
of cold water must be provided, through which a brazen and hollow pipe must
pass.


Doctor. These things are easy to be done, but how must the rest of the work
be accomplished.


Chirurgian. Then the retort must be filled with Guiacum, being small cut almost
to the neck.


Doctor. And this is easy?


Chirurgian. Being filled and luted (as we have said) we set it in the furnace
following. So that the neck of the Retort be left out three handfulles
empty, and so to be let into the pipe that passes through the water.


Doctor. I would to God Paracelsus himself had declared his works with so easy
a method: there would be found more Paracelsians than Galenists: but what
follows?


Chirurgian. Both the Orifists and the neck of the retort with the pipe are to
be luted with clay on both sides, the breadth of an inch, least the spirits
breath out whiles it is distilling: For the Spirits, because they are delivered
from their bodies, do easily fly, therefore the vessels and all the chinkes
ought to be well fenced with the Lute of wisdom.


Doctor These things have no difficulty at all as I think.


Chirurg. Well said: it has no difficulty, but the operation is somewhat
hard, but if thou art desirous to practice, first make a furnace with a
vessel full of cold water.


Doct. Very well: but must it not have in the top of the Furnace the form of
a Testicle?


Chirurg. It is true: Therefore after all things be finished acording to that
order which we have spoken of principally, it is to be wrought with a gentle
fire, least that vessel having the form of a testicle break.


Do. Must we then dispatch the business with a gentle fire?


Chirurg. No truly: but you must increase the fire with degrees, that is to
say, by little and little, until ye see the oil and the water to distill into
the receiver.


Doct. How long shall the Oil distill?


Chirurg. I know not that! but know this, when it can distill no more then
leave off working, for it is a token of no more moisture and spirits in the
body of the Guyacum.


Doct. Is the Oil of the Guyacum therefore distilled then?


Chirurg. It is truly: but yet does it want other preparations.


Doctor. What are they, I pray you?


Chirurg. First of all, that which is found in the Receyuer, both water and
oil, they must be afterward separated


Doctor. How must they be separated?


Chirurg. Because the Oil does pierce to the bottom, and is black like
Pitch, the water must be poured forth by little and little.


Doctor. Does this water contain in it any faculty?


Chirurg. Yea truly: but we will omit it here, and we will have nothing but
the Oil it self.


Doctor. But tell me, what must we do with the Oil separated from the water?


Chirurg. The Oil is to be put into another Cucurbita and a little water is to
be poured unto it:


Do. What kind of head or receiver must be put unto it? one with a snowt or
beak, as we have spoken of, or any other


Chirur. Every kind of Limbecke is not convenient for this work, therefore that
is the most aptest, that which is called a Vapor, because it contains in his
upper part cold water.


Doct. Wherefore is it so?


Chirurg. Because with the cooling of the head and snowt, the Oil is kept
down, and so falls into the bottom of the Cucurbita, from whence it
ascends not:


Do. How long shall we distill?


Chirurg. So long as you see any thing distill into the Receiver.


Do, What must we do afterward?


Chirurg. That which is in the receiver you may reserve to your self if you
will, for the oil lies in the bottom of the Cucurbita:


Do. How is the oil taken out of the Cucurbita?


Chirurg. After the vessel is cooled, it must be opened, and the water which
you find in the vessel must be separated from the oil by a leasurely pouring
out, least any of the Oil pass therewith:


Do. Is the oil then perfect, being separated from the water, does it need no
other preparation?


Chirur. As yet it has not his perfection: Moreover, we have need of another
metamorphosis that we be not frustrat of hope:


Do. I pray you what metamorphosis is this?


Chir. This Oil which is separated from the water, is to be put into a
Cucurbita of glass.


Do. Must we then distill it a third time, I fear me least the distillation so
many times repeated, will mar the nature of the Oil:


Chirurg, Why should it mar it: Nay rather, fear least the Doves fly out
from their open nests.


Doctor. Must we then distill it in a brazen Instrument, on the which the Vapor
is ouerluted?


Chirurg. We must have another instrument, as I have said, for the Oil must
run into a glass Cucurbita, or rather a Receiver.


Do. What afttrwards?


Chirurg, There must be also a glassen Limbecke luted over.


Do. Well, one glass in another aptly agreeing.


Chirurg. And this Cucurbita must be set in a vessel of Sand, fit for the
Lembick, in the first degree of heat.


Do. Will it then distill?


Chir. Do you ask whether it will distill: Yes truly, you shall see Oil as
red as blood in the Receiver, which is of such faculty that nothing can go
beyond it.


Doct. How long must we distill?


Chir. So long until no more will come forth.


Doct. Are the Fecis that are left in the bottom after distillation profitable?


Chiru. They are truly: but they require to be mingled, and before mingling to
be rectified in Horse-dung: of which matter, seeing the operation is somewhat
difficult, I purpose not here to speak of it, let our Oil suffice you, whose
faculty, how great it is, experience shall tell you, for good merchandise
needs no praise.


The eighth Lecture. Of the manner to prepare Wax before Distillation.
Doct. What think you of the Oil of Wax, is there great difficulty in the
preparing of it?


Chi. Do you not perceive such difficulty as some suppose?


Do. I pray you teach me how it is made of the chirurgia^.


Chirurg. Before all things the Wax must be prepared, for this part being
omitted as the chiefest, no oil is drawn from the Wax.


Doctor. Therefore how must it be prepared?


Chirurg. Amongst all other preparations, this is one of the best: Four or five
pounds of Virgin wax broken into six or seven pieces, must be put into the
Cucurbita, to the which must be poured three pettes of Malmsey wine.


Doctor. What afterward?


Chirurg. The Vapor being ouerluted, and the fire so to be tempered least the
wax flow over, as it is a boiling.


Doctor. In what degree of heat must it be then.


Chirurg. In the second: nevertheless, if you see a little of the Wax
together with the wine in like manner to distill ever, you may not think
therefore that you have erred, for this Wax after the Cucurbita it luted, may
be mingled again.


Doctor. The vessel being well fitted, how is the operation to be expected?


Chirurg. That must be done by the help of Vulcan, that the wax with the wine
may boil in the Cucurbita.


Doctor. What does this Ebrilution profit: or whereunto serves it?


Chirurg. It serves that in the boiling, the spirit of the Wine with the wax
by little and little does distill.


Doctor. Ought this distillation to be often repeated?


Chir. Yea, often therefore, that the wax may be well prepared, after that we
have of this distilled wine one pynt, then we pour it again upon the wax
through a pipe from the one side: and least any should euaporate, we stop it
close.


Doctor. What if the Wax stick unto th pipe of the Limbecke?


Chirur. It must be drawn forth by little and little otherwise the beak would be
stopped up.


Doct. What afterward?


Chirurg. Secondarily, the distillation hereof ought to be renewed, and eye
pint of the distilled wine (as before) must be poured in again through a wide
pipe, and work it together twelve hours that there may be a certain
recipricall Distillation and pouring forth.


Doct. And what must we do after twelve hours?


Chirur, The distillation being repeated, you shall gather the spirit of the
wine and wax: this spirit you must reserve, for it must be mingled with the
Oil of Wax, as afterward shall be taught.


Doc. Is the wax then sufficiently prepated with these absolute things?


Chirurg. Not so: but after many distillations, the Cucurbita is to be opened,
and the Wax must be sepeeated from the Phlegm to which it is mingled.


Doct. How must that be done I pray you?


Chirurg. Only pressing it down with your hands.


Doct. You say well: for with pressing down the wax, the moisture is taken
away.


Chirurg. Then this Wax being separated from his Phlegm, must be put into the
Cucurbita, from whence it was taken, and afterward is to be molten at a gentle
fire, and wrought with a Spatula so long till it ascend no more, and that
there come no smoke from it, or has no more froth upon it.


Doct. Are these sure tokens whereby we may know that the wax is sufficiently
prepared.


Chirur. Yea doubtless, and all these things are well to be bept in memory,
the distillations and pouring forth by course the pressing out of the Flegmes,
the boiling and working of the Wax, until we see these tokens now spoken of,
but if all things be done as it ought to be, we shall easily draw out the
Oil of Wax.


The ninth Lecture. Of the manner of drawing oil out of Wax being prepared*
Doctor. THe Wax being sufficiently prepared, how afterward shall we distill
the Oil?


Chirurgi. The Ware is to be made hot, and to be put into a large Retorte of
Glass well luted with tbat lute which is called Lutum Sapientiae, unto whose
neck a pype shall be aglutinated and so made to pass through a vessel of cold
water.


Doct. How is that Lute made?


Chirur. With clay, with Fullers hair, with whites of Eggs and sand.


Doct. After the Retort is luted, with his neck and pipe, what must we do?


Chir. It must be placed in the furnace, begin your work first with a gentle
fire, by the space of one whole hour.


Doct. And how must we proceed afterward?


Chirur. The fire must be increased by degrees, until such time that all the
substance be come forth into the receiver, which will be somewhat gross, but
nevertheless of most excellent efficacy.


Doct. Will not the oil then be clear after the order of Turpentine?


Chirur. No, it will not: but it will be congealed: for to have it clear would
require an often distillation, and cause the oil to be of a more hotter
operation and sharper.


Doct. Tell me the virtue of this oil, and how it ought to be applied?


Chiru. It is most excellent in all wounds and Ulcers whatsoever, if it be
rightly applied, besides it may be ministered inwardly for diverse deseases, as
occasion shall be offered.


Doct. Have we now finished our discourse in every respect, as may be
necessary for a Chirurgian.


Chirur. We have for this time, until it please God to cause us to meet again.


Doct. I pray you then make a brief repetition of such conferences as has
past between us since our first meeting.


Chi. Most willingly: for it shall be most necessary for the refreshing of both
our memories.


Doct. I thank you: I shall be a debtor unto you for your courtesy.


Chir. In our first conference I defined unto you what Surgery was, what was
the operation of a chirurgian: The 2. of the difference of wounds and their
curing: Thirdly, of the stitching of wounds Fourthly, of contused wounds: Of
deep wounds: Of wounds of the sinews: Of wounds of the head: Of wounds
piercing the breast: Of wounds of the intestines and belly: Of the drawing
oil out of herbs: Of compounding the spirit of Turpentine: Of drawing the
oil out of Turpentine. Of Ulcers, Fistulaes and Scabs: Of the drawing Oil out
of Lignum fanctum, and of Wax: Of all which, I have briefly and simply
discoursed of, according to that knowledge which God has given me.


Doct. You have satisfied me of al things that I can bethink me worthy the
asking, only I am to request you to set me down some receipts, whereof you make
good account, which may be as a supply for the brevity we have used in our
conferences,


Chi. Indeed, in many places of our talk I omitted the rehearsal of diverse
medicines, which of purpose I did to bring them in together at the end: which
shall serve as an Antydotarie for you to resort unto, when as occasion shall
require.


Ad ignem persicam, and the Canker.

Rec. Vittiolei j. Amborum Gumi minoru^, an. ij. Ocrae s^ Vini and Aceti, an. l
j cocta calidaque superligentur.

For the Fistula.

Recip. Aqua Galethini, iiij. Olei Vitellorum, Ouarum j Mumiae liquorum, vi.
Fiat Oleum quo madidi panni superpoponantur.

An Emplaister for wounds.

Recip. Cerae Terebinthinae, Visci preparati, ana l j. Olei Lini, l iij.
Litargiri preparati, Calaminaris prepar. ana l j. coquantur in emplastrum.

A powder for compound wounds.

Recip. Croci Martis, Veneris, atque Saturnia, ana s^. Mercurii dulcis, s^.
Inde fiat puluis

Emplastrum.

Recip. Olei Oliuarum, l j. Masticis, Thuris, Mirrhe, Oppoponaci, Serapina,
Storacis, Bdellii, ana j. Coquantur in formam: postmodum accipe Cerae l. j,
Calami preparati, l s^ coquantur in Cerotum, pinse manib. extrahendo cum
Camphora in Oleo Anetino vel ex Verbasco.

Potio ad Fistulasj

Recip. Aquae de cornib. Cerui l j. Centaureae, Consolid. aurea, ana iij.
Parthenionis, iiij s^. His impone Reubarb, Mannae electae, Spermatis ceti, ana
j. huius optime commoti singulis vicibus mane vesperique bibatur Coclear vinum,
etc.

Emplastrum ad vulnera.

Recip. Litargitii, Mimii ana l s^. Olei Oliuarum, l j. Cerae, l s^ Reduc in
emplastrum, postmodum accipe puluer. Aranciarum, Chelidoniae, Aristolochi rot.
ana iij. and formetur emplastrum.

Balzamum.

Recipe Terebinth. claris. l ij, Olei Omphacini, l s^. Gumii Elenii vj Resinae
Pimae. Colophonie, ana iij, Mirrhae, aloes ep. Thuris, Sarcocoll. Mastic,
Hannoniac. in vino dissoluto, ana j s^. Garophilorum, Nucis muscat. Cucubarum.
Cinamoni, ana iij. Sem. Hipericonis, Rubic. Tinctorum, Grani puri, ana x.
Vernum Ter. lot. in vino viij. Vini Maluatici. l j s^: Pull. puluersantur and
impone Terebinth. Oleum and vinum cum alus in vitre a pro dies x. vel xij in
Sole, and post distillentur in balneo.

Gargarismus prosquinantie.

Recipe Mellis rosacei iiij. Aristolochia rot. Pirolae, ana s^. Aquarum de
prinis, de prunella, ana vij. Fiat Gargarismus.

Cataplasm. pro squinatia.

Recip. Mucilaginis de Fenngreco, x, Cerusa, ij. Camphorae vitae, s^ misce and
siat Cataplasma.

Balsamum.

Recipe Mirrhae electae, Aloes hep. Spicenardi, Sanguis dtac. Thuris, Mumie,
Oppoponacis, Bdellii, Carpobalsami, Sinamoni, Sarcocoll. Croci, Mastic, Gumi
Arab. Stiracis liq, sing ij: Ladani elect. sieve Castorii ij s^. Moschi, s^.
miscetur Terebinth. Pondus omnium tritis a Lembico distillentur.

FINIS

