KING JAMES his entertainment at Theobalds: With his welcome to London,
together with a salutatorie Poem.

By John Sauile.

Dicito Io paean, and Io bis dicito paean. LONDON Printed by Thomas Snodham,
and are to be sold at the house of T. Este. 1603.

To the right worshipful master George Sauile, son and heir to Sir George
Sauile knight, his most approved kind patron; Health, honor, and happiness.
OF spring of Gentry, sprig for honor dressed,
It Is half your loss (o hell) but al my blame
Jn proper words your worth should not b'exprest,
Let it suffice that I adore your name,
Then pardon what is wanting, I will owe it,
And as I Am able, J will pay I vow it.
Mean while accept this poem, to our King sing
Peruse it at your leisure, half or all,
Your worships worth our Muse shall shortly
Though in true Poesy, her skills but small,
How ere it be, accept her pure good will,
She rests at your command, in all Saue-ill.
Your worships ever ready at command in all duty, John Sauile.

King James his entertainment at Theobalds, with his welcome to London.
CVrteous Reader, for the better understanding of this description following,
especially to whom the situation of the place is either less known or not at
all; they are therefore to note that Theobalds whether the Kings Magestie came
upon Tuesday, being the third of May, accompanied with his whole train, is a
Princely Manor belonging to the right Honorable Sir Robert Cecill, principal
Secretary to his Magestie, and one of his Highness Privy Counsel, seated in
the county of Essex, twelve miles distant from London, directly by North,
near to an ancient town called Walton-crosse. This house is not placed
adjoining to the high way side, as many sumptuous buildings are in that
country, and thereabouts, but especially between that place and London, the
most part whereof belong to the city Merchants; but has a most stately
walk, from the common street way whereby passengers travail up to the
Palace, by the space of one furlong in length, beset about either side with
young Elm and Ash trees, confusedly mixed one for another, from the highway to
the first court, belonging to the house, containing in breadth three rods,
which amount to some fifteen yards, in fashion made like a high ridge land, or
the middle street way without bishops gate. His Magestie having dined upon that
same day with Sir Henry Cocks at Broxburne, four miles distant from
Theobalds, about half an hour after one a clock in the afternoon, his
Highness proceeded forward toward Theobalds, accompanied with Sir Edward
Dennie then shriefe of Essex, he had followers an hundred and fifty in
parti-colored hats, red and yellow bands, round rould, with a feather in
every one of them of the same color, besides two trumpeters all which were in
blew coats gallantly mounted. There did accompany his Magestie from
Broxburne, many of the Nobility of England and Scotland. As his Highness was
espied coming toward Theobalds, for very joy many ran from their carts,
leaving their teame of horse to their own unreasonable direction.

After his approach nigh unto Theobalds, the concourse of people was so
frequent, every one more desiring a sight of him, that it were incredible to
tell of. And it was wonderful to see the infinite number of horsemen and
footmen that went from the city of London that day thetherwards, and
likewise from the counties of Kent, Surry, Essex, and Middlesex, besides many
other countries: There were in my company two more, who after I had put it
into their minds, what infinite numbers of horse and foot passed by us, after
our breakfast at Edmunton, at the sign of the Bell, we took occasion to note
how many would come down in the next hour, so coming up into a chamber next
to the street, where we might both best see and likewise take notice of all
passingers, we called for an houre-glasse, and after we had disposed of our
selves who should take the number of the horse, and who the foot, we turned
the houreglasse, which before it was half run out, we could not possibly
truly number them, they came so exceedingly fast, but there we broke off,
and made our account of three hundred* and nine horse, and an hundred thirty
seven footmen, which course continued that day from four a clock in the
morning, till three a clock after noone, and the day before also, as the host
of the house told us, without intermission; now whether every equal space did
equal the number of these I cannot justly say, therefore I forbear to set it
down. When we were come to Theobalds, we understood his Magestie to be
within the compass of three quarters of a mile of the house, at which tidings
we divided our selves into three parts, each one taking a place of special
note, to see what memorable accidents might happen within his compass, one
standing at the upper end of the walk, the second at the upper end of the
first court, the third at the second court door; and we had made choice of a
gentleman of good sort, to stand in the court that leads into the hall, to take
notice what was done or said by his highness to the Nobility of our land, or
said or done by them to his Magestie, and to let us understand of it, all
which accidents as they happened in their several places, you shall hear in as
few words as may be. Thus then for his Magesties coming up the walk, there
came before his Magestie some of the Nobility, some Barons, Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen and others, amongst whom was the Shriefe of Essex, and the most of
his men, the trumpets sounding next before his highness, sometimes one
sometimes another, his Magestie riding not continually betwixt the same two,
but sometimes one sometimes another, as seemed best to his highness, the whole
Nobility of our land and Scotland round about him, observing no place of
superiotie, all bare-headed, all whom alighted from their horses, at their
entrance into the first court, save only his Magestie alone, who rid along
still, four Noble men laying their hands upon his steed, two before and two
behind, in this manner he came, till he was come to the court door where my
self stood, where he alighted from his horse, from whom he had not gone ten
princely paces, but there was delivered him a petition by a young gentleman, his
Magestie returning him this gracious answer, that he should be heard and have
justice.

At the entrance into that court stood many noble men, amongst whom was Sir
Robert Cecil, who there meeting his Magestie conducted him into his house, all
which was practiced with as great applause of the people as could be, hearty
prayer and throwing up of hats. His Magestie had not stayed above an hour in
his chamber, but hearing the multitude throng so fast into the uppermost court
to see his highness, as his grace was informed, he showed himself openly,
out of his chamber window, by the space of half an hour together, after which
time he went into the Laberinth-like garden to walk, where he recreated
himself in the Meanders compact of Bays, Rosemarie, and the like,
ouershadowing his walk to defend him from the heat of the sun, till supper
time, at which was such plenty of provision for all sorts of men, in their due
place as struke me with admiration, and first to begin with the ragged
regiment, and such as were debarred the privilege of any court, these were so
sufficiently rewarded with beef, veale, mutton, bread and beer, that they
sung holliday every day, and kept a continual feast; as for poor maimed and
distressed soldiers which repaired thither for maintenance, the wine, money,
and meat which they had in very bounteous sort, has been a sufficient spur
to cause them blaze it abroad since their coming to London, whose
thankfulness is not altogether unknown to my self, whom some of them
hearing that I was about to publish this small remembrance, made means to me
to give me true information of such princely exhibition as they daily
received, during the time of his Magesties aboade at Theobalds.

But let us a little look back, into the mirror of Magestie, our sovereigns
own self, who in his princely wisdom, (considering the multitude of people
assembled together, had that provident care over us his loving subjects,
foreseeing that victuals would be dear, both for horse and man, had it been
permitted to have been disposed of, according to the insatiable desire of the
town inhabitats, ratified a deposition to that effect taken before the Clark
of the market, for such and such victuals, meal, bread, butter, eggs,
cheese, beef, mutton, veale, and the like, with lodging, and many more such
necessary matters, that they should not be out of measure dear, beyond
ordinary course and custom, within the Verge of his Magesties court, so long
as it continued at Theobalds, what his princely intention was in this toward
the public good of all his faithful subjects, then and there assembled
together, merely drawn with the bonds of love and bounden duty, may easily
be gathered by the publication of the same, by his Magesties privilege; but
how effectually this was observed by all estates of people, within the Verge of
his Magesties court, at the said time, I refer it to the censure of them,
that are assured of the certainty of it.

Upon wednesday morn, being the fourth of May, his Magestie rid very early in
the morning into Enfeeld chase, accompanied with many of the nobility, his
return was shorter then was expected by a great deal, by reason the morning
seemed to promise a shower, but did not perform it, I could have wished that
either it had never lou'red at all, so we should have enjoyed the presence of
his Magestie the longer, at that present, or else that the middle region would
have given us just cause to have rayld against it, by urging his highness
return into the house before his full recreation; he rid the most part of the
way from the chase between two honorable personages of our land, the Earl of
Northumberland upon his Magesties right hand, the Earl of Nothingham upon his
left hand. Now one word concerning his Magesties proceeding toward London upon
satterday being the seventh of May, and so will end. For the number of people
that went forth of the city of London to see his Magestie that day, doubtless
they were contained in a number, but without all doubt not to be numbered. I
heard many gray heads speak it, that in all the meetings they have seen or
heard of, they never heard or saw the tenth man was there to be seen that day,
betwixt Enfeeld and London, every place in this space so clogd with company,
that his highness could not pass without pausing, oft-times willingly
enforced, though more willing to have proceeded, if conveniently he could
without great peril to his beloved people. After our return to our houses,
in our recreating pratle, a gentleman then soiourning in my house, one master
Th: Pa: a man upon my own knowledge of sufficient wealth, yet he would have
been content to have exchanged his state, so he might but have had actually for
every reasonable creature was there that day, a Be, and a hiue to put them in.
Another (more reasonable then he) would ask no more living, then for every
one a pin, which according to an Arithmeticall proporcion, by the judgment of
two or three martial men, who had seen great companies together, as near as
they could guess, by their seeming show, would have amounted to an hundred and
fifty pound, receaiuing but of every one a pin. His Magestie coming to
Stanford hill, there was an oration made unto his highness, the effect whereof
I could not truly learn, and hear it I could not, by reason of the crowd,
for even there being three miles from London, the people were so throng, that a
ca^man let his cart for eight groats to eight persons, whose abode was not in
it above one quarter of an hour. From Stamford hill to London, was made a
train with a tame dear, with such twinings and doubles, that the hounds could
not take it faster then, his Majesty proceeded, yet still by the industry of
the huntsman, and the subtilitie of him that made the train, in a full-mouthed
cry all the way, never farther distant then one close from the high way,
whereby his highness rid, and for the most part directly against his Magestie,
whom together with the whole company, had the lee wind from the hounds, to
the end they might the better perceue and judge of the uniformity in the cry.
After his Magestie was come from Kings-land, there begun a division amongst the
people which way his Highness would take when he came at Islington, but in
fine, he came the higher way, by the west end of the Church, which street has
ever since, and I guess ever will be called Kings street, by the enhabitants of
the same. When his highness had passed Islington and another place called
New-rents, and entered into a close called woods close, by a way was cut of
purpose through the banck, for his Magesties more convenient passage into the
Charterhouse garden, the people that were there assembled, I can compare to
anothing more conveniently then to imagine every grass to have been
metamorphosed into a man, in a moment, the multitude was so marvelous, amongst
whom were the children of the hospital singing, orderly placed for his
Magesties coming along through them, but all displaced, by reason of the
rudeness of such a multitude. After his Magestie was come amongst the press
of the people, the shouts and clamours were so great, that one could scarce
hear another speak, and though there were no hope to find what was lost
especially by the looser, notwithstanding in token of excessive joy, inwardly
conceived in the heart, many threw up their hats; Now at last he is entered into
the garden, from which time till his going to the Tower, mine eyes were never
blessed with his encounter. Now he is amongst us, God long preserve him over us,
whose presence makes old men sing, Satis se vixisse se viso.

FINIS.
A Salutatorie Poem to the Magestie of King JAMES.
Hail Mortal God, Englands true Joy, great King,
All hail, thy coming forces my Muse to sing,
Too forward, so vntutor'd in these lays,
Unfit to blazon Kings befitting praise,
Yet nerethelesse I Am forced perforce to write
Some Fury does my head my hand incite
Antiquity has taught next that day
That English hearts first for your state did pray,
The Angel Gabriell, from Iehoua sent,
Told to the creature, what her maker meant,
How she a maiden wife should bear a son,
Mankindes sole Savior, when we were undone,
This blessed eve of th'blest Annunciation,
Was first day of your Highness Proclamation
What hopes, what haps this Proclamation brings
Is cause efficient why our Muses sings.
Hail full of Grace: thus ginnes the salutation,
Striking the blessed with deepest admiration,
Half daunted first, then straight no whit dismayed
Mildly made answer: Be It as my Lord has said,
Look what surpassing solace, Joy without measure
Possessed her soul for this caelestiall treasure
Entombing in her womb our Savior dear
Deigned only worthy, man's sauing-health to beat,
The like and more (if more or like could be)
Possessed our souls, longing so long for thee.
She blessed the author of her good, the incarnate word
Singing, My Soul does magnify my Lord,
At tidings of your Proclamation we
In hands, in hats, in hearts did all agree
the world has our applause, heavens have our hearty praying,
your self hands, hats, and hearts from you nere straying.
The fruit which came by the Angels Aue t'all
Is easily gathered by old Adams fall,
The world, the flesh, the devil, each one our foe,
By Aue had their final overthrow.
The fruit we hope to reap, by God save The King,
Which Englands counsel unto the world did ring,
'Pon that same days doubtless beyond compare,
Your self in Virtue, Learning, Valor rare.
Gabriell why star'st* Angel, why art thou slack?
Tell me eternal messenger, what holds thee back?
To take thy wings leave Demi-deitie,
And bid God save King James his Magestie,
Since you are create to tell thy makers mind,
And for no other end were first assigned.
Old Homes writes a silly dog could say
Welcome to's master, (...).
Persius has told us, for great Caesar's sake
A speechless Parrate, (...) to's welcome spoke,
What shall our hearts devise? or hands set down,
Worthy thy great and worthiest King) renown,
But thousand, of welcomes millions of (...) send
Plaudities numberless, shouts wanting end,
Should we not this do, thankelesse were we then
But often it is seen, Beasts are more kind then men.
Witness old Bardus Ape, freed from the pit,
That held a Senator, and Snake within it,
Adrian promised Bardus half of all
His goods, to rid him from his hunting fall.
Poor man untied his trusse, let down his rope,
To pull out Adrian first, was all his hope,
The Ape espying it, out of the prison burst,
Clipping the line in's arms, was haild up first,
Bardus lets down his cord, the second time,
Entending Adrian, up thereby should clime,
When 'twas come down, near to th'imprisoning ground,
The Serpent close himself about it wound,
He was released the next, whom Bardus feing,
Ran all aghast, hoping t'escape by fleing,
Lastly the Senator, fast by it caught,
Released, near thanked him for the deed he had wrought,
Th'aforesaid two wanting words, reason, art,
Did several duties to him, in their heart.
In thankfulness, poor Ape did give him wood,
A precious stone for his received good.
The Serpent gave him, thus we plainly see,
For good received, thankful dumb creatures be.
Why do I instant in ungrateful man?
Since all are pressed to do, say, show; the best they can,
To entertain Englands undoubted King,
James, first of that name, to his own to bring,
Do not our Parrats Persius aequall thine?
When one among many, so truly could divine,
Could Augurize aright, foresee, foresay,
A full month since, bidding King James good day,
Unseen of most, hearing his only name,
Tel'st in the streets, reck'es not her teachers blame,
Naming him twenty times at least together,
Ceasing no longer, than oyling of a feather,
Twixt each King James, or King, or good, or day,
And often poor fool, she totally will pray,
Withouten ceasing, utter the whole throughout
To the admiration, of the gazing rout.
I cannot deem it now gulling toye,
Which Vennard inspired) entitled Englands Joy.
I rather guess he did our good divine
Not daring to disclos't before full time,
Be bold, go on, nowe's thy praesaging plain,
King James is Englands joy, long hoped for gain,
That it is he, who cannot easily prove?
Since it is only he, we only love,
It Is he that Englands joy did first awake,
After sad sorrowing for Elizaes sake,
Then reck no clownish trumps, regard them naught,
Banish such Fooleries from thy purer thought,
We know the fruit, sprung from foreknowing pen,
King James is Englands joy, say all Amen.
Tokens of Englands joy who list to seek,
that night might find them straw'd in London street,
Making the night a day, Phoebe a Sun,
This was the first sign when our Joy begun,
Continued still to Englands aeternall good
In th'happie issue of your Royal blood,
Make have to make us happy (worthy King)
Our Muse desires to write th'inthr^^izing
At famous Westminster, in thy elders chair,
Where Englands peers, will yield our Crown to th'heir
To th'heire legitimate, your self dread Sovereign,
Wishing your happy and victorious Reign.
Besides a trine of Kingdoms, are your own,
Possess them all, possessing Englands Crown,
France and froward Ireland, with our English land,
Are feall subjects to your Regal hand.
Besides your sacred self, does bring with you,
A Kingdom never knit to these till now,
As Camdens Britain tells, since Brutus days,
Than let us thank our God, sing Roundelaies,
England rejoice, Saint George for England shout,
For joy Saint Denis cry, all France throughout.
Double thy joys o Albion hark Cambrian banks,
God has enriched thee with a Prince, give hearty thanks
You that of long, had Lords in judgment sit,
Deciding causes, for your country sit.
Clap hands, sing Io, chaungd is your government,
Our Kings dearest sonn's, your Prince, your President,
Saint David ring, for joy set up your leeke,
Your praier's heard, you have got, you long did seek
Brave Henry Frederick, that Imperial name,
I guess from his Nativity foretold the same,
Thrice happy in his threefold name are you,
Henry bold Frederick is a Steward true,
How well these titles with your names agree?
You almost all (at least possessing) three,
Welcome then heartily, welcome brave Prince Henry,
Sing Carrols for his sake, keep wakes, be merry,
Irefull cold Ireland, cease from thy rage at last,
To yield subjection to thy King make have,
Sound out Saint Patricke, Scotland Saint Andrew sing
King James is Englands, Scotlands, France, Irelands King,
What can I add to eeke our joys withal,
Since James is King of all, contained in all,
But have dear King, t'case our expecting mind,
Unstaid while your Highness stays behind,
Indeed nere truly stayed, till we you greet,
With (...), in London street.
Nor then indeed, till we do all resort
To see your face shining in Englands Court,
And then (o but till then make have) your grace shall see
Your stranger subjects faithful loyalty.
Now to return where first I did begin,
Among all estates Poets have cause to sing
King James his welcome; for he does excel
As his Lepantho and his Furies tell
In Poesy: all Kings in Christendom,
Then welcome him (quick spirits) blush to be dumb
And pardon him that boldly makes this suite
Forced by some Fury, scorns to be longer mute,
Rejoice your Patron is your countries King,
Judge; of all states, have not you cause to sing?
For shame then rouse your spirits, awake for shame,
Give Caesar's due, acquit your selves from blame,
All wish his welcome, among all sorts of men,
Save only such as are past sixty ten,
These wayward old ones grudge to leave behind
What our succeeding age is sure to find.
The peace, the plenty, pleasure, and such like gain,
Which we are sure t'enioy in James his reign.
Wishing would he had lived in their youths prime,
Or old age would return to ten and nine,
Were they but nynteene, who have nyntie seen.
The^ would they wish to see king James and's Queen,
And so indeed they do, the whitest heads
That lived in Antique time, and praid on beads,
These holiest fathers crave no longer life,
Then once to see King James, his Queen and wife.
With hands vprear'd, giving JEHOVAH praise,
That lenght their lives, to see his happy days,
That these his happy days, full grace may bring,
Let English hearts cry all, God laue our King.
FINIS.

