A strange and Wonderful Example of the Judgment of almighty God, showed
upon two adulterous persons in London, in the parish of S. Brydes, in
Fleetestreete, this third of February. 1583.

Set forth for a memorable Example before our eyes, both to make us remember
the frailty of this life, and to call us unto repentance.

By Samuel Saxey, Student in Divinity.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the sign of
S. John Evangelist, by H. Iackson.

The Epistle of Samuel Saxey to his loving Countrymen, the Citizens of London,
concerning the strange and wonderful Judgment of almightye God, given upon
two adulterous persons, the third of February, being Sunday. 1583.
Dearly beloved Countrymen, both you I mean, which love and embrace
righteousness with your whole hearts and souls, and you also, which open your
ears, and lift up your eyes to vanities, and seek after leasings, I beseech
you in Gods cause, and your own behalf, to worship the holy one of Israel
with a true, zealous, and sincere worship, and to repent you speedily and
heartily of all your vile and abominable transgressions, committed before the
face of that only wise God, who most clearly sees al things: And then will I
say unto you Londoners, as S. Paul writes to the Romans, the Corinthians,
and other nations: Grace to you and peace, from God our father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ. You know well enough, good Countrymen, with what notable and
singular, and thrice happy blessings, the father of heaven has blessed and
endowed you, his adopted children, and inheritours: you know what great riches
and treasures of body and soul he has bestowed freely and bountifully upon
you: he it is, which grants and gives you so joyful, so prosperous and
peaceable a realm: he it is which preserves our most virtuous and renowned
Prince Elizabeth: he it is, which continuneth his careful regard and kindness
daily and hourly toward you: and he it is which will not the destruction
and death of a sinner, but wysheth him to become a new and regenerate man, and
so consequently live. Wherefore lift up your heads and hearts, O ye good Citizens
of London, remember what good co^mandementes your godly and religious Prophets
and Preachers have delivered you: remember what they have told you of the
overthrow of proud Babylon, of wicked Niniue, of lascivious Sodoma, and other
famous Cities, of infamous Asia, and then too, learn this lesson, or rather
prouiso of me your poor brother in Christ, that unless you cast away your
iniquities far from you, and bannish your cankred and corrupt imaginations, and
circumcise the sensual appetites and unreasonable perturbations of your
mortal bodies, you shall be, (look for it) even like one of them, and then
without all doubt immortal confusion will ouerrunne and lay waste your most
stately and goodly buyldings. What slug and dromedarie is there amongst you,
that will not prepare himself lustily to the battle, when he hears the
drum or trumpet sound alarm, and proclaim open war? and shall ye Lord of
Hosts thunder aloude from his everlasting throne of Majesty, and will you, or
dare you yet lie fast asleep in the filthy puddle of cursed Adam your
forefather, and neither awake, nor arise? If the Lion roareth terribly in the
wild forest, can the little beasts choose but be afraid? And shall the
mighty and invincible Lion of the tribe of Judah, roar over his chosen children
and subjects, and shall not this same vile dust and ashes of ours fall in pieces
with a sorrowful contrition? God is your good king, therefore trust in him
with a true, faithful, and duetifull obedience: God is your graund captain,
and under his banner you shall easily vanquishe and captiuate the monstrous
armies of Satan: God is your loving father, take heed and beware, least other
neighbor Countries steal away your blessings from you, whilst you hunt
after wandering flesh, in this worldly forest: God is your wise
schoolemaister, and one while he teaches you with gentle instructions and
soft precepts, sweeter than honny, and the honny comb, another time he
entreats you sharply, and corrects you for your manifold offenses. He is
both merciful and severe, he is both patient and angrye, now he appears
unto you in white garments, and his saints rejoice about him with Olive
branches in their hands, and anon he descends from above in a boisterous
and fierce whirlewind, and in a tempest mingled with lightnings and coals of
fire. What should I say more? He sells you all goods without silver or
gold, and yet you will not harken unto my voice, says the Lord of Hosts. How
long will you flee, when I follow you, how long will you stop your ears, when
I call you? says the Lord of hosts. O London, London, London, hear what the
Angel of God has written in the judgment seat of the Lamb, I have made
Thamesis like unto the Rivers of Paradise, Euphrates, and Tigris are not to be
compared with it, her streams are of silver, and her sands of gold, her
springs are water of life, and who so drinks of them, shall not be adry: her
bathings make the blind to see, the lame to go, the dumb to speak, the
deaf to hear, and I have removed all hinderaunces which would stay her pipes
and conduites, the venomous poison of the great Dragon could not infect it, nor
the hotteissuinges of any Serpents could defyle it* my Rulers delighted to
row in her with Barges, and my Seers builded their houses near unto her, she
has been Queen of all Rivers, because her virtues and effects are
incomparable. Wherefore my Ministers and servants have I sent in to her, to
cast their nets and catch of her fish, I longed to eat of that brood, and
to be served with her young fishes at my Table, but they labored all night,
and took nothing. For Thamesis is made a dwelling place for water Snakes, she
is full of infectious woormes, she shall no more be called the Queen of
waters, if I send once again, and receive no fish of her, she shall be made
like the deadly waters of Gomorrha, says the Lord of hosts. Now my good
Countrymen, can you hear this Embassage and Revelation, and not mark it? Or
can you mark it, and not remember it? Then lay it closely up in your
breasts. Go to, for Gods sake, and your own sake, let us lay our heads and
join hands together, let us send our humble supplication, and letters of
submission unto our merciful God, and crave a pardon of his Grace, least he
come suddenly in his wrath, and vex us in his sore displeasure. He has sent
many miracles among you, my beloved brethren, to chaste^ your unchaste
misdemeanors. Do you not remember that horrible punishment, wherewith he
punished a sister of yours in Woodstreet who very desperately forsweared her
self in bargaynyng? For as her periurye stincked in the nostrels of the Lord,
so her perjured tongue became as her fundament. A great example, and notable
Admonition, for all buyers and sellers, not to lie, and forswear, and face,
and gloss, to gain the frail and corruptible money, and loose the penny of
eternal life. Yet for all this Gods anger cease not, but his hand is
stretched out still. Do you not remember that Lea an old man in London,
dwelling in Byshopsgate street, blasphemed the sacred name of God, and
forsweared himself in the Guildhall? Which heinous trespass begat in him so
forcible a compunction and remorse of conscience, that like to that mad Caine
and furious fratricide he cruellye shortened his own days, and so wounded his
bowels with a rustye knife, that presently without repentance he gave up the
Ghost. A worthy Caveat for all such, as do profanely, and irreverently take
Gods holy name in their mouths. Yet for all this Gods anger cease not, but
his hand is stretched out still. For when Mystres Saunders a Tenaunte of
yours, had a long time acquainted her self with the conueyaunces and devises,
wherewith dishonest Gossyps are familiarly accustomed, God would forbear her
payment no longer, but brought her and her wicked accomplices and adherentes to
the gallows, that all other amorous strumpets, and whoorish bloudsuckers might
see a fair warnyng before their eyes. Yet for all this Gods heavy wrath
cease not, but his hand is stretched out still. Do you not remember, what
Tokens have been sent you within few years? By blazing tails of Stars in
the Firmament, by fiery exhalations and excursions in the Element, by
extraordinary diseses and infirmities, by shaking your Theater, by other and
other signs of dislikyng and rebuking your inordinate kind of living. Yet for
all this Gods heavy wrath cease not, but his hand is stretched out still. Do
you not remember that most dreadful and tragical Earthquake, which caused the
huge and solid foundation of the Earth, to shake and totter up crepple? Beware
least the same and down like a drunken man or Earth gape suddenly and
swallow you up quick, as Corah, Dathan and Abyram were devoured for
gainesaying the omnipotent word of God, which descended from the holy hill of
Sinai. Yet for all this, gods anger cease not, but his hand is stretched out
still. Do you not remember the unfortunate and horrible mischief, that so
lately befell to them, which had more desire and delight to visit Paris
garden, than Paul's Cross, and to hear the beastlye cries of Bears and Dogs,
rather than the comfortable voices of gods preachers, which pronounce ye glad
tidings of the gosple? the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play, and many men and women were partly killed, and partly maimed in one
hour. Learn therefore and take heed, for there is a plague gone out from god,
and his hand is stretched out still. For mark, I pray, what a rare and
lamentable Example he showed upon two adoulterous persons the third day of
February, being Su^day, in the year of Christ 1583. There was a man above three
score years old, named William Brustar, who had bin sometimes of a reasonable
wealth, (carrying presently a great countenance of honesty) he was by
occupatio^ an Haberdasher, who either by licentious and prodigal spending or
idle laboring, or gods curse (for he was by credible report lately become an
usurer) fell into so low an estate, that the Parishioners where he dwelt,
because he had born al offices amongst the^, and had bin in good countenance
and credit, allotted and assigned him a chamber over the porch on the
southeast part of Saint Brydes church by Fleetstreet, rather than he should
be destitute of a dwelling place. This Brustar had put away his own wife upon
a disagreement which happened betwixt them, at two sundry times, for he
would never agree with her, and oftentimes, when the neighbors reprehended him
for using her so hardly, he made answer, that the end of them both should
prove, which was most faulty, he or his wife, and as I am crediblye
informed, he retained a woman which was one Breames wife, whom he before
had bayled out of Bridewell, under a pretense to reform her unnatural
manners, and bring her to goodness, but it proved clean contrary, for they two
oftentimes met unlawfully and ungodly together, and incurred therefore the
danger of God and man. Yet nevertheless I am enforced of necessity to except
yt holy, holy, holy, pope of Rome, who has neither showed himself like to God
in goodness, nor to man in wisdom and government, but rather a seducing and
erroneous spirit, in blasing his false and unlearned Kalenders, as shall, God
willing be hereafter proved more at large, and in sending his newfound
pasportes, his Turkish and Mahomatical licenses, his unreasonable beasts the
Bulls, his fond writs (for thus it is avouched by a constante report of many)
wherein he wills and permits his devout shauelings, and Catholic
children, and sanctified comminaltie, and royal generation, to keep a wife or
concubine for each hand or leg: his holiness might do well to amend this first
institution, and now bequeath a maid Marrian to every member, that so he
may have many sciences and goodly impes of his so godly and blessed stocks.
But let him alone, he is hatching more cockatrices eggs. If Brustar had been
an inhabitaunte of Rome, as he was of London, he might have received an
Absoluote for all his villainies, and played the Bigamus at his pleasure by
authority and privilege. Upon sunday last in the afternoon a little before
evening prayer, the parish being assembled together to the service of their
Lord and Master Christ Jesus, espied a smoke somewhat unlike common smoke,
to issue out of Brustars chamber: they by and by suspecting some harm, made no
small haste to his door, which they found fast shut: then the neighbors caused a
ladder to be set to his chamber window, where they found his key, nevertheless
they burst open the door: when they were entered in, behold what a grievous
spectacle the Lord had laid before their eyes, to make report thereof unto
their brethren and fellow citizens. Brustar that old fornicatour lay stark
dead on a settle by the beds side, his right thigh and right arm, which
oftentimes had embraced this harlot, were burned with fire, and specially the
outside of his arm, which very strange to see, was burnt up to the elbowe,
and yet his sleeves not perished. And the woman his companion had a semblable
reward for her wa^ton abuses, for she also lay dead by him bending over the
small pan of coals toward him, and her head on his right thigh, so that the
skirts of her garments were burnt, her arms were burnte to the bones, the
nether parts of her body burnt to the breaste, and al her hinder parts to
the shoulders, very horrible to behold: both her legs were burnt, saving her
left foot from the anckle downward. A strange euente that so small a fire
should consume so much flesh, the tenth part whereof had been able to drench
and quench every coal in the pan. (A wonder not much unlike that which
happened at the burning of one Gardener in Spain, a sparcle of whose fire set
on fire a goodly tall fair ship of the kings, lying then in the haue^, as
you may read more plentifullye in Master Foxes Ecclesiastical History.) With
the horror of which strange sight, was joined, so strong and stinking a sent
of the consumed flesh, that those that entered ye chamber were well nigh stifled
therewith. Concerning these persons, you hear how lewdly and vngratiously
they missused the holy Sabbath, and what a requiem god gave them for their
labor. You see the guerdon of carnal concupiscence: you see how the lord of
heaven and earth makes the same element to succor the good, and consume the
evil: you see, I believe, as significant and clear an instant against
whorehunting, as any age, or time, or place can afourde you: yea though you
consider the fire of Sodom, of Nadab and Abiahu, who offered strange incense
before the Lord, of Elias which consumed two chiefetaines with their fifties,
of Ananias, Azarias, and Mizael, which consumed their tyrannous persecutors in
the flame. And will you yet return back to your beastlye and fylthie lusts, as
the dog does to his vomit, o ye sons and daughters of London? will you not
yet leave to foster and entertain those tripping dames, those pery wigged
prickmidainties, those sodomitical libertines, those ruffia^ baudes, those
curled masking roysters which run like untamed heifers thorough hedge and
ditch, and ouerru^ other men's grounds and garde^s, which live by the spoil
and hauock of sobriety and continency, which care for nothing more tha^ their
bellies, and things belonging to the belly, well seen in secreates and
priuities of states, as your thrice excellent English poet has truly reported
of you in his Speculum Tuscanismi, wherein is contained a perfect rese^blance of
harebrainde natures and omnisidian counterfaites, which run eftsoon into all
regions, to buy extremities, to borrow new fangled qualities, and bear about
them at once ye head of a Numidian Tuscan or wild Irish, the breast of a savage
Bear and Leopard, the arms and winge of those Manucodiata, which birds as
Cardane reports, do fly continually in the air, hoping at the last to make
their nestes in the sun, but they are feign to build them in their own
backs* and fall down to the earth without feet, when they have done. Let
all such loose from among you, Oh my people, says the Lord of hosts: away
with them, either bend them to virtue, or break them in their vices says the
Lord of hosts. For what agreement has sin with righteousness, or God
with Belial, or heaven with hell? know you not that your bodies are the
temples of the holy Ghost, and will you suffer them to be made, nay but
will you your selves make them the sanctuaries of harlottes? understand you
not that commandment, which was sent from GOD, Thou shall not commit
adultery? And again, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife? will you
learn still, and be never the wiser? will you needs be like darnell, and
wild oats in the Wheat field of God, and be thrown into that unquenchable
lake of brimstone, and endless misery? for persuade your selves, that neither
whoremaisters, nor fornicatours, nor incestuous persons shall be made partakers
of the heavenly Jerusalem. You see that God would have this harlots prankes
known: for neither her face, nor the attire of her head was so much as once
scortched, that it might the more certainlye be reported in London: see how
such a man's daughter, such a ma^s wife, such a man's concubine came to her
end, unless we repent, we shall likewise all perish, every mothers child
of us, every dishonest liver of us, every dalying Dalila of us shall come to
naught. Why might not GOD as iustlye have executed his rigorous sentence
upon us miserable sinners that we are, as upon this neybour of ours? for we
are all gone out of the way, we are all become unprofitable, there is none of
us that does good, no not one.

Let us call to mind, how the widow Barnes in Cornhil, intending to defeat
an orphane of his right, in a rage by Gods secreate determination, threw her
self headlong out of a window, and cruelly ended her devilish life: let us take
heed, by prayer and fasting, least the devil provoke us to madness, as he
did one Berrie in the Counter of the Poultrie. It was that Satan, that
devouring Lion, which incited one R. Tod to slay Maystresse Skinner at saint
Katherines: and Maistresse Amye Middleton to martyr and kill her maid with
overmuch beating and with heavy cudgelles.

Let us imprint these fearful examples in our mind, and think not within your
selves, that they were greatest offenders, upon whom the tower of Silo fell, for
except we repent, we shall al like wise perish: Let us not say among our selves:
rushe, all is well, peace, peace, we saw when Gods wrath took the wings of the
wind, and flew into the uttermost parts of the world: for he will come in a
day, when we are not aware of him, and in a moment will he come, and find us
beating our fellow servants, and give us a portion in the land of the dead. My
people of London is like to a child, yea, even that goodly people, the people
of London, is like a dead block upon the mountains, says the Lord of hosts.
For if I beat them with my iron rod. they forgette it, and when I strike, they
feel me not. How long shall I forbear my vengeance, and bear with your
infinite enormities, which daily come before my presence, says the Lord of
hosts? My house is called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a
Tabernacle and inn of Gomorrheans, says the Lord of Hosts. I sent my Angel
with a sling and two stones, to scare you in my son Christ's Church, says the
Lord of hosts. But if you will yet remain like uncircumcised Philistines, I
will send a two edged sword, to strike of the heads of your proud and
disdainful Goliahs, says the Lord of hosts. And because I could not find one
Phinches among you, I was constrained to be both judge and tormentour my
self, and I smote Brustar and his Concubine with fire, wherewith they would
have warmed themselves, as sometimes I did choke the Israelites with
quails, when they would have slaked their hunger, says the Lord of hosts.
Thus I have turned their mirth to mourning, their joy to annoy, their pleasure
to pain, and will you not yet harken to my call, says the Lord of hosts?
wherefore I will yet punish you seven times more for your manifold
iniquities and treasons, which you have rebelliously raised against me: so
that you shall fetch no more of the gold of India and Ophir, you shall not have
your ships fraughted with the sweet spices of Arabia any more, you shall have
many losses by land and by sea, many submersions and shipwrackes shall
empouerish you, and he that escapes the waves, shall be taken of the
pestilence, and he that auoideth the plague, shall be apprehended of the
ennimye, and one neighbor shall spoil and endammage another, one friend shall
betray an other, and there shall reign a great desolatio^ over you, says the
Lord of hosts. But if you will take the tokens for a fair warning, and worship
toward my holy temple, and lay aside your proud flesh, and put of your
gorgeous apparel, and send away your cawles, your Moonelike tires, your
perfumes, bracelets, muffiers, bonets, tablets, earerings, vayles, wimples,
codpeesed dubblets, crisping pinnes, glasses, lawnes, and other allurementes
and lullabies of follye and incontinencie, which are snares of foreign
nations to entrap you withal, and keep my holidays arighte, and learn my
testimonies to observe and follow them, and worship my preachers as you ought
to do, nothing shall be too dear for you, your houses shall be filled with
all manner of store, your oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall be no
decay, no leading into captivity, nor no complaining in your bounds: then
ask and have, then knock, and it shall be opened: I will prevent the
trecheries of untrusty nations, I will tame the stiff necks of the hautie
Magnifycoes, the north wind shall not hurt you, nor the Souldan shall do you
harm, your foes round about you shall behold your prosperous estate, they
shall gnash with their teeth, and pine away, the desire of the ungodly shall be
like the grass on the house top, which wythereth before it is plurked up,
Themesis shall be better esteemed than Tyberis, and I will bless her ylande
with all increase and I will satisfy her poor with bread, and her Saints
shall dwell with me, and feed at mine own Table, and sing Alleluia in all her
circuites and dominions, says he which is, which was, and is to come. What
say you, brethren and fathers? whether had you rather live with quiet
consciences, and to keep house with GOD, than to wast your bodies, your
substance, and souls in wantonness, and repent when al is gone. You know the
old proverb, Too late to spare, when all is spent, and who counts not him a
fool, that shuts the stable door, when the steed is stolen? which of you
has not heard how that Ovid ye poet was bannished as far as Moscouie, by
Octauius Augustus an heathen Emperor, for writing his books, of the Art of
Love: and will you, which are Christians, suffer so many youths under your
noses to practice continual experiments and interluds of the Art of bauderie?
I perceive it is too too true, which your English Homer has written: No man,
but minion: stout, lout: plain, swain, quoth a Lording,
No words but valerous, no works but womanish always.


Good God what a vile indignity is this, that Archelaus a miscreant in a grave
and politic regard should burn all books and Epigrams of love, which he could
come by: and yt you which bear the titles of christians, and yet scarce have
one spark or title of christianity, will permit sycophanticall Applesquires,
and brothely baskets to warm them at your fires. He that touches Pitch shall
be defiled with it, one il sheep infecteth the whole flock: Si cum bonis
viuunt boni, vtrique fiunt optimi,
Si cum malis viuunt mali, vtrique fiunt pessimi.


Bethink you therefore, my loving Countriemen, and remember, that the haughty
mind of Alcibiades marred all Athens: that the fond louetrickes of Alexander
brought Troy to an overthrow: that for the fornication of the sons of Seth
with the daughters of Caine, welneare al mankind was destroyed by the
universal deluge: that for the outrage of concupiscence, both Sichem, and the
house of Emor, and almost all the tribe of Benjamin was brought to utter
ruin and subversion, that the people of Israel were stricken, and carried into
captivity for coupling with strange women, that great mortality happened by
pestilence, by famine, and by sword, for the only adultery of king David:
and let this example of William Brustar and his lewd Woman, be as effectuallye
weighed and scanned of us, as for ye rarenes it ought to be: and God who has
always blessed your City hitherto, will bless it still: to whose gracious and
fatherly protection I co^me^d you. Now, if al these prodigious Events may not
move you to turn over a leaf, and take a new lesson, hearke^ I pray what
Religion her self speaks unto you from her high Tribunal seat. Come unto
me, ye children of Thamesis and Britain, my arms you see are open to
entertayne you, my head is inclyned to kiss you, come, and you shall possess
me in peace. Oh that you would give love for love, for your good will is
better than Nectar, and Britannia her name is unto me, as a most pleasant
ointment. Thus it is meet that I your Lord and Saviors spouse should be
welcome unto you, with timbrels and flutes, and cimballes, and a Venite
exultemus. The vocie of your Osanna makes me heartily to rejoice, the gladsome
salutations of your lips, sound sweeter in mine ears, than any
instruments of Music in your Land. As the rose is among the thorns, so is
my beloved Albion among al genealogies of men. Lay thy right hand under my
head, and let thy left arm hold me: for my delight is to sit under thy
healthful shadows, and the pomegranates which grow in thy garden are my best
comfort. I traueled many years and indictions about the Countries of Bohemia,
and Praga: I soiourned in the shore of the Germane sea, I walked through the
regions about Nilus, and passed by Sicilie, and by Uenice, and visited all the
daughters of Europa. Yet none is so toothesome to my mouth, nor so favorable
in mine eye, as the youngest sister Albion is. We will build a silver bulwark
upon her walls, we will fasten her doors, with bourdes of Cedar trees. I
have set my seal upon her heart, because she is a well locked garden, and
a lively fountain runs from her. I am black with iourneying in many
Kingdoms, but I am not ill favored O ye offspring of Sion: I come to you with
Happiness in one hand, and Eternity in another, take not one but both of
these and we will keep together for evermore. Make our foundations of
Marble, our playsterings of Gold, and our pyllers of Iuorie, so shall the
King rejoice in thy beautye for he is thy Lord from above, and obey thou him.
Build up our Gates of Brass, and let Verity keep the entrance: let
Charity be our Schoolemaistresse: and let Humility sing Hymns and
spiritual Songs: let Patience bear the burden of the Cross before us:
let Prayer be watchman in our strong Towers: and then Magnificat, shall
daily be sung of us, and he only shall be gloryfyed, which rules above:
let us for the instruction of our children have the Acts and Monumentes of
the holy Woorthyes, portrayted even upon our Pallaice walls: and then also
the destruction of Saul will terrifye them from covetousness, the magnifycence
of Joshua and David will also hearten them in the way of godliness, the
blessing of Gideon will likewise exhort them to destroy all profane and
Madianitish idolators, the fortitude of Sampson will emboulden them against
millions of ennimies, the zeal of John will teach them to hinder the increase
of the ungodly rout of Baal, the courage of Jonathan will bid them never to fly
touch in Gods cause, the faith of Abraham will exhort them to trust in Gods
promises, the miracles of Moses will make them worship the power of God, the
virtues of Job, of Noah, of Daniel, of Joseph, of Jacob, of Judas Machabeus, of
Debora, of Judith, of Aquila and Priscilla, will inform the^ of pacient,
provident, manly, wise, and honest proceedings, and teach them the fear of
the Lord, which is the beginning of perfect wisdom. And to withdraw them from
the footesteps of transgressors, the picture of Caines autophonie, of
Antiochus and Herodes Pthiriasy, Ananias perjury, Pharaohs obstinacy, Simon
Magus sorcerie, Dives his gluttony, with many other notable narrations should
be set forth before their eyes. So the vanity of Sciences Magical could not
delude them, nor yet al Iulianistes, al Lucianistes, al heretics should once
remove them from their assured hope in Christ. For he that keeps Israel
shall not slumber nor sleep. They should be builded upon the rock which
neither stormy winds, nor great floods, neither earthquakes, nor pyrotechnies
may undermine and ouercast. We will keep them from gadding Dinahs, from
muffled Thamars, from ambitious Nimrods, from adulterous Absoloms, from
holowharted Achitophels, from traiterous Iscariots, and from ye whole train
and troop of wicked offenders. And as for this example of Brustar, it shall be
registered in ye chronicles of Gods just judgments, which teaches us to
detest and abhor the licentious excursions of the body, and to hate that
preternaturall lust of old age, and to pray against sudden death. And now
let us humbly beseech our sovereign king of heaven and earth, to look on us
with the eyes of his mercy: not to cut us off so shortly, that al time of
remembrance be denied us: to grant us his grace in such measure, that we may
be ready with our lamps, when the bridegroom comes, and enter with him into
eternal joys, which God for his Christ's sake accomplish in due season, to
whom al wisdom and power and goodness be ascribed for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

