The famous game of Chesse-play, Truly discovered, and all doubts resolved; So
that by reading this small Book thou shall profit more then by the playing a
thousand Mates. An Exercise full of delight; fit for Princes, or any person of
what quality soever.

Newly published by A. S. Gent.

If on your man you ^ight
The first draught shall you play,
If not it is mine by right
At first to lead the way


Printed at London for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop near
Fleetstreet-Conduit. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and Virtuous Lady, the Lady LVCY, Countess of
Bedford, and one of the Ladies of her Majesty's Priuie-Chamber, A. S. wishes
all gifts of Honor, with eternal happiness.
RIGHT Honorable and virtuous Lady, having received many courtesies from your
Honorable Father, late deceased; whose miss has caused many to mourn for
the loss of so Honorable and worthy a friend, and from your Honorable and
worthy self, who in duty I do ever reverence, I have in desire of showing
thankfulness made bold to present to your Honor this small Book, having no
other gift to tender you; and knowing you ever to be a favorer of all Virtue:
Therefore may it please you to accept this Work, being a Princely exercise,
whose grace will be a chief ornament to the subject I treat of: It is the
discovery of all the secrets of Chesse-play, which of all other games is the
worthiest that ever was devised, and has been practiced now 2227. years. This
therefore being so excellent a game, and so much esteemed of by the Nobility
and Gentry of this our Kingdom, as also in all other Countries in
Christendom. This considered, J have therefore imbouldned my self to refer
the perusing hereof to your Honor, and my self to your good opinion, which I
tender as that I esteem most dear: ever remaining in all duty at

Your Honors command Arthur Saul.

To the courteous Reader.
THere have been diverse which have written of the game of Chesse-play, who
have neglected to write the particulars of the Game, but have spoken some thing
which is as much as nothing, for the instruction of the Reader: therefore do I
imagine they wrote all they knew, or otherwise, not so much as they might;
wherefore Courteous Reader, if it shall please thee to read this small Book,
which to do will soon be performed, thou shall find in it more then yet has
been written by any other; in very brief manner. In this book shall thou
learn first; the manner how to place the men; next their quality or worth;
after that to know how they ought to be played: then follows that you
understand the Laws of the game rightly: and after I have showed thee some
reasons that there can be no rule for this game (as some hold opinion) then
shall thou find many pleasing plays to give thee delight and encouragement to
proceed in exercising this game Also thou shall learn directly what a dark
Mate is; and likewise what a Stale is, and how it falls out that it is given;
and lastly, how to give a Mate all the men being in the field at two draughts
without a guard, so that the King checked shall have no cover nor means to
relieve himself, but of force it shall be mate.

Vale. A. S.

To the World.
Go forth my little Book,
Thou art no longer mine;
Each man may on thee look,
The shame or praise is thine.
But seek thou for no praise,
No thanks, nor yet reward;
Yet all men for to please
Have thou a chief regard.
The labor has been mine,
The travail and the pain;
Reproaches shall be thine.
To bear thou must be feign.
For as to pleasure many
'Twas that I wished ever;
Right so to displease any
I purpose to do never.
But if thou please the best
And such as be of skill,
I pass not for the rest,
Good men accept good will.
Had thou remained with me
Thou should have had no blame;
Since thou abroad would be,
Go forth and seek thy fame.
Arthur Saul.

To the Reader.
THe order of the men in verse,
here also shall thou find
Thy knowledge better to increase,
and satisfy thy mind.
First, for the Pawnes here understand
their march is right forth still,
And who so does before them stand,
they have no power to kill.
But as they march who so they find
do in their color stand,
Such may they kill or check a slope,
to the right or left hand.
Not any in the rear of them,
they can once check or spoil
Forth must they march and not retreat,
but keep their rank or file.
Till by command they pointed are,
their King for to relieve;
Then must they bouldly unto war,
his foes to vex and grieve.
And coming at the last in place,
where Knights and Lords did dwell,
Their King shall give to them like grace,
because they served him well.
Thus being Bishops, Knights, or Dukes,
their Kings they will better steed
The Kings may make of them a Queen,
if they have any need.
Yet ere they can such honor have,
all storms they must a bide,
And do their best the Kings to save,
what danger ere betide.
The Bishops that attend the Kings
a slope do use to fight,
The one in black does help the King,
the other in the white.
Their check in field extends as far
as any of the rest,
What colors they are placed in,
there must they do their best.
The Bishop black in black must march
and therein use his skill,
For in the white he may not come,
no man to hurt or kill.
The Bishop white in white must serve,
so long as he does live,
To any which in black does stand,
he cannot one check give.
The Duke in value is half a Queen
and half her draughts has he,
Right forth and back and from each side,
he can give check for thee.
Through all the colors of the field
in such wise may he check,
And also when occasion serves
relieve the King with neck.
Like to a horseman does the Knight
assist the King always,
And over rank or file he leapes,
his honor for to raise.
When he gives check unto the King,
and is not for it slain,
The King must move out of his place,
elsewhere for to remain.
The Knights being forth, and coming in
such houses as are white
May help or harm eight ways them fro,
during the time they fight.
Like all the men within the field,
the Queen may aid the King,
Yet like a Knight no aid at all,
she can unto him bring.
Through all the houses of the field
the Queen may take her pleasure,
And use her power to help her King
still in a modest measure.
If in the martch she prove severe,
and takes all she may,
It Is for the safeguard of the King,
that she makes clear the way.
For this she may not blamed be,
that seeks her King to save,
It is her glory for to strive,
her King in peace to have.
The King in Majesty does martch,
one step at once he goes,
Further no time can he go forth,
for fear of foreign fooes.
If the black King shall bring a man
unto the white Kings side,
And then and there give him one guard,
he may there still abide.
Without which help if he presume,
so near the King to stand,
If need require such one the King
may kill with his own hand.
None of the Kings can take a man,
that stands on a guard,
'Twere check at once if he do so,
therefore he must be spared.
Thus may you learn the Kings no time
can into a check go,
In places where no perrill is
they may march too and fro.
Know you that this shall read or see,
I wish naught for my pain
If it thee please I have content,
I seek no other gain.
Arthur Saul.

The contents of this Book.
OF the antiquity, profit, and pleasure of the game, and what it represents.
Cap. I How to set the men. Cap. Cap. II Controversies resolved. Cap. III To
understand how the men guard each other. Cap. IIII For passing the guard of a
Pawn that is advanced into the fifth house. Cap. V The difference, or the
advantage by playing the first draught. Cap. VI What difference there is in the
great men and their true worth. Cap. VII The true value of the Pawnes. Cap.
VIII The denial of rule-play. Cap. IX Aduises for the assailant or defendant.
Cap. X How you may give a Mate at two draughts, all the men being in the field.
Cap. XI What benefit may begoten by exchanging man for man. Cap. XII The
satisfaction of controversies by tediousness of play. Cap. XIII How a dark
Mate, which some call a blind-Mate, is given. Cap. XIIII What a stale is, and
how that is given. Cap. XV For retreating. Cap. XVI When advantage is gotten
how to make use of it. Cap. XVII A play which one author is of opinion not to
be prevented, which I deny. Cap. XVIII The first way to defend that hard play
before mentioned. Cap. XIX The second way to prevent the former play. Cap. XX A
third way to hinder the same play at two draughts. Cap. XXI For the checking of
the King without guard. Cap. XXII
FINIS.
THE FAMOVS GAME OF Chesse-play.
CHAPTER I. Of the Antiquity, Profit and Pleasure of the Game, and what it
represents.
FOr the Antiquity of this game, I find upon Record that it was devised 614.
years before the Nativity of Christ, so that it is now 2227. years since it
has been first practiced; and it is thought that Xerxes, who was a King,
devised this game. Secondly, there be some of opinion that it was made by
learned and wise men, as may appear by the wonderful invention of of the
game, for it requires the whole mind of man, during the time he practices
the same, otherwise he shall not discern the purpose of his adversary, until
it be too late. Thirdly, whosoever he be that is desirous to learn this game
of Chesse-play, he ought to be of good apprehention, and a great memory,
without the which he shall never play well. Fourthly, if those which play be
of equal judgment, the standers by shall take great delight and pleasure in
behoulding them, if they have knowledge in the game, when they shall see one
Kings forces encounter with the other, sometime the black King assaulting the
white King, who valiantly defends the assault, and peradventure puts him
to the worst upon the least neglect that may be. O that this game were rightly
esteemed of, according to his worth: It is many years since I could play this
game, and as yet I never knew any fall out at the same: for a man cannot be
offended with him who he plays withal, but rather blame himself for not
governing his own men better.

Fifthly, it is apparent what quarrels and sudden stabbings happen at other
games, with cheating and cosening one another, from all which enormities this
is free, having the glory above all other games, for a peaceable and a Princely
exercise. Sixthly, it is to be understood that this game represents two Armies
encountering each other: so that when the black King shall assault the white,
the white King may presently draw forth many of his men to make good the place
assaulted. And for as much as the number of chesse-men are but few, you will
say when an assault is made at any time there cannot many men be drawn forth
to make good the place assaulted: for by bringing too much aid to one place,
you shall weaken another, so that thereby you may hazard all: to which I
answer, that albeit the number of the men is small, yet by the playing forth
of one man you shall hinder the assault of two or three; as for example.

Imagine that the black King for his first draught plays his own Pawn into
the third house in his own file, and that the white King entertaineth another
purpose, not coming into the field in such manner as the black King does, but
plays his Queens Dukes pawn into the third house in his own file, then the
black King for his second draught brings forth his Queen, and places her in
the third house, in the front of his Bishops pawn, entending at his fourth
draught to give mate to the white King, al which the white King sees, and yet
for his second draught plays carelessly somewhere else, and does not seem to
take knowledge what the black King intends to do: the black King for more
assurance of preuayling brings forth his own Bishop into the fourth house,
before his Queens bishop; all which is as much as nothing: for that the white
King by playing his own pawn into the third house in his own file, the black
King by such play shall fail of his purpose: but if the white King shall
forget to hinder the black Kings assault at his third draught, then the black
King shall give mate at his fourth draught to the white King by taking the
white Kings bishops pawn with his Queen, who shall be guarded with his own
Bishop, so that it is a scholars mate, but there is no man of judgment in
Chesse-play will take such a mate; it may be called also a treacherous mate;
for otherwise it were impossible a King should be delivered into the hands of
his enemies, without the loss of some men, unless the white Kings power would
make sleep a defense for treason, and so suffer their King to be taken before
they would take any knowledge thereof.

It on your man you ^ight,
The first draught shall you play,
If not it is mine by right,
At first to lead the way.


CHAP. II. How to place the men.
THe board standing here as thou see thou shall place the black King in the
fourth house being white, and the white King you shall place in a black house
being the fourth house on the other side, just opposite against the black
King; then place the white Queen next her King in a white house, which is the
fourth house on that side of the field; Likewise you shall place the black
Queen in a black house next to her king, which shall also be the fourth house
on the black Kings side.

Thus when you have placed the Queens next to their Kings, then shall you place
on the other side of the Kings, first a Bishop, then a Knight, and next to the
Knight you shall place a Duke, whose place is in the first house of the field:
the Queens have either of them likewise one Bishop, one Knight, and one Duke;
the Kings have either of them four Pawnes, and three Noblemen, and the
Queens have the like, the Kings Pawnes are these: first, their own Pawnes,
next their Bishops Pawnes, then their Knights Pawnes, and last of all their
Dukes Pawnes: the Queens they have also three Noblemen and four Pawnes,
which are these: first, their own Pawnes, then their Bishops Pawnes, next
their Knights Pawnes, and last of all their Dukes Pawnes. The Pawnes stand
before the Noblemen from one corner of the field to the other, the Pawnes have
all one manner of proceeding, which shall be showed unto thee, when we come to
speak of the advancing of the men and of the difference that is between them.

CHAP. III. A Controversy resolved.
ANd for as much as many times in play some men will be fingering and taking up
of his adversaries men, and then out of the abundance of his wit, thinks to
play better in some other place, and so sets down his adversaries man
again, this is very foul play, for albeit it is true he cannot play his
adversaries man, so also it is true he may not take him off his place, unless
he throw him out of the field, and install his own man in the same house
where the other stood, for by the taking up of a man in such a fashion and not
to play it, some a judge the player for his punishment, to kiss the foot of
the man which he so takes up, but indeed of right he ought to loose half his
stake that at any time uses such play, and if a man touch a man of his own,
and will not play him, then he ought directly to loose the game, and it is
known unto all men that can play, that if you touch any of your own men you
must play him, and look what color you touch with your man so taken up, in
the same color or house shall he stand; and if at any time the player which
so plays refueth so to do, the other may lawfully take up his own stake and
play no further of that game.

A chief lesson to be observed in this play.
And for as much as some in the time their adversary is framing his purpose
where to play, they will be talking, or singing, or using some apish tricks to
trouble the mind of him whom they play against, this is held also very foul
play, and ought not to be used at this game, upon pain of loosing the third
part of his stake, that uses it, for it is a game in which silence is to be
used, and all devises whatsoever laid a side, that may trouble one another in
the time of their play: this being observed thou art freed from the penalty
before mentioned.

A Caueate for such as will condition to give a Mate.
Imagine that two were a playing, and that many men on both sides were lost and
no odes in the men of either side, so that the game were indifferent, that then
I say, one of the gamsters should give over the game and draw his stake, the
other at this seeming to be a grieved, thinking his men stands better then
the others which has given over, he says, had you played out the game I should
have won it, and the other replying, demands what he will lay more one the
game, the party agrieued upon this offers a crown more, that he will win
the Mate, now here is a condition, which if he perform not he loses both
his first and last stake: The way for him that takes any man upon such
condition, is still to change, and to bring it unto a dead game, and so shall
he this way win the stakes, by reason the other had tied himself by
obligation to give the Mate, wherefore let any one take heed how he enters
into such condition; for who so does it gives the other advantage, whether it
be at the beginning of the mate, or after, it is all one.



CHAP. IIII. How the men guard each other.
THe Kings have either of them seven men a piece, and the Queens as many to
attend them: The King, whether he be black or white, gives guard to five
persons before he goes forth, and being once advanced forward into the field,
although it be but into the second house, he then, and still after, in all his
march gives guard to eight houses, till he come to one side or other of the
field again. Now those five whom he guardeth before he goes forth are
these: first of all he guardeth his Queen, on whom his greatest care
depends: secondly his own Bishop: thirdly his own Pawn: fourthly his
Queens Pawn; and lastly his Bishops Pawn. The Queen protecteth her King,
her Bishop, her own Pawn, her Kings Pawn, and her Bishops Pawn: by this you
see the Queen guardeth as many as the King, before she goes forth, and after
till the field be won or lost: the Kings Duke gives guard to his own Pawn,
and the Kings Knight, and to no more, till he be from the side of the field,
and then he gives guard to four houses, and in like sort is the power of the
Queens Duke: the Kings Bishop gives guard to the Kings Pawn, and the Kings
Knights Pawn: the Queens Bishop gives guard to the Queens Pawn, and the
Queens knights Pawn, the Knights gives guard but to three houses before they
go forth, and after they are from the side of the field, they give guard to as
many houses as the King or the Queen does. Now those houses whom the Knights
guard ere they go forth, are these, the Kings Knight gives guard to the Kings
Pawn, and to the third house in the front of the Kings Bishops Pawn, and to
the third house in the front of the Kings Dukes Pawn: the Queens Knight
gives guard to her own Pawn, and to the third house in the front of her
Bishops Pawn, as also to the third house in the front of her own Duke: The
Bishops of either side are tied to one only color, out of the which they may
not go, the white Bishops have the command of the white field, and the black
Bishops the command of the black field, and they martch sloping forward or
backward if way be made for them, and can endanger or give check from one
corner of the field to the other: The Pawnes who stand in rank before the
King and the Nobility, I shall show you their manner of guard which they give
before they be advanced or moved off their places: The Kings Pawn gives guard
to the third house before the Queen, and the third house before the Kings
Bishop: the Queens Pawn gives guard to the third house before the King, and
the third house before her own Bishop, the Kings Bishops Pawn gives guard to
the third house before the King, and the third house before the Kings Knight:
the Queens Bishops Pawn gives guard to the third house before the Queen,
and the third house before the Queens Knight, the Kings Knights Pawn gives
guard to the third house before the Kings Bishop, and to the third house before
the Kings Duke: the Queens Knights Pawn gives guard to the third house
before the Queens Bishop, and to the third house before the Queens Duke: the
Kings Dukes Pawnes, and the Queens Dukes Pawnes gives but one guard a piece,
and that is to the third houses before the Knights, by reason they stand on the
side of the field: Thus have I showed you from the King to the Pawn, how the
men guard each other before there be any of them stirred off their places.

CHAP. V. For passing the guard of a Pawn.
FOr as much as many times there is question made, whether a Pawn of the white
Kings, may pass the guard of the black Kings, at his first going forth, if
the black King have advanced a Pawn into the fifth house, without leave of the
black King: whereunto I answer no, for this is a rule strictly observed in
martial dissipline, from whence this game had his first beginning, that no man
shall be permitted to pass by any guard without leave first obtained, yet at
this game the Pawnes may pass the guard one of another, this house, or houses,
only excepted: for if a Pawn be advanced into the fifth house by the black
King, and that the white Kings Pawn might pass without leave, it would many
times be the ouer-throwing of the black Kings game: and further it is held
foul play, to play forth your Pawn by the guard of another Pawn so advanced,
without craving leave: so then if the King, who has advanced a Pawn into the
fifth house, will suffer you to pass you may, because there is power in him to
deny you such a favor, as well as to grant you the privilege of such a
liberty: and thus much for the readers satisfaction, that you may not pass the
guard of a Pawn that is advanced into the fifth house without leave. Some
therebe also that are persuaded if the King be once checked, he shall loose
the benefit of releeuing himself in any of the Dukes quarters, what extremity
soever he be driven unto, albeit the King checked does cover the check given
him: such as are of this opinion are in the wrong, for so long as the checked
King can cover the check given him, and not remove to avoid the check, nor
has not moved before upon no occasion he has still the benefit of exchanging
with any of his Dukes, but if he be once removed from his place, whither it
be for the releeuing of one of his men, or upon compulsion for the avoiding of
a check, he shall then after such time loose the benefit of exchanging with
the Duke.

CHAP. VI. Whether it be advantage to have the first draught, yea or no.
FOr satisfying the reader in this point, it is certain there is advantage by
playing first, The difference by playing first.
for who so has the first draught, if he can play well, shall make the other
still defendant, and will visit him with such attempts and assaults, wherein
if the King defendant fail in the least point to answer, he shall assuredly
loose the field; but between such as know not the game rightly, it is no
matter which of them plays first, by reason they know not when they have
vantage one of another, and if it fall out that the one of them should have
such clear eyes, as to discern he has the better of the game, and cannot
make use of his advantage, between such young scollers it skilleth not who
plays first.

CHAP. VII. What difference there is in the great men, and of their true worth.
MAny there are who can play a little at this game, The value of the men
that persuade themselves if they can take one great man for another they shall
do well enough, but it is not so, for there is a great deal of difference in
the men, and first of all for the King, who albeit he is King, and that his
command is to be obayed of his subjects, yet it is in all the Counsel of
war held unfit for the King to hazard his person at any time, and therefore
he does ordain a General under him, to have the command of the army, which
general shall have under him Coronels, Captains, and other inferior officers
for his assistance, for the better governing of the army: Even so at this game
there is a general, which is the Queen, for she does more service then any
too Dukes can, and if it happen at any time that she should be lost, the King,
whose Queen is taken, must forsake the field of force, unless the adverse
King, be a very silly King, and cannot make use of such advantage. And yet to
make the Reader to understand this better, know this, if the white King should
in the taking the black Kings Queen lose two of his Noblemen, as his two
Dukes, or his two Bishops, or his two Knights, yet the white King shall have
the better, for his loss is not so great as the black Kings, who has lost
his Queen. Some that write of Chesse-play calls the Queen the Amazon,
because the Amazonites go to war as familiarly as the men. Next to the
Queen for value is a Duke, for by how much a Queen is more in worth then a
Duke, by so much a Duke is more in value then a Bishop or a Knight, for a Duke
is vvorth two Bishops or two Knights, by reason he can give a Mate himself
with the help of the King, which a Bishop or a Knight cannot do. Now you say
two Bishops can give a Mate with the help of the King, it is true, but the Duke
will do it sooner: also a Mate is to be given with a Bishop and a Knight, and
this is also true, but he must play well that can give a Mate with them, yet
you see every Scoller at Chesse-play can give a Mate with a King and a Duke
Besides a Dukes check goes from one side of the field to the other throughout
all the colors, and a Bishops check serves but for one color in the field,
therefore you must have both the Bishops to do the service which one Duke can
discharge: and therefore I conclude, that a Duke is better then two Bishops,
and for the Bishops they are better then the Knights, by reason they can give a
Mate with the King, when no other men are left to help them, which the
Knights cannot do, and therefore they are counted better then the Knights; but
I had rather loose a Bishop at any time then a Knight, for his check is more
dangerous then a Bishops: the Bishop is tied to one color in the field, out of
the which he may not pass, the Knight passes into all the houses in the
field: the Bishops check may be covered, the Knights check cannot: there is
cover for all the checkes in the field that may be given, from the Queen to
the Pawn, the Knights only excepted, for whose check there is no cover: and
if it fall out at any time that a Knight gives check, and the King that is
checked cannot take the Knight without great loss, he must needs fly of
force, there is no covering for his check, as I have said before. I could say
more in the behalf of the Knights; as thus, when the one King has no other
men left but his Bishops, and the other King no help but his Knights, the King
that has the Knights, may happily in checking the King that has the Bishops,
take one of the Bishops, and so after by another check take the other, by
reason the Bishops cannot guard one another, which the Knights can do, and at
the beginning of the game, I had rather loose my Bishops for my adversaries
Knights, then that I should exchange my Knights for the gayning my adversaries
Bishops: and thus much shall serve for the explaining of the difference of the
great men.

CHAP. VIII. The worth of the Pawnes.
ANd for the Pawnes, there is not so much to be said of them, as there has
been of the Noblemen, by reason there is not so much variety in their
draughts, as there is in the great men: The Kings Bishops Pawn is the best
Pawn in the field, and therefore there ought more care to be had over him,
then any other Pawn in the field; for if it should happen that the black King
should loose his Bishops Pawn, for the gaining of the white Kings Pawn: yet
the black Kings loss were the greater, for that he after such loss can
never be able to make a rank of Pawnes, with three in a rank, no more on
that side of the field, for his own safty which is a great disadvantage,
wherefore it were better for any of the Kings to loose his own Pawn, then
to loose his Bishops Pawn. But you will say, if any of the Kings should loose
his Bishops Pawn, can he not relieve himself on the other side of the field,
by turning over into his Queens Dukes quarter, where he shall have Pawnes
enough to succor him: I answer he may do so, but he will be longer ere he
bring his purpose to effect, because he has more men between his Queens Duke
and him, then there is between him and his own Duke by one draught, in the
playing of which draught, ere he can bring his King into safty, he shall be
sure to loose the game, if he play with one that can make use of any idle
draught: thus much shall suffice for the worth of the Kings Bishops Pawn, the
Kings Pawn is next unto him in worth, then the Queens Pawn after the Knights
Pawn, and last of all the Dukes Pawnes, for they give guard but to one house
in the field: and thus I end with the Pawnes for their value and worth.

The diversity of Mates, and which are worthy of praise, or disspraise.
THe Mate with a Queen, a loving mate.

A Mate with the Bishop, a gentle mate.

The Mate given with a Duke, a gracious mate.

A Mate with the Knight, an honorable mate.

The Mate given with a Pawn, a disgraceful mate.

A Mate by discovery, the worthiest of all.

The Mate given in a corner of the field, was Alexanders mate.

A Mate in the Midea of the field, an unfortunate fortunate Mate.

The Mate given on the side of the field, a foolish Mate.

A blind Mate, a shameful mate.

The Stale, a dishonorable mate.

CHAP. IX. That there is no Rule for this game.
FOR as much as some are persuaded there is a Rule for this game, I thought
good to give the Reader, as I may, some satisfaction to the contrary. If there
were a Rule for this game every Woodcocke would be a Chesse-player; but
indeed there is none: if there were a Rule for it, then there should be but
one manner of beginning, and one manner of ending, which cannot be; for he
that can play knows, sometime the game is begun with some of the Pawnes,
another time with any of the Knights: again, one while marching forth with
some of the Pawnes, and some of the Noblemen; at another time giving an
assault only with Noblemen. Also if there were a Rule for the game how
comes it to pass that a Mate is to be given with any of the men in the field
upon guard, and some of the men will give a Mate without a guard? and that is
when the distressed King is driven to the side of the field, or a corner of the
field, the pursuing King lodging in the third house opposite against him: then
the Queen assaylant, or one of the Dukes assailant, gives the Mate to the
distressed King, by falling into any of the houses, in the same rank where
the distressed King stands; but upon guard any of the Pawnes, or of the
Bishops, or any of the Knights can also give a Mate: further, it is certain,
that a Mate may be given in any house in the field: now there are 64. houses,
then you will say there must be as many rules, to bring to pass that the King
may be Mated in any of these houses, and when you have proved that, then you
must bring forth so many several rules as there are men in the field: for that
they all can upon guard give a Mate, after all this I will demand for rules how
to give a Mate upon discovery, and then you must find as many more rules for
that, by reason every man can discover whereby a Mate may be given. Thus
may thou see courteous reader that I have showed thee, if there be a rule,
there must be more then one, or a hundredth: and from the first time I knew this
game to this present day, I never could meet with any man, that could show me
one rule for this game, for indeed it is according to the purposes of them that
play, and not by any rule: also I do persuade my self, if any man would play
with me, and observe a rule in his play, and not regard my coming forth
against him, I shall assuredly give him a Mate, do what he can.

CHAP. X. Aduises for the assaylant and defendant.
NOw for the Reader that is desirous to practice this game, he must observe
one thing diligently, which is, if he chance to have the first draught, and
find himself able to assault, let him follow it well; if better able to
defend, then give the other leave to assault; in both there is great policy
to be used: and first for him that assaulteth. He that assaulteth ought to
hold his passages free, for him to retreat as occasion shall serve; least his
negligence herein procure his overthrow when he shall be constrained to
retreat. The defendant, if he be excellent in the game, will not only answer
the assault sufficiently, but he will also devise plots to grieve the
assailant when he shall take occasion to retreat. A pawn is soon intrapped,
because he cannot go back to relieve himself: the Bishops and the Dukes are
more harder to be intrapped, because they can fly from one side of the field
to the other, if they fear any evil; but the Knights, and the Queen is the
hardest of all to be betrayed, by reason they have so many places for to
relieve themselves in, and specially the Queen.

CHAP. XI. How you shall give a Mate at two draughts all the men being in the
field.
FIrst, take the Board, and all the men, and when you have placed them right,
then let the black King, for his first draught, advance his Bishops Pawn into
the third house, before his own Bishop; then cause the white King for his
first draught to play his own Pawn into the third house before himself: then
the black King for his second draught shall play his Knights Pawn into the
fourth house, before his own Knight, and then the white King for his second
draught shall play his Queen into the fifth house, before his own Duke, where
she shall give check and mate to the black King. Here you may see a Mate may
be given at two draughts; but seldom or never shall you see a good player
receive such a Mate.

CHAP. XII. By exchanging Man for Man, what benefit he shall reap that uses
it.
When you shall play with any one that plays better with his Queen then he
can with his other men, with such an one change Queen for Queen; for there
are many after they have lost their Queen do not know how to play, by reason
they understand not the right use of the men: Other some will also in like
manner play better with their Knights; with such also use exchange, and for the
other men do the like. You see for example, some men can play very well with
Rapier and Poniard, that cannot use any other weapon; whereas he is esteemed
for a Master that is skillful at all manner of weapons: so at this game, he
that has the right use of all his men, with such a one you shall profit
nothing by exchanging man for man, yet who so uses such play is not to be
blamed, for there is much advantage to be gotten by such play, if you consider
rightly of it: this much shall suffice for the exchanging of men upon even
terms, the men being both of one quallity and power.

CHAP. XIII. For satisfaction of controversies by tediousness of play.
THere are some of opinion, that a Mate may be given at fifty draughts, and if
so be it be not given you at fifty draughts, you may take up your stakes and
beg on: to such I answer, it is true, a Mate may be so soon woone and at
fewer draughts also, but put the case that any King being in a City or Town,
should be by some foreign King besiged, and that after some ten, twenty,
forty, or fifth days were expired, the King within the City, should say to the
foreign King, for as much SIR King, as you have continued now your sige fifty
days, and cannot make me yield, nor take me your prisoner, therefore you must
depart: no, this ought not to be embraced, for if he cannot win it in fifty
days, he will prove fifty weeks, or fifty months, but he will have it: so
also is this game of Chesse, if the one King cannot Mate the other at fifty
draughts, he may prove a hundredth more, for he is not to be tied to any
certain number of draughts: for I have known some have been a playing one
game a whole day, and sometime again I have seen five, or six, played in one
hour, but be it many draughts or few, if you give the Mate you shall be sure
to win.

CHAP. XIIII. How a dark Mate, which some call a blind-Mate, may be given.
A Dark Mate, or a blind-Mate is all one, for if a Mate be given, and he
which gives it sees it not, you may say it was dark, he wanted light, or he
was blind, otherwise he would have seen it. When two plays earnestly, and
that one of them follows the check upon the other, and if it fall out that
one of the checkes be also a Mate, and he that gives it sees it not, as I
have said before, then is such a Mate called a blind-Mate: and for as much as
there are some which stand upon this, that a blind-Mate should be a lost game,
know this, it may not be so; for if a man has a horse that falls blind, the
owner thereof shall have his former right in him, which he had before he was
blind, and shall be esteemed for a horse for all his blindness, so he which
gives a blind-Mate shall not loose the Mate, but shall notwithstanding win.
To end this controversy and blemish of dishonor, let him that can give check
at any time, see first whether it will not be Mate also to the other King,
before he give the check, and finding it will be a Mate, then to use these
words, check Mate, and straight way the controversy is ended. Let this
therefore resolve the reader, that a Mate which we call a blind-Mate, is a
Mate, and shall win.

CHAP. XV. What a stale is, and how it is given.
NOw for as much as a stale is very dishonorable to him that gives it, I will
show the reader, or any other that is desirous to be resolved what it means,
and for such as understand the game already, they shall witness with me
whether I explain it rightly unto you or no: first, you shall understand a
stale is a lost game by him that gives it, and no question to be made further
thereof: therefore let him that follows the flying King take heed that he
forbear not a check, if he do see that the distressed King have a place to
fly unto, for the nearer that the dissressed King is brought to be mated, the
sooner a Stale may be given.

Imagine the white King were in the middle of the field, or any other place of
the field, beset round about, having only but one way to escape, which way the
black King likewise stops, without giving check, and this way comes the
Stale; for if the white King have lost all his men, or having any left he
cannot play them, and himself so enclosed about with the enemy, that now he
has but one place to fly unto, which his enemy the black King also stops
without check, then this is a stale: wherefore I shall advise those which are
desirous to practice this game, that they take heed they give not a stale,
least thereby they purchase unto themselves such shame, which will not after be
put away without much blushing.

CHAP. XVI. What care ought to be used in retreating.
FOR retreating, if the black King makes a retreat, and not upon constraint,
the white King may be assured it is to get some further advantage against him,
wherefore it is wisdom not to be too earnest in following such retreat, least
your rash pursuit be too late lamented.

CHAP. XVII. For advantage gotten, how to make use thereof.
When it shall happen that the black King has gotten advantage of the white
King, let him weaken the white King so much as he can, by changing with him
man for man, till he be assured his advantage shall profit him, for we see if
two Kings armies meet and fight, the one having gotten the better of the
other, he forthwith uses the sword till he makes him that has the worst
yield the glory of the field unto him: I remember that a Nobleman upon a time
said, too much mercy was rigor, wherefore he that has the better of his enemy
let him make use of it, he ought not to be blamed, but that King is worthy of
much blame, who after he has the better of his enemy, does notwithstanding
loose the same again, by forbearing his sword, when with praise and honor he
might bouldly use it, and for reward be crowned King of the field.

CHAP. XVIII. A play which one author affirms that no man possibly can
prevent, and this is the play.
FIrst take your board and the men, and after you have set up the men, then
play thus: let the white King for his first draught advance his own Pawn into
the fourth house in his own file, then the black King shall advance his Pawn
as far forth in the same manner, then the white King for his second draught
plays his own Knight into the third house, before his own Bishop, and the
black King for his second draught shall bring forth his own Knight in the
same order: then the white King for his third draught, with his Knight takes
the black Kings Pawn, and the black King at his third draught, with his
Knight takes the white Kings Pawn; then the white King at his fourth draught
brings forth his Queen, which he places in the second house in his own
file, this being perceived by the black King at his fourth draught, his Knight
to retreat into some place of more safty for fear of the white Kings Queen;
the white King at his fifth draught shall advance his Knight into the third
house, before the black Kings Queens Bishop, and so gives check by
discovery to the black King, with the white Kings Queen, which check the
black King howsoever he covers it, yet he shall loose his Queen
remedilesly, for the white Kings Knight at his sixth draught shall overthrow the
black Kings Queen, who cannot be played out of the Knights guard howsoever
the check be covered, this being the play which is so hard to be prevented, I
shall show you three several ways to make this easy even at to draughts.

CHAP. XIX. The first way to make a defense for the hard play before mentioned.
IMagine the white King for his first draught plays his own pawn into the
fourth house before himself, and the black King for his first draught plays
his Pawn in the like manner; then the white King shall play for his second
draught, his own Knight, into the third house before his own Bishop, and the
black King to hinder the coming on of the white Kings Knight, for his second
draught aduanceth his Queens Pawn into the third house, before his Queen for
to guard his own Pawn, so that the white Kings purpose this way is made
frustrate.

CHAP. XX. Another way to hinder the same play.
SEcondly, imagine the white King for his first draught, plays forth his own
Pawn into the fourth house before himself, and that the black King does the
like for his first draught, then the white King commands his own Knight into
the third house before his own Bishop, then you shall play the black Kings
Knight in the same order, then the white King with his Knight takes away the
black Kings Pawn, and the black King with his Knight at his third draught
takes away the white Kings Pawn, then the white King at his fourth draught
aduanceth his Queens Pawn into the third house before his Queen, whereby the
black Kings Knight shall be forced to fly: after this the white King for his
fifth draught may cover his King, as he will, for the game is equal, and this
is also the second defense for the play spoken of before.

CHAP. XXI. The third way to hinder the same play at the second draught.
IMagine the black King for his first draught aduanceth his Pawn into the
fourth house before himself, then shall you play the white Kings Pawn for his
first draught in the same order, then the black King for his second draught
plays his own Knight into the third house before his own Bishop, after this
the white King shall place his Queen in the second house before himself, for
his second draught: So then the black King dares not meddle with the white
Kings Pawn, for fear of loosing his Knight, by reason the white Queen
guardeth the Pawn, and this is done at two draughts: I could show you also
other plays for the same; but this shall suffice.

CHAP. XXII. For the checking of the King without guard.
IF a Pawn, or any other man in the field be so hardy, as to give check unto
any of the Kings without a guard, and that his check be given the King in
such a house where the King may endanger, those men may the King destroy
himself, but if they have guard he may not medell with them for going into
check: yet the King that is so braued by his enemy, may cause any of his
under-officers, that has guard upon that house wherein the King is checked, to
kill any such one which shall presume to check the King without guard.

For your last lesson learn this.
The Kings, what danger soever they are in, may not press one upon another,
for there must be always one house free between them, neither can they check
one another: and when it shall happen that there is no place for the distressed
King to fly unto, but that he must seek for relief in his adverse Kings
bosom, then is it Mate.

The Conclusion.
THus gentle Reader, after thou have learned to know thy men, and how to place
them, which by this book thou shall easily do, then not to play forth a man
without a guard; after that to know well the difference and value of the men,
how much one is better then another, and what advantage it is to play first,
then to be careful when you exchange that you exchange not for the worst; then
to practice, and it shall suffice, for practice is the chiefest of all to bring
thee to perfectness. Read this book often, and observe well what thou
find in it, and it shall profit thee more then the playing of a hundredth
games: as for the laws of the game thou shall find them in this book also.
Thus having endeavored my self to show thee courteous Reader what I can, for
thy instruction, wishing thy love to this game may be equal to the worthiness
thereof, then shall all other games by thee be little respected and less
practiced, which no doubt shall give thee much quietness and profit. Farewell.

FINIS.

