THE PRACTICE OF THE BANCKRVPTS OF THESE TIMES: In whom are considered, 1 Their
fraudulent and deceitful actions. 2 The evils accompanying their courses. 3
Laws and Punishments ordained to curb them. 4 The charitable cure of so great
an evil.
A work now very necessary.

Written in Latin by Mr Daniel Sauterius, and made to speak English for the
general good of all Commerce.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton, for William Garret. Anno M.DC.XL.

TO ALL THE HONORABLE AND WORSHIPFUL: And all other of what degree soever, who
have occasion to deal in any passages between Creditors and Debtors, the
Translator wishes all happiness.
HOnorable and Worll.
I am not so perversely minded, as not to discern, nor so ungrateful as not to
acknowledge Gods great goodness to our Nation in granting and bestowing on us,
as all things needful for our bodies, so also plentiful and necessary
instructions for our souls. Yea I behold with much joy many of the Sages of
our Law, and others in place of Government, adding to their skill in the Laws
of this Land, and promptness in matters concerning men's temporal estates, the
knowledge of Gods sacred Book, and heavenly skill: as for the Salvation of
their own souls, so also for keeping others from unjust courses prejudicing
their eternal estate. I see this, I say, in many, I hope it in the rest: hence
therefore I am induced to present this Treatise to the Patronage of all such as
love Gods sacred truth, and be in place, and strive to promote faithful and
just dealing between man and man: without which two, props the Commonwealth
may desire, but will hardly find true safety. So that their endeavor is
highly to be commended, who employ their thoughts and pains in upholding the
same. Subtle heads may devise, and worldly policy may forge many shifts; but
justice armed with insight into divine and humane laws, will never, or not
easily be deluded. Go on therefore with noble and undanted resolutions, show
your selves still and ever men fearing God, and hating Covetousness. By
rooting out of the vice in this Book treated of, take away the blemish of
Merchandise, the subverter of fair and just dealing, the bane of Widows, and
Orphans and many others, the underminer of Justice, the stain of Christian
profession. So being faithful in discharge of your places for a short time
here, God of his mercy and goodness will advance you to a place of endless
bliss hereafter.

To the most Noble, High and Prudent Counselors of State in Holland.
ANcient writers to ennoble the force of Music, have recorded, that it has
cured diverse infirmities both of body and mind. How far their relations may
be credited may not without cause be questioned. But it is undoubtedly true,
that the diseases of men's minds have been and are often cured by pious
reproofs, seasonable admonitions, faithful counsels, and religious directions.
For to this end God has given us his sacred Scripture, that it might be a
Closet and storehouse full fraught with medecines of this nature, by which the
depravations of humane frailty may be corrected, and men be persuaded (which
God often inculcateth) to eschew evil, and do good. Having well weighed this
with my self: I resolved among other Ecclesiastical performances of my
calling, to attempt the cure of a most dangerous and pernicious sore among
tradesmen: who by crafty devices and ungodly courses become Banckrupts to the
disgrace of their calling, disturbance of the Commonwealth, impoverishing of
their Creditors, and the discredit (a thing much to be lamented) of
Christianity. And surely much the worse are the practices of delinquents in
this kind, because God of his especial favor has given us plentiful
knowledge, and divine directions most clear, to keep us in the ways of God,
and in honest, faithful, gracious, and Christian dealing. Further, when I saw
and considered the ill consequents of Banckrupts naughty practices; I judged
them more hurtful and mischievous, tha^ their diseases who are affected and
afflicted with corporal maladies of what kind soever; for bodily diseases
especially grieve the outward man of the party diseased, and often conduce to
the safety of the soul* Whereas the evils accompanying Banckrupts proceedings,
cause much detriment and harm to all such as deal with them, and cast the
Banckrupts headlong into many sins prejudicial to their souls. Thence it is
that often ye shall find Banckrupts deaf to good counsel, lame and not able
to tread in the paths of equity; blind, and not willing to see what belongs
to fair dealing. Men distracted, and such as be infected with the plague, are
shut up in close places from doing mischief: But banckrupts frequent Markets
and places of Commerce, and by crafty and cunning carriage wrong full many.
Obstructions in the veins may breed some diseases in men's bodies; but the
intentions and dealings of these crafty deceivers cause obstructions and
stoppage to all faithful dealing and trading. Wherefore I have in brief, 1.
Laid open the diseases of Banckrupts. 2. Showed the vices incident to them. 3.
Declared what laws have bin enacted to prevent their evil dealings. 4.
Unfolded the remedies necessary for the cure thereof. And in each part of my
discourse intermingled pious and wholesome exhortations, reproofs, admonitions
out of sundry learned and approved authors; and with that moderation dealt with
them, that if they rightly consider of my Endeavors, they shall have more
cause to embrace and like of this Treatise, than to malign and reproach it. I
am one among the rest of Gods watchmen, Exek. 3.17. etc.
and seeing so manifest a mischief bred, growing up, and increasing, might not
in any wise hold my peace. May it please you to accept of, and take into your
patronage a work so necessary for the Credit and quietness of a Christian
Commonwealth, and the defense and protection of many Innocent and wronged
Creditors. Thus praying God to protect you under the shadow of his wings, and
to direct you in these troublsome times for the happy and prosperous mannaging
of the charge committed to you, I rest

Your Highness in all Christian observance to be commanded, Daniel Sauterius.
Mart. 20. 1615.
The Translator to the Christian Reader.
I Wish from my heart (gentle Reader) that this Book useful (as it seems)
in other Countries, had been needless in ours. So might I have spared my
labor in translating it, and you better have employed your time than in
reading it. But such is the frequency and obliquity of Banckrupt courses at
this day with us, that it was thought necessary to fetch these Antidotes and
Medicines for the same from our neighbors Country. And J knew not where better
to find them, than in this learned Author; who in this his discourse has
spoken of this subject briefly, and yet usefully, judiciously, religiously.
Read it thorough, and seriously consider each passage. No ingenuous and
well-minded peruser hereof can choose but be bettered by it in his judgment,
as, for the producing in his heart an hatred of this vice: so, for discerning
the crafty wiles and tricks of them, who will lay Harpyes claws on what they
can catch, and part from nothing which possibly they can hold. It cannot
otherwise be, but that some persons at sight hereof will fret in their hearts,
bend their brows, and sour their speeches. I wish them a better temper, and
more calm affections, and such a demeanor toward them, who mind their good,
as may clearly testify good ground of hope for their amendment. Mr Daniel
Sauterius the religious and learned Author hereof, being a worthy and faithful
Watchman of God, has given warning of the evil in the world, which he saw to
grow too rife and increase exceeding much; Ezekiel. 3.17.18.
He has admonished the wicked of his wicked way, and done what God his Master
enjoined him: It remains also that men do their parts, Ezekiel. 18.21. etc.
And turn out of their evil ways, that they may live. Jf there be any who
notwithstanding will run headlong on in their own courses and fraudulent
practices, to them J say; Go too now ye false and deceitful dealers: rejoice
in your advantages subtlily got, whilst they which loose by you, weep: Cloth
your selves bravely, feed daintily, look high, whilst your Creditors go with
dejected Countenances, be barely clad or naked, and want necessary food:
Abound you in all jollity und earthly pleasure, whilst others groan under the
burden of sad miseries, into which you have cast them: But remember that for
all these things God will bring you to Judgment. But I hope better things of
you, and such as tend to the future reformation of your courses. I wish the
intelligent and godly Reader to hope the same with me, and admonish all who
have been subtle and fraudulent delinquents in the practices here spoken of,
not to deceive us in our hopes, least they deceive themselves of their future
comfort. More I shall not need to say, because the religious Author has very
well opened his mind concerning this Treatise, and I have briefly comprised it
in the Epistle precedent.

THE PRACTICE OF THE BANCKRVPTS OF THESE TIMES.
The first Part, Declaring their deceitful actions.
HEathen writers of Old exclamed, O the Times! A complaint of the corruption of
the times.
O the courses of men! O their wickedness! For they saw an infinite and
intolerable licentiousnes reigning; they Plin. Epist. 2.14.
saw the bars of shame, and bashfulnesse broken up, and audacious men daring
to do any thing, and running into extremity of sin without measure or
restraint. straint. They observed Juvenal. sat. 13.
that there could be no bounds or limits set to men's sinning, where an
ingenuous blush was quite banished from their hardened foreheads. They saw the
market place full of buyers and sellers, and plenty of Commerce, but saw
likewise vices as frequent, as men. They beheld Senec. of Auger. B. 2.
one man supplanting another; scarce any man gayning but by another loss, and
some others for a little pleasure or profit, not caring whom they ruinated;
Then appeared also more ways to sin than means to restrain iniquity, and men
striving daily, who should outvie each other in mischief. Then pronesse to
sin increased, shamefacednesse decreased: So that due respect to Authority
and Justice being expelled, unbridled desires rushed which way they lusted;
Innocence was rare, Vice frequent, and sought not secrecy, but was so rooted
in men's hearts that it feared not public view.

These of old were the Heathens Complaints; and have not the streams of vice
from former times flowed down to us; and all later times made good, what our
Savior foretold of the days after him? Because Mat. 24.12.
Iniquity shall be multiplied, the Charity of many shall wax cold. Even now
we see, as it were a Trumpet sounded to make a general Concurrence of all men
for the confounding of right and wrong. Now are benefits Senec. B. ^ of Benef.
requited with mischief, and men spare not to shed their blood for whose sake
they ought to venture their own. In a word this was our Ancestors complaint,
this is ours; That Id. B. 1. of Ben.
virtue is subverted, that vice reigns, that all things grow worse among men,
and that the reins are let loose to all impiety.

That matters grow worse and worse is proved by ou^ Banckrupts.
a while examine with me the life and courses of the men of these times. I wish
they had not proceeded to the highest degree of injustice. Even now As Lactant.
of old B. 7. and 15. of Div. reward.
Justice is rare; impiety, injury, covetousnes common; good men become a prey
to the bad. There is no faithful dealing, no peace, no humanity, no shame, no
truth; Salust.
craft and subtle dealing is more prized than faithfulness. This is most true
in the general Courses of men. But especially among Banckrupts; so that to
defraud others, and leave trading, is no more disgrace, than to go from a
Winter house to a Summer house in May.

As Plaut. in Pers.
easily do some shift of their Creditors, as a wheel in a swift race turns
round. What else is cause of these and the like evils, than a Corrupt Judgment
of things? As namely, that Prosperum ac felix scelus vir^us vocatur. Senec.
Trag.
success in ill and fraudulent dealing makes it counted a virtue.

Because their Craft prospers, even the success makes a perverted Judgment
to think their sin warrantable; so that away they pass without punishment.
Then Senec. B. 3. c. 10. of Benefic.
also the multitude of offenders takes away the shame of the offense, and the
Commonnesse of the ill report makes it cease to be counted a disgrace. So that
hereby it Dio. in Nerv.
comes to pass, that we live in an age in which, I say not, a man may do
nothing, but in which a man may do any thing. For now bad men become worse by
their good success, and please and delight themselves, that the designs of
their knavery Salvian. of Gods government. B 1.
have a prosperous issue; such are our times, our Courses, our naughtiness.

Tull. de orat.
a right distinction of things beautifieth speech, Of two sorts of Banckrupts
and preventeth objections) several kinds. The first is of them, who by
casualties have their substance wasted: The Benven. in his Treatise o^
Banckrupts.
second sort are they, who by their own default are impoverished: These last
are the worst sort of men and deserve no pity. Of them I intend to speak in
due order. So that my speech shall aim at no particular man, but make an
inquiry of the vice in general. Whosoever therefore (as in like case St Ierom
says) shall be offended therewith, even confesses himself in particular to
be the man, who in general is spoken of.

Of Banckrupts become so by Casualties.
The Lawyers say well; out Sancinus de paen c. 1. de injur. lib. 6.
of a hatred to to the Guilty, to lay blame on the Guiltless, is contrary to
natural equity. And it is thought altogether inhumane, that a Banckrupt should
be punished, whose goods have been wasted by certain and evident casualties.
Wherefore we cannot well lay the blame of his failing upon himself, if it be
made manifest, that he lost not his goods by his own default.

Now breaking of men's estates may befall, first by casualties at Sea: when
Horat.
the Merchant by restless pains (desiring to fly poverty) say leth to the
Indies, and miscarrying by storms in his voyage becomes poor. We Tacitus
ann.
all know that nothing subjects a man more to casualties, than the Sea; and
that Senec ep, 36.
a Merchant needs prosperous failing, who shall stand to his engagements:
which if he find not, he must needs be impoverished, cannot pay his debts, and
is compelled to leave the Exchange. 2. They Benven. Treat. of Banckrupts.
may be overthrown by casualties, who fall into Pirates hands: for Pirates L.
Florus B. ^. c. 6.
range and rob at Sea, hinder Commerce, shut up the Ports by their forces, and
are worse than a Tempest, so that no ship well freight with wares of worth can
pass them. And Chrysostom. ^om. 4. on Genesis 1.
thereby often the Merchant becomes insolvent, and departs his Country.
Lastly, some men without their own default, loose their estates by being
fraudulently dealt withal by others: So 2 K. 4. Jo^eph. antiq. ^ 3.
it befell the Prophets wife left in debt by her husband, not by her own, but
by another default; in this manner it may come to pass, that an honest man
may suffer through another man's failing and naughtiness. To become banckrupt
absolutely by another man's default, is not liable to infamy: and Alex. of Alex.
B. 5. (...). 2.
therefore question need not be made concerning his corporal punishment.
Hence, Otho made a law, that men impoverished by Shipwreck, not by their own
negligence or wastfulnesse, should stand in an appointed public place, that
all men might see them, and out of true compassion relieve them. But whosoever
spent themselves by riotousnesse and ill courses, should be quite excluded and
denied that benefit. Now further consider we, what men undone by casualties are
to do.

What men undone by casualties ought to do.
but possess their souls in patience. For Cicer. sam. ep. 8.
then is adversity patiently to be undergone, when a man is not cause thereof.
Well said Cicero, common Idem. fam. epist 5.
and uncertain casualties which providence could not avoid, are wisely to be
suffered; Impatience lesseneth not, but aggravateth greifs; whereas moderation
Plant. in Rudent.
of mind is like good sauce, and sweetneth adversity. Let them therefore that
are exercised with crosses, take unto themselves a patient prudence, and learn
to mollify hardship befalling them, with the skill of right learning
adversity. And let them think, that this Sense. ep. 103.
is one Haven of a sea-tossed and troubled estate, to contemn chance, to stand
boldly and ward the darts cast by crosses with a resolute heart prepared for
them. Besides, let them remember, that they be men brought forth and subject to
the common misery of humane condition, and may not refuse to live exposed to
that frailty, to which men in this life are borne. Let them with patience
undergo the casualties, which by any Council, Prudence, and Providence they
could not avoid, and remembering the crosses, which have befallen others, think
with themselves, that no strange, or uncouth, or unusual matter has befalne
and light upon them. Let them Job 1.21. etc. 10.
take Job for a pattern of singular patience in manifold miseries: So also
Abraham a man conspicuous both for crosses, and happy success. With what
evennesse of carriage, with what resolution, did both these bear their
troubles? In this manner all may be happy, who have learned by the course of
human life well and humbly to bear misery, and not to shake off the yoke laid
upon their necks. God the high and Almighty Governor of the world, permits
crosses to fall on men, yea lays them on some: Not Arrianus to Epict. 1.12.
out of a desire to plague them, or to hurt them, but like a good Physician,
Tutor and Father, to do them especial good. For we Romans 8.28.
know, that all things work together for good to them, that love God.
Affliction Romans 5.34.
brings forth patience, patience experience, experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed. If you desire the furtherance of your own Salvation: Hear what
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.31.
We are judged and chastised of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with
the wicked world. Does your faith languish? Crosses assault you, that it may be
rouzed up: God Aug. in ps. 93.
is good to you; for if he did not mix some bitterness amidst the happiness
of this world, we should forget him. But by his raising storms in men's
minds, by vexations and crosses he wakens faith, which before lay asleep.
Wherefore God by Senec.
afflicting men out of fatherly good will to them, desires to put life into
them, and to make them get new strength. So that those rather are truly to be
called miserable, who lie snorting in too much happiness, whom a lazy
restinesse possesses, as in a becalmed Sea. Let us then think it best with
patience to bear, what God pleases to lay upon us: He rules as King, we must
obey: Neither shall we ever be well prepared for crosses, unless without
murmuring in the midst of all troubles we can often say; Deo aliter visum est,
immo Deo melius quid visum est: God has a hand in this, yea, God has laid
this cross on me for my good: He knew what was best for me. Our minds being
thus composed, will moderately and thankfully entertain happiness, and
resolutely and constantly bear adversity.

Of the second sort of Banckrupts, who fall by their own default.
shall not here be requisite; because our intent is not to treat of them: Come
we to the second kind of Banckrupts who are Benvent in his Treatise of
Banckrupts.
impoverished by their own default, and are indeed the worst sort of men,
worthy of no commiseration; for their il carriage makes them incapable of
pity. Hence first anciently they were counted contemptible and infamous. This
we see by Crassus called the Rich Val. Max. B. 11.
: His poverty in the end put on him the name of Banckrupt; for his goods
(because he could not make payment to his Creditors) were sold and himself
walking, as a beggar, saluted with the bitter geere; Behold rich Crassus.
Secondly, they were forbidden commerce. The 12 Roman tables say thus: Because
Jul. Paulus sentent. 13.6.
you lavish out your estates, we therefore forbid you the use of money and
Commerce. Thirdly, they were adjudged unworthy of the name of Tradesmen: for he
that trades Baldus in Gens. 74.
unjustly or is an ill Tradesman, is not properly called a Tradesman, but
equivocally and abusively. Fourthly, because not observing the rules of
fidelity, they deserve the style of frandulent wasters of other men's money, and
in Benvent. in Treat. of Banckrupts.
Latin are called Decoctores; which word comes from decoquo to boil away; for
as fire by little and little boyleth away the substance of any liquor: so these
Banckrupts by degrees waste and diminish their estate. Fifthly, in Tuscany
Boerius b. 7. Divis. 215.
and all Italy, they are called Banccafalliti, and in diverse other Countries
Banckrupts, because they fail, break, and appear not at the banck, table, or
compting board, where they should pay their debts.

Of these let us speak in order, for (as Cicero) it is not enough to find out
and declare any thing: the maine matter is judiciously and orderly to entreat
thereof. Concerning this sort of Banckrupts first we will unfold their deceipts
in getting other men's money into their possession. Secondly, we will describe
their diverse courses of wasting it. Thirdly, we will lay open their base and
dishonest purpose to deceive and fail their Creditors.

Plaut. in Rud.
has devised many tricks and snares to deceive the unwary. Of Banckrupts
crafty courses to get money into their possession.
Fowlers houses are not more full of engines to catch birds, and fill their
cages; than Banckrupts heads are full of plots to store their warehouses
Aristophan.
; Nor herein only do they deal craftily, but also dishonestly, and
knavishly. Gain is the mark they aim at; which if Lactant. B. 1. of true
worship.
they cannot attain by their lawful trading, a false finger must do the
deed; they will cheat, steal, spoil, circumvent, forswear, stick at
nothing; so that they may glitter in brave apparel, rings, pearls, and make a
gallant show with their silver and gold, and satisfy their greedy desires with
other men's wealth. Their first trick is pretending themselves to be rich; for
Proverb. 15.
there is (says Solomon) one that makes himself rich, when indeed he has
nothing: These Banckrupts will make a show as if they were Magnifico^s, brave
and accomplished Merchants and Traders, both by their words and courses, though
they be of mean estate. Secondly, they conceit that brave apparel, orient
Pearls, gold Chains, and the like gallantry will easily beguile the common
people, who judge Cicer. Orar. pro Rose.
much from a light opinion, little from real truth. Whence the report of their
wealth shall be so blasoned, that there can be no better birdlime for their
bush. Admonish Bernard B. 4. ad Eugen.
them of carrying a lower sail; Tush say they, I scorn it: It becomes me
not: It Is not suitable for the time, this lofty carriage is for my good.
Thirdly, to gain the peoples applause, they build stately houses, astonishing
the beholders with their strange Architecture the ready way (says Livie) to
make rich men run much into other men's debts: So that it is a vanity of fools
and mad men, to gain popular applause, and to make a nine days wonder for to
get an opinion of their worth in men's minds, which soon fades, dies and
deceives them. For what Lactant. B. of true worship 11.
is it to pretend large possessions, and to be much engaged for them? to have
brave houses, but built with other men's money? to have gallant attendance* but
to want means answerable? Those are ill accomptants, who see not that having
paid their Creditors, they are just worth nothing; a Cipher may serve instead
of summa totalis. The tongues of Banckrupts drop Plaut. in Trucul.
milk and honey, when their hearts are freight with Gall and Vinegar. They
sweeten Lucret. B. 1.
the lip of the cup with sweet juice, when the potion is wormwood; and guild
the pill and cover the distasteful Aloes, not to do good, as loving Mothers
and skillful Physicians are wont, but to wipe Plaut in Pers.
men of their money with a few fair words, and closely and covertly to purloin
other men's estates. Many more are the tricks and shifts of these deceivers: So
that had I Centum linguas, oraque centum, an hundred mouths and tongues, yet
could I: not rehearse the names of their tricks and legerdemain, much less
fully decipher them; What Banckrupts do, having got money into their clutches.
Let us further proceed to open them as well we may.

Manus arripidae nunquam postea cripidae Plaut in Pers.
they lay hold on, they never let go. If you demand, what is due, and require
restitution of the money lent. 1. They have in their mouths Antigonus Plutarch
in the life of Aemil.
(...) his large promises; but as Chares the Athenian they will pay nothing. 2.
If you urge and press them to satisfy at the time Eccles. 29 4.
appointed, they desire forbearance a while, they feign excuses, plead
hardness of the times. 3. If more and more you be instant with them; Then they
Teren in Andria.
who could not at first deny payment, now when the time of performance is come,
they must needs show themselves and deny it; and then most impudently they say;
what are you? what would you have me do? will you beggar me and mine? I love
you, but I must love my self better. But ask them; Is this your performance,
is this your fidelity? they are not a shamed at all. At the borrowing where
they should be bashful and timorous, lest they should not be able to pay,
shame was far from them: Now when they should pay, they fear, they blush,
hide themselves, which they should not do: 4. If you threaten to bring them
before the Judge, they imbitter and sour their speech, countenance and gesture
toward you, and with opprobrious and disgraceful words revile you. The Plaut
in Cap.
greatest part of men are of this temper. They are kind and good till they
obtain their desire; when they have obtained what they would, then become they
stark naught and extreme fraudulent. These (as Siracides Eccles 29.5.
says) till they receive what they desire, kiss their neighbors hand, and
humble their voice, and at last pay him with cursing and rebuke, and give him
evil words for his good deeds: Lyfias in Athen. B. 13.
for they reckon the money. which was but lent them, as a thing found, and
conceit that which was lent them to use, as truly their own, as their patrimony
rightly descended upon them. An utter evil kind of men are these! may you not
well affirm that there is less danger in a storm in the Irish Sea, than to
deal with them? Let us see how they bring themselves into these evils.

The courses of Banckrupts for spending their own and other men's estates.
nor care of restitution; for they observe no mean, no stint in spending, many
ways they lavish out their estate. First, by prodigal and foolish largess,
not out Cicero. offic. 1.
of a bountiful nature, but vain glory, and to expend more than their estare
will be are, as Agrippn Joseph. antiqu. 18.8.
Herod the greats Nephew, beggering himself thereby. Or secondly, these
Banckrupts spend all in riotous and excessive cheer, as the Eroliant Polyb. 13.
who plunged themselves into debt by their delicious fare. or Thirdly, at
gaming houses take a compendious way to loose all, imitating Claudius Casor,
who Sueton.
was a most studious gamester, and wrote a book of the Art of gaming. Or
fourthly, as Pericles Plutare. in Pericl.
the Athenian, by can grificent building which either shall have a short or no
continuance whereon to creat their memory: This Lactant. B. or true worship
6.11.
also is a ready vain of needless expense to squander away the patrimony of
light-heads. Or fifthly, they consume their goods by giving themselves up to
luxurious Florus 3.12.
preparation of magnificent banquets; which sumptuous mother will ere long
bring forth poverty a bare and needy daughter: for hereby may be exhauted
Tacit. B 2.
a Princes treasure: hereby the Boetians Polyb. B. 10.
after the Leuiruh battaill consumed their wealth, and proved before (...)
unkards. In Tullies time there were found some, who 2. ag. Catil.
spent all their industry and whole life in nightly revells: And after his
days there arose others, who by Benvent in Treat. of Banckrupts.
sumptuous banquets and gluttony lost both wit and wealth together. Such are
still living, and are the wastfull brood and successors of those riotous and
spend-all Progenitors and predecessors. From these causes have issued such
abundance of insolvent debtors.

The purpose of Banckrupts to run their Countries or co^ceale themselves from
their Creditors.
We see also many now adays as deeply engaged as the Roman Knight, Macrob.
sat. B. a. chapter 4.
to walk up and down idle and heartlesse, and not unlike to Annius Plin. B.
36. chapter 5.
Milo, who did owe 700 Sesterties, and by Pliny is censured, as a Prodigy
among men: Or as C. Curio Val. Max.
, who was engaged for 600 Sesterties: Such men conceit it their only course
with C. Galba Sueton.
the brother of Sergius the Emperor, as they have run out of their estates, so
to run out of their countries. We need not seek far for domestic examples
equalling the worst of these, and never minding to pay their debts whilst they
live, and therefore to their great ignominy and disgrace, dishonestly do they
purpose to fly their native country, or play least in sight and mew themselves
up from their Creditors aspect: And so to lie close for a time, till compact
can be made with their Creditors, to take part for their whole debt. Minsing
Inst. 4.6.
So that they may be justly called, not only Forifugae Runagates from the
market, but Lucifugae Runagates from the sight of men, and are termed by Vlpian
Pandect. 21.
night birds and batts: who in respect of their engagements in the day lurk
unseene at home, and lest they should be caught by their Creditors, scout forth
in the night. I cannot but mourn for their naughtiness, because it little
moves themselves. Oh their blindness justly to be bewailed! For who is August.
more miserable than a miserable man, who is unsensible of his own misery?
Charity says Bernard, moves me Bernard. Epist 2.
to grieve for them, who being in a grievous estate, grieve not for themselves;
yea it makes me the rather to pity them, because when their case is pitiful,
they persuade not themselves in how pitiful a condition they are. Well, let us
proceed in this discourse. Plenty of matter afforded carries us on further and
forbids us here to desist.

THE PRACTICE OF THE BANCKRVPTS OF THESE TIMES.
The second Part, Showing the Evils incident to Banckrupts.
Many evils proceed from the fraudulent dealing of banckrupts.
BUt what? me thinks I hear the Banckrupt within himself say: The rude rabble
of the people geere and hiss at me, but I applaud my self at home when I view
the baggs in my chest; As Horacea sat. 1. Sermon. 1.
what need I care, what my Neighbors chat: when as I know, how by other men's
miseries and grief to get a goodly and rich prey for my self? Away with this
impudent speech. Heathen Tully could Book 3. of offic.
censure it for a crime of wicked men, that any thing should seem good and
profitable for them, which is not also just, honest, and may stand with their
credit. Undoubtedly in these our times it is much to be lamented, that men out of
an opinion of things being for their good, that is, their profit and advancing
their estates, rush headlong into many evils, if not into their own perdition.
Now that we may recall and withdraw Banckrupts, who are deepest in this bad
opinion, from their ill courses: Let us consider the multitude, confluence, and
sinck of evils issuing from their enormous courses. Yea there is an Ocean of
them; may you please with me compendiously to sail through them.

The first evil of Banckrupts. They disturb the Commonwealth.
Many things there be troublous to Commonwealths, pernicious to Cities and
Kingdoms; but nothing worse than the courses of fraudulent wasters of their
estates. For as the Sea is calm of its own nature, but made dangerous by
violent winds: So a state quiet in it self, is made subject to most violent
tempests by the actions of fraudulent dealers. For they preferring their own
gain before the public good, disquiet and disturb the commonwealth. This is
evident. First, because fidelity in performance of Covenants and Promises is
one maine foundation of a well ordered Commonwealth. Nothing says Offic. 2.
Tully does more keep a State in due course, than fidelity in dealing, which is
utterly taken away if there be not a faithful and true payment made to
Creditors. If Banckrupts the Arch-builders of fraud, utterly subvert and take
this away, as indeed they do, who doubts Bodin of the Com. W. B. 5.
but that the Commonwealth, unless prevention be in time used, will shortly be
ruinated? Secondly, by Banckrupts courses, Trading which Cicer. offic. 1.
was invented for the maintenance of the life of man, is quite overthrown: yea
commerce and dealing of man with man is the bond and prop of Cities and
Kingdoms: If then Banckrupts weaken or violate performance of fidelity, which
to do says Aristotle Rhet. to Theod. 1.15.
overthrows all use of trading among men: The Commonwealth cannot flourish,
but become a body without a soul. Thirdly, often seditions and and discords
arise upon Banckrupts cheating their Creditors of their estates, or Compounding
with them for the third or fourth part. Tully Bodin of the Com. W. 5.11.
censured that the cancelling the first Covenants made with the Creditors, and
drawing new Covenants is the overthrow of the foundation of a State. And Seneca
Caelius Antiq. 12.10.
says, that the benefit of new Compounding is most pernicious to a
Commonwealth. And surely no less mischief comes to a City by giving liberty
to Banckrupts to abide insolvent; for hereby a greater occasion Bodin. 5.11.
is afforded desperate men to violate their promises and Covenants, and to
disquiet all. And truly this will be the Condition of our times, unless
speedily a remedy be applied to prevent this mischief spreading in the bowels
of the Commonwealth; lest Por. Lat^. in Catil.
as a flame at length it so prevail, that it lay hold on all (which God
Almighty prevent) and we in vain go about to quench the furious and
exorbitant flames thereof. The second evil of Banckrupts, is perjury.


In the Actions of Banckrupts, perjury has its place: If Salvian. B. 3. of
Gods government.
fraud and perjurie be incident to the courses of ill trading, much more to the
courses of Banckrupts by whom no course is Sophocl.
counted ill, which may make for their gain: Thence go they on to the
Carthaginian Cic. B. 1. of the Punick. W.
perfidiousnes, and observe no true, no holy dealing, and so familiarly Plaut.
Bragg. sold.
use false speech, false deeds, false swearing, and play fast and loose at
pleasure: It Is agreed, it is not agreed; It Is not agreed, it is agreed; And Alex.
of Alex. B. 5. C. 10.
think they may deceive men with false oaths, as Children with Toys: When
they borrow they Covenant, plight their troth, make mutual promise of
performance, do it under their own hand writing, have witnesses subscribed
thereunto. But what of all this? They Aristoph.
(as Eucrates) have a way and trick to frustrate all this; they can ever find
a starting hole, a slight to avoid all, and neglect all fidelity. First, Put
them in mind of their promise, press them to fidelity. They stick not to say
by their practice, if faithful dealing Sueton*
be to be violated, it is to be done (not as Caesar said for a Kingdom, but
for a less matter) for money. In other occasions be pious. Yea they are like
lustful lovers, who Catul.
fear not to swear, to promise any thing; but when their lust is satisfied,
they neither fear, nor care what they said, or what they swore. Secondly, if
their own hand writing cannot hold them, no marveil that their Plaut Aulul.
words cannot. Their Juvenal. sat. 16.
own subscription, their seal of a rich Pearl kept in an Ivory box, cannot
make them to pay the money borrowed.

Vana supervacuae dicunt chirographa chartae.

The evidence produced is but a scribled paper in their account; they will
rather part with all shamefastness, than a dram of silver, and therefore
esteem Cic.
witnesses a sport, and an oath as a jest. Filthiness added to deformity
causes the greater loathing in the body: Now how great is the corruption and
filthiness of a perjured and depraved soul? Whither As Enn. in Cic. offic.
now is reason, which used to stand upright, unreasonably bowed and inclined?
Is there no punishment Juvenal. sat. 13.
in store for perjured tongues and subtle fraud? Poor Souls! Though Tibul.
for a time ye may escape: at length Revenge comes with still and slow, yet
with sure stepps; ye cannot avoid it.

The third evil observable, in Banckrupts is breach of brotherly love and
charity: Thirdly, Banckrupts break the bonds of brotherly love and charity.
For Banckrupts possessing and wasting other men's goods, cannot choose but
break the bands of humane friendship and charity, which forbids Cic. offic. 1.
to wrong any man, and injoynes us to respect the common good, and by mutual
interchange of duties, and trusting forth and receiving again wares, to
confirm the bands of humane society. Cic. offic. 3.
These bonds will not Banckrupts spare to break; and therefore also undermine
the very foundation of humane society, to enrich themselves and others with
other men's money and estates. Lend any thing In Trinum.
(says one in Plautus) thou loosest it: the borrower takes it as his own:
ask it again, for thy good will thou find the borrower thine enemy: press
to restitution, and then, of two evils take thy choice, either to loose what
was lent, or else thy friend. They will neglect the bond of friendship and not
pay. M. Crassus was at once bereaved Plutarch.
both of money and friends: for when at the time appointed he craved to receive
what he lent without use: that which was done by him gratis was more odious to
them than had he lent it upon use; Thus made he of friends, enemies, and for
his money possessed the wind. O wretched men! who once thrust out at doors
fidelity and friendship, who are so averse from fair dealing, that they carry
a violent hate and hostile rancor toward their Creditors, and opprobriously
seek to disgrace them! Give me leave to exclame and power out this just
Complaint. The good man Mic. 7.2.
is perished from the earth, there is none righteous among men: They all lie in
wait for blood, every one lies in wait for his brother with a net. It Is
safer trusting to fire and water than to fraudulent men: It Is safer Crates in
Lactant.
to do a kindness to a serpent or savage beast by breeding them up, than to
these men. What more harmefull, what more cruel to man, than the Dragon,
Panther, Lion? Elian. T B. 13.
yet did a Dragon preserve from thieves a Youth who had accustomed to feed him.
The Panther, Joh. a S. Gemin. B. 5.
if a man free her young ones from the trap that has caught them, fawneth on
him and conducts him safe out of the desert. A Lion Agell. 5.14.
requited Androdus for pulling the stump of a tree out of his foot, and
defended him in the den of wild beasts, into which he was cast at Rome, and
thus showed a grateful memory of the cure wrought on him. And shall men with
evil requite a kindness done by lending them money? Truly it is not safe to
Plutarch.
bring up savage creatures, whose minds are soon alienated from their
benefactors, and that to their great peril: because they harm their masters
and requite with mischief the kindness done to them. Much more is it not safe
to credit them with money, who will make a prey of it, and from a kindness
done them, raise extreme hostility and hatred, Cic. offic. 3.
and in men's shapes express the savagenesse of beasts.

Fourthly, the theft of Banckrupts.
The Courses of Banckrupts in the fourth place draw them within compass of
theft. If Cato likened Advertis. sur diverse crimes.
a Usurer (one of those who in their times had no bounds set for their
Consideration) to a close murderer; surely a man may well call a fraudulent
Banckrupt a thief; for of a set purpose he possesses himself of a Creditors
estate, carries it away, and cheates him of it by cunning and subtle devises.
This is thus proved: First, if he according to Dracos laws Agell. 7.16.
be liable to theft, who imployeth a laboring beast* otherwise than in that
use for which he was let out to him: on the same ground are not Banckrupts, who
use men's money to other uses than they were lent, well termed thieves? Now they
turn them to other uses than the lender intended, 1. when they lavish the^ out
upon their pleasures. Secondly, when they borrow them of one Creditor to stop
another Creditors mouth, that clamours against them. Such Diodorus 16.
was the fault of the Phocians, who to pay the amercement to the Amphictyons,
conspired to rob the Delphick Temple. Thirdly, when Banckrupts spend the
borrowed Henry 4. K. of France Edict. An. 1605.
money in estating their Sons or making rich dowries for their Daughters, or
any way convey and turn them over to their heirs or agents or friends in
trust: Thus some Banckrupt does, though it be a folly in him to provide for
others, and be in want himself, or to make others unjustly to gape after his
death and wealth, who unjustly robbed others of it: for oftentimes the Senec.
Epist.
largeness of the prey and entire enjoying it, makes them of friends turn
enemies to the Banckrupt.

Secondly, Banckrupts are proved liable to theft thus; if by all men's verdict
he be judged a thief, that having pawned, or lent on consideration any thing,
takes it closely into his possession before the time; much more is he to be
accused of theft, who after the time of payment is expired, deteineth in his
hand another man's money against the owners mind, and will not restore it. The
former is true; for by his own consent to lend it, he made the use of the thing
another man's if therefore he take it away before the set time, he endammageth
the borrower and commits theft, as say the Lawyers. L. Si quis cui. D. de
furto L. in action * qui rem and L. si aves D. de furtis, therefore also the
latter is true.

Thirdly, he is a thief that concealeth another man's goods: But Banckrupts
often conceal borrowed money, and will not let their Creditors know their
estates; and running away with all or a good part thereof, say that they are
insolvent. And surely in all passages, especially in concealing of goods got
into their hands, so many and so covert are Banckrupts subtilties that they
cannot be either unfolded or indeed imagined. In so much, that it is taken for
granted among Lawyers, That Nic. Boerius.
Banckrupts and fugitive merchants or tradesmen may be wracked, that they may
tell what is become of the money lent them for merchandise and trading, which
now they deny themselves to have, and say, that the Retayler has got it, and
by him it is lost: Therefore for concealment of other men's goods they may have
theeft laid to their charge.

Fourthly, and lastly, he Danaeus in his Ethic Lev. 19.12. Exodus 22.17.
committs theft, who denies what he borrowed or had deposited in his hands:
But banckrupts often deny with impudent faces that they received the money
which was lent them; therefore they are liable to be accused of theft. Now to
deny the truth in this kind is base and dishonest, and makes a man incapable
of the benefit of avoiding prison and compounding with his Creditors.

Besides it is no ingenuous part, Minsing Inst. b. 4.
rather to be found in the crime of theft, than to pay what a man owes: And
if they be men of place, they should regard what beseemed their persons; for it
is more gross and base for men in dignity to circumvent by fraud, than to take
goods from others by open force and violence.

Fifthly, Banckrupts guilty of murder.
Greater yet is the mischief arising from the dealing of Banckrupts: For
fifthly, they are found also guilty of murder. For first, there is in them an
intent and purpose to hurt and wrong others in the course of their lives. And
as St Austin says, every unjust motion August. in Johan.
of the mind, by which men are incited to to wrong their brother, is murder.
Thus are they mutherers not armed with swords, but with fraud and craft for
their own gain to overthrow others. Secondly, he that depriveth others of the
necessaries for their life, what does he else but deprive them of their lives?
He kills Eccles. 34 22.
his neighbor, that takes his bread from him; he that Tull. offic 1.
unjustly sets upon another with craft to wrong him, does as it were lay
violent hands on him. If Banckrupts by their Cunning shifts and tricks carry
away the money of honest Citizens, poor widows, and Orphans, which should
sustain their lives, what do they else but as Vultures suck their blood and
tear in pieces, and devour them who are innocent, and know not how to help
themselves?

But the Banckrupts plead, do we not for their money afford unto them the
yearly maintenance, upon which they live? I answer, this small kindness is
soon turned into a great mischief: Nor indeed is it a kindness, to seem to
do Creditors good for a while, and then wholly to rob them. So then thirdly,
under a show of being helpful to Creditors lives, the Banckrupts in the end
go away with the principal, and dig the deeper pit for their Creditors
overthrow. This kindness of Banckrupts is like the stinging of the Aspe, with
whose Chrysosthom.
venom if a man be infected, he falls in a pleasing sleep, so that the
venom disperseth it self through all the veins, and the party dies sweetly
sleeping: So the Banckrupt for a while lulleth with kind supply his Creditor
asleep, that he may disperse his poison more securely, and carry away the
principal, and by spoiling Ambros.
him of his lively hood does prejudice to his life; so that Banckrupts may be
justly called a viperous brood, who eat out the very bowels and the states of
their Creditors, that themselves may subsist in the world. What difference
Senec. B. of Benef.
then is there between a Banckrupts kindness and an enemies wish? an enemy
wishes thy overthrow, and a Banckrupt by pretending to supply thy life with
maintenance, in the end works thy ruin.

Sixthly, Banckrupts hypocrisy.
Furthermore the courses of Banckrupts are in the sixth place full of craft and
cannot want hypocrisy: Do Plaut in Pseud.
but hear their humble words and view their smooth faces, no man can think
them bad men, at opera fallunt, you shall find them false in their deeds, like
Basil. Hom. 7 on Ex.
the fish called Polypus, which by taking the Color of the rock by which it
lies, devours fishes approaching for shelter. So Banckrupts by taking and
counterfeiting the color of kind and good men, make such as come near them
their prey.

First then before they break they Accurs in Benvent.
get store of money into their hands, that they may seem rich and able easily
to satisfy their Creditors, so that no man needs to press them? And for
this end, they will discharge other men's Benvent in Tract. de Adjecto.
ingagments, that they may seem some body, and good pay-masters.

Secondly, at their very breaking they play the hypocrites, and perfidiously
blame the perfidiousnesse of fortune, and feign Casualties, that they may
compound with their Creditors to their loss; yea they will pretend poverty and
damages, when they swim Senec. of Ben. B. 4.
in plenty and have money coming in very flush; and to bring their Creditors to
pity them, they can command some feined tears to distill.

Thirdly, after their breaking they conceive Cic. orat. after his rec.
that all their vices are hid, if they but show their faces in open market: and
because they bear wittingly Lactan.
with their own vices, whose sweetness much pleases them, will not endure to
have them named, but Salvian.
make show of religiousnes and assume the title of sanctity, that they may
color their dishonest gains and base shuffling dealings. Though their dealing
be naught, yet they desire to seem of honest and fair carriage; So deceitful
is man's life, so carries be his mind in Covert, and sets a fair face on a
false heart; and thinks not, that Cic. offic. 1.
there is no sin more capital and mischievous for men, when they most
notoriously beguile, even then to make the greatest show of honesty. And surely
herein is an by pocrite most dangerous, because he Cic.
catches and intrappeth men, before they perceive any thing or can be aware.
And therein Plutarch of Herodor. Mal.
appears the extremity of their injustice, that they would seem just and
honest, when they are not so; Secondly, their arrant naughtiness, that they
counterfeit plain dealing and goodness, when they are most crafty and
injurious. These courses too frequent and palpable, may be discerned, when we
find most of the Banckrupts using Lucil.
all study and art warily to place their words, and cunningly to demean
themselves, to cologue, and to counterfeit honest dealing. Thus Chrysostom. hom.
45.
are they whited sepulchers, outwardly beauteous, but inwardly full of
rottenness. So that whilst their slights are undiscerned by a faining duty and
observance, they seem honest men: but when the visard is taken off, they
appear themselves, such indeed as cannot choose but be held to be odious and
detestable by all good men. Seventhly, Banckrupts Injustice.


The seventh fault of Banckrupts is injustice: How can he choose but be unjust,
that wastes his estate and takes Banckrupts courses? For his chief desire
Curt. B. 4.
and aim is to deceive, so that his heart must needs be far from all just
dealing. His mind is pitched upon his own gain, so that Ovid 2 Pont.
the venerable name of Justice sits but like an harlot in the Porch, to call in
Customers for his profit. Some ulcers Senec. of Tranq. c. 2.
there be, that are never better than when the hand does chafe and rub them;
such an ulcer is injustice, which though it hurt a man, yet desires to be in
action, and to have objects still to work on it. Let but Plaut.
hope of gain show it self, the unjust man rem divinam deferet will omit his
duty to God, rather than to his Mammon; for he that Horat. ep. 1.
makes haste to be rich, and plungeth himself into the world, bids virtue
adieu, sleights Plutarch
the repute of Justice, shameth at nothing, dum ob rem, will do any thing, so
it stand with his profit. For what will not men's hearts attempt, when an
extreme thriftinesse possesses them? Virgil. Aurt sacra fames quia non cogit?
But they shall find it better by much to leave this course of fraudulent
dealing, in which death and destruction with baits tempting to injustice
closely concealeth herself, than to have continued therein to their future
misery.

Eighthly, Banckrupts Covetousness.
The eight evil incident to Banckrupts is covetousnes Avarus aris avid alien.
Agell. 10.5.
The dealings of Banckrupts show them to be covetous and ravenous after other
men's money, and to be like them, Erasm. in Adag.
who count nothing sacred, but gain, to whom, as to their God, they consecrate
themselves. By this they weigh out their godliness, friendship, honesty, fame,
all things divine, and humane, and count all things else but trifles; Their
chief Juvenal. sat. 9.
prayers tend to this, that their wealth and state may be advanced; this makes
abstinence from other men's goods a stranger to them; this makes them ready to
catch, rake, and snatch what ever they can; yea Basil. homil. 7. against the
Covetous.
how ever they be moderate in the beginning, yet the further they proceed, the
more potent they are, by the ruin of some caught in their snares, to catch and
devour others. Not unlike a River, which being small and weak in the head, in
the progress receives such increase, that with a violent stream it carries
all along with it: Banckrupts I say, if once through the impetuousnes of a
Covetous mind, they esteem gain more than goodness, wrong than equity,
falsehood than truth, Lamprid. in Comod.
every booty shall be conveyed into their bosom. Of this temper Plutarch. in
Agesil.
were of old the Lacedaemonians, who made the chief point of honor and virtue
to consist in doing Sparta good; other justice they neither learned, nor knew;
So being wholly possessed with this persuasion, they cared not whom they
injured: Not unlike them are our Banckrupts, who to adorn their Sparta,
persuade themselves of singular performance, if hiding their subtilties and
persidiousnesse, they can supplant others, and rob them to enrich themselves.
Now if a man conclude with himself that each man desires Terent. in Andr.
it should rather go well with himself than with others, and proceed to an
immense and unsatisfied desire of having, and bound not his thirst of getting
within compass of reason, at length all respect and observance of Justice will
be extinct, so that he will not only say in his own heart, but by his deeds
proclaim to the world,

Vnde Juvenal.
habe as quaerat nemo, sed oportet habere.

Inquire not whence a man has his wealth, have it he must.

O damnable speech! beseeming a Savage! such a Covetous heart straying beyond
the bounds of moderation and reason, declares openly the Speaker to be a
Worldling and Mammonist, and not a Christian; to be a statue and Image having
no more of the man in him than barely the name of a man.

Ninthly, Banckrupts lying.
The ninth fault of Banckrupts is lying. So that we reassume to Banckrupts the
speech which the Apostle borrowed: In Covetous 2 Pet. 2.3.
wise with fained words they play the Merchants. For furely they that stick not
to lay covetous clutches upon other men's estates, they will not blush to cover
truth over with the ashes of lies. The study Circer. Agrac.
of gain soon calls to the study of fraud and lying; And if, as Salvian
says, Book. 4.
the life of greedy and deceitful tradesmen be nothing else, but the hammering
of deceit and forging out of lies; Banckrupts may well be held to be the
Chief, Euripid. in Andro.
and Master-workmen of lying: for they use (those called by Plautus) Rudent.
magnificent lies, and count lucre Sophock in Athenaeus.
sweet, though got by lying. This appears: First, because in their buying and
selling they speak Jer. 9.8.
peaceably to their neighbors with their mouths, but in their hearts lay wait
for them: So that there is no good agreement between their tongues and their
hearts; I wish and pray God that they do not in hypocrisy speak lies, having
their consciences seared with an hot iron as they 1 Timothy 4. Then secondly, when
the time of paying the principal comes; these Dosoes great boasters of their
fair dealing, set the great Juvenal. fat. 7.
bellows on work to forge huge lies. Strigelius hitts them right, saying,
that they who willingly run in debt, unwillingly pay; Ethick. B. 2.
and they that unwillingly pay, willingly tell lies: So that the first step is
being in debt, the second is coining of lies; Thus lying and evil speaking now
adays abounds. Whence just ground have we to say with the Prophet, let
every man take heed of his friend, and let him not put confidence in a brother.
Jer. 9.4.
For every brother will supplant, and every friend will deal deceitfully;
every one will deceive his friend, and will not speak the truth; they have
taught their tongues to speak lies and take great pains to do wickedly.

Tenthly, Banckrupts. blemish the credit of their children and posterity.
Furthermore, Banckrupts are tenthly very injurious to their children and
posterity, and by their fraudulent dealing lay an aspersion and disgrace on
them, and brand them with Infamy; for when b a foundation of a good name is not
laid by the Parents, the stain thereof falls also on the Progeny.

So that First; the Children and Nephews be pointed at in public. Secondly,
when they would speak in the assembly, some one boldly interrupts Cic. orat.
for Sylla. Plutarch.
them and enjoyneth them silence; for Laert. 2 1.
the virtuous and commendable life of the Parents is a Treasure of freedom in
speech left to the Posterity. Thirdly, when their children come into the market
place and Exchange, where Merchants show themselves, presently some will step
in, and with open mouths and bold faces give items to others to have no dealing
with them* or not to trust them. Fourthly, if occasion of marriage be offered
them with some honest Citizens daughter, presently some unlucky bird will sing:
take heed and be well advised; know you not, that his parents do animam debere
owe more than they can pay? And Terent. in Heaut.
thus this brute breaks off the marriage. Thus Banckrupt parents are many
ways injurious to their Children and posterity.

And here give me leave to lay an accusation against these unjust Parents: I
know well Cic. orat. for Cluent.
that Children ought not only to keep in silence injuries done them by their
Parents, but also to take them patiently, and therefore quietly will I bear
those things which are to be borne, and in silence conceal them which are to
be concealed. But this branding with Infamy and blasting the credit of the
Children, which proceeds wholly from the Parents, who can keep silent, who
can be so patient as to bury it in oblivion? Is this fit? The old men Aug.
Medic.
committed the faults, the young Sons are put to the wrack; the Fathers swelled
with pride, the Sons be brought low for it. They did devour the sweet gain,
these eat the bitter gall of disgrace. The unjust offends, the just is
punished; the guilty goes away with the fault, the innocent smarteth for it;
The good man suffers, what the bad man deserves: the Sonne-in-Law bears the
blame which the Father-in-Lawes sin merited: what can be thought more grievous?
Every Cicer.
ingenuous man has a desire to partake and have a share in true glory, which
is the honorable fruit of true virtue; and further, there is no ingenuous and
good nature but would willingly have a good name and fame derived upon him from
his Parents and family: Why then do you Banckrupts deprive your children and
posterity thereof? It Is too grievous Cic. Brut.
That Parents sins should lie thus heavy on their children. By the bowels of
tender compassion I entreat you, to bethink your selves, what you would
answer, if your children should thus speak to you? Fathers, you begot Cicer.
in Catil.
us; next after God, you are Authors of our lives; you have given us education;
but out alas, why are ye so bewitched with the love of gain, that ye will be
the ruin of our good names? Did your Parents Plaut. in Trim.
deliver over an unblemished and unstained fame to you, that you should
overthrow by your wickedness what they got by their virtue? that you should be
blemishes to the honor of your posterity, that you should commit these things
so bad, and so unbeseeming your house and kindred?

Think with your selves can any Cicer. orat. to the Nobil.
thing be more near and dear unto you than your own children. Now how little
do you regard them, when by your ill courses you brand them with infamy, and
extinguish all the glory Cicer. orat. for Sylla.
and ornament of your stock, name and honor by your miscariage? May not your
posterity complain of you, because by you they are made heirs of such a
calamity, and for your sakes are despised? shall not your children Eccles.
41.10.
grieve at you their wicked fathers, because by you they are exposed to
disgrace and shame? will not God be offended with you and lay just judgment
upon you? for he 1 Timothy 5.8.
that has not a care of his children and household, is worse than an Infidel.
Consider, consider these things, I say, all ye, which blush not to please and
solace your selves in the evil courses of your most dishonest and unjust
playing the Banckrupts.

Amongst the former evils, Eleventhly, Banckrupts endanger their own
salvation.
the courses of Banckrupts in the eleventh place draw them often into the loss
of their own Salvation. For, how can it otherwise be? when by hook and crook
they unjustly enrich themselves with other men's wealth, and rob others of their
livelihood, and so endanger the robbing of their own souls of happiness; Woe be
to him, says the Prophet; Habac 2.10.
which coveteth an evil covetousness to his own house, and sins against
his own soul. Wonder not at this; for behold the Ang* on the Psa.
devil sets before thine eyes, thy neighbors goods to entice thee to evil;
these goods thou can not get without fraudulent dealing; They are the bait,
fraud is the snare. O wretched man, why do thou so eye the bait, that thou
see not the snare? there is no way to get the goods, but by fraud and
subtilty, and if thou make use of deceit and wiles, needs must thou be
taken, and if thou be taken, what can thou expect but loss of thy soul?

Hence it is that many catching at gold, captivate their souls, and for
fruition of money adventure upon perdition of their own salvation. O folly of
men! who to advance their gain run heedlesse on their bane. What a madness is
it to get gold and lose heaven? What Aug. Sermon. on Christ's W.
profits a chest full of Gold, if the Soul be empty of hope of Salvation? Will thou have good, and wilt not thou thy self be good? blush, blush at the sight
of thy goods: since an house replenished with goods calls thee her Godless
master; What Mat. 16.26.
will it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? or what
can a man give in recompense for his soul? what can that which a rich man has
do him good, if he have not God, who has all things at command?

These things should be your daily and serious meditation; but oh your
disturbed and perverted reason! oh your unbridled desires! oh your dissolute
counsels! How long will this your fury delude you? whither will this your
undounded licentiousnes carry you? Are your minds so inflamed with folly, your
desires so infatuated with the love of money, that the fear of God and care of
your Souls cannot make you more considerate, and withdraw you from your
thirsting after Gold? Let the salvation of your souls move you, let it I say
move you to consider better of your courses, for if the Soul be once lost, you
shall be for ever after most miserable.

Thus far have we treated of the several kinds of sins (the mischievous joys
of perverted souls) which do proceed from the fraudulent dealings of
Banckrupts; we have painted out their folly in its due colors, but not so
fully, as we might have drawn it to the life: for there can be no such depth
of invention, no such Copy of Elocution, no such divine and incredible fluence
of speech, which can. I will not say fully express, but so much as number up
the mischiefs arising from the courses of Banckrupts. Surely as Covetousness
in the Ancients esteem, comprehended in it all vices in a lump: So we may
judge, that the fraudulent courses of Banckrupts have a Confluence in them of
all evil: which any man will easily grant, if he well and seriously weigh all
their actions. As for us, we contented our selves in few words to lay open few
of their evils in this brief discourse.

THE PRACTICE OF THE BANCKRVPTS OF OUR TIMES.
The third Part, Which declares the punishments decreed to be inflicted upon
them.
Great punishments have been decreed for Banckrupts.
WHat then shall Banckrupts run on in their sins unpunished? God forbid: shall
bonorum extortor Terent. Senec. 3. of Benefi.
legum contortor, a cheater of men* a wrester of laws escape? Can courses so
hateful pass unpunished? The Heathen Oracle said; Never did any Herodot.
man guilty of unjust dealing escape the whip of revenge. It Is Menand
as it were fatal and unavoidable, that the unjust and injurious designs of
evil men should be required with their deserved doom. Even the wisest sort of
Heathens held Salust.
it for a truth that neither the good nor the evil deeds of men should pass
unregarded: but that a different requital should attend both good and bad,
according to the nature of their deeds. And herein rightly have humane laws
imitated the true pattern of Gods Justice: for our Ancestors Tacitus Ann.
have ordained that where Crimes went before, due punishment should follow
after. Let us then briefly collect the several laws of our forefathers
enacted against Banckrupts, and in order set down what has been decreed.
First, by the laws of Nations. Secondly, by the Cesarean laws. Thirdly, by
several Kings laws. Fourthly, by the Common law. Fifthly, by Gods Law. So
shall we meet with those fraudulent persons in many of their evil and enormous
dealings. And surely needs must these Banckrupts be a most wicked and bad kind
of men, Benven.
had we no other Argument to prove it, than so many statutes and laws in
several parts of the world which have been ordein'd to repress and reform
their naughtines. Let us now in particular set down the laws and ordinances
of the Ancients, in their own words and tenor.

1. The laws of Nations against Banckrupts.
The Laws of Nations, by which in several Commonwealths the states thereof
are upheld, have an aim and respect to this; That humane society and
conjunction may be kept in safety: and therefore if any man trespass against
this, they inflict on him death, or banishment, or imprisoning, or amercement.
Now hear their different laws against banckrupts.

The Romans decreed that the debtor owing very much to his creditors, Alex. ab
Alex. B. 6.10
should satisfy his debts by deviding his substance amongst them; and being
deprived of all his goods, should be put into prison and Chains, and
afterward that his joints should be divided, at the pleasure of the Creditors
amongst them.

The Egyptians ordained that satisfaction should be made by the debtors goods
and estate, but no punishment to to be inflicted on the body; Alex. ab Alex^
ibidem.
for they held men's goods liable to satisfy for debts of money, and not their
bodies; yet they used to pawn the embalmed bodies of the dead for money, and
held it for an extreme disgrace, if the debtors redeemed them not at the time
appointed.

Among the Boetians he that could not pay his debts, Srobeus Sermon. 42.
was thus disgraced by the basket. He was to be brought and set in the open
market with a basket on his head. He that had thus sat, was ever after held
infamous. This punishment Mnesarchas the father of Euripides the Tragedian
suffered.

Among the Indians, Alex. of Alex. ibidem.
he that paid not his debts, if he was called in question and sued by his
Creditors, a day was appointed them, and then if he satisfied not, first his
hand was cut off, and his eye put out, and then he was executed.

Among the Pisidians, Stoheus Sermon. 42.
any one defrauding Creditors of what was committed to any man in trust, was
very severely punished, for he that defrauded, was put to a most cruel death.

Amongsgt the Tyrrhenians, Heraclid. in polit.
if any man paid not the money which he borrowed, by public appointment Boys
followed him which an empty purse for his utter disgrace.

The Judgment upon Banckrupts among the Smyrneans and Athenians, Caelius
Antiq. lect. 70.20
was, that they which according to Covenant did not give due content to their
Creditors, were for ever excluded, and forbid to come into the market.

Among the Muscovits, Guagin* descript* Muscov c. 4.
debtors that have not wherewithal to satisfy their Creditors, are according
to their laws brought into a public place ordained for that end, and there
grievously without any mercy beaten with whips and wands on the legs and feet,
till they make full payment to their Creditors, whencesoever they can get it:
if they cannot get wherewithal to satisfy, then being often whipped, they are
compelled to become servants to the Creditors, thereby to satisfy them
according to the value of the debt.

Among the Iurkes when any ones fraudulent dealing is detected, Aerod. B. 1
the Governor adjudges him to death.

Among the Florentines if any be Banckrupt, and be convicted so to be, there
is appointed him a certain day of payment, Brut. B. 1. hist, Florent.
as seems fit in the Magistrates discretion, at which day if the debtor pay
not, his name is registered among the fraudulent Banckrupts, and he is deprived
of his freedom and disabled to give his voice as a Citizen: He on whom this
punishment is inflicted, is said to be brought to be looking glass, because
in that Catalogue as in a glass, you may see the worth and estate of such men.

At Roan the Banckrupts and men insolvent, are made to wear a green hat, that
by this badge they may be known from all other men, and that no man unawares
may enter into Covenant and bargain with them which used to fail and be
insolvent.

Hence it appears how contemptibly diverse Nations and people have thought of
debtors branded with ignominy of false dealing or notorius Banckrupts courses.

In the second place the Caesarean laws against Banckrupts have been many. 2
The Caesarean laws against Banckrupts.
In the days of Charles the fifth were made many constitutions and many edicts
promulgated, by which it was thought good to prevent diverse frauds ptactised in
buying and selling and in subtle supplanting men of their estates, as also
grievous and dire punishments assigned to Banckrupts, according to their
demerits. This well beseemed the Caesarean Authority; for he knows how to
rule well, who has a special regard that a Corporation be not infected with
evil men, and that Merchants and Tradesmen be free from perfidious and false
dealing. For a Cities Epicter.
safeguard depends not upon the strength of the walls, but the virtue and just
dealing of the Citizens; Nor is As said Antigonus.
there any surer bulwark to defend a kingdom, than the mutual love and fair
dealing and honest demeanor of the subjects. The Poet said well, that a City
is strongly Plaut. in Persa.
walled, if the Citizens be virtuous. And again, if, First, false dealing.
Secondly, alienating the common treasure. Thirdly, Covetousness. Fourthly,
Envy. Fifthly, Ambition. Sixthly, Calumniation. Seventhly, Perjury. Eigthly,
Slothfulnes in men's vocations. Ninthly, Oppression. Tenthly, Murder (which
falls heavy upon the committer) if I say these vices be not banished the
City, an hundredfold wall is too little to defend it. Now suppose the state of
a Kingdom be such, that some of these vices, at least one of them, namely
fraudulent dealing abundantly reign in peoples minds: The question is what
shall the chief Magistrate do? Shall he wink at it, or inflict severe
punishment thereon? Too much mildness and too much severitie are both
culpable, the one lets the reins of government hang too loose, the other holds
them in too straight; reason and moderation is so to be used in punishing, that
a Magistrate observe a due temper of Justice, and justly punish unjust
defrauders of other men: Hieronym. to ^ip^^ius.
for if a Judge punish an offense, as he is Gods Magistrate, it is not cruelty,
but piety, and Blessed is he who does justice at all times. Psalm. 106.3.
Let no man then wonder at the Emperor Charles the Fifths Constitution against
Banckrupts, promulgated after this manner.

This Constitution of Charles the Fifth against Banckrupts, was enacted and
published, October. 7. Anno Dom. 1531.

Charles by the Grace of God, Roman Emperor, etc.
Against insolvent and fugitive persons or Banckrupts.
We formerly ordained, and further ordeine, That all Merchants and Chapman or
women or others that deal in buying and selling, who do fraudulently and
deceitfully beguile other Merchants or persons whatsoever of their moneys,
wares, or debts, shall be counted and reputed in the same rank and condition
with arrant thieves. And by this statute we have and do declare them so to
be.

In like manner we declare our said mind to be concerning all such as
tolerate, enterteine, or by silence countenance them, as also all them that are
privy to the said Banckrupts frauds, and imbezelling of other men's goods, and
know whither they be fled, and where they hide themselves; unless they
manifest these things unto the Judge or chief Magistrate of the place.
Furthermore we count them in the same rank with thieves, who craftily agitate
the business of banckrupts, who be the Receivers or Retaylers of their wares,
whether under the pretense and name of partners or otherwise, as also all them
that pretend and feign themselves to be creditors of banckrupts, by whose
means the fraud and perfidiousnesse of the Banckrupts may be concealed or
boulsterd out.

All the aforesaid we have and do deprive of all the immunities, liberties,
and privileges of all Cities, and Corporations, and Towns, and places to whom
freedom in any kind has been in any manner granted.

And we bid and command that Banckrupts and their Partners, Helpers and
Assistants, and all above named, found and adjudged to be so, as also all
persons that fly for debt into any City, Town, Borough, or any privileged
place, whatsoever, none excepted, be fetched and taken thence, and that their
goods and estates, if they brought any thither, be taken thence:
Notwithstanding we will that the privileges and liberties of the said Cities,
Towns, and places whatsoever, enjoying any freedom, abide and continue unto
them, in all other causes and occasions. And also, We ordeine, that the
Banckrupts and their Assistants before specified, being proved and adjudged so
to be, shall be punished as Thieves and violaters of the public good, and that
without Connivence or delay, for an example to all others.

And further that the goods and estate of the said Banckrupts and their Agents
and helpers be taken from them, and be deposited and kept in some place
convenient, for the benefit and right of the Creditors, as shall in Justice be
thought meet.

Further, that the Wives of the Merchants or Traders, who prove insolvent, and
the goods in which their Wives, either in their Husbands presence or absence,
have dealt by buying or selling in open Market, be liable to answer for, and
satisfy the Husbands debts, in which he engaged himself during the time of
their marriage.

We will also and Command that all Merchants and Chap-men or women, who
fraudulently to deceive their Creditors, fly out of our dominions, and abide
elsewhere, within forty days after the publication of this edict, do return
into the place of their usual dwelling in our Territories, and that within
forty days more they make satisfaction to their Creditors, which thing unless
they do within the forty latter days prescribed: We ordeine that the
Banckrupts themselves, as also all their assistants aforesaid, be for ever
banished out of our Territories and dominions, never to return into them
again.

Furthermore, we Command that all Contracts fainedly, fallaciously, and
fraudulently made, be frustrate and of no force and validity. And that all the
Creditors of Banckrupts, and their Partners, and of other fugitives for debt,
join together in the felling of the Banckrupts goods, and whatsoever can be
found, for the discharge of the Banckrupts debts, and that a regard be had to
the proportion and value of each Creditors debt without any partiality to
satisfy any particular man.

Neither shall any Creditor benefit himself by preventing others in arresting
the goods of any decayed person, though it be done in any privilege place
whatsoever: Nor shall the Customs, rights, or laws of any place whatsoever,
made to the contrary, hinder what herein we Command: for our pleasure is, That
in the foresaid cases they be of no force, and that if the cause so require, by
this our constitution they be of no validity.



3. Kings laws against Banckrupts.
3 Diverse worthy provident and potent Kings have enacted strict laws against
Banckrupts. Plato Plat. in Alcib.
said well, that the Providence of a Governor consists in consulting well for
his own and his peoples welfare.

This thing the French Kings, truly careful of their peoples good, duly
weighing, most providently enacted good laws for the due punishing of
Banckrupts; for being informed that this crime grew too too common by its
impunity (which is Cicer. Orat.
a great bait to draw on offenses) and that trading and Commerce was quite
taken away by the breach of Compacts and fidelity; which false dealing would
prove the weakening of Kingly State, they therefore made special use of their
princely power in purging out all great enormities of Banckrupts: This may
appear in their several decrees against them.

1. Francis the first of that name King of France decreed Anno 1536 That
Banckrupts, and their partners, and adjutors should be severely dealt with, and
diligent inquiry made, witnesses and other extraordinary remedies used, and
the fault apparently found, the persons guilty should have some corporal
punishment inflicted on them, according to their desert, either by putting them
into the pillorie, or some other way, as should seem good to the Judge. In
which decree what may seem severe? seeing Cic. Offic. 2.
that for the good of the Comwealth severitie is to be used, without which no
state can be well ordered. Better is it by August. Confess. 9.
severity to express love to the Commonwealth, than by lenity to ruinate it.
We cut off a finger, that the gangrene may not proceed to the Arm: So
offenders are justly punished, that their sin proceed not further to the
detriment of the whole body politic.

2 Charles the niuth King of France in an assembly of the Peers and States, at
Orleance, did constitute that fraudulent Banckrupts should be extraordinarily
punished, and afterward put to death. Who can find fault with this? The
public good so required; for he Plut.
wrongeth good men, who conniveth at the bad: And the place of a King and his
office is to punish offenders Hieronym. on Jerem.
and relieve the innocent: He is the dispencer Arist. polit.
of Justice, and will not suffer the rich to be invaded by the poor, nor the
poor contumeliously used by the wealthy.

3 Henry the third renewed and confirmed this edict against against Banckrupts
at Bloys, Anno 1579. And let not any man hence tax him of severity: for he
that sits at the stern in the tempestuous sea of Civil affairs, ought ever
to have his eyes bent and intent to advance the Common good of all; Cic. Offic.
1.
And men in authority are to provide for, as the safety, so the benefit of the
people who called them to their place, and not to mind only their own profit
and safety who are called thereunto: And herein especially differs, says
Aristotle, a King from a Tyrant, the one studieth and procures his own
benefit, the other the Subjects welfare.

4 Henry the Fourth Successor to the former, as in Kingly authority, to in
prudent administration of Justice, did by his Royal edict severely meet with
the Crafty arts and audacious tricks in Banckrupts courses. Read his
constitution against Banckrupts and failing tradesmen enacted in the supreme
Court, June 4. Anno Domini 1609. Thus far of the French Kings edicts against
Banckrupts.

Laws in England made concerning Banckrupts.
Nor have the Princes of England been backward in this kind, but have seriously
considered the mischiefs which were incident to Commerce and humane society
and to the well ordering of the Commonwealth, and which have been pulled upon
us by the subtle and unconscionable and ungodly dealings of Banckrupts, and
thereupon our said Kings have with great care and circumspection provided good
and wholesome laws to prevent or punish Banckrupts courses. Anno 34. Hen. 8. A
statute was was enacted for remedying the harms and evils befalling this land
by Banckrupts.

Also Anno 13. of Fliz. cap. 7. more fully was declared what Merchants or
Tradesmen, etc. departing this Realm, or keeping their houses, or willingly
being arrested, etc. to defraud their Creditors, etc. shall be counted
Banckrupts. And further is enacted, how Commission shall be granted, by which
the body and goods whatsoever of the said Banckrupts may be seized upon, and
how by the Commissioners a course shall be taken for satisfying of the
Banckrupts debts: As also how the Comissioners shall have authority to find
out and dispose of the Banckrupts goods, lands, etc. in the hands of any other
person whatsoever, and how they shall by oath of any person suspected to have
the goods of the Banckrupts, endeavor to find out the truth: Besides in this
statute penalties are imposed on the Banckrupts who hide or convey themselves
from their usual places of abode, and on such as wittingly and willingly help
to hide or convey any person proclaimed Banckrupt and going about to conceal
himself. See more in the said Act.

Also Anno. 1. Iacobic. 15. Because banckrupts fraud and deceit increased, (as
it is there said) to the hindrance of traffic and to the general hurt of the
Realm, it is further explained, who are to be reputed Banckrupts, and how the
power of the Commissioners should be further enlarged. Also it is enacted, That
if Banckrupts by conveying their lands, tenements, leases, goods, Chattells,
etc. to their Children, or any other person; or persons, seek and endeavor to
defraud their Creditors: That then the said Commissioners shall have power to
bargain, sell, grant, demise, convey, and dispose of the same, as if the
Banckrupts had been actually possessed thereof, or as if the debts were in his
own name. And that the acts of the Commissioners in this kind shall be good
in law against any man, who shall question the same.

See these things in that act more largely set down.

It is there also further enacted that because the practices of Banckrupts were
become secret, subtle, and hardly to be found out, in what cases any one
withdrawing him or herself from their usual abode, shall be proclaimed
Banckrupt, and how the said Banckrupt not appearing before the said
Commissioners, is to be apprehended, wherever he or she may be found, in
places privileged or not, and are to be examined by the Commissioners about
their own lands, goods, debts, books of accounts, etc.

It is also enacted that if the offender refuse to answer to the
Interrogatories propounded, that then the Commissioners shall have power to
commit him or her to close prison, till they conform themselves. etc.

It Is also enacted, that if the party examined commit wilful or corrupt
perjury to the endamagement of the Creditors, ten pounds or more, he or she
shall be indicted, etc. And being convicted shall be set on the pillory, and
have one care nailed thereto and cut off. As also such as have Banckrupts goods
or be indebted to them, shall be examined by the Commissioners, and how if in
case they refuse to appear, or if they appear and refuse to answer to
interrogatories, the Commissioners shall have power to cause them to be
arrested and made to appear, and afterward may imprison them till they submit
themselves to the said Commissioners, and answer to the said Interrogatories:
And if any of the said parties shall wilfully and corruptly commit any manner
of wilful perjurie by his deposition before the Commissioners, that then it
shall be lawful to indict the said persons, and upon their conviction injoyne
them such forfeiture, and lay upon them such pains and punishments, as was
limited Anno quinto Eliz. by the Statute of perjurie. Further also it is
provided concerning the Commissioners, how they shall proceed and maintain
their proceedings for the good of the Creditors, and the Banckrupt, and for
their own discharge of the trust committed to them. And how they shall proceed
to execution of their Commission, though the Banckrupt die. See these things
more fully declared in the Statute.

Also Anno 21. Iac. In regard that Banckrupts much increased in number, and
their frauds were many in deluding the former statutes, to the hinderance of
traffic and Commerce, and the great decay and overthrow and undoing of
Clothiers, etc. So that the Banckrupts evill-dealings tended (as justly there
is affirmed) to the general hurt of this Realm: It is there enacted that all
laws made against Banckrupts, shall be beneficially construed for the good of
the Creditors. There also is more expressly showed who are to be accounted
banckrupts, what the authority of the Commissioners is, what shall be the
prosecution of the laws in force against Banckrupts. It Is further enacted that
the wives of Banckrupts shall be examined in the same manner, as was before
spoken concerning the husbands. As also in what case the Banckrupt and his wife
shall be set on the pillory, etc. Also it is there provided how the Banckrupts
goods and estate shall be divided to the Creditors. Also how Banckrupts making
themselves accomptants to the Kings Majesty, shall not hinder the proceedings
of the Commissioners to right the Creditors. These things and many more are
contained and more fully and largely set down in the foresaid statutes
concerning Banckrupts, for the utter rooting out of all Banckrupts courses, and
the bridling and reforming of so great a mischief to the Common good. Leaving
therefore these things to the Readers perusal in the book of the Statutes at
large, we forbear to cite any more out of them: And having here inserted what
we thought most expedient for our own Nation to take notice of; Let us
proceed.

4. The Canon Laws against Banckrupts.
Fourthly, nor have the Common laws passed over the perfidious courses of
Banckrupts and Covenant-breakers, but punished them by degrees according to
their deserts.

1. They lay a blemish and stain upon their credit and reputation, who
faithfully pay not their debts: for in the constitutions of Boniface the eight,
it is said, he 8. Rule of the Canon Law*
that is once a false dealer, is ever presumed so to be. Thus the honor and
name of a good man is taken from a Banckrupt: who shows himself by his
fraudulent course and dealing, and by palliat and pretended honesty, to be a
knave, and utterly unworthy to be trusted, or to have Covenant kept with him.
Book 5. Rul. 75. of the Can. Law.
For unjustly does he require others to observe fidelity toward him, who
breaks it at pleasure toward them; Besides in the ancient statutes of the
Church, it was Canon 12.
ordained, that he which invadeth another man's goods, should not escape
unpunished, but should make restitution of all with advantage.

The second decree of punishment was confirmed by a Statute of John the Fourth
Pope of that name; He that invadeth other men's goods let him restore them
fourfold. Yea, Eusebius the Pope constituted, that Ibid.
restitution ten-fold should be made.

The third punishment of such as unjustly possess themselves of other men's
goods, is, that they should hope for no remission of their sins, until they
had made restitution; for Bonifac. 8. Rul 4. in the Can. Law.
Peccatum non remittitur, nisi restituatur ablatum. And that there can be no
repentance, unless the goods ill gotten be restored, is confirmed by this
speech of Augustine in his Epistle to the Macedonians: Cant. 5.
There is no performance of Repentance, if the goods of other men be not
restored.

4. To bring Banckrupts to a true sense of their sins, and to fit them for
Gods gracious work upon them, and the obteyning of pardon of their offenses, by
the edict of the Lateran Council was decreed, that they ought Lateran. Conc.
under Fabian.
to be excommunicated, who possess themselves of men's goods, unless they
restore them to their owners, their heirs or others, to whom by law the
wronged persons goods descended, because they rob and deprive them of their
estates, whom according to the rule of Faith they ought to relieve.

See here how anciently decrees were made to withdraw men from fraudulent
dealings, such as are the subtilties of Banckrupts, and to lay Condign
punishment upon them. As men cut of those parts of their bodies, which want
blood and spirit, and would harm other joints: So evils are to be taken away
from among men, and to be rooted out by good laws, lest they prove pernicious
and hurtful to the Church and Commonwealth, or the parts and members of the
same; Of which kind, we account the Courses of Banckrupts in getting into
their clutches other men's goods* and robbing and defrauding them thereof.

5. Divine Laws against Banckrupts. Curt. 7.
Some may think the Canon Law mild, because it inflicteth no severe punishment
on fraudulent and crafty Banckrupts. Come we then Fifthly, to speak of divine
vengeance which no man can escape, who lays Covetous and false fingers on
other men's goods. The Heathen Poet could say, They who blinded with Eu^yp.
folly, and possessed with madness, out of opinion and hope of gain, neglect
Justice, shall surely smart for it: God whom they see not, will come upon them
with a silent foot, and though long after, will catch the wretched man. Thus
says the Poet; As if he had learned from Deuteronomy. 25. That he is an abomination
to God whosoever does what God forbids and deals unjustly.

Now God punishes such falfe dealers severally.

1 With external punishments in this life. 2 Internal punishments in this
life. 3 With grievous punishments after this life.
Banckrupts perhaps promise to themselves much happiness by lurching others of
their goods; but behold how they (such namely as be wicked men among them)
beguile themselves, not minding how great damage so small gain brings unto
them.

Hear ye this, Amos 8 4.
ye that devour the poor, and thrust the needy out of the earth! Alas
deceived souls, of all miserable men the most miserable, I appeal to your
selves, you Banckrupts, who get into your hands great sums of money lent you,
and with set purpose and intent run your Countries, and feign false courses by
which you lost them, that having put your Creditors to troubles suits, and
expense, and thereby wearied them, you may force them having been thus vexed,
to compound with you upon unreasonable conditions. I pray you say what you
shall gain in the end, when for that fading pelf, which you have so greedily
and falsely hunted after, and got by hook and crook, you shall at last reap a
sad and fearful harvest. O sad and lamentable harvest, of external and
internal pains in this life, and of endless pains after this life: Of these
I will now speak in order.

First, God has appointed external divine punishment to be laid on Banckrupts.

1. External divine punishments on Banckrupts.
Certain it is that God the Lawgiver has assigned just punishment to them
that unjustly get other men's goods into their hands. Exodus 22.4. he makes this
law; that he which takes away another man's goods, shall make restitution five
fold, or double, according to the nature of the theft. And that if he have not
wherewith to give satisfaction, that he be sold, for making good the theft: Nor
does it much skill by what means he does get another man's goods, and takes
them as his own possession: Seeing God will not have this rule of Justice,
(that each man should enjoy his own estate and means) by any wicked course to
be violated, without due punishment; yea that Jod. Nahum Domin. 22. Trin.
by no means, equity may be left unvindicated, God has concluded that not the
debtors only, but their wives and children should be taken and become servants
to the Creditors.

This shall be made evident by reasons and examples: As it was lawful among
the Hebrews Ex. 21.7. Lev. 25.39. Deuteronomy. 15.12.
for a man to fell himself and his Children also, when he was impoverished:
So it is credible that there was some Magistrate, who at the suit of the
Creditors, when the debtors were insolvent, did require them to sell
themselves, and their children, that by this course the debt might be
discharged.

This may manifestly enough be collected from the parable, Matthew. 18. of the
King who had bid that his debtor and his sons might be sold, that payment
might be made.

With this agrees 2 Kings 4. Where a Widow complayneth to Elisha that her
Creditor did press her earnestly, that he would take her two Sons from her to
be his servants.

What condition is more grievous than servitude? If our dear children and
wives should be taken from us, and put to perpetual servitude, what
lamentation, what sighs would these put us unto? Now it is evident by these
places of Scripture, that debtors, who were not able to pay, were in those
times sold, that fidelity might be observed, and every man might have what in
truth was due unto him.

Internal divine punishment.
Secondly, God has appointed internal punishments to light upon Banckrupts;
even such pains as will not only outwardly afflict the body, but inwardly
also trouble the mind; such as are anguish, fear, sting of Conscience: for
Conscience Cic. or at. for Cluent.
is implanted in us by the immortal God, so that it cannot be extinguished.
And truly God has for our great good given it into us, that it might be Origin.
the Corrector of our affections, and the tutor of our reason, that it might be
a bridle to us before we sin, because Senec epist.
it has in it a detestation of that thing which nature condemns; and a
scourge after sin, because when sin is committed, it understands the
grievousnes of it.

This we see to be true by experience in unjust men, which though they be
environed and defended which the countenance and assistance of great men, yet
when their consciences are troubled, their minds are inwardly gnawed with
wondrous torments, which never give them a breathing space, never suffer the^
to rest. So that they are not unlike to Prometheus Horac.
who is said to be chained upon the hill Caucasus, and to have his liver torn
continually by a devouring Vulture. In this manner fares it with Banckrupts,
who rob others of their money. So that if not in the very act, yet soon after
it, they feel grievous stings and whips, which for their frauds and wicked
shifts like tormentors do gore and lash them.

For no Sen. epist.
man can long joy in the success of his fraudulent Courses: fall out it will
sooner or later that evil men shall find how they have purchased a prey little
worth, with great loss and heavy discommodity. But thou will say, thy laugh,
and rejoice. I confess it, but their joy at their bankets is not a true and
right joy: Surely it is no other than joy of such as lying in prison adjudged to
death, sometimes play at cards and dice, and think to beguile their grief, but
cannot; for the terror of the punishment shortly to be inflicted is so deep
imprinted in their minds, that it cannot be removed. The representation of
pale death, still attends in their sight; so the punishment due to the wicked
dealings of unjust Banck rupts and insolvent tradesmen, sticks fast in their
minds and suffers them not to rest. The conscience privy to their wicked
fraudulent and injurious dealing, does disquiet and terrify them with restless
and distracting thoughts.

These are the continual Cic.
and homebred furies, which day and night hale wicked men to punishment, which
trouble the fraudulent and impure heart, that it can be quieted neither
sleeping nor waking. O most wretched men, whose Juvenal.
minds a guilty conscience lasheth with stripes, which others hear not!

3. Divine punishments upon Banckrupts after this life.
3. There are grievous punishments after this life to be by Gods Justice laid
upon Banckrupts. Now go too, you Banckrupts, howl and lament for the
miseries, which shall come upon you; you have done Gualt. in Hab.
much evil unto other men, but yet ye have robbed them of naught but
transitory and momentary riches; whose loss may be repaired sundry ways; but
in this Circumvention of others, you have defrauded your selves of endless
happiness, and plunged your selves into hell: For, God Psa. 5.7.
abominateth the deceitful man, and will destroy all workers of iniquity: and
denounces that the wicked shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven. But what
is that I hear? you say, who Eccles. 23.24.
sees us? darkness encompasseth us, the walls hide us, and no man sees us,
what should we fear? God on high remembers not our sins. Be not deceived;
certain it is, that we must all appear before Act. 10. 2 Cor. 5.
the Judgment Seat of Christ: that every one may receive according to that
which he has done in his body, whether good or evil: your inward and your
outward actions, all your sins shall be balanced; behold Jud. 11 and 14
the Lord comes with thousands of Angels to bring all men to judgment, and to
judge all wicked men for all their impious works; your words, whether they be
idle or deceitful, must be accounted for, and your thoughts whatsoever must
come to Judgment, and then your conscience shall bear witness, and your
thoughts accuse or excuse one another in that day, in which God shall judge by
Jesus Christ all the secrets of men according to the Gospel. Then fourthly in
a word, account shall be taken of you for all the extent of your whole lives,
in what manner you have spent it. Woe to you poor souls. Whither will ye go?
if ye be found in your sins, where will be your refuge?

And fifthly, whereas in times past offenders fled to Temples and Altars, and
debtors might not be taken thence by their Creditors; and at this day there be
privileged places, which as Sanctuaries, keep Banckrupts and insolvent men
from molestation; in the last day the fraudulent cannot escape, there will be
no Sanctuary to protect them.

And sixthly, there will be no escape, no starting-hole, no shifting for
malefactors: there can be no color to cloak their lies and cheating, no
pretense sufficient to boulster out their frauds and guile. Such as had nothing
truly their own, but a tongue to lie and forsware, and fraudulent cunning
tricks and wicked devices to rend and tear in pieces other men's estates, and
leave them with bare and naked corpse, shall truly appear themselves and show
what they are.

Seventhly, let them consider that 1 Pet 4.5.
God the Judge of quick and dead, is most just; that he will put on
righteousness for a breast plate, and true judgment instead of an helmet, and
so adjudge all men; that Matthew. 5.
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be bewen down and cast
into the fire. And if Fulgent. in Matt.
barrenness and want of doing good be cast into hell fire, what will false
dealers and robbers of other estates deserve? If he be Aug. de verb. Dei.
cast into the fire, who has not been liberal in giving his own goods; into
what shall he be thrown, that has taken away other men's goods? if he burn
with the devil that clothed not the naked; where shall he burn, that took
away his clothing? They Hugo B. 2. of the Soul.
are justly punished who abuse their own lawful goods: So Satan lost Heaven
and Adam Paradise; but more justly shall they be plagued, who unjustly rob
others of their estates.

Thus have you heard, what will be the punishments of Backrupts. In due time
take heed, and avoid unjust dealing, and conceive that what is here spoken, is
as a bitter pill, not to please, but to profit you; distasteful to your ears,
but serving for the Cure of your hearts, that ye may be drawn to repentance
by the fear of danger and punishments hanging over your heads, and so to Luk
21.36.
be counted worthy to escape miseries to come, and to stand before the Son of
man.

THE PRACTICE OF THE BANCKRVPTS OF THESE TIMES.
The fourth Part, Concerning the remedy of their practices.
It Is now full time to come to the remedies of Banckrupts practices: For we have
laid open their wounds, not out of a desire to hurt them, or shame them: but to
better them, and cure their maladies. Now as Physicians having found the causes
of a disease, Tuscul. qu. 3.
think the cure also found: So we having found the causes of this mischief
and sickness, will atempt to discover the remedies: And because Senec. ep.
old diseases, and so ill manners of men inveterated and habituated, require
the more care in their cure: We also for the cure of the spreading disease of
Banckrupts, will with all care imitate the guise of the Egyptian Galen 5*
epidem*
and Grecian Priests; who set up notes for the cure of common diseases in
public places.

Let us then in like manner publish holy Antidotes and preservatives for the
cure of Banckrupts diseases, which we will borrow from the sacred Scriptures:
For Gods Prove. 6.23.
Commandment is a Lantern, and Instruction is a light, and reproofs duly
applied are the way of life. They therefore shall do amiss, who will be
offended with friendly advise propounded for to free them from a deadly and old
disease, and to give them Cure and remedy.

1. Banckrupts must confess their sin^.
Banckrupts must necessarily confess their sins and offenses: He that has
fallen off from God and languisheth under the burden of his sins, ought for a
perfect cure of his disease perfectly to turn again unto his God. Now the
first step or degree of a man's conversion is the confession of his offenses: He
Senec. epist.
that tells his dream, may justly be concluded to be awake, and he that
searches for his sins, and confesses them, may be rightly judged to be in the
ready way to recovery: But thou will say: Indeed I shamed not to commit sins,
but I am ashamed to confess them. O August.
incredible folly! art thou not ashamed of the wound, and art thou ashamed to
have it bound up? He that denies, Plutarch.
concealeth, and covers his vices, makes them to take deeper root in him;
and he stops up the way to his cure, that will not open the cause of his
disease to his Physician. Tell me how will God vouchsafe to pardon that sin,
which man will not vouchsafe and humble himself to confess? Wherefore Eccles.
4.21.
for thy Souls good be not ashamed to confess the truth: there is a shame
that brings sin, and there is a shame that brings grace and glory. In
regard of the concealing and not confessing sin: the Kingly Prophet said;
When I kept Psalm. 32.3.
silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long: and to
encourage us to confession St John says, If we 1 John 4.6.
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
purge us from iniquity. Thus is Confession Salvation to the Soul and the
queller of vices. Wherefore let not the Banckrupt conceal and hide, but
confess and acknowledge his offenses.

2. Banckrupts must repent of their sins and leave them.
Secondly, Banckrupts must repent of their sins: for it is not enough for an
offender to confess and lay open his sins; he ought also to repent and
forsake them; he that repents of his sins is in some sort innocent.
Repentance Lactant. instit.
has not the least place among the virtues: because it is a correcting of a
man's self; and if when we have sinned we grieve thereat and confess that we
have done amiss, and crave pardon of God, he (such is his mercy) will not
deny us pardon, unless we continue in our sins: Great is the help, great is
the comfort of repentance, it is the curing of our wounds and the hope and
haven of our safety. When David Psalm. 32.5.
betook himself to this harbor and confessed his sins, he found that God
forgave the iniquity thereof: for God is a most loving and kind Father, and
promises remission Ezekiel. 18.21.
of sins to them that repent, and will blot out all their offenses, who begin
anew to do justice.

Wherefore O sinner, put a period to thy naughtiness, take a breathing time,
consider well thy case, despair not, hope in him whom thou fear; fly to him
from whom thou runnest away, deplore and lament thy wicked life, so long as
thou live: Turn again Anselm.
and repent, lest thou having bin circumvented by the Devil to circumvent,
cheat and beguile others, be cheated and deprived of eternal life, and
be adjudged to eternal death.

3. Banckrupts must pray for pardon of their sins.
Thirdly, Banckrupts ought daily to pray for remission of their sins, for
seeing the cry of the Banckrupts evil courses has pierced the ears of God,
they ought also to cry aloud and often to God for pardon of their sins. Great
is the force of prayer: fire Chrysostom.
does not more take away rust from iron, than prayer purges the filth of our
sins; wherefore let the Banckrupt pray now as heartily and opportunely, as he
has has sinned highly and proudly. Let him prepare his heart constantly to
power out his supplications and prayers, and in the end he shall prevail for
pardon. With heart and tongue let him thus say. O Lord, though I have lost my
integrity by my sin, yet have I not bereaved thee of thy mercy; do not, O
Lord, so observe the evil of my sins, as to forget the goodness of thy
nature: Be not so mindful of thy just anger against my guilt, that thou mind
not thy loving pity to poor wretches. True it is, that my guilty conscience
has deserved damnation, and my repentance has not been sufficient to satisfy
thee. But sure it is, that thy mercy is beyond all my sin: Therefore O Jesus,
be to me Jesus and Savior, for thy names sake; let thy pity be extended to
me, while the time of mercy lasts, lest I be condemned in the time of
Judgment. If thou take me into thy bosom, there will not be less room for
others.

4. Banckrupts ought to repay every man his due.
Fourthly, Banckrupts ought faithfully to repay money borrowed; for to the end
that a debtor may lift up pure hands and mind to God, assuredly it is very
expedient that he pay the whole sum borrowed; for a Christian Romans 13.8.
should owe nothing to any man but love; wherefore Senec. B. 5. of benef.
he that is obliged in any kind to another, ought faithfully to discharge the
same. He is Senec epist. 81.
not well-minded that does more willingly borrow, than repay.

See how Zacheus not grudgingly entertained Christ at his house, yea how
willingly he gave satisfaction to them, whom he had defrauded, which appears
not by a bare, but by a fourefold restitution, when Christ told him of
Salvation come to his house: for thus he says, Behold Lord, if Luke 19.8.
I have wronged any man by forged cavillation, I restore it fourefold. So it is
said of Gabael debtor to Tobias Tob. 9.7.
Upon sight of the writing and seal he presently made payment. Plutarch.
Gelo the Tyrant paid the money borrowed of his subjects, as soon as the
occasions of his troubles were ended. And Alexander Diod. B. 17
the Great, when Asia was vanquished, out of his own treasure paid the debts
of his Army to their Creditors. Neither indeed ought the care of a private man
to be less for the performance of his promise and maintaining his Credit by an
exact payment of the money which he owes. Above all a Christian should
surpass all Pagans and Infidels in care to pay his debts, and maintain his
credit by performing his promises and Covenants.

5. Banckrupts must avoid lying.
Fifthly, a care must be used by Banckrupts in all things to avoid lying: for
seeing they who resolve to be rich, oftentimes in their courses baulk truth,
sure it is that in such straying paths a Banckrupt also walks: and therefore
he is to be admonished to avoid falsehood in his speech, and to think with
himself that to Cic. Offic. 3.
lie, to beguile, to supplant others, by cunning to deceive them for his own
profits sake, is in no wise incident to a good man, and that a fraudulent Mich.
6.
tongue has its residence only in the mouth of the wicked.

The Persians and Indians so detested lying that they put it in the rank of the
greatest Crimes: And enacted a law, that he Alex. of Alex. B. 6 c 10.
which deceived his Clyent and thrice abused him by lying, should be enjoined
silence for all his life time, and should be incapable of all magistracy and
honor.

Artaxerxes Ibidem.
so wonderfully hated lying, that he commanded a liars tongue to be fastened to
a post with three nails.

Apaminondas Ibidem.
was so serious a lover of truth that he never spoke a false word, no not in
jest.

The Erasm. in Adag.
Athenians forbad lying in markets or places of Commerce: because it is never
more frequent or impudent any where than there; and what does more become a
reasonable man, than Cic. Offic. B. 1.
to make use of true reason and speech, and in all things to have an eye and
due regard to truth? And on the contrary it is as unbeseeming a man to deceive
and beguile, as to dote, and not to be himself. Much more should a Christian
be of this mind.

Speech was Plat in Tim.
given us of God, that mutually we might unfold and declare our minds one to
another, and therefore a good man Nigid. in Agell. 11. B.
will avoid lying, and a prudent man ever tell the truth. Especially as says
Lactantius, He that Of true worship B. 6.
is a worshipper of the true God, should take heed, that he never be found to
lie with an intent to deceive or wrong others; for it is a foul fault, that he
who makes truth his study, in any thing should deal falsely, and depart from
that truth which he pretends to follow after. In this path of Justice and all
virtues there is no place left for lying. Therefore he, who is a true and just
traveller therein, will not only say with Lucilius, a man must not lie to his
friend and familiar, but further add and resolve, that no man ought to lie to
any other man, no not to one wholly unknown to him, no not to his enemy, or at
any time suffer his tongue, which should be the interpreter of his heart, to be
at variance from his meaning and thoughts. Every deceiver Prove. 11.
is an abomination to the Lord; wherefore let us follow the Apostles rules, And
lie Col. 3.9.
not one to another, but laying Ephesians. 4.25.
aside false speaking, utter the truth each man to his neighbor, for we are
members of one another.

6. Banckrupts ought to shun Covetousnes.
Sixthly, the Banckrupt ought to abandon all Covetousness, and to have a lowly
mind, and to be well content with his estate: for a Covetous purpose to be
rich is a great spur and provocation to much injustice; they that be sick of
this malady fall into tentation and snares and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts. 1 Timothy 6.9.
The wages of deceit, which caught Balaam, will chain up these men to their
confusion. Let a man be a slave to these covetous and furious desires, Jud. 11.
they will draw him into destruction and perdition: for the love 1 Timothy 6.10
of money is the root of all evil, after which while some coveted, they erred
from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many forrowes. Wherefore as
much detest them as thou would the Egyptian thieves, Senec. ep. 51.
who pretend love and embrace strangers with an intent to strangle them. Let
thy desires Idem. epist. 11.
be moderate, thence can thou not fall. We err Horat. carm. 3.
in calling him rich who possesses much; that name is better placed on him,
who wisely uses Gods gifts, and has skill patiently to bear poverty. A man
is so much the happier, by how much his fardell is shorter trussed up for his
journey.

Why then should any man covetously thirst after riches? A little Psalm. 37.16.
which the righteous has, is better than great plenty of the wicked: yea
better is a little with fear of the Lord, than great treasure where there is
vexation and iniquity: Wherefore Heb. 11.6.
let your Conversation be without Covetousnes: for by conquering a Covetous and
high spirit, you shall possess a larger Kingdom, than if you should reign
over Lybia and the furthest parts of the world Northward, Horat. 2. Carm.
and make both India's do you homage.

7. Banckrupts must shun perjury, and keep covenant.
Seventhly, Banckrupts ought to shun perjurie, and perform their Covenants.
For perjury is a sin abominated Erasm. de ling.
by the heathen, among whom this speech (I swore with my tongue, Euripid. in
Hippol.
my mind is unsworne) was held most wicked and unjust; much more should a
Christian take heed of all manner of perjurie: Hear how some Nations punished
it: Among the Indians Alex. of Alex. B. 6. c 10.
he who was convicted of perjury, was punished by having his fingers and toes
cut off. By the Egyptian laws perjured men Deod. B. 2. Alex. B. 10.
had their heads cut off: because they were guilty of a double crime, First,
for violating their duty and faith to God; Secondly, for not holding and
observing fidelity with men; which is the greatest bond of humane society. And
even Idem Alex.
at this day the humane punishment is disgrace and infamy, the divine
punishment of perjurie is destruction.

That men may seriously avoid both: Let every man esteem more his God than his
gold, and Godliness than gain, and ever observe faithful dealing in all his
actions.

The Romans were so careful of their fidelity that they founded a Temple of
Fides or True Dealing in their City, to teach all men to express faithfulness
in all their words and deeds. And that fidelity might be inviolably observed
by the Romans, Numa Plutarch.
their King consecrated the right hand to it. Let then Christians take heed of
a slippery and unconstant fidelity in their right hand, and to play fast and
loose at pleasure in their speeches. Let their breasts be purged of this filth,
that they may be Temples of God glittering and adorned with the resplendant
rays of faithfulness and truth.

8. Banckrupts must deal justly in all their courses.
Eighthly, the Banckrupts ought to observe just dealing in all their Courses.
It is a most undoubted truth, that it is impossible entirely Tacit. Ann.
to observe just dealing, where a man has an eye to the greatness of his
gains: Let each man Ambros. in his Offic.
therefore think with himself, that a man ought not to decline from true
dealing, nor wrong or beguile any man thereby to advance his own estate.
Heathen Tully therefore said well, that the markets and minds of men were both
to be purged from Orat. for Rabir.
all footsteps of wicked and unjust dealing. And God by Esaias Esaias 1.16.
bids, wash ye, purify ye, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do wrong, learn to do good. And Lanctantius B. Of true
worship. 6.13.
says rightly, It is the chief point of a wise, just and holy man to account
it his riches to deal justly. And if any man be otherwise minded, though he
pass Crassus or Craesus in wealth, yet he is to be reputed a poor man. And
therefore a wise man Sense. of an hap. life.
will let no penny come within his doors, that had not an honest and just
entrance. Stob. Sermon. 42.
If example will prevail with us, The Ethiopians, especially the Macrobians
were (and are so styled by Homer) most holy and most just. Among the Scythians
there are a people, Caelius antiq. lect. 23.9.
whom no man will wrong: because they be held to be sacred; and whosoever
sojournes among them, they keep him secure from all harms. The Thuriacks much
exercised in Merchandise, are free from all craft and deceit. If these things
were practiced by Heathens, they should not be neglected and grow into disuse
among Christians. Especially seeing God by his holy Prophet, when question is
made, Psalm 8.
Who shall dwell in in thy holy mountain and rest in thy holy hill? Answers:
Even he that walks uprightly and works righteousness.

A Banckrupt must ninthly avoid hypocrisy, and be truly virtuous. 9.
Banckrupts must be truly virtuous and avoid hypocrifie.
St Bernard complained Bern. on Cant. Sermon. 602.
that in his days the filthy contagion of hypocrisy spread it self into
many men's minds and became the more dangerous and desperate, by how much it was
more common; because connived at. The best Counsel and most compendious way to
root out this mischief, is to strive for a serious and true performance of
each man's duty; for as the light Cic. 2. de finibus.
of the Sun makes the light of the Candle seem nothing, and quite
extinguisheth the pleasure and benefit which we took in it: so the splendour
and nobleness of true virtue will Eclipse and darken the esteem of all
outward things and the covetous desire thereof. Virtue and true godliness
makes men truly noble, and entitles them good men. Therefore, whatsoever wild
Horac. Epod.
and fruitless boughs spring in thy heart, prune them off, and graft better
fruit thereon, even the fruit of true virtue, which is the peculiar good
belonging to mankind, expecially to a Christian man, who bears about in him
the Image of his God, and is never more mindful of the Name of God, than when
he is not only an hearer of Gods Word, but really and indeed a practiser of
the same. And a Christian man is a living Temple of God, and is not so much to
be adomed with gold and the corruptible splendour of pearls and precious
stones, Lanctant. Instit. 5.8.
as with everlasting and glorious ornaments of true virtue and an holy life.

10. Costly apparel must be avoided.
Tenthly, such as would not be Banckrupts, must abstain from superfuous
expenses, and namely from too costly apparel: for if needless and too
sumptuous outward omaments spend men's estates, Banckrupts must shun expense
herein. For as Seneca says, all goodness and virtue is extinguished by the
fickle unconstancy and too great nicety of adorning the body. Alexander
Atheneus B. 12.
having conquered the Persians, left the modest Grecian habit for the
effeminate Persick Garb, whence the more noble Macedonian spirits deemed not
the Persians so much conquered by the Grecians Arms, as the Grecians triumphed
over by the Persians delicacies. And in these times outlandish and strange
attire is so ambitiously hunted after, that other countries may seem to have
triumphed over us and put their fashions upon us. Yea, such is our folly
herein, that not that fashion is pleasing to our humors, which is most
convenient, expedient, and useful, but that which is last invented, though it
be most vain and fantastic: not that which best preserves from cold, and is
most for our health, but that most sets forth our riotous fancy. A glorious and
pompous ostentation is more regarded than a seemly and decent moderation. Let
men of this humor know, that these things cannot pass without Gods just
indignation. For God will visit Sophon.
all them that are clothed with strange apparel. Were not riotousnesse in
Apparel and Greg. homil. 6. on the Gospel.
gallantry a fault justly to be blamed: God would never have set forth and
commended John the Baptist in his rough garment: Nor would the Apostle have
taught women not to delight in precious and costly garments, but to cloth
themselves as became women professing religion, and expressing it by good
works. Nor would the Gospel have spoken of a rich man clothed in silk and
purple every day. Those things, Epictet.
which we use about our bodies, are for our souls sake, and for life's
preservation, as meat, drink, clothing, houses, attendants: whatsoever therein
serves for superfluous ostentation and delicacie is to be rejected. A
cleanlynesse, not womanish or odious, Tully Offic.
but such as may free us from Clownish and uncivil neglect of our selves, does
best become us. As in most things else, so in apparel, a mean is best.
Besides there is a clothing more precious and honorable than golden Tishew, and
all outward bravery: And that is the putting Ephesians. 4.24. Zanch. ep. to Q. Eliz.
on of Jesus Christ: Here is the true g and most comely garment of all; to
obtain which, each man should employ his best care, and strive to put off the
old man with his actions, and to put on the new, the Lord Jesus Christ: This
garment, he that is a professor of the true faith, will put on, that he may
appear beautiful and gracious in the cyes of the most High.

11. Stately building is to be avoided. Horat. Carm. 2.
Eleventhly, he that would avoid impoverishing of himself and being
Banckrupt, must not build for his private use stately houses and magnificent
palaces; such as his own ground will not sustain, without extending their
foundation into his neighbors and Clyents bounds, nor his estate maintain
without borrowing. Such builders commonly forget their Sepulchers, and set
their debts farthest off from their thoughts; yea they Salust.
make all things about the^ more worthy to be seen than themselves, and take
great care to have their buildings an honor to themselves and themselves a
disgrace to their buildings. I wish that such as these are, would consider
truly, what is to be thought of brave buildings: Are they not mere shows,
vanities, bubbles? Solomon Eccles. 1.
built him royal houses, prepared gardens and orchards: So that he was great
and increased in all things beyond all that were before him: But when he had
thus denied his eyes nothing which might content him, and had considered with
himself, and justly judged of the works of his hands, behold all were but
mere vanity and affliction of Spirit. B. 1. of true worship.
For (as says Lactantius) they are soon either ruinated by a sudden
earthquake, or consumed by fire, or taken away by enemies invasion, or moulder
away in time. For there is nothing erected by humane art and industry, which
time does not waste and consume. Why then e should man let his mind wander
after vain things? This made the Heathen Cic. Offic. 1.
Orator to dehort from sumptuous and magnificent buildings, and to require a
mean and measure as in the whole course of man's life, so especially in
building. And surely let a Epist. 7.
man weigh all things duly, and he will, as Seneca advises, think meanly of
all ornaments and glorious superfluities, which the needless labor of man
produces, and count nothing wounderfull, but the soul which being of greatest
worth of all things in this world, can here find nothing greater than it
self. Besides let a man Cicero.
look upwards and behold the everlasting palace and mansion above, then can he
not set his care, or fix his hope and trust on buildings, lands, or any humane
mane thing, which the common sort of men so much applaudeth. And therefore
sacred scripture tells us of an house 2 Cor. 5.1.
and building not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, where is all
perfection of bliss and happiness. So that it cannot otherwise be, but that
thou should disesteeme thy rooms set out with marble and precious stones,
Cyprian Epist. to Donat.
and the vaulted roof glittering with gold, when thou remembrest, that God
has prepared for thee an heavenly house, in which he himself abides as the
Temple.

12. Riotous and sumptuous banqueting is to be avoided.
In the twelfth place riotousnesse and sumptuous banqueting is to be avoided.
And why should a man lavish out his wealth in prodigious and prodigal
banquets? Why should he seek for delicates from all parts, and never think his
table sufficiently decked and a dorned? Tacit. hist. 4. Sense. col. 95.
In old time men contended to excel one another in virtue and moderation; and
now will they outvie each other in wanton and needleste riot, in curious
dainties, and night-revellings and banquets? Is all frugality so banished that
men Idem.
are not contented to glut their teeth, pallates, stomachs and bellies, but
have gluttonous eyes, not easily satisfied? did they but consider Cic. Offic. 1.
what is the excellency and dignity of man, they could not but conceive, how
base and beastly a thing it is to run out into a riotous delicious and wanton
course of life, and how commendable it is to live sparingly, continently,
gravely, soberly. Surely Senec. ep 65.
man is a more excellent creature and borne to higher matters, than that he
should become a drudge to his body. And shall he Cicer. parad.
, when God has given him a soul, than which nothing is more excellent and
divine, so abase and vilify himself, that he shall make no difference
between himself and a beast? Let him rather think, Alex of Alex, B. 3. c 11.
what becomes the indowments given him by God, and avoid rare, new invented
delicates, richprized and sumptuous dishes, exquisite sawces and provocatives
of gluttony. If any pretend that different times require different manners: I
wish that Plaut. in Trin.
old and frugall course of frugality and sobriety might rather do man honor,
and maintain his strength and hardness, and fit him for virtuous actions, than
new and worse course and manners make him contemptible, effeminate, and unfit
for any worthy employment. But some will say, custom has prevayled, and if
there be a fault of that kind among men, it is not at all discerned: because it
is grown common. St Gregory answers this, Greg. c. 10. in the decrees.
saying that custom is not to be of force to induce any man to sin; An evil
custom as an evil humor or disease in the body, is to be purged out and quite
extinguished: lest wicked men should draw it up by degrees into a privilege.
Let a pious Christian rather learn how little serves to maintain a sober and
religious life, and what moderation contenteth and best fitteth nature, and so
shall his mind be hardened against excess, and taken off from from all
allurements to pleasure and deliciousnes.

13. The Banckrupt must avoid pleasure.
The Banckrupt in the thirteenth place to shun all excess of pleasure and to
bridle all exorbit and desires, and free his mind from all pernicious and
voluptuous incitations to evil: Let him give care to the Apostle, who says,
Beloved 2 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from freshly lusts which
fight against the soul. It Is a high point Hieronym. Epist.
of virtue for men that carry flesh about them, not to live according to the
flesh, but to watch this enemy included and carried about in them, with Argus
hundred eyes; that the soul and better part become not slave to the body and
worse part of man. Man has a continual warfare to exercise himself in: he
is never at quiet; diversities of pleasures do still and ever invade him; what
a careful watch, what scouts and sentinels, what strong bands are to be
prepared for the opposing and overcoming so subtle, pernicious, Lactant.
and mortal a foe. Suppose we that these things be so, though the fight be
dangerous, yet is the victory glorious, which he shall obtain who subdueth
and quelleth his unruly affections, banisheth poisonous pleasures, warreth
against all beastly lusts, and endeavors to compose his life after the rule
prescribed by the divine and sacred laws. And this shall any man more easily
do, if he consider with what endless pain and intolerable torment a short
and small pleasure is bought. If any say, I find corruption so strong in me
that I cannot abandon and cast off pleasures which insinuate themselves into my
heart most powerfully. To him I answer: Horat. B. 1. ep.
This softness and easiness of mind is to be rejected, and manly courage put
on; the affections are to be tamed and chained up: for unless they be mastered
and made to obey, they will domineere and overrule. Romans 6.2.
A care therefore must be had that sin reign not in our mortal bodies to
make us obey it in the lusts thereof: So shall the swelling, proud and unruly
motions of men's minds (though become unbridled and wild by prosperity and
success, and lashing out beyond the bonds of reason and right understanding)
be crubbed and made obedient to reason and temperance: So that the Soul shall
more safely sit as Queen, and ruling more easily the quelled affections (which
otherwise would draw men from obedience to Gods Law and reasons direction) more
seriously and earnestly employ it self in the duties of piety and equity, and
for ever here reign over inordinate lusts and pleasures, till at length it
reign in heaven with Christ, and be freed from the least molestation and fear
thereof.

The Conclusion.
Thus far have I proceeded to open the remedies of Banckrupts courses, and in
breife have set down, what I judged most profitable, useful and effectual. My
wish and desire is; that my Counsel may prove as pleasing, as it is wholesome;
and may not only delight, but Cure: which it will do, if it pierce not the
ears of men only, but the hearts too; And be not sufferd there to lie
fruitless, as seed lying on the top of the ground, which dries, withers,
and comes to naught; but take deep root in the bottom of men's hearts, and by
the rays of Gods goodness shining thereon, prove most fruitful. They whose
bodies are wasted and weakened by a lingering disease long growing by degrees
upon them, must be cured by a continual course of Physic, and by daily
evacuations and cordials be brought to a due te^per again: So the sickness of
men's minds and harmfull maladies long rooted therein, cannot possibly be cured,
unless the Physic here prescribed be faithfully observed, and frequently and
daily used, and the due circumstances of the precepts and directions for the
planting of virtue and extirpating of evil, most conscionably put in practice:
which that it may truly and indeed be done and effected, I humbly and heartily
beseech God the sovereign ruler of all to grant.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Johannes Hansly.


