A FVLL AND SATISFACTORIE ANSWER TO THE LATE UNADVISED Bull, thundered by Pope
Paul the Fifth, against the renowned State of VENICE: Being modestly entitled by
the learned Author, CONSIDERATIONS UPON the Censure of Pope PAVL the Fifth,
against the Commonwealth of VENICE:

By Father PAVL of VENICE, a Friar of the Order of Serui.

Translated out of Italian. PSALM. 108.

printer's or publisher's device MALEDICENT ILLI, ET TV BENEDICES.



LONDON Printed for JOHN BILL. 1606.

CONSIDERATIONS upon the censure of Pope Paul the Fifth, against the
Commonwealth of Venice.
THe Commonwealth of Venice has ever constantly held, that the principal
foundation of all dominion and empire was laid in true Religion and piety;
and hereof (by the special grace of God) it has had experience, by having
been begun, instituted, and augmented in true divine worship: the which with
great care she has always sought to increase, especially by building many
religious houses, and magnificently adorning of the same, furnishing them with
decent Ministers, and enterteining of those religious Orders which age after
age the Catholic Church has brought forth. A manifest testimony whereof
appears in the great number of Churches richly endowed, and the largeness
of Monasteries, not only in the city of Venice, but also in others subject to
the same; and that always with a convenient and necessary respect to cut off
all those accidents which might be hurtful to her cities and dominions,
through such innouations as usually creep in under the pretext of Colleges,
Frieries, Societies, or Conuents, and to the danger and damage which great
buildings, erected and situated in unfit places, bring unto a public
security: for she had always a special consideration what sorts of persons
made entrance into her city, and in what places Monasteries and Churches had
their foundations, the better to nourish and enterteine them: and when they but
perceived that common and ordinary diligence was not enough, from the year
1337 a Law was enacted, That in Venice there should be no Churches,
Monasteries, Hospitals, nor other such like places built without license. The
which law was afterward renewed and confirmed in 1515 and in 1561: but then
perceiving, that such a like care was also necessary to be had over other land
and maritime towns, in the year 1603 commandment was given to all Rectors
and Governors, that from that time forwards they should not permit any
Religious or Lay person whatsoever to build Monasteries, Churches, Hospitals,
or other Conuents of Religious or Secular, without license from the Senate,
under penalties of banishment to their persons, and of confiscation of the
building and ground.

The Commonwealth also was ever of this opinion, that as for the time past she
had been exemplarly preserved, so in like manner, that it ought to be cared for
hereafter, with the administration of sincere and incorrupted justice, executed
over her subjects, knowing what the holy Scripture says: Regnum de gente in
gentem transfertur, Eccl. 10.
propter iniustitias, iniurias, contumelias, and diuersos dolos. And so on the
contrary: Rex qui iudicat in veritate pauperes, Pro. 29.
thronus eius in aeternum firmabitur. Wherefore she mainteining every one in
the possession of his goods, together with the special protection and defense
of every ones honor, she has maintained and happily perpetuated public
tranquillity and peace; the which, that it might not be disturbed by unjust
usurpations and injuries toward others, diverse Ecclesiastical persons having
many times been convicted of enormous and heinous offenses, who rather, by the
goodness of their life and manners (as their duty is) should exempt
themselves from criminal justice; the Commonwealth did not forbear to
execute it upon them, so far as was necessary for public safety, granting
them notwithstanding an immunitie from the Magistrates, in common
transgressions, for a favor to that Order, after the example of other
neighbour-princes; she ever by this means keeping the wicked in fear, and
satisfying those that were in any wise offended: so that she using thus the
power granted unto her by God, she has from her first beginning unto these
present times accustomed to sentence and punish, in case of grievous offense,
any person Ecclesiastical, of what degree or Order soever: and by this means
she has gone forward in enjoying and practicing, with public tranquillity
and peace, the ancient and independent liberty of her true dominion.

In like manner, the Commonwealth has labored at all times to keep her
subjects abundant in possessions and stable substance, she knowing how
principally it did import for public security, if the private were well
accommodated: whereupon, about some three hundred years since, she began to
observe, that the Clergy contended daily to augment in possessions and
revenues; a matter notwithstanding (though peradventure they had no such
intention) which fell not out only to the loss and prejudice of secular
families, which of necessity must needs decay upon the diminution of their
goods; but further, to the detriment of the public revenues and incomes, and
also of public force: for when the number of Citizens which were liable, and
served in civil governments, impaired, and the quantity of their goods
diminished; upon which the public reuenew was raised; and so, on the contrary,
the number of Ecclesiastical persons augmenting, which pretended exemption
from all the necessary offices and functions of the Commonwealth, and their
goods increasing; of necessity it must needs come to pass, that all public
interests would be wonderfully impaired.

Unto this may be added another matter, which is, That the Clergy never
alienating of any thing, but with their great advantage and benefit, and the
Churches, being perpetual; if they always purchased, and the Seculars
impouerished; it must necessarily in the end come to pass, that all the wealth
would rest in the Clergies hands, and all Nobility and Civility would have
been utterly extinguished, the world being reduced to these two ranks of men,
Ecclesiastical and Peasants.

To prevent therefore so grievous and notable an inconvenience, the
Commonwealth ordained, the year 1333, that there should not be given or
bequeathed to the Churches, the perpetuity of any thing stable within the
City and Dukedom of Venice; and yet if that any such bequeathment were made,
after a certain time, it should be sold, and the price thereof to remain to
the Church. The which law was observed diversely, til the year 1536, when it was
established after this manner: That none might leave any thing stable to the
Church for above the term of two years; during which time it was to be sold;
and this not being performed by Ecclesiastics themselves, a Magistrate should
be appointed to execute the same. And from the foresaid laws, at diverse times,
so great both public and private good has ensued, that some other subject
Cities, even out of their municipall constitutions, decreed the same, partly of
old, and partly in these our days. Which things, when the Senate had well
pondered, to reduce their whole State to an uniformity, and to prevent the
diminution of secular substance, in the year 1605 they promulged a Law which
was ordained for the City of Venice, and together extended it self to the
whole State; adding furthermore, That no man in the City of Venice, or through
the whole State, might under any color whatsoever, sell, give, or by any other
means alienate to an Ecclesiastical person, any thing stable, without license
of the Senate, to be granted them after the same manner and form as was usually
granted in the alienations of goods public, and that every alienation
otherwise performed, should be frustrate, and the stable confiscated, with a
penalty set upon the Notaries.

For which considerations, three years before, 1602, to moderate the
superabundant purchase of the Clergy, who under pretext of their direct title
in some things of theirs possessed by the Laity, went about every day to
appropriate the same to themselves, suing sometimes one, and then another of
the possessors, Enfiteusi newly planted or engrafted.
and imposing the term of Enfiteusi upon all their Leases and Perpetuities;
and by this means pretending daily a right in all sales, that either the
possessors were decayed, When direct heir failed, to one but collaterally
allied.
or that the goods could not descend to every kind of heir; to the great
prejudice of the subjects, who were entangled and molested in continual
brabbles and suits: upon occasion of a certain controversy moved by the
Monks of Pragia, the Senate decreed, that Churches might not appropriate to
themselves goods possessed by the Laity, per praelationem lineae, cum
solidatione vtilis, their direct right and freehold still reserved. The which
was enacted, considering the use of this custom, for more than two hundred
years, and innumerable judgments conformable thereto denounced, to take away
all occasion of controversy and strife, and to set down a written form for
the Judges upon all occurrents to prosecute.

These Laws, ordinances, and administrations of justice had been very well
discerned, known, and observed by the former Popes, as well by the continual
informations they have from the Clergy of this State, as further; by those
particularities which they daily received from their Noncioes resident in this
City; whereas also, many Popes have had full notice and knowledge thereof by
themselves; some because they were borne and brought up in this State, others
by having lived a private life in the same, discharging there the office of
Confessors for many years; some the office of Inquisitors, and others having
been Bishops of some cities. So that every Pope has by some means had
knowledge of the equity and justice of the Venecian laws, and of the arrests
of their Magistrates; whereby we may suppose, that they never having reclaimed
any of them, they have secretly in a manner approved of the same. Judgments and
arrests have ever been executed upon Ecclesiastical persons, and in times
past more often than of late days; and the ordinances or laws above written,
omitting more ancient Records, have been administered above this three hundred
years, although now of very late time some of them have been newly confirmed;
others more largely extended; and others of unwritten (which notwithstanding
were observed) made written laws; and finally, are so expressed and diuulged.
Of which, one of the year 1602, and another of 1603, were perused by Pope
Clement the Eighth, a most zealous and vigilant Pastor, and yet they could not
give satisfaction to this Paul the Fifth, who thought good, in the beginning of
his Papacy, to examine the Laws and Statutes of the Commonwealth.

But in the end of October last past, in an ordinary audience, he complained
to the Ambassador of this Commonwealth, because in sede vacant they had made
a law, which prohibiteth the Clergy to purchase any thing stable; he further
urging, that though it were instituted in the virtue and force of another
former, yet that the Canon laws, both the old and new, were inualidious; for
which cause it was his absolute pleasure it should be disanulled, enioyning the
Ambassador to certify the Commonwealth of this his will and pleasure.

Who performing as much, and having received order from the Senate, that he
should lay open to the Pope the equity, justice and reasons of that law, and
of the prerogative which the Commonwealth had for the making of such
ordinances; the Pope ^^auing still to his former deliberation, said openly, he
was content to hear them for their own satisfaction only, and not to
consider any further of those their allegations; and so concluded, that upon
this point an hortatorie Breue should be directed unto Venice, showing an
Excommunication, which he caused to be published against another City;
intimating, how that in such like causes he looked not for answers or
allegation of reasons, but for a speedy and ready obedience. And he moreover
moved another complaint for the retention (some few months before) of a Canon
of Vicenza, and of the Abbat of Neruesa, alleging how it was his pleasure, that
they should be put over to the Ecclesiastical Court, and that though the
Commonwealth were privileged to judge Clergy men, yet this did not extend to
such manner of persons, nor to such kind of offenses, for which the two above
named were imprisoned. And here I think it needful to digress a little, for
a declaration of the true cause why these delinquents were committed to prison.
Brandolino Valdemarino, Abbat of Neruesa, was accused and complained of for
using many tyrannical courses upon the goods and wives of certain men that
inhabited in the towns near about him; that he had killed diverse persons with
poison, and amongst these, one religious Priest, which was his Curate
domestical; that he had given poison to his father and a brother; that he had
caused diverse men to be slain; that he had continual and daily carnal
conversation with his natural sister; that he had used many magical and
wicked practices to compass his dishonest purposes, and for other ends, which
can not without horror be more particularly expressed; as appears in the
denunciations and complaints made by diverse persons against him. And Scipio
Saracino, a Canon of Vicenza, was accused for having contemptuously broken up
the public seals of the Rectors of Vicenza, set upon the Bishops Chancerie,
sede vacant, for the custody and security of the Evidences and Writings of
the Bishopric, at the instance and request of the Chancellor of the same;
and moreover, that he had insolently carried himself toward a gentlewoman, a
widow, of the principallest family in all Vincenza, his kinswoman, by defiling
her gate and house, after he had a long time, by indecent means, attempted her
chastity to the public scandal; for he forbear not to put in practice his
luxurious disleignes, even within the Churches.

But to return to the Pope, his H. in diverse meetings with the Ambassador,
persuaded the Commonwealth to lay aside all their reasons, and absolutely to
obey him; and after some days he renewed fresh complaints against the law
above written, which prohibited the building of Churches without license: and
at last, he resolutely came to this point, That he would have the foresaid two
Laws revoked, and the two prisoners delivered to his Nontio then resident in
Venice: wherefore on the tenth of December drawing two Breues, one upon the two
laws, and another upon sentence given on these two Ecclesiastics, he enjoined
his Nontio to present them. But the Nontio (moved thereunto peradventure)
because the Senate at that time had chosen an Ambassador extraordinary, to
assay all mild and possible means to remove his holiness from this
resolution, which he had undertaken, before well understanding of the cause;
and to induce him, first to be better informed, before he proceeded to any
other execution; but he deferred the presentation of the Breue, this being a
thing not well approved of by the Pope: so that with all expedition he sent him
commandment to present them immediately. Wherefore on the day of the Nativity
of our Lord, when Duke Grimanni was even yielding up his soul into Gods hands,
and that the Signorie with the Senators were assembled, of whom, some had
already received the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, others were to receive
it, he requested audience, and presented the two Breues sealed, which were not
then opened, by reason of the Dukes death, which happened the day following,
while after election made of a new. They being at last both opened, they both
appeared to be of the selfsame tenor, and implied thus much: How it was given
him to understand, that the Commonwealth in her decrees had constituted many
things against the liberty Ecclesiastical and the authority of the Sea
Apostolic; and that particularly she had extended thorowout her whole dominion
certain laws, which concerned only the City of Venice, which prohibited the
building of Churches, Monasteries, and Religious places; and another which
forbad the alienation of Lay men's goods to Ecclesiastical persons, without the
Senates license. All which things, as being contrary to the Ecclesiastical
liberty, he declared as inualidious, and he that instituted them had incurred
Ecclesiastical censure, commanding under pain, latae sententiae, that they
might be revoked and cancelled, threatening, if he were not herein obeyed, to
proceed further.

Whereunto the Senate, about the eight and twentieth of Ianurie, made answer,
That they had with grief and much wonder understood by his H. letters, that
those laws, which through so many ages had so happily been executed by the
Commonwealth, and which by no one of his predecessors were ever reprehended,
and which to repeal, would be a turning topsie-turuie of the foundation of
their government, were now found fault withal, as being contrary to the
authority of the Sea Apostolic; and so they which instituted them, being men
of singular piety, and that deserved well of the Sea Apostolic, which are in
heaven, come herein to be taxed for Violaters of the Ecclesiastical liberty;
that they had, according to his H. admonition, examined the laws, both old
and new, finding nothing in them which might not be decreed by the authority
of a supreme Prince: and touching some particulars of their allegations and
reasons, they concluded how in their opinion they had incurred no censures; and
that his H. replenished with religion and piety, would not without well
understanding of the cause, persevere in his comminations and threatenings.

And here it is first required, that we proceed a little further, and declare
what the objections are which he makes against the two laws aboue-written, how
easily and readily they may be answered; and together, what is the reason,
justice and equity of these laws, and how lawful the power of the
Commonwealth is to institute them.

The Pope obiecteth against both these laws together, That they are sedis
Apostolicae auctoritati, and ecclesiasticae libertati immunitatique contrariae,
tum generalibus Concilijs, and sacris Canonibus, necnon Romanorum Pontificum
constitutionibus repugnantes; wherefore, above all other things, it will be
very fit, that we understand what this Ecclesiastical liberty is, and from
whence it took the original; seeing it is most certain, that this name is
but new, and for twelve ages never so much as heard of in the Church. The holy
Apostle S. Paul makes mention of a Christian liberty, in his Epistles to the
Romans and Galathians, at full, showing therein, That by the sin of our first
father we were all made servants unto sin, from which servitude Christ our
Lord has freed us, we being redeemed by his blood; and therefore he says: Cum
serui essetis peccati liberi fuistis iustitiae, nunc vero liberati a peccato,
Romans 6.
serui autem facti Deo, habetis fructum quidem sanctificationem, finem vero
vitam aeternam. And to the Galathians he propounds another servitude to the
ceremonies of the Law of Moses, from which in like manner Christ has freed us,
when he says: Gal. 4.
Nunc fratres, non sumus ancillae filij, sed liberae, qua liberate Christus
nos liberauit. This so great grace of liberty was given to no others, but to
every one of Christ's faithful, and generally to the body of the Church.
Wherefore some of the ancient Saints, called it the liberty of the Church, and
none oppose themselves against this, except the minister of the devil, and the
partakers of hell; and there is no doubt, but whosoever in the least tittle,
went about to derogate from these laws, but that he should be an alien from
the holy Catholic Church. But of this liberty we speak not at this present,
seeing that the famous and authenticke name of Church, which anciently was
common unto all the faithful, as well Clergy as Laietie, seems now to be
restrained for the most part, to signify the Clergy only. Whereupon liberty
has been granted to it, separate from the former, of which, as it appears,
Honorius the Third was the first that made mention thereof, about the year 1220:
but what the same Honorius understood by Ecclesiastical liberty, and the
Emperor Frederick the Second, who in the same time, and at the instance of
the same Pope names it so, neither they themselves express, nor is it yet
well decided amongst the Canonists: for in all the Canon Law we find it not
determined, neither be these things expressed which are comprehended under the
same; as also there is no rule set down, how to judge of them: for the which
cause, when disputation grows upon any point, they do not agree upon it, what
is against Ecclesiastical liberty. Liberty is defined by the Ciuilians to be
a certain natural faculty, of performing what one will, as far as the
laws permit. Some think, that this faculty in the Clergy, to do what they
list conformable to the laws, should be the liberty of the Church; so that by
this means, and in that sense, the same which is absolute liberty in the
Laie-man, in him of the Clergy it is liberty Ecclesiastical, and it
consists in enioiing that faculty, which common laws afford every one. It
seems this is the meaning of that chap. Eos qui: De imm. Eccl. in 6.
where it is said; that if any man forbid the baking of bread, the grinding of
corn, or such like services to be done to the Clergy, this would be presumed
to be done in derogation to the Ecclesiastical liberty: Others are not of
this opinion, but under this title, they comprehend those things which only
concur with the Clergy, by reason of privileges granted unto them by God,
or by the Pope in things spiritual, and in those temporal by Princes; so as
by this means it signifies no other but a privilege of exemption granted to
the universal Church, as well in things temporal a, Spiritual.

An other opinion there is, which comprehends these two in one: Some call
Ecclesiastical liberty, whatsoever has been done in favor of the Clergy,
and they say those Statutes are made against it, which make the Clergy more
fearful, and the Laiety more insolent, the which is Bartoloes definition,
Authen. cassa, C. sac. sanct. Eccl.
and it appears to be most applied to the exaltation of Ecclesiastical order.

Now it is fit we declare, that in which soever of these senses you take these
words, Ecclesiastical liberty, the ordinances of the Venetians Commonwealth,
together with the condemnation, and imprisonment of Ecclesiastical persons,
infringe no liberty; and withal, we will resolve such objections as are
particularly made against any of those laws.

The Pope alleges no other special reason why the law of prohibition to
build Churches, is offensive, but only because it was instituted; for so be
the formal words of his Breue: Quasi Ecclesiae, and Eccl^siasticae personae
temporali vestrae iurisdictioni subiectae aliquo modo essent, vel qui ea
ratione in vestris ditionibus Ecclesias, and alia pia ac religiosa loca
extruerent, tanquam in aliquo scelere deprehensi mulctandi viderentur.

Neither in like manner, does he allege any other reason to prove his
intention, that the prohibiting of the Laietie not to bequeath or give in
perpetual, and not to alienate any thing stable to the Clergy, is against the
liberty Ecclesiastical, but that it seems it is grounded upon a certain
usurped jurisdiction, which the Secular power has over Ecclesiastical goods;
and these be his words: Perinde ac si temporalibus dominis liceret in
Ecclesiastica bona, quae Ecclesijs, Ecclesiasticisque personis, and alijs locis
pijs, a testatoribus, and caeteris Christi fidelibus, pro remedio peccatorum,
and exoneratione conscientiae plerunque relinquuntur, aut alio modo
conferuntur, ius aliquod exercere.

But first of all, any one that shall but diligently consider, will of himself
conceive, that to make a law which prohibiteth every body, as well
Ecclesiastical as Lay, to build no Churches without license, is not (as the
Pope obiecteth) to exercise a power over the Church; but rather over the
ground, floare, or superficial part, where one may build; which no man can
deny to be purely and merely secular. No private man that should forbid an
Ecclesiastical person to build a Church upon his ground, could be said to
ordain any thing against the Church, or any Ecclesiastical person; but that
he may dispose of his own ground at his pleasure, and forbid the use of a
thing, which he is not bound by the law to permit or grant. That which may be
built, is not called a Church; but that which is ready dedicated: every
private man has power over his own freehold, and the Prince has a greater
power over all the ground and free-holds of his dominion. Wherefore as it would
be injustice to build a Church upon any private man's ground without his
permission; no less an injustice it were to do as much in what place soever
belonging to a Prince, contrary to his prohibition: In neither of these
constructions is the liberty Ecclesiastical infringed: not in the former
case; because no man has liberty to use that of an other man's, against the
owners will: and in the second in like manner; because God the universal Lord
of all things, giving liberty to the Ministers of the Church to build Temples,
he does not in this take away private power and dominion, nor yet the Princes
empire and prerogative over the soil; neither did the Pope otherwise at any
time, nor he cannot dispose of the same, being a thing temporal; and no Prince
could ever with his privilege dispose of any thing in the State of this
Commonwealth, which was born free; and so in no respect there is no derogation
herein from Ecclesiastical liberty.

For if this reason were preualent, The Church is a spiritual thing; wherefore
he which disposes of the building of the same, goes about to dispose of a
thing spiritual: it would follow, Rouen, a kind of oaks.
that a Prince that should prohibit to put oaks or timbers into the building
of Churches, which likewise serve to build galleys, ships, bridges, and for
other uses; or that through scarcity should forbid to cover them with lead,
for which he had more necessary use in the wars, he might be said to make a
law against the Churches, and the covering of them, it being notwithstanding
true, that his ordinance is but upon timbers and lead, which are merely
temporal things. What is it I pray you which may not be dedicated unto divine
worship? Why surely nothing; for sin only being opposite and contrary unto
God, all other things may be consecrated unto him. He therefore that disposes
of a thing by forbidding it not to be dedicated; shall he in this offend God?
No questionless.

For the commandments of divine honor being affirmative, comprehends not all
matter, all places, all times, as they would have them to do that wring every
thing to Ecclesiastical behoof; but he permits, after nothing is wanting
to his service, that the rest be applied to humane uses, and that there may be
ascribed to himself, what is aptly decent and fit.

If it were lawful against a Princes will to build a Church in any place, it
would be in like manner lawful to use any matter, or what workman soever; the
which extending even to the furniture and ornaments of the Churches, and of the
sacred implements, it would follow that every cloth, all metal, wood, or any
other thing, should belong unto the State Ecclesiastical: the absurdity of
which consequences do evidently declare, that as the Church being once
dedicated, it pertains then to the Spiritualty; so no place can be dedicated,
without the permission of the Temporal Prince: and the equity of this law
has ever been apparently known unto the world. L. sacra. 1. ff. de re diuis.
L. si plures sint and l. 2 ff. de rel. q. and sum. fun. L. vlt. ff. un. in pos.
legael.
Cicero in his Oration pro domo sua, shows, that in those days no man could
consecrate an altar, iniussu populi. Under the heathen Emperors also, there
were four laws which forbad the consecration of any thing without the Princes
leave; which Justinian having placed amongst the Digesta, out of doubt he has
adapted them to our religion, and given them vigor also over the building of
our Churches: and whosoever shall read the Ecclesiastical Histories or Justinian
his Nouels, will find, that in the Emperors days, as well in the East as in
the West, it has in this point been referred to the Prince above all others;
so that their license and favor was ever requested to build new Churches; and
further, that not any did ever so much as think of the building of a
Metropolitan or Cathedral Church, without the express decree and permission
of the Prince. Upon this point we may peruse the 27 Novel of Justinian, and
that which Balsamo very copiously relates upon the 17 Canon in the Council of
Calcedon. And here it will not be much from the purpose, to add the custom of
France, where they can not build any Churches without express grant by the
Kings Letters Patent; and moreover, the arrest or Act of Parliament. And
further, to set down an example of some place in Italy, we have it here
recorded, that in the Commonwealth of Genoa, there is a particular
constitution, that without the license of both the Colleges, they can not build
any Monasteries, under penalty of confiscation of the place.

But the Commonwealth of Venice never cast her eye so much upon the material
Churches, as on the persons which were to govern them; for every Order of
religious men befit not any place. We have an excellent example of this in the
famous government of the Kings of Castilia, where, without the Kings license,
no new religious Orders can have any entrance into those Kingdoms; and
therefore even at this present the Cappuchine Friars could never be thither
admitted. And there are not many years past since the Fathers of S. Francis of
Paula began to build a Church in Madril, without the Kings permission; which
work King Philip the second made stay of, the Church it self yet remaining
for an example, it being begun, and not finished. And your holiness having
sometimes been Nontio extraordinary to that King, may peradventure have seen
the same.

The foundations of this decree are no less equal, reasonable and lawful,
than most necessary; for as it would not in any wise be permitted to a great
number of a strange State, contrary in their customs of life, and having
diverse ends from those of a Commonwealth, to enter into the State of such a
Commonwealth, to gather themselves together into one place, to make amongst
them an head, and in secret to practice with the Princes subjects; seeing this
would be presently interrupted as a suspicious and pernicious conuenticle: So
under pretext of some new Monastery, many of other nations sometimes may come
in together under an head, they being contrary in customs and affections, and
by the opportunity they have, through Confessions or other Spiritual
conferences, insinuating with the Princes subjects, they may by this means
corrupt them in their fidelity: this in like manner, for many excellent causes,
is diligently to be looked unto, for the public preservation and peace of the
State; and even for this very respect it greatly concerned the Commonwealth
to dismiss certain Fathers of a Monastery, all of them being of strange
nations, because diverse men of the Arsenall were seduced by them. And thus we
may see, that the Oratories and Monasteries in a City which consist all of one
Nation, especially when they are replenished with diverse sorts of men, can not
be enterteined without notable danger, if the Prince be not always made privy
with what passes amongst them in their assemblies. Unto this may further be
annexed, that buildings which are not situated in convenient places, they bring
great damage unto Cities, and especially to those which are strong and
fortified: and it is well known how many Cities have diverse times been lost,
by means of a Church built without the walls, not far from the Town ditch,
when it has come into the enemies hands there encamped: as also in like manner,
what hurt such a building nere unto the walls within has procured: and so
what a number of aedifices and erections, for important respects, have been
rased and plucked down for public security, to the no small wonder
(sometimes) of devout and ignorant persons.

It is not only profitable for public good, as has above been showed, that
Churches should not be built without license; but further, it is requisite for
the Churches themselves, to the end that any man, at his own will and
pleasure, may not erect them in indecent places, near to public Stews or
common Necessaries; nor of unseemly form, or without the convenient decorum
due unto the majesty of Religion; so as they might serve rather for derision,
than any thing else. And we see, that the great and superabundant number of
Churches is not profitable for devotion, but rather quite contrary; for when
they are too many, due services can not be discharged to all; and one Church
ill served, procures more indeuotion, than ten well employed can prevent: as
also, the alms suffices not for all the Churches, when the number of them
exceeds; so as neither the old nor the new have their requisite cures.

Through Gods grace and favor there want not Churches and other holy places in
the City of Venice, and in all others subject to that State; and these such
and so many, that some Cities replenished with the relics of innumerable
Martyrs, scarce decently preserved, may take an example from them: and yet for
all this, the Senate never forbear, when convenient opportunity was offered,
to give license for the building of new Churches and religious places,
whersoeuer it fell out fit; and in like manner, to admit ingresse to new
religious Orders, after the enacting of the said law.

But who will not marvel, when he shall hear the penalty of this Venetian
law, imposed upon him which builds Churches without license, reprehended; it
being objected by the Opposer, That to build them is in it self no wicked act?
As though a work of his own nature, and in it self good, if it be performed
without due circumstances, is not vicious and deserves chastisement. Not from
the matter or object only (says Aristotle, and after him, 2. Ethic. c. 6.
all the Divines) is an action construed, but from the integrity of all the
circumstances. It is good to build Churches in place, time, and manner
convenient: but without these conditions it is not good to build a Church on
another man's ground; neither is it just, without the owners consent. Besides
the dominion which every private man has, a Prince has a far greater power
over all places, to whom both the owner and the place it self is subject; so
as we may not do with them what the Prince prohibiteth and consents not to.

Out of question, I have spent many more words herein than was requisite, that
every one (if he have but common sense) may conceive the reasons and occasions
of this law: but I repent me not hereof, because they may also serve for a
defense of that law of 1605, which prohibiteth the Laity to alienate any thing
stable to Ecclesiastics. For this does less dispose of any thing of the
Church, neither imposes it any thing upon Ecclesiastical persons, but only
upon Seculars and Secular men's goods. What injury shall a Prince offer in
this, when he commands his subjects to have no commerce with some kind of
persons? The prohibiting of foreign transportations, or to bring in all kind of
merchandise, is an usual thing in all Kingdoms: is it therefore an injury to
strangers? I think no man will subscribe to this consequence; and so much the
rather, by how much private men make such a law upon their own goods, when in
contracts liuellarie they set down conditions, When one builds upon an other
man's floor.
that the liuellaries shall not sell or alienate his goods to the Church: and
yet every one does this. And others in their Testaments, to keep their goods
in their house, they devise covenants, that it may never pass over to the
Church. All laws de fide commissa would be against the liberty
Ecclesiastical, because they forbid the making over of any goods to the
Church, and those of Falcidia Trebellianica also, because they all detain that
portion from the Church, which being taken from the legaced, they would have
then remained unto the true heir.

I know that some one very desirous of the augmentation of Ecclesiastical
rights in the Temporaltie will affirm, that so it is; but I believe his
opinion will have but a few followers: and it is a great wilfulness, to
condemn actions and ordinances which all Christendom, from a thousand five
hundred and more years since, has not only (I will not say) admitted; but
further, praised, commended, and thought them serviceable unto God.

There are indeed some, who in favor of the Secular may say, That it had
been, and would yet be very lawful, to constitute a law, that none might sell
their stable possession without license: which general caveat would also
comprehend the Ecclesiastics: and the Prince, being sued unto for license,
might readily grant it, when the alienation were to pass over to a Lay man;
and so to deny it upon the demise to an Ecclesiasticke; and this would not be
against liberty Ecclesiastical.

To whom we must answer with some liberty, for if they would a little look
over their Logic, they should find that the whole genus being granted,
every species in private and particular is yielded unto: so that whosoever
grants, that a Prince may absolutely prohibit any alienation, he must needs
likewise confess, that he may prohibit it in Strangers, Noblemen,
Ecclesiastickes, or in whatsoever kind of other persons in particular. They
say he may do this absolutely to all; but so not to the Clergy alone: and the
Logician says; he may universally to all; and therefore also to the
Ecclesiastical in particular.

But yet we will speak unto them somewhat more seriously, and advise them to
study a little the holy Scriptures, where S. Paul will teach them: Nolite
errare, Gal. 6.
Deus non irridetur: A goodly matter certainly. If this be no sin to procure
that lay goods may not be passed over to ecclesiastical persons, why do they
condemn it? why reprehend they it? Has not the Prince done well enough, in no
ways offending of God; and if it be sin, when the same effect remaining, the
words are but only changed; what have they done else in this, but iested with
God, and thought to deceive him with Sophistications? It is not Gods pleasure
that such like thoughts should ever come into a Christian man's heart. If it
were Gods will, that the Clergy ordained by him to attend Spiritual things;
and allowing this institution, that they should be made owners, not only of a
part of Temporal things, but even of all; we ought not then to honor them
with words only, but even with deeds to procure also, that as soon as
possible, this his divine will might be effected.

But let us proceed to declare more perspicuously, that a Prince by such a law
ordains but truly of his own things, and not of those of the Church. This is
most manifest, that if any service lie upon a possession or tenure, the owner
of the same cannot pass it over so to the Church^, as that this service and
bond may be frustrate: but whatsoever possession stable there is in a State, it
owes subjection to the Prince, the which is greater and much more strict then
can any ways belong to a private man; for the power of a Prince over all
goods, is far greater then is the prerogative of a private man. A Prince by
his power for public good, may extenuate and utterly take away a private
right; but a private Lord can in no wise derogate or take away from the power
of a Prince: for even by his will and gift, or any other means he cannot
procure but that a Prince will have his interrest therein. Let every one but
weigh and consider how conformable to nature it would be, that any thing should
pass by the disposition of a private man unto the Church, and that for this
cause it should be free from subjection to the Prince. But they will answer:
they are content it should be conveyed over with bond and obligation, to pay
all such duties as it was charged withal in the Lay man. Very good; but why
at this present do they consent heereunto, and in times past they would be
exempted from all covenant and bond. And yet moreover we may affirm, that a
Prince has other right over all stable goods, besides ordinary tributes;
seeing he may challenge extraordinary duties also in the same, without the
which covenant, it is not reason it should be conveyed over, because as well as
the others, he may tax it with other impositions. And if this seem somewhat a
hard condition, yet is it but natural. But further yet; if the Prince
challenge some personal services from the possessors, as in the wars,
offices, Court attendance, or any other respect; why should he lose it? and
besides this, the Prince has ius, to confiscate that stable possession for the
Lords offense; but being passed over to the Church, it is not then confiscable;
and therefore why should the Prince lose his ius? and here occurreth a most
notable example to convince these opponents.

Ecclesiastical Benefices are void by the death of the Intendants, and
therefore the Court of Rome has the first fruits, and the price of the Bolle.
Many Benefices belonging to Monasteries, Chapters, and other Fraternities, the
Popes perceiving that by such a dependence they lost that benefit, which
otherwise by the Curats death came unto their hands, and they considered that
under every fifteen years, such a vacancie might have fallen out; and
therefore they ordained, that all Benefices thus depending, should pay every
fifteen years a fifteen. So in like manner may a Prince suppose, that under
every hundred of years, a possession may come to be confiscated, and so make
them pay every hundred years a valuable confiscation.

To prevent which, in some kingdoms there is a custom that when any thing
stable is conveyed over to the Church, the same is bound to give homine viuente
moriente, and confiscabile, till the stabilitie be by royal authority
extinct. Every fifteen a fifteenth, and once in an hundred confiscable value.


Stable possession also, is oftentimes sold, and paieth for the same some
duties to the Prince, or goes to strange heirs, for which likewise a certain
portion is paid: as in like manner, if after the term of many years, one of
these accidents should occur, would it be reason that the Prince without any
consent given thereunto, should be deprived of these his rights? And therefore
the Statute of 1605 is very just and iuridiall: and if together with license
for the reasons above alleged, there were a peculiar duty paid upon the
conueiance over of any thing stable to the Church, it would not be unjust; for
in France and many other kingdoms, when any thing is passed over with license
to the Church, they pay a third part, as they say, amortization, that is, for
the possession stable, which now lies dead as it were to the Prince, who has
no profit nor service from it as before. There is nothing therefore committed
against justice and equity, if the Prince seeing himself to lose so many
royalties, and perceiving the Clergy to enjoy twenty times so much as they may
well content themselves with, deliberate and resolve to stay their hands, and
to permit no further purchase without license: the which notwithstanding he may
grant them when it shall be convenient. These respects of confiscation, sale,
and legacy unto strangers, concurring also with the ground or superficies
where any determine to build Churches; no wonder though a Prince permit not,
that his royalty therein be amortizate without his license. But proceeding yet
somewhat further; they which deny a secular Prince this prerogative, to make
laws upon Ecclesiastical goods, or that Ecclesiastical persons should be
subject to secular laws, they nevertheless consent to this, that any kind of
laws may be instituted to comprehend within them also the Clergy. But public
good requires, that this most principal member of a Commonwealth should be
preserved, which is, the part Secular, in that it bears all burdens,
performs public actions, as well real, as personal, to the end, that fall
not out whereof Vlpiano speaks; ff. de mune and bon. l. 3.
Quod viribus destituta erit Respublica. This law therefore is just, and it is
but convenient, that this member should be protected by the Prince, so that his
own good and treasure being preserved in the same, it may retain necessary
force to serve the Commonwealth: and if it grow from this, that the
Ecclesiastics have less then they should have; this comes not directly from
the Prince, but acaccidentally occurreth; and the laws or justice has never
respect to that which insueth indirectly or by accident: neirhet is it
presumed, he does injury his neighbor that has only reference to his own
peculiar profit, although it may well grow thereupon, that his companion is
deprived of some gain, which otherwise he might have made to himself. l. si
quis ne causam ff. si ^ert. pet. c. quia diuersitatem de conces. praeb.
I confess, if this law were not, the Church indeed might be more enriched;
but iniunctiue charity and God commands us, that every one should first regard
those things most necessary for himself, and that is, to follow his vocation.
He that preserues his own, preserues it out of doubt from coming into another
man's hands; and one never grows rich, but another is the poorer for it: and
yet it is not against the rule of charity to prevent our own poverty,
because herein we hinder another man's enriching. A Prince must have a care,
that the peace and power of his Empire be maintained.

And if from hence it come, that the Clergies allowance shall not augment, the
Prince must not have an eye to that. Gaietan, who was followed by diverse
others, In Summa ner. excom. c. 31.
denies that Secular statute to be against Ecclesiastical liberty, which
restrains and moderates the expense of Funerals, Marriages and new Masses;
and yet it manifestly proceeds heerefrom, that the Clergy are by this means
deprived of those gains, which otherwise they should enjoy, if all excess
were lawful.

If the Clergy would buy or purchase, 12. q. 2.
with what money shall they buy or purchase? The granted Canon commands, that
the Ecclesiastical reuenew should be distributed into four parts; the first
for the Bishop, the second for the Clergies maintenance, the third for
building, and the fourth for alms to the poor: the which was also confirmed
by Charles the Great, in his Capitolar. l. 1. c. 87.
The Clergy certainly would not purchase with the first or second part; and it
is not convenient to take away necessary maintenance: to let old buildings go
to the ground to buy new, there is no reason, and it would be against public
good; and to employ therein the fourth part, which belongs to the poor,
piety will not suffer, nor the saying of our Lord, seeing S. Paul commands us
to have always in remembrance, Beatius est dare, quam accipere. Wherefore
returning to possessions left or bequeathed, we must observe, that by this law
the Church is not denied to hold all that which is given or bequeathed unto
it; the which, though they have not in proper kind, yet have they the price,
which is equal to the thing.

It would peradventure be from our purpose, to add hereunto, but very briefly,
that it would be as evil, as profitable, for the Clergy to possess
superfluously; for by this means they have forsaken Gods service, which they
have in charge to prosecute; and in the Ecclesiastical laws there is an whole
title to this effect: In decretal.
Ne Clerici, vel Monaci secularibus negotijs se immisceant: where it seems,
that the first chapter was particularly made to prohibit these present
disorders: 2. Tim. 2.
and S. Paul in a few words commands; Nemo militans Deo, implicat se negotijs
secularibus, vt ei placeat cui se probauit. In Matthew. hom. 26.
There is a long discourse of S. John Chrysostom, wherein he shows, That two
maine inconveniences proceed from the riches of the Church; one, That the
Laity by that means cease from giving of alms; and another, That Clergy
men, leaving their cures, which is the cure of souls, they become Proctors,
Economists, and Tole-gatherers, practicing things unbeseeming their Ministry.

The Clergy sometimes with grievous complaints do urge, That they are
forbidden that which is permitted to all other sorts of men, even unto the
vilest and most infamous; as if they were of worser quality than they. To
which we may answer: First, that every thing is not convenient for every body:
and it is no consequent, though one thing be granted unto others, that
therefore it should be permitted them also. Soldiers and Gentlemen are
suffered to go armed; should the same be likewise permitted unto them? And the
same not being granted, may they justly esteem themselves herein iniuried, and
that they are worse entreated than all others? when if any body in the
Commonwealth possess more than his part, it is convenient he should purchase
no more. Novel. extrau.
Constantinus, Porfirogenitus, Romanus and Basilius, Emperors of
Constantinople, made laws, that the Patritians and Senators, Bishops and
Monasteries, might purchase nothing of their inferiors by sale, donation, or
testament, to preserve that necessary member of the Common wealth: and so may
the Senate make another law upon the goods of the subject, convenient for their
good government, when need requires: and so they have done upon Ecclesiastical
persons at this present, because the body of the Common wealth must be kept in
such temper, to the end that any one member exceed not his due proportion, and
that the body by this means become monstrous; and taking to it self more
nourishment than is requisite, it may prejudice the other members, in abridging
them of their allowance; and so of it self not being able to digest this
superfluity, it comes to be possessed with evil humors, whereupon, first
infirmity grows to it self, and afterward corruption to the whole body.
But the Ecclesiastical State in this dominion, is a member which may be
thought to be an hundred part of the whole number of inhabitants, and yet has
drawn unto it self a portion of the goods, not proportionable to the same:
for in the territories of Padoa they have more than a third part; in the
precincts of Bergamo more than the half: and there is no place where they do
not enjoy at least a fourth of the goods and wealth; and if they were suffered
yet still to purchase, there is no doubt, but in time they would be Lords of
the whole country, leaving all others poor and naked, yea, even slaves, and
cutting off the Seculars from all sustentation and nourishment.

The time and place present require a law, which may prohibit such an excess.
In ancient times, when the State Ecclesiasticke was governed after the same
manner as the blessed Apostles instituted it, and the holy Fathers after their
examples prosecuted the same, it was then very profitable that it should
possess much; and in the body of the Commonwealth it was like the stomach,
which received indeed all the meat, but so it digested little for it self, and
much for others. And thus the Clergy possessing much, and participating but
sparingly of the profit of the incomes it self, but distributing all the
remainder in alms deeds, they were very emolumentall to the Commonwealth: for
the which reason also, every one labored to power upon them goods and
possessions, because the more they had, the more it redounded to public
utility and profit, in which the Ecclesiastics were Gardians, and Procurers
for the poor and needy; so that from this no monstruositie was derived, goods
Ecclesiastical being as common goods, which gave nourishment and increase to
all the whole body proportionablie, and not to one part alone. But this
laudable custom now being come to an end, the substance and goods conveyed
over to the Church, surmount in measure and equality; and this is too
disproportionable for the body of the Commonwealth, which would find a great
discommoditie, if it should further augment: neither could it be well governed,
but of necessity either it must be reduced to his true measure and proportion,
or else the ruin of the whole body must succeed. And though we have spoken of
Ecclesiastical goods, as common to them all, yet is not the possession thereof
equally divided amongst them; nay, and which is more, the fourths of the
Religious live not upon the Church revenues, but upon alms, and secular men's
devotions; the possessions and revenues lying in the hands of a few of the
Clergy, which scarsely amount to the fourth part of them. And that which more
imports, is, that the moitie of these inhabit out of the State, and yet these
hale unto themselves all the revenues, with most evident loss and prejudice
to public services and emploiments.

Ad fra. in er^m. ser. 52.
And if in better times, when men thought more on heaven than on the world, and
when the Augustines flourished, who refused such inheritance as was left unto
the Church, by depriving of their own children, there was such purchase made;
what would fall out in these our after days, there now living a number, who
with devices and deceits labor still; for out of doubt it is to be feared,
that in two or three hundred years, their purchase will grow to that height,
as they will become Lords over all. There are Monasteries which have been now
built this three hundred years, and yet have they not the fourth part of the
revenues which some have that were built within these forty years. Now there
are diverse Religious orders, which are prohibited to possess any thing stable;
the which if it were removed, which in probability might easily be done,
because we see as much done by four most numerous orders, besides some other
minors; let any man that has judgment but imagine, what purchase in a moment
would be made.

Many things in their beginnings have been good, which altering with time
become most pernicious. The purchase of the Clergy men, which was excellent in
the beginning, is fallen by four degrees, unto this present State: First,
Act....
the possessions were sold, and the Clergy and poor were maintained of the
price: Afterward they studied how to retain the freehold, and to maintain
the poor of the incomes: Thirdly, there was distribution made of it, into
four parts; one for the Bishop, the second for the Clergy, c. futurum
etc......
the third for the building, the fourth for the poor. Now there is a stay of
the profits, and an opinion start up, which by all the Divines and good
Canonists, was ever rejected: that, c. concesso.
Clerici sunt Domini fructuum: although the sacred Canons and holy Fathers have
ever constantly preached, that the Ecclesiastical goods belonged to the poor:
For which cause also the sacred Council of Trent: Omnino interdicit Episcopis,
ne ex reditibus Ecclesiae, consanguineos, familiare sue suos augere studeant,
cum and Apostolorum Canones prohibeant, ne res Ecclesiasticas, quae Dei sunt,
consanguineis donent. Sed si pauperes sint, ijs vt pauperibus distribuant. And
a little underneath; Quae vero de Episcopis dicta sunt, eadem non solum in
quibuscunque beneficia Ecclesiastica tam saecularia, quam regularia
obtinentibus pro gradus sui condition obseruari, sed ad S. R. E. Cardinales
pertinere decernit.

And Ecclesiastics should not so sinisterly interpret a law made for a public
necessity, it being so conformable to equity and justice, and say that it was
made to make them inferiors to base and illiberall men: they might rather have
said, it would be far better that they would live conformable to the
Apostles. But will they then peradventure allege, Act. 4.
that the Apostles themselves selling all their possessions and distributing
them to the poor, were of worser quality and condition then the most infamous
sort of men? Shall so many fraternities of Regulars, which possess nothing, be
reputed infamous or vile? And if they answer that they do thus voluntarily, it
may be replied, that voluntary or not voluntary, make some difference indeed,
about the being meritorious or virtuous, but not about the being honorable or
base: For this purpose there is a Canon worthy of consideration, De consec.
distin. 1. c. vasa.
wherein it is said: Bonifacius martyr and Episcopus interrogatus si liceret in
vasculis ligneis sacramenta conficere, respondit, quondam sacerdotes aurei
ligneis calicibus vtebantur, nunc e contrario lignei sacerdotes aureis vtuntur
calicibus.

But let them be contented willingly with that which they have, which is so far
above their share; and so we shall quickly be at a point. The example of Moses
is worthy of imitation in chap. 36 of Exodus, who having exhorted the people to
offer up gold, silver, and other precious things for the building of the
Temple, when there was more offered then was convenient, he appointed by a
public proclamation, that no body should offer any more. And we may add unto
all this, an other reason also; If by these laws the Ecclesiastical liberty
were infringed; then by the Laws Pontifical also, which prohibit the
Ecclesiastics to alienate any thing to Seculars, the Secular liberty should
be iniuried, and by this means they might make Laws, to take away other men's
liberty, and they might not do the like again unto them: and this reason is
so much the more preualent, in that Lay possessions though they might not be
passed over to the Clergy, yet the price thereof might be conveyed, and with
license the goods themselves by a just sale; but the Ecclesiastics can not
alienate upon any gratuite bargain whatsoever, nor sell, nor change, but with
good gain and advantage; and if the Seculars which have more reason, complain
not of this, why should they grievously complain for a matter of far less
consequence? I will finish this point with this saying; That before the year
400 of our saving health, Valentinian, Valent, and Gratian made a Law; C.
Theod. de ep. and cler. l. 20.
That the Clergy might not purchase any thing of women; the which law was also
put in ure by Saint Damase Bishop of Rome in those days when it was published,
it being openly proclaimed, and also for a long time after it was observed in
Rome; and S. Jerome who makes mention of it in his Epistle to Nepotianus,
says, he found no fault with the law, because the Clergy had worthily
deserved it; but only he grieved at their avarice, which had given Princes
just occasion to make such an one. There was such a like law also made in
Saxony by Charlemaine of famous memory, which was long observed and kept. In
the year 1300, Polyd. l. 13. Hist. Anglicae.
Edward the Third King of England, made a law precisely conformable to this,
and though the Clergy resisted, yet was it for all that put in execution. De
cont. t. d. 2. 140. l. 2. t. 8..
Lodouicke Molina testifies in the ordinances of Portugal, that there was a
law made; that Churches and Monasteries might not, either by sale, donation, or
succession, purchase any thing stable, to the end that Ecclesiastical revenues
and possessions might not immeasurablie increase, to the prejudice of the
Laietie; he further adding, that in other kingdoms of Spain also the same law
was in force. Certain it is, Petr. Bolug. in spe princ. R. 13. C.
that James king of Arragon constituted in the kingdoms subject to that
Crown, that Realenco goods (for so they term them which hold in capite, or
pay any thing to the King) might not be demized over to the Clergy without the
Kings license. In France the same law was enacted by S. Jews, which was a
strange matter, and afterward successively confirmed by Philip the Third;
Philip the Fair, Hen. 17. c.
by Charles the Fair, by Charles the Fifth, by Frances the First, by Henry the
Second, by Charles the Ninth, and by Henry the Third. And yet the Commonwealth
of Venice, now three hundred years since, having made the same law for her
City and Duchy, we can say no less, but that the extention of the same over
her whole State and Dominion, is an innovation, seeing Saluius Guilianus
answers; Omnes debere sequileges and consuetudines vrbis Romae, as the Emperor
Justinian reports; C. de vet. iur. enuel.. sed etsi.
And in Sicilia the year 1296 King Frederick (as it is written in the
Capitular of that kingdom) made a law of the self same form that the same of
Venice is, in the year 1536, but that it gives the respite but of a year
only.

Pius Quintus in like manner in the town of Bosco, where he was borne, having
built there a great Monastery, because the town might not come to decay, he
prohibited for ever the Clergy, to buie any thing of the Laietie: and Clement
the Eight perceiving how much the house of Loreto possessed, for preservation
to the Laietie, he forbad them to buie any more. And in Genoa also, there is a
general Constitution, that all goods should be tied to the Commonwealth, so
as they might not be alienated to the Clergy. Peradventure some will answer;
that Pope Clement made such a law, as a temporal Prince, having first asked
leave of himself, as he was Pope, to do so. A very profound consideration
indeed, but yet not conformable to the solid, moral, and divine doctrine,
which teaches that God having given the government of a State to him that is
Prince thereof, with independent power in things temporal, he has also given
him authority of himself, and without the license and permission of any body
else, to make all those laws which are necessary to maintain it.

We never find that God made any precept or commandment, which to perform we
must needs have leave of an other. In things indifferent, or good, so they be
liberal and free, it may so occur, that an error may be committed against
the superiors will; but for those which are expressly commanded by God, that
which S. Peter says, does touch them near: Obedire oportet Deo, magis quam
hominibus. Act. 5.
If God said to a Prince, Make those laws which are necessary for public
peace and tranquillity; and if thou failest herein, I will be offended with
thee; and yet we must needs have license to obey him, and license being
required, whereas without, non licet: shall not then that which God commands be
lawful? Nature in all her final drifts gives also such faculties and powers
as are necessary for the atteining to the same; and shall God set down an end
and commandment which can not be executed without the favor of men? This is
too great an inconvenience. But let us return to the matter of the same law,
the which as it is in it self no new invention, so the most famous Ciuilians
have discussed of the same, and defended it for just; and amongst others, there
is Baldus, the Archdeacon, the Abbat, Signarolus, Alexander, Bal. c. qua in
ecclesiarum, c. ecclesia S. Mariae de constit. Arch. c. R mana, de app. 16.
Abb. l. 1. cons. 63. Signorolus cons. 21. Alex. cons 93. Barbat. l. 2. cons.
14. Crotus l. 1. cons. 5. Tiraq de retract consang.. 1. gl. 13. Gail l. 2.
cons. 32. Capit. de fac. pol. l. 3. to. 1.
Barbaccius, Crotus, Tiraquellus, Gaelius, Renatus, and Copinus; by reading of
whom every one may plainly discover, whether this were any sufficient cause,
against which to proceed with censures, and the principallest points in such a
sentence not having been duly observed. Whereupon it will not be altogether
unprofitable to deliver some thing also about the order observed by the Pope
herein, to the end that we may plainly see how many nullities passed in the
management of such a business; of such a judgment or censure I will not say,
because wanting all substance thereof, it can not so justly be termed. The
Divines say, That an unjust sentence may well appear externally to be a
judgment, but in it self truly it is not so: as also, That every unjust
judgment is of it self nothing; and That an indirect judgment is no more a
judgment, than a dead man is a man. But what? we see in it a plain formal
defect, and this of that substance, as it makes it altogether immomentall.
First it was declared, without any citation preceding, That the old and new
laws, of not alienating of goods, and building of Churches without license,
are against the authority of the Apostolic See, and of Ecclesiastical
liberty, and that the Lawmakers themselves have herein incurred censure; and
yet it is an apparent point in all the Ciuilians, That citations are de iure
naturali, and also very requisite in all causes declaratory. The which may well
serve for a nullitie of the aboue-mentioned Breue, and of whatsoever has been
prosecuted in virtue of the same. But that so many godly men already dead in
Christ, and which have always communicated with the Popes of their times,
should be denounced excommunicate; what is it else, but to condemn so many of
the Popes predecessors, and to auerre, that they discharged not so well their
care of souls as they ought to have done? And I assure you, amongst them there
were diverse Popes of singular virtue and piety.

The Pope yields a reason, why he determined to proceed against the
Commonwealth, saying: Cum praetermissi officij nostri, and causae Ecclesiae
desertae a nobis rationem extremo Iudicij die exigi a Deo nullo modo velimus;
neque enim existimetis nos qui alioquin pacis and quietis publicae cupidissimi
sumus, omnesque nostros cogitatus eo intendimus, vt soli Deo interuenientes rem
Christianam, quantum possumus, pacate gubernemus, quique omnium animos,
praesertim maximorum Principum, nobiscum ea in re consentientes esse optamus,
si aliquando Sedis Apostolicae authoritas laedatur, si Ecclesiastca libertas,
and immunitas impetatur, si Canonum decreta negligantur, Ecclesiarum iura, and
Ecclesiasticarum personarum priuilegia violentur, quae muneris nostri summa
est, id aliquo modo dissimulaturos, aut officio nostro defuturos; hac vero in
re id vobis persuasum esse volumus, nos nullis humanis rationibus moueri, aut
quiddam praeter Dei gloriam quaerere, aliudque habere propositum, nisi
perfectam, quoad eius fieri possit, Apostolici regiminis functionem. And surely
his H. not without just cause, may well fear a judgment divine, having
offended in his Pastoral office, because God threatens by Ieremias: Veh
Pastoribus qui dispergunt, and dilacerant gregem pascuae meae, dicit Dominus.
Ideo haec dicit Dominus Deus Israel ad pastores qui pascunt populum meum,
dispersistis gregem meum, and eiecistis eos, and non visitastis eos: Ecce ego
visitabo super vos malitiam studiorum vestrorum, ait Dominus. And to the people
he promises: Dabo vobis Pastores iuxta cor meum, and pascent vos scientia and
doctrina. For this is most certain, that the very sum of all Pastoral charge
consists in the preaching of the Gospel, in holy admonitions and instruction
to Christian conversation, in the administration of the Sacraments, a care over
the poor, and in the punishment of such offenses as absolutely exclude us out
of the Kingdom of God: these being things which our Savior Christ recommended
over unto S. Peter, committing them to his charge; the which things only were
practiced by him, as also by the holy Martyrs his successots, and the holy
Confessors also, which succeeded them from time to time; but not in such a
manner, as the darkness succeeds the light.

In the sacred Scriptures we learn, that the glory of God consists in the
propagation of the Gospel, and in good Christian life; 2. Cor. 4.
and in brief (as S. Paul speaks) in the mortification of the external man,
in the life of the internal, and in the exercise of charitable deeds. For if
the glory of God should lie in the abundance of Temporal goods, we might have
just cause to be afraid of our selves, seeing Christ has promised to his
nothing but poverty, John 15.
persecutions, discommodities, and to conclude (as the same vulgar know very
well) troubles and want are the true trials of the ftiends of God; Math. 8.
and no man (says the Gospel) follows Christ, but after he has taken upon
his shoulders his own cross.

That which by some one has been dispersed in diverse places, and to many
persons, is very different from the doctrine of S. Paul; which is, 1. Cor. 15.
That it can not be seen wherein this city can be so truly commended for
religion; for though alms and charitable deeds toward the poor abound in the
same, as also ornaments of the Church, and worship divine; yet for all this,
the very substance of a Christian consists in favoring the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction: and in Venice we see the contrary to this. 1. Cor. 15.
The saying of S. Paul is: Si tradidero corpus meum, ita vt ardeam, charitatem
autem non habuero nihil sum. We read in the holy Evangelists, that our Savior
in the day of judgment will demand an account of the wicked for not having used
the works of mercy and pity: Esuriui enim, and non dedistis mihi manducare:
Math. 25.
Sitiui, and non dedistis mihi potum: Hospes eram, and non collegistis me:
Nudus, and non operuistis me: Infirmus, and in carcere, and non visitastis me.

But so we need not to fear, that God will call us to an account for cutting
off all liberty from the wicked to offend their neighbor; or that a part or
portion of goods belonging to them, should be allotted to the Seculars: nay
more than that, we may boldly give all the goods of the Church to the poor,
without any ways offending of God therein.

Neither may we here also omit to ponder a little the last words of that
Breue, where it thus runs: Quinimo, nulla alia ratione melius publica illa
Christianae religionis incommoda, in quibus euitandis tantopere insistitis,
long a vobis propulsabitis, quam si Ecclesiarum, and Ecclesiasticorum, qui pro
vobis dies ac noctes excubant, and assiduas ad Deum preces effundunt,
immunitates and iura (prout religiosos and pios viros decet) conseruaueritis.

The Commonwealth questionless has need to be assisted with the Clergies
prayers, for which cause she daily recommendeth herself unto them, as
understanding well what the Wise man says: Eccle. 21.
Deprecatio pauperis ex ore vsque ad aures perueniet. And they grieve, when as
but few intending these holy actions, by their evil example, they are an
occasion of great transgression in the Laity: whereupon in stead of pacifying
divine Justice, and moving him to mercy toward us, they rather stir up the
more Gods wrath to punish us, by the means of Infidels and miscreants. And we
must not believe that the prayers of the fortunate and rich are aptest to
appease his Majesty divine, of whom it is written: Psalm. 21.
Non despexit deprecationem pauperis: considering that then a number of Monks
and Hermits, which did and do live in great poverty and humility, had done
and do very evil therein, they being otherwise of a firm belief, that in
such a State their prayers will more easily ascend before the presence of God.

But now it is high time to pass over unto the third point in controversy;
the which consists in the matter of sentencing Ecclesiastics, the which
subject must distinctly be entreated of, seeing the Breue upon this argument
was also presented at an other time. Peradventure divine Providence herein had
a hand, that an error should be committed by one of the Popes ministers,
whosoever it were, in presenting of the Breues, to the end his holiness might
have some time better to weigh of what moment the affair was, which he then
took in hand; but notwithstanding this, his Ho. forbear not expressly to
command, that the other Breue upon the two prisoners should be presented, as it
was on the 25 of February, with this superscription; Marino Grimano Duci, and
Reipublicae Venetoru^: although his Ho. was privy to the death of that Prince,
which had fallen out two months before, and he had procured congratulatorie
offices to pass betwixt him and this renowned present Prince his successor.
Some Canonist peradventure may defend this action with their doctrine; Papa est
iudex viuorum, and mortuorum; but rather we may suppose he imagined thus, that
the self same dignity remaining, the change of persons was of no great
importance; in which point notwithstanding, the Canonists are quite opposite
against him, who are of opinion, that in treating of censures, it being termed
an odious subject, the words ought most strictly to be construed: so that if he
pretend this present renowned to be sufficiently admonished thereby, they will
no ways grant it him; for even in this respect he has proceeded against him,
without observing a circumstance very material in judgments, which is, a
citation for the declaration, and an admonition for the censure. We must hold
this for infallible, that if the Pope had but duly regarded the reasons
whereupon the Commonwealth of Venice groundeth her authority for judging
persons Ecclesiastical, he would never have moved one word about the same;
but seeing he would not discuss nor hear the reasons of the same
Commonwealth, with that patience, maturitie, and charity, as was expected
from his Ho. as being the general Father of all Christendom: no marvel
though he blame the judgments of the Commonwealth, affirming them to be
grounded upon use and naked custom, and upon some Pontifical Breue. The
Senate made answer to the Popes Breues in few words, and that they wondered how
new cause of controversy daily grew, and he attempted to shake those
foundations upon which their liberty had been grounded, for the space of a
thousand two hundred years. For even from the cradle and swathing clouts of
the Commonwealth, their predecessors received authority from God, to punish
any kind of delinquents, the which they have continually put in practice to the
honor of his divine Majesty, with public peace, the approbation of his H.
precedents, and universal commendation and praise. Of custom there was no
mention made, considering that their power was much more firmly and deeply
rooted, then upon an use, though never so immemorable, because they held this
doctrine of the best Divines and Canonists for undoubted, that the exemption of
persons Ecclesiastical from the Secular Courts, upon offenses not
Ecclesiastical but Temporal, or as Justinian says, civil, comes not De iure
diuino, but through the privileges of Princes; except one should be so mad
as to take the signification of these words, ius diuinum so largely, or
abusiuely, as to extend them to ius humanum too.

This doctrine, that if the Clergy were not by some favor or privilege
exempted, they were to be subject to the Secular Magistrate, it is declared and
confirmed by examples in the old Testament, where we may see, that all Kings
have commanded, judged, and punished Priests; and that this was not performed
by wicked and reasonable good Kings only, but by those also most holy and
godly, David, Solomon, Ioas, Ezechia, and Iosia; and in the Gospel we find it
precisely in the words which our Savior Christ delivered unto Pilate, Non
haberes potestatem aduersus me vllam, Ioh. 19.
nisi tibi datum esset de super; unto which we may add that (if one would but
make an extrauagant construction thereof) the exposition of S. Augustine, S
Bernard, and Gaietano is, Super Ioh. tract. 116. Epist. 42. in 2. q. 62. a. 1.
Act. 25.
that Pilats judgment was indeed very wicked, but not usurped; and besides
this, we have a confirmation also thereof in the example of S. Paul; who
doubting lest that Festus under pretext of judging him at Jerusalem, would have
delivered him into the Jews hands, he appealed to Caesar; which he would never
have done, if he had not been his lawful Judge, it being a mortal sin to
appeal to him, that has no lawful power nor authority to be so appealed
unto. A modern writer makes a profound consideration hereof; which is, that
S. Paul would have appealed to Peter, but he did not, because it would have
been reputed in him a great folly; a consideration surely worthy of a
perspicuous and deep understanding, but yet not beseeming the resolute
constancy of S. Paul, that he did forbear to speak a truth for fear of
being thought a fool: He had not this respect before Festus, and he ceased not
to utter those words upon which the Prefect answered him; Insanis Paul: and S.
Paul himself then said; Act. 26. 1. Cor. 1.
Nos praedicamus Iesum Christu^ Crucifixum, Hebrais quidem scandalu^, gentibus
autem stultitiam; and yet for all this, he desisted not to speak and preach
that which he knew to be reputed folly: let not this therefore in any wise be
injurious to S. Paul, seeing doubtless that most holy and exemplar Apostle
never deserved it. And what can we say to the precepts of S. Peter, and the
same S. Paul, 1. Pet. 2.
which are Subiecti igitur estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deu^, sieve
Regi quasi praecellenti, sieve Ducibus tamquam ab eo missis ad vindictam
malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum, quia sic est voluntas Dei? and of this,
admonet illos Principibus, ad Tit. 3.
and Potestatibus subditos esse dicto obedire? as also that which we find
written in the 13. chap. to the Romans, which may serve even for a Sun, to
dissipate the clouds, of whatsoever error or doubt: Omnis anima potestatibus
sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisi a Deo quae autem sunt, a
Deo ordinatae sunt: itaque qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit;
qui autem resistunt, ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt: nam principes non sunt
timori boni operis, sed mali. Vis autem non timere potestatem, bonum fac, and
habebis laudem ex illa, Dein. Minister est tibi in bonum: si autem malum
feceris, time, non enim sine causa gladium portat, Dei enim Minister est,
vindex in iram ei, qui malum agit; ideo necessitate subditi estote, non solum
propter iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam: Ideo enim and tributa praestatis,
ministri enim Dei sunt, in hoc ipsum seruientes: Reddite ergo omnibus debita,
cui tributum, tributum, cui vectigal, vectigal, cui timorem, timorem, Expos. ad
Romans num^. 72 super Episto^^m ad Romans Hom..... in expos.
cui honorem, honorem.

Look in S. Augustine, for he puts himself also now into the number of
those which are subject to the secular Prince; observe Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and Oecmenius, who with very manifest and plain words include
within this compass, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Priests, and Monks. Read
S. Thomas upon the same place, and you shall see how he most clearly
affirms, that all Ecclesiastical exemption grew from Princes their
privileges. ep. 42.
But S. Bernard, yet somewhat more perspicuously affirms the same, writing
thus to an Archbishop; Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita est, si
omnis, est and vestra: quis vos excipit ab vniuersitate? si quis tentat
excipere, conatur decipere. Let these Opponents but well consider, whether ever
any of the ancient holy Popes, Bishops, or other Priests affirmed, that they
were exempted from the authority of Princes and Magistrates; and I know they
shall not find one: but so they may well find that every one has confessed
this subjection, denying only the justice of the cause for which they were
condemned.

We have a famous example of this in Polycarpus Bishop of Smirna, and disciple
to S. John the Evangelist, one of the excellent Founders of our faith; whose
words reported by Eusebius, are these: Magistratibus enim, Iuseb. 4. c. 4.
and potestatibus a Deo constitutis eum honorem, qui nostrorum animorum saluti
nostraeque Religioni nihil affert detrimenti, pro dignitate tribuere docemur.
Some say, that the Apostles were enjoined obedience unto Princes while they
were Heathens, but not after they became Christians; and this was, by reason
that the Clergy in respect of their holy Order, and the spiritual authority
that they retain, are greater. But these men S. John Chrysostom answers in
a few words: Si enim Paulus cum Gentiles adhuc essent Principes, praecepit,
multo magis oportet and fidelibus exhibere, quod si maiora tibi concredita esse
dixeris, disce non nunc honoris tui tempus esse, peregrinus enim hic es, and
aduena, tempus erit cum omnibus apparebis illustrior, nunc vero vita tua
abscondita est cum Christo, in Deo; quando Christus comparuerit, tunc and vos
comparebitis in gloria.

Who is it that may well doubt, but that Ecclesiastical exemptions have been
the privileges of Princes, when the self same laws and privileges are
extant? and we see they were not granted all at one time, but by little and
little; the which I will set down according to their times, because it greatly
imports for any man's satisfaction, that desires hereof to be certified.

Constantine the Great, about the year 1315, C. Theod. de epis. and cler. l.
2. ibid. l. 10.
exempted the Clergy from public, personal, and Court services; Constance
and Constante his sons added heereunto an exemption from all illiberall and
sordid actions, as also from impositions; and they privileged Bishops only
from the arrests of Secular Courts, ibid. l. 12.
all others of the Clergy still remaining under the Secular Judge, as well in
cases criminal as civil: and about this there afterward were enacted two
laws, one by Valente and Gratianus about the year 380, ibid. l. 23. ibid. l.
37. ibid. l. 41. ibid. l. 47.
and another by Arcadius and Honorius in the 400; but then much about the year
420, Honorius, and Theodosius the second, and after that the same Theodosius,
with Valentinian the third, put over the trial of the Clergy to the Bishops,
so both parts are well content, and if one of them would not accept of the
Bishop, C. de episc. and clo. l. cum clerici, C. eod. l. omnis qui.
referring them then over to the Secular Magistrate: the which was also
confirmed by Martian in 460, and by Leo his successor: finally, by Justinian
about the year 560: all difference and variety was removed and taken up by a
law of this import, Novel. 83. Novel...
That the Clergy in civil causes should be subject to the Bishop, and in
criminal to the Secular Judge; the which continued in force til 630. When
Heraclius further exempted them from the Secular Magistrate, as well in cases
criminal as civil, yet ever reserved entire the Princes immediate Deputies
and Substitutes. And thus it was observed while the division of the Empire; as
also after the same manner and fashion the Greek Church continued as long as
that Empire lasted.

But indeed in the West the French Emperors and Saxons, with the Kings of
Italy, they have diversely observed herein; sometimes committing of judgments
to the Clergy, and otherwhiles sentencing not only Priests and Bishops, but
even the Popes themselves; one while referring them in part to be judged by the
Spirituality, and in part by the Magistrates, according as the alteration of
times permitted; at one time the Popes authority prevailing, and at another
the Emperors. And at last, Frederick the second, about 1220, made an
authentical insertion into Iustinianus his Codex, That no man might bring any
civil or criminal Clergy man before any Secular Judge; and whosoever reads
the titles Episcopis, Auth. C. de episc. and cler. l. statuimus.
and Clericis, and de Episcopali audientia, vel de Episcopali iudicio, in
Theodosius and Iustinianus his Codex, he may find all these laws, and be
fully informed, how Ecclesiastical exemption has been a benignity and
favor vouchsafed by the Emperors; as also they shall be certified, that
though they granted exemption to the Clergy from the power of their
Magistrates, yet did they never except any from their own highest and supreme
power. The power of punishing whosoever offends against the laws, is so
annexed to all principallitie, as it is individual from the same: and to say
that a Prince has one in his State not subject to him in causes temporal or
any other concerning public good, it implies so much, as if he were not a
Prince. A natural body could not comport, that there should be in it any one
member not allotted to the service of the whole and entire; much less can a
civil body endure, that there should be a man in the midst of it, that did
acknowledge any other but the Prince, in humane and temporal things. The Pope
himself, in things spiritual, exempts whom he lists, from Bishops and
Archbishops, but from himself, he can privilege none, without desisting to be
Pope. The Venetian Commonwealth being freely begun, and borne as it were,
about the year 420, notwithstanding (as it usually falls out in all great
States) not so expatiated in her beginning into so large and spacious dominion,
yet has it received from God no less than other great Princes in their
mighty Empires, authority and power over any person, living within her
dominions; and the same Commonwealth has suffered the Clergy to enjoy the
same privilege from Magistrates, as they were granted from time to time in the
towns and cities of the Empire; being contented to punish in them those
exorbitances, which being vile and enormious, might be a disturbance to public
peace and tranquillity: and there remain Records of Ecclesiastics punished
for all sorts of offenses, and sometimes for such as would now be counted but
slight, but yet in respect of some particular circumstance, deserving worthily
to be punished by the Commonwealth. And though the Popes of Rome, since the
year 1160, C. at si clerici de iudi. C. clerici eodem. C. cum non ab homine
eod. C. qualiter and quando eod.
have made diverse decrees for the privilege of Clergy men, yet have these
been received so absolutely in no place, by any Prince, neither been able to
effect, but that offenses of high treason have been always subject to Secular
judgment. Thorowout all Italy they punish Ecclesiastical persons (without
any warning) which go not in their habits, notwhithstanding any exemptions or
decrees Pontifical. In Spain they do the like, upon the wearing of arms, and
diverse other offenses. In France they distinguish between common and
privileged offenses, and only the former are referred to the Clergy, and the
latter to the Secular Judge.

And so in like manner, this Commonwealth has divided offenses into those
grievous, and others light and little importing: those of no moment are put
over to the Church, and those grievous, committed to the Magistrates. And thus
have they always proceeded in executing the justice and liberty of their
jurisdiction. I will not affirm, that this is only a custom, which being
contrary to a law, has in tract of time worn out the vigor of the same law
it self: for we doubt not, but that custom must not prevail against the law
of God and of Nature, though it had continued for many thousand years; and we
will readily confess thus much, That if God himself had ever excepted persons
Ecclesiastical, the act of any Prince whatsoever, decreed to the contrary,
would be but an usurpation and offense against God. And further, to the former
we will annex this also (by their favors which say, That their privilege
grows de iure diuino) That if it were so, the Pope could have no power to
bring them under, because Seculars should not then be capable to put in
practice that, by the Popes dispensation, which God had prohibited. God has
forbidden Secular men to say Mass, to confess, and such like: the Pope can
not by any of his dispensations bear them out herein. And if they tell me,
that this is ius diuinum, indispensable, but the Popes is dispensable, not to
argue or labor to show the contradiction which is in saying ius diuinum, and
yet dispensable by humane authority, Innoc. c. cum Apostolica. de sim. de
priuil. c. quod quibusdam de verb. signif. c. in bis. c. super quibusdam.
it may suffice to answer them: that all the means which may be obtained by a
Dispensation from the Pope, may also be acquired by a custom, which may grow
and propagate contrary to a law: and if we should suppose the execution of
Clearks to have been first ordained by law, and also executed, and that
afterward through immemorable use and custom, the contrary were prescribed; I
say, it might lawfully be practiced and put in use. But in this our case, the
use and custom of the Commonwealth preceedeth any law which priuiledgeth
ecclesiastical persons from Secular trial in enormious criminal causes, and
no decree whatsoever, which the Church has made, can prejudice them a whit. To
which may be added, the secret approbation hereof in all the Popes, who seeing
and knowing thus much; if they had not judged it convenient, they would have
reprehended it; and moreover the express approbations themselves of Sixtus the
Fourth; Innocent the Eight; Alexander the Sixth; and Paulus the Third; whose
Breues are reserved in the secret rolls of Commonwealth, do truly maintain
what she has justly constituted. The which Innocentius evidently declares in
his Breue, directed to the Patriarch of Venice, delivered on the last of
October 1487, in which intimating with what good reason the Commonwealth did
sentence Clergy men, not only in those most horrible, but also in all other
offenses that were any ways odious and vile, he uses these words; Nos
attendentes priuilegia ad been viuendum dari non ad delinquendum, illaque
praesidio bonis contra improbos esse debere, non autem malis ad nocendum
facultatem, etc. A matter which does not only often fall out in these our
days, but then also it was most frequent and usual, as Pope Sixtus the Fourth
in his Breue to the Patriarch of Venice, delivered the 2. of June 1474
testifies in these words; Cogimur non sine cordis nostri dolor, plurima quae
nollemus de personis Ecclesiasticis audire ex ista Ciuitate, praesertim in qua
saepe nonnulli aut monetas adulterasse, aut crimen loesae maiestatis admisisse
dicuntur.

And if any man to prove that privileges are de iure diuino, should allege
the example of Constantine in the Council of Nice; let him but read it over
again well, and then tell me whether it make for or against his intention.
Iustiman the Emperor his Nouels: the 3. 5. 6. 11. 123. 131. 133. 137. with
abundant perspicuitie set down, what exemptions were proper to Clergy men
under that Emperor, and what they enioied before his time. If then in the
beginning by the privileges of Emperors, and afterward through some
conniuencie they have obtained privilege; why should they so set up their
bristles when the Venecian Commonwealth says: that though others in their
State have permitted that enormious crimes also in the Clergy, should be
judged by the Ecclesiastical Courts, supposing and thinking that this might
stand well with their government; yet they never yielded nor consented
thereunto, as reputing it a thing contrary to their public peace and
tranquillity.

We might here further allege; that these exemptions are not grounded alike
in no Dominion nor Kingdom; and he that does but read what the Cryminalists
have written, but especially Clarius in particular, l. 5. fin. q. 36.
shall clearly see how diversely in diverse places these privileges have been
performed and practiced; this being an indissoluble argument, that they are not
de iure diuino: so as custom may ouerrule them, and that the Popes decrees
upon this point, have not in all places been received.

And here it were also good to consider, that in the Breue of the 10. of
December, this present Pope says; a Canon and an Abbat are imprisoned:
Personas in Ecclesiastica dignitate, constitutas. There might a thousand Papal
Breues be produced to show, that Cannonicatus non est dignitas: but at last
spying this error in their Printed Monitorie, they have excluded the Canon, and
mentioned only the Abbat, propter personam, in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutam; so that by this we may collect, that even in the Popes Breues
there may also be errors, especially when they are wrtiten with too much haste,
which is an occasion they are not therein so considerate as reason requires.
And yet there is some doubt whether these commendatorie Abbatships be dignities
or no, in that the sacred Council of Trent prohibiteth all Commendams: yet it
greatly concerns this Treatise which we have in hand, that it should be a
dignity, and that hereupon the Pope may lay his foundation so as if it were
a poor Priest vnbeneficed, the matter would not be so great. For the quality
of the place is a special matter to make the privilege greater and more
authentical; considering it is most certain, that there are orders appointed
in the Church (such as the Sacraments are) iure diuino, amongst which
Priesthood is the highest: but for these dignities of Abbats, Priors,
Archdeacons, they have been brought in iure humano: wherefore if exemption and
privilege were ex iure diuino, it would belong principally to the Priests,
though they had no title at all; and not to certain special and remarquable
places, as they would have it. And out of question he that goes about to
dissolve this firm knot of equity and reason, he cannot attempt it without
pain and great labor. This argument requires the consideration of two qualities
in the person of the Pope; the one of the Bishop of Rome; a Bishop of that
particular Church, and the universal head over all others; and an other, as he
is Prince of that State, which he possesses; for though at this present they
are joined together, yet is it not necessary that either the Temporal Prince
of Rome should be a Pope; as that the Pope should be a Prince. It boots not now
to express when both these qualities were united, for it is peradventure above
four hundred years: and yet say it had so been this eight hundred years,
this would not a whit disable our discourse; as Pope in the City of Rome, he
has there his Vicar or Vicegerent, and in other cities under him, Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Rectors; and as a Prince he has Ministers,
Governors, Judges, and others, who though they be partly Priests, yet as being
Priests they do not discharge those offices, and many of them also are mere
Lay men. Now when any Ecclesiastical Priest or Friar, commiteth any enormious
offense, we see, that the Bishops or those that discharge Ecclesiastical
places, do not punish them, Three special prisons so called.
but rather Governors, Auditors, and such like. How often have we seen Terre
de noua, Corte Sauella, and the town of Boloqua with other Lay prisons, full
of Priests and condemned Friars; and that which imports more then all the
rest, during the Popedomes of Sixtus and Clement, there were Friars hanged,
with their regular habit on their backs. This assuredly was but just and
necessary, for otherwise the State Ecclesiastical could not live in peace.
Wherefore other States are not free from this necessity; and if his Holiness
would please to measure other men's occasions by his own, he would not condemn
Princes for punishing such Priests, as live not like Priests.

And we must not suppose that in other States there is that perfection which is
not in our own; but rather we ought to give an example of that in our selves
which we desire others should be; for seeing the evil which arises of the
contrary, we shall seem to have a feeling of others necessities.

I know well what answer will be made, and that is this; that the Pope has
concurring with him the two dignities before mentioned; the one of a Prince,
and the other of chief Bishop; and therefore as a Prince, seeing it necessary
for the good government of his State, that the enormious transgressions of the
Clergy, should be punished by the Secular power; he demands leave of
himself as being high Priest, and as he grants it unto himself; so he can
likewise afford it unto others, if they request it by way of favor; this is a
medicine more insupportable then the disease, and hurts the body more; and an
answer which divides also things invisible. Would it not be a more likely
thing to affirm; that the Pope as he is a Prince, knows how necessary it is
for the good gouernme^ts sake of a State, to punish with temporal authority
every one which disturbeth the peace, though he be one of the Church; but he
not being able to discern the occasions of other Princes and States, nor
consenting to the authority which they have from God, he only takes notice of
his own proper authority, as he is a Pope, for which cause he would also have
an hand in there governments.

Here some object, saying; all punishment is for the correction of a
malefactor; otherwise, if it have not reference to so good an end, it may
rather be termed a tyrannical act: and the correction of every offender
pertaines to his superior. Wherefore it touches not a Prince greatly, whether
an ecclesiastical delinquent be punished or no; let him in Gods name look to
the punishment of the Laietie; for if Clergy men be not chastised, the Prelates
must give an account thereof unto God. And surely this reason should have
concluded very well, if the mayor thereof had been true, which is, that the
punishment of a malefactor was the only end of criminal justice. It is an end
indeed, but a secondary end, and the least of two, it being for a private
benefit; but the principal is a public end, and consists in two things;
one, in maintaining of good customs and conversation in the Citizens, and in
the city tranquillity and peace; and an other is, that when any one usurps
over his neighbor advantage or hard dealing, by afflicting and preiudicing of
him against reason, by inflicting a proportionable punishment again upon the
other, to reduce things to an equality. When the Ecclesiastical person,
laying aside the fear of God and of the world, does violate the laws, he
gives therein a public offense, by being an evil example unto the Lay man,
who by such an imitation grow bad and wicked: and moreover he instigates him
whom he injured, to seek revenge, with the subversion of public quiet and
repose. It ought therefore to be a Princes special care, that offenses may be
punished; otherwise, by the reason above alleged, a Prince might never punish
a stranger which should offend in his State, seeing he being none of his
subject he need not be careful of his profit or good. A Prince does punish a
stranger, not as having in this a simple reference to correction, but to defend
his own subject from injuries, as he is bound, and to cut off all wicked
example which might induce customs pernicious to public peace. And therefore
it preuailes not to say, If it be necessary for public good, that a Clergy
man be punished, let the Prince procure him punishment from his Prelate, and so
let him suffer the Lay Magistrate to execute the same.

For answer to which, we must observe, that the Church, according to the sacred
Canons, cannot punish in poena sanguinis, no not for the most grievous and
enormous offenses that are committed; but the chasticements of the Church must
be with censures of suspension, privation, deposition, or penalties of
degradations; or else they impose the profitable penance of prayer, fasting, and
other charitable deeds; and the seuerest sentence which they denounce, is, to
confine one within a Monastery, or some strait prison, there to perform
perpetual penance: of which notwithstanding, we have not been eie-witnesses
in these our days, upon any offense, how heinous soever committed. And if some
whiles they enjoin this penance for any long time; after relation made of the
penitents humility, and his willing obedience, they quickly forgive him, and
readily receive him to grace and favor. And notwithstanding that it was
Justinians own commandment, that offenders should be committed to the Secular
power; yet the common and received opinion of all Canonists is, that it is only
to be performed in three cases; that is, in the case of heresy, of falsifying
letters Apostolical, and upon conspiracy against their own Bishop: for they
rest, they affirmatively hold, That if a Clerk had committed never so foul or
heinous an offense, yea, though he had killed the Pope himself, if he did but
offer to undergo due penance for the same, that he ought not to be degraded,
nor delivered over to the Secular Judge, but to be confined to perpetual
prison.

From this quality and form of justice it follows, that Clergy men would
readily transgress the laws; for they feeling more profit and pleasure in
their offense, than loss or pain in the punishment, they make choice rather
of this chastisement, it being of them more lightly esteemed, than to be
deprived of their proper lusts and appetites: and so, being in no fear at all
of their lives, (a thing, that for the most part does most bridle and terrify
all malefactors) and hoping, though some Ecclesiastical penalties be imposed
upon them, to take up the matter again quickly, they make it lawful without
any law at all, to enter into any flagition: as also Ecclesiastical Courts
punish not those offenses most which disturb public tranquillity, but rather
those which abridge and infringe their own interests. For the falsification of
letters Apostolical, or a conspiracy against a Bishop, which are the cases
(as was above said) for which degradation was instituted; these touch not the
Laity so near: but proditions, high rreason, falsification of coin,
manslaughter, for which they would impose their Ecclesiastical penance; these
are the enormities which for the service of public quiet and peace should be
punished with rare and exemplar severity. And certainly a Prelate which
gouernes his Clerks, can not well do any act, but that which will have most
reference to themselves only, and their own benefit: neither can he respect
the profit of the whole common wealth in punishing of his priests, even as an
householder does punish his sons and servants, but with a respect to the good of
his own house only. The executions and chastisements of Princes only, and
their Substitutes are directed, and truly tend to common benefit, which is his
real and true end. To say that a Clerk should be punished by his Prelate for
heinous offenses, which break public peace, it is no other, but to say, Let
that punishment have reference to the good of Ecclesiastical Order; and for
the Laity, let them participate only of the prejudice which grows from such
offenses as the other commit; and of the good which should arise from their
chastisement, let them have no part at all. And to speak boldly the truth;
Prelates never punish Priests for offenses committed against Secular men, but
upon great instance made unto them by the Magistrate, or for fear lest they
should supply the others default. And not without some reason: for their care
is how to govern the Presbytery, and not how to defend the Secular. But a
Prince that receives tribute and other services from his subjects, in defense
of their lives, honor, or goods, he can not without sinning abandon them, when
they are oppressed by their insolency, who under color of privilege run
into all impieties, permitting that malefactors should escape unpunished; or
else to be chastised only with Spiritual penance: but the Prince is bound to
punish them for preservation of justice, and the example of others; especially
the same Prince being appointed by the almighty Creator, as S. Paul says,
Minister Dei Vindex in iram ei qui malum agit: wherein if he fail, he is also
punished with deprivation of his State: Regnum de gente in gentem transfertur,
propter iniustitias, iniurias, contumelias, and diuersos dolos. And besides the
offense unto God, whereinto a Prince runs by abandoning his subjects, and
they wanting their due protection, other evils hereof ensue; all which do tend
unto public ruin. Secular men thus ined by Priests in their lives, honor, or
goods, and seeing themselves deprived of that just revenge which public
authority performs herein, they are with some color of reason invited as it
were hereby to private prosecutions; and which is worse, fearing
multiplication of wrongs, nor hoping for justice at the Prelates hand, they go
about to prevent it with their own; and thus of one grows a thousand other
inconveniences, which procure sedition and grievous disturbances in cities.

And for that which is further urged in defense of Ecclesiastical judgments,
That exemption from Lay Courts is granted to Clerks in honor of that Order,
which being dedicated to divine worship, it is but reason it should be
respected. This is a thing which every good judgment will interpret quite
contrary: for if it be said in respect of him who has committed the offense;
first, he deserves not to be honored; and S. Paul says: Vis non timere
potestatem, bonum fac, and habebis laudem. For Socrates said very well:
Unhappy he is that sins, but yet much more unhappy if he shun punishment.
And it can much less be auerred in honor of the good, for they may be
blemished by the company of the wicked; and good men are most honored, when
they are without wicked company. S. Paul advised us: Auferte malum de
vobismetipsis, modicum fermenti totam mass^m corrumpit: so that if they,
according to the rule of the sacred canons, by taking away of a wicked man's
life, cannot exclude them out of their number, it will stand well with
Eclesiasticall dignity, that their goodness being separated from the wicked
by the authority of the Prince, it may remain by this means the more pure
and sincere, and therefore the more honored. And we can not say, that any
other liberty is taken from them, but a liberty of doing evil. By these
considerations it is more then manifest, that the Commonwealth of Venice makes
no account of any extreamitie, as by instituting of laws, by administering that
justice which God by the power of a supreme temporal Prince has put into her
hands: neither has she so deserved to be proceeded against with
Ecclesiastical censures; and so much the rather, because these thundrings have
come forth with such expedition, that every one which understands the
courses of Rome, may wonder from whence it shoud grow, that causes (yea and
those sometime of small moment) continuing in suit so longtime in Rome, that
most of them end rather with the death of the parties, then by the Judges
sentence; and yet in a matter of such consequence, they have proceeded not
swiftly, but even with precipice: For in the beginning of Nouemb. these matters
were first moved, and in five months it grew to such a furious resolution, as
to excommunicate a multitude of three millions of souls, and to interdict so
great a circuit of ground and dominion, especially when as with insupportable
impatience they attended always this short time with complaint, that some
delay might be procured; and so to make use of the time. And his Holiness
descended to such a resolution in making it only known to the Cardinals, but
without asking their opinion herein, as commonly they do, and principally in
cases of weighty importance, and not without some grudging of the Court of
Rome; he being otherwise accustomed, not only to acquaint the Cardinals with
such matters, but further to use their advice and consultation herein. And af-
that his last Breue of the 17. of April, was decreed and printed the same day,
he delivered it openly in the Consistory, and proceeded immediately to
intimation, and setting them up: And in this also there is a matter of great
wonder, for it being professed in Rome, that no body else may send for the
Process, and that great vigilancie should be used in observing of the order,
it running in every man's mouth by way of a proverb; Omnis processus formatus
exira Curiam, vt plurimum est nulliu; yet in a matter of so great moment, he
proceeded without citation. But they say, that this is de iure naturae, and
they have ever in their mouths, Adam vbi es? and vbi est Abel frater tuus? and
yet we see herein this was not observed. But if any man say, that the two
Breues of the 10 of December, might serve for a sufficient citation, there are
three things which contradict this: the first is; that those two first Breues
of the tenth of December, are also tainted with this incurable disease: for in
one of them declaring the nullitie of the Senats laws, and that they who made
them, had incurred censure, they could not well come to this point before a
citation, to deliver their reasons for the contrary. Moreover, admonition is
one thing, and citation an other, as the Ciuilians very well teach us; the one
peremptorily commands obedience, as in a matter already decided; and the other
requires but a discussion to know whether it be well and necessary, or that we
are bound to obey: wherefore those Breues commanding a reuokement of laws, and
a consignation of prisoners, under peace, censure, and penalties, they cannot
be called citatorie, but monitorie: and it cannot be said, that they run in
the tenor of a citation, they having no express term, nor time set down;
but they enioined execution immediately. As also we cannot affirm, that the
Monitorie was conuertible into the nature of a citation, because it expressed
the term of 24. days; for by it the statutes of the Commonwealth were
frustrate and inefficacious, not after these 24. days expired, but even at the
day, of the 17 of April: wherefore such alike annihilation cannot in any sort
be converted into a citation. And so much less in respect of the rest, there
wanting in the same, a clause iustificatiue, without which it cannot only not
be conuertible into a citation; but further, the Monitory it self, ipso iure,
is nothing, together with the excommunication, as Nauarra proves at large
upon the chap: Cum contingat; 8 causa nullitatis. And yet if we yield to all
these defects, where appears any citation or admonition upon the law of 1602?
which men say concerned goods enfiteoticall; Rent charge.
and which surely is more, upon censuall goods or leases, for a long time; the
which notwithstanding has first place in the Monitorie, and is annulled
without so much as understanding what the true meaning of it was, or with what
reason it might be defended; if they had first, at least but heard some speech
of it, or if some extraiudiciall discussion had been used herein, why this
had been somewhat; but that it should so suddenly and speedily be condemned,
before it was conceived or understood, this is a great and most scandalous
wonder.

It may be it is not so requisite to extend into a discourse concerning the
desert of this cause of Enfiteusi, As in the beginning is mentioned.
seeing such a notable error was committed even in judicial place and calling:
but because some peradventure will desire to have a summarie understanding of
the Commonwealths reasons herein; it will not be much from the purpose,
briefly to touch some of them, by which we may clearly conceive the lawful
authority which the Senate had for the justifying of such a law; the necessity
that urged them thereunto, and the equity of the thing instituted, and so
incidently we may discern an error, which either purposely or by chance crept
into the understanding of the words, and cause of this law.

The Pope says in his Monitorie, that the Duke and Senate on the 23 of May
1602, taking occasion upon a controversy occurring betwixt Doctor Francesco
Zaberella, of the one part, and the Monks of Pragia of the other, they did not
only enact, that the Monks either then, or in any time to come, ought not to
pretend plea under any title whatsoever, to be preferred to enfiteoticall
goods, possessed by the Laietie, nor obtain property in the said goods, by
the claims, prelation, consolidation, or extinction of direct line, or upon
any other title whatsoever, their direct right or freehold reserved; All these
were in the beginning expressed.
but that the force of this law also was intended and firmly to be extended
over all other Ecclesiastical or religious places.

From this it cannot appear whether his Holiness reprehendeth the order of
the Senate; forasmuch as it extends to all places and persons
Ecclesiastical, which was decided, in the cause between the Monks and the
Doctors, approving notwithstanding this foresaid decision, in a particular
controversy; or whether it may be construed, that he reprehends together both
the one and other: For granting that the Senate had lawful power to end that
suit, and to deny that they could ordain by a general law, that the same
should be understood and intended upon any other such like case occurring, I
cannot see how a man but of indifferent capacity, can any ways conceive it;
considering it is a most evident thing, that it belongs to the same power to
make a law upon an occasion, and to judge particular controversies occurring in
the same. Polyt 3.
Aristotle shows that judgment is but a particular law, and the law a
general judgment: and that it would be sufficient if a Judge could be found
without all partiality; or the law would of it self be preualent enough, if
it could comprehend al particular cases. And in Justinians codex we see, L. 3.
t 5. ne quis in sua.
that jurisdiction comprehends two heads, that is, either iudicare, or ius
dicere, the one pertaines to the instituting of that, whereon sentence may be
grounded; and the other in pronouncing the same. In Rome the Proctors office
was to make general edicts, and to depute Judges, who conformable to them,
might give sentence in particular causes. If the law were spiritual, and the
Judge Secular, it could not be understood how he might judge according to the
same. Spiritual science, and worldly action had no correspondencie: the
Philosophers say, that the rule must be homogenea, with that ruled; for which
cause the Ciuilians affirm with all reason, Forum sortiri, and statutis ligari
paria sunt. Pau. Cast. l. omnes populi, ff. de instit. and iur.
Wherefore he which consents that the Senate has lawfully determined the cause
between the Monks and the Doctor, he must needs also grant them power to
decree that in general, which has been ouerruled in judgment given, and
ought so to be in all others that shall occur.

But if it be understood to reprehend also the examination, and end made by the
Senate, Decius c. quae in Ecclesiarum, etc. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae, de
const^^^t. Alex. cons. 201. l. 2.
in the case between the Monks and the Doctor, this may be; which manifestly
declares how requisite it was, not to have been so forward, but at first to
have framed a Monitory, and principally upon this point, before seeing the
process framed in the suit, and controversy above mentioned.

Considering it is not true that the Doctor was plaintiff in that case, and the
Monks defendants, as the Monitorie supposes; it running thus; inter doctorem,
etc. ex vna, and Monachas, etc. ex altera partibus. of the one party, and the
Monks of the other party.

But Corsato de Corsati, in 1598, having bought of Andrea Monaldo eight fields
which paid canonate to the Monastery of Pragia, the Doctor 1602. the 12. of
February, tendered the price, to make his draft by border or confine: and the
second of March, the Monks pretending to be preferred to him, as Patrons of
the freehold of those fields, they came before the Podesta of Padoua, Like our
Mayor.
and commenced suit, pretending prelation; in which cause many actions were
tried before the Magistrate; till according to the custom of this State, by
the Doctors and Communaltie of Paduaes supplication, the hearing of the matter
was referred over to the Senate. The Doctor drew not the Monastery to a Lay
judgment; but the Ecclesiastics themselves knew well, that the determining of
this cause belonged unto a Secular Judge; for this cause they had recourse to
the same: the which one example only, if there had been no other, gave
jurisdiction to the Podesta, and consequently to the Senate in that cause, as
in express words it is declared; in l. prima, C. de iurisd. omn. iudic. But
besides this firm and solid foundation, we may add another very preualent
and universal, which is, that from time out of mind, much before 200. years
last past, when any plea has been of goods possessed by the Laietie, (give
them the name of emphyteoticall, censuall, feudatorie, lease for long time, or
what other title soever) the Ecclesiastical Judge in this State has never
denounced judgment therein; but always and without contradiction, the hearing
and jurisdiction thereof has belonged to the Secular. So that by this, we do
not only prove, that the controversies between the Monks and the Doctor was
iuridically determined by the Senate; but further, that a power is proper to
them, to make statutes, which may dispose and order of those goods above named,
possessed by the Laietie, wherein the Church has directly freehold; for unto
them it has and does appertain, to determine those controversies, which have
or do arise about them; and above we have made clear demonstration, how it
stands with the same power to make statutes and denounce judgments. There
remain registers in all the Chanceries of this city, of judgments given by a
Secular Judge since they have been subject to this State; and not one can be
produced which was tried in an Ecclesiastical Court. And it cannot be termed
an usurpation, seeing the Clergy have not been drawn to these Courts, as
defende^ts but they have voluntarily appeared as plaintifes: and that which
overthrows this claim more then any thing else, is; that in such
controversies between Church and Church, they themselves have appeared in the
Secular Court, to demand Justice against another Church. Nay and out of doubt
it may certainly be believed, that the beginning of this introduction has
been very Canonical, seeing the Clergy of that time were also very good men,
and zealous in the Churches behoofes; and in like manner the Popes were most
exact mainteiners of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and so as well the one
as the other, knew very well the title of that ground for which they came in
suit before the Secular; nor none of them ever reprehended this course of
judgment, but rather securely we may affirm, that they themselves have
brought it in. And there is an express constitution of Justinians, that
custom alone gives as great jurisdiction as a law made.

But in that his Holiness says in his Monitorie, C. de eman. lib. l. vlt.
that the Senats ordinance constituteth in bonis Ecclesiasticis emphyteoticis,
it must necessarily be, that either his ministers have had some other copy or
writing, then the true original, or else that transported with affection, they
supposed they saw that in it, which cannot be found neither in words nor sense;
because that emphyteoticis, is not there either formally or in equivalent
words; and they can no ways excuse themselves by saying they thought that the
sense had been so, as they have expressed it: that it is not lawful to relate
an other man's speech in other words, but especially in such a manner as to
restrain that to one kind, which was spoken generally. The law says; that
Churches may not appropriate unto themselves, goods possessed by the Laietie,
their direct title and right notwithstanding reserved. It is not true, that
there is distinction of directum, and vtile only in Emfiteusi, but both these
claims concur in patrimoniall goods, both the which are treated of in a title
of the second book of Justinians Codex, whose direct right may lie in the
Church, tit. de sun. patrim. L. siquis fundos. L. fundi patrimoniales. L. hi
quibus.
if the Prince have given them it: and although this manner of possessing was
out of use in Italy under the French Emperors, and their successors, and
instead thereof, there has come in fee-simple; yet does there remain in
Churches but especially those cathedral, some goods of this nature which were
given before the Emperors of Constantinople were wholly excluded from the
Empire of these adjacent regions; in lease perpetual or perpetuities, there is
directum and vtile: where notwithstanding (as also in the lands above
mentioned) neither relation nor consolidation, nor extinction of line take any
place, as Couaruuias, and Valasco, who are cited by many Doctors, do
effectually prove; although some not very circumspect hold the contrary.

A great part of the direct titles of Churches in these low Countries near the
sea, which sometimes were marshes and valleys, are of this kind: for this
soil being altogether under water, and reaping no fruit from it, but reeds and
flags, they were let out for ever, or at least for a wonderful long time, at a
very easy rent, answerable to the profits that they yielded, though now
through the wonderful charge of the Secular, both public and private, in
raising of the ground, drenching of the marshes, and draning of the water;
they have been reduced to the State wherein they are: whereupon the Church
has no reason in this, neither by written evidence, equity of pretending
prelation, deuolution, or under any other claim to appropriate them to
themselves; and of these the law of the Senate, in a great part entreats, as
also it constituteth upon other kind of goods, as shall be expressed.

For it must needs be, that a pension was paid to the Church, either by the
claim of a reseruatiue cense or imposition, or that the Church in ancient
times upon suits made, have couenanted this reservation, or that having been
reserved by other Lords the sellers, it was afterward given to the Church by
them: In which case, this reserved cense or tax, out of doubt belongs to the
Church in perpetuum: but over the possession stable, there remains in no sort
any title unto them, by virtue of which they may pretend consolidation,
prelation, covenant, or other such like actions.

Fee-simple is also of this nature, that in it direct title is distinguished
from profits; and I wonder, when they would needs add to the law of the
Senate, and declare it in another sense then the truth thereof imported, with
that word Emphyteoticis, why to change and adulterate it the more, they said
not, Feudalibus: but peradventure they would not proceed so far, because they
could not hope it would never be spied, it being a vulgar word, and well
understood of all men.

The word Emphyteoticis, is somewhat more unknown, and therefore was thought
the fitter to be secretly put in; and therefore I cannot forbear to reply,
that in the Senats law the word Emphyteotici, is not used, but it generally
speaks of all contracts, and manner of possession, wherein the two titles of
directum and vtile stand divided; neither is it lawful for any body to
restrain or express it, contrary to the true sense thereof, to the end, the
better to bring in the conclusion following, set down in the Monitorie, which
otherwise could not have been deduced: Cum praemissa in aliquibus ecclesiarum
iura, etiam ex contractibus initis ipsis ecclesijs competentia, auserant.

It is no new matter, that the Spirituality, to enter upon goods possessed of
Seculars, have assayed to bring in this name of Enfiteusi into their titles, by
which they receive a canon or pension: but two hundred years ago, diverse
cities of Italy have stood out against them for this cause; and they themselves
have otherwhiles been constrained to give over their pretenses and titles, and
to be contented with their bare canon coming in.

In the same city of Padoua, Extant authentica capitula transact.
about an hundred and fifty years since, great controversies grew betwixt that
Communalty and the Monks of S. Iustina, and Pragia, upon this point, the which
they ended by comprimise; where amongst other things it was set down, that in
all their goods, neither escheat, prelation, nor consolidation for di^ect line
extinct, should take any place, as the city then constantly auerred, that from
time out of mind, it had been the use and custom of the place.

Paula Cas. l. Consil. 244.
In Vrbine also before that time, there fell out a great controversy betwixt
the Clergy and the people, the which was likewise ended by comprimise, with an
express declaration that consolidation upon line extinct, should never take
place. A little before that also, there grew very dangerous tumults in Ferrara,
about this very point; for pacification of which, Pope Boniface the 9. rather
as a Sovereign Prince, then as a Pope, not out of favor, but by justice was
enforced, in fees, Emfiteusi, and other such like contracts, within the
territories of Ferrara, to take away escheate, prelation, with consolidation,
per lineam finitam, and to set down a new form, correspondent to equity and
justice, which might reduce them more to the nature of Censes, then of any
other tenor; and the Doctors also perceiving the notable damage the Laietie
received by deuolution, or consolidation by line extinct, out of a common
opinion, they absolutely removed it; affirming that in such a case, the
nearest kinsman collateral might claim by justice to be invested therein,
Vide Clar. and Valasc. Ruin. cons. 12. vol. 1. Decius consil. 131. Bero cons.
98. l. 1. Abbas c. bonae, de postul. praelat. and consil. 113. Curt. Sen. cap.
47. Riminal. cap. 44.
and being denied, he might appeal; and many grow to this specification, that
the Church sought to encroch upon the stable possession it self; and also
others annexe heereunto, that they are not bound to grant the inuestiture, but
further that they cannot improve nor enhance the Canon.

It is no wonder if by a law or solemn comprimise in the places above named,
caducitie for Canon not paid, prelation in case of sale, and consolidation for
line extinct, are taken away, considering that none of these are necessary, or
essential in a contract. But whatsoever may be done by a law, may be performed
by a deed, as also custom may bring it in; For which cause a long and
prescript custom time out of mind, this State was of force an hundred and
fifty years since, to take away from a little emphyteoticall substance,
(provided if there then were any) caducitie, prelation, and consolidation; and
furthet to introduce, that more then the payment of a pension, they should be
held for patrimoniall and leasable. We may see the 72. Cons. of Panormitano,
where he discourses at large, that custom was also of that force in
Ecclesiastical emphyteusi to procure in the city of Vrbine, that the
condition of caducitie was utterly removed. The which notwithstanding were
more profitable for the Church; for by this the Church should gain the
improuements without paying them, the which by prelation, consolidation, or
line extinct, they could not appropriate to themselves, without paying them at
a just rate; whereupon by an argument a simili, and also a maiore, so much the
rather may custom take away prelation, and consolidation. We may add
heereunto, that it is not peculiar to this State, that some goods
emphyteoticall should be made leasable; but also in France all Emfiteusi are
made such, as Joan. Rub. Auth. Ingressi, de Sacrosanctis Ecclesijs testifies.
All which things do evidently show the equity and necessity of such a law.
The which, though the Venetian Senate did not constitute at that time, in form
of a written law, published through their whole State, in general terms; yet
notwithstanding they have by use, custom, and writing also, in causes
occurrent, made, observed, and executed the same, from that time hitherto.

There are many Decrees of the Princes of this Commonwealth, with their
College, which from time to time in controversies occurring betwixt the Church
and the Seculars, or between Church and Church, have been resolved and
determined, not to admit of caducitie, prelation, or consolidation of profits
with the freehold; and sometimes they have put into their evidences general
clauses, which might comprehend all these cases, as in Duke Vendraminos days,
in 1476. in a rescript made to the Podesta of Monselice, upon such a particular
controversy, these words were added; nunquam pati volumus (etiam in bonis
Ecclesiasticis, quenquam, qui diu tenuerit agrum aliquem iure liuelli, quem
sumptibus, and laboribus suis meliorauerit, sic de facto expoliari, sed tantum
quod soluat liuellos non solutos: and in Duke Moroes time, in other rescript to
the Rectors of Brescia the year 1466, having excluded the Abbat of Leno from
withholding any of his liuellarie goods sold unto others, there is added; Et
de hac nostra intention, date dicto Abbati notitiam, and declarate, ne contra
eam dictos Christopherum, and Cornelium inquietet, sed acquiescat huic
voluntati nostrae, quia hoc idem in alijs terris and locis nostris seruari
volumus, and facimus in similibus.

C. de leg. l. si Imperialis. Afflict. d. 313. Menoch. vide cons. 676. nu. 2.
487. nu. 3. 973. n. 20.
From which we may clearly collect, that this is no new law, but from ancient
times by custom established, and also confirmed, not only by the particular
iudgemets of Magistrates, but by the Prince himself. Of which the law thus
speaks: Si causam Princeps inter parts cognouerit, and sententiam dixerit,
est lex in omnibus similibus: and according to the Ciuilians, they retain the
vigor of a law, though they were but decisiue only in a particular case; as
indeed all the Canon laws are but in a manner the decisions of particular
cases: but so much the rather, when they are further joined with a
signification of the Princes will in such like cases, with an explanation
thereof in general terms, as in the above specified. And these things were
performed by the Commonwealth; not only the Clergy, who were repulsed in
their demands, but the Nuncioes Apostolical also: and so consequently, the
Popes themselves seeing and understanding as much, yet never repealing them,
and therefore secretly approouing them for just, and necessary to be put in
execution. So that what the Senate did deliberate 1602, is a declaration and
expression in writing of an old law, enterteined by custom, and mentioned in
direct writings to particular Magistrates, even as also in the self same law
it is manifestly declared in these words: The service of our affairs, for the
quiet and comfort of our subjects, requires that this suit be determined in
such a manner, as not only in the present occasion of Zabarella, but that for
ever, upon any other of the like nature, it shall not be determined differently
from the good custom and judgments often times denounced, conformable to the
same. I will not omit to add, that if there had been the least scruple of
offense in that law, Pope Clement the Eight, during whose Papacy it was
published, being a very zealous Pope, and one that in this city had very
vigilant ministers, would never have dissembled it.

And if the tenor of this ordinance has been read, it yet seems very
requisite, that hearing custom, and judgments so often to be named therein,
they should first have seen and understood, what custom and judgments those
were. What is he of so mean an intellect, which sees not how this proceeding
has been without understanding the cause, and that many particularities have
been purposely kept back by them, which should have been related to his
Holiness, for verification of this act; they conceiving well that all these
things were necessary to be understood, before the coming to treat an
execution? But it seems there was such a special desire that these thundrings
should come forth, as for fear of meeting with somewhat which might divert it,
they shunned the very sight of any thing that might remove his Holiness
mind from such a deliberation.

If the intended brevity of this present discourse would permit, it should
evidently be made known, how beyond all reason, it is said in the Monitorie,
having reference to this law, as it appears: Cumque praemissa in aliquibus
Ecclesiarum iura, etiam ex contractibus initis ipsis Ecclesijs competentia
auferant. As also withal, it would be clear, that by that law there is no ius
quaesitum taken from the Church, nay, and which is more, the same continuing in
vigor and force, there remains still to the Church a most easy and ready way
to retain omnia iura quaesita sibi competentia. It was never the custom of
this Commonwealth, to take away ius quasitum, from any body whosoever, much
less from the Church; but he that will judge of others laws without erring,
it is necessary that he first understand and have full information of them,
and not to proceed to their condemnation before he have so much as looked into
their foundations. I have spoken more of this matter, then was convenient for
this discourse, yet is it not the least part, in respect of that which remains
behind.

And if occasion be offered, to make known the foundation of this law, every
one shall perceive, how it is grounded upon justice and equity, and how
lawful the authority of the Senate was to constitute it.

Now let us return again to deliver that which yet has been unspoken of,
concerning the matters above discoursed of. If the Pope prevented of his more
mature deliberation, would not admit of reasons so clear and evident as those
before declared, and so to have justified the cause of the Commonwealth: yet
at least perceiving that all Europe had laws like unto these, which he so
sharply reprehended, and that such a number of approved Doctors hold a
contrary opinion to himself, he might have held the case doubtful, and have
proceeded with circumspection; calling to mind that excommunication, is a
grievous penalty, and an odious matter; and as the Canonists affirm,
Sirictissime interpretanda. Neither is it understood that any one incurs the
same, when the words of the Canon are ambiguous or general, the which may not
be wrung to an other case, by way of similitude, and much less with an
argument a minori: For if one give a Priest a box on the ear, he is
excommunicate; but if he shoot an harquebusse at him, and that in the Church,
and hit him not, he is not excommunicated for this, though the second offense
is an hundred times greater then the first. Let it be granted, that whosoever
makes statutes against Ecclesiastical liberty, ipso facto is excommunicated.
This point must also be cleared, whether the Venecian statutes be against the
liberty of the Church; and it has been proved with most effectual reasons,
that they are not; the which also though they were, it appears by act, and
not by discourse, that the like laws have been received all Europe over: and
we see in Print, how many writers do justify them. Then this is out of doubt
at least, that they are not absolutely against the Popes authority, as it is
supposed. Unto which let me annex this; that being not yet decided, what
Ecclesiastical liberty is, as has been said, and the Doctors not agreeing
thereupon, much less can they be out of doubt, that these laws and acts are
against it. But for all this, in a matter, of which according to some men's
opinions, there is controversy, and that in so many points remains doubtful,
out comes me headlong an Interdict or excommunication, without foreseeing, or
maturely considering the inconveniences, which says the Chap. De sentent.
excom. in 6.
Alma Matter, ensue of such censures; that is, the people lose their devotion,
heresies are brooded, infinite dangers grow to men's souls, and without the
peoples fault due service is taken away from the Church. Surely Christian
piety required, that the worthiness of this cause should first with all
diligence have been examined, neither should less then a good opinion at
least have been borne toward a Commonwealth so pious and devout. Every
Prelate is bound first, in himself to conceive the worthiness of the cause,
and then with Christian love to acquaint others with the same; and as S. Paul
teaches, in spiritu lenitatis; Gal. 6.
the which as it would have produced some excellent effect, being observed; so
being neglected, it has caused great evil, which now may already be seen,
and further greater dangers, which still hang over our heads.

The Pope in his Monitorie of the 17 of April says; that the Duke and Senate
of Venice, have many years past made sundry statutes, through which they did
incur censure; but amongst others, he specially names three, upon which he
discendeth to fulmination, except they be revoked within four and twenty
days. Every good Christian may here desire to understand, that seeing a great
number of different and sundry statutes have been made by a Commonwealth, to
the souls prejudice, and that for every one of these, she has incurred
Ecclesiastical censure, being further bound, to cashiere and annihilate them
all: why is the Senate told but only of three? We neither can nor must
believe, that the other would be omitted for the damnation of souls, and
therefore at this present why are they not all treated of? When any one meets
his own debtor, he may ask him a part of his debt, and as he is principal,
he may remit the rest, or the whole: but an agent or factor, can not do this,
except by a commission from the principal. If diverse and sundry statutes made
some years since, offend God, the Commonwealth is bound to revoke them all,
and in but reuoking of three, they should not sufficiently discharge their
duty. Iac. 2.
S. James says; Quicunque totam legem seruauerit, offendat autem in vno,
factus est omnium reus.

Our Savior commanded the use of excommunication for sins, which procure the
souls prejudice, when he says; Si peccauerit in te frater tuus: Matthew. 17.
and S. Paul expresses what these were, saying; Si is qui frater nominatur est
fornicator, aut auarus, aut idolis seruiens, aut maledicus, aut ebriosiu, aut
rapax, cum huiusmodi nec cibum sumere. Wherefore at this present we may allege
what the Son of God sometimes said; Matthew 23.
Vae vobis, qui decimatis mentam, and anetum, and cimmum, and reliquistis quae
grauiora sunt, legis iudicium, and misericordiam, and fidem: haec oportuit
facere, and illa non omittere. Out of which we may answer plentifully to that
which is contained in the Monitorie, that the laws and decrees of the
Commonwealth were, in perniciem animarum. And moreover, if it had inferred,
that the actions of the Commonwealth were in in scandalum plurimorum; they
must take heed lest they conclude quite contrary to that they would. Out of
question, we ought diligently to extirpate all things scandalous, but
especially if they be of badde edification unto many; but we never heard, that
any has been scandalized by seeing offenders chastized and punished, that
disturb the public peace, or to see avarice and luxury bridled. It rather
breeds scandal to see a wicked fellow walk through the city; when his
companions in the same offense were executed: and so consequently to see one
sued by the privilege of the Church, whose punishment above all other, the
Church should rather have procured. And it boots not to extend far, in
manifesting what things are scandalous, because every one is privy to
himself, wherein he gives or receives scandal; and those also that in some
sort defend things of bad instruction, they do it not without blushing, and
feeling in their own consciences that they oppugn the truth.

It is true that this Monitorie was made after the example of ten Popes more,
which therein are named, and his Holiness is to be commended in imitating of
them; but so again, an hundred others his most Holy predecessors are worthy
of no less commendations, which never gave the least sign, that ever it came
into their thought, that they might disanull the laws of Princes, made for
public benefit: but rather they have published and executed the same also; and
when they met with any scruple in their proceedings and justice, they have with
great dexterity and charity sought to make known unto their Princes, what
Gods will herein has been. In this manner S. Damase published and executed
Valentinians law: and S. Gregory, one made by Mauritius, wherein a soldier was
prohibited to become a Monk. Further the denouncing of an excommunicate
sentence against an whole Senate, which is not a particular person, is far from
the doctrine of the ancient and best divines. Lib. 3. cont. Ep. Permen. 23. q.
4. c. non potest.
S. August. holds an excomunication against an whole multitude, though it were
for some notorious and manifest sin, too sacrilegious, pernicious, impious,
and insolent (for these are his formal words:) and he advises good Pastors in
those cases to have recourse unto God, with sighs and prayers: a place
entreated of by that Saint at large; Two scurrile writers. q 22. a. 5. in add.
and in 4. d. 18. q. 2. a. 3. quol. 10. 15
and with such a spirit, as if it were read instead of Barbaccia, or Zenzelino,
it would produce a very charitable spirit in every Christian mind; which the
reading of the others will never do. S. Thomas puts a question, whether any
Generaralitie may be excommunicated; and he answers himself, No: and produces
reasons for the same, concluding that the Church appointed with great
providence, that no Community might be excommunicated: and all other Divines
with accord determine the same. As also Pope Innocent the Fourth in the Chap.
De sentent. excom. in 6.
Romans says thus; In vniuersitatem, vel Collegium proferri sententiam
excommunicationis penitus prohibere; where the Gloss debates whether a sentence
of excommunication denounced against a Community would be validious or no, and
he alleges four famous Doctors which affirm that it would not, and he
voucheth one of the contrary part: in the end he comes to this point; that it
should not indeed be denounced; but if the denunciation were past, he holds it
securest to take it for validious. In this argument they all agree, that such
an excommunication ought not to be thundered out; many say also, that being
denounced, it is nothing: and some few after fulmination, hold it preualent. It
belongs to a religious and godly conscience, to follow the opinion of the most
famous, the best grounded, and that which is established by Pontifical
constitution, or that favors piety most; and not that generally condemned
by the Doctors, seeing those few also which repute it true, give no advice to
follow the same. And that which we read in all the books of the Canonists,
cannot be opposed thereto, Papa non potest errare; the which proposition was
soundly understood by him that first delivered it, and was limited only to
matters of faith, in decreeing and determining; not in supposing or thinking;
and being to speak, the Pope was to use the due means of divine invocation
and assistance. At this present, adulation, remoouing the true limits, carries
it away absolutely for true, although the effects were oftentimes quite
contrary. S. Peter himself may serve for an example; Matt. 16.
who after that Christ had said unto him, tibi dabo claues Regni Coelorum,
immediately he fell a reprehending our Savior himself, because he would be
crucified; wherefore our Lord said unto him; Vade post me Sathanas, scandalum
es mihi, quia non sapis quae Dei sunt, sed quae hominum. His denial also is so
well known to every one, that it imports not to recite it. And S. Paul in his
Epistle to the Galathians, says; Cum venisset Cephas Antiochiam, Galat. 2.
Genesis 2.
in faciem ei restiti, quia reprehensibilis erat. And S. Peter's example is not
alone by it self; for if Came had not been reprehended for discovering his
father Noah's nakedness, three and twenty Popes might be produced subject not
only to some imperfection in their private customs, but in their government
and doctrine also; and if any man please to read the lives of the Popes after
the year 890, for an hundred and thirty years following, without looking
after some others dispersed; he will discern that to be most true, Heb. 5.
which S. Paul says; Omnis Pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus
constituitur in his, quae sunt ad Deum, vt offerat dona, and sacrificia pro
peccatis, qui condolere possit ijs, qui ignorant, and errant, quoniam and ipse
circundatus est infirmitate. So that S. Boniface the Martyr said not without
just cause; Si Papa suae and fraternae salutis negligens deprehenditur,
inutilis, and remissus in operibus suis, and insuper a bono taciturnus, quod
magis officit sibi, and omnibus, nihilominus innumerabiles populos cateruatim
secum ducit, primo mancipio gehennae cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum
vapulaturus. Huius culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus, quia
cunctos ipse iudicaturus a nemine est iudicandus; nisi deprehendatur a fide
deuius.

We need not take it for such a great wonder, that one Pope with his decrees
and censures has offended or injured another, nor repute it such a sin to
say, that he ought also to amend his own errors committed: for not only
religious and godly Popes, but those also that were lead most of all by humane
means and policy, have confessed that they might err, and offered themselves
to reclamation. Innocent the Fourth entreating of a controversy betwixt him
and the Emperor, Frederick the Second, uses these words; Si Ecclesia cum in
aliquo contra debitum laeserat, quod non credebant, parata erat corrigere, ac
in statum debitum reformare, et si diceret ipse quod in nullo, contra
iustitiam, laeserat Ecclesiam, vel quod nos eum contra iustitiam laesissemus,
parati eramus vocare Reges, Praelatos, and Principes tam Ecclesiasticos quam
seculares ad aliquem tutum locum, vbi per se, vel per solemnes nuncios
conuenirent, eratque parata Ecclesia de consilio concilij sibi satisfacere, si
eum laesisset in aliquo, ac reuocare sententiam, si quam contra ipsum unjust
tulisset, etc.

A sentence therefore of Excommunication having been thundered out against the
Duke and Senate, and all their dominions interdicted, because they will not
suffer the liberty of the Commonwealth to be defrauded; because they give not
consent for the cooping up of the foundations whereon it is built; because they
do not deprive her of the power granted by God, in the administration of the
Commonwealth, so necessary for to maintain the tranquillity and peace of
her dominions; because they defend the lives, honor, and goods of those people
committed to their government; and to conclude, because they have ever, and now
do that, which they are commanded by his divine Majesty. And though this
Excommunication was denounced without understanding the cause, without citation
or observation of those essential terms proper to judgment, and ordained by
God in the law of Nature, with an affection, far different from that which
his divine Majesty commands, without due advice, and flat against the
doctrine of the holy Fathers, sacred Divines, and the Pontificiall
constitutions themselves; yet remains it to be considered upon: for all the
injustice thereof is so clear, and the nullitie perspicuous and plain, what
the princes duty in this case is, and how he ought to bear himself herein
before God and his holy Church.

At the first sight, somebody may advise peradventure, that it were good to
follow herein the counsel of S. Gregory: Sententia Pastoris, sieve iusta, sieve
iniusta timenda: and so to commend his cause unto God, with assurance, that
patiently to support unjust censures, will turn to his great merit before the
Majesty of God. An excellent course and counsel for an innocent, which could
not show the equity of his own cause; but for a Prince that has so clear
and manifest reason on his side, a more pernicious way cannot be taken either
for himself, his State, or the service of God, which must be respected above
all other things: For a Prince is more bound then a private man, to fear God,
to be zealous of his holy faith, to reverence Prelates, that he discharge Christ
his place; but so he is more bound to avoid hypocrisy and superstition, to
preserve his dignity, to maintain his State in the exercise of Religion; to
take heed lest that do not happen to his people which sometimes fell out to the
Jews, through Moses long absence, who thinking that in him they were deprived
of the true God, they made them one of gold: a thing which if it were well
considered, the world would not be at that pass which now it is. That saying
is not so generally true; sententia Pastoris, sieve iusta, 11. q. 1. c.
sententia.
sieve iniusta timenda, as some Doctors interpret it, who have introduced and
would maintain in the Church of God, a power which in name should be called
Ecclesiastical, but in deed is Temporal.

There is another Canon made by Pope Gelasius, he that went before Gregory, and
no less famous in doctrine, and sanctity then himself, where he says; 11.
q. 1. c. cui illata.
Si iniusta est sententia, tanto curare eam non debet, quanto apud Deum, and
eius ecclesiam, neminem grauare debet iniqua sententia. Ita ergo and ea se non
absolui desideret, qua si nullatenus perspicit obligatum. These two holy
Fathers are not so opposite as the words may seem to import: But Theological
doctrine will very well reconcile this apparent contradiction. There are some
unjust censures, because they are denounced with a perverse mind and
intention; although it were upon a just and lawful cause; there is no doubt
but all men will yield that these are to be feared, and that before God they
oblige us, as if they were just: although the Magistrate in his wicked
intention offends his divine Majesty; and of this it may be understood,
that, sententia Pastoris sieve iusta, sieve iniusta timenda est. Some are in
truth grounded upon an unjust cause, though in appearance just, by reason that
in things humane, the truth is oftentimes so concealed, as it is not possible
to discover it; so that an innocent sometimes may be condemned without any
fault in the Judge. This kind of sentence obliges us not toward God, neither
ought it to be feared, before his divine Majesty, or in conscience, although
he condemned be bound to make a show of fear, not to scandalize his neighbor,
who esteems that sentence good, and to live toward God, as his innocence
requires, before the world, that thinks him culpable (if he cannot manifest
the truth) to live in patience, and so to commend his cause unto God: But if
the sentence be unjust, denounced without a lawful cause, neither in truth,
nor in appearance, we must not only not fear it, but with all our power we
are bound to oppose our selves thereunto. This doctrine is established in
eleven Canons in the Decretorie, Cap. qui iustus, c. cui illata. cap. secundum
Catholicam, c. coepisti. cap. remerarie, cap. quod obesse. cap. quo, c. illud
plane. c. non debet, 11. q. 3. cap. manet 24. q. 1. c. si quis, 24. q. 3.
and it is so received amongst all Divines and Canonists, that no one of them
differs from another; as also they agree in this point, that none can be
excommunicate, except it be for mortal sin, the which must be prosecuted
also, after he has been first admonished by the Church. He that will but read
all the foresaid Canons, may be fully instructed, that he need no whit to
doubt, but that unjust censures do no ways oblige or offend, and that they
are not to be esteemed. And so much the rather he may understand this truth,
if he read but the authors, in the fountains themselves, out of whom these
Canons are taken; for the words both before and after, will make the matter
more manifest. The sentence unjust in truth, but yet just in appearance, and
which to avoid scandal ought to be feared, cannot grow but from an error in
the fact; for the case being delivered in sincere truth, the Judge which
erreth in discerning of equity, though it were through ignorance, is always
in fault: therefore whatsoever sentence is unjust through manifest error in
iure, it is nothing, nor of any validity, neither does it bind us before God,
or before the world. In that, for which the Pope thundreth out this present
excommunication, there is no error at all in the fact, the truth is most
clear, the laws of the Senate are in writing; the delinquents accused and
imprisoned; there can be no concealed innocence, which may appear to be a
fault. The question is, in iure, we must see whether in the laws made, or in
the imprisonments decreed, there is any error committed: for if neither the
Prince nor Senate have offended, but have contrariwise obeyed the commandments
of God, in procuring the preservation of their subjects honors, lives, and
goods, as at large in all these points has been declared; we can no ways
doubt of the justice of the Senats cause, and consequently of the nullitie of
the sentence Pontifical; but especially and by which this is made manifest,
there needs not such great dexterity of conceit to apprehend them, but with
very slender consideration, they appear manifestly to all men: wherefore
considering the innocence of the same Senate before God, and euidencie also
thereof before the world, there remains no scruple, wherein just scandal may
be given. In like manner there is no reason why they should in any sort fear
this excommunication, neither in conscience, nor in any external trial,
except as any one may fear a manifest violence offered to a sinister end;
considering it is a manifest violence to use the power of excommunication,
granted by Christ, contrary to his own institutions: and toward him which
has power, and unjustly uses the same, the remedy is to have recourse unto a
superior, if he may; but if there be no superior, to whom to have recourse, God
has allowed no other remedy to a Prince thus offended, but to make resistance
with his own force, opposing himself to force; because it comes from God, and
the civil being of every Commonwealth or kingdom is to the end of his glory;
and therefore a Prince cannot permit without a sin and offense, that his own
liberty should be infringed, which is the civil being of every
principallity, and there is no doubt but negligence in defending of it, is a
grievous offense unto God, and most heinous, if he voluntarily suffer it to be
usurped over his head. To obey the commandment of God therefore, we must
oppose our selves against him whosoever, that would take away the power which
God has given to make laws, and with justice to defend the foresaid offended
in their lives, honors, and goods. And as the innocent by an error in facto,
unjustly excommunicated, to avoid scandal, is bound patiently to endure: so
when the error is in iure, and the manifest injustice thereof is apparent, to
avoid scandal likewise, the Prince is bound to resist, and to oppose himself
against this injury; because there is no doubt, but when this shall be known
to other kingdoms, where the like unto the Venetian laws are observed, and
where malefactors are judged after a conformable manner, that the Commonwealth
for fear of unjust censures, and those inualidious, has yielded unto
violence, and omitted to exercise and execute his natural power, they would be
much and exceeding scandalized heereat, as also the subjects that should
discover such a vain fear, they would become very perverse. And therefore for
this point also, it was both equal and necessary for the Prince to make due
resistance.

So that the Popes fulmination being unjust and nothing, it follows
consequently, that for necessary defense, the obstacle of the Commonwealth,
in the publication and execution thereof, has been most just and lawful. And
the Commonwealths subjects, but especially those of the Clergy, ought to
pacify their minds and consciences, attending the service of God, under the
protection of the Prince; constantly believing, that the holy Ghost was
promised and given to all the faithful, among whom Christ himself is present,
when they are congregated in his name; and that none can justly be excluded out
of the holy Catholic Church, except by his own worthy demerits he be first
excluded from the favor of God. And that the obedience which God commands us
to perform to our Ecclesiastical superiors, is not a foolish or ridiculous
subjection; nor the power of Prelates is not an arbitratorie judgment; but
both the one and other must be ruled by the Law of God, who in Deuteronomie
ordained not an absolute obedience to the Priest, but a prescribed observance,
Deuteronomy. 17.
according to the law divine. Facies quaecunque dixerint qui praesunt loco,
quem elegerit Dominus, and docuerint te iuxta legem eius. God only is an
infallible rule, we must only profess obedience unto him, without all
exception. He that generally professes this toward others, without the
commandments of God, sins; and whosoever supposes any humane will to be
infallible, commits great blasphemy, in ascribing to the creature a
property only divine. Absolute obedience is only rendered unto God, an
observance limited within the bounds of laws divine. And this they used in the
ancient Church; we have an example hereof in the Acts of the Apostles, written
by S. Luke: That the faithful thought the contrary of S. Peter, and withstood
him about the vocation of the Gentiles; and yet were they not thundered against
with hideous excommunications, or threatened by him, and forced to hold their
peace; but by the reason and authority of divine revelations, and the words of
our Savior, 1. Cor. 13.
they were taught and persuaded. Christian charity, says S. Paul, Patiens
est, benigna est, non inflatur, non est ambitiosa; It threatens not, it
destroys not, it entreats all men like brothers. Considering that Prelates
must not domineere nor command with empire, 1. Pet. 5.
but with examples and instructions of piety and charity: lets hear S. Peter
a little; Pascite qui in vobis est gregem Dei, prouidentes non coacte sed
spontanee secundum Deum, 2. Cor. 1.
neque turpis lucri gratia, sed voluntary, neque vt dominantes in cleris, sed
formafacti gregis ex animo: and S. Paul, Non quia dominamur fidei vestrae, sed
adiutores sumus gaudij vestri: And a Prelates charity should be as ready to
teach, as to be taught of others: for when S. Peter erred in Antioch, Gal. 2.
S. Paul forbear not to reprehend him grievously in the presence of all men:
and let no man here reply, who is like to S. Paul, that may be so bold? as
though S. Paul by reason of his excellency, might be the bolder to oppose
himself against one, whom it was not lawful to resist; nay, but we may
justly, and constantly affirm quite contrary, who is like Paul, that may be
compared unto him in humility and acknowledgement of himself, and of due
reverence to the high Priest? Questionless we may undoubtedly believe, that as
S. Paul in all the virtues far exceeded, whatsoever we are able to perform,
so in due reverence to the head of the Church, Romans 15.
he observed that, which the least of us is bound to perform. The holy
Scripture says, Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt.
The holy Ghost would never have written this History but for our example, to
the end we might imitate it; and we see, that all the Doctors in discussing how
any one may oppose himself to the Pope, when he commiteth error, and gouernes
unworthily, they have recourse to this example.

Let no man therefore be astonished, depending only on the authority of a
Prelate; Mat. 16.
let him remember, That not one but two keys were given to Peter, and if they
be not both used together, the effect of loosing and binding does not ensue;
the one being of power, and the other of knowledge and discretion. Christ gave
not a power to be used, without due knowledge and circumspection, but with
great and exquisite judgment; the which wanting, power only takes no effect.
The Canonists say, that the power of binding and loosing is intended by a key,
not erring; and S. Leo the Pope, 24. q. 1. c. Manet.
expressly affirms it in a Canon, speaking of this privilege given by S.
Peter: Manet ergo Petri priuilegium vbicunque ex ipsius fertur aequitate
iudicium, nec nimia est, vel seueritas, vel remissio, vbi nihil erit ligatum,
vel solutum, nisi quod Beatus Petrus soluerit, aut ligauerit.

FINIS.

