THE HISTORY OF THE QVARRELS OF POPE PAUL. V. WITH The State of VENICE. IN
SEVEN BOOKS. Faithfully translated out of the Italian, and compared with the
French Copy.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. M.
DC. XXVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS COVENTREY KNIGHT, L. KEEPER OF THE Great
Seal of England, One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
My most Honored Lord,
THe Author of this Excellent History was the same wise and worthy Friar, who
of late with so great judgment and fidelity has revealed unto the World that
piece of the Mystery of Iniquity, those Arcana Imperij Pontificij, in the
History of the Trent Council, which shall be a lasting Monument of his
memory, and Fame to all Posterity. His own Contrymen knew well how to
value and reward his Virtues, judging him a Person capable to assist in their
Highest Counsels of State: But at Rome his goodness easily merited the extreme
hatred of the Courtiers (though he lived and died in the outward Communion of
that Church,) so far, that they sentenced and martyred him in his Picture
(being defeated in their real attempt upon his Person) as a Mezzo Lutherano,
an Heretic, such as are, in their account, all those that cannot believe that
thirteenth Article of the Roman Creed, Subesse Romano Pontifici etc. est de
necessitate salutis. In these Annals Your Lordship may see the natural Power
of all Sovereign Princes and Law-giuers, first rudely assaulted by Him who
will needs be Perpetual Dictator at Rome, and give Laws at his pleasure to
all the World; then generously asserted and vindicated by that most Prudent and
Illustrious Commonwealth, which though one of the most aged in Europe, has
still maintained it self fresh and flourishing, amidst all the Confusions and
Alterations of Italy; an indubitable argument that it is a Body well
complexion'd, and foundded upon sollide Rules of good Policy. The Translator
presumes to put this Piece into Your Honorable Hands, not as prizing so highly
his own performance (which is but weak like Himself, then whom none is more
conscious of infirmities:) but encouraged hereto both by Your Benignity, and by
the Dignity of the Work it self, from which he knows Your Lordships
Wisdom will draw many serious and important Considerations. Also his private
Interests bind him publicly and upon all occasions to profess his very very
deep obligation to Your Honor, such as He can never satisfy. He could speak
largely in Your Praise, and the common Voice of the People would acquit him
from suspicion of flattery (which naturally He abhorres,) the Kingdom
generally being much comforted to observe the great Judgment of our most
Gracious Sovereign, and his love to the Public in his choice of so Able and
worthy an Officer: But he forbears, lest He should offer violence to Your
Modesty, and refers Your Goodness to God, and Your own good Conscience to be
more really recompensed. Finally, He every day heartily blesses God to see
this Church so happy in so great a Friend, and an Example of Religion, and this
State in so great a Patron and Pattern of Equity. The same God of Grace
continue long Your Lordship an Instrument of his Glory, and multiply all his
Mercies upon Your own Person, Your most Religious Lady, and Your Hopeful
Children. This is the Prayer of

Your Lordships sincerely and thankefully devoted C. P.

TO THE READER.
THe Ambition of Princes has many goodly shrouds and disguisements; it usually
borrowes the false beauty of apparences to bleare vulgar eyes, and to elude or
pacify Opinions: But among the rest it has none either more potent to this
effect, or more malicious than when it gilds it self with the color of
Religion, and assumes the couerture of Piety. For this is to write God
himself the Author of all their usurpations, and to cast upon that Infinite
Justice the patronage, the shame and dishonor of all their public Robberies,
Oppressions, and Violences. The Pagan Tyrants of old, though they were not more
just, yet they were more modest: They had a more venerable conceit of their
Gods (such as they were) then to entitle them to their own unjust actions And
therefore when by plain force or fraud, they took from lawful Princes their
Crowns and Kingdoms, they professed ingenuously herein to neglect Piety and
Justice, hence that Maxim of theirs -- regnandi causa violandum est ius, In
caeteris rebus pietatem colas. But among us Christians (to the great blemish of
our most holy Faith, and the scandal of Infidels,) we have Two great
Catholics, the one a King, the other a Bishop, who under the fair pretense
of Piety have already invaded a great part of the World, and in their hopes
devoured it all. The former under shadow of Converting the West Indies has
depopulated them, baptized those poor Paynims in their own blood, and to make
them Christians, has made them no men. And no doubt it was merely respects of
Conscience and pure zeal for the Church against Heresy, that moved him to
seize upon Nauar, Sicily, etc. to imbroile all France with that (damned) Holy
League, and now lately to deprive the Grisons of the Valtoline, and that most
Noble Prince Palatine of his ancient Inheritance. For it seems it is a part of
their Gospel in Spain, that the Catholic Faith cannot subsist without the
Catholic Monarchy. And it seems they are alive again, whom that noble
Britain of old in Tacitus called -- raptores Orbis -- quos non Oriens non
Occidens satiaucrit -- auferre, trucidare, falsis nominibus Imperium, atque vbi
solitudinem faciunt pacem appellant. I am sure whosoever looks upon the
present miserable Face of Europe, every where mourning and laboring under his
Arms or Artifices, will confess that if he advance his Conquests a little
further (though every good man will abhor the Omen, and humbly pray the Lord
God to auert it,) he will quickly lead all Europe in triumph, make the Pope
himself become his Chaplain, turn all Kingdoms into his Provinces, and Plant
them with Colonies of Moors or Indians, all Princes to be petty Officers of
his House, and send the mean people to dig in his Mines, or to fish Him some
Pearls in America. The worst is, he preuailes not so much by his own Virtue,
as by our sinful security, who are become (...), fallen from the innocence,
wisdom, and courage of our Ancestors: if betimes we look not to it, our
Posterity will have occasion to curse us for betraying their Liberty. The Lord
of Hosts go out with the Armies of our most religious and worthy Sovereign,
and send him Counsel and Strength and good Success in these his just and
necessary Wars, so as all that hate Him may flee before Him.

For the Other who qualifies himself the Catholic Bishop, its a pity to
read how he enchanted the World in former times with the formidable names of
S. Peter's Keys and his Swords, of the Roman Succession and Apostolic See;
his infallible Judgment and unlimited Jurisdiction. How by degrees he plucked
up all ancient Pales and Boundaries, extended his Diocese all over the Earth,
and at length enclosed all Christendom within the walls of Rome. His first
attempt to this purpose was to depresse his Concurrent of Constantinople in
spite of so many Canons of ancient General Councels, so jealous of their
(...), Ecclesiastical limits, and so often assigning to those Two Prime
Patriarchs, (...), equal Honor and Authority;) which he easily compassed by
favoring the Treasons and Parricides of that usurper Phocas, receiving from
Him in recompense the Title (so much detested by Gregory 1.) of Oecumenicall
Bishop. After this he contended with all Catholic Bishops in that quarrel
about Images, and against them all gained his Process in that ridiculous Pack
the second Synod of Nice. At last, being encouraged with this great success,
his Arrogance still prompting Him (...), he fell to contest with Emperors
themselves, in appearance for Ecclesiastical Inuestitures, in truth for
Sovereignty: Confounding all Europe with horrible ruins, tumults, and
bloodshed, firing all Countries with his Excommunications and Interdicts, which
were indeed but Igues fatui, never penetrating (contrary to the lightning of
Heaven) but where they found no resistance, and receiving all their heat and
vigor from the cold patience and weakness of the Times, and assuming to
himself a vaste power to dethrone Kings at his pleasure, and to toss their
Crowns like so many Tennis-Balles: Till, in conclusion, he was saluted Dominus
Deus noster Papa, (...), no more a Mortal, and had seized himself as in fee
of all Churches and Kingdoms, all Bishops being now his Curates, and all Kings
(in his account) his Vassals and Homagers. With such lewd impostures and holy
trum peries he cheated our innocent Forefathers, having first blindfolded them
by withdrawing the divine light of Scriptures, and by planting a fatal
ignorance of all good Letters, which (together with the superstition which
followed) so amused and enfeebled all Spirits, that they were rendered capable
of any (absurdest) impressions. But it exceeds all wonder that he should yet
still continue to put his iugling tricks upon this Age of Light and Learning,
wherein he has been so often convicted and stigmatized for a Coozener:
Unless happily his lanizaries the Jesuits make Him believe that they have
subdued all Peoples under his Blind Obedience, and taught them (like unclean
Beasts or like Themselves) to swallow his morsels without chewing, to receive
his Commandments without disputing. If He nourish any such impudent hopes, the
stout Venetians (as appears in this History) will help to disabuse Him, and
lend Him spectacles (if He be not stark blind) to see his Error. Besides,
those Excellent Wits of that Republique (all collected in the Latin by
Goldastus) which upon this occasion canuased the Controversies, have so
learnedly nullified these Papal pretensions and Censures, that hereafter his
wisest course will be to play these parts upon the stages of Iapan or Mexico
among his new silly Conuerts, not in Europe where an Ass is easily known from
a Lion, and his Rodomantades in this kind will find as much credit as Lucians
true Histories. In one word, We are told in this History (page 117.) by an
Oracle, our late blessed Sovereign of Immortal Memory, (and it is a truth as
clear as if it were Solis radio scriptum, in the Proverb of Tertullian,
written with a Sunne-beame,) that the only pride of this Usurper has bred and
fomented all Contentions in point of Religion, miserably difioynted the
Catholic Church into so many fragments and pieces, and still keeps fresh the
bleeding wounds and ruptures of Christendom; Whilst he is obstinate in
despite of God and Men to erect his absolute Monarchy, and to that end urges
every Canon of the Trent Council more rigorously than any part of Canonical
Scripture, and all those new Articles of Pope Pius the fourth his Creed more
then the old ones of the Apostles: Whilst be disdaines to acknowledge his
Humanity by exempting Himself from Error, obtrudes upon the World every
fantafie of his Court for a Catholic verity, and presumes (as if he had the
keeping of the Book of Life) to raze out of the Communion of Saints all that
are not of his Schismatic Congregation, as if Fides Catholica were now
nothing but Fides Vrbica, or Vrbana, and as if they had no part in Christ
Jesus, who are not in the part of Pope Urban, just the old iargon of Donatus,
one of the Patriarchs of Popery.)

Now for these broils at Venice, it had been a Miracle (far exceeding all
that ever were wrought by Father Xauier, or any of his Comperes in the East or
West Indies,) if the Jesuits had not been tampering with their bellows in
this fire. Although in the event, (by the just providence of God) all the
smoke was blown into their own Eyes, and their own Nests by this fire
consumed. For this wise Republique observing the seditious humor of these
wicked Spirits merely incompatible with the Peace of any State) thought best
to conjure them out of their Dominions, and accordingly by an irreuocable
Decree (which will not be so easily demolished as that Pyramide erected once at
Paris to their infamy) banished them for ever: Grounding their Judgment upon
this evidence (page 138.) that the Jesuits have been the sole Authors of all
discords, disorders, and miseries in this Age thorowout all Kingdoms of the
World. And certainly few parts of the Habitable Earth have escaped their bloody
and violent Practices; neither is it possible in Europe to name that Country
(save only Spain and the House of Austria, their great Patrons) wherein those
restless Furies have not been kindling Combustions, and plotting the division
(and consequently the desolation) of the State. Without question, when they go
to their own place, the Devil is wise enough to pin up these Brouillons in
some close dungeon by themselves, for otherwise they would disturb Hell it
self, and Satan should have no peace in his own Kingdom, which (as our
Savior tells us) if it be divided cannot stand. Nor do they only act but
teach Sedition; give rules of disloyalty, perjury, and parricide; make their
Disciples believe that Rebellion is a virtue, and the murdering of a Prince a
merit; that a Clarke cannot be a Traitor, because he is no Subject; and that a
King ought not to reign or live if he serve not the Pope, who has (directly
or indirectly, it matters not) all Power in Heaven and Earth. These are the
Maxims of their Cabale; above 30. Jesuits of late have been openly
challenged by the University of Paris (in the name of all the others of France)
to have published these execrable Doctrines, tending to the ruin of Mankind.
And lest they should want Actors for any of their Tragedies in time of need,
they have their Chambers of Meditation, which are clearly so many Seminaries
of King-killers and Assassins: wherein their weak or wild Nouices are first
frighted out of their Wits, and so animated and prepared for any (the most
desperate) enterprises. Never was Sect so justly and universally hated and
feared: All Nations detest and suspect Them, yet still they prosper. So
strangely, that whosoever seriously eyes their Power and Practices, will see
they do but equivocate with their own Masters, the Pope and Spain:
pretending to be their Factors and Instruments, but indeed having their right
eye upon Themselves. So that if the World do not quickly resolve to prevent
Them by an utter abolishing of this pestilent Vermin, the next Age will see the
Jesuits plant both the Catholic Crowns upon the Head of their General. In
the mean while we sleep, and which is worse, we sin; Never more need we had
to be at peace with God, and well united among our selves, being threatened
with so many dangers and Enemies abroad. What then can we judge of so many new
Doctrines in the Church, so many old sins in the State, but that they are
certain symptoms (and indeed Causes) of our approaching ruin, which in all
humane judgment cannot be avoided, unless the Lord as he is wont) work some
Miracle in our preservation. He has long wooed us with innumerable
vnparalell'd mercies, and of late scourged us with a furious Mortality: but our
dull and dead hearts are still stupid and insensible, we do not turn to him
that smites us, we do not meet our God by Repentance, we return nothing but
insolence and ingratitude. We despise his Mercy, and defy his Justice; we
scoff at Holiness in stead of honoring and imitating it, we laugh at sin,
in stead of lamenting it, and those are called Manners with us, which our
honest Forefathers would have counted Vices. Our Atheism, Sacrilege, Luxury,
Excess, Pride, Unthankfulness, open Profaneness, etc. cry down vengeance
upon our heads, and will doubtless make us the example of Gods indignation to
all the World, (as we have been formerly of his love,) the pity of our
Friends, the hissing and reproach of our Enemies round about us. Tunc votorum
praecipuus locus, quum spei nullus. All you that love and fear God, and that
tremble under the expectation of his wrath, give him no rest, stand up in the
breach, and quasi manu facta Deum ambientes, assault him with your prayers,
helps to quench this fire of his anger with your tears of sorrow. Give not
over weeping, repenting, and praying, till you have received a gracious answer,
till the sins of our Nation be pardoned, his imminent judgments auerted, his
ancient favors recovered; till he have rebuked Satan, and trodden him under
our feet, till he have frustrated the bloody hopes and desires of the Enemies
of his Truth, till he build up the breaches, raise the ruins, bind up the
wounds of his Sion: Saying with Daniel, O Lord God which art great and
fearful, which keep covenant and mercy toward them that love thee and
keep thy Commandments: We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, we have rebelled and have departed from thy Precepts, and from thy
Commandments. For we would not obey thy Servants, thy Ministers which spoke
in thy Name, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the
People of the Land. O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open
shame and confusion of face, as appears this day. Yet compassion and
forgiveness is with the Lord, albeit we have rebelled against him. Now
therefore, O Lord, hear the prayers of thy servants and their supplications,
and cause thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that lies waste for thy Names
sake. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it, defer not for
thine own sake, O my God, for thy Name is called upon thy City, and upon thy
People.

Errata.
PAge 8. line 1. for was sent, read was near sent. p. 16. l. 19. for degree,
r. decree. p. 23. l. 1. for Neralse, r. Neruese. ibid. l. 10. for Priorie, r.
Prior. p. 37. l. 9. for of Fen, r. of the Pregadi. p. 115. l. 14. for Prinli,
r. Priuli. p. 119. l. 3. for could, r. would. p. 164. l. 4. for obedience unto,
r. obedience due unto. p. 193. l. 16. for Damila, r. Damiata. p. 206. l 5. for
Papatins, r. Papalins. p. 207. l. 26. for Courts, r. Commands. p. 210 l 21. for
there Sosa, r. Friar Sosa. p. 211. l. 2. for as be was desired, r. as he
desired. p. 229. l. 11. for it is, r. it was. p. 245. l. 16. for that not
having, r. that having. ib. l 19. for repaied, r. repaired. p. 334. l. 16. for
his horse, r. his House. In Epist. to the Reader, conclusions, r. combustions.
amassed, r. amused.

THE HISTORY OF THE QVARRELS OF POPE PAVL 5. With The State of Venice.
First Book.
POpe PAVL the fifth, was addicted from his youth and nourished in those
studies, which have no other end but to acquire unto the Pope the Spiritual
and Temporal Monarchy of all the world: and to advance the order of the
Clergy so far, as not only to exempt them from all power and jurisdiction of
Princes, but further to exalt them about Kings themselves, and to submit unto
them Secular men in all kinds of services and commodities. Being come to
perfect age, he had yet better means to manage those arms by which this
doctrine is maintained, For having exercised the office of Auditor of the
Chamber, a charge altogether agreeable to his nature and inclination, in as
much as the power attributed to that Magistrate, is, to be Sententiarum and
censurarum intus and extra latarum vniuersalis executor; He employed himself
in this charge more exactly than any of his Predecessors, so that more
Monitories and Citations were thundered out by him, during the five years of
his office, than had been in any fifty years before.

In that while, he conceived a vehement desire of vengeance against those who
seemed to him to bring some empeachment to the liberty or (to speak more
properly) licentiousness of persons Ecclesiastical, and to the free and
arbitrary exercise of Excommunication. But because the desire of revenge is
extinguished, or at least repressed, when it is directed against Persons so
potent and eminent, that there is no hope to effect it: his courage and
resolutions were bent not so much against Kings and Monarchs, as against
Republiques or popular Commonwealths, because that considering the Governors
thereof in their private persons (in which respect they are without power,) he
might hope to attain his end, howsoever they were joined in one body, and
assisted by authority, which accompanies public forces. But above all, he
had a particular design of revenge against the State of Venice, as well
because it alone sustaineth the dignity, and has the true marks of a Prince,
independent, as because the Ecclesiastiques have no dealing in that Estate, and
yet further, it alone (among all Princes) does not give pensions to any of the
Court of Rome: which being by them interpreted a contempt, is the cause that
they carry all an especial hatred, and nourish in themselves an evil will
against that State. Hereupon being advanced unto the Papacy, he proposed no
other thing for his end, but to enlarge the Ecclesiastical authority, or (as
he termed it) to restore it unto that condition from which it was fallen by the
negligence of this Predecessors, and particularly of Clement 8. Wherefore his
first purpose was to establish a Congregation at Rome, whose only charge and
study should be to consider o^ whereby this authority might (...) and
augmented; or at least by cramining all writings upon these matters to raise
new difficulties, and to prepare occasions for his Successors to give
perfection unto that which he could not finish, and in the mean while to
mortify the presumption (as he called it) of Secular Estates. Besides, he
imagined that to bring this his design to perfection, it was necessary to send
into all Kingdoms and Courts of Cat^ Princes such Nuntio's as were enclin^ the
like thoughts. That which straight ways he began to execute, by changing the
(...) formerly employed; and particularly (...) to Venice Horatio Matthei,
Bishop of Gi^ a man so passionate in this cause, that he bl^shed not to say
unto the Duke in full assembly that Alines and other works of piety, the
frequ^^^ing of Sacraments, and all other good and Christion actions, ad nihilum
valent vltra, were nothing available, if men did not favor the
Ecclesiastical liberty: these were his words. And in many familiar discourses
which he had with diverse persons, he was wont to say, that he had heard the
piety of the City of Venice often (...) amply commended, by himself could
perceive but little; considering that Christian perfection does not consist in
alms deeds and devotions, but in exalting the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
which is the true ciment of that perfection. And many times he would intimate
that he had been sent by the Pope in that charge of his Nuntio, for to receive
martyrdom (if it were needful) in defense of the autho^^tie of the Sea
Apostolic. But the vanity of this man, so desirous of Martyrdom, was not
without some mixture of ambition, and desire of command. For if any one did
reply against him with reason, or contradict his discourses upon this subject,
his ordinary answer was (as if it had been a form of speech or a lesson given
him) here I am Pope, and I will be obeyed. But the Pope did not crect this
Congregation according to his first deseigne, being advertised that by this
means he should too manifestly discover his intentions, which might bring
jealousy to all Princes, and cause them to project some remedies, and so it
might produce effects quite contrary to his meaning; as it fell out with
Clement 8. who by founding a Congregation upon the affairs of England, excited
the spirit of that King to observe more narrowly the carriage of the Catholics
of his Kingdom: which was the cause that their enterprises were afterward much
more thwarted. And again, the Pope would not put in execution (during the
first Months of his Papacy) any one of those particulars which were already
designed, because being first weakened by the vehemence of his hopes and joys,
he ^as afterward assailed with a grievous melancholy, accompanied with a
strong apprehension of death, which he feared would seize upon him within a few
days. This fear was more increased by a rumor dispersed through Rome, that
the Image of our Lady de Subiacco had sweated; which usually happens (as the
vulgar believe) for to advertise the Popes that their death is at hand. And
further, a Flemmish Astrologer had foretold that in March Pope Clement 8. was
to die, and that after him should be elected one Leo, and then one Paul, who
should live but a short time. Besides, this Pope by nature was timorous, and
much inclined to give credit unto Diuinations, which he entertained upon all
occurrences and accidents. This perturbation of spirit held him five Months in
such extremity, that all things affrighted him; in so much that he dismissed
his Cook and his Caruer, who had long time served him; and if any persons of
base and mean condition and unknown, did present him with any memorial or
petition as he passed the streets, very often he let them fall to the ground,
fearing lest they might be empoysoned. Being thus vexed with suspicions, his
design touching the enlargement of Ecclesiastical Liberty was neglected.

But in the Month of September after his promotion to the Papacy, his friends
and kinsmen found a remedy for this fear; having made a great assembly of all
the Astrologers and other Fortune Tellers of Rome, in the house of the Lord
John Francis, brother to his Holiness, who concluded by their rules that the
time of some perils threatened by the influences was past, and that therefore he
might now live many years. His fear being thus removed, he resumed again his
first and ordinary thoughts of augmenting the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

He began to move the most Christian King that the Council of Trent might be
received in his Kingdom. In Spain he procured that the Jesuits might be
exempted from paying any Tithes. At Naples he wrought in such sort that John
Francis de Ponte Marquise of Morcone, called the Regent de Ponte, was sent to
Rome, as punishable in the Inquisition, for having condemned to the Galleys a
Bookeseller, for a matter which the Inquisitor pretended to belong to his
cognizance. He took from the Religious of Malta the collation of certain
Commanderies, conferring them upon the Cardinal Borghese. He raised many
difficulties to the Duke of Parma, as well for the imposts which he had put
upon his Subjects of Parma in the absence of the Bishop, as for the fact of
Count Albert Scotto, and also for other things which the Pope pretended to have
been enterprised against the Bull, in caena Domini. Moreover, he had some
differences with the Duke of Sauoy, not only because his Officers took
knowledge, and gave judgment in the temporalty of Benefices, but also because
Laiques assist at the Office of the Inquifition; but especially by reason of an
Abbey which the Duke had conserred on the Cardinal Pio. All things being put
in deliberation, the Duke changing the person named to the Abbey, placed
therein a Nephew of his Holiness, some what to appease him.

But none of these attempts succeeding to his mind, in the beginning of
October, two occasions were offered, not only of themselves very proper for the
end which the Pope pretended, but very commodious, as being so many degrees and
means to open him a passage to greater matters. The one was, that the
Republique of Luca considering that many of their Citizens having changed their
Religion, had retired themselves into Protestant countries; in this regard they
had published an Edict, by which all their subjects were forbidden to have any
commerce, or to treat in any fashion whatsoever with such persons: an Edict
which doubtless had been highly commended by some former Popes. But this man,
after it had been represented unto him, approved the law in it self; but said
nevertheless that the Republique of Luca had no authority to make any such
ordinance which touched Religion (howsoever it were in it self good and holy,)
for as much as Laiques have not any power to decree in matter of Religion,
although the Law be in favor thereof. And therefore he absolutely commanded
that the Edict should be rased out of their Records, having an intention to
make another (the same in substance) but to publish it by his Pontifical
authority. The other was, that the Republique of Genoa being advertised that
the Governors of certain Lay Fraternities, instituted by devotion, had not
dispensed the Reuenew with requisite fidelity, resolved to examine and renew
their accounts; and to this effect commanded that the Books should be brought
unto the Duke. And in the same City there happened a thing of much greater
importance, occasioned by a new institution of an Oratorie of Secular persons,
in the House of the Jesuits, for Christian exercises; wherein they of that
Congregation conspired not to favor any but of their own Society in the
distribution of Magistracies. Whereof the State having notice, by public
authority they took order to prohibit all such Assemblies. These Decrees
(which indeed commended the piety of that Republique, as desirous to provide
against the evil husbanding of temporal goods given to pious uses, and to
prevent all unlawful conuenticles and assemblies, which under pretext of
Religion tend to the ruin of Co^mmon-wealths,) were not expounded in the true
sense, nor well accepted by the Pope; but contrarily he was much offended, and
gave the Republique to understand, that these Ordinances were against the
Liberty Ecclesiastical, and therefore expressly he enjoined them to revoke
their Edicts, otherwise he threatened to thunder out his Censures. He made
great instance to the State of Venice, that they would succor the Emperor
with money for the war of Hungary against the Turk, offering himself (in
case the Senate should make difficulty, for fear of provoking against
themselves so puissant an Enemy) to receive it secretly, and pass it
underhand, that it should not be perceived. In which treaty he and his Nuntio
used a form of discourse, not like as when one Prince represents unto another
their common interests, but like one which demands some extraordinary
contributions from his subjects. And therefore after some modest words of
answer, at last for a final resolution the Senate said, that, for the
conservation of their Estates they were forced to make great expenses, and to
provide for many diffidences, which hindered that they could not apply
themselves to any new enterprises; that it was necessary first of all to settle
a perfect intelligence among Christian Princes, to the end that having quitted
all suspicions, they might (being well united) entend the oppression of that
common Enemy; that whenever any ouerture unto a good Union should be
offered, the State would not be the last that should take arms against the
enemies of Christianity. This answer seemed strange unto the Pope, as
persuading himself (conformably to the doctrine of the modern Canonists) that
he might command any Prince to do whatsoever he thinks expedient for the
common good of Christendom: neuerchelesse, he judged not meet to ground his
Quarrel upon this, but upon some other occasion, which (in pretense at least)
might be more spiritual and trench more nearly upon the Sea Apostolic.
Wherefore, first only in general terms he treated that the Ecclesiastical
liberty might not be in any fashion violated, but rather that jurisdiction
restored entire: this was the talk of his Nuntio in Venice, and of himself at
Rome to the Ambassador of the Signiory. After, coming to particulars, he
mentioned some affairs concerning Navigations, and the imposition upon oils,
and touching an exchange on the coast of Romagna for the Marquisate of Ancona;
assaying by all means to make the State receive his commandments. Further, he
proposed the reuocation of an Ordinance made by the Senate the eleventh of
December MDCIIII. forbidding the Subjects of the Signiory to set forth any
Vessels by sea, or to make any assurances or companies for the traffic of any
merchandise whatsoever (to be exported out of the State of Venice into foraine
countries,) unless first it passed by Venice; alleging that this would hinder
the great importations and abundance in the Estate of the Church, and by
consequent was against the Ecclesiastical Liberty. But being answered, that
every Prince commands his subjects that which may serve for the commodity of
his own Estate, without considering, what may follow thereupon to neighbor
Princes, which cannot justly be therewith offended, howsoever they may be in
some sort endamaged: and that whenever his Holiness shall command his
Subjects any thing which may turn to the profit of his Government, the State
would not take it in evil part, nor esteem it against their Liberty: the
Pope perceived by this essay that thus he could not compass his intention,
there being not any shadow of pretext, to fetch this controversy within the
bounds of things Spiritual. For this reason, so soon as he could apprehend an
occasion, which might more probably be thought Spiritual, leaving the rest, he
settled his proiects and purposes wholly upon this.

The occasion was, that at Vicenza, one Scipio Sarraceno, Canon there of a
Church (who had with great contempt defaced the Seal of the Magistrate, which
was put to, for the custody of the Bishops Court of Chancery, at the request
of the Chancellor, the Sea being vacant,) did his utmost endeavor to seduce a
Damsel his kinswoman; and prevailing not with her, after he had long molested
and pursued her in public, and even in the Church, at last in a despitefull
outrage, he shamefully defiled her portall and house doors with his
excrements: for which cause, being assisted by some Gentlemen of her family,
she came to Venice, and there put in her complaint against this Canon, who
being called, readily presented himself. The Canon had a kinsman Bishop of
Citta Nuoua, a man very busy and enterprising, who served in Venice for a
Guide and Counselor to all the Nuntio's and Ministers of the Pope, and by his
counsels directed all their actions; and the Nuntio's had express order to
communicate with him their Commissions. By his means the Nuntio was moved in
this affair, who both by his own disposition was vehemently desirous to
procure for the Clergy a licentious exemption, and but a little before was
come to Venice with that design. The Nuntio then and this Bishop speedily gave
advice of this business unto the Pope, and to the Bishop of Vienza, who was
then in Court: who thereupon treated together, and mutually excited themselves
to the defense of the Canon, and of the Ecclesiastical Liberty. Both the one
and the other spoke of this matter to Augustine Nani, Ambassador of the State,
with the Pope, a bout the end of October. The Bishop told him, that the Pope
would not endure the emprisonment of a Canon, and that he was by him
encouraged to do the office of a Bishop; that therefore it were good to give
satisfaction to his Holiness, by rendering the prisoner to the Judge of the
Church, the crime being not so grievous. But the Pope was much more peremptory;
that he would not in any sort permit that Ecclesiastiques in any cause should
be judged by Seculars, this being against the ordinance of the Council. The
Ambassador advertised the State of these passages, and whilst he expected
their answer, the Pope again complains unto him in another audience, how that
at Venice since the decease of Pope Clement 8. they had made a Decree,
forbidding Secular men to alienate their goods to Ecclesiastiques; saying, that
howsoever that law were founded upon another more ancient, yet this latter was
much more ample; that both the one and the other were void, and could not
subsist, as being against the Canons, against the Council, and against the
Laws Imperial; that it was scandalous, and made the condition of
Ecclesiastiques worse then of infamous persons; adjoining withal, that they
which made that law had incurred the Censures. The he same commanded his Nuntio
to propose in full Senate. And the Ambassadors of the Republique being come to
Rome to congratulate with his Holiness about the beginning of November, Senate.

In the mean while, they of Genoa, for to satisfy the Pope, had revoked the
Degree touching the reuiew of the accounts of their Fraternities; but excused
themselves for the other Decree touching the Congregation, which for security
of the State was necessarily to be executed. Which did so much enrage the Pope,
that he caused a Monitorie to be imprinted against that Republique, meanacing
the Cardinals of Genoa, that if the Decree concerning the Oratories were not
revoked, he would forthwith publish his Excommunication.

The Pope believed that by this example the State of Venice would be induced
toyeeld (without using any reply) to his desires; strongly conceiving that they
would willingly abandon their liberty to avoid their trouble, especially, if
they were taken before they had time to deliberate. And therefore without
expecting an answer to that which the Extraordinary Ambassadors had treated at
their return, or that which the Ordinary had writ to Venice, the Pope a new
expostulated with the Ambassador both touching the imprisoned Canon, and the
Ordinance formerly mentioned; the matter he exaggerated, saying, that the Law
had been made upon Maundie Thursday, and concluded his speech, (showing the
Monitory prepared against them of Genoa,) that he would be obeyed, and that he
would send to Venice a Breue Exhortatory, and after proceed yet further. The
Ambassador represented to his Holiness, that the 26. of March (on which day
the Law was made) could not fall within the Holy week of that year;
considering that Easter day was then the tenth of April; and prayed him that,
since he had required him to write of these particularities to Venice, and had
given charge unto the Ambassadors Extraordinary to treat thereof by word of
mouth, he would expect an answer before he determined any thing in this
business. This stayed the Pope for a little time: till that about the middle
of November, the Ambassador having received answer to all that which he had
written by order from his Holiness (although he had no intelligence of what
the Extraordinary Ambassadors had treated,) he made remonstrance unto him,
following the commandment which he had from the Senate; that the just title
and possession which the State has to judge Ecclesiastical persons in causes
criminal, were founded on the natural power of a Sovereign Prince, and on
custom never interrupted by the space of a thousand years, and approved by
the Breues of Popes themselves, yet extant in the public Archiues: showing
further, that the Law against the alienation of Lay goods to the Clergy, had
not been made only at Venice, but was also received and established in the
greater part of the cities of their Estate; and for the rest which had it not,
it was their duty to follow the ordinances of the Sovereign and Capital
City. He showed likewise the equity of that Law, and how necessary it was in
these times for the conservation of the strength of their State, by many
reasons and examples of sundry Christian Kingdoms, and even of some Cities
within the State Ecclesiastical. The Pope heard this discourse with
impatience, turning himself from one side to another, and testifying by the
outward gestures of his face and body, how grievously he did resent it within;
and then he answered, that the reasons alleged were frivolous; that for to
judge of an affair it was to no purpose to ground it upon custom, which is
often so much the worse as it is more ancient. And for the Breues, he said
there was no other Archiue of the Breues of Popes, but that at Rome, that those
which they pretended in favor of their cause were but waste papers, and that
he would lay any wager they had not any authentic Breues in this matter. For
the Law, he said, that having passed his youth in the Schools, and after that
practiced in the Offices of Vice-Legat, of Auditor of the Chamber, and of Grand
Viccar of the Pope, he was become well versed and of good understanding in
these businesses: so that he knew certainly that this Law was of itself
inualid, as was likewise the other of the year MD XXX VI: that the power over
his own goods belongs to each man, so that he may freely dispose of them,
neither can that freedom be restrained without tyranny: that the Senate it
self esteemed it unjust, forbidding to give a copy thereof to any person;
that if elsewhere were any such like Laws, they had been made by authority
of Popes; that it pertained not unto the Venetians to govern the
Ecclesiastical State, but to the Pope, who might appoint and ordain what
himself pleased in that State; and that he would be obeyed. In all this, the
Pope observed not (suffering himself to be transported by his vehement
passion) that whilst he desired to defend the Ecclesiastical liberty he gave
unto Secular men too great a license to dispose of their goods at their
pleasure, without any restraint or respect of Laws; and by calling that a
tyranny, which was indeed a just limitation, he principally branded the Popes
themselves, guilty of the same excess.

The Pope not content with these difficulties, added yet another; understanding
that the Count Brandolino Valdemarino, Abbot of Neruese, was imprisoned, he
commanded that both this Abbot and the Canon should be delivered into the
hands of his Nuntio. Besides, he heard of another Ordinance made in the year
MDC III. whereby was prohibited the building of any new Church without the
permissio^ of the Senate; which he blamed with rude and violent terms. At
last, he concluded with these words; Even the Heretic Moulin says that sapit
haeresim. He adjoined further, that the State retained 500000. crowns of
Ecclesiastical Legacies; and charged that in all these particulars they should
give him satisfaction. The Ambassador answered that God had not given to Popes
any greater authority in the Government of their Estate, then to other Princes,
who by the Law of Nature have all power which is necessary. And as it
appertains not to the Venetians to Govern the State of the Church, no more
does it appertain to Ecclesiastiques to Govern the State of Venice. That the
Law had not been kept so secret, since it was published in all their Cities,
and enregistred in the Chanceries, where any one might have a Copy. Moreover,
he showed clearly how false a suggestion it was that the State reserved any
portion of Legacies Ecclesiastical; adding further, that if his Holiness
would examine all the Laws of their Signiory, and give credit to such
calumnies as might be cast upon them by their ill willers, the differences
would grow infinite. Here the Pope stayed him, and said that for the 500000.
crowns his answer had satisfied him, and that he would not multiply
differences, but restrain them to three heads, that is, to wit, to the
Ordinance touching the building of Churches; to the Law against the alienning
of Lay men's goods unto Ecclesiastiques; and to the judgment of the causes of
the Canon and the Abbot. In all these three he would be obeyed, adding that
they should not think to draw out the business with delays, for if speedily
they did not satisfy him, he would use such remedies as he thought convenient.
That he had been placed in that Chair for to sustain the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, in defense whereof he would esteem himself happy to spill
his blood; that for his kindred he regarded not if they remained still private
persons, being resolved to neglect all other respects, and to proceed in this
matter to the uttermost, whatsoever should be the issue. Withal again he
threatened to send a Breue exhortatory unto the State, having a design to pass
on further if he were not obeyed.

This Abbot of Neralse was accused to exercise a most unjust and cruel tyranny
upon the Country near about his dwelling; taking up the goods of any man at
what price himself was pleased; and to commit vile rapes and impurities with
all sorts of women, and withal to practice in Sorcery and other Magical
operations. That he studied the Art of tempering and composing of subtle
poisons, whereby he had wrought the death of his brother, of a Prio rye of
Saint Augustines Order, and of his servant: these two latter because they were
conscious of his crimes, and the first because he was his competitor in the
House. And that with the same poison he had brought his own father in extreme
danger of his life; that he had for a long time the carnal knowledge of his
own sister, and had empoisoned her maid, fearing by her to be discovered;
that he had caused an enemy of his to be killed, and after that empoisoned the
murderer, lest he might accuse him. Shortly, that he was guilty of many more
murders and notorious vile crimes.

In the beginning of December, they of Genoa, by mediation of the Cardinals of
that Nation (herein more moved with their particular interests, then with any
respect which they owed to their Country) revoked the Decree which they had
made touching the Oratory, upon the Popes promise that for the time to come
they should not therein treat of any thing but matters spiritual. Of this
reuocation, his Holiness quickly gave advice to the Ambassador of Venice,
exhorting the Senate to deliver up the prisonners into the hands of his Nuntio,
and to revoke the two Ordinances. And proposing the example of the Genuois, he
said, Sequimini paenitentes. To this the Ambassador answered, that there was
not the same reason of the State of Venice, seeing they had not seven Cardinals
their Citizens to mediate between them and his Holiness; that the things were
very different, considering that the Ordinances of the State were very
necessary for the good Government of it; that they were well known to his
Predecessors, who (before their election to the Papacy) had lived at Venice in
quality either of Confessors, or of Inquisitors, or of Nuntio's: and that
after their promotion they did not question or disprove them. To these reasons
the Pope replied, that if the laws of alienation, and of erecting Churches,
were necessary, himself would make them, having power to do that which is not
lawful for Secular Princes; that if they would have recourse to him, they
might find him very ready to impart all kind of favors, being willing even to
establish these Laws, when it should appear unto him that they are necessary:
But that he would not endure them to judge Ecclesiastical persons, who are not
subject unto Princes, and whom they cannot chastise, though they be rebellious;
that the former Popes did not well understand themselves; that he desired to
have regard to the safety of his soul, and would handle these holy businesses
according as was meet, and as his reputation required; that till then he had
done the office of a Father, but now he would come to further remedies.
Therefore he purposed to send a Breue exhortatory concerning the three points
aforesaid, and if he were not obeyed within a time, which he would prefix, he
would proceed further; because he had power over all, and could deprive Kings,
and to this end had legions of Angels for his aid and assistants. The
Ambassador requested the Pope to consider that it was not meet to proceed in
this matter with so much precipitation, seeing it seemed not to the purpose to
confound the law touching Churches, with that of alienation, much less yet the
cause of the Canon, with that of the Abbot; especially for that he knew not yet
the intention of the State in these two points, as having yet received no
answer; and exhorted his Holiness to weigh well the business. The Pope made
answer, that himself ought therefore to reply, that he might more speedily
know their resolution.

The Senate, when they had thoroughly weighed the affair, and balanced on the
one side the disdain and the rash proceedings of the Pope, on the other side
the public liberty and the necessity of their Government; the first of
December returned answer unto the Nuntio, and writ to Rome to their Ambassador,
that they could not render the Prisoners so lawfully detained, nor revoke the
Laws so justly ordained, lest they should prejudice their natural liberty
given by God unto the State, and preserved (by the help of his divine
Majesty, and with the blood of their Ancestors) for so many hundred years;
and to the end that their Government might not be disturbed, which had
prospered under such Laws and Customs until this age, nor any confusion
brought into their State, which might move withal some perilous sedition. The
Senate all with one voice consented upon this resolution, whereof the Nuntio
was advertised. Which was also reported at Rome, to show how well the State was
united for defense of their liberty, and to discharge the Pope of his vain
hope that the Senators would be divided, as the Jesuits had promised him.

The Pope having received this answer by the Letters of his Nuntio, and by the
mouth of the Ambassador, did not for all this change his design, but remaining
constant and resolved what to do, to wit, to expedite a Breue, he was nothing
moved with any thing which the Ambassador could say of the reasons and causes
which had induced the Senate to make this deliberation, of their courage and
constancy to persevere therein, together with the pernicious inconveniences
which might ensue, if his Holiness should use any means of violence; but he
commanded that two Breues should be dispatched, the one concerning the two
Laws, and the other the two Prisoners.

At the same time there came advise to Rome of an Edict made by the Repub. of
Luca, which, to prevent great troubles occasioned in that State by letters of
execution sent from the Auditor of the Apostolic Chamber, ordained that
thence forward no such letters should have force, unless first they were
viewed by the Magistrates. Whereat the Pope chafed beyond measure, saying, that
it was against the liberty Ecclesiastical, and his pleasure was, that this
Edict should be revoked, although the Agent of that Signiory answered; that
their State had herein followed the example of many Princes, and would further
follow it in their reuocation, when others should be brought unto it.

But for the Venetian business, it fell out that on the ninth of December (an
ordinary day of audience for the Ambassador of the State) the Pope treated very
courteously with him; in such manner as he never had so favorable
entertainment. Which made him think that his vehemence being now settled, he
meant to proceed with maturity; but it happened quite contrary. For the Pope
resolving to come to action, did not any more use violent words, as by the
event appeared. The day following (10. of December) he prepared and sealed two
Breues, addressed Marino Grinani Duci, and Reipub. Venetorum, which he sent the
same day to his Nuntio, with charge that he should present them. And fearing
lest if this news of the Breues sent to Venice were discovered, his Messenger
might be stayed or hindered, he dispatched another by the way of Ferrara, with
Copies of the two Breues unto the same Nuntio; but neither the one, nor the
other Currier found any let, for the Nuntio had the Expeditions in good time.
After the sending of these Breues the Pope called a Consistory the twelfth of
the said Month, wherein he declared how the State of Venice had violated the
Ecclesiastical Liberty, by publishing two Laws, and detaining in hold two
persons of the Church, dilating a little upon each one of the three heads: yet
he did not take the opinions of the Cardinals, nor so much as permitted them to
speak; at which the Cardinals murmured, esteeming it fit not only that such
matters should be communicated to them, but also that they should thereof
deliberate and give their judgments. And whatoeuer were the substance of the
affair, they then with one accord agreed that the resolution was rash and
perilous. But afterward when they had considered the reasons of the Pope and
of the State, they differed in judgment upon the matter, and diversely answered
the Ambassador of the Signiory, who talked thereof with diverse of them. Some
said that the Pope ought rather to have an eye upon other more urgent
necessities of the Church, and to omit these questions. Cardinal Bellarmine
said clearly that the Pope did not speak with him of these matters of
Jurisdiction, because they knew his judgment herein to be sparing, and that
he exhorted his Holiness rather to think on the Residence of Prelates in
their Churches. Cardinal Baronius said, they were not wont to treat with him
of these matters, because they knew what was his accustomed answer. Cardinal
Zapata, that there were in Spain Laws semblable to these in question: and
Cardinal Monopoly that the Laws might be allowed without any material
alteration, provided that the Ecclesiastiques should not be therein mentioned.
There were some that approved the Laws, but not the Judgments; and some
again that approved the Judgments, but not the Laws. It is certain that
before the Expedition of the Breues, out of a fear of the inconvenience, the
Cardinals Baronius, and Du Perron, did secretly in a private Audience
effectually labor with the Pope, that he would desist from an enterprise so
difficult and perilous; or at least by putting it in deliberation, he would
serve himself of time for to compass his end, and not put all in danger
through precipitation. But nothing could make his Holiness desist from
pursuing the execution of that which he had enterprised.

The Senate in the mean while, to give the Pope a manifest testimony of their
respect, lest they should seem in any sort to contemn him, and withal to
gain some time, that the Pope might have leisure to think seriously of what
he purposed to do; but especially to furnish themselves with a just and
evident pretext, if they found him obstinate, thought good to send unto him an
Ambassador expressly for this effect: and to the end that by the quality of the
person the Pope might see what reverence they carried to the holy See, they
made choice of the Lord Leonardo Donato, an ancient Senator, and without
comparison the most eminent in the State, who was afterward elected Duke.
Besides, they resolved to write unto their Ambassadors in all Courts of
Princes, to inform them concerning their public reasons, the stiffenesse of
the Pope, and all that was passed. But the Nuntio who received the Breues a day
after that Donato was e lected to go in Embassage, stayed the presentation,
and gave advise by a Post of that Election, which highly moved the Pope
against his Nuntio, for that he had not executed his commandments, and
presumed to interpose his own judgment after his Ordinance. And therefore he
dispatched unto him an express Currier with order to present the Breues
immediately after the receipt of his Letter; and that this might be concealed
from the Ordinary Ambassador, he caused the Currier to go out in a Caroach
without boots, and so to take horse at the second stage. The Nuntio having
received this command on Christmas Eve, that he might punctually obey his
Holiness, on that solemn Festival day presented the Breues unto the
Counselors assembled to assist at a solemn Mass, in the absence of the Duke
Grimani, who was then in his last extremity, and died the day following; which
was the cause that the Breues were not opened, but according to the order of
the State, they attended the creation of a new Duke. The Pope having advise of
this from the Nuntio, how he had presented the Breues, and how the Duke was
deceased; writ unto him that he should Protest unto the State, and enjoin them
not to pass on to a new Election, in as much as it should be void, being made
by men excommunicated, aiming by this new device to bring some confusion or
division within the State, as sometime it falls out at Rome in the Vacancie of
the Chair; showing himself herein utterly ignorant of that Republique, which
does not receive any alteration by the change of their Dukes, or by a Vacancie,
but remains still equally firm and stable. The Nuntio, to execute this
command, required audience of the State with great importunity, but he could
not be admitted, it being their custom not to hear any Ministers of Princes,
during the Vacancie, unless their business be that of condoling.

Whilst they applied themselves to the Election of a new Duke, the Nuntio
communicated to many persons the Commission which he had to protest, and
besides another order which he had, to see that he did not any thing, which
might seem to approve any of those proceedings. They made remonstrance unto
him concerning this enterprise, how important it was; to attempt a thing
unheard of in the world, and at once to confound matters Spiritual with the
Temporal. Briefly, that it was an extreme injury and irreparable not only to
the State, but Potentates, and that in the City would not follow any
alteration on this occasion, but the injury would excite all the world jointly
to sustain the public dignity, and peradventure break off all commerce with
the Court of Rome. He gave notice unto the Pope how he had not been admitted
to Audience by the Counselors, and at the same time writ unto him of all these
considerations.

But the Electors did not long delay to acquit hemselues of their charge: for
the tenth of January M DC VI. by scrutiny (according to the custom) they
elected unto the Dukedom Leonardo Donato, a Senator of all the rest, without
controversy, the most eminent, for his life (full of integrity,) for his
experience in Governing, and for his exquisite knowledge in all good Learning;
adorned besides with all heroical virtues, qualities rare in this age. All
Ambassadors forthwith went (as the manner is) to congratulate with the new
Prince; only the Nuntio neglected to do that office, till he had received
answer from his Holiness, touching some considerations which he had sent by
suggestion of some sage Prelates. Yet though the Nuntio did not perform his
complements, the Duke did not omit to write unto the Pope, as the custom is,
and to give him advise of this Election.

Upon this news there went a rumor in Rome that the Pope had a purpose not to
acknowledge the new Duke; and although it came to the ears of the Ambassador,
yet he neglected not to visit all those who were near the Pope, declaring the
certain mischiefs that would ensue if this deliberation were executed; and
that for his part he was resolved what to do, if his Holiness should refuse
the Letter which he was to present unto him in the name of his Prince. But the
Pope, whether moved with his discourses, or by some advice, which he had from
his Nuntio, passed in silence that pretension, received the Letter, and
answered the Duke, congratulating with him for his Election; and revoked the
Order formerly given to his Nuntio, of not presenting himself to the Duke.

In the space of time which passed from the presentation of the Breues, until
the answer, which was made by the Senate, whereof we shall speak; at all
Audiences the Pope urged to have their resolution, saying that they ought not
to defer for default of a Prince, and that the Senate might well
notwithstanding be assembled; that they should not think to spend or gain
time by deliberations, that he was an enemy of time, that he had written in
hope of the obedience of the Republique, but if he had not a speedy answer, he
would resolve upon some other course: and one time he said, We will dispatch
the next morning; which afterward he explained not to have been spoken
affirmatively, but only that he might not oblige himself to any limited time,
but remain free to do what pleased him; and though he should lose his skin,
he would maintain the cause of God, and his own reputation. The opinion of
the Court was, that the Republique would submit, and rather liberally bribe,
than trouble their peace; that among the Senators many were scrupulous; and
therefore that in the streits of deliberation fear might produce good effects.

But at Venice the first affair treated in Senate after the election of the
Prince was this difference with the Pope: and first an Ambassador was appointed
in place of Leonardo Donato (now made Duke) who was Peter Duodo Knight; and
taking the Breues, which they believed to be the one touching the Laws, the
other the Prisoners, after they had opened them, they were both found of the
same tenor, and couched in the same terms. In these Breues the Pope said in
substance; That it was come to his knowledge, that the State in former years
had treated, and ordained in their Council many things contrary to
Ecclesiastical liberty, and to the Canons, Councels, and constitutions
Pontifical: but among others, that in the year M DC III. in the Council of
Ien, having regard to certain laws of their Ancestors (for bidding to erect
Churches or other places of devotion without permission,) in stead of
abrogating and disanulling the old ordinances touching this matter, they had
again revived and decreed the same, and extended that statute, which formerly
only concerned the City of Venice, to all other places of their Dominion,
under great penalties; as if Churches and persons Ecclesiastical were in any
sort subject to the Temporal jurisdiction, or he, who foundeth a Church, were
worthy of so rude a chastisement, as if he had committed some great crime.
Moreover, that in the Month of May last past, the Senate having regard to
another law made in the year M D XXXVI. whereby was prohibited the perpetual
alienation of Lay men's goods within the City and Dukedom of Venice to
Ecclesiastical places, without permission of the Senate, under certain
penalties, in stead of reuoking that law (as their duty required) they had
again renewed the same, and extended that law with the penalties to all places
of their Dominion, as if it were lawful for Temporal Princes to ordain any
thing, to exercise any jurisdiction, or to dispose in any sort (without the
Ecclesiastiques, and particularly without leave from the Pope) of the goods of
the Church, especially of such goods as have been given unto Churches, persons
Ecclesiastical, and other places of devotion, by the faithful, for remedy of
their sins and discharge of their consciences. That these ordinances, tending
to the damnation of souls, to public scandal, and also contrary to the
Ecclesiastical liberty, were of themselves void and of no value, as
furthermore he declared them to be such, no man being obliged to observe them:
On the contrary, that they, which had made these Statutes (or any like) or
which had furthered them, had incurred Ecclesiastical Censures, and deprived
themselves of all such lands as they held of the Church, as also their Estates,
and Demaines were subject to other penalties, in such sort that they could not
be absolved, unless they revoked all such laws, and reestablished all things
in their former estate. That hereupon being placed in the Sovereign Throne,
and not being able to dissemble or endure these things, he admonished the
Republique to consider the danger whereinto they had cast their souls upon
this occasion, and betimes to seek a remedy; otherwise in case of
disobedience, he commanded under the pain of Excommunication latae sententiae,
that the foresaid Laws, both ancient and modern, should be revoked and
disanulled: that this Monitory should bepublished in all places of their State,
and that he expected from them account there of; if they did it not, that he
should be constrained (after his Nuntio had given him notice that his Letters
were presented) to come to execution of the penalties, and to such other
remedies as he should think meet: remembering the reckoning which he was to
give unto God at the day of Judgment, and declaring that he (who had no other
end but the repose, and tranquillity of the Commonwealth) could not in duty
dissemble, when the authority of the Sea Apostolic was dimini shed,
Ecclesiastical liberty trod under foot, the holy Canons and Decrees neglected,
the rights of Churches and the privileges of Ecclesiastical persons violated,
of all which the charge and custody is committed to him: besides, affirming
that he was not moved to do this by any worldly consideration, nor desired
any other thing but the glory to exercise perfectly (so far as he could) his
Apostolic Government. And as he did not purpose to usurp any thing upon the
Secular Authority, so would he not permit that the Ecclesiastical should be
diminished. That if the State would obey his commandments, they should deliver
him from great pain which he suffered in their regard, and might still retain
the lands which they held of the Church. That by no other means the Republique
could so well secure it self from the incommodities which it suffered by
Infidels, as by conseruing the rights and liberties of Churchmen, who watch
day and night in prayer to God for their conservation.

The Senate considering these difficulties raised by the Pope, deliberated to
confer thereof with their Counselors learned in the Civil laws, who were
Erasmus Gratian of Vdine, and Marcus Antonius Pellegrine of Padua, Knights and
famous Lawyers at that time, as it appears by the works which they have
published. And further, that they might have near them a Counselor versed in
Divinity, and in the Canon Law, they called unto the service of the Signiory
Friar Paul of Venice, of the Order of the Seruites With these three, and with
other principal Doctors of the University of Padua, as also with those of the
City of Venice, and the neighboring places, men eminent for sound learning
and good conscience, the Senate advised how to answer the Pope with most
conueniency. They resolved also to consult on these questions the most
celebrious Doctors of Italy, and other parts of Europe, and to use their
counsel touching other difficulties which might be offered. And in short time
they had the judgment of many excellent Lawyers of Italy not subject to the
State of Venice, and in particular of James Menochio President of Milan, a
person illustrious for his honorable Labors in the defense and maintenance of
the Authority of Magistrates, and for his learned Writings which he has
published, and wherein he shall live for ever. They had also not long after
sent unto them in writing the opinions of the most renowned Doctors of France
and Spain, who by diverse arguments showed evidently that the controversies
moved by the Pope, concerned nearly the Temporal Power, wherein the Papal
authority ought not to intermeddle; and therefore that it was lawful for the
Republique to make any such Ordinances, so far as respects of Government
might require. There were also sent to Venice the Laws of almost all the
Realms and Estates of Christendom, wherein the like Ordinances are observed;
which afterward were alleged in diverse Books published in favor of the
right of the Republique. But for that time the Senate understanding the
judgment of the Doctors, made answer the 28. of January, in these words for
substance; That with much grief and wonder they understood by the Letters of
his Holiness, that the Laws of their State observed carefully through so many
ages, and never questioned by any of his Predecessors, (the reuoking whereof
would subvert the Foundations of their Commonwealth) were reprehended as
contrary to the authority of the Sea Apostolic; and that they which made them
(Persons of great piety, meriting well of the Sea Apostolic, who are now in
Heaven) were noted for violators of Ecclesiastical Liberty: That according to
the admonition of his Holiness, they had examined, and caused to examine their
Laws old and new, but had found nothing which might not well be ordained by
the authority of a Sovereign Prince, or which might justly offend the Popes
authority; being evidently a thing belonging to the care of a Secular Prince,
to have regard what Companies are erected within his Dominions, and to prevent
the building of such Edifices as in time to come may be hurtful to the
public safety. And although their State abound with Churches and places of
Devotion, as much as any other, yet (when they see convenient) they have never
refused to give permission to new Foundations, themselves thereunto
contributing liberally. That in the Law against the perpetual alienation of
Lay goods unto Ecclesiastiques, the question being of things purely Temporal,
they could not be taxed to have done any thing contrary to the Canons and
Decrees. That if the Popes have power to forbid the Clergy to alienate any
goods of the Church unto Persons Secular without leave; Princes may do the
same, and take order that the goods of Seculars shall not be alienated to the
Clergy without permission. Nor do the Ecclesiastiques by this means lose any
thing bequeathed or given unto them, seeing they receive a price answerable in
value to the immovable: adjoining, that it tends to the great prejudice not
only of the Temporal State, but also of the Spiritual, to weaken the forces
of their Republique, which by such alienations is deprived of necessary
services, and which in effect in a Vantgard and Fortress for all Christendom
against the Infidels. That for these reasons the Senate could not persuade
themselves that they had incurred any Censures, since Secular Princes have by
Law Divine (from which no Humane Law can any way derogate) a power to make
Laws in things Temporal; as also that the Admonitions of his Holiness have
here no place, where the question is not of any thing Spiritual, but of a
matter merely Temporal, not any way touching the Papal Authority: much
less yet could they believe that his Holiness (full of Piety and Religion)
would persist without knowledge of the cause in his Comminations. That this was
the summary of thereasons of the Senate, remitting themselves to their
Ambassador Extraordinary, further to explain and open unto him their
intentions.

In the mean while the Pope longed with an extreme desire to have their
answer to his Breues, which he expected would be conformable to his fantasy;
and he could not be persuaded that the State would have more care to preserve
their Liberty, than fear of his threatenings. Which that he might make to
appear more formidable, he served himself not only of the example of them of
Genoa, but yet of one much greater. For having notice that the Duke of Sauoy
had commanded the Bishop of Fossano to depart out of his Dominions (which he
was occasioned to do upon great and important reasons,) being hereby incensed,
he menaced the Duke with Excommunication, unless he revoked his commandment.

At length the Letters of the Senate arrived at Rome, and were presented by the
Ambassador unto the Pope, who opened them in his presence, and at the first
sight was greatly moved for the error committed in the presentation of two
Breues both of one tenor, in stead of two different; and attributed the fault
herein unto his Nuntio. And passing further in the reading of the Letter, he
showed himself much more troubled. In the end, not coming to particularities,
he said; that the Monitory Breues could not be answered, and that the answers
of the Senate were frivolous: that the matter was clear, and that he was
peremptorily resolved to proceed on further. He added, that lately he had heard
of another Law, touching goods Ecclesiastical holden as Emphyteuticke, which
his pleasure was should be revoked with the other; and although till then he
had not mentioned this Law (because he knew not of it,) yet he had more to say
against it, than against all the other; that it behooved in all these things to
obey him, because his cause was the cause of God, Et portae inferinon
praeualebunt aduersus eam. That if the Monks of Padua or other places should
purchase more than were meet, they might have recourse to him, and that in this
case he would provide, the Secular Authority being not herein to intermedle,
which the Venetians doing, were Tyrants and different from their Ancestors. The
Pope spoke all this with so great heat, that the Ambassador did not judge fit
at that time to pass on further: wherefore after some words concerning the
last Law, he took leave. But as he was going out of the Chamber of Audience,
the Pope called him back, and rising from his seat, he took him into a
chamber apart: where, releasing some what the exteme rigor which hitherto he
had used, he discoursed moderately of his pretensions, and heard the answers of
the Ambass. as she wing himself inclined to some composition, and touching the
Law newly questioned he concluded that he had not spoken of it if they had
given him any satisfaction in the other two comprised in the Breue which he had
sent. And for the Prisoners, that if they rendered the Canon unto his Nuntio, he
would in favor yield and deliver the Abbot to the judgment of the Secular
Magistrate; but that this should be done speedily, because he was an enemy of
time, and would not that they should defer in hope that the Pope might die.
That if within fifteen days he had contentment, he promised not to trouble
them during his Pontificate, but if that time were expired that he would
proceed. Further, he counseled the Ambassador to write hereof, and that to
this effect he meant to dispatch a Currier, as also he did. And in conformity
of this the Nuntio spoke in Senate, exhorting them with many words to give
satisfaction unto the Pope, by reuoking the two Laws and by delivering the
Canon; promising that this being done, from his Holiness they should receive
as ample favors as in former times had been ever granted by the Sea
Apostolic to any Prince. He mentioned also the Law of the Emphyteuses, which
the Pope esteemed more opposite to his authority than the other two;
notwithstanding he did not much enlarge himself upon this point, but left it
without conclusion, which caused in the Senate a great astonishment, and the
Duke not understanding fully his meaning, desired of him a more ample and exact
explication. But the Nuntio approaching near him, said in his ear, that it was
not needful to pass further upon that subject, promising on his word unto his
Highness that there should be no more speech of it. The Duke did not think
fit to keep secret this promise, and therefore he repeated aloud what the
Nuntio had said unto him and on his word had promised.

This release of rigor which the Pope used at Rome and his Nuntio at Venice,
made men believe that upon the arrival of the extraordinary Ambassador with
his Holiness all these debates would easily be composed. The Senate did much
desire that the Pope would be persuaded by their reasons, and therefore
answered the Nuntio (who earnestly moved them for their resolution) that Duodo
should go to his Holiness to represent unto him that which had passed. But
the Pope scarcely let pass the fifteen days, when being returned to his
accustomed rigor (though the Ambassador Nani had told him that Duodo was
already dispatched) in the month of February, he complained that they deferred
so long, saying he could not in any sort endure such delay, and that he would
not be tied to expect any longer. And a few days afterward, when the
Ambassador was relating unto his Holiness some news of the route of Cicala
upon the confines of Persia, he made not any reflection upon this narration, but
thinking all the while upon Duodo, he said; Let him not come with any more
reasons, for you have spoken thereof sufficiently. The Pope remained firm in
his deliberation, and accordingly commanded his Nuntio to present the other
Breue, dated the 10. of December before, and addressed to Marin Grimani Duke,
and to the Republique of the Venetians, concerning the Canon and the Abbot
Prisoners: which commandment he executed the 25. of February two days after
the departure of Duodo going to Rome, his instructions being expedited upon the
18. of the same Month. The Duke appeared to be much offended, that this Breue
should be delivered two days after the departure of an Ambassador sent upon
this business, and so much more because it was not addressed to him, but
should have been presented to his Predecessor. In this Breue the Pope said;
That he understood by the letters of his Nuntio and by the discourses of their
Ambassador, that the Canon and Abbot, arrested hereto fore by the Officers of
the State, were still detained, pretending that they had power to do this by
virtue of some Privileges given them by the Sea Apostolic, and by a custom
which they have to judge persons Ecclesiastical; which things he would
willingly suffer if they were conformable to the sacred Constitutions. But
being contrary to the holy Canons and to Ecclesiastical liberty (which has
ground in divine ordinance, he was forced by the duty of his office to
advertise them that their custom was not available, as being repugnant to
Canonical institutions. Therefore there remained one only scruple, whether
the State had any privilege granted unto them by his Predecessors; that herein
they should speak ingenuously and with confidence, to the end it might be
examined by himself and the Romans Church, who hereupon might give their
necessary admonitions. That they mistook their grant, and conceived it larger
than it was indeed; because that the Republique had ouerpassed their
jurisdiction, as having extended it to persons and cases and places which were
exempted, (whereof his Predecessors had sometime made complaint,) and by
consequent had forfeited their Privileges, as not observing the conditions
prescribed when they were granted. For which reasons he commanded under pain
of Excommunication latae sententiae, that speedily the Canon and the Abbot
should be delivered into the hands of his Nuntio, who should chastise them
according to the gravity of their crimes, lest any should think that his
Ministers would abuse their Ecclesiastical immunitie and exemptions: and all
men knew that he intended that the Ecclesiastiques should give example of
goodness to all others. That if the Secular Officers had already proceeded to
any acts or sentences of condemnation or execution, he did annull them and
declare them void, threatening that if he were not obeyed, or if they deferred
to obey him, he would proceed further, so as Justice should require, not
purposing to neglect any thing pertaining to his charge, for the conservation
of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

The Senate having heard the contents of the Breue, although they had already
consulted the Doctors not only touching the Laws mentioned by the Pope in his
other Breue, but also touching the question of judging Ecclesiastiques, which
his Holiness first of all quarrelled, as has been said: and though they were
by them resolved that the custom practiced beyond all memory in the State was
lawful and well grounded; yet nevertheless lest any thing might be neglected,
which might help to clear these difficulties, again they assembled the same
Doctors which resided in Venice, or other parts, and required their opinions
concerning the contents of this Breue, what answer were fit to be made. Upon
which consultation, and after they had duly examined all circumstances, the
Senate answered the Pope the 11. of March in these terms: That the Breue of
his Holiness had been read with great reverence, but not without great
grief, as thereby perceiving that these matters of discord did every day
increase, and that his Holiness purposed to destroy the Laws of their
Republique, which till this age so long had been preserved entire. For to
command them to deliver up unto his Nuntio the Canon and the Abbot, was nothing
else but to demand that they should despoyle themselves of their just power to
chastise crimes and wickedness, which power they had inioyed (even with the
approbation of Popes) from the original of their Commonwealth. That God had
bestowed this power upon them which were the first founders and establishers of
their State, and from them derived to the present Governors; which they had
ever exercised with moderation, without exceeding their lawful bounds. That
the precedent Popes had herein approved them, and if some one among them had
attempted ought in prejudice of this authority given by God unto the
Republique, this could not any way deprive them of their right, nor did they
forbear notwithstanding to exercise their authority. That the Senate were
sufficiently persuaded, considering the purity of their conscience in this
cause, no place was left for the threatenings of his Holiness; hoping also that
he would take in good part that which the Senate anciently and of late had done
in this case for the honor of God, and in consideration of the public
repose, and for the punishment of malefactors.

Presently after the Pope had dispatched his Commission unto his Nuntio to
present the Breue, he had advice that in Rome there went a rumor that he was
desisted (or at least much abated) in his pretensions. Which so extremely vexed
him, that for to quench it, and to recover the reputation which he seemed to
have hereby lost, he resolved to speak a new in Consistory, and make it there
appear, how he persisted in the same deliberations. Wherefore the 20. of
February, the Cardinals being assembled, he made remonstrance what he had said
the first time, and adjoined what he had yet to say against the Law of the
Emphyteuses. Nevertheless he did not permit any of the Cardinals in these
points to speak any thing, but passed on to Consistoriall matters. After at
the audience of the Ambassador, he complained of their delays, and that the
Extraordinary was too slow in coming, menacing that he would abridge the
business. The Ambassador failed not to answer, that the Republique was not
accustomed to defer affairs; that it seemed his Holiness meant to precipitate
things, forasmuch as in the Consistory 12. of December he had complained of the
Republique touching the Law against building of Churches, before he understood
either by word or writing what was the intention of the Senate in that behalf.
And further, that in the last Consistory he had made complaint concerning the
Law which he called of Emphyteuses, of which neither himself had written any
one word, nor had commanded him to write thereof, nor caused his Nuntio to
mention it. The Ambassador also endeavored by the mediation of Card. Borghese
to stop a little the violent courses of the Pope. But the Cardinal excusing
the Pope answered that he could not now give back since he had twice engaged
himself in this affair, in the Consistory and to all Princes.

After these things arrived at Rome the answer of the Senate, with charge unto
the Ambassador to present it immediately, before the coming of Duodo, to the
end that if the differences were by him composed, yet this Breue might not
remain unanswered. The Ambassador therefore quickly presented it; but the Pope
not willing to read it in his presence, as he did the other, only said; that
the Venetians did just like those that strike first, and then complain; that
he would hear the Extraordinary Ambassador, but not treat with him; that if he
brought him not some satisfaction, he would pass on. He added his usual
complaints, that they meant to delay the affair, and take the benefit of time,
of which he was an enemy, not being able to endure any more prolongings. He
complained besides, that the Ambassador Extraordinary deferred too long his
coming, not because he hoped by his presence to find or admit any
composition, being already resolved, and fully in his mind determined to
pursue against the Republique the injuries which they had offered unto the
Church, but because having said to many Ministers of Princes that he would give
audience to that Ambassador, he could not well proceed till first he had heard
him speak: being extremely vexed to see days passing without coming to
execution. Likewise he writ a new to his Nuntio's which he had with all
Princes, commanding them in his Name to make complaints against the Republique,
which being known at Venice; the Senate resolved to write unto all Courts, and
to send ample instructions to all their Ambassadors, to the end that on all
occasions they might demonstrate the justice of their cause, with their unjust
vexations by the Pope.

In the end of March, Duodo the Extraordinary Ambassador arrived at Rome, who
was not suffered to pass the first Audience in Complements according to the
custom, but the Pope without other discourse falling upon the business heard
him courteously, yet would not answer to any particular, although the
Ambassador propounded to his consideration the several reasons pertaining to
each Controversy. But staying only on the general, he said; that the
exemption of the Ecclesiastiques was de iure diuino, and therefore he would not
now content himself with (what he formerly had propounded) the restoring only
of the one Prisoner: that he would not meddle with things Temporal, but their
three Laws were usurpations; that he was not moved with any passion, and that
his cause was the cause of God: that the Ordinary Ambassador had often repeated
unto him these same allegations, but all were of no force: and that he would
hear him to do him a pleasure, but not to depart in any thing from his
resolution; that he would be obeyed, and such other like discourses. The
Ambassador to stay a little this torrent, and to give him time to be think
himself, offered to write to Venice what was his resolution: wherewith the
Pope was content, counting in what time the Currier might return with an
answer, and threatening that he would not wait one moment longer. Which thing
being known at Venice, it was resolved that all should be communicated unto
the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of France, and of Spain. The Ambassador of
the Emperor said that his Master desired Peace, and that in such matters he
would not foment the will of the Pope The Count of Cante-croix approved all the
reasons which were represented to him, by the example of Francke, a County in
his Country, where the same things are observed. Monsieur de Fresne,
Ambassador of France, answered, that he knew not what to make of these
Pontifical Laws, by which Princes are forbidden to Govern their Estates, and
that in all reason the Repub. ought to prefer their Liberty to all other
respects, for salus populi suprema lex esto, the weal of the people ought to
be the Sovereign Law.

Duodo, as the custom is, visited the Cardinals, and had speech with all of
them touching the differences in question; and although they answered
differently, yet it appeared they had no great hand in the affair, save only
that they heard it propounded in the Consistory upon the twelfth of December,
and the twentieth of February. Duodo did not cease in other Audiences which the
Pope gave him, to assay if he could any way assuage him; hoping that the
differences might be reduced to some terms of accord, if he might find means
a little to hinder his Holiness from his headlong courses. But the Pope still
showing himself resolute, saying that he had used a very great patience: that
the Senators were still more obstinate, and his condition every day worse; for
he understood how it was openly spoken in Venice, that they were not purposed
herein to give him any satisfaction, that therefore he could not abandon his
reputation: that in the Senate there was not one that understood these matters,
and that they were content to consult thereof with their Doctors, but that he
had written to such Persons as were able to set their Doctors to School, and
concluded that he would proceed with his Spiritual Arms; but in other things
he would account of the Venetians as of his children. The Ambassador hearing
his resolution, and knowing it would be to little effect for him to reply,
retired himself from the Audience with few words, but full of prudence and
gravity.

The day following, the Cardinals of Verona and Vicenza found means to
insinuate themselves near the Pope, and to talk with him upon this subject:
where they did very good and effectual offices, exhorting his Holiness to use
some delays: whereto he answered, that he had deferred but too long; that the
offer by him proposed to the Ambassador Nani, had been esteemed not worthy an
answer; that he had heard the Extraordinary, although he spoke big: that he had
five and twenty or thirty Letters from Venice, whereby he had notice that he
could not hope for any satisfaction. Yet notwithstanding all this, that he
would yet give term of four and twenty days, which was enough time to give
them for their repentance. The Cardinals represented unto him with many and
powerful words what damage might follow, if the Spiritual arms should be
contemned. To which the Pope answered, that then he would employ the Temporal.
And so without communicating that which he had in mind to many persons, he
caused to draw up and imprint a Monitory against the Republique; which after
reuiewing and finding it not to his liking, he changed it, and at last
composed and made to be imprinted another, dated the 17. of April, purposing
to publish it that day in Consistory. But that morning he was found very much
troubled in spirit, and perplexed what he should do; and the hour approaching,
(the Cardinals being already assembled) he began profoundly to consider within
himself, whether to proceed as he had determined, or to defer the business
till some other time. But the Cardinal Arrigon (who, according to the custom
of the Cardinals, which have part in the Government, was not descended into the
Hall with the rest, but was gone up into the Chamber of his Holiness with his
Nephew, for to accompany him down,) exhorted him by no means to relent.
Whereupon again resolving upon his former purpose, he entered the Consistory,
where he made recital of his pretensions against the Republique, enlarging his
speech particularly upon that Law (by him called) of Farms Emphyteuticke,
although he said he had written nothing thereof to Venice, nor tretaed of it
with the Ambassador, save only that he had told him, he had observed it. He
adjoined, that he had first himself studied these points, then he had
conferred thereof with the most famous Canonists, who did conclude that the
ordinances of the Republique were contrary to the Authority of the Sea
Apostolic, and to liberty Ecclesiastical, all edging further that they were
condemned by the Council of Pope Symmachus, and by that of Lions under Pope
Gregory 10. as also by the Decrees of the Councels or Assemblies of Constance
and Basil; that this matter had been declared against Henry 2. King of England,
against the Kings of Castile, and against the Kings Charles the 2. and Charles
the 4. That he knew well there were some Doctors Canonists, who approved that
Law, forbidding the alienation of Lay men's goods in favor of the Clergy, but
that they were of small number and account, and spoke against the common
opinion. And in case there yet remained any doubt, he did then declare that all
these Laws were contrary to Ecclesiastical Liberty. Besides he caused to be
read a Constitution of Innocent the third, upon a certain Edict of Henry
Emperiour of Constantinople; and proceeding to speak of criminal judgments
against persons Ecclesiastical, he said that the Venetians pretended to have
some privileges, which not withstanding they did extend to places and causes
not comprised in them, even against the persons of Bishops. He commended
further his patience, having so long time expected their repentance: by reason
whereof he might, without further delay or granting any longer term, come to
the Interdict; but mitius agendo, he had deliberated to give them respite of
four and twenty days more; and that he might do all things canonically, he
was content to take the voices and suffrages of the Cardinals.

Whereupon each one gave his suffrage; and first the Cardinal Pinelli
commended his Holiness for that he had assigned four and twenty days for
term of respite, because so much had been assigned to Henry 3. King of
France. The Card. d'Ascoli made a sign with his head that he was of the same
opinion, without speaking word which could be understood, as also he had done
under Clement 8. when the Monitorie against the Duke Caesar d'Este was
published. The Card. of Verona, having praised the zeal of his Holiness, who
had proceeded (he said) in this affair lenta festinatione; he added, that in a
Senate composed of so great a number of persons, as was that of Venice, things
could not be dispatched with such speediness; that it was not good to be too
hasty against a Repub. which had well-merited; that the business might well
be yet a while deferred upon hope thereby to gain them, and in the mean time
men might have time to weigh their reasons, and he concluded with these words,
Sed differ, habent paruae commoda magnamorae; But defer, holy Father, little
delays sometime bring great commodities. At this word the Pope interposed and
said, that he had done nothing of his own proper judgment; that he had
advised with learned men, and been directed by their counsel. Whereupon the
Card. replied, if this were so he could not contradict that which had been
resolved by his Holiness. The Cardinal Sauli said, that the Venetians had
been too long forborne and heard; that it was meet to use rigor against them
to make them yield; therefore for his part, he thought it good to proceed with
courage in this business, referring the issue to God whose cause was handled.
The Card. of Saint Cecile said, that he lamented the condition of the times,
which forced his Holiness to have recourse to such remedies, but withal he
rejoiced that in this his Holiness had not any humane respect, but aimed only
at the honor of God, and the dignity and liberty of the Church. The Card.
Bandini praised God who had given occasion unto his Holiness in the beginning
of his Papacy to purchase unto himself an immortal renown, by restoring the
Ecclesiastical liberty and jurisdiction. The suffrage of Card. Baronius,
grounded upon that Theme, that the ministry of S. Peter has two parts, the
one to feed, the other to kill, has been so often published, that it seems
not needful here to mention it. The Card. Iustiniano said, that he conformed
himself to the judgment of his Holiness, being justly taken upon a case
notorious, Notorietate facti and notorietate iuris; that he saw not what excuse
the Venetians could allege; that to wait any longer should be to nourish them
in their sins, and to partake with them; upon these reasons he commended the
resolution of his Holiness. The Card Zapata said, that the delay of twenty
four days was too long, and that the Ecclefiastiques under the Venetians were
in worse condition then were the Israelites under Pharaoh. The Card. Conti gave
thanks to God who in these times had given a Pope vigorous of age and strength,
which by his zeal and virtue could and would restore again Ecclefiasticall
liberty and the authority of the Sea Apostolic. All the rest with few words
consented, or after a repetition of the reasons urged by the Pope, confirmed
them, or amplified the reasons and allegations of the Canonists. Which being
done, they passed to Consistoriall propositions according to their custom. The
number of Cardinals present in this Consistory were forty and one; the
Cardinals of Como, Aldobrandin, Santiquattro and Caesis not going that morning.

No other thing could be expected from the Cardinals, but that they would
consent to the deliberations of the Pope; some by their proper inclination
being carried to the same opinion, as being passionate for the Ecclefiasticall
liberty; others because their particular interests (by reason of the
pretensions which they might have unto the Papacy) forced them to accord;
others had not the boldness to contradict the Pope in any matter, lest they
should so cut off the hope of profit from them or theirs; in which regard, one
of them excused himself, saying, that if he had said any thing against the
design of the Pope, he had much endamaged himself without any furtherance to
the Republique. And it is a thing without doubt in the Court of Rome, that the
Cardinals voices are taken in Consistory only in appearance and by way of
ceremony, in as much as they are never informed of the affair whereof they
are to treat, but of the fact alone which is presented; or at the most they
have no further information then those few words which the Pope is pleased to
speak two several times in Consistory, as has been said. And not seldom
matters are propounded whereof they never heard word. So that the Popes go
with assurance to propound in Consistory whatsoever is to their humor,
grounding upon the custom which is among the Cardinals, to consent to all that
which is proposed; which is openly derided in the Court of Rome, changing the
Latin word (by the figure of agnomination) assentiri into assentari.

This Consistory thus finished, the Monitorie was affixed in the accustomed
places of the City of Rome, and incontinently scattered every where, an
infinite number of Copies being imprinted, partly in Latin, and partly in the
Italian, which were sent thorowout all the Cities of Italy; and into the State
of Venice it self, were dispersed a great quantity which had been sent unto
the Jesuits and other Religious (which took part with the Pope,) as also to
their friends, accompanying them with seditious letters. And thus they
continued sending during some weeks, in form of pacquets or blancs with
inscription to any whomsoever whose name they knew. One thing was much wondered
at, that in the vulgar Copy printed in the Vatican, this clause of the
imprisonment of the Abbot and the Canon had been adjoined [And have committed
the knowledge of their cause unto the Secular Magistrate of the Signiory named
the Auogardor,] which clause was not in the Latin copy. That which caused the
wonder was that such commission was never given, and men could not penetrate to
what end this falsehood could serve them.

The Monitorie was addressed to the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, their
Vicars General, and to all the Ecclefiastiques Secular and Regular, having
Ecclefiasticall dignity within the Estate of the Republique of Venice. The
Pope by this Monitorie declared, that some Months before it was come to his
knowledge, that the Duke and Senate of Venice some years before had made some
Decrees contrary to the authority of the Sea Apostolic, and against the
Ecclefiasticall immunitie: repugnant unto the General Councels, to the Canons
and Constitutions of Popes; and specially he made mention in the first place of
that ordinance in the year M DC II. by which Ecclefiasticall persons were
forbidden to receive or purchase goods immovable, under shadow that themselves
were thereof the direct Lords, their right notwithstanding being not hereby
impeached. In the second place he mentioned that of the year M DC III. by
which the prohibition to build Churches or other places of devotion without
leave, was extended to all the State. In the third place, that of the year M
DC V. which in like manner extended to all the State, a prohibition to alienate
for ever any goods immovable Secular or Lay, to men of the Church. In the
fourth place he spoke of the restraint of the Canon of Vicenca, and the Abbot
of Neruese; adjoining that some of those Laws abolished the rights which the
Church had ever inioyed, and tended to the prejudice of his authority, of the
rights of the Church, and of the privileges of persons Ecclefiasticall, in
brief of Ecclefiasticall liberty, all of them tending to the danger of the
souls both of the Duke and of all the Senators, and also to the great scandal
of many others. That they which had made these Laws had incurred the Censures
and the confiscation of their fiefs, from which they could not be absolved but
by the Pope, and by reuoking first all these statutes and ordinances, and by
restoring all things into the former estate. But forasmuch as the Duke and
Senate after sundry fatherly admonitions had not daigned to revoke their Laws,
or to render the Prisoners, he who might not in any sort endure that
Ecclefiasticall liberty and immunitie together with the authority of the Sea
Apostolic should be violated, following the example of ten of his
predecessors there recited and many others, with the counsel and consent of
the Cardinals, after mature deliberation, although the Decrees aforesaid were
of themselves void and of no value; nevertheless he did now declare them to
be such. And further he did Excommunicate, declare and pronounce for
Excommunicated, as if they had been particularly named, the Duke and the
Senate which then were, and which should be hereafter, together with all their
favorers, counselors, and adherents, if within the term of four and twenty
days, to be counted from the day of the publication (which he appointed in
three terms, each of eight days) the Duke and the Senate did not revoke,
abrogate, and disannull the Decrees aforesaid, and all that which had followed
thereupon, without any exception or excuse; and if they caused not to be openly
in all places published that abrogation of the Laws, and the restitution of
all that which had been done in consequence thereof, with promise not to do
any more such acts for the time to come; and to give account of all these
things to himself, as also actually render into the hands of his Nuntio the
Canon and the Abbot: That from this Excommunication they could not be absolved
but by the Pope, except it were in the point of death, in which case if any one
receiving absolution should afterward recover his health, he should again
fall within this same Excommunication if he did not (so far as in him lay)
obey this his commandment: That until they had obeyed, he did forbid to bury
any one deceased in holy places. And if after the four and twenty days the
Duke and Senate should continue three days longer obstinate, he put all their
State under the Interdict, in such sort that none might celebrate Masses or
Divine Services, except in form, in places and cases granted by common right.
And he deprived the Duke and Senate of all their goods which they held of the
Church of Rome, or of other Churches, as also of all their Privileges and
indults obtained by it, and specially of that privilege inabling them to
proceed against Clerks in certain cases; reserving to Himself and his
Successors power to aggrauate and reaggrauate the Censures and penalties
against them and against their adherents, favorers, counselors and others,
and to pass unto other pains and remedies, if they persisted in their
contempt, not withstanding etc. Commanding all Patriarks, Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Ecclefiastiques under penalty etc. respectively, that after they had
received these letters, or had thereof notice, they should publish them in
their Churches, when their people were fully assembled, and cause them to be
affixed to the Church doors. Ordaining that they should give credit unto the
Copies hereof, imprinted, being first signed by a Notarie, and sealed with the
seal of some one promoted to Ecclefiasticall dignity. And that the publication
made in Rome should oblige as much and have like force as if there had been
personal intimation.

SECOND BOOK.
THe publication of a Monitorie so rude, suddenly and unexpectedly, thundered
out against a State so great and puissant, troubled the Ministers of Princes
which resided with his Holiness. The Marquis of Chastillon, Ambassador for the
Emperor, (whether because it seemed unto him that the interests of his Master
did so require, or because he had his own estate confining upon the
Venetians,) made great instance with the Pope, to defer a while; at which his
Holiness was little moved, either for that he esteemed this Office of small
consideration, as proceeding from a Minister, and not from direction of his
Master, or because he lightly regarded the Emperor himself, or his
interests, as standing in need of his aid in the war against the Turks. For
these reasons, whenever he judged fit to communicate of this affair with the
Ambassadors, he neglected in a manner the Emperors. But the Marquis seeing how
little account was made of his Office and interuention in this business, sent
to the Emperor, to the end that he might have order from himself; which yet
did no more succeed, by reason of the opposition made by the Marshall Prainer,
ill affected toward the Venetians.

D'Alincourt, Ambassador of the most Christian King, did the same Office, but
as from himself; to whose demands the Pope would not condescend, but answered,
that he ought rather to exhort the Republique to obey: wherefore he gave advise
to the King his Master by the ordinary Currier, as well of that which had
passed, as also of the Office by him tendered, and of the Popes answer. The
Count of Verrue, Ambassador of the Duke of Sauoy, treated with more vigor in
the name of his Master with his Holiness, exhorting him to make delay, and to
find means to compose these differences: to whom he answered that this were
the ready way to render the Venetian, more obstinate, and that the Duke ought
to address himself to them, to make them obey. Whereupon the Ambassador
could not contain himself, but replied, that the word (Obey) was too harsh to
be used toward a Sovereign Prince, and that a delay in this case would in the
end be found very behouefull. The great Duke of Tuscany also writ to the Bishop
of Soana, praying him to do the same Office in his name with his Holiness.

After the publication of the Monitory, the Ambassadors of the Republique were
visited by the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of the King of France, and of the
great Duke of Tuscany; who communicated unto them, what they had done with the
Pope, and how they found him still in his first resolution.

Some men were of opinion, that the Pope, according to the custom of those
that are without experience, quickly after the Monitory had been published,
the heat of his courage being a little tempered, would seriously consider the
inconveniences which in all reason he might see would follow, and hereby
beginning to relent, would desire an occasion to prolong the term, if he were
thereunto required by the Republique. Others said, it was likely that by the
mediation of Princes and their Ambassadors alone he would give longer term, if
he did believe that the Republique would accept it. Which might have been for
his advantage, considering that by this means a way had been opened to cause
his commandments to be received. But the Pope remained firm, resolved to see
the issue of his Monitorie: the publication whereof being known at Venice, it
was first by the Senate ordered that all should have recourse to their prayers,
and command was sent to al Churches, Monasteries as well of men as women, and
other places of devotion, to make orisons and supplications, following the
ancient usage, and a good sum of money was also distributed in alms to these
holy places. Then after they deliberated upon the Government, and consulted
whether it were meet to leave their Ambassadors at Rome, or to call them home.
Some were of opinion that they should be recalled, since that the Republique
having received so great an injury, could not with any honor keep them at
Rome. Others considered that to call them away were utterly to break off all
communication. In the end both opinions were approved, and both the one and the
other followed, with this temperament: They resolved to call home only the
extraordinary Ambassador, thereby sufficiently testifying their sensiblenesse
of the wrong: but to leave the Ordinary, to do all offices of piety and
reverence toward the Sea Apostolic, and to prevent an absolute rupture,
which they would avoid till they were forced by an extreme violence. It was
also determined, to communicate all these matters to the Ambassador of England,
to whom (till then) they had not imparted any of these things, for
considerations which hinder to treat with him upon points controuerted with the
Pope. And accordingly they writ to Gregory Iustiniano Ambassador of the Repub.
in England, that he should inform the King. Henry Wotton the English
Ambassador at Venice complained with words of courtesy that they had
communicated these things to other Ambassadors so long before him: but for the
pretensions of the Pope, he said, that he could not understand this Roman
Theology which is contrary to all justice and honesty.

Now to the end that they might provide against the inconveniences which the
Popes Monitorie might cause, command was given to all Prelates and
Ecclefiasticall persons, that they should not publish or permit to be published
or affixed in any place wheresoever, any Bulls, Breues, or other writings which
might be sent unto them. Furthermore, proclamation was made, under pain of
incurring the displeasure of the Prince, that whosoever had any Copy of a
certain Breue published at Rome against the Republique, should bring it unto
the Magistrates at Venice, or to the Governors of Cities and other places of
their State; to which all men did so cheerfully obey and brought out so many
copies, that it was a thing marvelous to see what quantity had been
imprinted; neither was any one any where affixed, by reason of the general
diligence of all the people, who discovered in diverse places and caused to
arrest those who came for that effect. They imparted likewise to all the Agents
of Princes which were then at Venice, the reasons and causes of these motions;
and the same was written to all the Residents for the Republique with Princes.
It was also thought fit by the Senate, to write to all Governors of Cities and
places within their State, and to give them advice of the injury which the
Republique had received and did daily receive from the Pope; as also the
pregnant reasons which they had in their defense, with order that these letters
should be communicated to the Consuls and Communalties of their Cities. Which
being done, every where were seen the effects of an incredible obedience and
submission toward their Prince, with great resolution to defend and maintain
the public liberty, for aid whereof they offered succor of men, of money and
arms, according to the ability of each place: and these offers were
afterward performed, in their time, with the same promptitude and
cheerfulness.

During this time, Duodo the extraordinary Ambassador of the Signiory at Rome,
received commandment to depart. He took leave of the Pope the 27. of the
Month, telling him, that seeing he could not obtain of his Holiness to take
into his consideration the reasons by him represented, and having no more to
say or do, he was called back to Venice. The Pope answered him with words of
courtesy toward himself, and touching the difference, said, that he had done
nothing but what his conscience obliged him to do; that the case was clear
and decided; that in the whole order of his proceedings he had followed the
example of his Predecessors: that his weapons in this quarrel were spiritual,
the use whereof accorded well with that fatherly love which he had ever carried
to the Republique, requiring only such obedience as all Princes are bound to
render unto him.

But at Venice the Nuntio of the Pope after he had received advice that the
Monitorie was published, every day frequented the house of the Jesuits, where
were then Fathers of great authority amongst them for their actions passed in
the most important affairs of State: among the rest, were Father Bernardine
Castorius of Siena their Superior, who was Provincial at Lions at what time
the Jesuits were banished thence: Father Anthony Posseuine of great renown
for the things by him managed in Moscouia and Polonia, not only whilst he was
in person in those countries, but afterward by his sleights and treaties:
Father John Baro a Venetian, a man greatly enterprising, not permitting that in
any City where he made his residence any thing should pass of moment without
his presence: Father John Gentes much versed in the profession (as they call
it) of Cases of Conscience, apt to condemn and reprehend any action
whatsoever, if it were not done with their knowledge and counsel, as also to
ustifie all the actions of their Obedients: besides many other Fathers, all
zealous practisers of their fourth vow.

The Nuntio having advice of the Interdict, came not in Senate till the 28. of
the same Month, where first showing a great displeasure for what was passed,
he added that they ought not to proceed toward his Holiness with so much
repugnance; that the Pope was moved by pure zeal; and that yet (if they would
yield a little) all things might be accorded. And to this effect he desired
that his Serenitie would devise some temperament: that for his part he offered
his interuention to represent it, and to favor it. But to the end that his
discourse might seem more passionate, and be more perswasiue, the Nuntio
seasoned it with many words of piety, and spoke often of God, using these
terms [our Lord,] of which also he served himself when he spoke of the Pope;
which made his discourse ambiguous to the hearers, excepting some more prudent
who had formerly observed in other actions, and at that time took notice, that
in pronouncing these words [Our Lord] if he meant the Pope he would uncover his
head, but when he spoke it of God, he held on his bonnet. To this discourse
mixed of affairs and simplicity, made in form of a Sermon, the Duke answered:
That none of found understanding could approve it, that a Commonwealth so
pious and Catholic should be on such a fashion vexed: that the actions of the
Pope could not be justified. He complained likewise that he had not deigned to
hear their Ambassador Extraordinary: that he had published a Monitorie
esteemed unjust by every one without any scruple, and that he came to so
important a resolution without knowing before how the world is governed; that
his Holiness could not have done an act more proper for to put the Sea
Apostolic upon the censure and hatred of all the world, and in a manifest
peril that if the Republique should hereupon separate from the Pope, this
separation should be followed with a loss irreparable to the Ecclesiastiques.
But that the Repub. would not depart from their piety, yet would defend
themselves; that for him, he did well to persuade peace, but that he should
turn his speech to the Pope who troubled it.

The Nuntio hearing this, made some instance to have answer likewise from the
Senate, and took leave. The Senate eight days afterward answered him in the
same manner as the Duke had done: whith he understanding, beginning with the
same unseasonable complaints, which at other times he had used, he passed
further and made appear his displeasure, in that he could not find any
temperament, concluding that the Senate should take heed, lest whiles they
desired to sustain a particular Law, they might draw on themselves an
universal ruin. To which the Duke answered, that he ought to speak of
Prudence unto the Pope, who had used so much precipitation, and that he should
do well to set before his eyes the imminent perils which might follow
hereupon, with the necessity to avoid them by desisting from his injuries;
that these counsels came from an old man many years employed in the affairs
of State.

The Pope knowing the Proclamation made against his Monitory, and the
resolution of the subjects of the State, who were then most ready to serve
their Prince, and to maintain their Liberty, being therefore out of hope that
his Interdict would be observed, he thought that his Nuntio could not any
longer continue at Venice, with his honor. And therefore he writ unto him,
speedily to depart, and the sixth of May he sent the Bishop of Soana to give
dismission unto Nani the Ordinary Resident of the Republique, charging him
expressly not to leave behind him at Rome any one of his Company.
Notwithstanding the Pope desired to see him before his departure, and therefore
the Ambassador having sent to demand Audience the day following, he granted him
incontinently. But after, either because he was so persuaded by other, or of
his own motion, and peradventure for fear lest he should make some
Protestation, he sent unto him early in the morning the Master of the
Ceremonies, to tell him that he would not receive him in quality of
Ambassador, but that he might come as a private man, and so he would receive
and welcome him gladly. Nani made answer, that he knew not how he should
separate from his Person the title of Ambassador, and much less could he do
this without knowledge of his Prince, whose Person he represented: and
therefore since it would not please his Holiness to see him as Ambassador, he
was ready to be gone. The Master of the Ceremonies reported this answer to the
Pope, who sent him back again to Nani, with resolution that he would not
receive him in quality of Ambassador. There were already with him many
Prelates and other persons for to accompany him unto the Audience; some
whereof, having knowledge of the resolution of his Holiness, and of the
Ambassadors purpose thereupon to depart, demanded of the Master of the
Ceremonies whether they might accompany him, whereunto he answered as of
himself, that it seemed to him not convenient: it fell out that all their
Caroaches followed the Ambassador, but few Prelates accompanied him in Person.
Yet some few went along with him, moved by some respects. But the Count John
Francis de Gambara, although he was a Prelate of no great time, and by
consequent his hopes being so much the greater, as they were more fresh, and
who himself had employed the Pope for Intercessor to the Republique, for the
deliverance of the Count Hannibal his brother from the Ban which he had
incurred, which yet he was not able to obtain, not without some indignation
of his Holiness, yet did not omit to accompany the Ambassador in Person,
saying that no occasion was sufficient to make him forget his duty; whose
action and words might justly cause them to blush for shame, who being obliged
by most strait bonds, were very forward to fail in their duty. The Ambassador
then departed Honorably accompanied, for as much as the bruit of his departure
being scattered through Rome, all they of the Nation resorted to him, and
besides the Barons and Roman Gentlemen affected to the Republique. But the
Pope on the morrow dispatched after him a Colonel to accompany him thorow-out
the State of the Church, who ouertooke him at Foligno, and offered to attend
him, in the name of his Holiness. The Ambassador, though he was well
accompanied, received notwithstanding the Colonel, for a part of the way, and
then thanking his Holiness, sent him back, (who returned,) and was well
entertained in all places of the State Ecclesiastical as he passed.

At the same time, the chief of the Council of Ten sent for the Superiors of
Monasteries, and other Churches of Venice; to whom was made known that the
intention of the Prince was that they should continue the Divine Services, and
that none of them should depart out of the State without permission; Protection
was promised to them that would remain, and for them that would be gone it was
declared that they might not carry away any goods of the Church, nor any other
thing of value. They were further commanded, that if any Breue from Rome, or
any order from their Superiors were by any means sent unto them, they should
bring it unto the Magistrate before they read it. In like manner the
Governors of all Cities within the State were commanded to do the like
thorowout all places of their Jurisdiction. After they consulted whether it
were meet to make answer unto the Monitory. There were that proposed, to use
the remedy of Appeal practiced in all times by all Princes and Republiques,
especially within these last three hundred years, against the attempts of
Popes, and particularly by the Senate of Venice upon like occasions, and in
like occurrences, yea even since that the Popes, Pius 2. Sixtus 4. and Julius
2. by their Breues, and others by the Bulle in Coena Domini, have assayed to
condemn such Appeals. Others nevertheless alleging that Appeals are made
in case of an injustice, which has some color of justice, which has no place
in this Monitory, where the nullities were in great numbers, and so notorious,
their advise was received. Wherefore it was resolved with one consent, to write
unto the Prelates of the State, touching the judgment of the Prince,
concerning the Monitory published, and why he determined to use no other
remedy. These Letters were written the sixth of May, and were imprinted to be
affixed in public places, and contained in substance; that he had received
advise of a Publication made at Rome on the seventeenth of April, of a
certain Breue fulminated against him, and against the Senate and Signory;
wherefore being obliged to have a care of the public tranquillity, and of
the authority of a Sovereign Prince, he Protested before God and all the
world, that he had not omitted or neglected any means possible to make the
Pope capable of the most clear and strong reasons in behalf of the
Republique. But having found his cares shut, and seen that Breue published
against reason and justice, and against the doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, of
the Fathers, and of the Canons, in prejudice of the Secular authority given by
God, and of the liberty of the State, with the trouble of the repose of his
subjects, and to the great scandal of all the world; he did not doubt to
account that Breue not only for unjust, but for merely void and null, and so
unlawful that he did not repute it needful to have recourse to such remedies
as in other occasions the Republique and many Sovereign Princes have used
against such Popes as outpassed the power to them given by God; trusting, that
the Prelates would hold on in their accustomed courses, and continue the divine
service, the Republique being resolved to persevere in the holy Catholic
faith, and in the reverence of the Roman Church, such as they had from the
beginning ever tendered.

Upon this there happened a thing notable: Upon the 8. of May the same time that
the Nuntio was with the Prince to demand leave to be gone, were affixed
thorowout the City Copies of the foresaid letters, and as he returned he saw
one fastened to the door of S. Francis Church which was hard by his lodging.

The Capuchins and Theatins until then did not think of departing out of the
State, or at the least they did not discover their design; on the contrary,
the Provincial and other Fathers of the Capucines (which governed one of their
Provinces which they have within the State) when they understood that the
publication of the Monitorie was made at Rome, took counsel among themselves,
and determined that, seeing no matter of faith was treated between the Pope
and the Republique, they were not obliged to follow the intentions of the Pope,
and to this effect (following this resolution) they sent letters to all their
Conuents situate within the State. Afterward, receiving an express command
from their Superiors that by all means they should be gone and retire out of
the Venetian Dominions, they wrought in such sort that they were prohibited to
depart upon pain of death, and procured this commandment to be general, to
the end that they might be less suspected: which being done, they raised and
spread a rumor, that they had an intention to retire, but now they could not
being forbidden by the Prince under pain of death. But afterward they utterly
changed their opinion upon the occasion which follows.

The Jesuits, immediately after they had notice that the Monitorie had been
published in Rome, dispatched to his Holiness the Father Achilles Gaillardi of
Padua for to represent unto him what good offices they might do to his
advantage if they were permitted to remain within the State. For this reason,
expecting hereof an answer from Rome, when the pleasure of the Senate was
signified unto them, they spoke in appearance as did others: nevertheless
either because they were in doubt of the Popes intention, or for some other
reason, serving themselves of their ordinary equivocations, they professed that
they might continue the Divine Offices, their Sermons and Confessions,
according to their custom. But the Pope hearing the propositions of the
Jesuits, and considering that if they did not publicly keep the Interdict,
they would bring more damage to his pretensions then profit by their sleights
which they could practice under hand, he gave them to understand that his
resolution was they should observe the Interdict; and for this effect sent unto
them a commandment by the same Currier which brought unto the Nuntio his order
to depart, yet that they might delay so long as they could with conuenience.
Notwithstanding they scattered a report that they had decreed to stay,
abstaining only from saying Mass in public, but otherwise to continue all
Divine Offices. And forasmuch as it seemed a great diminution of their
reputation, if when they went away, the Capuchines should abide; after they had
used many artifices to make them depart, as well by means of the Nuntio as of
another Minister of a certain Prince, who for four days space hanted their
Covent at last they gained them, by suggesting, that all the world would cast
their eyes upon the Capuchines, and that their resolution would be a definitive
sentence of the validity or inualiditie of the Monitorie. Wherefore since
their opinion would be infallibly followed and embraced by all the world, they
now had a fair occasion offered to merit much of the Holy See. Which did puff
them up in such sort, that they went to the Prince, to declare unto him that
they could not remain, and Father Theodore de Bergamasco, the Companion of the
Provincial, passed so far as that he had the boldness to say that their
condition was much differing from the condition of the other Religious, whose
actions were of small importance: but the Capuchins ought to be the rule of all
the rest, all the world having an eye to them for to take example whether to
esteem the Popes Censures or to contemn them.

Now the term of 24. days prefixed in the Monitorie approaching, the Jesuits
were required on the 9. of May to give a certain resolution; who then declared
their equivocation, by refusing to say Mass, which they said was not contrary
to their former promise, inasmuch as the Mass, for the excellency of it, is
not comprehended under the name of Divine Offices. And certes it was a pretty
invention, to offer themselves to do Divine Services, and then after to
exclude the Mass because of its excellence, and all others likewise because
they had not wont to celebrate them, and so by this shift to promise all things
and perform nothing to the Republique; as also to abide within the State, and
yet withal to keep the Interdict according to the intention of the Pope.
Hereupon the same day the point was put in consultation, and it was determined
in full Senate to send the Grand Vicar of the Patriarch for to receive and take
into his charge all the ornaments and jewels of the Church, with commandment
unto the Jesuits that they should speedily avoid the Country. Letters also
were written to the Governors of Cities, that they should cause them to depart
from the places of their Jurisdiction. The Jesuits of Venice understanding
this resolution, called tumultuously unto the Church their devoted ones, from
whom they drew a very great sum of money; and persuaded the Capuchines, that
at their parting, they should go forth in Procession with the Holy Sacrament,
seditiously intending to move the people, if it had been possible. And the
evening being come, they demanded of the Magistrates to be assisted by public
Officers for their security, which was accorded unto them. But here with not
contenting themselves, they sent to request the Ambassador of France, that it
would please him to let them be attended by his Servants, which he did not
think fit, seeing they had already a public guard. In the end, that evening
they departed two hours within night, each one carrying the Holy Host at his
neck, to intimate that Jesus Christ departed with them: and to this spectacle
there were assembled a great. multitude of people, as well by land as by water.
And when the Superior, who last of al entered the Barque, demanded Benediction
of the Viccar of the Patriarch, who was there, straight a voice was raised by
all the people, crying in the language of that Country, Ande in mall' hora, Go
with a vengeance, or in the Devils name. These men in the mean while had hid
in the City, vessels and precious ornaments of the Church, many books, and
the best moueables of their House, which they left in a manner void. All the
next day there remained the relikes of a fire in two places where they had
burned an incredible quantity of writings. They left also a good number of
cruses to melt metals, the noise whereof being heard through the City, which
scandalized the few devoted ones which were left there, the Father Posseuine
writ (and his letter was publicly seen) that these cruses were not to melt
gold or silver, as they were slandred, but only for to acco^modate their
bonnets. Shortly, there remained not any thing of importance within the House,
save the Library bequeathed unto them by the Archbishop Leuys Molino Bishop of
Treuiso, which was found with in their Armories, and a case of books
forbidden, in a place separate. But at Padua were found many Copies of a
certain Writing, containing eighteen rules under this title, Regulae aliquot
seruandae vt cum Orthodoxa Ecclesia vere sentiamus, that is to say, Rules which
ought to be observed, to the end that our Belief may be conformable to that of
the Orthodox Church: in the seventeenth whereof there is a prescription to take
heed how men press or inculcate too much the grace of God: and in the third it
is ordained, that men must believe the Hierarchicall Church, although it tell
us that that is black, which our eye judges to be white. Before their
parting, they left unto their Penitents some instructions, how they ought to
govern themselves in the observation of the Interdict.

The Jesuits being thus gone, there seemed small cause of fear for the other
Religious that they would breed any trouble. But upon the bruit which ran of
the Capuchines and Theatines, who said that they must needs keep the
Interdict, there were some that imputed this manner of proceeding in them to a
feebleness of conscience, easy to be deceived, and so condoled with them, and
desired they might be tolerated. Others more advised, seeing well that this did
proceed from their ambition to seem better than others, with design to be
favored by his Holiness, detested their hypocrisy. But the Senate reputing
it not agreeable to that reason and justice which they used in matters of
State, nor to the service of God and tranquillity of Religion; and that on the
contrary in times so calamitous, such a novelty might bring much danger, if
within the State it were permitted that any Ecclesiastique should observe the
Iuterdict, gave order that all those who were not disposed to continue the
Divine Services should retire out of their Dominions. Whereupon the Capuchines,
Theatines, and the reformed Franciscanes departed from Venice, and others
Religious were appointed to the Government of their Churches. But the
Capuchines in the Territories of Brescia and Bergamo, where there were no
Jesuits to seduce them, did not accord with the other, but remained and
continued their Divine Services without any innovation, for which they were
bitterly persecuted by their Superiors at Rome with Excommunications and other
Spiritual penalties, although without effect as touching their Temporalls,
because the Prince had taken them into his protection: and for the Spirituals,
they defended themselves by some Writings which were published, upon very good
grounds, being men well learned and of great prudence, who were not carried to
take any resolution but with the safety of their consciences. The Capuchines of
Venice, according to the intention of the Jesuits, would have gone out with
solemnity, thereby to move a tumult; but being therein hindered, they
celebrated that morning only one Mass, and consumed all the holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which was preserved in their Church, and concluded the Mass
without giving Benediction unto the people. They left also to their Deuotes
diverse instructions for to observe the Interdict, as did likewise the
Theatines. But in such a confusion, and in so great haste, being not able to
consult together, they did not well accord with the Jesuits, as also the
Jesuits disagreed amongst themselves; whence it came to pass that their
adherents proceeded diversely, some being of opinion that all the Sacraments
administered by the Priests that stayed were nullities, and therefore that it
was not lawful to adore the holy Eucharist, as before: Others esteemed that to
hear Mass was only a venial sin, and others held it a sin most grievous,
although the Sacrament were truly celebrated. Of these instructions, and of
the different ways of observing them are yet to be seen the Writings
published by their Favorers.

The Jesuits being departed, retired themselves to Ferrara, Bologna, and
Mantua, neighboring places, where they might receive the consulations of their
friends, and readily send their answers; as also employ themselves to excite
more easily some sedition, whether by their emissaries, or by their frequent
letters. The other Religious likewise which were gone, retired in like manner to
Milan, Ferrara, and Bologne, and Mantua, where they were seen with an evil
eye by the other Religious of the same Orders, as those who were come to spend
part of their commodities. And the Superiors of Houses complained, that though
by this means the mouths were doubled, yet the Pope had not sent any other
provision but Indulgences; and they said openly, that if other succor did not
come from Rome, they could not continue to make such expense, nor to furnish so
many persons with Vestiments. And it is certain that the Capuchines, which
departed out of the State of Venice to the number of eight hundred, could not
find (at least all of them) any convenient retrait, so as many of them died
for want of sustenance.

At Venice they communicated to all Ambassadors and Agents of Princes, all that
had passed, and also writ unto the Ministers of the Republique in all Courts;
how that the Nuntio was recalled, that their Ambassador had been dismissed;
that the Republique judged all things done herein by the Pope, mere nullities;
that they were resolved to live Catholics, and to defend themselves.

At Rome men held for constant that the Monitorie would cause three notable
effects. The first, that the Religious would all depart the Country, and so
the Interdict at least by necessity should be observed. The second, that the
Cities and people seeing themselves deprived of Divine Offices and Exercises
would seditiously be moved and send to the Prince to give satisfaction to his
Holiness. The third that upon this occasion the Nobility might be disordered,
grieved and terrified, and so divided amongst themselves. Upon these hopes and
considerations they suffered to slip not only the four and twenty days
before determined, but many more; during which the Jesuits, tho absent, put in
work all their artifices. But they saw at Rome, that neither the Censures nor
the sleights of the Jesuits did work any great effect, nor produced the
commotions which they had figured; so that (except the Jesuits banished, the
Capuchines and Theatines dismissed) no other Order was departed, and the Divine
Service was celebrated after the custom, yea oftentimes with more solemnity,
the people coming to the Churches in greater multitudes, and some of them now
frequented the Service, which at other times had not been so diligent. The
Senate was greatly united in their deliberations, the City of Venice and the
inhabitants kept themselves in all quiet obedience, and the Cities of the
Estate which till then had not sent their Deputies to the new Duke for
congratulation, did now perform that duty, without any regard or respect unto
the Monitorie already published; further declaring openly that in things
temporal they would not acknowledge or obey any other power whatsoever. And
this so great a tranquillity did not only proceed from the voluntary
obedience of the people, but also from the providence of the Senate, and the
diligence of the Magistrates which provided for all accidents: and this great
affair was conducted with so much prudence and dexterity, that no blood of
any man was shed for contempt or rebellion; every man admiring that so great a
Body and Government should be kept upright without any violence or execution.
For touching the commandments given unto the Eeclesiastiques under pain of
death, they were given in that sort at the instance and request of those
amongst them who being voluntarily disposed to execute them, desired
nevertheless some pretext to excuse themselves.

The Court of Rome blamed the actions of the Pope, and those which spoke least
to his disadvantage, said, that though his cause had been never so just, yet
in his proceeding he had used too great celeritie, and too too excessive
confidence. On the other side they commended the prudence of the Venetians, who
having received so vehement a shocke had yet retained their state in repose and
tranquillity. After this came to Rome the Father Antony Barison, who had taken
post to go tell the Pope what was said at Ferrara (from whence he came,) and
at other places confining upon the State of Venice, where the reasons of the
Republique were approved: and notwithstanding he incited the Pope to preserve
the Pontifical dignity.

The Pope made great complaints in the Consistory that the Interdict was not
observed by the Ecclesiastiques; and he required the Cardinals that every one
of them would with great care think of some remedy, and make unto him report a
part. Nevertheless the Cardinals did not believe that as well the
Ecclesiastiques as the people for the most part were persuaded that the
Censures were nullities; rather they conceived that there was in them a
disposition to observe them, but that they expected some occasion to come to
that effect; wherefore they esteemed it good to give occasion by exciting the
Religious to some new practices, either by abstaining from Divine Offices, or
by departing out of the State. This was the reason, why the Cardinals,
Protectors of the Regulars, together with their Superiors which were in the
Court of Rome, and in other places of Italy, did what they could with them,
with menaces of Censures, pains, and other evils corporal and spiritual, as
also with promises of graces, honors, dignities, not only to the Chief but
further to each particular, if they would observe the Interdict or retire
themselves.

But they dealt one way with the Monks and other Regulars endowed, another way
with the Mendicants. To these they said, that being not able to remain and
observe entirely the Interdict, they should abandon their places and depart;
that it was the intention of Our Lord (so they called the Pope,) and if they
could not depart, that they should in this cause suffer martyrdom. But to the
rented and endowed they gave to understand that the Pope though he would have
the Interdict observed, yet he would not therefore have the Monasteries
abandoned. They sent also as Commissaries some of the Regulars of the same
Order, such as being the most abject in their Congregations had offered
themselves to go into dangers to acquire to themselves some credit; but some
had not the boldness to enter within the State, as also neither by their
menaces nor promises were any seduced, saving some few timorous or ambitious,
who yielded upon hope of great recompenses. Further, they suborned some
hypocrites or Hermites, to enter within the Country to excite some troubles
among the people, but being found upon the confines laden with papers and
instructions, they were sent back, upon a commandment given by the Senate the
24. of May to all Governors to take heed that no Religious or Priests from
foreign parts should enter with any writings, for fear and for preventing of
sedition. All these devises of the spiritual arms, and artifices covered with
pretext of Religion and piety, remained thus without effect within the State of
the Republique.

But in the Courts of Princes these differences were received very diversely.

In Polonia, Lewis Foscarini being come Ambassador expressly to congratulate
with that King for his marriage, the Nuntio of the Pope in that Kingdom, and
the Jesuits, did what they could to make him receive some affront. The Nuntio
first desired the King that the Monitorie might be published, wherein he was
absolutely denied: whereupon addressing himself unto the Religious, he gave
order to all of them that they should not admit within their Churches the
Ambassador or any of his People. And afterward, two of his Gentlemen being
gone to hear Mass at the Cordeliers, they were put out of the Church; of
which the Ambassador having made complaint to the Marshall of the Court, he and
the Cardinal of Cracouia commanded those Religious that the day following they
should sing a solemn Mass, to which they should inuit the Ambassador, first
demanding him pardon for the affront given unto his Gentlemen. The Mass was
celebrated with great concourse of people, and displeasure of the Nuntio. The
King approved of that which had been done by his Officers, and by Decree of
Parliament was published an Edict, prohibiting all men from doing any act that
might displease the Republique; and he writ unto the Pope, complaining of the
attempt of his Nuntio, where he added that his Holiness had great occasion to
make esteem of the Republique, to which all his Kingdom and he himself
inclined, being moved both by his own interest, and by that of his Kingdom.
He said moreover, that for light occasions, and where no point of faith was
questioned, it was not good to make so great stirs, and exhorted his
Holiness to be willing to appease these broiles; making mention again how
much the enterprise of the Nuntio had displeased him and all his Council, and
so much the more, because it was a thing unheard in his Kingdom, that they
should therein publish Censures against any Prince whatsoever, seeing it was not
done when the Monitories were published against the King Henry 3 and after that
in the cause of Ferrara against the Duke Coesar de Este: that it did not stand
with reason to govern themselves after another fashion toward the Republike of
Venice. whose cause was common with his Kingdom. All these particularities the
King imparted to the Ambassador, yea himself delivered him a Copy of Laws of
his Kingdom like to those of Venice.

In the Court of the Emperor, by reason of the ordinary difficulty to have
Audience of his Majesty, the Ambassador treated with all the Imperial
Ministers, who showed themselves sensible of the wrongs of the Republique;
alleging that in all the States of Germany were observed like constitutions,
and highly displeased they were for that which the Pope had done, because the
Protestants would take hence advantage for to fortify their reasons, to the
end to retain Ecclesiastical Benefices; only the Great Chancellor, and the
Marshall Prainer inclined for the Pope. In the end Francis Soranzo, Ambassador,
had Audience of the Emperor, who thanked him for communicating these matters
with him, and marvelled that the Nuntio had never spoken unto him thereof; and
exhorted him to find some temperament of composition. But Corpus Christi day
being come, upon which the Jesuits are wont to make a very solemn Procession,
whereat assist all the Ministers of Princes; the Fathers did what they could
with the Ambassador of the Republique, that he would be absent, who bitterly
reprehending them resolved to be there, as he was, the Nuntio in the mean
while faining himself to be indisposed to avoid it. But two other being to be
made the days following, the Nuntio considered what prejudice it would be to
him, if they were done as the first. And therefore he employed the Ambassador
of Tuscany to deal with him of Venice, that he should not be present,
threatening otherwise he would cause the Church doors to be shut up, and hinder
the Procession, in as much as he was not to he admitted into the Church, being
a person Excommunicate. Wherefore he might do well to prevent the scandal
that would ensue, since all the Protestants would unite themselves to him, and
on the other side all Catholics separate from him. Hereupon the Ambassador
referred himself to be directed by the Emperor; but his Majesty not willing
to meddle in these Ecclefiasticall matters, the Ambassador resolved to take
Physic and keep in, fearing to receive some affront by the means of the
Jesuits, and of the Nuntio, being herein aided by the Marshall Prainer, ill
affected to the Republique, to whom no other Minister did oppose himself: upon
hope to have 100000. crowns from the Pope for the war against the Turks. But
afterward, the Pope having refused to give that succor, for want whereof they
were constrained to make peace with the Mutiners of Hungary, and to yield unto
them the places which they had seized, with the exercise of their Religion; and
the Marshall Prainer being dead, as also the Nuntio a little softened, after
that he saw the Nuntio's of France and Spain had been made Cardinals, without
any reckoning of himself, things there received some change, and the
Ambassador of Venice was freely every where admitted. And there is no doubt,
that if he had showed himself firm from the beginning, he had surmounted all
difficulty, seeing that a Month after complaining in the name of the Republique
to the Emperor, and representing unto him that besides the injury done to
Him, his Majesty had therein been wronged, in that the Pope should intrude
himself to command (within his Court,) the Ministers of Princes, which were
there, for to render him service: the Emperor excused himself for what had
passed, saying, he knew nothing of it: Which was very likely, considering that
his Ambassador at Venice was present with the Duke in all the Chapels and
Solemnities, as also was the Ambassador of the most Christian King.

In Spain upon the first news which was brought touching the pretensions of
the Pope, and the answer of the Republique, they knew well that i^ concerned
the common interest of all Princes, and commended the constancy of the Senate;
although that the Marquis de Villenas, Ambassador at Rome, inclined to the
Popes side, to the end to obtain by that means the Cardinalate for Don Gabriel
Pacieco his brother; he writ also into Spain in favor of his Holiness. But
they not believing that for such a cause men would come to arms, and being
assured that the Republique would maintain the common cause of all Princes;
and judging specially that they might draw profit to themselves, if these
dissensions between the Pope and the Republique were continued, since a
difference between two the most Potent Princes of Italy would render their
affairs more firm; and that if the Republique should prevail against the
Pope, it would increase so much more their Temporal Jurisdiction, and if
happily these things might be reduced to the terms of a rupture (that which
they did not believe,) it was in their power to hinder the war if their
utility required so, or to serve themselves thereof to their advantage; they
left the business to have its course, without giving any instructions to the
Ambassador who was at Rome, who by this means might continue his practices, in
fomenting the intentions of the Pope, whereunto his own inclination and profit
carried him; going so far as to promise succor of arms when there should be
need, yet only with general words which did not precisely oblige him. But
upon notice that the Interdict was published, the King saw that things had
passed further than he was willing, and was grieved that he had no sooner
interposed. The Nuntio in the mean while made instance that the Ambassador of
Venice might be declared Excommunicate in the Pulpits, saying that if the
Ambassador presented himself in the Chapel of the King, he would command
the Kings Chaplains to cease the Divine Offices, and if he were not obeyed,
that he would go out. In this Court were rendered many evil offices to the
Republique, especially by them of Genoa, out of envy, because their Republique
had yielded to the Popes will, and that of Venice preserved their liberty.
They turned all to their advantage, recommending Genoa for Devotion and
Obedience, and ascribing to obstinacy and want of Religion, that which had
been justly done at Venice, for the conservation of their own Liberty. But
above all that showed themselves enemies of the Venetians, the principal was
the Bishop of Monte-pulcian, Ambassador of the great Duke of Tuscany, who not
only abstained from visiting the Ambassador of Venice, but also sought all
occasions to detract from the actions of the Republique; as also Asdruball de
Montaigu, Resident for the same Duke at Venice, did not cease to do in like
manner on all occasions that were offered. For these reasons, at Madrid in the
House and presence of the Cardinal of Toledo, was assembled a Congregation of
twelve Divines, where it was consulted whether they should admit the Ambassador
of Venice to Divine Offices, not only the Nuncio, but the Jesuits also making
great instance that he might be excluded: but in the Congregation there being
none which opined against the Republique but only the Jesuits, it was in the
end concluded that nothing should be altered. And the King, that he might not
declare himself either by admitting or excluding him in his Chapel, remained
many days without using it. And the news being arrived in this Court, that
the Ambassador Soranzo had been excluded at Prage from the Processio^, they
did not make any great account of what had passed in the Court of the Emperor
touching this business, and the Nuntio who in his instances proposed him for
example, was answered, that that Kingdom was not governed after examples of
others.

The Ambassador of Spain at Venice being not accustomed to be present in the
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies with the Duke, because of the question of Prioritie
between him and the other of France, had no occasion herein to show the
intention of his Master: but in all other things he comported himself after
the same fashion as before, treating after the accustomed manner, so that no
man saw any difference.

And though in these affairs and others, the King of Spain and his Ministers
showed much respect toward the Republique, yet they intended to make
declaration for the Pope, his Holiness having written very effectual Letters
unto the King, and to the Duke of Lerma; to which they made answer conformably
to his desire, so as shall be said hereafter.

In France, when upon the thirtieth of January, Peter Prinli Ambassador of the
Repub. gave advise unto the King of all that had passed, his Majesty testified
a very great desire that there might be found some means of agreement which
might be without prejudice, and that a Treaty to this purpose might be
furthered: giving example in himself, who had eluded the great instances which
had been made unto him for the receiving of the Trent Council, so far as
offer was made him to restrain it, where it should be contrary to the
liberties of the French Church. And albeit he knew well at what they aimed,
notwithstanding that he made his benefit of the time, dissembling somethings
which he saw well. He enquired further of the Ambassador how these encounters
might be avoided, without wrong to the order in Government used in the
Republique, discovering herein a desire to be solicited to be a Mediator in
this affair. He commanded also speedily Alincourt his Ambassador at Rome, that
he should render all kind of good Offices for the Republique, with his
Holiness. Fresne likewise Ambassador of the same King at Venice advertised the
Senate, that the Pope had made known unto his Master the justice of his cause,
and therefore exhorted them (as of himself) to inform the King, to the end
that he might receive some impression; adding, that as well himself, as the
Ambassador which was at Rome, had commission to serve his Serenitie. Which
words were uttered with great zeal, as well by the King, as by his Ministers,
with aim to find an ouerture to be employed in the composing of so great a
difference. For which the Senate thanked the King, and gave information to his
Ambassador upon all the points controuerted, as also commanded Prinli their
Ambassador in France, to represent the same things to the King, which he did
accordingly.

Now presently after the news of the publication of the Monitory at Rome was
arrived in France, the Nuntio Barberin made great instance, that the Ambassador
of Venice might be excluded out of the Churches, but he could obtain nothing;
not only because the purpose of the King was to carry himself as a Neuter, but
especially because that Kingdom holds it for a matter most certain and
apparent, that Popes have no power over the Temporalty of Princes, and that
they cannot proceed by Censures against The^ or their Officers in things which
concern the State. Upon these reasons, the Nuntio was constrained to quit his
pretensions, and they treated with the Ambassador of Venice after the manner
accustomed, not altering any thing for the Popes Censures. On the contrary, as
soon as the King knew of the Publication of the Monitory at Rome, he
complained greatly of the too hasty proceedings of the Pope, and sent a
dispatch to him with speed, requesting him to prolong the Term, with design
to interpose his authority (by consent of the parties) to accommodate the
difference. He further writ thereof particular Letters to this effect, unto the
two brethren of the Pope, to the Cardinal Borghese, and to the French
Cardinals: and although the Post did not arrive till after the days prefixed
by the Monitory, Alincourt the Ambassador of the King did not therefore omit to
deliver the Letters, and to treat thereof with his Holiness; who excused
himself, for as much as the Term was expired, which took from him the means
of prolonging it, and so of giving satisfaction unto the King. The King was
offended that his mediation had been so little esteemed: nevertheless he
resolved to pursue it, and writ to his Ambassador that he should not neglect to
treat with the Pope for to give ouerture to some other means of accord.

In England, the opinion which that King has of the Popes authority being
well known to all the world, any one may judge how he received the news of
these actions of the Pope. Nor shall it be necessary to relate any thing
thereof, but only the answer which the King gave to Iustiniano, Ambassador for
the Republique, then, when he informed him of all that had passed in Senate;
which was very notable. The King then having heard the relation of the
Ambassador, after he had showed how well he accepted that office, and had
commended the Laws of the Republique, said, that he longed to see the whole
Church of God reformed; and that to this end he desired much a Free Council to
determine so many Controversies, which have no other cause but the Spiritual
Usurpations of the Roman Bishops, in which desire he thought the King of France
and other Princes would join with him: that perhaps God meant to produce this
happiness out of these troubles of the Republique; that he had spoken thereof
to Pope Clement, then when he was moved by him (when first he came to the
Crown of England) to unite himself unto the Roman Church, but he would not
hear any thing of a Council; that this Union was much to be desired, but
clearly there was no other mean to effect it, then by a free General
Council. The King added moreover that the ruin of the Church proceeded from
this, that the Popes esteemed themselves as Gods, and further were so corrupted
by flattery, that it was no marvel if they could not give care to any reason,
and if they proceeded with precipitation.

From Holland, the States of those Provinces United, and the Count Maurice of
Nassau apart, writ letters of great affection to the Repub. offering succor of
arms and victuals, with all sorts of services upon any occasions which might
be offered by this difference: whereunto the Senate answered by letters full of
the like benevolence, accepting their offers, if necessity should require.

At Turin, when the Duke of Sauoy understood by Peter Contarini, Ambassador of
the Republique, how the Monitorie had been affixed at Rome, he showed that he
had been formerly advertised thereof, and made it appear that he well
understood the reasons of the Republique, and that it was the common cause of
all Princes, so as he could not make any demonstration in favor of the Pope,
although the Nuntio made great instance to that purpose. Yet not willing openly
to offend his Holiness, he abstained from the Chapel, to take away all
occasion of quarrel. Notwithstanding the Ambassador which he had at Venice did
not govern himself with the same moderation: but on the contrary, retired
himself from the Court, avoiding the Dukes presence, though he was often
invited: and in the City, in the part where he had his lodging, he did many
evil offices toward the Ecclesiastiques, against the Repub and in favor of
the Pope; which served more to show his crooked spirit and passion, then to do
any hurt or damage to the State. And the Duke himself, although he had always
the same opinion of the Popes Censures, did not afterward treat in the like
fashion with the Ambassador. For the Republique having written to his children,
with the title of Excellency (so as they had accustomed) he in disdain
hereof, made a Chapel without admitting thereunto the Ambassador, and gave
him notice that it was because the Republique had not used the style of
Highness to his Sons.

At Florence, the great Duke did not make any nouelty with Robert Lio Secretary
of the Republique, but treated with him in all respects as formerly he was
wont. But Antony Grimani Bishop of Torcelli, the Popes Nuntio in that place,
although a Venetian Gentleman himself, refused to receive the Secretary into his
House; giving him to understand that he would not be visited by Him, until he
had order from Rome what he should do. Yet a few days after having changed his
mind (no man knows for what reason) without expecting any other order from
Rome, he returned to treat with him as before.

At Naples, the Count de Beneuento, Viceroy, upon that which was represented
unto him by Austine Dolce Resident in that Court for the Republique, blamed the
rash proceedings of the Pope, approved the reasons of the Republique, and
treated always with the Resident as formerly, as did in like manner Bastoni
Bishop of Pauie the Popes Nuntio.

The like was also observed at Milan by the Count de Fuentes Governor of that
Estate, toward Antony Paulucci Resident with him for the Repub. For the other
Cities of Italy the Repub. has not in them any Minister.

The Dukes of Mantua and Modena also testified what esteem they made of the
Repub. and what judgment they had of the Popes actions, by means of their
Residents at Venice.

But (to resume our discourse) the Princes of Italy together with the
Ambassadors of Kings, as well at Rome as at Venice, after that they knew that
the Pope (seeing his Monitorie lightly esteemed) was much perplexed, as if he
had manifestly repented him of the fact, had some hope that the affair might
be accommodated, and each of them desired to be a Mediator in the difference;
and during three Months after the publication, they offered themselves not
without envy one of another.

The Duke of Mantua, (who had notice from his Agent at Rome that he had found
the Pope more tractable, as if he meant to do more for his sake then for all
the rest, and willingly would treat with him,) made offer to go both to Venice
and to Rome upon this employment. But the Senate answered him that they had
used all reasons and dexterity possible to stay the Pope that he might not
precipitate, but possibly they could not hinder him from doing that to which
his will passionately carried him. And now that they had sustained such
irreparable wrong, nothing could be done, unless first the Pope would retract
his Censures, and reduce things to their first estate; that nevertheless there
remained in the Republique a disposition to show themselves obedient to the Sea
Apostolic in all things wherein their Liberty should not be violated, nor
their Government altered.

The Lord Guicciardin, Ambassador of the great Duke of Tuscany being come to
do complements unto the Duke because of his election and still remaining at
Venice, gave them notice of the good office which the great Duke had performed
for the Republique with his Holiness, by the means of the Bishop of Soana,
and what had been treated hereupon; that his Highness offered to pass yet
further, and even to go to Rome in person. Answer was made him, with hearty
thankfulness and acknowledgment of his good will; adding withal that these
troubles were not raised by the Republique, but by the Popes rashness, who
without any reason had offended them so sensibly. And therefore things standing
in such terms, they could not but think of defending themselves, yet always
purposing to continue in the Catholic religion. After, the great Duke treated
with Robert Lio Secretary and Agent of the Republique with him, to whom he
said; That he could not deny but the Pope had too much precipitated this
affair, that he ought not in such fashion to have proceeded with a Prince, no
not in case of heresy; but that since he was better advised, and began to
hear, and therefore that it was time to begin the treaty; that the answer
which had been sent him from Venice was full of affection, but concise and
short; that it was needful to enter to particulars and to give some
satisfaction unto the Pope; that they might serve the public by some other way
which might be agreeable to the Pope; that it was unprofitable to dispute of
words when men desire to compass their intentions; that between the Pope and
the Repub. things were not equal, and that they had to treat with the Vicar of
God; that there might be devised some temperament with declaration upon the
public Laws so as they had accustomed to do, at least that preserving their
Ordinances they might give the ordinary satisfaction of words.

The Duke of Sauoy said also to the Ambassador Contarini that he had employed
himself with the Pope, to whom he had freely declared that the coniuncture of
things seemed to require him to admit of some temper, since it was certain
that all Princes would not be on his side. And that the Republique ought to
have the same consideration, howsoever in all reason they had the right: that
he himself had continual disputes with the Court of Rome, but that he
temporised in putting them off from one day to another. Wherefore that it was
expedient to pacify these differences, to which end he offered his labor and
diligence.

Don Innigo de Cardenas, Ambassador of Spain, exhorted also greatly the
Republique to peace, assuring them that his King had the same thoughts for the
tranquillity of Italy; and therefore prayed the Repub. to open a way to some
temperament, adjoining that this office was not done only toward them, but it
had been also done effectually at Rome on the part of the King his Master.

But Monsieur de Fresne, Ambassador of the most Christian King traveled with
much more efficacy and care then all the rest. For the term of the Monitorie
being not yet expired, he gave advice unto the Senate that the Pope would
repent himself, and was greatly moved with that which had passed. That with
any little satisfaction, or even appearance of satisfaction, he would be
contented; that so he was advertised by Alincourt, Ambassador for the King at
Rome Afterward he told them how the said Alin court and the French Cardinals
had made an in stant remonstrance to his Holiness, making it plain unto him
that the present opportunities (when the Sea Apostolic was not without
affairs in Hungary,) could not permit that he should deprive himself of his
right hand which was the Repub. And upon the request which they made unto him
in the end of their discourse, to suspend the Monitorie, having demanded two
days to think upon it, how he answered that he had conferred thereof with
diverse Cardinals, who jointly concluded that he could not do it with honor,
by reason of the Protestation of the Repub. full of injurious words (so he
said) against his Person. Notwithstanding it was told them by the Card.
Borghese, that if the Repub. would show any duty, reuoking the Law of the
Emphyteuses, and rendering the Prisoners into the hands of the King, the Pope
might suspend the Monitorie for some days, to the end to give ouerture to some
treaty. To this the said Fresne adjoined, that they should take in good part
the interposition of the King, who having his Kingdom peaceable, assured, and
without any interests, whatsoever he did was for the common good of others;
that if he could hope by his means to accord these differences, he would send
for that purpose the greatest Prince in France, yea he would come in person
himself: that the Pope was not another Julius 2. who carried fire in his
hands; that the Republique might be confident in the King, and if they should
open his heart they should find it wholly Venetian. Fresne yet a third time
returned, and said, that by an express Currier he had been advertised that
the Marquis de Villena had prayed the Pope not to proceed further for some few
days; because there were to come some commandments from Spain, with such
effectual offices toward the Repub. that They should be necessitated to give
all satisfaction: Wherefore he prayed his Holiness not to yield to the offers
or offices of France; and that the Pope was therewith very well content, so as
he said that if he could hope to be aided, he had a purpose to cite the Duke
into the Inquisition, and to accuse him of Heresy. Therefore Fresne adjoined,
that he exhorted the Republique to use diligence, and resolve themselves, that
they might not do by force and with prejudice what they might do voluntarily
and with honor. And that they would not do for any other, what they refused
to do for the King their Friend and Confident.

To all these propositions, the Senate answer red at once. First, they thanked
the King for his good offices, maruelling that the Pope had not been any more
affected with them; thence exaggerating so much more his stiffenesse, and
thereby that it might be concluded, there was small hope to reduce him to any
sound counsels. Then they added, that if the Pope would not repair their
injuries by reuoking his Censures, there could be no ouerture to a treaty; that
the Senate had already (by extraordinary Ambass.) made appear, with many
demonstrations, all sorts of respect; that now things were at that pass, that
proposals were not to be admitted, seeing the Pope had gone so far as to wrong
them; that the Republique had not hurt any person in their Protestation, but
only defended themselves, and to make it appear to all the world that they
would continue Catholic; that when the Censures should be removed, the Senate
would treat upon that which the King propounded, provided that it might not be
against the Liberty of the Republique, nor for to confound their Government;
that touching the things treated by the Ambass. of Spain with the Pope, it was
not needful to say any other thing but that in all cases the Republique would
defend their Liberty, without doing any thing unworthy of Them; that therein
they desired to have the most Christian Kings favor, at whose request they
would do any thing they could, and that they would not do for any other what
they would not for him; that the injuries offered to the person of the Duke did
not touch so much his particular as all the Repub. which would avenge
themselves for so great and extraordinary an injustice, which was nothing but
a pure malice for to divide the concord and good intelligence which was in the
Senate and in all the Repub. and that it would be a means to cut off and
hinder all sorts of treaties. Fresne much praised this answer, notwithstanding
he replied; that the Pope with tears had said to Monsieur d' Alincourt that he
would not alter the Rights of the Republique, but only conserve the authority
and dignity of the Sea Apostolic: that if the Senate would suspend their
Laws he would suspend his Censures, promising he would be contented that
things should stand in their former estate, and that the Laws should be
observed after that He had confirmed them. And continuing his speech, he said,
that it should be very good to make ouerture to a treaty, without deferring,
for delays would but every day multiply difficulties: that the K. himself had
bin calumniated at Rome, as if he had procured the abasement of the Authority
of the Holy See that the King his Master desired that whethersoeuer had first
offended should be the first to repair the offense: but the Pope persisting,
there might be found a temperament to suspend the Laws and the Monitorie both
at the same time: that the King desired this accord for the affection which he
had to the Republique; and further, because these differences would hinder the
extirpation of Heresies, which ought to be equally agreeable both to the Pope
and the Repub.

The Agent of Mantua having received dispatch with diligence, gave notice from
his Prince, that the Pope was not any more so rigid, and that there was good
hope of some agreement; and he made this proposal, that the Republique by an
express Ambass. should pray his Holiness to suspend the Censures, and to
remit the treaty of all the Controversies to a Congregation of Cardinals or
Prelates by him deputed, but not suspected, who should examine the Laws, and
endeavor to find some remedits to content both the Parties. Hereupon the
Resident discoursed long to show by reasons that the Republique should not
hereby receive any diminution in their reputation, in rendering all humility to
the Sea Apostolic. To which proposition the Senate having not speedily
answered, the Resident returned to solicit them, offering that his Master
would come to Venice unknown and thence go to Rome in post. But the Duke
answered with thanks unto the Duke of Mantua, adding these words; That they had
done what was possible; that the Republique was too much injured; that the
things proposed implied many contributies; that if any other thing should
happen to the Senate, they would impart it to him.

The great Duke at the same time said unto the Secretary of the Republique,
that the French negotiation could not produce any effect, the Pope being much
enraged; therefore it was meet to bend a little on both sides, in as much as
the Pope would hardly remove the Interdict, if at Venice they did not give him
some cause to do it; that for himself he pressed the affair only in regard
of the public repose; that if he might be credited, he would interpose with
hope yet with assurance to reduce all to good terms, and that not for any
interest, nor for ambition, being willing to leave the glory thereof to others:
that he had caused the same to be said unto the Pope: who thereupon had
released his rigor, euch with tears: that it was necessary to resolve to give
some satisfaction to his Holiness, otherwise all would go from bad to worse.

But on the contrary, Augustine Valerio, Cardinal and Bishop of Verona, a
Prelate which in all his actions has showed a sincere affection to his
Country, with much devotion to his Prince, writ after another fashion, saying;
that he had spoke with the Pope, and that he had found in him a good will and
disposition to some temperament: but that by the means of Princes there was no
hope to do any good: he proposed another course, that the Patriarch elected
should go to Rome as a private man, which would be acceptable to the Pope, who
would see him willingly for diverse respects; that that Patriarch might treat to
as good purpose and as effectually as an Ambassador.

In the Senate, after they had considered that which was proposed from so many
hands, and examined the Reasons which on the one side persuaded to lend ear to
some propositions, and to open a way to some treaty, by yielding somewhat to
content the Pope; and on the other, those which forced them to preserve their
Liberty, never till then violated, even in most difficult times; they resolved
to answer all on the same fashion.

To the Refident of Mantua, after they had affectionately thanked his Highness
for his good: will and diligence, it was said, that the desires of the
Republique were greatly bent on peace; but having been grievously offended by
the Pope, it was not meet they should first move for a reconciliation; that
whenever the Pope should repair the injuries which dured yet with the
Censures, they would study to give him any contentment which might not
prejudice their Estate: that the Senate hoped the Duke in his wisdom would
acknowledge that the conditions proposed were to their damage, and would
approve their deliberation, as knowing how important it was to be jealous of
the public Liberty.

To Mounsieur de Fresne they answered to the same purpose; that notwithstanding
the great injuries of the Pope, and the evil will which he carried to the
Republique, nevertheless they were ready to receive any just advice tending to
peace. And therefore that he should employ himself toward the Pope, to cause
him to take off his Censures, that so a way might be opened for the Senate to
show their good will; and then in respect unto his Majesty they would do
whatsoever they could possibly, saving always their Liberty.

The Ambassador hereupon replied; that the King foreseeing and fearing the
evils which would follow upon these differences, not for any particular
interest, but merely out of respect to the Republique, had deliberated to
interpose Himself; that already at Rome he had done all that could be desired
in this affair. Wherefore, it seemed unto him that the Senate ought to put
confidence in the King, and declare unto him what they would do, in case that
the Pope should take off the Censures, or for to induce him to revoke his
Monitory. But since the Senate would not depart from these general terms, nor
trust the King, he was resolved to retire himself, and henceforth not to
trouble any person about this business. For touching the Pope, who believed
that he had not done amiss, as being ruled and conducted by the holy Spirit,
and that in reuoking his Censures he should suffer in his reputation, it could
not be possible to draw him to it, but only by showing him what he might
obtain for his satisfaction in favor of his Dignity. He said moreover, that
Alincourt found the Pope of a nature firm and resolute, and that it was meet
to be a skillful Orator to persuade him; that if sometimes being vanquished by
reason he yielded a little, yet after he was wont to resume his former
resolution. And when he was forced by reason, he would say, he would think on
the matter: but this thinking was to remain constant in his resolutions.
Wherefore, if they would say no more, the King his Master would not intermeddle.

THIRD BOOK.
Whilst these things were treated at Venice, at Rome, and in the Courts of
Princes, the Jesuits did not cease to do all sorts of evil offices to the
Republique within and without Italy, in the Cities where they lived; scattering
many calumnies, as well in private Discourses, as in their public Sermons. So
far, as that they sent Letters into the Signiory to their adherents, and
caused their Deuotes to come to the Confines, and themselves very often entered
the State disguised and unknown, for to seduce the Subjects: publishing
Indulgences in favor of them who would observe the Interdict, or persuade
others to observe it, or who would favor the pretensions of the Pope. They
forged also false and counterfeit Letters, dispersing them under the name of
the Republique of Genoa, to that of Venice; and also scattered in many places a
writing of one of their Sectaries in the name of the City of Verona, to the
City of Bresse. These artifices being come to the knowledge of the Senate, it
was decreed that information should be made against the seditious actions of
these men, as well since these last occasions, as long time before upon many
others. And touching that which they had done in this last occasion, it was
manifestly justified, that in their Sermons they had used inuectiues against
the Republique, calling them Heretics, Lutherans, and slandering the
Government as tyrannical, abominable, with an infinite number of like
Epithetes, and that within the Cities of Ferrara, Bologne, Parma, Mantua, Bari,
Palermo, and in other places: that from their sleights and suggestions had
proceeded all the evil passages happening in Spain and in Bohemia unto the
Ambassador of the Republique, and in France and Polonia they had attempted
that they might receive all kinds of affronts: especially in England that they
had done all the disgrace unto them which they could with the Catholics of
that Kingdom, so far as to find fault that the Republique held an
Ambassador with the King, as that King reciprocally at Venice, although they
excused other Princes, saying, that their interests required it, but there was
not the like reason for the Republique. That with the Princes of Italy they had
endeavored to effect that the Republique should not be permitted to make any
leuy of men within their Estates; and when this device succeeded not, they went
in all places detesting the name of Venice, and finally menacing them that
should go to war in their defense; the seditions are numberless which they
have excited within the Dominions of the State by their Letters, instructions,
and speeches with the Subjects of the Republique, who went for their affairs
unto the Cities where these men were, and with their devoted ones which they
caused to come upon the confines of the State. It was further justified, that a
good part of the vexations done by the Pope unto the Republique, upon these
occasions had proceeded from their instigations, and from the hopes that they
had given him, that they had a faction, and could put division in the Senate.
Now for matters passed formerly, it was also verified, that when the Republique
after the death of Henry 3. gave the title of most Christian King unto Henry 4.
these men had vaunted at Rome that they had put scruples in the consciences of
many Senators, who had repented themselves of that they had done, promising to
absolve them in case that they would promise to retract; that therefore it was
facile at the least instance of the Pope, to change the whole face of this
affair, which was the cause that his Holiness pressed them, who being not
satisfied, hence followed so many discontentments; that on diverse occasions
they had showed themselves the favorers of great Princes, and by that means
had mingled themselves in the affairs of Government; that they dispended
yearly above an hundred crowns in the portage of Letters, whereby appeared
the multitude of their affairs, and the correspondencies which they had in all
parts. Further, it was proved against them that they had great designs upon
the goods and faculties of their Penitents, and of Women especially, to the
great prejudice of Families. Also their Doctrine was considered in matters
Politic; that they praised Monarchy, and blamed an Aristocratie, with
certain Maxims very contrary to the Government and Institution of the
Republique: add hereunto that the Jesuits had been the Authors and
Instruments of all Vproares, Seditions, Confusions, and Ruins happening within
our Times in all Kingdoms and States in the world. Wherefore having found their
faults in so great number, and they not only in some particulars of them, but
in the corpse of their Society; all was proposed in Senate, who deliberated
hereupon the fourteenth of June, and made the Decree which follows; That the
Congregation of Jesuits having been received at Venice from their first
beginning, and there ever since favored, they on the contrary returning
nothing but ingratitude toward the Republique, and showing themselves still
inclined to do all sorts of evil Offices to that State: in which disposition
they yet continued by insupportable enterprises, and insolent calumnies,
seeking all occasions to offend them: For these causes, they should never be
admitted or received in any place of the State, nor this Decree revoked,
unless the whole Process against them were first read in full Senate, (which
consists of no less than 180. Senators,) whereof five parts (the whole being
composed of six) should give suffrage for their reuocation. And this may be one
certain argument of their enormous and evident crimes, that there was not any
one Person (of so great a number) who spoke anything in favor of them: and in
the Scrutiny made by secret voices, all were found unanimous to decree their
perpetual banishment; notwithstanding that some of this number had formerly
used them as their Confessors, who had much favored them on many other
occasions.

But the Pope foreseeing the difficulties to come to this accord so much
desired, with the honor which he expected; and likewise considering that all
the shifts and artifices as well of the Jesuits as of other Ecclesiastiques,
could not cause any trouble in the State of the Republique, (which he thought
might be greatly profitable to induce the Senate to yield to his will) all
enterprises to this effect resting vain and without fruit, as also being not
able by so many devices and tricks to draw to himself any other than some
simple persons, advised himself of a most subtle invention: Which was, that
on the nineteenth of June he published a Iubilee, whereby he invited all
Christians to pray God with him for the necessities of the Church; and to this
end granted Indulgences, Absolutions, and Remissions to all, excepting them
that were found in Cities or places Interdicted, whom he excluded from these
favors, not comprehending them so much as in their number, whose prayers he
implored. In Italy no Spiritual thing is more wished or expected by the
people, and when it is granted, nothing received with more devout affection
than a Iubilee. Whereupon at Rome they believed that the people within the
State of Venice seeing themselves deprived of such Graces given to all the
faithful, would certainly be moved with sedition to seek their part in them.
But the evil design which the Jesuits did hope would succeed by their
Sermons in the neighboring places, where they had publicly declamed against
the Honor of the Republique, being frustrate; they advised hereupon to put in
work their last artifice to raise up commotions, by writing to their
Adherents, that although the Pope had excluded from the Iubilee in general all
the Subjects of the State of Venice, yet they had power from his Holiness to
grant it to such persons as would observe the conditions by them propounded,
among which these were some, not to go to Mass, not to approve the public
reasons and actions, and others more important.

The end of this Inbilee was very well known in Spain, for although they have
a very great devotion toward the Indulgences which come from Rome, and
principally in the Jubilees, nevertheless they remained in suspense; and
though the Nuntio were very instant to cause it to be published, yet three
Months passed before they gave their consent.

In this same time wherein at Rome they were thus busied in Ceremonies, a
certain Writing was affixed at Vicenza, and many other places, whereby the
Republique was exhorted to withdraw it self from the obedience of the Roman
Church, and hereupon it touched many points of Religion, calling the Pope
Antichrist: Which being known at Venice, the Senate was there with greatly
troubled, their resolution being to continue always most constant to conserve
their Religion inviolable. They considered that howsoever such actions might be
done by stealth, and some one man, nevertheless if provision were not made
strictly to deter any more to imitate the like, there might follow very
pernicious consequences. Whereupon they caused to be published a very rigorous
Ban, promising recompense to him that could discover the Author, giving charge
to the Governors to make an exact search after him. But with all the diligence
which they could use nothing could be found, save only some obscure co^iectures
that this was an Artifice of the Ecclefiastiques themselves, whether to show
the danger wherein they were, and thereby to incite the State to some speedy
accord with the Pope, or for to verify the calumnies which the Jesuitical
Fathers dispersed against the Republique.

At the same time when the Pope published this Iubilee, he wrought in such sort
with the Marquis de Villena, that he dispatched a Currier into Spain, to give
advise unto his King, that his Holiness would cast himself entirely under his
Protection; and that for this reason he demanded not only his favor, but some
succor of men. But the King of Spain answered his Ambassador, that he ought
to repress these thoughts, in as much as the troubles of Italy would not be
aduantageous either to the Sea Apostolic, or the Crown of Spain. And
although this answer afflicted the Pope beyond measure, nevertheless to try
all means, he himself dispatched a Post with a Breue to that King, and a
Writing containing his Reasons: which he accompanied with a Letter addressed to
the Duke of Lerm^^ wherein with an ardent affection he recommended unto him his
Person and Affairs, with offers of Obligation and acknowledgment, calling him
the Base of the Crown of Spain; upon whom depended the Catholic Monarchy,
and the only pillar of the Church.

This Breue was written first in Latin, but afterward in the vulgar Italian,
for to give unto him the title of Excellence, a thing which the Popes have not
used. Notwithstanding all this, the Pope, distrusting to obtain from Spain
that which he desired, hearkened unto the treaties of peace proposed. And it is
certain, that the offices done by the Cardinals and Ambassadors at Rome, and
especially those of the Ambassador of France, had such effect, that being
joined with the remorse which the Pope felt in his conscience, they reduced him
to such a point that he was near persuaded to condescent to a suspension of
the Censures, to open a way to some farther treaty; and he came so far as to
collect hereupon the suffrages and opinions of the Cardinals. But whilst he
was considering of their advice, in the beginning of July, at the same time
when Fresne made his last instance whereof we have spoken, and when the Ban
against the Jesuits, and the publication of a Iubilee interrupted the treaty,
came the answer of the King of Spain to the Letters of his Holiness: Which
was presented unto him by the Marquis de Villena, being accompanied with three
Cardinals; which imported, That the King had desired that the differences with
the Repub. of Venice should not have come so far; but because He saw the honor
of his Holiness much interessed, he was resolved to assist him with his
forces; which his intention he had signified to his Ministers in Italy, and
likewise given order that they should make it known to the Princes his
Dependents.

This Letter was read by the Pope with great joy, which he testified not only
by words, but by his Letters full of affection to that King, and to the Duke of
Lerma, which he sent by an express Currier. There were who believed that these
Letters, which were said to come from Spain, had been written in Italy: and
they alleged for a good conjecture, that the King therein wrote that he had
signified his pleasure to the Ambassador of Venice who was with him, although
he had not spoken one word to him thereof before he had received the answer of
the Pope. But it is true that the Duke of Lerma for the honor which his
Holiness had done him, and in regard of his humble prayers in his Letters, was
willing on his side to correspond, which was to him very easy: For the
Counselors of Estate, by reason of the translation of the Court, having
permission to absent themselves for three Months, none of them were at the
Court, save the Duke de Chincon, who (as brother in law to the Marquis de
Villena) had the same designs. It was further said by some Ministers of that
King in Italy, that he suffered himself to be persuaded to write that Letter,
upon hope to pacify things more easily, inasmuch as some Venetian Prelates had
assured, that when the King of Spain should declare himself openly for the
Pope, the Senate would yield, and quickly humble themselves: which being writ
from Rome into Spain, did render the demand of his Holiness more easy with
the King and the Duke of Lerma, both which inclined to the conservation of the
peace.

But the Ambassador of the King of Spain at Rome, and his Ministers in Italy,
pretended by this Letter and other offices, to have put the Sea Apostolic in
great reputation: so that Ambassador said unto the Pope; That his King would
make him obtain with a few words that which others could not do with many;
and that he would bring the Venetians prostrate at the feet of his Holiness.
Hereby it seemed unto the Spaniards that they had well merited of the Holy See,
and that they might expect requital from the Pope, at their need. And
therefore purposing hereby to reap no less profit and reputation than the
Pope himself, they required of him three things: The first that he would make
at Rome a public Festival, with bonefires and other signs of joy and
gratulation. The second, that the Letter might be read in Consistory and
conserved within the Archiues. The third, that he would totally break off the
treaty begun by the Ambassador of France, and not speak any more of this
affair with the most Christian King. Which demands being published in Court,
and from thence thorowout the City, moved Alincourt to go to the Audience,
and to give the Pope to understand what rumors were scattered of the Triumphs
which were made by occasion of this Letter, and of the things promised and
demanded by the Ambass. of Spain. To which he added, that all was nothing but
vain ostentation, to interrupt the treaty of Peace, and to hold in discord two
of the greatest Princes in Italy, who remaining united might be a counterpoise
sufficient to hinder the designs of these men: that the terms which they used
were too too arrogant, even in the mouth of a Monarch of all the world: that
the Spaniards knew well enough themselves and their feebleness, which they
could not otherwise maintain: that in Italy they believed they might command
all, and be the sole arbritrators of all things; nevertheless if they would be
stirring, others would not only look on with the arms acrosse, and let them
do what they list. The Pope confessed that the demands of the Spaniards were
true, but that they could not please him, and that He could do nothing
therein: that he would not cease for all that to continue the Treaty already
begun: True it is, that he held himself obliged to the two Crowns for the
piety of the two Kings, from whom he equally hoped for all protection: That he
had already taken the voices of the Cardinals, and that every of them
counseled him not to pass further on the points proposed for accord, if the
Venetians did not show respect. Notwithstanding, the partisans of Spain did
not cease to extol and magnify the offers of that King, so far, that the
Cardinals of the Congregation consulting what was to be done to reduce the
Venetians to yield to the will of the Pope, concluded and reported to his
Holiness, that the succors of the Catholic King would be more than
sufficient, and would not fail him, provided that he would yield him that
which be desired touching Sicilie; which (as men believed) they said, after
they had talked and agreed with the Marquis de Villena, the Catholic
Ambassador.

In Spain the Counselors spoke on the same fashion to the Nuntio, saying,
that if the Pope desired favor of their King, it was but reason that he should
yield somewhat on his side, for to give some satisfaction unto his subjects, to
the end they might not repent themselves to have been embarked in such a
war. They touched in a word the remitting of the fief o Naples, the granting
of Ferrara for the garrisons of their soldiers, and Ancona for the retrait of
their Army. The Count de Fuentes in the mean while in execution of the
promises of his Master, sent Don Francis de Mendozza, Captain of the Castle of
Lodi, the Governor of Lech, and the Captain Lachiuga to the Princes of Italy;
dividing among them the charge according as the commodity of the voyage
required, and that for to make known unto them the intention of the Catholic
King, and to move them to join with him in favor of the Pope. These offices
were diversely interpreted by those Princes, who nevertheless each one in
particular sent back these Messengers with general answers, none of them
thinking meet to come to such a declaration. But it seemed to the Count
Fuentes, that the Duke of Modena only had not answered with such readiness
and freedom as he wished.

The Pope highly contented with this Letter, and with that which the Count de
Fuentes had done, remained nevertheless in suspense, seeing the Ambassador of
Venice welcome in the Court of Spain. But the Marquis de Villena found means
to accord these actions which seemed contrary, saying that all this was done
for the service of his Holiness, to the end that that which the King intended
to do in his favor might be more easily received.

This Letter of the King of Spain, and the ^ffices which the Count de Fuentes
did through Italy, were so many trumpets which in the midst of Peace excited
all the world to War. For although formerly the Senate of Venice had made
some provision, yet was it not with any design to assail others, nor did they
think it would be needful to defend themselves from the temporal arms of
the Pope, and much less of any other Prince who would enterprise to serve
himself of this pretext for to invade some part of their Estate, as sometimes
it had fallen out among Christians; but only by reason of State they made some
light provisions when they saw the Pope resolved to pass on to Consures. For
this cause they suddenly writ to the Prouisor General in Candie to send his
Galleys into the Gulf. They established also Philip Pasqualigo with sovereign
authority over all the Isles of the Leuant. And further they commanded the
Prouisor General in Dalmatia to levy 400. footmen out of Albany and Croatia.
under four Captains, for to distribute them into ten long Barques, 40. to a
Barque, prepared to that effect. They elected also 30. Governors of Galleys,
to be readily armed if necessity should require. Benedicto Moro, Procureur of
S. Marc was also elected Prouisor General for the firm Land.

But the Pope having regard to an evil humor which was in his Estate (not
only for the custom of the people, which are never contented with a
Government which tends more to the commodity of those that govern then of
them that are governed, but also for some particular defaults of his
Pontificate,) caused a reuiew to be made of men drawn out of those which are
appointed to carry arms within his Estate. He made also some feeble
reparations at Rimini and at Ancona; and to assure himself of Ferrara, where
most danger was to be feared, having therein only 500. footmen, and 45. horse,
he adjoined more a 1000. foot. After he banished from Romagna and from the
Marquisate of Ancona, all strangers, commanding that all the Natives should
come home. But having received the Letters from Spain, he esteemed it
necessary (to maintain the reputation, which he thought he had acquired, with
some effects, and by the fear of Temporal arms to induce them to yield unto
the Spiritual,) to make the greatest preparations of War that he could
possibly, wherein not withstanding he was many ways hindered. For first, there
was an extreme want of victuals at Rome, and in all his Estate, which made men
cry out at Rome and elsewhere for Bread and Peace: which famine likewise
afflicted the neighboring places, and especially Naples and Abruzzo; whereas
on the contrary, in the Venetian Dominions there was great abundance of all
things. He considered further the danger of the river of Romagna, which lay
open and exposed unto incursions, the people of that Country being well
affected unto the Venetian Name, for the great and necessary commodities which
by co^merce they received from them. The inhabitants of Ferrara were likewise
suspected by him, for remedy whereof he took from the Cardinal Aldobrandin
that Legation which Pope Clement the 8. had given him irreuocably during his
life. He took away also that of Bologna from the Cardinal Montalto who had
kept it eighteen years: and created Legate at Ferrara the Cardinal Spinola,
and at Bologna the Cardinal Justinian, and in Romagna the Cardinal Caietan,
holding them but little affected to the State of Venice. He made likewise some
preparations, but very slender, in the maritime Towns. He conuayed the silver
stuff (cups, chalices, crosses,) from the Chapel of Loretto, under pretense
to keep it safer. He sent to Ferrara, Lucio Sauelli, to command there. the
men of war, where having caused the Citizens to have been disarmed, and the
Artillery of the Castle to be turned upon the City, and all Strangers to be
banished who had not any traffic of consideration, he increased the Garrison
to the number of eighteen hundred foot, and one hundred horse, changing the
Guard of the Cittadell every ten days out of distrust; and wanting Arms, he
took away those of Meldola, which the Pope Clement had given by a Breue to
John Francis Aldobrandin. In Romagna he published a new Ban, that all Strangers
should be gone, and the Natives return. He provided Rauenna of two hundred
foot, Ceruia of three hundred, and Ancona only of forty, because that City
would keep it self. He put in Garrison by the Seacoasts, some Soldiers
taken out of them who were chosen in Villages to bear Arms, which he was
forced often to change, because they were not paid, and many ran away.

The number of Soldiers sometime increased, sometime diminished, according as
they escaped, or were constrained to retire themselves to their Houses, as
wanting maintenance; but it is certain that the number of footmen paid, was
never above 1400. and the number of horse 350. He sent to Ancona the Colonel
Fabio Ghisleri, elected Captain of the Lighthorse, who made a List of 1700.
Harquebusiers, Horsemen taken out of diverse Cities of the Ecclefiastique
State, the most part nevertheless without Arms, and without Horses; to whom
notwithstanding he gave no other stipend, but only a permission to bear Arms,
and therefore they could never be gotten together. He made further a List of
Captains fit to serve him when he had need, which List he every where
diuulged, and called to his service some of those that were in Flanders. He
forbade likewise them of Romagna, and the Marquisate of Ancona to have any
comerce with the Venetians, which quickly after he was feign to recall, having
learned by experience that the greatest damage herein would redound to
themselves, in as much as the Customers protested they would quitte the
Customs which they had farmed, and he knew not how elsewhere to have money to
pay the Soldiers. Further he prohibited the transportation of gold or silver,
above ten crowns; and arrested the revenues of all Venetians within the lands
of the Church. And at Rome to get silver, was laid a new imposition upon Salt,
upon Flesh and Paper, with resolution to lay it likewise upon Wine and Timber,
when he should be reduced to any great necessity. These Impositions being not
yet sufficient, they consulted in Congregation how to provide money, and in so
difficult a matter the opinions much varied. It was treated to tax the
Cardinals, whereat some were silent, others made signs that they did not
approve it; wherefore nothing was resolved, but that a Subsidy should be paid
by the Orders of Regulars, as it was indeed. I have thought meet to joy ne all
these things in discourse, although they were done successively in diverse times
by the Pope until the accord, that I might not interrupt the order of the
negotiation which is the principal subject of this History.

In the Duchy of Milan there were not in all above 900. Spanish Soldiers
comprising also those that were in Garrison, seven Companies of Light Horse in
good order, and a small number of others ill appointed. And in the Chamber
there was not above 400000. crowns, and the Garrisons so ill paid, that the
Soldiers in the Castle of Milan were near a mutiny, had not the Count de
Fuentes and the Governor of the Castle appeased them by giving them some
silver. The Count de Fuentes added some twenty Companies of the baser Spanish,
making in all 1800. men, the greater part being young, raw, and without any
experience in the wars, which were put in the Garrisons. He made also some
musters of Horsemen within their quarters, that they might not be paid, who
appeared on horses for the most part borrowed, being not able to furnish
themselves with horses, unless they had received their pay. He brought also
out of rank some Spanish Soldiers, coming down from Monaco and Final, and
made them diligently to labor at Pauie and in the Castle of Milan, for the
transporting of the Artillery. And the Pope to enduce the Count de Fuentes to
serve him with more cheerfulness, gave many Benefices in Spain to his
kins-men, and to such as he commended: and to aid his expenses, he granted him
the Tenthes out of the Clergy of Milan, although the Ecclesiastiques,
assembled by the Cardinal Borromeo, for the execution of this Grant, did
contradict it, saying, that the charge was new, and had never been imposed.
Wherefore they resolved humbly to entreat his Holiness, and the Count de
Fuentes, that such a nouelty might not be introduced. The Count was not earnest
in the affair, and therefore it easily passed without execution. He made also
a rumor to be scattered that he would have an army in readiness of five and
twenty thousand men, composed of Neapolitans, Dutch, Suisses and Spaniards; but
because he began not to execute this Design till the year following, we shall
speak more thereof in due place. In the mean while the Spaniards armed at
Naples six and twenty Galleys, to be ready upon any exigent.

But the Senate at Venice did not so much attend the Preparations of the Pope,
as to prevent some ambushes, and the army at Sea provided at Naples. Therefore
besides the eight and twenty Galleys which they had ordinarily, they adioined
other ten; and three great Galleys with twenty lesser Barques, whereof each
one carried fifty Soldiers. They gave charge unto the Prouisor General in
Candie, that he should send to Corfu the Galleys appointed for the guard of
that Isle, well strengthened. They commanded all the Sea-Captaines to retain
all Vessels, which passed by the Gulf, for what place soever, and to send them
unto Venice, except such as had Patents from the K. of Spain for his affairs;
which brought a great disorder on the Coasts of Romagna, and the Marquisate of
Ancona, which by this means were in a manner besieged. All exportation of
Corn was prohibited, even unto Subjects Ecclesiastical; and the
transportation of Gold and Silver above ten Ducates, into the State of the
Church; and the Revenues of such Ecclesiastiques, as were out of the State,
were sequestered, which brought many incommodities to the Court of Rome, many
Prelates being hereby constrained to abridge their Families and expenses. The
leuies of men which had been made out of Families, were discharged to a third
part, to the end that al heads of Families, and men married should be left
behind, and that third amounted to the number of twelve thousand footmen.
Besides the Garrisons which were ordinarily kept in the Forts, they leuyed in
the beginning two thousand Italians, six hundred Corses, and an hundred and
fifty Alban Horse, under three Captains; to whom they joined six hundred more,
under the pay accustomed, all which were distributed upon the Continent in
several places, sending to this effect Nicholas Delfin to be Prouisor on this
side the Menzo, and John James Zanne, upon the Po, and in the Polesin of
Rouigo. And the troubles after increasing, they entertained six thousand
Italian footmen, the ordinary Bands remaining, which were put under the charge
of certain Gentlemen of the Continent, Subjects of the Signiory; which were
augmented the year following unto the number of twelve thousand foot, besides
those of the former leuies, and four thousand horse, as shall be said
hereafter. In the same time, the Cities and other particular Subjects, offered
to contribute whenever they should be commanded, and these offers from diverse
places amounted to the number of seven thousand footmen, and twelve hundred
horse, which were not leuyed, because at length peace was concluded. As also
there was no need to make use of those Christians, Subjects of the Turk, whom
the Archbishop of Philadelphia, a man highly esteemed among the Greeks, as
well for his good life, as for his excellent learning, offered to cause to come
by his authority, in such numbers as they would desire, and upon such honest
conditions as the Senate should judge fit: whereunto the Turks also easily
accorded. Likewise for the same reason they did not employ the several
succors which some French Lords offered, among whom the Duke de Maien offered
to send his sons, and the Prince of Ionuile his nephew; and Monsieur de
Boniuet (whose ancestors have been always well affected to the Republique,)
was purposing to come himself in person. And the Protestants of that Kingdom,
not only offered voluntarily Captains and Soldiers, but even solicited to
be therein employed: and although the Senate thanked them, with a purpose to
serve themselves of them if need required, yet had they a firm resolution not
to use them, unless they were pressed with extreme necessity, as also not
first to begin the War in Italy, but only prepare themselves for defense,
in case they should be assaulted.

The Count de Fuentes for to maintain the effect of the promise of his King
and of his sleights, gave the Pope often to understand, sometime by means of
the Ambassador of his Master at Rome, sometime by express persons, what he
purposed to do, and how he had resolved to hinder the passage of any soldiers
into Italy, giving advise that he kept a strong guard on the confines of the
Grisons to that end, and that he was armed in the frontiers of Venice to keep
them in awe. All this notwith standing, the Pope knew well that by reason of
the dearth and famine which was in Naples, the Provisions out of that Kingdom
would go on but slowly, and further he saw that he could not satisfy the
demands which were made on the behalf of Spain. Besides he thought deeply
upon the words which that King had spoken to his Nuntio, that his purpose was
not to move any war, but only to assist the Pope if he were assaulted in his
own State; for which cause he imagined that the King of Spain did rather
desire to see Him lose reputation, and the Republique driven to expenses, then
that the affair should be ended to his advantage. And therefore he lent an
ear to all that spoke of the accord, and especially because it was ardently
desired by his Brethren, who had a purpose to buy Regnano of Lucio Sauelli, as
afterward they did, notwithstanding the need which the Sea Apostolic had of
money. For these considerations the Pope heard and favored greatly the
Ambassador of the most Christian King, who spoke unto him touching the accord;
and although the Ambassador of Spain did the same offices for a Peace, his
Holiness nevertheless hearkened more willingly to him of France, as well
because he judged that the most Christian King would be more easily heard and
believed at Venice, as also because he could treat with the French more freely,
fearing that the Spaniards would use more authority toward him.

But in Spain the Counselors of State being come to Court, made reflection
upon the Letter written by their King, and upon the practices of the Count de
Fuentes with the Princes of Italy; and how it was not their intention to make
War, but only to show that that Crown on all occasions would unite with the Sea Apostolic. Also they thought it necessary to let them of Venice
understand so much, to the end that nothing might fall out against their
intention; and repenting themselves to have suffered these differences to run
so far, they judged it expedient for their affairs to interpose themselves in
some fashion. But being desirous to effect these designs with some reputation,
the Duke of Lerma, when the Ambassador of Venice had imparted unto him all that
had passed in this affair, said, that in the maine of these Controversies the
Republique sustained the right of all Princes, but for the form they might
more fairly avoid the spiritual arms by addressing themselves unto the
Catholic King, who would make known unto the Pope, what prejudice he did
unto himself by putting in hazard the obedience unto him. He added, that the
King his Master had commanded his Ministers to be instruments of Peace, and
would have continued, if he had not been forced to do the contrary, because
they had admitted the authority of some Princes, who had not any interest in
the affairs of Italy. Afterward, they endeavored by the means of Count
d'Oliuares to persuade the Ambassador of Venice, that he would make some
instance unto that King, if not in the name of the Duke, at least as from
himself, to interpose himself in the business. And when the Ambassador had
refused to do this without commission, they resolved to deal openly; and to
send Don Iuan de Velasco, Constable of Castile into Italy without certain
instructions, but that they should be sent after him according to the
occurrences. The Nuntio opposed himself to this journey of the Constable,
because at Milan he had always showed himself very opposite to the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and at Ferrara, when the Ceremonies were done at
the entry of the Queen of Spain, he had much troubled the Cardinals in the
point of precedencie. Wherefore they thought upon John Idiaques, and others,
but to avoid delays, it was ordained that D. Innigo de Cardenas, Ambassador of
the King Catholic, residing with the Signiorie, should do the first offices
in this behalf. Who accordingly presenting himself the 30. of July to the
Senate, said, that his King affecting the conservation of Peace, desired that
the disgusts between the Pope and the Republique should pass no further, but
that some composition might be found out: and that to this end he had commanded
all his Ministers to employ themselves, and particularly had charged him to
pray the Republique herein, assuring them that whatsoever they should think
meet to be done to finish this controversy, would be very acceptable to his
Majesty. To which the Duke (having praised the design of the King, and
thanked him) answered, That the Republique could not do any more then already
they had done, that it was meet to deal with him who had been the cause of all
these broils. And then briefly recapitulating what had passed, he concluded,
That it was not for them to open the way which had been stopped up by others:
That the Pope by dismissing their Ambassador and withdrawing his Nuntio had
broken off all means of treaty, which could not be set afoot, unless his
Censures were removed, with which the Republique thought themselves offended
and injured. The Ambassador replied, requesting the Duke to give him leave to
tell him, that now the question being of their agreement, it was not convenient
to remember old injuries, which could not produce good effects: That if the
Republique should complain, the Pope on the other side would do no less:
That he would not thereupon enter into discourse, whether the Pope had done
well (which were to renew things past;) That if the Duke should say they had
been only upon the defensive, yet they had been so stiff therein, that
hereupon especially the Pope complained and found himself agrieued: That
therefore it was meet to forget all that had passed, and looking only forward
to find some means to reestablish the former union and Friendship: That the
prudence of the Duke was such, that it were temeritie in him for to adventure
to instruct him touching those means: That it was a thing notorious to all,
how the Pope sustained a double person, one of the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and
the other of a Prince Temporal, and that distinguishing the one from the
other, it would be easy to see wherein it was convenient to give him some
satisfaction; since as to a Prince temporal men owe him no more respect then
is due to all Sovereign Princes, but as he is the Spiritual Prince, and Vicar
of Jesus Christ, there is not any who is not obliged to obey him: That the King
his Master did not intend, that the Laws of the Repub. (whereof was question)
should be sent unto the Pope, to the end that he might correct or amend them;
or that they should do any thing contrary to their liberty, or prejudicial
to the dignity of the Republique; That if the Senate had any intention to do
such a thing (as tending to the prejudice of all Princes, and even of his
Catholic Majesty) he had order to exhort and encourage the Repub. not to
do themselves such wrong, or commit any such indignity: That they might well
give unto the Pope some demonstration of Spiritual obedience, which in
substance should be nothing. The Duke hereunto answered, that the Republique
had made appear unto the Pope all kinds of service and filial reverence,
before that his Holiness came to the publication of his Censures, so as there
remained no more to be done; but the Monitorie being published, the Nuntio
called away, and all communication interrupted, they could not now any longer
do the same acts of respect, unless the Pope by taking off his Censures should
open away. The Ambassador replied, asking the Duke, whether (for to give an
ouerture to this end,) his Serenitie were content that he should pray his
Holiness in the name of the King to take away the Excommunication. To that the
Duke answered, that as formerly he had ever said, so for the time to come he
would say still, it was necessary to remove the impediment. But that this
should be done by this mean or that, or by the free will of the Pope, or at
the request of some other, it little imported for the substance of the affair;
and that his Majesty might do what pleased him. The Ambassador answered; Your
Serenitie may well be content, that the Pope be entreated in your Name. The
Duke said, That for the repose of Italy, and to hinder so many mischiefs as
might follow upon the war if it were begun, if the Catholic King were
certain, that the Pope being moved on this fashion would remove his Censures,
he would not hold it any great inconvenience to be so contented; that yet
notwithstanding he would give him a more resolute answer with the Senate. Then
the Ambassador taking him at the word, immediately answered, that he received
that word from his Serenity, which was to pray the Pope, and even in his Name,
to take away the Censures; but being to treat with him in words of courtesy,
he thought it necessary to adioyne, that his Serenity was sorry that he had
given any disgust unto his Holiness; that such like words of courtesy were
vain and nothing, but yet necessary in this occurrence. The Duke replied, that
neither himself nor the Senate had given any occasion of disgust unto the
Pope, if he had taken any himself without cause, they could not help it; that
in voluntary discontents, there is no other remedy than a voluntary
acknowledgement.

The same day the Ambassador of France was at the Audience, where he reported,
how the Pope had said to Mounsieur de Alincourt, that he had taken the voices
of all the Cardinals, which were found all conformable, and that according to
their advice he could not come to a suspension of the Censures, if in behalf
of the Republique there were not made some demo^stration of submission. Then he
added, that happily the Pope might suffer himself to be persuaded by reason, and
be induced to begin the first; but certainly it was necessary to tell him what
the Repub. would do afterward, otherwise he would never be moved. And
therefore that it behooved the Republique to declare what they would do, and to
rest confidently on the King, who was their Friend and Confederate, and who
took to heart the interests of the Republique; that they might safely open
themselves to him, and ought not to believe that his King had any other end
save only the Weal of the Signiory. The Duke answered, that to this matter
they had spoken already sufficiently, and their answer sent unto the King, both
by himself, and by the Ambassador, which they had with his Majesty; that this
demand was not meet, seeing he could not yet have received any answer to that
which had bin written and said unto the King. Mounsieur de Fresne replied, that
he foresaw what the King would say, seeing that which they had written was only
in general terms; and that he was forced to prevent that which the King would
say, being much pressed on the side of Rome, where affairs were treated with
great dignity; that it was needful in some sort to submit themselves, and that
the Temporalty did not receive any prejudice by yielding to his Holiness, it
being a ius Commune, to humble ones self unto the Sovereign Bishops. And he
adjoined, that he made this insta^ce, believing that they should do great
wrong unto the King, and to that affection which he ever bare to the
Republique, not to be confident in him, and freely to open unto him the heart.
And therefore to gratify the King that they should make this declaration,
seeing that by means of a simple promise made to his Majesty, the Pope would be
content to suspend the Censures. He put also in great consideration the Letter
of the King of Spain to the Pope, magnifying the promises of that King, and
the Popes acknowledgement to him, concluding that it was no time therefore to
disgust the King of France, who without doubt would take it very unkindly if
they should not speak plainly and freely with him. To this last point the Duke
began to answer, telling him, that the Letter was not such as it was published,
nor the promises so great as men made them, and that the Pope himself did not
much trust unto them That the Ambassador of Spain even then was come to treat
with them in very mild terms, confessing the Reasons of the Republique to be
such, as that if they yielded, all Princes should thereby be much prejudiced;
and that when the Republique should do any thing not fitting, or should be
wronged in their Authority, the King of Spain should equally partake in the
damage, because of the Interests common to all Princes, and that it was clear
and evident, that the King of Spain applied himself to an accord; that it was
not meet to precipitate the business, by putting before what should come
after. Further he added, that whatsoever were the event, the Republique would
never degenerate from the virtue and constancy of their Ancestors. Then
Mounsieur de Fresne prayed the Duke not to take in evil part the words which
he had said, proceeding from a singular affection, and that only to signify
that the Pope being assured that no Cardinal would consent to the Suspension,
if first something were not done at Venice, it was necessary to advise what
might be done, and how far they could yield, which being done, they might
with all confidence communicate with his King, as with their Friend. The Senate
having considered the Propositions of these two Ambassadors, made answer to him
of Spain, saying, That it was necessary to apply the remedies to the part
whence the evil proceeded; that in these Differences the Republique had not
given any cause, and that all did arise only out of the Popes will, who had not
only attempted to violate the Liberty of the Republique, and to take away their
Power, but further had gone to offenses and injuries. Notwithstanding since the
King desired to pacify these Co^tentions, to the end that they might proceed
no further, it was meet that he should turn to the Pope, and there help to
begin the Peace by the reuocation of his injuries. And when the King should
have certain word that the Pope would take away his Censures, the Republique,
for to gratify his Majesty, would be content that by form of Office he might
pray the Pope in their Name to remove them; and they yet adjoined, that the
Senate with displeasure resented that his Holiness had taken in evil part the
Actions of a Republique so well devoted to him, which had no other end but the
glory of God, the conservation of public tranquillity, and of that Liberty
and Power which God had given them. This same answer was also made to the
Ambassador of France, and withal, that if the King did think good, he might
serve himself of the same Form toward the Pope.

This was the first word given to make ouerture to the Negotiation, whereof
when the Senate saw there proceeded no good effect, but further observed, that
not only the Pope continued his preparations of War, but also made pressing
instances with the King Catholic, for the execution of his promises, that he
dispatched often into Spain, and pursued the Designs of the Count de Fuentes,
to arm powerfully; they believed that the Pope was far from any Concord,
although he showed the contrary, or that possibly he desired to appear
puissant, that he might treat with the more advantage. Wherefore they esteemed
it necessary to try in like manner what would be the intention of their
Friends, in case they should come to strokes; and hereupon they writ to their
Ambass. in France, and England, for to give advise unto the Princes with whom
they resided, that the Pope was every day further from all reasonable
Pacification, and went on with his warlike Provisions; that already the King of
Spain had declared himself, having given his own Letter for a pledge, with
promise to assist him: that the Pope sent often into Spain. On the other part,
that the Repub. was resolved to do nothing against their Liberty and Honor
for any respect; that the Senate thought it time to have recourse unto their
Majesty's, to understand their intentions, and what they would be pleased to
do, if things should fall out into a manifest rupture. These Ambassadors had
also charge from the Republique, to do what they could to sound the intention
of these Kings, and to draw from them some resolution. Besides, it was
deliberated to call the Ambassadors of the one and the other King, Residents at
Venice, and to impart unto them the same things. Whereupon the English
Ambassador (after he had thanked the Senate for this Communication, and had
complained in the Name of the King his Master, of the injuries which were
offered against all Reason, to a Republique which merited graces and favors,)
he praised their Generosity and resolution to defend their Honor, assuring
them that on so important an occasion, they should have from his King all aid
and favor, as well in good Offices, as in Arms and succors. The Ambassador
also proposed, as from himself, a League with his King, and other Princes his
Friends.

But the Ambassador of France answered, that the King his Master acknowledged
very well the Reasons of the Republique, and the wrongs offered unto them by
the Pope; with whom notwithstanding they ought not to proceed toorigorously,
giving example of the submissions which the King had used toward Pope Clement,
and exhorting the Republique to use all diligence to find some means to
acco^modate these Controversies: adjoining nevertheless, that if they should
come to Arms, (which he could not believe) the King would assist the Signiory.
That the Spaniards were not in case to begin new Wars, that they brought
nothing but words and apparences, which for certain would not come to effects.
But if that should fall out, he promised in ample words the assistance of his
King. He added further, that the Pope spoke mildly, demanding that the Laws
might be suspended, and that he would suspend his Censures; yea whenever the
Pope was assured that the Laws would be suspended, he would be the first to
suspend the Censures. Moreover, Mounfieur de Fresne propounded another motion,
yet as from himself: that (for to put an end to all debate, and wholly to stay
the Pope, with assurance that the reasons of the Republique should remain
entire,) they might remit all difficulties into the hands of the two Kings of
France and Spain, who because of their interests, and seeing the matter was
common to all Princes, could not but approve the Laws and actions of the
Senate. Whereupon they considered the great difficulties which might grow
before the Pope might be made to consent to this ouerture, and after he had
consented, how many other questions might arise before the conclusion. So it
was represented to the Ambassador, that this proposition could not succeed;
wherefore he passed it in silence.

The Senate advised their Ambassador in Spain of all these propositions and
answers, commanding him to thank the Catholic King for his offer to
interpose in this affair, and to make remonstrance unto him, how needful it
was for that Crown to conserve the amity of the Republique, and so modestly
to complain that the designs of the Pope were fomented by the Letters of his
Majesty, and by the offices of some of his Ministers. Whereunto the Constable
of Castile in the Name of the King answered; That the Letter written unto the
Pope was not for to break the amity which was between his Majesty and the
Republique, but only to show himself a defender of the Sea Apostolic when
the Pope should be assaulted in his Estate. Some fifteen days after the
communication made to these Ambassadors, He of Spain was at the audience, and
gave account of the Letter which his King had written to the Pope, assuring
them with effectual words, that it was nothing, and that it was written only
in general terms, since the King his Master had no intention to assist the
Pope, but only in case that he were set upon in his own Estate, by the forces
of the Republique, accompanied with the Arms of foreign Princes; but
otherwise he had not any purpose to offend the Republique. And although the
Letter was written unto the Pope with words of great affection, that this was
only to gain credit with his Holiness, to the end that he might more
powerfully mediate an amiable agreement of these differences. That to this end
he had required leave of them to demand of the Pope in the name of the Repub.
that he would take away the Censures; and withal, to signify they were sorry
for the disgusts of his Holiness. But that the commission which the Senate had
given him for to pray the Pope, was too much restrained, to produce any good
effect; that therefore it was meet to enlarge it, as might seem good to his
Serenitie. And he added further, that he assured the Republique on the word of
a King, of this his good intention; and more, that he knew not whether others,
who made show to interpose themselves in this agreement, aimed so much at
Peace, as the King his Master. Some men believed that Cardenas resolved to do
this office, after he understood the communication which had been made to the
Ambassadors of France and England, and considered the alteration which the
Letter of the Catholic King had produced, with other effects which might
follow. Others held that he had received express commission thereof from
Spain. But it is certain, that the same office was done some few days before
in Spain to the Ambassador of Venice by the Constable of Castile, sent
expressly to tell him; That the Letter written by the King to assist his
Holiness, was not to break the amity which his Majesty had with the
Republique, but only to get reputation with the Pope, with out design to come
to arms in his favor, unless it were in case of necessity when he should be
assaulted in his Estate. And certainly in Spain they employed themselves with
all sincerity to the Pacification: and did what was possible to persuade the
Nuntio to treat with the Ambassador of Venice, at least in secret, to the end
that from him he might understand that which they thought not convenient for
themselves to tell him: Particularly the assurance which the King gave, that
he would not assist the Pope but for the defense of his own Estate against
foreign Nations; and further that he might know how the Republique treated
with the French. But the Nuntio would never consent to treat, no not secretly,
with the Ambassador of Venice.

Although the business of the agreement was in the hands of two great Kings,
nevertheless the great Duke of Tuscany had an excessive desire that by his
means it might be ended. Whereupon, he complained unto the Resident of the
Republique with him, and also made it known by his Resident at Venice, that
he had effectually employed himself with the Pope, not to any other end then
for the quiet of the Repub. in which he had no other interest then that of
amity, his own affairs being in good case, and very well settled. That if
there had been any correspondence on the side of the Republique, by
communicating unto him their intentions, and giving him some liberty to treat,
he had peradventure brought the affair to good terms; adding withal a large
discourse of the profit and advantages of Concord, of the damages and
incommodities of War. The Senate made answer to his Resident, and gave order
to Robert Lio Secretary of the Signiorie, who was with his Highness, to let
him understand; that his sincerity and good will was well known unto them;
that the offices which he had done with the Pope were acceptable, and that his
discourses were very true; but the times were such, that the Republique could
not condescend to any particular proposition before the Censures were removed;
because the Pope having interrupted all commerce and means of treaty, it was
meet that he should open the way by taking off his Censures, which way once
opened they might then advise upon the propositions which they should find
most proper to put an end to the differences. This answer being made by Robert
Lio to the great Duke, he replied; That his intention was very good for the
good of the Republique, which he would always procure if he were required;
that his own affairs were not in any bad case that he should desire a change;
that he was aged and therefore his counsels merited to be followed; that on
both sides notable faults had been committed by passion, and that there was
need of a Physician; that they might make use of him to that purpose; that he
had spoken freely to the Pope, who was in some diffidence with him, because he
had not offered him succors as did others; that the Pope was well inclined,
but the Cardinals did ill offices; that he would yet further employ himself
for the Republique, and speak in their behalf, if they thought well;
otherwise he knew not what he could do.

When the proposition of the Senate was arrived in France, by which the King
was desired to make some declaration, his Majesty answered; That the Nuntio of
the Pope had required of him the same in the name of his Holiness: But he saw
very well that in declaring himself he should do nothing else but render
himself suspected on the one side, and consequently deprive himself of all
power to be a Mediator for an accord, and utterly to break off the treaty
already begun. Upon this reason he did not think fit to declare himself for
either party, or to favor the reasons of the one or of the other; but
remaining neutrall, to continue the treaty of agreement which might be more
profitable to both parties, then the declaration could be aduantageous to
either of them: and so much the rather, because he had a good hope very quickly
to finish it; also that the Senate must needs yield a little, because the Pope
was not unwilling to have all accommodated.

But the King of England, although he was much busied by the presence of the
King of Denmark, his Brother in Law, in such sort that he could not think on
any other affair, or give audience unto any Ambassador; yet having notice,
that Iustimano, the Ambassador of Venice, had something to say unto him, he
heard him; and after he had understood all the progress and success of
matters passed, with the demand of the Senate, He answered; That he was much
comforted to understand the Constancy of the people, and the Union of the
Senate, to the defense of their proper liberty, of Justice, and of the Power
given by God to all Princes. He laughed at the declaration of Spain made only
by a Letter, saying, that he who will come to effects is not wont to give
words; that He was obliged to the Repub. for the affection which they had
testified to him, and for their demonstration of Honor toward Him in sending
their Ambassador Ordinary and Extra ordinary. And therefore that there was
contracted between them an amity reciprocal and sincere; so as there should
never be occasion of rupture between the Republique and Him; that He could
not say so much for others. But for that which the Senate then demanded, He
held himself obliged to condescend; First, because in judgment He approved
the actions of the Republique: and secondly, since they had a great confidence
in Him, that He should show himself ungrateful and unjust, if He refused to
protect a cause so righteous, wherein the Senate only defended themselves from
oppression, and sustained their liberty together with the authority of all
Princes; that it was indeed a prudent advise to proceed herein with dexterity
to avoid War and Troubles; but if the violence of others would needs bring
all to a rupture, the Senate might rest assured that in the word of a Prince
he would assist the Republique with all his forces: That he had given charge
to his Ambassador at Venice to perform more amply the same Office; not being
able then to say more for the presence of the King of Denmark. The Earl of
Salisbury by commandment from the King, confirmed the same things to the
Ambassador, and added thereunto that the King was not moved to assist the
Republique for any design that he had to divide the Members of the Roman
Church from their Head: that he knew well they meant not to leave their own
Religion, wherein he did not blame them; that he was carried to this resolution
by the Declaration which the Spaniard had made for the Pope: that his intention
only was to oppose himself to those who assaied to deprive Princes of their
Liberty, and to aid those that would sustain and defend it.

The Ambassador of England at Venice spoke on the same manner, saying, That he
had particular Commandment from the King his Master, to oblige him under the
Word of a King, to a near Union with the Republique, to assist them with
Connsell and Forces, as also to labor with all his Friends that they should
do the same, nor for any base ends or private interests, nor for to foment a
division, nor to come into concurrence or opposition with any other Prince; but
especially for two Reasons. First, for that acknowledging himself obliged to
God for infinite favors received from him, he thought it his duty to defend
his Cause, that is, to conserve that Power which his Divine Majesty had
established upon earth. Secondly, because of that Bond of Amity renewed with
the Republique. The Ambassador hereunto added, that he had order from the King
to publish or to keep secret this Declaration, according as it should seem
most expedient to the Republique. The King was thanked in the Person of his
Ambassador with many words, as also Justinian their Ambassador with his
Majesty had charge to do the same; and further, a Letter was written unto
that King, with such thankfulness as was meet.

The Ambassador of France a few days after that the Answer of his King was
arrived, and happily to sweeten it, came to the Audience, where he made a long
Discourse for the Accord, concluding that though it should not fall out, yet
the King would not depart from the Amity which he had with the Republique. That
therefore his Majesty desired to be thoroughly informed of their Reasons, not
only for the merit and justice of the Laws, and other things controuerted, but
also touching the order which they had holden in opposing the Censures of the
Pope, who complained not only of the things aforesaid, but that he had received
some new offenses, both for hindering Navigations into places of the Church, and
for banishing utterly out of their Estate the Order of the Jesuits. To which
by decree of Senate was made answer, thanking the King for his good and sincere
affection, and also there was given in writing to the Ambassador, a brief
Summary of their Reasons, for justification as well of the Laws and of the
Judgment, as of that which the Senate and the other Magistrates had done to
repulse the injuries of the Pope, and to hinder the Seditions which the
Censures might have occasioned. The complaint touching Navigations was also
resolved, saying that it appertained to every good Government, to provide that
the State might be furnished with things necessary, not letting that be carried
away to others, whereof it self stands in need; that accordingly the
Republique had stayed all Vessels at Sea, wherein were provisions necessary for
the State; whereupon, if it followed that the State Ecclesiastical were in
some want, this was not their fault, but the order of humane things so
required. Concerning the Jesuits, that they had not been banished, but rather
were gone away of themselves, as not being willing to obey the Commandment
given unto them, to continue the Divine Service; but after their departure
having notice of an infinite number of injuries, Machinations, and Treasons by
them contrived, the Senate had ordained (as Justice required) that they should
never more return. But although the King had promised to continue his sincere
Amity with the Republique, yet he would never employ himself in any particular
thing which might aid their Cause; on the contrary, when their Ambassador
requested his Majesty to hinder the leuy of Suisses, which the Pope purposed
to make, and to favor the leuy of the Republique; he did refuse, saying, it
was a means to make him declare himself, which he intended not to do, but
showing himself neutrall to treat the Agreement; saying besides that it was
needless for the Republique to make so great provision of Arms, it being
sufficient to have their own Places well furnished.

FOVRTH BOOK.
Whilst these things were thus in treaty, the Spaniards attempted to imbroile
the Republique with the Turk, to the end they might be constrained to have
recourse to them, and so they might have power to carry the Senate to accept of
a Composition with the Pope upon such terms as pleased them. But their Project
was so far from success, that on the contrary there had fallen upon them a
great mischief, if by the prudence of the Senate it had not been diuerted.
The occasion was this. The Marquis de Santa Croce, being departed from Naples
(after he had received Benediction from the Nuntio,) with six and twenty
Galleys, he passed to Messina, where he strengthened himself with fourteen
more; and having advice that the Venetian Army was at Corfu, he sailed very
secretly, striking his Masts that he might not be discovered; and in this
fashion he arrived the tenth of August at Durazzo, a City of Albany (holden by
the Turks,) which he finding near void of Inhabitants, who were occupied at
their Harvest, as He himself has reported in his Printed Relation, he sacked
and burned it with little resistance, carrying away 155. men, women and
children, among whom were thirty Christians, which he set free as soon as he
came to Otranto: he took also thirty pieces of Ordnance, the smallest he
carried away, being constrained to leave the greater cloyed, for fear of the
Turks, who came with Forces unto the rescue. This news being come to Venice,
greatly displeased the Senate, who feared that the Turks would revenge
themselves by falling upon their State, which was nearest unto them, as at
other times they had done; or that at least they would enter the Gulf, and set
upon Puglia, and by this means put things in a confusion. Wherefore the
Ambassador of Spain was called, and the Duke greatly complained unto him,
saying, That for a trifle they would provoke the Turks, and draw their Armies
into the Gulf, with no less damage to his Master, than to the Republique; and
that the deceased King, whose prudence was such that it merited to be imitated,
would never consent to such enterprises. The Duke further intimated, that if
hereafter they should make such attempts, they would not be endured. To which
the Ambassador answered, that he had prayed the King his Master to command
that his Armies should not henceforth enter within the Gulf.

But at Constantinople, the Turks perceived very well the Artifices of Spain,
and that the enterprise of Durazzo had been attempted to no other end, than to
set them at ods with the Republique. And therefore the Grand Seigneur sent
command to the Captain of his Army to keep good union and intelligence with
the Venetian Armies, to the damage of the Pope and Spaniards. Afterward, the
first Vizier called Octauian Bon, Bayliefe of the Republique, and complained of
the assault made on Durazzo, concluding that the Republike was obliged to be
sensible of it; because the Grand Seigneur knew very well that it was done
only to set him at variance with them: but on the contrary, being willing to
proceed generously, on this occasion they should be freed both from this and
some other troubles on their side, implying hereby the V^^hocs with diverse
other damages and displeasures, using withal that Proverb of the Turks, It
is better to be one day a Cock, than always a Hen. He offered him to join
with them his present Army, with all sorts of aid against the Spaniards and the
Pope, showing unto him that the Republique had no greater enemies than
Spaniards and Priests: which being manifest, they ought to think of revenge,
and rest assured always of their assistance, it being a vain thing to arm,
and not to use their Arms against their enemies. And if they thought not fit
to unite with their Armies and other succors, he proposed that if the Venetian
Army would assault the State of the Church, or of the Spaniard on the one side,
they would do it on the other: and that the Grand Seigneur had writ to all his
Ministers to lend all sorts of aid to the Republique, without expecting any
further order from the Port.

A few days after, the Army of the Turks appeared in the Gomenices, not far
from Corfu, to the number of 55. Gallics, commanded by Iaphar Bashaw; to whom
the General Pasqualigo, who was then at Corfu, and commanded the Venetian
Army, having sent Victor Barbaro his Secretary for to visit Him, and to
complain of some small damages done by some Galeots of Corsares, Iapher
speedily dispatched twenty Galleys to take them, which accordingly they did,
and hanged the Captain. The Bashaw further discoursed unto the Secretary of
the great esteem which the Grand Seignieur made of the Republique. To which he
adjoined, that he had commandment from his Master, by his Letters of the fifth
of September, to join himself with the Venetian Forces, to go against the
Pope and the King of Spain, in such manner as he should be advised by the
Venetian Captains, or else to march severally if they should judge it better.
And the Bashaw sent three of his Galleys to the General Pasqualigo, with the
Bei of Damita, him of Scio, and of Assan, Surnamed Ianarin, a Genoan by Nation,
for to give him account of the Order which he had from Constantinople, and
thereupon to solicit his resolution. To this Office the General of the
Venetians corresponded, praising and thanking the Grand Seignieur; yet he added
that it was meet to give advice of this Proposition at Venice, and from thence
to expect a resolution. The Turks offered a light Galley to perform the
Voyage more speedily, the return whereof they would expect. But the General
alleging the length of time, and the incommodity which the Army might suffer,
if it remained so many days at Sea, wrought in such sort that they retired,
giving them to understand that they should be advertised what resolution was
taken.

In this Month of August was begun a kind of War by Writing, offensive on
the Popes part, and defensive on the side of the Republique, handled on both
parts with very much heat, and which served greatly to the Negotiation which
was in treating. For though it was certain, that the Pope was the first that
assailed the Republique with this sort of Weapons, nevertheless, he was so
far infeiour in the event, that this was one of the principal Causes which
incited him to an Agreement, and he suffered more in his reputation by these
Writings, then the Republique, by the continuation of the Censures.

The beginning and progress hereof was thus. After that the Republique had
hindered the execution of the Censures, by such reasons, such dexterity and
constancy, as before we have mentioned, the Pope, who saw himself blamed by
the Court of Rome for his inconsiderate proceedings in this affair, traveled
on his side to find some Reasons, and commanded Some to study these matters:
then in the end resolved to publish his Motives, and caused a Writing to be
framed by Scipio Gobellucci (to whom he gave for recompense the Office of a
Secretary, which he was wont to sell,) which Writing he sent to Mantua, Milan,
Cremona, and Ferrara, to the end that it might be dispersed in all Quarters. He
sent it likewise into Spain to his Nuntio, not only for his Instruction, but
also that it might be diuulged. Hereupon at Venice some proposed that it was
necessary to publish in like sort the Reasons of the Repub. as well to oppose
the foresaid Writing, as because it was a thing earnestly desired by the
Subjects; and so much the more, for that having in their Letters of the 6. of
May, spoken of the nullitie of the Monitorie, it seemed requisite that the
Reasons thereof should be explained and declared, and how the Letters of the
Duke were supported by good and clear arguments. And that which incited them
yet more, was an advice that the Jesuits, no less passionate in this affair
then the Pope himself, went up and down saying, persuading, and declaiming in
their Chaires and also writ unto their adherents within the State, that if the
Republique had any Reasons they would have manifested them: but that it
sufficed them in general to say they had many Reasons, being not able to
particularize in any. Others said that they had done enough for a sufficient
defense, and that it was not meet to say any more till they were forced: and
this advise prevailed, for the great reverence which the Republique carried to
the Sea Apostolic: thinking it more fit to fail in some point of reputation,
then to give any sign of disrespect unto that See, although they had received
from it so manifest injuries. Yet it was not possible to retain some lively
wits, that they should not write somewhat by stealth; hence there came abroad
diverse Discourses on both sides, but yet only in handwriting. Diverse Letters
were also written under fained Names to gain the more credit, and in
particular, one in the Name of the Senate unto the Cities their Subjects. It is
true (as has been said) that there was one written and read in all the
Counsels of Cities, but not any Copies thereof were given to any. It may be
that some person of learning having heard it read, and committing it (as he
thought) to memory, did afterward set down in Writing rather that which he
imagined he had heard then that which he heard indeed; or else, thinking the
style of the Senate too modest, too reserved and reverent, he adjoined
thereunto of his own some biting and eager words to fit it better to the taste
of the vulgar, and so let it run under hand among the People. But at Milan
there fell out an accident of most pernicious consequence, where some
Ecclefiastiques of great quality caused to imprint (without the name of the
Author or of the Place) a Writing of one sheet of paper very seditious, wherein
was affirmed, against all sound doctrine, that Marriages within the State of the
Republique were inualide, the Matrimonial conjunction Adultery, and the
Children all Bastards; that it was not only lawful, but even meritorious, for
Pastors to abandon their Flocks. And to conceal the Place where this was
printed, they forbade the Printer very straightly, even under pain of Censures,
that he should not give any one Copy thereof within Milan. The sheet was
therefore distributed in the Confines of Bergamo, Brescia and Crema. To
contradict this Writing, a certain Person published some Treatises written
150. years ago by John Gerson, so well fitted to the affairs of this time
that they seemed to be written on this occasion, and such as certainly at this
day none could write so well and so resolutely. Hereunto was adjoined a Letter,
without the name of the Author, whereby the Curates were exhorted to take care
of their Churches, and not to fear the offense of God by not observing the
Interdict.

But the Inquisition of Rome the 27. of June, prohibited by name this last
Writing, and also the others not yet imprinted, under pain of Excommunication
for them that read or kept them: alleging for reason, that they contained many
propositions, rash, scandalous, slanderous, seditious, schismatic and
heretical, with this clause, respective, to make all ambiguous. In the end,
they brake off silence at Rome, whence came out a little Book of Cardinal
Bellarmines against the Treatises of Gerson, and a little after the Admonition
of Cardinal Baronius, full of railing speeches and detractions, as also a
Discourse of Cardinal Colonna, hoping by such Writings to move the fidelity
of all sorts of persons; forasmuch as Card. Colonna had endeavored to terrify
the Prelates and other Ecclesiastiques placed in the greatest charges by the
fear of Censures, and the privation of their Dignities and Benefices. Card.
Bellarmine aimed to shake the devout consciences by exalting the authority of
the Pope so far as to make it equal to that of God. And Card. Baronius thought
by his reuiling and declaiming to draw to his cause all learned Persons. They
did not believe at Rome that any would be found so bold as to oppose himself
to the reputation of these great Cardinals, considering their high and eminent
quality; as also they hoped to find that ignorance among the people which
they had long labored to breed and bring in. But at Venice, to the end that no
weak conscience might be troubled by the Hyperbolees of Card. Bellarmine, he
was speedily answered, to discover the truth, and to show unto all what
obedience a Christian owes to the Sovereign Bishop; where also the public
Reasons were manifested, and the three Ordinances of the Republique maintained,
together with their Authority to judge and punish Ecclesiastiques, which the
Pope in his Monitorie had oppugned; with other Writings, entitled,
Considerations and Aduises. And in as much as it seemed necessary to give
account to all the world, that the commandment made by the Republique for the
continuation of Divine Service was just and lawful, they judged expedient to
prove it, by a Treatise of the Interdict: and withal the Senate gave
permission to imprint other Books in favor of the public, provided that men
should observe herein the Laws which the State prescribed, that is, that there
should be nothing written contrary to faith, good manners, and the Authority of
Princes. And because the Inquisitor was not able to examine all Writings which
were presented to be allowed to the Press, there were deputed five Divines
together with the Patriarchall Vicar and the Divine of the Repub. to take care
of those matters.

As soon as these foresaid Writings appeared in Rome, the Inquisition
presently censured them, by particular name, because (as they said) they
contained heresies, errors and scandals, with the ordinary clause, respective:
and adjoined a Prohibition of all other Writings which should be made against
the Interdict, whether in Print or Manuscript, so as they might not be read or
kept without incurring the penalty of Excommunication, and reservation of their
absolution. These prohibitions which might (considering the terrors of
Excommunication) have repressed all Writings to be made in favor of the
Republique, did not withstanding produce a contrary effect, forasmuch as many
did hence conclude, that reason could not stand on their side, who would not
suffer the Reasons of both parties to be read and published. Others said, that
these three Cardinals had disguised the truth, and would not that it should be
discovered. Others thought strange that all Writings which might be made were
prohibited; as if they pretended to have the spirit of prophecy to foresee
that men could write nothing good, or else of authority to extinguish
indifferently the good with the evil. There were some who from this
Prohibition collected, that in those Writings was nothing worthy of Censure,
seeing that the Court of Rome had not the boldness to note any particular, and
by this Aduerbe Respective, they had reserved to themselves a shroud against
all objections. Whereupon, some proposed that for their own defense against
such injuries, it was meet by public decree to prohibit all Writings
composed in favor of the Pope. But others represented that this would be to
imitate that which they reprehended in another: that the free course of these
Writings would be for the advantage of the Republique, and that hereby men
should see that on their part nothing was palliated or disguised, neither that
they distrusted the judgment of the World upon that they had done. This
opinion prevailed in such sort, that not only the Writings in this Cause were
tolerated, but also the public felling of them permitted, and Liberty given
to bring them into the State.

Touching them that held for the Pope, it is to be noted, that all that time
which passed from July to that April wherein the Peace was concluded, all
sorts of Persons striued to be writing to gain the good grace of his
Holiness. Wherefore there were published many Treatises, as well of Jesuits
as of others, partly under true names, partly under fained; to which Learned
me^ made answers to repel their slanders, and to confure those false Doctrines
which they attempted to scatter.

The Doctrine of the Venetian Writers was, in sum; That God has established
two Governments in the World, the one Spiritual, and the other Temporal, each
one of them being supreme and independent upon the other. The one is the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, the other is the Civil Government. Of the
Spiritual he has given the care unto the Apostles, and to their Successors;
of the Temporal the charge is put in the hands of Princes, in such sort, that
one may not intermeddle in that which appertains to the other; that the Pope
has no power to abrogate the Laws of Princes in Temporal matters, nor to
deprive them of their Estates, or free their Subjects from their Allegiance
which they owe unto them; that to depose Kings from their Estates is a new
thing, never attempted till within this five hundred years, against the
Scriptures, and the examples of Jesus Christ, and of his Saints; and that to
teach that in case of controversy between the Pope and a Prince, it is lawful
to pursue him by frauds and open force, or that the Subjects which rebel
against him, do by that means obtain remission of their sins, is a
Doctrine seditious and sacrilegious; that Ecclesiastical men by Divine Law are
not exempted from the Secular Power, neither in their persons nor in their
goods; but have received from godly and devout Princes, since Constantine the
Great, until Frederick the second, diverse Privileges both real and
personal, greater or lesser according to the exigence of times and places;
which has bin also practiced in other Realms and Principalities, being
always exempted (as well by Emperors, as other Princes) from the power of
inferior Magistrates, but not from their own Sovereign authority. That the
Exemptions granted by Popes unto the Order of the Clergy have not been
admitted in some places, and in others admitted only in part, and that they
have been valide only so far as they have been received; that
notwithstanding any Exemption, the Prince has still Power over their persons
and goods whenever necessity constraines him to serve himself of them And if
at any time they should abuse such Exemption to the perturbation of the
public tranquillity, that the Prince is obliged to provide a remedy. Another
point of their Doctrine was, that the Pope ought not to think himself
infallible, unless where God has promised him his Divine assistance; which
some Modern Doctors say to be only in necessary points of Faith, and when
he uses fit means to that purpose, of divine Invocation and of
Ecclesiastical consultations. But the authority of Binding and Loosing ought
to be understood with this Caution, claue non crrante, seeing God has
commanded the Pastor to follow the Merit and Justice of the Cause, and not his
own inclination: that when the Pope upon any difference with Princes, passes
on to thunder out his Censures, it is permitted unto the Doctors to consider
whether he has proceeded claue errante aut non errante. And the Prince when he
is assured that the Censures thundered against him, his Estates and subjects are
inualide, may and ought, for the conservation of public peace, hinder the
execution thereof, preserving his Religion, and the reverence due to the
Church; and that according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, the Excommunication
of a multitude, or of Him who commands, and is followed by a great number of
people, is pernicious and sacrilegious; that the new name of Blind Obedience
inverted by Ignatius Loiola unknown to the Ancient Church and to al good
Divines, takes away the essence of that virtue, (which ought to work by
certain knowledge and election,) exposes us to the danger of offending God,
does not excuse him who is deceived by the Ghostly Father, and may engender
seditions, as it has been seen within these forty years since that abuse
has been introduced.

On the contrary, the Doctrine of the Roman Writers, or Papalins, affirmed;
That the Temporal Power of Princes is subordinate to the Power
Ecclesiastical, and subject to it; consequently that the Pope has authority
to deprive Princes of their Estates for their faults and errors which they
commit in Government, yea though they have not committed any fault, when the
Pope shall judge it fit for the good of the Church; that the Pope may free
Subjects from their obedience, and from their oath of Fidelity which they owe
unto their Princes, in which case they are obliged to cast off all subjection,
and even to pursue the Prince, if the Pope command it. And although they all
agreed to hold these Maxims, yet they were not at accord touching the manner;
for they that were touched with a little shame, said, so great an authority did
not reside in the Pope, because Jesus Christ had given him any Temporal
authority, but because this was necessary for the Spiritual. Wherefore Jesus
Christ giving Spiritual authority, had given also indirectly the Temporal:
which was a vain shift, seeing they made no other difference then of Words. But
the greater part of these men spoke plainly, that the Pope has all Authority
in heaven and earth, both Spiritual and Temporal, over all Princes of the
World no otherwise then over his Subjects and vassals: that he might correct
them for any fault whatsoever: that he is a Temporal Monarque over all the
earth: that from any Temporal Sovereign Prince men might appeal to the Pope:
that he might give Laws to all Princes, and annull those which were made by
Them. For the Exemption of Ecclesiastiques, they all with one voice denied,
that they held it by the grace and privilege of Princes, although their Laws
to that purpose, Constitutions, and Privileges be yet extant; but they were
not agreed how they had received it, some of them affirming that it was de iure
diuino; others that it came by Constitutions of Popes and Councels. But all
consented upon this, that they are not Subjects to the Prince even in case of
treason, and that they are not bound to obey the Laws unless it were vi
directiua: And some passed so far as to say, that the Ecclesiastiques ought
to examine whether the Laws and Commands of the Prince beiust, and whether the
people be obliged to obey them, and that they owe not unto the Prince either
contributions, or customs, or obedience: that the Pope cannot err or fail
because he has the assistance of the Holy Spirit; and therefore that it is
necessary to obey his Commandments whether they be just or unjust: that to Him
appertains the clearing of all difficulties, so as it is not lawful for any
to depart from his resolution, nor to make reply though the resolution be
unjust: that though all the World differ in opinion from the Pope, yet it is
meet nevertheless to yield to Him, and he is not excused from sin who
follows not his advice, though all the world judge it to be false. Their
books were also full of such other Maxims, that the Pope is a God upon earth,
a Sun of justice, a Light of religion; that the judgment and sentence of God
and the Pope is one same thing, as also the Tribunal and the Court of the Pope
and God: that to doubt of the power of the Pope is as much as to doubt of the
power of God. And it is notable what Card. Bellarmine has boldly written,
that, to restrain the obedience due unto the Pope to things concerning the
Salvation of the Soul, is to bring it to nothing: that Saint Paul appealed to
Caesar who was not his Judge, and not to S. Peter lest the bystanders should
have laughed at him: that the holy Bishops of old showed themselves subject to
Emperors, because the times so required. Others adjoined further, that then it
was meet to introduce the Empire of the Pope by little and little, it being a
thing unseasonable to despoile Princes newly converted of their Estates, and
also to permit some thing unto them for to interesse them. Other like
discourses they made, which many godly Persons abhorred to read, and reputed
them blasphemies.

Furthermore, the manner of treating on the one part and on the other, was very
different; inasmuch as the Writings of the Popes partisans and especially of
the Jesuits, were full of railings, detractions, injuries and slanders against
the Republique; and their Doctors, full also of many motives to sedition. But
the Writings of the Venetians, following the intention of the Senate, were full
of all kinds of respect unto the Pope, and of modestie^ toward them who had
written in his favor; pressing the matter in hand without digressions, and
without nothing the faults of the Court of Rome, not for want of good
information (being so many and so notorious to all the World,) but only to use
all due seemelinesse; which is, not to pass from the matter to the persons, as
do those who fail of reasons. All this may be evidently seen in the
Recollections printed in diverse places and in several Languages, wherein are
contained the Writings of both parties.

The Spaniards were not well pleased with the publication of these Writings,
and they signified unto the Pope, that it was better to proceed herein by his
sole Authority; forasmuch as Books gave matter of discourse unto the World, and
occasion to each one to frame his judgment with diminution of the Popes
authority. Especially that they of his side had too far trenched upon the
Authority of Princes, which could not bring any advantage to the Church; as
also that they did more abound with reuilings then with reasons: besides that,
each proposition drew to it self an Answer. Also Father Sosa a Franciscane was
reprehended, for Writing in Spanish upon this matter, and he was enjoined to
call in all the Copies of his Book, which accordingly he did. And at the
instance of the Nuntio they consented that all these Writings should be
forbidden, not by the Counsel of the King (as was desired) but by the
Inquisition. And lest the Protestation of the Prince should be included, they
specified by name in the Censure all Writings imprinted, save only that,
censuring the Manuscripts in general terms, in the end commanding that for
the time to come none should write in this cause for the one side or for the
other. Not withstanding this Edict was not imprinted nor affixed, contenting
themselves only to have it published throughout the Parishes (which are
Churches less frequented.)

By occasion of these Writings, in Milan was like to have followed a great
disorder. For as they were greedily read by some in secret, so were they by
some ill affected, bitterly reprehended with calumnies and injuries (familiar
to the Ecclesiastiques:) which Antony Paulucci Secretary of the Repub. could
not endure, and gave testimony of his dislike. Whereupon a Process was formed
against him in the Inquisition, which being come to his knowledge, he
complained thereof to the Count de Fuentes, who maruailed at their presumption,
and promised to take speedy order for his quietness. But a few days after a
Notary of the Office cited him in the name of the Inquisitor; to whom he
answered, that he was a public Person, and under the protection of the Count,
and that he owed no obedience to any besides his Prince; threatening the Notary
to proceed against him on another fashion. The Count advertised hereof, sent
for the Inquisitor, and signified to Paulucci that he might come securely to
the Audience. Yet after the Count had talked with the Inquisitor, he said to
Paulucci, that he published too freely the Reasons of the Repub. and that he
should do well to go to the Inquisitor, who had one word to speak unto him,
and no more. Paulucci refused to submit himself to any whomsoever without
Commission from his Prince. The Count offered to send along the Treasurer
Torniello to accompany him to the Office, who should stay with him till the
Inquisitor had taken his answer, and then conduct him back unto his house.
For which Paulucci thanked him, but said he could not do it without leave.
Wherefore the Count sent to tell him that he would not trouble him any
further, or take more knowledge of the matter. The Secretary gave advice of all
to Venice; whereupon complaint was presently made to the Ambassador of Spain,
and all that their Secretary had done was approved. The Ambassador having
written hereof unto the Count, he called Paulucci telling him, that he had
spoken too boldly of these affairs, and that it behooved him to give no
scandal. To which Paulucci answered, that he hoped his Excellency would take
order for the time to come, that none should give him any occasion. Afterward
the Inquisitor gave him to understand, that, not as Inquisitor, but as his
friend, he desired to speak with him in some private house. He answered, that
before this difficulty he was still ready to speak with him as a particular
Friend, but now he could not, and he would not do it.

But to return to the treaty of Peace, which still continued, not withstanding
that either part defended their Reasons by writing: in the end of August was
made a greater ouerture to the Agreement, which almost gave perfection unto the
Treaty, although afterward many Negotiations passed without effect. On the
seventeenth of August, Mounsieur de Fresne came to the Senate with Letters from
the King of the fourth of August, wherein he testified his great displeasure
for the Differences between the Pope and the Republique, fearing the
mischiefs which might ensue: that in regard of the place which he held in
Christ endome, for his Devotion to the Sea Apostolic, and for the Amity which
he had with the Republique, he was moved to interpose himself, desiring to
find some honest Composition; but that he should be hindered to execute this
his laudable design, if the Republique did not aid him by such means as
depended upon them: that he had enjoined Fresne his Ambassador, to exhort his
Serenity to continue his ordinary Prudence, and the affection which he had
toward God, toward Christendom, and toward the State; and to assure him that
his intention aimed merely at the conservation of the Liberty of the
Republique. The Letter of the King being read, Fresne made his proposition,
saying, that the King was disgusted for that he could not draw from them any
thing but general words in a business so important, and so pressing: that he
doubted the new instance which now he made with sincerity, would bring
discontent, and be interpreted to other ends than he intended; nevertheless
being a friend, and obliged to the Republique, for that which sometimes they
had done in his behalf, and remembering their courtesies, as also foreseeing
the inconveniences which might fall out, he was sorry for this quarrel, and had
interposed himself (not being desired,) to stay these evils, which doubtless
would increase, if the Repub. would not aid him: that the Pope had
condescended to honest Conditions, and such, as he seemed not to demand any
thing contrary to the Dignity and Liberty of the Republique; that the King
would be displeased, if (the Pope having justified his Cause to the World in
some sort, though in effect all judged for the Repub.) they should resist the
Motions of al Christian Princes, in which case he could not favor them: as
otherwise he was purposed to do, if the Pope against all justice would force
their Liberty, and endamage their Government, for then he would employ all his
Forces, all his Arms, and his Estates for the Service of his Serenity. Fresne
added further, that His Majesty was so much displeased for that he could not
draw from the Republique any particular Intension in this business, that He
was minded once to rest himself and to meddle no more; but yet he had resolved
to hazard one Trial more, and to make one Reply, praying the Senate for his
sake to be confident in him, as in their Friend, and so far as they might to
yield, and give some satisfaction unto the Pope, assuring them that his
Holiness would rest content with a little, if by any means he might save his
Reputation. And thereupon the Ambassador proposed two things: The one was, that
the Senate would suspend the Execution of the Laws, and the Protestation
published against the Monitory of the Pope, upon condition that his Holiness
would do as much with his Monitory, and with the Censures, for four or six
months, during which time they might treat of the Merit of the Laws that were
questioned. And here he she that the Suspension of the Laws was a thing that
might be easily yielded; because the Laws being Prohibitiue, the Observation
whereof consisted in not doing that which they forbad, a Suspension of them
could not bring any innovation. But for the Suspension of the Protestation, he
did not desire that it might be done in such passages, wherein the actions of
the Republique were proved just, and consequently the Censures pronounced void
and inualide, but only in such clauses wherein they seemed to break off
friendship with Pope: that if this manner did not entirely satisfy, some other
more convenient might be devised, the thing in it self being honest, the
question only of words: that if the term of six months for the Suspension of
the Monitory did not seem sufficient, the Pope might be easily induced to
prolong it. Another thing proposed, was, that the Prisoners might be rendered
without prejudice to the Cause of the Republique; that the Religious gone out
of Venice, by reason of the Interdict, might return, and the Pope would
Suspend the Monitory for some time. But the Ambassador passed lightly over this
Proposition, saying, That it was not the Intention of the King, that any thing
should be done against the Dignity or to the disadvantage of the Repub. and
that if either of these Propositions were to their prejudice, he was content to
let them pass in silence; that he had proposed them not thinking them
prejudicial, but if they showed the contrary, he had done. He desired them
further to consider, that it was necessary to give some apparent Occasion unto
the Pope, that he might retract, because it was never heard that a Pope has
revoked his Bulls, excepting at Constance by Authority of the Council; that
if it seemed indecent and against the Custom of the Republique to correct
their Laws at the instance of the Pope, or to render Prisoners upon his
demand, for these things might be found some temper, so as the things aforesaid
might be done at the request of the King, and to gratify Him, without making
any mention of the Pope.

In the Senate this Matter was put in Deliberation; where, after they had well
examined all the Reasons, and considered withal the Perils which followed upon
the continuation of these Differences, they preferred with one joint consent,
before all other respects, the preservation of their Liberty, which without
doubt had been violated, if the Senate had been constrained under any pretext
to take away the Authority of their Laws. For the point of giving up the
Prisoners in gratification to the King, they thought this not to touch upon
their Liberty, although they saw it was desired to give satisfaction unto the
Pope; in as much as it was a particular fact which drew not with it any
consequence that the like ought to be done in times to come. And here there
were two opinions; some proposed that only One of the should be rendered,
others were of advice that they should render Both. And this opinion prevailed,
because if the one were released, the deliverance of the other (the case being
like) could not be well refused; and besides, if the Senate at first should not
yield so far as they might, by this means a gate might be open to other
prejudicial demands; but if they should consent so far as was possible, they
should be freed from the importunity of new Propositions, and the King Obliged
to turn himself upon the Pope. They also considered that by yielding one
Prisoner to the King of France, they should inuit some other Prince to demand
the other, which if they refused, he would rest ill satisfied; and if they
granted him, the most Christian King would judge the favor done to him to be
but small. So then resolving to yield the two Prisoners unto the King, the
Senate answered to the Proposition of the Ambassador, thanking his Majesty for
his mediation, and adjoined, that as the Republique took in good part all that
was done by his Majesty, so they prayed him not to interpret amiss that they
had not condescended to any Particularity, in as much as they knew not what to
say in such a difficulty, offered against all reason, and above belief,
contrary to the Liberty and Government of their Estate, which they were
assured (and it was certain) his Majesty would not prejudice. That it was
easy to see whereat aimed the Designs of the Pope, who, seeing that the
Justice of the Repub. for the merit and ground of the Cause, was known and
confessed by all, not only out of Italy, but even in Rome, would therefore to
take advantage find disorder in the form and manner of proceeding; wherein the
Justice of the Republique was so clear, that it was manifest to all, the
Errors of the Pope so gross, that they could not be excused. Wherefore, that
it was not just to correct the Faults of another with their own damage and
dishonor, and since others had caused these Disorders, it was not for the
Senate to remedy them: they had done sufficiently, in that having received
insupportable Injuries, they had proceeded with exemplary moderation, doing
nothing herein but for their necessary defense. That the Questions moved by the
Pope in the beginning of these differences were very unreasonable, but that
which was done after was intolerable, the Republique being assaulted by
Treacheries, and practices of Sedition to move the people, Religion it self
(which is most of all) being by these means endangerd: that yet still they
were disquieted by the Pope; who under pretense of propositions and
satisfactions of form sought to justify his Cause. That the Repub.
notwithstanding all this was ready to do what they might, their Liberty
remaining entire, but they could not consent that it should be diminished in
any fashion, without the high offense of God: That to suspend their Laws was
nothing else but to confess a want of authority to ordain them, which in
effect was to cut the sinews of Government: considering that the question was
not only of these Laws, but of all others, as also of their Authority to rule
and govern their State, which must needs be hazarded if they grant the Pope a
power by his Censures to constrain them to a suspension; a thing pernicious to
the Liberty not only of the Repub: but of all sovereign Princes who must
necessarily rest deprived of al Sovereignty when they submit themselves unto
the Pope, who shall have power by his Excommunications to force them to
regulate their Laws and Ordinances after his will. And that pretext of
Ecclesiastical Liberty will bring forth this effect, that no Law shall be
exempt from the Censure of the Pope, seeing he attributes to himself
Authority to define and determine, even against the opinion of all the World,
what Laws are just or unjust. That though the Laws were prohibitiue, yet it
followed not they might be suspended without prejudice, since if the
prohibitio^ were taken a way, men had Liberty to do the contrary, and every
suspe^sion implies a want either of authority or of wisdom, and especially to
do it for fear or at the threatening of another necessarily inferred a
Subjection. That the Repub. received willingly the word of the King, to wit,
that he would do nothing which might turn to their prejudice, and thereupon
desired to be excused if they did not condescend to this particular: that they
had not proposed any thing to his Majesty, as looking that the remedy should
come whence the evil it self, and all these disorders: But now in favor of
his Majesty, they were purposed to declare what they could do if the Pope
should first take away the Censures, and that to let the King see what
inclination they had to Concord, and how willing they were to do for his sake
what was possible, (a favor not to be yielded to any other whatsoever,) which
was in sum and in particular, that when the King should be assured and have
the firm word of the Pope, that he would totally take away the Censures, and
put an end to all these Controversies: the Repub. in gratification to his
Majesty, would render him the two Prisoners, although they were guilty of
great crimes, and would take away their Protestation, saving yet still their
public Reasons, and their Power to judge the Ecclesiastiques, when it should
be expedient for the State. In conformity of this, the Senate also answered the
Letter of the King, and gave order to their Ambass. Priuli to speak unto him.
The King thanked them, for that they had done for him what they would not for
any other; and said, that he was obliged to the Repub. for many good offices
which he had received from them, and particularly for that they had admitted
him into the body of their Nobility. And for that which they had done in his
favor, that he would give order to his Ambassador at Rome, to press the Pope
to be therewith contented: but that if he should not consent, and if nothing
remained but a Suspension of their Laws, he hoped they would herein also yeel
somewhat, seeing Fresne had written unto him that the Reasons which they urged
to the contrary were not pressing. The Ambass. Priuli replied, that they had
signified all that could be done to Fresne, but happily he had not written all:
and further he made remonstrance to his Majesty, what great prejudice was done
to the Authority of a Sovereign Prince, if he were constrained to change his
Laws at the pleasure of another passing from one Law to another, or to
acknowledge that he borrowes from another all power of Governing. Which
Discourse being amplified by the Ambassador, the King condescended to say,
that he would never persuade the Republique to do any thing against their
Liberty, their Dignity, and good Government.

At the same time when the Answer of the Senate was sent into France, the
Ambassador of Spain assaied to make the Republique yield to some particular,
and presenting himself to the Duke, exhorted him to a Composition: and
concluded, that it was necessary to grant something to the King his Master,
because if he might carry assurance of any satisfaction unto the Pope, he would
cast himself at his feet, to pray him for an end of these Differences, which
drew with them so great troubles; That the Pope was not contented with all that
had formerly been proposed, and therefore it was needful to give him more
ample Commission; that it was not sitting to stand upon small pointills with
the Pope, being the Vicar of Jesus Christ; consequently it was no shame to
yield unto him, and submit to his Will; that he would propose this ouerture, to
wit, that they should make him Auogador for two hours, during which time he
would so effectually work, that all the affairs should be accommodated. The
Duke demanded what he meant by being Auogador, and what he would put in
execution by means of that Charge? He answered, that they should first put him
in that Charge, according to the custom, which being done, he would to good
purpose use his Authority. And he adjoined, that it was not meet subtly to
go to work, when men are to Treat with the Pope, but only to be very humble,
abundant in satisfactions, submissions, and obedience toward his Holiness.

To this Proposition when the Senate deferred some days to answer, the
Ambassador appeared again, saying that he had very express commandments from
his King, to move the Repub. to give him some occasion that he might present
himself to the Pope: that he saw well the Republique to desire the agreement
no less than the Pope; that on both parts there wanted not good will, but all
consisted in the means to execute, which until that time neither was able or
willing to find; that in this affair, as in Paradise each one desired the
end, but none would use the means proper thereunto. When the Senate did not
answer to this Proposition, no more than to the former, the Ambassador well
judging, that if he pressed them too much, he might receive some unpleasing
answer, he signified unto them, that if they had not resolved to yield somewhat
according to his Petition, they should rather defer their answer, than reject
and deny him altogether.

But some days afterward, this Ambassador being sent for touching that which
happened at Durazzo (whereof we spoke before,) after they had treated of that
business, He modestly complained that as yet they had not answered his late
Propositions, adding yet that he did not demand an answer, although it appeared
that he desired it. To which the Prince by Decree of the Senate formerly made,
answered, That since they could do no more for the contentment of the Pope
than they had done, and so not satisfy him by an answer, they had resolved
(according to his desire) not to answer at all. D. Innigo replied, I will be
then for the present Auogador (said he) and I do Suspend the Answer which the
Senate has made me, to the end that they may better advise themselves, and at
length resolve to Suspend their Laws to gratify my King, and not the Pope.
And he endeavored to persuade by many Reasons, that as a Suspension at the
instance of the Pope might bring prejudice, so it could not be any way
prejudicial to do it in consideration of another Prince; and for example
alleged that his King, at the request of the King of France, Suspended the
Edict of thirty for an hundred, and did not esteem that it was any diminution
to his reputation: Wherefore he exhorted them to balance the Suspension (a
light thing) with the incommodities and dangers which might be caused by their
resolution, and made instance to have a new answer.

Whilst they were considering this Proposition, being still resolved to yield
nothing prejudicial to their Liberty, they received advice how the Pope had
erected in the beginning of September a new Congregation at Rome, called, The
Congregation of War, with order that it should be holden twice a week to
Treat upon the point of War: which gave matter of discourse not only in Rome,
but thorowout Italy. And first for the extraordinary Name of the Congregation
of War, it has been an ancient Custom of the Court of Rome, to cover the
managing of Temporal things under Colors and Names Spiritual, whereas here
on the contrary, the Pope being destitute of all means to make War (though he
had desire enough) made this vain ostentation of worldly Power, intitling this
Congregation with the proud Name of War. And men maruailed so much the more,
considering the quality of those Men where of this Congregation was composed,
who were all of a Profession utterly unexperienced and unfit for such affairs,
fifteen Cardinals being thereunto called; in the choice whereof the Pope
discovered in whom he placed his greatest confidence, all being of the Spanish
Faction. The names of these Cardinals were Como, Pinelli, Sauli, Camerino,
Sfondrato, Justinian, S. George, Arrigone, Visconte, Conti, Burghese, Sforza,
Montalth, Farnese and Cefis: Out of these he culled Four, to wit, Pinelli,
Justinian, S. George, and Cefis, to be employed with the Treasurer and the
Commissaries of the Chamber, about the means to provide money. He also Created
eight Cardinals in the middle of September, not without the astonishment of
godly Persons, and such as reverenced Antiquity, because he had not expected
the due time of Ember, which followed but a few days after. It is true
sometimes the Popes upon some urgent consideration, had formerly Created one or
two, or three Cardinals out of that Time, when it is far off, but this was
observed to be the first entire Promotion made out of Time, which had been
seasonable the next week following. These Cardinals newly Created, were the
Nuntio's of France and Spain, to the end that they might employ themselves
more zealously in his Service, by reason of this Honor which they had
received, and also that by this means they might have more credit with those
Princes. Two others were Caietan and Spinola, to serve himself of them in the
State Ecclefiasticall, upon the Frontiers of the State of Venice, as well
knowing their humor and disposition; To these were joined sour others, Lanti,
Auditor of the Chamber, Montreal, Maffei, and Ferratini, by whose Promotion
fell vacant many great Offices vendible in the Court of Rome.

This Promotion in no sort pleased the Ambassadors of France and Spain,
although this latter had reason to be content, for the Interests of his King;
since of this whole number of eight, there were at the least Six well affected
to that Crown. But that which displeased the Ambassador, was that his Brother
had been neglected, as also He of France was not well satisfied, because they
had not thought upon Villeroy his Father.

His Holiness rendered an account of this Promotion unto the King of Spain,
by his Nuntio, and on this occasion made new instances to that King to be aided
against the Republique, representing in a violent fashion (according to his
custom) the matters treated by Fresne, who said (as he fained) that at Venice
the Authority of the Catholic King was despised, and so did him no benefit:
for the King of France (who yet was his Friend, and employed himself for him
effectually) would take the contrary side, if he saw him thus joined with
Spain. But the Spaniards were too well advised to be swayed by such feeble
Reasons.

At Venice, by reason of this Congregation which the Pope had erected, the
Senate now clearly made answer to Cardenas the Ambassador of Spain; that it
was Notorious to all the World, that the Republique could not alter their Laws
in any sort, without great detriment to their Estate; that it seemed strange to
them why they should address themselves unto the Republique only, and make
Propositions so prejudicial, whilst on the other side they fomented the
pretensions of the Pope: that if their end were the repose of Italy and of
Christendom, they might clearly see the good affection of the Republique to
that purpose, and that the contrary signs appeared manifestly in the Pope:
that the most apparent was the Congregation newly formed for War, by which it
was evident where at they aimed, and that by the quality of them which he had
elected, he had showed sufficiently where he grounded his hopes. The Senate
also protested that they had no other end or intention, save only to defend
themselves, in which regard if they came to Arms, the Cause should proceed
merely from the Pope: Wherefore if the King of Spain desired the Peace, that
he should labor with the Pope, from whom arose the beginning and progress of
all these Troubles. They commended likewise the good Offices done by the
Ambassador for quietness, to which end if others elsewhere had employed
themselves with like intention and dexterity, things had not gone so far;
noting hereby the Marquis de Villena, of whom they were advertised even from
Spain, that he did not aim at Peace. They sent also a Currier with diligence
to Francis Priuli their Ambassador in Spain, commanding him to speak in like
manner to the King, and to his Ministers.

The same time Monsieur de Fresne was called by the Senate, with whom they
discoursed touching the Congregation of War newly erected, and of the Cardinals
whereof it consisted, who were ill affected to the Republique and not well to
France; wherein the Pope had testified his small respect of the most Christian
King, not expecting his answer, which they could not ascribe to any other cause
but the Popes purpose to pursue the Troubles, who was confident in the
declaration of Spain, not making account of any other, for the assistance and
forces which he expected from thence. Adjoining, that the Senate would
communicate with him in all confidence, as with the Ambassador of a King just
and their friend: that they were resolved to do what they could in their
defense, and to repel the injuries, promising themselves on the Kings part all
assistance for the common Service. The Ambassador complained of this
Congregation, and of the quality of those that were elected, as also for that
the Pope had not expected the answer of the King as he had promised. And
because he had then received answer from the King concerning that which the
Republique had yielded in gratification to his Majesty, he gave them thanks
for the Prisoners, and for the other things which they had promised: yet he
signified that there remained some doubt in the King that the Pope would hardly
be induced to revoke his Censures before the Suspension of the Laws, seeing
the Laws had given occasion to the Publication of the Censures; that his
Majesty had considered the Reasons of the Republique and approved them, and
that he would serve himself thereof in time and place, although he would not
contest with the Pope; who having cast himself into a precipice by evil
counsel, yet would not see the means to recover himself, and therefore often
recalled the word which he had once given, and all delay put him in doubt and
suspicion: Wherefore he exhorted them speedily to put an end unto the
Difference, which could not be done without suspending the execution of their
Laws, alleging for reason that this was nothing but a pure ceremony, and
should be done in gratificatio^ of the King, not of the Pope: That it should be
done to no other end, then to give some pretext unto the Pope to retire
himself with honor; and that happily in so doing there should be no speech of
the Prisoners nor the Protestation: That the King in all this protested he
desired not any whit to prejudice their Liberty and their Estate, as having for
end only the common good: That hereby they perceived his intentions to differ
from theirs who had requested the Pope to suffer no Composition but by their
means, the end whereof was to consume both the one part and the other. Fresne
adjoined, that when they should be forced to make War, the King would
readily serve the Republique, if they would communicate with him their Designs
as well offensive as defensive. He demanded also assurance, that they would
not treat of the Accord but by his Mediation, and by no other means, because
the King was not yet certain that the Pope would cast himself into the arms
of Spain: But if he should see him resolved to break, he knew well how to
restrain his fury, which he would do principally for the favor and good
intelligence which he had with the Republique; though if he had not so strict
an alliance with them, yet he was obliged by reason of State to assist them,
and oppose himself against their ruin. Upon this the Senate thought it
convenient, to procure a confirmation of all this from the Kings own mouth,
and therefore commanded their Ambassador Resident with him to do all that he
could to discover the mind of his Majesty, and to draw from him this
confirmation; entreating him that since the Pope relying upon the Spaniards and
others, did not cease to Arm, and because the times required, his Majesty
would be contented to use his authority to stop the course of these evils,
which if they should continue, the Republique could not but have recourse to
their true, ancient and approved Friends, among whom he was the Principal. And
when it should please him confidently to communicate with them his intentions,
they would send unto his Majesty a Person expressly to treat of
particularities. To this the King answered, that he had been desired by the
Nuntio in the name of the Pope, to declare himself for his Holiness; that he
would answer them in like manner as he had answered the Pope, to wit, that to
declare himself for either party wereto foment the Differences, and therefore
he would not favor the purposes of the one side or the other, as did the
Spaniards for their own advantage, but if they should disturb the public
tranquillity, in that case he would do what beseemed him, and as any one
might conjecture: but for the present they ought not to press such
Declarations, but rather study to prevent a rupture for to avoid the
incommodities of War, which none can comprehend but they that have tried them,
especially considering the danger of Religion which War imports. That for
these reasons it was fit to use all means not to interrupt the Treaty, nor to
render him incapable to conclude the agreement, as he should be if he declared
himself for the one or the other: that to send unto him an express Ambassador
was to render him suspected unto the Pope, and to give occasion to the
Spaniards to fill his mind with evil impressions.

Further, they communicated to the Ambassador of England, Resident at Venice,
the Preparations which the Pope made at Rome, and told him, that he might now
publish the Declaration of the King his Master, and procure the Succors which
he promised; accordingly they gave order to their Ambassador Justinian to treat
with the King. The English Ambassador testified very much contentment to do
this Office, affirming that it was to publish the glory of his King, which he
would do not only in Venice to all the Ministers of Princes, but also that by
his Letters he would diuulge the fame thereof thorowout the world. He also
prayed them to signify unto him their particular Designs, for that the King,
Himself, and other Ministers of his Majesty in all places would do their
uttermost in their behalf, and show their affection and open heart. He passed
further, and said, that it was necessary to put a speedy end to this affair,
which could not be attained but by one of these three means, either by
yielding, or referring the matter to Princes, or by War. That he saw well the
Republique had no mind to the first; and if they resolved to make a reference
to any, they could not make choice of any fitter then his King, who
maruellously well understood how much it imported to maintain the Authority
given by God to Princes. But if the matter should come to Arms, he prayed his
Serenitie to consider that though Philosophers say, the Sun warmes these
inferior bodies without heat in it self, yet in humane things it is not so;
but he that would heat others in his favor must first be hot himself.

Moreover, the Senate determined to signify unto all Princes the Declaration
of the King of England. But the King upon the Representation of the Ambassador
Justinian, answered, That he called God to witness, his resolution to defend
the Cause of the Republique, had no other end but the Service of God, and to
conserve the Liberty given by God to all Princes, and not for any evil will
which he carried to the Pope, being not moved by the particular Interest of the
Republique, but only so far as he knew they defended a Cause most just and
acceptable to God: which the more he considered in his mind, so much the more
was he confirmed in their Protection and Defense, not finding any apparent
shadow of Reason to relinquish them: that He had readily taken this resolution,
and would sustain it constantly; that He would not do as the Spaniards, who
by a Letter had filled the Popes Spirit with Vanity, to carry Him into a
precipice, but that He would execute with courage and sincerity what He had
promised. He considered also as a thing of great importance, that the Pope
prepared himself for the War, and had to this effect erected a Congregation
of men Disaffected to the Republique, and Dependents of Spain. To which He
added, that he would be as ready to perform his Promise, as to publish his
Declaration; and if it might turn to the good of the Republique, He would do
it with all possible Advantage, doing also good Offices in their behalf, with
all Princes his Friends and Allies; as with the King of Denmark, and the
Princes of Germany, from whom he hoped to draw some Succor. For the King of
Spain and the Archduke, he said it was to no purpose to speak unto them,
seeing that the Former had declared himself for the Pope, and the Latter
depended upon the former: that for France it was not necessary, because Spain
being for the Pope, it behooved that King more than others to consider it, and
to foresee the enterprises which might ensue against his Kingdom, so as
formerly he had experience: that if he believed the Defense of the Church to
appertain unto him, by reason of his Title of Most Christian, he might well
know that the Church herein was not endangered, but the Cause in common touched
the Liberty of Princes, by whom the Church was to be Protected and Maintained.
For conclusion, He said, that He would do more by effects than in words. And
accordingly he executed all that he had promised, Signifying by the Earl of
Salisbury unto the Ministers of Princes, which were with him, the resolution
which he had taken to Assist the Republique, and writing also as much unto the
Princes of Germany, and other his Friends.

Whilst these things were thus treated with Kings, and by them with the Pope,
the great Duke of Tuscany judged that it would be an action worthy of his great
Experience, if he assayed to finish that which was so difficult to two so great
Kings. Wherefore every week almost he spoke thereof to Robert Lio, Resident
with him; and caused his Resident Montagu in like manner to speak at Venice,
exhorting them to Peace and Concord for the good of Italy, and offering
himself to become the Mediator. To which they always answered with thanks,
and with this conclusion, that he should address himself rather to the Pope,
since the Republique had so far condescended, that the King of France had
thanked them. But the great Duke was not content with this Answer, which gave
no occasion for him to draw the affair to himself; and therefore he
complained with great dexterity, that he had profitably employed himself both
with the Pope, and with the Republique, without any correspondence on their
behalf: on the contrary, that on both sides he had received such words, which
if he had reported, they had been sufficient to trouble all the affair, and
to cut off hope of a Conclusion. That his meaning was not to give counsel unto
the Senate, knowing well their prudence, much less to enterprise to Treat with
the prejudice of other greater Princes, but to join with them for the Service
of God, and of Christendom: That he would therefore advertise the Republique
of all that the Pope had said in the last Audience to his Ambassador, which
was, that his Holiness could not, nor would consent unto the Conditions
proposed by the Ambassador of France; in as much as it should be to him a great
prejudice to receive the Republique to favor by the hands of any King, being
himself the Spiritual Head of the Church, to whom it is not sitting to
receive his Subjects at the hand of another: and so much the more, because
generally in any difficult between the Ecclesiastical Court and the Secular,
the Judgment thereof pertains to the Ecclesiastical, as to the more worthy.
That the Pope further said, that to receive the Prisoners by the hands of the
King, was to go backward, because some Venetian Prelates which were then at
Rome, had assured him that the Republique would willingly deliver them to
himself; That therefore he was resolved not to Suspend the Excommunication
before the Prisoners were delivered, and the Writings revoked which had been
published in favor of the Republique: that afterward he would be content the
Differences remaining might be examined at Rome by a Congregation of
Cardinals, Auditors, and Divines, whereof a part might be the Confidents of
the Republique, upon Condition notwithstanding that the King of France and the
great Duke would pass their word, that they would stand to that which was
determined by this Congregation: that although he had formerly condescended to
an Accord by a reciprocal Suspension, of his Monitory, and of the Laws of the
Republique, yet he could not execute this Accord, because it was not approved
by the Cardinals; That the Most Christian King had signified unto him, that
the Venetians ought to accept this Condition, but for himself, he was not
obliged: That if the Venetians had the aid of Heretics, he would have on his
part more Christians than men believed. That the great Duke signified these
particularities to the Republique, to let them see that there could be no worse
resolution than that which inclined them to War against the Pope, which must
needs be to their damage; for as much as whosoever contends in that kind with
him may lose much, but gain nothing which it shall not be meet doubly to
restore. That War is profitable to none, especially not to them who find
themselves in good estate, seeing it produces alterations, and easily men pass
therein from better to worse with little hope of returning. That if the King of
France treated in this Business with great zeal for the good of the
Republique, himself would not be inferior to him in a good desire to procure
the same, being their Friend, an Italian Prince, and a good man: That they
ought not to doubt, but if the War proceeded, the Pope would be assisted by
the Spaniards and others; and therefore to avoid the Troubles of Italy, which
might follow, he would persuade the Pope to be contented that all Differences
might be referred to the judgment of the Two Kings, and desired the Republique
to do the same; yea that he would counsel them to do this, not expecting the
Popes assent, considering that since it was certain the Pope would not consent
to this motion, because it was to submit himself to the judgment of another,
the Republique hereby might gain some advantage by putting the Pope in
diffidence with these Kings, and by taking away the courage of the Spaniards
for his assistance. And although the Pope should consent, yet the Republique
might be assured, that the Kings in the decision would have respect to their
own Interests, which were the same with those of the Republique. That of this
Proposition were not admitted, then be had another peradventure some what more
difficult, but which would certainly better succeed, if they would make some
small Expenses; which it behooved them not to reject, for as much as a
seasonable Expense is ordinarily very effectual. That he knew well what he
said, having a great Friend in Court, the Lord John Baptist Borghese, the Popes
Brother; that if they would give way, with a little silver he would assuredly
bring the Controversy to a good agreement. To these Proposuious the Senate
answered, after they had thanked the great Duke for the communication of all
that which he knew from Rome, as also for his good Offices, Counsels and
Discourses; that the inclination of the Republique to Peace was known to all
the World, in which they purposed still to continue, provided that they were
not constrained to do otherwise: also they had given hereof good Testimony,
seeing that not having no regard to Offenses received, and to the justice of
their Cause, which required that Injuries should be thoroughly repaied, before
they gave care to any Conditions of Peace; they had notwithstanding not only
kept open the way unto The Treaty, and harkned to the Propositions which had
been made, but had further yielded so far as they were able at the instance of
the Two Kings. And although they had done so much, and that the King of France
was not only fully satisfied touching their actions, but had also sent
expressly to thank them, yet nevertheless they could not yet see any effect of
the Treaty of that King with the Pope; and therefore the Republique was obliged
to stand to that which they had treated with the King, and expected what his
Majesty would do in the business, judging it not fit to interrupt the treaty
which he had enterprised: but in the mean while, that they would say
confidently, there were many and unavoidable difficulties in those things which
the Pope had signified unto him by his Ambassador. For touching the point of
the Prisoners, having given them unto the King, they had no more to do in
them, nor was it in them now to take any other resolution. And for that which
concerned the Writings, those of Rome being first published, and full of
injuries, reuilings and calumnies, whereunto they were of necessity to make
answer with modesty, it was not meet to urge them, if they did not first of
all, or at least at the same time, urge against those of Rome. For the
Congregation to which the Pope would remit the affair, it was not needful to
say much, the Republique being not accustomed to refer unto the decision of
another, such things as coucerne their Government. And for the other
Propositions of his Highness, since that the Popes fashion of proceeding gave
just suspicion that he was not disposed unto Peace, they could not examine
them, unless they had greater certainty of his intentions: and seeing all
former Treaties had produced no good effect, by reason of the Popes
inconstancy well known to his Highness, the Republique saw clearly it was
to no purpose to harken to any further propositions, or to oblige themselves by
their word in any points without a reciprocal assurance on his behalf. But
when (after the removing of the Censures) they should see any appearance of an
amicable temperame^t, which might efface the just apprehensions which they had
of his ordinary inconstancy, they would consider thereof advisedly, and end
all with resolution; that which could not be done so long as matters were
handled by discourse. To this answer made by the Resident in the name of the
Senate, the great Duke replied, that the Pope was not ill affected, although
happily some accidents had troubled him, which he could affirm out of his
certain knowledge: and that although he seemed to be altered, yet when his
Ambassador did represent unto him the things aforesaid, he confirmed them; and
he adjoined, that he had caused many Propositions to be made to the Republique,
and yet could not prevail to know their intentions: That it was meet to
understand the one the other; That treaties prepare the way to conclusions, and
that if they should trust him with any thing he would make use thereof to the
advantage of the Republique, his purpose being not to discover all at once unto
the Pope which he had to tell him, but to reserve a part to serve himself
thereof as occasion required, not meaning to do as others, who had not drawn
from the Pope any resolution, although they had proposed many things to his
advantage.

The interposing of so many Princes for the according of these Differences,
moved also the Emperor to have his part therein: and to this effect, he sent
in the beginning of October his Vice-Chancelor named Coraducci, to the
Ambassador of the Repub. Soranzo, Resident with him, for to tell him, that his
Majesty understanding that the Differences between the Pope and the
Republique were so far passed, that the agreement thereof was very difficult,
especially since the King of France seemed ready to forsake the Treaty,
Himself was once purposed for the good of Christendom (which he passionately
desired,) to employ himself for the settling of a Peace between the two
parties, if he had thought that his travel herein would be accepted, and that
he might perform it with honor: but since both of them were so resolute not
to yield any thing the one to the other, he could not hazard therein his
dignity and reputation. Soranzo answered, after he had thanked his Majesty;
that the Republique was ready to do all they could possibly to prevent the
trouble of the public Tranquillity, saving ever their Liberty, their
Dignity, and the Interests of their Estate: but that the Pope would needs carry
all, and pretended that all ought to yield unto his Will without any demurre or
contestation. The Vice Chancellor, after some Discourses upon the Points,
replied, that the Emperor would not demand any thing of the Republique which
might be against their Honor, and that he would send the Marquise of Castillon
with good instructions. After this the Nuntio of the Pope and the Ambassador of
Spain did all they could to cause the Emp. to decalre himself for the Pope;
to whom the Emperor freely answered, That He thought not fit to declare
himself for either part, or to make such offers as some had made by Letters
and other such Apparences, this tending to countenance and encourage very
exorbitant Pretensions; That He wished Peace might be established in any case,
and being resolved to bend himself this way, he would not do a thing whereby
Peace might be hindered. And in private, he gave the Ambass. of Spain to
understand, that for the public quiet of Christendom, the King his Master
ought to mortify in some sort the Pope, to the end that being reduced to
Reason, he might more easily admit the Peace. These things when the Ambassador
Soranzo had writ to Venice, he had charge to thank the Emp. and to certify
him of their inclination to Peace, and further to tell Him, that the Senate
would esteem it a great Honor, if his Majesty would be pleased to induce the
Pope to content himself with those offers which they had made by the means and
in consideration of the King of France.

FIFTH BOOK.
THE time was thus spent in Treaties, until the end of October, when the Pope
began to take into his consideration, that so long as this separation of the
Republique from his obedience continued, his reputation would be more and more
endamaged: because the Books written in their Defense had opened the eyes of
many, and the Liberty of Speech had made known the great Defects of the Court
of Rome, which formerly many men did not so well consider. Moreover, he
observed by Treating with the Spaniards upon the particularities of the
succors which they had promised, that the Effects were not answerable to their
Words, since they proposed hard Conditions; and further gave him to understand,
that it did not agree with the Piety of the Catholic King to be the cause of
a War in Italy: wherefore that he was not disposed to succor him but in case
that he should be assaulted. For these causes, the Pope resolving in himself
to see an end of this Affair he called Alincourt the Ambass. of France, to
whom he made a long Discourse, showing that he acknowledged all these
Disorders; and repeating the Damages and Preiudices which he suffered, with the
Dangers to which he was exposed, he testified his great desire of an Agreement
in any sort, assuring him to this effect of his good intention. And forasmuch
as it was not honorable for him to begin the motion, he promised to be ready
to accept any reasonable Proposition. He proceeded also to touch some
Particulars, but so as he seemed not willing to propound them.

Alincourt having communicated these things to the French Cardinals, they
advised to propose unto the Republique by Fresne a motion with these
Conditions; That the Pope should take away the Censures, after he had been
prayed in the name of the King and the Repub. and that first of all the
Interdict should be observed for the space of 4. or 5. days; That the
Prisoners should be rendered to the Pope by way of Gratification to the King;
That the Letters of the D. should be revoked; That the Writings published in
favor of the Repub. should be supprested; That the Religious gone out of the
State only by reason of the Interdict, should be reestablished; That they
should send an Ambassador to thank the Pope for opening the way unto a
friendly Treaty, That they should speak no more of reuoking or suspending the
Laws, but only of taking away the Censures; and for the difficulties
remaining between the Pope and the Republique, they should Treat as one Prince
with another; That a certain day might be prefixed, to the end that at the
same time the Republique and the Pope might do what was agreed upon, that
neither the one nor the other might be said to have begun first. Fresne made
accordingly these Propositions, having first confessed, that the Republique was
not in any necessity to admit the Accord for fear of being forced, because
he knew very well both the Power of the Republique, and the assistance which
they should have: But forasmuch as some of their Assistants were such as did
not acknowledge the Church of Rome, the Senate in their wisdom would think
meet not to make use of them, howsoever they readily offered themselves. The
Senate, when they had maturely considered all things, answered, that they were
contented the Pope might be prayed by the Ambassador of the King in the name of
the Republique to take away the Censures; That the Prisoners should be given
unto the King, without prejudice of the Reasons of the Republique; That for the
Protestation made by the Duke against the Monitorie of the Pope, it should not
fail to be retracted when the Censures were taken away. And for the other
Writings the Republique would do with them as the Pope with those which had
been made in Favor of him: That to observe the Interdict for one only hour
(not to speak of days) was to confess that it was valide: which being
untrue, they could not do it without offending God, and condemning the Actions
of the Republique, which were but just and lawful. For the Religious, that
this was no point of the Treaty, but only with his Holiness himself: That
the Censures being once removed, they would send an Ambassador to reside in
Rome according to the Custom. But all this upon condition that the Ministers
of the King would openly let them understand that they had assurance from the
Pope; because otherwise they did not mean to condescend to any thing, unless
they were assured that the Pope would accept the Condition. To this Fresne
replied, that he had not proposed these things if the Pope had not first given
his word; but he has given it, said he, and repeated four times, he has
given it: and adjoined, that although it was true, that Popes sometime give
themselves a License to retract their words, yet he believed that this Man
would constantly keep his, having given it. Wherefore he said, that he
accepted the Conditions, and took their word, to pray the Pope in the Name of
the King and of the Republique, to take away his Censures. And in like manner,
that they would send an Ambassador, who, according as the Pope had promised to
Alincourt, should be received with accustomed Honor. Adding, that he would
receive the Prisoners in the Name of the King, by way of mere Gratification,
and without prejudice of the Reasons of the Republique; that the Pope indeed
would not make hereof any Declaration, but that should rest upon the King, and
the Popes Declaration in this case was not needful to the Republique, in as
much as they Treated not with the Pope, but with the King. Concerning the
Religious, he said: I shall be for them indeed a cold Advocate, because they
cannot deny but they have committed a great error in disobeying their Prince
contrary to the Commandment of God, and seeing it behooves them especially to
Preach Obedience so straightly enjoined by God. Besides that having abandoned
their Country, wherein they were well treated and entertained, their ingratitude
herein is so intolerable, that if it belonged to me, I should cause them to be
decimated for example unto others. He added, That the facility of the
Republique was very great, in that they consented that their Ambassador might
Treat of their Matter with his Holiness. And concluded his Discourse, by
giving thanks in the Name of his King, for that which they had done to
gratify him, assuring them that he would acknowledge their good disposition to
public. Tranquillity, having in truth done as much as was convenient.

Whilst these things were thus treated, the King of France received advice of
the Popes inconstancy, and of the great Dukes practices to interpose himself
in the business, to whom the Pope gave care: whereupon he was displeased both
with the great Duke for meddling in his Negotiation, and also with the Pope,
commanding his Ambassador to make complaint unto him, and to show him that he
had but little confidence in his Holiness. And the King made the same
complaint unto Cardinal Barberino, the Popes Nuntio, Resident with him; and by
Fresne he told them at Venice, That he thanked the Senate for that they had
passed their word not to conclude the Affair by the Mediation of any other but
of him, although the Popes inconstancy constrained him to permit, that his
Serenitie might endeavor to do by other means what he could. But when
Alincourt had signified unto the Pope the commandment of the King, which was,
that his Majesty had charged him not to meddle further in the Affair of
Venice, seeing his Holiness imagined he could better accommodate the Business
by the Mediation of others: the Pope who was already advertised by Letters from
Cardinal Barberino, and prepared for his answer, excused himself, that he
could not hinder the zeal which some Others might have to determine this
business, and much less use inciuility by refusing their offers: but that
notwithstanding he had always great confidence in his Majesty, and his
Design was that all might be done by his hand: and he affirmed with many
oaths often repeated, that his intention was very good, and that he wished the
Business might be ended that very hour, if it were possible, and that not any
other besides the King might have part therein. And to show by effects the
truth of that which he said, he adjoined, that he would be content with the
Conditions proposed by his Majesty, and would firmly hold the word which he
had given, to erect a Congregation of Six Cardinals, and so many Auditors,
among whom he would put the Cardinals Delfin, Mantica, and Seraphin, and for
Auditors, Cuccina, and Marquemont. Alincourt here much maruailing, replied,
That no such thing had been formerly spoken off: But the Pope affirming the
contrary, the Ambassador modestly said, That he had not so understood it; and
that it was certain, the Republique was resolved not to refer themselves to
any Congregation After many Replies on either Part, the Pope was content to
give his word, that no more should be spoken of a Congregation; and then he
discoursed on the other Conditions, having first prayed Alincourt, for the love
of God to keep all secret, for as much as the Spaniards observed all that was
treated, to disturb it. He promised to take away the Censures, provided that
in exchange the Republique should give assurance to execute these Conditions;
That the Prisoners should be consigned into the hands of a Prelate, whom he
should name; That an Ambassador should come to demand that the Censures might
be removed, who should present himself with Alincourt, with promise that he
should be well treated and received; That on the day appointed they should
revoke the Protestation, with all that thereupon had followed; That the
Religious should be recalled; and that he might have assurance of the King,
that whilst the Ambassador should Treat with him, the Laws should not be
executed: Adding, that whatsoever he did herein, was for no other Reason, but
for the Dignity of the Sea Apostolic, and for his charge. And here he
enlarged himself with vehement words and gestures to persuade these
Propositions, adjoining notwithstanding, that he was not certain whether He
could in Consistory draw all the Cardinals to his opinion. Alincourt replied,
that for the Ambassador to be sent, no such Condition had been proposed. The
Pope said, that otherwise he could do nothing, this tending to conserve his
reputation, and to show the validity of the Excommunication. Alincourt made
answer, that reason concluded the contrary, in as much as the receiving of an
Ambassador with Honor and usual complements, rather implied the inualidity of
the Excommunication. But for all that he could say as well upon this point as
others, he could nothing prevail; for the Pope concluded, that thus he should
write to Fresne, and no otherwise. Who reporting these words unto the Senate,
added, That in this point he would not persuade them to one thing or to other,
but only demanded that he might have their answer.

The Duke immediately with vehemence complained, that in stead of approaching to
an end by these Treaties, things were further off, the Differences being
imbittered by this alteration of minds: since that the Pope being not willing
to hold his word, which he had given, this was openly to declare that he would
either do thus, or carry all; That it was little for the credit of so great a
King, to intermeddle in this Affair, since the word once given him was
revoked: Wherefore that it was not meet to labor any more, for it was nothing
but vainly to spend time, seeing that to yield that which the Pope Proposed,
was indeed to yield all the Cause, which if they had been willing to do, they
could have done it without any mediation of any Person. But the Senate to
satisfy the instance of the Ambassador, made him answer, that with
astonishment they understood the change of the Propositions, and that thereby
it was easy to see that the intention of the Pope was not such as he would
make the world believe, since the new Propositions were full of contrarieties
and insuperable difficulties. Touching the Prisoners, that they could render
them to satisfy the King, as a thing already accepted by his Majesty and
himself, nevertheless with this condition, that it should be without
prejudice; but that they could not consent to any of the other Propositions, as
being perilous and contrary to their Government; That to send before an
Ambassador, were to publish to all the World that they had erred, and that the
Excommunication was just, as contrarily to condemn of injustice all that which
the Republique had done in maintenance of their innocence: that to recall at
the same time the Religious, should be to make them triumph for an action of
disobedience, and for abandoning their Country, it being sufficient to remit
this Matter to be treated by their Ambassador with his Holiness, on this
particular many great occurrences being to be considered; That to demand
assurance of the King, that the Laws should not be executed, was a thing
unjust, and no less prejudicial to his Majesty, than to the Republique, who
were resolved to execute their Laws, and further clearly said, that they
would not give care to any Suspension or alteration of them in any part. For
when the World should see them executed, after the King had contrarily passed
his word, Men would have occasion to believe, either that the Republique had
failed in their Promise unto the King, or that he had bin moved too lightly,
and without ground to oblige his word. The Senate said further, that without
doubt the K. would not take in good part this alteration, which implied little
respect unto his Majesty, in whose regard the Republique had condescended as
far as they might: And although this manner of proceeding by the Pope might
(and happily ought) induce the Republique to retract all which hitherto they
had accorded, notwithstanding to make it appear that on their part they had
not failed to do all that was possible to prevent the trouble and disquiet of
Christendom, they had a good purpose to continue in their good disposition to
an Agreement, and constantly to stand by their word already given,
notwithstanding the inconstancy of the Pope, who if he would not yield to
reason, yet the Senate hoped to have still good intelligence with his Majesty;
for as much as they had testified the great esteem which they made of his
Mediation, for that they had in consideration of him remitted many of their
Interests. At the same time also the Senate gave the Ambassador to understand,
that upon his request all Presses at Venice had been stayed, and order given
that no Books upon this Difference should be imprinted: That nevertheless
from Rome and elsewhere came forth many Libels in behalf of the Pope, that the
Treatises written in favor of the Republique were condemned, the Authors and
Printers proceeded against by Censures, and other undue courses: and therefore
that they should be constrained, by way of necessary defense, to give liberty
unto their Printers, as before, to the end that their just Reasons might be
made known to all the World.

The time passed in these Negotiations until the middle of November, about
which time arrived at Venice, Don Francis de Castro, sent Ambassador
Extraordinary from the Catholic K. for to employ himself in the reconciling
of these Dissentions between the Pope and the Republique. From the beginning
they conceived in Spain, that it would be greatly aduantageous to their
affairs, to accommodate these Controversies: as well to prevent all occasions
of War in Italy, as because they saw the French to interpose in the business.
Wherefore after long deliberation to whom this Charge should be committed, the
King at last settled upon Don Francis de Castro, a Principal Person of great
Authority, having been Viceroy of Naples, and highly esteemed, as Nephew to
the Duke of Lerma. Yet he came not by and by, after he had order from Spain,
but stayed at Gaeta some days, because D. Innigo de Cardenas the Ordinary
Ambassador, being not well content with the coming of any Extraordinary, had
writ that as yet there was no appearance of Accord, and that they would hazard
the Reputation of the King, in sending an Extraordinary Ambassador. unless it
were some way necessary; seeing he had the Dukes word, that as well the
Soldiers already prepared, as they that should be levied hereafter, were not
to offend the Pope in any fashion, but only in defense of their Estate in case
of necessary. But the principal cause of his stay was to expect the Arrival
of Aiton the new Ambassador of the Catholic King at Rome, a Personage who had
great knowledge of this Affair, and who had charge to keep good
correspondence, in his Treating with the Pope, to the Negotiation of Don
Francis de Castro at Venice; which they could not hope from the Marquis de
Villena then Ambassador, for that he had too openly declared himself inclined
to the Intentions of the Pope, so far that he had disgusted them in Spain. The
Marquis had order from the King, to give the Pope to understand, that as his
Majesty would sustain the reputation of the Pope so far as was possible, so
had he no desire to have any manner of Wars in Italy; for this was not
behouefull either for his own service, or for the profit of the Sea
Apostolic which would receive in Italy an irreparable loss of respect and
obedience due unto it, (although it should carry away the victory,) by the
confluence of men of a diverse Religion, which would come to this War. The
Marqu^^ executed this commandment at the first Audience which he had of the
Pope. Another chief cause that delayed Don Francis de Castro was, for that he
expected some order from the Pope; who having built great Designs upon this
Ambass. would draw all that he could by the means of the French, holding for
certain that the Senate would be induced to yield something at the instance of
the Catholic King, besides that which they had already granted in favor of
the King most-Christian. Wherefore the Pope seeing he had obtained all that
could be by means of the King of France, (resolving with himself to end the
business upon those terms, although he could have no other,) deliberated to
give the last stroke, sending ample and secret Instructions to this
Extraordinary Ambassador of Spain. Which when he had received, he came to
Venice accompanied with many great Lords of the Realm of Naples, and with the
Secretary Cauezza Leale, whom the Ambassador at Rome had sent to him, as a
Minister of great wisdom and capacity. He had brought with him also the
Jesuit Cigala as a principal Instrument of the Embassage, but being better
advised he sent him back to Rome.

Don Francis being arrived at Venice, was extraordinarily honored by the
Republique, and defrayed at the cost of 100. Crowns by the day. This Lord had
no special Commission from the King touching the particulars of this Affair,
because he knew not in what case it was, and how to manage it effectually as
yet; but only he had Order to speak at first generally, to the end that
considering from day to day what was needful to be done, he might after
accordingly descend to particulars. Upon this Reason, in the public Audience,
where he was received with all demonstrations of Honor, he did not pass the
terms of Complements: and in the first which he had in private, he presented
the Letter of the King his Master of the 5. of August; wherein, after he had
testified his good Will toward the Republique, he added, That he had resolved
to send Don Francis de Castro to compose the Controversies which they had with
his Holiness, unto the contentment of the Republique. And Castro having
presented the Letter, said, That he was sent by the King for the desire which
he had of Peace, and for the good of the Republique, and of all Italy, in
favor of which he desired to do more if he could: That for himself he had
willingly undertaken this Charge, both in obedience to his Majesty, and for
the affection which he carried to the Repub. hoping easily to conclude a good
Peace with his Serenity, seeing he should meet with none of those three
Impediments, which usually render all Treaties difficult; which are, First, the
Passion or extraordinary Affection of him in whose name men Treat, or of him
who Treats: Secondly, the Inconvenience of the matter Treated: and Thirdly,
the incapacitie or want of good will in the Person with whom the Treaty is.
For, touching the first, it was certain that the King his Master was well
affected, and had no other aims but the common good: That the greatness of
the Republique was aduantageous to Him, as being the Bulwark of Christendom
against the power of the Turks. And for his own Person, he protested that he
was not come to use Deceit, being noble by Birth, and therefore obliged to
speak Truth above all things. Touching the second, the point of Treaty was for
Peace, a thing excellent, and for an Union with the Sea Apostolic, a thing
very profitable to the Republique, all Histories being full of the mutual good
offices which they have ever rendered the one to the other; as on the contrary,
their Disunion must needs be very pernicious to the Repub. for if their cause
were unjust, it would incense all Princes against them, and though it were
reasonable, yet was it not fit therefore to forget what Reverence men owe to
the Sovereign Bishop. Touching the third, that the Treaty here was with a
Senate of great Prudence, Lovers of Peace, enemies of Nouelty, who had been
always Authors of Tranquillity in Italy, not of any Troubles. He discoursed
further of the damages of War, and the mischiefs of Heresies, saying, that
although the Republique by their own strength and greatness could sustain
all sorts of violence, and were able to withstand sufficiently all that should
assault them, nevertheless other succors (although not expected or desired)
would uncalled offer themselves, and such, as might be suspected, hand to
dismiss, and so much more hurtful as Italy was in good estate, whence might
arise many corruptions which might put their Government in great danger. As
these things were considerable, so the King his Master accordingly had been
willing to advertise them thereof, for the affection which He and his
Ancestors ever have had to the Republique, and for that all are commonly
interessed in the Peace of Italy: and he prayed them to refer all matters to
some Arbiters, Himself and others: That the King did think himself obliged
by way of gratitude to interpose in this affair, as remembering that sometime
the Republique had interposed to accommodate some Differences between the
Emperor his Grand Father and the King his Father, and the Pope. That it was
very necessary for Princes to maintain their reputation, but yet they ought
not to deal too rigorously with the Pope* And D^ Francis, the better to
express the Kings vehement affection in this business, passed so far to say
in manner of exclamation: The King has so great a desire to compose this
Difference, that of his two Daughters he would be content to sacrifice the one,
if by that Sacrifice all Dissentions might be appeased. For conclusion, he
said, That he saw very well there (...) no other way to this end, but that the
Repub should in some sort satisfy the Pope; and that if he could conjecture
what would be acceptable to the Senate, he would willingly propose it, but
being not able to do it, that he would expect from his Serenitie some
temperament which he might carry unto the Pope, and he would labor with all
his power that it might be accepted; his purpose being not thereby to hinder
any Treaties already in hand, but rather to cooperate so far as he could,
inasmuch as it was not the intention of his King to take the Treaty out of the
hands of the King of France, as desiring naught else but that an Accord might
follow, which would be as pleasing to him if Others could perform it, as if he
Himself. To this the Senate answered, praising first the great piety of the
Catholic K. and his good will to Peace, and thanking his Majesty for his
good Offices to pacific these contentions; adjoining; that they saw willingly
and with much contentment his Ambassador, principally for the Person of the
King which he represented, also for the good will which the Duke of Lerma had
to the Republique and for the good correspondence and intelligence which the
Count of Lemos his Father did always hold with them. Then they passed to
particulars, saying, That they had used all kinds of humility and of respect
toward the Pope, and also done all good offices which might be desired, to the
end that he should no^ fall into this precipice, giving him many occasions and
means to see his danger; and after he had thus precipitated, yet they gave
care to althose that were willing to speak of an Agreement, and had
condescended to all which D^^ Innigo de Card enas proposed. On the other side
the Ecclesiastiques had let themselves loose to Injuries, that they had
published defamatorie Libels, Detractions, and railing speeches, not only in
printed Books, but in their Sermons made in the Cities neighboring upon the
State Moreover, that they had used all means to corrupt the Religion, and to
sow sedition amongst the People; briefly, they had attempted all sort of wicked
practices, both openly and in secret And for the Pope, they saw for the present
to great inconstancy in his actions, often recalling his own words, they saw
also his preparations for War, that they had occasion to fear, that he would
serve himself of time to gain advantage by the Treaty, and to make others
secure, having indeed no desire of Agreement. That for the time to come the
Rep. would do nothing but what was necessary for their defense, and to
repulse injuries; by consequent, that it was needless to persuade them to the
Peace so much required, but it was meet to address themselves to Him from whom
the evil proceeded, and who still was the cause that it was not remedied. Yet
notwithstanding, if besides that which had been done by the Republique (which
was more than they ought to have done,) He could advise them what to do more
(save still their Liberty, and without prejudice to their Government,) they
would not fail to show their good will in execution of it, as they had done to
others.

Don Francis replied, that he had nothing to answer for the Popes actions, or
of his intentions, much less what they ought to be, as being sent, not by Him,
but by the King his Master; from whom though he had order to procure with all
his power an Agreement, yet had he not Commission to descend to particulars.
And if he should resolve to write that he might receive order to this effect;
it would be a thing too tedious, and no way proportionable to the Affair which
required speedy resolution, and which with Time would grow worse and worse.
That he was a Stranger in the Business, and therefore not to be remembered of
what was past, but when the Senate would declare their will to him with
confidence, he would effectually propose it, and cause it to be accepted.

To this the Duke immediately answered, that when the Senate should understand
what the Pope desired, they could Treat and make declaration of their will; but
the way being shut up by reason of the Interdict, if that were not removed, no
good Treaty could possibly be furthered. Therefore since he desired to know the
intention of the Republique, that this it was, to wit, that all things might be
reestablished in that estate wherein they were before the Monitorie published,
and that the Pope would Treat with them, as a Father with his Children, so as
he was obliged, which if he had done, all men had been freed from all these
Troubles. Here D. Francis said, that this Proposition to restore all things to
their first estate, would be diversely interpreted, because the Republique
understood it, before the Censures, and the Pope without doubt would take it,
for the Time going before the Laws. Whereunto the Duke replied, saying, That
it sufficed to bring matters into such case, that the Treaty might be as
between the Father and the Sons, and that then by means of the Treaty other
things might easily be accommodated, as they had been ere then, if the Pope
had not despoiled himself of the quality of a Father, and taken that of an
Enemy. And though all were brought back to that estate wherein they were
before the Promulgation of the Laws, yet things had been then more easy to
accord, because they should have had to do with a Clement 8. or a Leo 11 who
had not occasioned these difficulties, as they did not any, although the Laws
in their time for the greater part were published: those Popes knowing right
well what was the Authority of a Prince, free and independent, and not mingling
themselves in any fashion in the Government of another. The Ambassador then
concluded, that he would make the Proposition to the Pope, and to that effect
employ himself.

The Senate considered that it was not meet to give an absolute repulse to an
Ambassador, sent expressly from so great a King, and for this particular
Affair; also that it should be inciuility, if they did not communicate with
him that which they had yielded in Favor of the Most Christian King, and which
might give him occasion to retire himself with discontent, seeing the small
care they had to correspond unto the good Offices by him done, a thing which
might be of ill consequence. Wherefore they determined to communicate all unto
him, first aduertising Fresne hereof, and giving him to understand that this
should not hinder the progress of the Treaty begun by the King his Master, for
as much as Don Francis de Castro had clearly said, that he would not pluck
the Treaty out of his hands; and although he had the same Design, yet the
Accord would be acknowledged entirely from his King. But Fresne understanding
the intention of the Senate, was not only well pleased with this communication,
but further said, That he esteemed it necessary, it being certain that the
Pope would communicate all unto the Spaniards, and therefore if they should
conceal what had passed, it might give occasion of diffidence; That for this
reason they might assure themselves, the King would rest content. To which he
added, that the Pope had entreated him by Alincourt, to be willing to join his
Offices with those of Don Francis de Castro; wherein he knew not what the Pope
intended, or whereat he aimed, and therefore had written that his Holiness
would further declare himself; because if his meaning were, that what his
Holiness and the Republique had yielded in Favor of the King his Master,
should be thought to be done in like manner in Favor of the King of Spain,
this was to alter all the Affair, to which he could not agree without express
Order from the King. Wherefore he approved their Commu^^cation with Don
Francis, so as they did not pass to any further Treaty, and that they did not
at his instance what had been already done for his King.

Don Francis de Castro being then called into the Senate before the Duke, they
read unto him all that had passed until that day, together with that which the
Pope had required of the Republique, and what they had yielded in Favor of the
King of France. Which when he had heard, he thanked the Senate for this
Communication, and for the confidence they had in him, adjoining, That for
further correspondence and to break the ice, which already began to melt, he
would propose a mean which to him seemed very proper speedily to end these
Controversies, which should not be any of those things which the Senate had
justly rejected, whereof it was impertinent to speak. And therefore ommitting
the reuocation or Suspension of their Laws indeed prejudicial to their
Liberty, he would Propose a Suspension only for a time, of five, four, or
three months, with Conditions very clear; That what the Republique did
herein, was only to open a way unto a Treaty, and out of an exceeding desire to
the Public quiet, and by way of Gratification to the Two Kings; That by so
doing, the Republique should be so far from receiving any loss or prejudice,
that on the contrary they should gain a great advantage, for that their hands
should not be tied to enter again into their former estate, and because a State
so well founded, and of such Antiquity, could not hereby receive alteration:
That the Repub. had condescended so far, as that no more could be desired. For,
touching the Prisoners, it was very reasonable that they should not be
rendered, but with a reservation of their Reasons; That, being content the Pope
might be prayed, the Republique therein had testified their Devotion: as also,
to send an Ambassador to Rome when the Censures were removed, was a notable
testimony of the good will of the Republique toward the Pope, wherewith He
ought to content himself, and he believed that at last he would be therewith
satisfied. But since all this did not bring matters to a conclusion, (as it
appeared that till then they had concluded nothing) he therefore proposed this
Suspension for a time, which (as it seemed to him) could bring no prejudice.
And he adjoined, that he would do his utmost endeavor, that an accord might
follow; and although the Marquess d'Aiton was very sufficient to treat this
affair with the Pope, notwithstanding, if it did seem good to them, that he
should send a Gentleman expressly to this end, or that himself should go in
Person, he was ready to do all that they should desire of him, so vehemently
did he long to see this Difference accommodate.

The Duke answered him, that he was very joyful to see his Lordship rest
satisfied, and that he acknowledged the sincerity of the Republique, together
with the Reverence they had to the Sea Apostolic in the form of their
Treating; as also how false it was which their Enemies had divulged, that the
Repub. purposed to separate themselves from the Church and Holy See. That
notwithstanding they were still minded to preserve their Liberty, with all that
which was necessary for the Tranquillity of the State. And seeing himself
confessed that they ha^ yielded very much, they did not think fit to admit of
any new Propositions, since they had done more than at the beginning they
purposed, and so much that he had an easy way opened to come to a Conclusion,
if he did not do murre upon what the Pope was every day purposing, his thoughts
having no bound or limit. For if to day he obtain one thing, to morrow he
demands another, saying, he craves but a very little for his reputation, and
then makes it appear that much contents him not. Upon this Reason, that the
Republique was resolved not to pass further, and rather to run a hazard of
any evil fortune, than submit their necks under the yoke, since they could
not be in worse case than so. That Princes their Friends ought no^ to desire of
the Republique what was not convenient, but only, according to the Proverb,
things honest: nor ought the hopes of the Pope to be fomented, by endeavoring
that he might obtain that which was not reasonable; considering that it was
not only the case of the Republique, but also of all other Princes.

The Senate having also heard the Proposition of Don Francis de Castro read,
made this answer; That the Suspension, as it was proposed, did absolutely
weaken the Power of Government, and therefore they could not possibly
condescend unto it: wherefore they were resolved not to give ear to such a
Proposition. But since that which was already yielded, afforded ample matter
for a Treaty, Don Francis might join himself with the French, and turn
himself to the Pope, who ought to be fully satisfied with the Conditions by
them granted. To which Don Francis replied, that his Master had not sent him to
the Pope, but to the Republique, and that his journey should be without fruit,
because the Pope would tell him that he brought no news, and that others had
made unto him the same Proposition: and that he came to no other end than to
persuade him to do that which he had refused at the instance of another; That
he could not make this journey but as from himself, since he had no charge
from the King to use therein his Name, but only in that which should be
granted upon his demand. And here he endeavored with great efficacy to
persuade the Suspension for a certain time, which formerly he proposed,
showing in the first place that it was a thing which could not bring them any
prejudice, for as much as they were not forced by any violence unto it, in
which case only their Liberty should be wronged, but it should be a pure
Gratification yielded by good will and that to suspend for a time, was not to
suspend absolutely, but was a petty thing, and of no consideration. Then
arguing from the Person of him from whom it was proposed, he said, the
Reputation of that great King should be much diminished, if he could nothing
prevail that he could not demand the Prisoners, considering that they were
already yielded to the King of France, in whose Favor having done this, it was
meet to do as much for his King, and the kindness would be equal, if they
granted unto him this Suspension. Withal Don Francis adjoined his own
particular Interests, saying That indeed he saw himself welcomed, and
entertained with many magnifice^t demo^strations of Honor, but all this he did
not esteem in regard of that Honor which he might have by according the
Dissentio^s. For if he obtained nothing, Men would believe that he was ignorant
how to Treat, or that he had been circumuented; and so much more necessary was
it for him to speed in this, being the first Negotiation by him made, wherein
if he did nothing, nor could prevail, his reputation, and that of the Duke of
Lerma his Uncle, would be much impaired. The Senate thought it expedient to
answer amply to this instance made with so much heat and affection, and
therefore clearly answered; That having already spoken at large touching the
preiudices which they foresaw voon the Suspension, the Senate believed that he
would have been therewith fully satisfied: but because he had taken the pains
to reply, and therein to show that he was not contented, for two Reasons, They
told him, for the first, that such a Suspension would not indeed be conceived
as forced from them, if there had not been an Excommunication preceding: but
so long as the Pope held the Scourge in his hand, and the Republique was
offended by the Censures, the offense being still without remedy, it could not
be said that they had freely consented to what was demanded: and that so much
the less, for that the Pope continued to refresh the wound by suggesting unto
the Ecclesiastiques, that they should endeavor to corrupt the people, to
scatter his tares, to multiply Writings and defamatorie Libels, willing by
these courses to constrain them to render themselves whence men might collect
that whatsoever passed on this fashion was not voluntary, or done out of
pleasure, but on the contrary that the Republique being not able to subsist any
longer had yielded, showing in effect by this Suspension that the Laws were
worthy of Censure; and so the Excommunication should take force and authority
and would appear lawful, which is not true; as also the world might believe,
that to avoid a plain and direct confession of their error, they had confessed
it indirectly by way of gratifying another: that upon just reason they had
always said, and did again repeat it, that when the Censures should be
removed, and a friendly Treaty prosecuted, then it was fit to speak of
gratifications, and the time would be proper to conclude. That the second
Reason was not of any consideration, to say that the Suspension for a time was
not any way prejudicial; it being no good consequence, that it brings no
prejudice at all, because not so much as a perpetual Suspension: as it
follows not that a man is no whit offended because he might be more: also
that the comparison was no better of the yielding of the Prisoners with the
Suspension of the Laws, since the one was but a Concession in a particular
case, but the Laws were general which comprehend infinite cases, and for this
reason they could not yield this to the King of France, howsoever he demanded
it very instantly, as they had yielded the Prisoners. Besides that the
Suspension would give men occasion to dispute of the thing suspended, and to
question their Liberty and Authority, and it was no small courtesy that the
Republique had promised to come to an amiable Treaty after the reuocation of
the Censures. Wherefore the Senate assured themselves that the Ambassador would
for these reasons rest satisfied, holding for certain that neither the
Catholic King nor himself had any purpose to do them prejudice, according
as they had many times protested; especially having nothing in his hands which
the Pope had yielded, nor any particular of the intentions of his Holiness,
neither special Commission from the King his Master. But that by the
communication made unto him, he had a spacious field to exercise himself with
the Pope, to the end that he might content himself with that which the
Republique had yielded, first for to gratify the King his Master, and then in
consideration of the King of France: who having always pursued the Treaty, had
obtained that at his request the Republique had granted all that might be, to
testify their good inclination to Peace, and their reverence toward the Holy
See, as they had done the like for the King Catholic, if he had entreated
them: and that they were induced to yield so far upon the assurance which was
given them, that by such means the whole business would be ended. That they
were willing to perform what had been yielded, upon condition that the
Censures should be revoked, which the Pope not being willing to do, the act of
the Senate was not irreuocable, but on the contrary both parties remained in
their first estate. Yet notwithstanding the mutabilitie of the Pope and his
incertitude, the Senate desirous to manifest their sincerity, would firmly
keep their word. Wherefore if Don Francis would make use of these concessions,
and join his offices with the French at Rome, happily he might obtain what
others could not, and so he should not return without success; on the
contrary, he should have a great part in the Accord, with the praise to have
accomplished by his first Negotiation so high an enterprise. That if the Senate
had been willing to yield a Suspension, all had been finished without the
interposing of any Person, and without his coming, since there remained
nothing for the Pope but to demand: which could not be called an Accord, the
advantage being all of one side, and on the side of him who had offended, which
ought to be quite contrary. That if he would turn to the Pope, he might at
least say something upon good ground of the Intention of the Pope; and
employing the authority of the King his Master, might happily obtain of his
Holiness to be contented with this ouerture, which of necessity must content
him, seeing that if the Senate could yield any farther, they would deal
plainly with him and acquaint him, although he had not any thing in hand from
the Pope, as is the custom of Ministers which interpose themselves, to take
the word of either Party, the better to conclude an Accord. Don Francis
repeated what he had already said, that he was not content with their answer,
to which he replied, that he did not Treat as an Ordinary Ambassador, who when
he has propounded and received answer, proceeds no further, and also that the
Affair it self was not ordinary: That he could not see by these discourses
what glory he could have by his Negotiation: That he was well entertained, much
visited and honored, but in the essential point he received no contentment:
That if he would go to Rome the Pope would say unto him, You do not bring any
new thing, for that which you offer was given by another: That it was meet to
distinguish his King from others, and to do in his consideration something
more, seeing he had sent him expressly, that which others had not done: That if
he had not any thing from the Pope, the reason was because he came from the
King his Master to the Republique to receive from them and to carry unto the
Pope something which might conserve both the Dignity of the Church, and the
Liberty of the Republique: That he did not know what the Pope desired, and if
he said he knew he should not say truth: That if the Pope had signified to
others his mind to agree upon the Conditions imparted to him, and after had
recalled his word, it appertained to him to defend himself; he desired to know
who were herein the Mediators, because in might be they had said something
which the Pope would deny that he spoke unto them. In the end, he prayed them
affectionately, to think anow upon that which he had said, and to make him
answer. But seeing they did not answer him at the present, he demanded to have
Audience in the Dukes chamber, because he hoped to find the Prince with less
assistance of Senators, and so to discourse more familiarly with him, or
because he believed he might say some what more proper for the Affair in the
absence of Don Innigo de Cardenas the Ordinary Ambassador, who greatly observed
to Treat with reputation convenient to the dignity of his King, Don Francis
therefore being come into the chamber of the Duke where the Senate were
assembled, accompanied only by the Duke de Vietri, he made in the first place
a long discourse of the favors and honors which he received daily from the
Republique, such as the Duke de Vietri said to be extraordinary. Then he said,
that he came into that private place to speak more freely and without so many
witnesses; and the substance of his Discourse was, That he had now been three
and forty days in Venice; where the people said, that he did nothing but play
the smell-feast: That he was young, and that the old ones would dispatch him
with good words without effects: That as he had a good affection for the
service of his Serenitie, so he desired to see the like on his part
reciprecally; but the Republique would propose nothing, nor accept that which
he had proposed, although the Reasons which he urged were so strong that they
were unanswerable; as well in concluding, that the Suspension required was a
small thing and easy to be granted, as in demonstrating that so much being
done at the Petition of the French, it was fit at least to do a little in
gratification of the Catholic King, which was no less worthy, no less
friendly; nor less officious toward the Republique. And here with much
eloquence (wherein verily he excelled) he proposed, repeated, and amplified the
same things, with the same reasons, making a formal Oration full of sentences
and conceits, enlarging principally the argument drawn from the reputation of
the King his Master, of the Duke of Lerma, and of Himself. To which the Duke
answered, and let him see that he had ample occasion to employ himself, and
purchase reputation by means of that which had been communicated to him, and
expounded more succinctly what the Senate had said, to wit, that Don Innigo had
been the first who had put the Difference in Treaty, and had caused them to
make the two first paces. Wherefore it could not be said that nothing had been
done in favor of Spain: but after Don Innigo passing no farther, and the King
of France interposing himself, this gave occasion to the Republique to go on
so far, to show themselves desirous of, Peace and full of respect to the Church
which thing they had also done at the instance of the Catholic King, if he
had continued his Offices. But although there passed many answers and replies
of Don Francis and the Duke de Vietri, yet in conclusion nothing was determined.

In the mean while at Rome, the Pope upon all occasions continued to make
instance with Alincourt, that the French Ministers would unite their Offices
with the Spaniards; which was diversely interpreted. Some said it was out of his
desire that the Accord might be effected, because he feared left, if they
proceeded severally, they might hinder one the other through reason sie, or
other respects, which ordinarily do not permit that any Affair come to good
end, which is handled by two Mediators, who do not communicate together.
Others said on the contrary, that to hinder all good success in the business,
he desired that it might be managed by the Spaniards and French, to the end
that one should undo what the other had done, which usually comes to pass,
when an Affair is undertaken jointly by those who have different ends and
interests, and when there is no likelihood that the one will yield to the
other. At Rome, Alincourt answered, that it was necessary to have first some
order and commandment from the King. And at Venice, Fresne was displeased,
that such a thought should come into the Popes head, saying openly, that he
knew not what end he had, unless it were his own advantage: but that he saw
well, this was nothing else but to cross the Treaty of the King his Master;
since having often proposed the Suspension, which the Pope said he demanded
only in appearance, and to have some color to preserve his Dignity and
Authority, the Senate had still denied it as a thing most preiudicall, and
therefore he saw not how they could now yield it: On the contrary, he requested
the Senate, when they had a purpose to grant more then they had done at the
instance of the King his Master, that it would please them to let him know it,
to the end that he might accordingly govern himself. Also when the resolution
given to Don Francis de Castro, that they would not in any sort condescend to
the Suspension, was communicated to him, he assured them his King in that
Matter would solicit them to farther.

Whilst these things were treated at Rome and a Venice, the Emperor continuing
in his purpose to interpose himself for the accommodating of this dissension,
resolved to give the charge hereof to the Duke of Sauoy, and to the Marquis of
Castillon, with some prerogative unto the Duke; but without touching any
particulars in their Commission, only in general giving them order to Treat
the Manner in what manner they should see fit; yet so same reserving himself,
that when there should happen any point of moment, they should give him advice,
and wait his answer. This his resolution being sent to the Republique, by their
Ambassador Soranzo, in the Name of his Majesty, the Senate writ back to the
Ambassador, that he should than he his Majesty for that it pleased him to
interpose in (...) Affair; as also for that he purposed to employ herein a
Prince of such note and eminency: But that he should persuade him to turn his
Offices toward the Pope, from whom proceeded all this stiffenesse: for so much
more facile as they were at Venice, the Pope was still so much more difficult.
It is certain that the Duke of Sauoy seeing what difficulties had passed in
the Treaties of Peace by the French and Spaniards, did think that himself
should overcome them, or at the least make his use of these occurrences to some
other effect. Wherefore that he might interpose with great Reputation, besides
the credit of his own Person (being a Prince of gre^^ consideration in Italy,)
he thought to ioy^^ thereunto this quality of One representing the Emperor,
together with the Kings of France (...) Spain. But in those two Kingdoms he
found many oppositions. The Spaniards dissuaded him, saying, That it was not
for the Reputation of himself, or of their King (to whom he was so nearly
Allied,) that he should run the hazard of doing nothing in this Business, as
there was evident danger. That notwithstanding all this, the King had granted
his desire, if he had known his intention in time, that he might have revoked
the Commissions given to Don Francis de Castro. But there wanted not some who
believed, that there was a more secret cause which moved the Spaniards
unwillingly to behold the Duke mingling himself in this Treaty, as judging
that he might have some Designs separate from theirs. Again, in France, the
Proposation of the Duke was holden for a Spanish Artifice, and therefore the
King excused himself that he could not grant him what he desired, saying, That
he had already appointed the Cardinal de Ioyeuse to accomplish the Treaty
begun by his Ambassadors: So the Duke had recourse only to the Imperial
Authority.

When this was signified unto the Pope, it was to him very welcome news; as
well because all those which interm^^ed in this Treaty did him an acceptable
courtesy, as also because the greatness of this Duke would give great
Reputation unto the Business. The Pope was resolved to come to a Concord, and
to do all he could to that purpose; nevertheless he desired to obtain the
best Conditions that he might possibly, and hoped that each one of these
Mediators would get something to his advantage* and further, if he should be
constrained to yield, he should seem to do it with less indignity, when h^
was swayed therein at the instance of so many great Princes. With these
Treaties the year 1606. passed.

January of the year following, although the Treaties were not intermitted,
ye^ seemed to approach to a Conclusion, notwithstanding in the Duchy of Milan,
and in the State of Venice, were made great preparations of Was, which gave
jealousy to all Italy. And the Pope, though he desired not to make any greater
provisions than formerly, contenting himself to rest his Reputation upon the
Spanish Arms, yet to show that he would not have War without his cost, he
obtained of the Genuois to make a levy of four thousand Corses, upon
condition that they should name the Captains, which yet took not effect.
Moreover, he sent by Fabricius Verallus, Bishop of Saint Souero, his Nuntie, a
Breue unto the Catholic Suisses, Wherein he gave them notice of his
Differences with the Senate of Venice, and the purpose he had to use temporal
Arms against the Republique, sine^ the Spiritual were not sufficient;
requiring (...) this effect a Regiment of three thousand footmen of their
Nation, and appointing fifteen thousand crowns to be answered at Milan by the
Merchants, to begin the levy. But this money was not sent to the Suisses, nor
any mention made afterward of the Levy.

The Spaniards to make it appear unto the Pope, that they did not only give
words unto the World, saw it necessary to show themselves at least prepared to
effects, although (as they testified, and as the event declared) they abhorred
to see any War in Italy. Yet the opinion of Men was that the Count de Fuentes
desired it, but could not alone bring it to pass, especially against the
liking of the Duke of Lerma, who was more potent with the King: nevertheless
he hoped that things once troubled would not so easily be pacified, and that
many accidents might fall out, which might force the King to come from shows
to actions. The 23. of December, arrived at Milan an extraordinary Currier,
with Letters of the eighth, and with Commission unto the Count, that he should
arm for to assist the Pope. Wherefore he gave order that after the Holydaies,
the Drums should be beaten to gather 3000. Italian foot, under Jews Palota a
Milanois, which was done with much diligence. But at the same time the Count
had another charge not to do any act of Hostility in Favor of the Pope,
without more express commandment. And the Ministers of the King upon the
dispatch of the Currier, said to the Ambassador of Venice, that they armed out
of reason of State, seeing the preparations of the Republique, assuring him
that they should not receive any incommodity from their Arms, unless they
were provoked. But the event did show, that that King had never any intention
to disturb the repose of Italy, as necessary for him as for all other Princes,
but only under pretense to take the Protection of the Pope, and to show that he
was the sole Supporter of the Sea Apostolic, to the end that the Pope might
cast himself into his arms, and when good occasion were offered that he might
set foot within the Fortresses of the Church, which after he would forsake at
his leisure (as he is accustomed.) The Count de Fuentes, either because it was
indeed his opinion, or that he might bring about things to his desire, writ
into Spain, that the money which he had was not sufficient to stay his
Soldiers, and that to make such shows without effects, would give disgust
unto the suspicious, a pretense unto the ill affected, and diminish their
reputation with those who could not abide apparences. To this he had answer
from Spain, that the King would have an Army of 25000. footmen, and 4000.
horse; that money should be sent, seeing it was necessary; in the mean while
that he should think of Arming, the Reputation of the King requiring, that as
he had been the last to begin, so he should be the first in readiness.

The first day of the year, the Count de Fuentes being gone to Mass, attended
by all the Gentlemen of the State, the first Trumpet sounded, and when they
took their leaves of him, he told them that they must be ready, because they
were shortly to be employed for the Service of his Majesty. He sent Spinello,
Master of the Camp, to Levy 3000 Neapolitanes, and the Ambassador Casale to
the Suisses, to draw 4000. men out of the Cantons, Confederate with the Crown
of Spain. And to this effect he sent 100000. crowns, to wit, 80000. for two
Pensions due long before, and 20000. as earnest money for the Leuy. He said
further, that he would have in readiness 4000 Spaniards, and 6000. Germans,
under the Lord Gandentio Madrucci, and 3000 Italians, which should make in all
20000. foot, to which he purposed to join 6000. horse, to make up the Body of
an Army. He dispatched from Milan the foresaid Madrucci for the Levy of
Germans, giving him 3000. Pistols for pay of the Principal: as also he sent
the Count Baltasar Bia to Parma and Modena, the Count Rogier Mariani to Mantua,
and the Governor of Lodi to Florence and Vrbine, to give notice unto those
Dukes that they ought to make ready an Army, and be ready upon all
occurrences: not signifying that it was to Assist the Pope. From the Duke of
Parma he had general words, that he would not fail to be ready upon occasions.
He sent to Genoa the Letters of the King, wherein he writ, that they should be
provided upon warning from the Count de Fuentes his Captain General; and
other Letters of the same King to the Archduke Albert, to the end that he
should furnish him with Captains and others, according as his service should
require. He held also continually Counsels of War, coming himself in
Person, and abiding there till four hours within night. Furthermore, he sent
Charles Maria Visconte into Germany, to the Archdukes and Catholic Princes,
to signify unto them the intention of the King, which was to be armed in
Italy. He caused a Bill to be imprinted, wherein he said he had need of 2000.
Pioners, 1884. Oxen, 157. Wagons; which the Commonalty of Milan, and the other
Territories refused, saying they were not obliged to such a charge, and also
not able, having otherwise so many burdens. And when they could not be heard
neither of the Senate, nor of the Magistrates, nor of the Count, they appealed
into Spain: Wherefore the Count gave order to remit the Oxen of the State, and
he procured 400 horses out of Flanders, not buying them, but only at the hire
of fifty Sous a day with harness and furniture fit to co^uey the Artillery. He
made also a view of Arms which were within the Magazins, where he found 1500.
Harness for the body, 2000. Harquebuzes, and 500. Muskets. He prohibited the
Ministers of the Pope to carry any Arms out of the State, and cancelled a
contract made with Tauerna, Brother of the Cardinal, for 4000. Harquebuzes and
1000. Muskets, the money to be paid, within three years, though they were
sold at so high a rate, that it was rather a ransom, than a bargain.
Notwithstanding, the Count conceived that Milan was not sufficient to furnish
him with Arms, whereof he might have need, wherefore he purposed to provide
himself from Brescia; but finding there impediment, he turned his thoughts
upon Spain whither he dispatched a Currier, demanding 100000. Muskets, which
were speedily granted He dispatched also Nicholas Doria Master of the Camp,
with 20000. Crowns, to assure him 3000. Wallons, who quickly returned without
doing any thing; because the Archduke having use of men for his own occasions
would not permit the Levy. He treated likewise with the Count of Emps to levy
4000. Lance-knights, to put them in Arms beyond the Mountains, and to oppose
the Lorraines, but nothing was executed. He caused a muster of Horsemen to be
made at Lodi and at Pauia, but they appeared all on borrowed horses; and to
provide himself of some good horse, besides the 250. light horse of the Guard,
and the ordinary Companies of soldiers (the number whereof exceeded not 200.)
he adjoined 600. Cuirasles well armed and mounted, although the bruit ran that
they were 800. Whereupon he had in foot 14000. men, and 650. horse. He made
account to lodge the Albanes, gathered out of the Realm of Naples, within the
State of Parma, and the Neapolitanes at Montferrat, the less to charge the
State of Milan.

All these Provisions could not be presently in readiness, but only in the
end of March arrived at Varese almost all the Germans, stout men and old
Soldiers, who had been in the Wars of Hungary, but were without Arms, bare
foot and naked, many being sick for want of necessaries, and it was thought
they had the Plague amongst them. After the Month of April, the Suisses began
to arrive at Lomellina, and being about the number of 3000. were sent to lodge
in the Territory of Lodi: and having no other means to lodge the 3000
Neapolitans, he thought to give them lodging in the Suburbs of Milan, which
highly offended the Nobility of Milan, complaining that their Privileges were
violated, and the Lieutenant of the Provisions gave him to understand that he
would not consent to this, making thereupon many Protestations. And certes in
all that space of time the Count found many obstacles. The other Ministers of
the Catholic King had little correspondence with him, so as Don Francis de
Castro did not communicate unto him any thing of that which he treated at
Venice. He had need of money, and the Commons of the State of Milan not only
did not obey him cheerfully, but even made resistance; so that the pleasure
which he took in Arming, was very much counterpoysed with many unpleasing
Accidents which fell out.

The Senate of Venice seeing the Spaniards to Arm themselves, could not in
reason of State remain without Forces which might be answerable to those of
their Enemies, Wherefore to meet with all occasions which might occur, they
sent to Padua, Verona, Brescia, Crema and Bergamo, 500000. Crowns, 100000. for
each City to prepare themselves for all Exigents. Unto the 9600. footmen, and
600. horse, and 150. horse of Albanes, they added 600. foot Italians, and 1000.
Albanes under Paul Ghini, and increased the Alban horse to the number of 1000.
men. Also order was given to Count Francis Martinengo to levy in the Confines
4000. French soldiers, and 600. Cuirasses, which they caused to come out of
file. To the 3. great Galleys was adjoined one other, and to the 38. light
Galleys they adjoined 5. in the Isles of the Lena^nt, and 12. more newly armed
at Venice. Also in the Isle of Candy upon command were armed 20 Galleys; and
Nicholas Sagredo Prouisor General by his prudence and dexterity, which was
singular in the managing of great Affairs, wrought in such sort that all was
done at the expense of private Gentlemen, which they executed with such
facility, that they were first of all ready. So that the Republique brought
together in all 75. light Galleys, and 4. great ones: and in this business
they did not find themselves in like case with the Pope, who was feign to use
prayers to many Princes for the maintenance of his reputation; because besides
the voluntary offers made to the Republique by a great number of the French
Nobility, the Turks themselves did all they could that their succors might
be accepted. For besides that which has been said by occasion of the sacking
of Durazzo in the beginning of the year, the second Vizier (the first being
then at the War of Soria,) sent for the Baylife, and gave him notice that the
Grand Seignor would send an Army to Sea in favor of the Affairs of the
Republique, and that already they had given order to all the Sangiacs of the
Confines to give them leave to draw out men of War and Munition: but that this
was nothing, that it was meet to come to effects and not only to stay upon
words. That to free themselves at once from all stratagems and dangers, the
Repub. ought to unite with them, to admit their powerful succor, and come to
a speedy execution. The Baylife thanked him and said, that as yet the Senate
had no purpose but to defend themselves, which they hoped to do by their own
Forces, and the aid of other Christians their Friends yet that he received
willingly their offer to suffer a levy of Christians their Subjects, with
vicutals.

Sometimes the Popes when they would excite all the world unto their succor,
were wont to take the pretext of Religion: but this Difference has now showed,
that if ever the Pope should be willing to move War under this color, he
would provoke more men against him then on his side. The Turks built great
Designs upon these Controversies, in so much that they ordained public fasts
and prayers for the continuance of Discord among Christians, and to thank God
for that he had given a Pope more favorable to them then any Mufti which they
could desire. The Republique well understood that it is not profitable to any
Prince to receive a great succor of a more puissant Empire, and therefore
took order to furnish themselves with Italians so many as were possible. Also
the Senate solicited a levy of 1800. Grisons, for which they had given order
many months before to their Resident with the Lords of the three Leagues;
commanding him to procure 6. Captains of that Nation, with 300. footmen for
every one, and to the same effect was sent a rich donatiue to each Captain.
This Levy was a little interrupted by the secret Counsel of those Lords,
saying, that it was necessary to give advice here of unto the Commons,
although the Resident showed that by the Capitulation of the League between
the Republique and them, the Levy might be made without further deliberation
with the Commons. Wherefore the Affair being not able to be concealed, but on
the contrary being observed by the ill affected, they essayed to hinder the
execution of it, scattering a rumor among the people, that so long as they
stood in difference with the Spaniards touching the Fort of Fuentes, it was not
expedient to exhaust the Country of men or good soldiers; and further they
frighted the more feeble, telling them, that this was to provoke the King of
Spain against their Nation; also they added to these bad offices, that the
Levy would not please the King of France, because the Captains were all of
the Privy Council, and well affected to France; and that when they were
departed, it was to be feared that others might creep into their places, not
well disposed either to the most Christian King or to the Republique. But when
at last these difficulties were surmounted, and there was some hope to effect
this Levy, there happened in the Month of September another hindrance, which was
a controversy between the Canton of Berne and the Bishop of Basil, upon an
exchange made by them of the land of Biel with some other: Wherefore being in
some fear that this question might come to Arms, the Suisses had written unto
the Grisons to be ready for their succor, and to depute some persons to go to
the Diet which was to be holden at Baden upon this matter. Some men imagined
that all this was done purposely by the Bishop against the Bernois, to hinder
all Leuies which the Repub. intended to make among the Suisses or Grisons: they
were more confirmed in this opinion, because some of the principal of Lucerne
used all their endeuouis with the Grisons, to the end that they should not
serve against the Pope. But being assembled at Pithac, they found by a
scrutinie of voices that the greater part consented to the Levy in favor of
the Republique absolutely, and others (the lesser number) consented thereto
upon condition that the Republique should declare what succors they would give
in recompense when they might be required, and among these the principal were
they of T^sane. The cause that made the Grisons so difficult, was, the Archduke
Maximilian Governor of Tirol, who for to assure himself of a strong passage,
commodious to go and come, in favor of the Spaniards, would fortify Venosta
whereof he gave a manifest sign, by causing all the passages which descend
from thence into the Vale Camonica to be sounded. And the Count Fuentes
designed to make himself Master of the Valtoline, having put 200. foot within
the sort, and other 200 in the three Parishes, and 200. more paid by the
Ecclesiastiques. But that which assured men's suspicion hereof, was an accident
very light, which was not accounted an accident, considering the realousie
where with the spirits of men were possessed: which was, that some soldiers
being fled from the Fort Fuente retired themselves into the Valtoline, whither
being pursued by a Band of others, till within the State of the Grisons, there
they were arrested, which beginning of a breach made men fear worse. Wherefore
they deliberated to send Vespasian de Salis with two others to govern the
Valtoline, and to place therein 1800 soldiers; and they committed to them of
Agnadina and Poschiauo the custody of the passage of Bormio, with purpose to
put therein 1600 soldiers, taken out of those who were appointed in Villages
to serve in War, and 600. in Chiauenna, which was executed in the beginning
of this year, upon the occasions which we shall mention hereafter. They
deliberated also to send Ambassadors to France, to Venice, and to the
Protestant Suisses, to know what succors they might expect from France, from
the Repub. and the Suisses, in case that any thing should be attempted against
their Liberty. They purposed to send to Venice, Hercules de Salis, with charge
to assure the Republique of the Levy, and to demand succors. They determined
likewise to require of the Count de Fuentes the restitution of the Prisoners,
which yet they had no hope to obtain; as also they made a dispatch unto the
Suisses Protestants to demand their assistance.

Salis then being arrived at Venice, presented himself unto the Duke, and
first complained, in the behalf of his Masters, of the enterprises which the
Pope made upon them: then promised the entertainment of the Capitulation; and
finally recounted the particular grieuances which they received from the
Spaniards, and the iealousies which they gave them, affirming that they further
menaced them to take the Valtoline. He adjoined that they were resolved not to
suffer any longer these Injuries, on the contrary that they would enterprise to
recover the Fort. That they prayed his Serenitie to declare what aid they would
afford them in this enterprise, which howsoever it seemed particularly to touch
his Masters, yet it imported happily more the liberty of all Italy. He said
moreover, that the King of France had declared himself, and that some of the
Protestant Suisses had imitated the King, and others expected what the Repub.
would do: that the Catholic Suisses held themselves neutrall. He touched also
particularly the great prejudice which the Republique should receive, in case
that the Spaniards should make themselves Masters of the Valtoline, or should
shut up that passage, or finally reduce the there Leagues to the ancient
Capitulation. In the end he repeated the resolution of those Peoples to deliver
themselves from all these enterprises, and persuaded the Republique to resolve
to give them powerful Assistance, alleging the examples of many things done
by Them to maintain the Liberty of Italy.

The answer to this Ambassador was a thanking of his Masters for their good
affection to the Republique, praising their resolution to defend themselves,
with promise to observe entirely the Treaty made with them, together with the
Succors agreed upon in it, assuring them that they should have all sorts of
Assistance from the Signiory, and having Treated with the King of France, as
Principal in this Business, they would further descend to particularities.

But besides the provisions made by the Republique for an Army by Sea, and
then Leuy of Italians, as we have said, the Senate having advice of the
Designs of Count Fuentes, gave commandment to their Ambassador in France, to
give account unto the King of the negotiation of Don Francis de Castro, of the
answer that was made him, and of the Order which the Count de Fuentes had
received by three Curriers to assist the Pope; together with his preparations,
and how he had begun with a Leuy of 3000. footmen, Italians, besides the other
of Germans, Suisses, Neapolitans and Spaniards; that it seemed the Pope
expecting these Forces had so often varied, giving words unto the K. without
inte^tion to keep them, and with design to revoke them. Wherefore that he
should entreat the King to declare himself, and what the Republique might
promise themselves from him, in case the Pope should not deal uprightly, which
it was necessary they should know speedily, and that his Ambassador in Rome
might tell the Pope thereof resolutely. This was communicated to Fresne, who
answered, that the King his Master knew, that the King of Spain sending Don
Francis de Castro was persuaded that the Republique would deny him nothing,
that so the agreement might pass by his hands; which was the cause that the
King of France had commanded Alincourt to speak reseruedly till he should see
what were the effects of the Treaty of Don Francis. But now, said Fresne, since
the Spaniards are defeated of their hopes, He must needs be moved, especially
since the Nuntio has complained in Spain, that the King has not favored the
Pope, but only with vain words; whereupon that King seeing his Reputation
impaired, has writ to the Count de Fuentes, and to his other Ministers to make
provision of Arms, to the end that his Holiness might know that he would
Assist him in effect, not only in words. That this resolution of the King of
Spain being published to all the World, and the advice which his Serenitie had
hereof, being conformable to that which the Most Christian King had received
from Spain, it seemed unto him now seasonable to unfold his Commissions. And
then he said, that the King commanded him to assure the Republique, that in
this occasion he would be their good Friend and Brother, as he was obliged to
show himself in time of need. And thereof as his Ambassador he assured them,
and promised the good will of the King. He added further that more then three
months before he had charge to Communicate unto them another thing, but to do
it in seasonable time, which time he thought was now come. And this was; that
the K. understood by good intelligence, that the Count Fuentes having a Design
to go armed into Paradise, was purposed to come into the Vicentine with 1500.
horse, and 10000. foot, and to take some places of strength (whereof he knew
not the names,) to divide the State of the Republique. That consequently it was
very fit to prevent him, and to kindle the fire first in the house of an
enemy; That his Majesty on this occasion proposed to make the Grisons come
down into the State of Milan; and he declared, that for to Treat this Affair,
Hercules de Salis was come to Venice not only with the consent, but by the
commandment of the King; adjoining, that if the Republique intended to assist
the Grisons, as he exhorted them to do, the King would openly declare himself
in the Difference which they had against the Pope: but that it was necessary
that the Republique should first resolve with themselves, before they proceeded
to a rupture with the Spaniards. Wherefore that it was not meet to break all
at once, on the sudden, but to gain time to make preparations, and to receive
Succors; and he believed that the Succors were ready for defense of the
Republique, and therefore it was necessary that they should declare what aids
in particular they desired in this occasion. That certainly the Republique
could do no less than sustain their Dignity by force, seeing that having
showed themselves sensible of the injuries received from the Pope, and having
notwithstanding condescended in Favor of the Most Christian King, so far as
they might; if at the present they should yield any further, it would appear
that they had been constant and made great shows, so long as men treated by
words, but that after the noise of the Spanish Armies they had basely relented.
And as the K. his Master was obliged, because they had done so much in his
consideration, so should he be free, if they should do for others what they
would not for him. And to the end that the Senate might not rest doubtful any
longer what was the final will of the Pope, Fresne said he would clearly
reveal it unto them, and this it was; That his Holiness would have the Kings
word, that the Laws should not be executed by the Republique, and that not by
way of Ceremony, but because his real intention was that it should be indeed
performed, until they might further Treat thereof, desiring to hasten the
Treaty unto a Conclusion, that it be not put off ad Kalendas Graecas; That he
would examine the Laws deliberately, with resolution to have them abrogated if
they were found unjust, but if he found them good and convenient, he would
enjoin the Ecclesiastiques by a Bull to observe them, as made by the Sea
Apostolic, and not as Laws of the Republique, who could not establish them:
Further, that his Holiness was firm and constant to have a restitution of all
the Religious, and specially of the Jesuits. He said moreover, that they
needed not to despair of an Agreement, if the Treaty were pursued (as it had
been begun) by the King his Master, whose Propositions were as different
from those of the Spaniards, as are those of a Friend and of an Enemy, in as
much as the Most Christian King did not enter into this Affair as obliged unto
the Pope: That notwithstanding it was necessary to surcease the Treaty for a
while, seeing it could not be continued, but with disadvantage, the Armies
being levied, and any show of fear would puff up the Spaniards with pride.
But if by their refusal they did occasion Don Francis de Castro to retire, the
King might then after continue the Treaty, wherein he would employ himself
with affection. And if they imagined the Pope might be won by fair means,
he judged fit that they should signify all unto the King by some express and
capable Person. The Senate answered (thanking the King for his good will, and
for this Declaration,) that they had not failed to put all in order both in the
Territory of Vicenza, and in all their State: And that the Count de Fuentes, or
whosoever should attempt any such enterprise, should find strong and able
resistance; That now nothing remained but that it would please the King to let
them see what the Republique might promise themselves from his Majesty, in
case that necessity should force them to break the Treaty, being still most
resolute to maintain their Liberty and Dignity given by God, until the last
breath without the least relenting; which they desired to know more
particularly, considering that the Provisions made, and still increased by the
Spaniards, required some assurance; that the Republique would powerfully assist
the Grisons, and immediately execute what they promised, so soon as they were
secured of Succor for their own indemnity, which they must be speedily,
desiring to have that Succor specified, that they might Treat thereof with his
Majesty, which they would do by means of their Ambassador Priuli, and if it
were needful they would send an Extraordinary: That touching the Treaties of
Don Francis de Castro, they had communicated all that was done to Fresne
himself, who confessed it necessary that they must give him an answer, which
he demanded continually with great instance. And it was very true that Don
Francis often presented himself, urging to have some answer to his Proposition.

For, the Holidaies were no sooner past, but he appeared in the Senate,
saying, That his thoughts were still bent on the Agreement, and that he had
spent already 53. days since his Arrival, during which he might say he had
done nothing, although he demanded but a very small thing, to wit, a Suspension
for some time, with which he was assured the Pope would be contented; That if
he would not, the Catholic King would cease to favor him, who wished indeed
the contentment of the Republique, but yet after that of the Pope; for whose
satisfaction, when the Repub. should have done somewhat in gratification of his
King, he would cast himself at the Popes feet, and would not rise till he had
obtained of his Holiness some Honorable satisfaction for the Repub. from whom
that did not suffice which had been yielded in Favor of the King of France,
since it stood not with the Dignity of the Catholic King to speak upon others
travails, and of things already rejected by the Pope. That he was not
unwilling therefore to join with the French Ambassador, for as much as his
King refused not Companions in this good work, but he desired to know what
kind of Union he might have with the French: that he expected answers more
clear and ample than had been given him. That desiring a good success in
this Affair, he had waited, and would yet wait with patience, but he looked
for some Declaration of what might be done by uniting himself with the French:
And that he would yet again solicit Fresne, to see whether yet he had a
purpose to demand of the Senate, that they might pass their word that the
Laws should not be executed, whilst the Accord was Treating. And if this
Proposition were not admitted, that he would resolve to take his last farewell
of his Commission, being already vexed and tired with so tedious delays, by
which he had acquired little Honor. There was not any week wherein Don
Francis did not once at least, but usually oftener, show himself in Senate,
with the same Proposition, notwithstanding that he had always the same Answer;
because he had continual Commandments from Spain, rather to press with
importunity these things, than to relent a whit. As also they charged the Count
de Fuentes to Arm, but with command not to move farther with out new Order,
although he were provoked by the Grisons, or by Others. And because Don Francis
offering to unite himself with the French, found not in them such
correspondence as he expected, he could not contain himself (about the end of
January) from complaining of the small respect which he had received from them;
saying, That assuredly the Pope would remove the Censures, provided that he
might have assurance that the Laws should not be executed; That they might and
ought to believe him herein, as having never varied in his Treaties. That the
Affair was in great disorder, because it had not been sincerely treated by
the Mediators, who howsoever they pretended a desire of Peace, yet peradventure
aimed at other ends; which could not be truly affirmed of his King, who had as
great interest in the Repose of Italy, as the Repub. That having so frequently
proposed these things to the Senate, it seemed to him high time for them to
return him an answer.

SIXTH BOOK.
DVring these Treaties at Venice, in France, the Ambassador Priuli proposed
unto the King that which the Senate had given him in charge, that it would
please his Majesty to declare him. himself. He answered, that it was yet not
convenient to do it, to the end that neither party should persevere in their
stiffenesse: That he had received Letters from all the Princes of Italy and
other Grandies, who prayed him to endeavor a conclusion of these Debates:
proposing unto him, that as the success herein could not but advance his
Glory, so to retire himself should be to draw upon him the fault of all
sinister effects which might follow. Therefore, that he had dispatched a
commandment to the Cardinal de Ioyeuse to pass into Italy, and effectually
to interpose in this business. To which the Ambassador replied, having
commended the good will of the King to Peace, that there appeared little
correspondence in the Pope, who prided himself in the promises of the
Spaniards: That he doubted not but They being for the Pope, his Majesty would
stand for the Repub. Fresne having given his word in his Name to that effect,
especially since the Republique at the instance of his Majesty were disposed
to assist the Grisons. Here the King said, that in assisting the Grisons the
Repub. should do themselves a good service, both to conserve the amity of
that Nation, and to keep the passage open: That Fresne had no commission from
him to come to particulars: That he knew no what he had said or promised, but
He understood himself not to be obliged: And further he saw clearly, that to
declare himself were nothing else but to loose his Authority with the Pope,
but of that he would make answer more particularly by Villeroy. Who after told
him from the King, that his Majesty having a good hope of the Agreement, lest
he should interrupt or trouble the Treaty (so long as any point thereof was a
foot) he would not declare himself: That for this reason he had writ to the
Card. de Ioyeuse that he should speedily go to Venice, and from thence to
Rome; in the mean while he would write to his Ambassador that he should
proceed with efficacy: And conformably to this he had given order to Fresne to
tell the Venetians: That the King had certain advice, that on the Popes part
there was not any difficulty touching the promises, and that with these
conditions mentioned, all Controversies might be accommodated, to wit, That the
Prisoners should be delivered into the hands of an Ecclesiastical Commissarie:
That an Ambass. should be sent toward the Pope, who being come to a place
appointed, the Pope would take away the Censures, as also the same day at
Venice they should take away the Protestation; and this being done, the
Ambassador should continue his journey, and be received at Rome according to
the ordinary custom, being not withstanding accompanied to the first Audience
by Alincourt. And because the Pope wished the Kings word that the Republique
should not use their Laws, the King was ready and desired to give it, so that
the Republique by some sign would give consent, to assure him that his word
should be executed: That for the Jesuits he believed the thing to be without
difficulty, howsoever the King speaking with the Ambassador Priuli had found
therein great resistance, and a stronger resolution then his Majesty expected,
so far that Priuli said, that sometimes the Republique had had all the Princes
of Europe banded against them, yet had not despaired nor had been willing
therefore to do themselves any prejudice: That nevertheless he hoped not to
find so great resistance from his Serenitie, but that in gratification of his
Majesty they would consent to these two Points. The Duke, considering the
preiudices which would come of these two things, immediately answered, That
this were to make the world believe that the Republique had committed some
fault; That it was a means to make them of Rome insolent, and give them
occasion to conceive Pretensions above all Princes, if they should thus carry
the matter against the Republique. That the Prisoners had been given to the
King, and to him it appertained to do with them as he pleased: But the
Republique could do nothing more, and would never consent to send an
Ambassador, before the Pope, by reuoking the Censures, had satisfied for the
injuries. That the offenses received from the Jesuits were too excessive, and
of too great importance, having instigated the Pope, and defamed the Republique
throughout all Christian States: That it was not meet to reestablish their
Enemies after the example of others, and if others had sometime done it, they
had been governed therein by their Interests, different from those of the
Repub. That every one knows what is fit for his own particular, and what is
done in one Estate is not therefore meet to be executed in all. For the
Cardinal de Ioyeuse if he came he should be very welcome and honorably
entertained, but they much more desired that he should turn himself toward
Rome, where his employment was much more necessary to reduce the Pope to point
of reason: because the Republique having yielded all that they could, there was
no more to be done, but at Rome, where the remainder ought to be Treated.

By all these Treaties it appeared that the Pope was little inclined to any
Concord, unless it might be with his great advantage, especially seeing the
Spaniards to continue their warlike provisions. But above all he gave a
manifest sign of a mind utterly auerse from Peace, when he declared the day
of January in full Consistory, that he would have War with the Republique of
Venice; That to this effect he had from the King of Spain 26000. foot, and
4000. horse, and named the Cardinal Borghese his Nephew to be his Legate with
1000. Crowns a Month for provision. This declaration of the Pope joined to
the preparations of the Spaniards, were little pleasing to the Princes of
Italy, and particularly to the Duke of Sauoy, the great Duke of Tuscany, and to
the Duke of Mantua; who considered very prudently, how much it imported, that
the Spaniards had so great forces in Italy, and that the Pope had cast himself
entirely into their hands. The Duke of Sauoy observed it so much more
iealously, because he had been iutreated by the Count Fuentes to fill up his
companies of horse, to receive within his Country some of his Troops, and to
put in his hands the Fortress of Carbonara, to hinder the Huguenots of France
to pass unto the succor of the Venetians: giving his word that so soon as
the Republique of Venice should be vanquished (which he said would be within
three Months,) he would withdraw his soldiers and leave the Country free;
wherewith the Duke was much grieved, and complained thereof in Spain. And the
Duke of Mantua being required to lodge the Neapolitans within Montferrat,
excused himself not only unto the Count but also to the King: who sent order
to Milan that the Duke should not be pressed. But to divert the course of these
disorders, the Duke of Sauoy Treated with the Pope by the Count de Verua his
Ambassador, that he would join himself with the great Duke of Tuscany, and
that they would put together good forces to succor him: and on the other side,
the same Duke signified to the Senate of Venice the offers which he had made
unto the Pope, protesting that he made them not to offend the Republique, or to
strengthen the Pope further for the War, but to the end that the Pope should
not wholly cast himself into the hands of Spaniards.

But the Pope did not take in good part this Embassage of the Count de Verua:
on the contrary, he maruailed that his Master did not joy ne his intention with
the Spaniards. Wherefore he began to suspect his journey to Venice, and wished
him to consider that for the obstinacy (so he spoke) of the Venetians nothing
could be done, and therefore exhorted him not to hazard so his reputation.

In Spain the Duke of Lerma complained to the Ambassador of England of the
Demonstrations of assistance which his King had made in favor of the
Republique, saying, that they had not showed themselves so resolute against the
Pope, if they had not been encouraged by his King; because from France they
could expect nothing but words, or peradventure some Troops hired with their
own silver. He said also that the King his Master opposed himself to the
Treaty of Peace with the Hollanders, to enfeeble so much the more the Succors
which the Pope might otherwise have from Spain: but that the Catholic King
would abandon all other enterprises to increase his power for the maintenance
of Religion: That not withstanding he hoped to be able for the service of God
to do both the one and the other, making ready 50000. soldiers which would
suffice both for Italy and the Low Countries: That he would levy 45. Companies
of foot to send into Italy under Don Ferdinand of Toledo: That he would draw
the men of War out of Sicily, Naples, and Milan, and gather more out of
Germany and Suisserland, being resolved not to aband on the Pope: That he
would have the King of Great-Britaine understand, that the aid which he
intended to the Republique should be to small purpose, forasmuch as they had
not forces answerable to report: That their great treasure was a brag: That
their subjects were discontent, and desirous to change the Government. That the
Signiory had no Captains of reputation, the Catholic King having with him
all the Italian Princes, unless they had recourse to some heretical Prince,
which would render them odious both to the People and the Soldiers. All this
was spoken, to the end that the Republique, seeing themselves forsaken by all,
should yield more easily to that which the Pope desired.

Now at Venice men believed for certain, that the Differences with Rome could
not admit of any Concord, and that the present year would not pass with such
tranquillity as the former had enjoined, which was wholly spent in Treaties
and Disputes. Which they feared so much the more, because the Leuies of men of
War within the State of Milan every day increased. And though some imagined
undoubtedly (as also the event afterward showed,) that all this was done to no
other end then to constrain the Republique only for fear to yield unto the
Popes demands, or rather by these apparences to give him content or to oblige
him farther; not withstanding this produced a contrary effect in the spirits of
the Venetians, who resolved to hasten with more courage the preparations of
War, and to make ready all their Troops, Italians and Albans, with some
others of the Vltramontans. They determined also to elect a Secretary to be
sent to the Count de Vaudemont, as well to give the first pay to the soldiers,
as to write unto him that he was to begin the Levy: and they elected John
Baptista Padauin, who had been employed to the same effect in the year 1601.
who had Commission to make a Levy of 6000. footmen, to wit, 3000. French,
Lorraines and Wallons, and 3000. Dutch, although afterward he had
commandment to let the Dutch alone, and to levy 3000. natural Suisses, to
whom he was enjoined by the way to communicate the Differences of the
Republique, and the occasions which they had to make use of their Nation; and
in particular he had charge to do these offices at Zurich, Basil and Berne,
without lingering, that he might quickly pass to Nancy, which was the
principal aim of his journey.

Verdelli being still at Venice, where he had been since April of the former
year, it was determined to let him know, that if the Controversies with the
Pope passed on further, the Republique should have need to serve themselves of
men beyond the Mountains; and therefore that he should advertise the Count de
Vaudemont his Master, to take so good order with his Affairs, that he might on
all occasions cause to pass into Italy such numbers of Soldiers, as the
Republique should require for their service. Verdelli answered, that the men
were ready, and that they should be more troubled to retain them that were
superfluous, than to send them that were required: That for the passage, the
Count his Master would let them pass securely by the way of the Suisses and
Grisons. And he said moreover, that it was fit to give advice to the Duke of
Lorraine touching the occurrences and state of the Business, and that he would
take it as a singular favor, Which accordingly the Senate executed speedily,
commanding their Ambassador, who was with the Most Christian King, to send to
Lorraine, and to signify unto those Princes the state of the Republique, to
make remonstrance of their most just Reasons, and the wrongs which they had
suffered by the Pope: and to let that Count understand, that he should provide
things necessary, to the end that when the time should require, and when the
Republique should give him notice, he might be ready to transport Soldiers
which should be demanded.

When the Ambass. of Venice in France received this commandment, the Count de
Vaudemont was at Paris with the King, to advise him of the Marriage of the Duke
of Bar his Brother, with the Daughter of the Duke of Mantua: wherefore the
Ambassador had opportunity to advertise him according to his charge. To which
he answered that the Reasons of the Republique were full of honesty, and the
instances of the Pope very unreasonable, and that he would not fail to send
such numbers of Soldiers as were required. The Ambassador also sent to the
Duke of Lorraine the Secretary Dominico Dominici, who being arrived the second
of June at Nancy, communicated unto the Duke what had passed between the Pope
and the Republique, and the great Reasons which urged the Republique to
maintain their Laws, and their ancient Authority to judge the
Ecclesiastiques. The Duke testified, that he received gratefully the Honor
which the Republique had done him in this Communication, and enlarged himself
amply in the praises of their Prudence, and of their Religion; adjoining for
the particulars of the matters in dispute, that if the Cardinal his Son
would make purchases within his Lands without his permission, he would not
endure it. And for judging Ecclesiastiques, he said, That it was practiced in
his Estate, and in all France: and as it was meet for them to surpass others
in innocence, so ought they so much more to be restrained to right courses by
fear of pains. Touching the Soldiers which they desired, he answered that
the Count his Son was at the Service of the Republique, as also all his horse
should be ready to the same purpose. Thus all things remained till the
beginning of October, at which time the Prisoners were rendered in
gratification to the King of France; but the Republique seeing that what they
had done, did not produce any good effect, they gave order a new to the Ambass.
in France. to send his Secretary into Lorraine, to give account unto the Duke
of the state of their affairs, of the Popes obstinacy, and that if things
passed further, the Republique should be constrained to provide Soldiers
beyond the Mountains. The Duke exhorted the Republique by many reasons to an
agreement, adding nevertheless that in case of a rupture he would perform
what he had promised, believing the Count to be of the same mind; with whom
the Secretary (who was Christopher Suriano) did not Communicate because he was
then in England.

This was the state of things until January of this present year, when in the
universal concourse of all the Princes of Christendom, who interposed in this
Treaty, the Duke of Lorraine desiring to make one, sent to Venice Mounfieur de
Marinuille to exhort the Republique unto an accord. To whom they answered, as
they had done to others, and gave him advice of the Commission given to the
Secretary Padauin, and what confidence they had in the diligence and good will
of the Count, to execute what the Republique had ordered.

The Secretary Padauin passing by the Country of the Grisons, (which he found
all in commotion for fear of the Count de Fuentes,) arrived at Glaris a
Canton, which confineth upon the Grisons, mixed of Catholics and Protestants;
where he found that the Count de Fuentes had with silver corrupted the Counsel
to be of the Spanish party, but the people would not consent to the
Proposition. Padauin visited the Lords, and made known unto them the Reasons
of the Republique, and told them, they desired to serve themselves of some men
of their Nation. They promised to assemble the Counsel, to give him all
satisfaction for the Leuy, and approved his Reasons, as did also those of the
Counsel of Zurich, who manifested their intention and consent both to the
Leuy, and to give passage, saying, That they had prohibited their people to go
to any War, not with purpose to oppose the demands of France or Venice, but
to the end that they might not go for the Canton of Friburg against that of
Berne, about a difference moved by the Jesuits between those two Cantons, by
reason of certain Bailywikes. In all these places Padauin was received and
welcomed with much Honor, and found generally a good disposition to satisfy
and serve the Republique. Yet he did not proceed to any Treaty, because the
time permitted not, hasting himself to pass to Nancy. And for as much as by
occasion of the Differences between Friburge and Berne, the Deputies of the
Cantons were assembled at Soloturn he did not go to Beroe, lest passing from
thence to other places whither he was sent on these Affairs, even to the
Cantons confederate and not confederate with Spain, he might give occasion to
suspicions, or cause some diffidence or displeasure, which might bring
prejudice to his Negotiation. At Basil he found Verdelli sent by the Count de
Vaudement to meet with him, who told him, that the Count was retired into the
County of Salma, a Fief of the Empire, not depending on the Duchy of Lorraine,
which had been given him in Marriage by his Wife, to absent himself from
Nancy, where the Duke, the Cardinal, and all the House of Lorraine had
received Breues. from the Pope, full of odious terms against the Republique,
concluding, that by their Arms they ought not to soment Disobedience and
Rebellion against the Church; by which means all of them, and particularly the
Cardinal, vexed him with solicitations that he should not serve the
Republique in this occasion; and those persuasions were accompanied with others
from the Archduke Albert, and the Duke of Bauier. He added also, that even in
Nancy there were many who did move to the same effect, and some Ecclefiastiques
at the instance of the Jesuits did practice (...) make a collection among
themselves, and among some Gentlemen devoted to those Fathers, to assure the
Count of an yearly Assignment of 12000. Crowns, to turn him from the service
of the Republique, which was one of the principal causes of his retiring. He
said further, that the Count had prepared his men in readiness, if he had not
believed that the Questions would have been accommodated; to which purpose he
had staid in his small Country some numbers of Soldiers, where he appointed to
unite his Troops which were scattered, and had given order to make a Levy of
1000. S^^^ses, whereof he named the Captains: That (...) would further provide
himself, but that it would not be good to pass too speedily; That by his
presence at Nancy, he had rather increased than diminished the difficulties
caused by the evil offices of the Jesuits. This difficulty found Padauin in
the success of his journey.

But at Basil he received a very favorable answer from the Counsel as
touching the Levy, but for the passage it was told him, that it was meet to
expect the return of the Deputies from Soloturn, because Basil being the gate
of Heluetia, they ought to have the consent of their Allies before they
suffered any foreign Soldiers to enter.

At Soloturn a Gentleman appeared in the Name of the Archduke Maximilian, who
said, that his Master understanding of the Journey of the Secretary of Venice,
to obtain a Levy and a passage, demanded that both might be denied; which
demand he made for his zeal to Religion, and for the quiet of Heluetia and
their neighbors, principally for his Estates of Alsatia, by which they of
Lorraine must pass. This instance was favored by the Catholic Cantons, and
especially with great heat by the Son of the Colonel Lusi of Under walden,
who had been dismissed by the Republique, for the small contentment they found
in him. But the Protestant Cantons opposed themselves, saying, that it was not
the Custom of that Nation to deny passage to those who would not any way
endamage the Country, or bring prejudice to their Neighbors or Friends: On
the contrary, that without danger or trouble the Lorraines might pass orderly
without insolence, and without Harquebuzes, being no way reasonable to forbid
them passage, seeing it had been yielded two years before unto the Spaniards
going into Flanders.

To return to the Secretary Padauin; Verdeut seeing him resolved to speak
with the Count de Vaudemont, to divert him from Nancy, he conducted him to
Badonuille, a place in the County of Salma, where not finding the Count, he was
welcomed and defrayed by Therel his Secretary and Treasurer; but he
discontentedly made his plaint to Verdelli, saying, That it would seem very
strange to the Republique, that their Minister should be thus hindered, in the
Affairs of the Signiory, by one who was obliged to do them Service,
especially being further to Treat with the Duke and his other Children; and
thereupon complained also of the Duke. Verdelli excused the Duke, as knowing
nothing hereof, and that the Count was very well disposed, but his Servants had
found means to stop him, to avoid many evil accidents; and especially the
Cardinal was the cause, who for his Interests was a Partisan of Rome. All
these discourses did not satisfy Padauin; wherefore Verdelli resolved himself
to go in post to Nancy, from whence he would write for him to come, and that he
would come to meet him; as he did in the Ca^^ach of the Duke, and told him that
he should be very welcome to all, and that the Cardinal would even embrace him
without scruple, offering himself to interpose for a peace, because the Pope
desired it. Verdelli further declared to Padauin, how the Pope had writ a Breue
unto the Cardinal, wherein he charged him to command Friar Verdellia Knight of
Saint John of Jerusalem, that he should not make any levy of men for the
Republique of Venice, who were refractarie to his commandments, which the
Cardinal had intimated unto him, setting before his eyes his own interests,
and those of his Fraternity. And that Mounsieur de Maliana father to a
Chamberlain of the Popes, offered him the first vacant Commendam to make him
desist from his enterprises. But that he answered, that seeing he levied not
men for to command them, nor at his own expense, he might do it without
scruple. Padauin also had advice at Nancy, that the Canton of Zurich had
granted the passage, and the Levy absolutely, declaring the Cause of the
Republique to be as just, as that of the Pope unjust and violent. Likewise that
Basil and Berne had freely granted the passage without condition, and for the
Levy they had done the same, only reserving to speak with him by word of
mouth to consult about security for the payment of stipends and touching the
conditions, according to the custom of that Nation, who will not admit of
Captains but only such as are Natives of their Country.

Padauin had Audience of the Count de Vaudemont, and declared his Commission,
reporting unto him what he had Treated with them of Zurich and the other
Suisses, and gave him to understand that the money was ready for the Leuies,
and that now nothing wanted but to come to execution. The Count answered coldly
that he would do his duty, and take care to Treat the other particulars, but
he prayed him to consider that he was only a Son in the Family, and that he
depended upon his Father, with whom it was necessary first to speak. The
Secretary replied that he had order so to do; and two days after he had
Audience of the Duke, and said unto him in the first place, that the Republique
did well accept the sending of Marinuille, and the zeal which he had showed to
public Tranquillity, from which the Republique was never auerse; but that the
Preparations of the Pope and of others in his favor, constrained them to do
the same for their conservation. The Duke answered, that he had sent Marinnille
with good intention, and that it pleased him well that he was accepted: He
exhorted them to Peace, and said, That he was busied about the Assembly of the
States of Lorraine, to be holden at Nancy, in such sort that he had not leisure
to think upon any other particular Affairs. Padauin did also his complements
to the Duke of Bar; and requiring the Cardinal to give him Audience, he
answered, That he would willingly hear him if he would Treat how to end these
Controversies, but for simple Complements he could not admit them, because of
the Dignity of Cardinal which he had, and lest it might give occasion of
Discourse. The Cardinal upon this occasion dispatched a Currier to Rome,
giving advice of the coming of Secretary Padauin, and of the quantity of
silver which he brought, together with the preparatiues which were made in
diverse places, as also the answer which Verdelli had given him. Padauin knew
well the great instances which the Count had from diverse Persons, to hinder him
from serving the Republique in this particular. The Pope also had renewed his
Instances by other Breues, complaining that a Son of the House of Lorraine
would take Arms against the Church to maintain Rebels in their obstinacy,
especially having no obligation to this Service, the seven years being now
expired during which he had obliged himself. He offered him further to make
him Confalonier (that is, chief Standard Bearer,) of the Church beyond the
Mounts (a new title, which cost the Pope nothing.)

The great Duchess his Sister writ unto him, that he should not, by serving in
favor of the Republique, cause in the end a War damageable to his Friends
and prejudicial to all Christendom: putting him in mind that he had but one
Soul, and that he ought to do any thing to save it, and not to lose it: That
he should take good heed how he thrust himself so far forward that after he
could not retire himself That he would not be the cause of combustion in
Italy, it being much better for him to restore all that he had received of the
Republique, then to enrangle, himself so dangerously. And the Card. to obtain
from the Pope certain Benefires at which he aimed, did all he could in his
favor, and was instant with the Duke his Father, that it was not for his good
that the Count should bear Arms against the Pope: That the Republique could
not complain, forasmuch as by the nomination of Captains he had given
sufficient reputation to their Affairs: That it behooved not to pass any
further, but only to employ himself for a Concord, as did all other Princes.
Besides, the Governors of Alsatia writ that they had order not to give passage
to any soldiers: an opposition of no moment, since they might have a thousand
other passages.

Among the Grisons things passed with great confusion, because the Count de
Fuentes on the one side, and those of the County of Tirol on the other,
continued to give them great occasious of jealousy; seattering a rumor that
they would invade the Valtoline in three places: with those of Milan by the
Lake, with those of Tirol by the Valley of the Sun, and of Trentin by Bormio;
and they had already removed the Monks out of some Monasteries within these
passages to make room for lodging of soldiers. Whereupon Salis at Venice
continued his solicitations, that the Repub. would give them effectual
succors; assuring them that they could not maintain those Garrisons so
necessary to preserve the Valtoline for themselves, and the passage for the
Republique, unless they had some pay: That the soldiers placed in the
Valtolins were for the service of the Signiory, and therefore ought to have pay
from them: That there wanted more money to erect a Counterfort to that of
Fuentes. The dangers were not indeed so great as they were represented, but
they were thus amplified to draw silver from the Republique, and the 1800.
footmen put in the Valtoline under the conduct of 12. Captains were all good
soldiers, but such as could not well be trusted being of the Diocese of Como,
and being corrupted by some writings published by that Bishop. This
notwithstanding, upon the pressing importunity of Salis, the Senate decreed to
give for the payment of these Garrisons 27000. Crowns for nine Months, 3000
for each Month, and to lay down for the present in hand 6000. for two Months;
wherewith Salis being not content, and urging for a greater sum, he received
to the sum of 10000. Crowns: and it was told him, touching the erection of a
Fort, they had not yet determined for the time or place: But if things came to
a manifest rupture, the Republique would not fail to give all necessary
assistance. And when Salis pressed further to have declaration what succors
they intended, two Senators of the College were deputed to Treat with him, and
to understand the particular state of things and their necessities. But, as it
happens often, that they are surprised with terror who mean to terrify
others, the Count de Fuentes hearing of the descent of the Grisons into the
Valtoline, and considering how easy it was (if they had any numbers) to
ouer-run all the Estate which was without defense and unprovided of soldiers,
he sent the Marquis of Como, and writ to the Duke Sfondrato, and to the Count
Ptolomy Gallio to be prepared for all events: He collected some Paysants about
the number of 7000. without Arms and ill soldiers, the conduct of which he
gave to the Governor of Lodi, not without the coffeehouse of the Marquis,
of the Duke, and of the Count, and other persons of quality in the Country:
He sent them Drums and Ensigns to discipline them, with the wonder of all
men, that against all Rules of Policy he would put Arms into the hands of
Paysants, the Allies and Kinsmen of those against whom he would employ them,
and such as were not entirely affected to the Spaniards. Fuentes thought also
to put some division among the Grisons under pretext of Religion, endeavoring
to seduce the Catholics, and promising they should serve under the pay of the
Pope; which produced a clean contrary effect, because the Grisons were so much
the more suspicious. And by the permission of Card. Borromeo he brought to
Milan the Preacher of Bargaglia a Protestant, to Treat with them of that
Quarter, some Grisons (traitors unto their Country) promising that he should
obtain a Levy, which moved a sedition, and being assembled in Pitae at the
end of February, they made some difficulty touching the Levy and passage for
the Republique. But when the news came from Venice of the moneys granted, the
secret Counsel were very thankful, and all those that were at Pitac, even
they that had been most opposite, consented to the Levy and to the passage.
Notwithstanding the Bishop of Coira did not cease to do Offices for Spain
with all the Catholics, even in his Sermons, assuming to himself this
color, that they ought not to go against the Church, or to abandon their
Country. Insomuch that he prevailed with them of Longatissa and of Visilis,
which for the greater part were Catholics: whereunto the friends of the
Republique did not oppose themselves as it was meet, hoping that the more these
broils increased, they should obtain the greater sums of money. Whence grew
new tumults, which were pacified by Vincenti Secretary of the Repub. giving
some Donatiues to the Pitac, which was done in the beginning of March. Yet the
Bishop did not cease to continue his evil practices against the Republique, as
well in his Preaching as upon all other occasions that were offered; so that a
new tumult was raised in some Catholic Cantons, who pressed the Garrison of
the Valtoline to send back the money to Venice, with hope that if they
demanded 20000. Crowns by the Month they should have them. Wherefore the
Garrison sent to tell the Chief of the Leagues that they would not permit
either Levy or passage unto the Venetians if they did not augment their wages,
seeing that upon their occasions all these disorders were in their Country:
That the Count de Fuentes would not move, if he were assured that passage
should not be granted to soldiers from beyond the Mountains to come into
Italy. They sent also soldiers among the Commons, to display their Ensigns
for a common Union, and to hinder the passage: with whom joined the favorers
of Spain, who with their silver fomented the Sedition, protesting unto the
Heads of the Leagues that they would call the Commons at their own charge, in
case they would not hinder the Levy: for which cause they sent to the
Captains chosen by the Republique, that they should not display their Ensigns
or pass any further, whereupon the Captains made complaint to the Secretary
Vincenti by reason of the expenses made in earnest money and in victuals. But
Vincenti, who had received money from Venice for the Levy, appeased them, by
distributing among them some small part. The Companies began to be assembled,
and the first was that of Coutenalt, who being about 200. men presented
themselves before Coira, where the City being not willing to receive them,
they stayed without expecting others. For which reason the Secretary Vincenti
who was without the City retired himself into it, as he was counseled. From
day to day the Sedition increased, other Companies arriving, and being to the
number of 800. men, they made instance to be admitted into the City, which was
granted to avoid further mischief, the City standing still upon their guard.

The Preachers which were among these Mutiners did all sorts of good offices,
but the Bish. of Coira and the Adherents of Spain traveled contrarily. The
Ministers of the King of France and of the Republique sent money to the Commons
to move them against the Mutiners, laboring also to appease the Principal
amongst them with silver, but the rage of the Commotion was so great that they
prevailed nothing. They of Agnadina and Poschiauo kept themselves free from
Sedition, which sufficed to keep the passage open. And those of the Valtoline,
repenting themselves, were reduced to their duty, and a large Trench was begun,
whereof the Ouer-seers were Captain Long a Frenchman, and an Ingenier of Count
Francis Martinengo. The 24. of March was called a Pitac at Coira, where the
Secretary Vincenti gave particular account of the Provisions which the Republique
had ordained. The Agent of France promised in the Name of the King, to give
7000. Crowns a Month for the Garrison of the Valtoline, and that he would
build a Fort at his own charge, and pay the Garrison of a if he might appoint
the Captain, which should be one of that Country.

At Rome they had certain advice that the King of France by means of
Caumartin his Ambassador in Suisserland, had demanded in the Diet of Soloturn,
a Levy of 10000. Suisses, with little contentment of that Nation; because the
Ambassador had not named either Time or Place or the Captain, nor disbursed
one sole denier, nor declared where they were to serve, but only had said, that
he must go to Paris, and that Monsieur de Refuge his Successor would come with
things necessary for the Expedition. There were who thought (considering these
circumstances) that the Most Christian King had no intention to make this
Levy, but only to hinder the Spaniards that they might not obtain another.
Some also gave a more sinister interpretation of this Pursuit, saying that he
did it to the end that their Friends might not have men from thence, unless
they acknowledged it (...) from him. But because the King had elsewhere an
Army of 10000. French footmen, and 4000 horse, the Pope, although he nothing
mistrusted the King, was greatly troubled: and it is certain, that he shed
tears upon it, because he saw well it was to hinder the King of Spain, lest
he should employ himself for his succor as he desired. Wherefore weighing
these encounters, and having considered the journey of the Secretary Padauin
beyond the Mounts, he resolved seriously to intend the Agreement, and
solicited the King of France that he would not abandon the Treaty, and that he
would to this purpose move the Card. de Ioyeuse. It is true, that the K. of
France so soon as he had notice that Don Francis de Castro was sent from
Spain, straightway resolved to send an Extraordinary, and many principal men
of that Kingdom were put in consideration to be employed about this Affair:
but the King very prudently made choice of the person of this Cardinal, as
well because of his excellent qualities, as for that he was acceptable to the
Pope, and a Confident of the other Princes, who had interposed for the
appeasing of these Troubles; and further because being an Ecclesiastique by
quality, and one of the prime in the Court of Rome, he might not only be a
Mediator for the Composition, but also a Minister in the execution of it, as
afterward it came to pass. The Cardinal being on his way, the minds of men
were in suspense whether he would go to Rome or to Venice, but as soon as he
was arrived in Italy, it was published that he was for Venice.

At Thurin the Popes Nuntio did what he could with the Cardinal, to hinder
that he should not receive the Visit of the Ambassador of the Republique. But
the Cardinal considering how much it imported to his Negotiation, received the
Ambassador with all demonstration of Honor, not regarding the instances of the
Nuntio, The coming of this Cardinal was acceptable to the Pope, howsoever at
the first sight it did not please him, that a Cardinal, one of the principal
in the Court, should go into a City Interdicted, and to a Republique which he
held for rebellious. Nevertheless, the desire he had to finish these
Controversies, seeing Don Francis de Castro had done nothing, made him to wish
that this Cardinal would adioyne his endeavors. The Cardinal stayed for some
time at Papozze a Village within the Dukedom of Ferrara, confining upon the
Venetian Dominions: expecting the issue of Don Francis his Negotiation,
together with the Answer of the King his Master, and the Popes Commission.

In this interim the Jesuits at Rome and in Spain, but much more in Spain,
did their utmost endeavors to be comprised in the Treaty; displaying their
great merits toward the Crown of Spain, and the small reputation which his
Holiness should have if the Conclusion were made, and themselves excluded, who
had defended more than all others his Interests; and that the Catholic King
would receive a great diminution in his Authority, as being not able for his
seeblenesse to range the Venetians under reason. And they brought the example
of Demosthenes, concerning an accord made between the Wolves and the Sheep,
upon condition that the Dogs should be banished, Wherein they compared all the rest of the World to Sheep, which had need of their keeping. And they
published some Books with these considerations, and which is more employed
herein the Confessor of the Queen, a Father of their Society, who openly said
not only to the King, but to all the Court, that they could not with good
conscience make this accord without comprehending the Jesuits, and couenanting
their restitution.

But the Cardinal de Ioyeuse having at length received very ample instructions
from his Holiness, and new commandments from the King, (by an express
Currier,) came to Venice about the fifteenth of February, where he presented
his Letters of credit from the Most Christian King, in a public Audience, and
passed some words of complement, both in the Kings Name, and in his own: And
the morrow he was visited by the Duke, his discourses being such as the day
before. He was received not only with demonstrations of all sorts of Honor,
but further was lodged and defrayed sumptuously on the public charge; which
he would not suffer, but prayed the Signiory that he might live at his own
expense, and it was permitted as he desired.

The Cardinal immediately gave beginning unto the Treaty; saying, that he had
Commission from the King to procure the weal and contentment of the
Republique, and because he knew how profitable Peace was, both to them and to
all Christendom, he had interposed himself in this Agreement. Therefore he
desired there might be found some temperament to satisfy the Pope, and to
maintain the Reputation of the Republique. That the Pope expected and proposed
(besides that which had been treated,) that the Republique should send an
Ambassador to require his Holiness to take away and revoke his Censures; that
all the Religious, especially the Jesuits, should be restored; and that the
King might give his word to the Pope, that the Laws should not be executed
during the Treaty. Upon which point, the Cardinal insisting more than upon any
other, prayed them to yield that the King might pass his word, and that to
this effect they would proceed speedily and with secrecy.

If seemed very strange to the Senate that the Pope made so many circuits,
notwithstanding they would not retract what they had once promised: On the
contrary, they confirmed to the Cardinal all that for which they had formerly
given their word to Fresne; to wit, that the Censures being once taken away,
they would send an Ambassador to reside at Rome, who should there Treat the
point touching the Religious gone forth of the State: That for the Laws they
would proceed in the use of them with such moderation and piety, as has been
ever peculiar to the Republique, and to their Ancestors: That this ought
sufficiently to satisfy the Pope and the King. Hereupon the Cardinal
testified, that the King his Master was greatly satisfied with all that which
the Republique had yielded to the Pope in Favor of Him: But his Holiness
being not willing to rest herewith with content, his Majesty for the Service
of the Republique, for the quiet of Christendom, and for the desire of Peace,
prayed them to find some temper, by means whereof, without hurting the
Liberty and Dignity of the Republique, the Business might be finished.
Nevertheless he adjoined, since it seemed not good to his Serenitie to pass
any farther, that he would think thereon more maturely, and weighing that
which had been read and said, that then he would return to Treat with more
solliditie.

Another day the Cardinal returned with an instance more vehement and more
particular, demanding that the King might give his word unto the Pope, that the
Laws should not be Practiced during the Treaty; which he endeavored to
persuade, saying, That the King desirous of the good of Christendom, and a
Friend of the Republique, considering the peril which followed upon the
discord of two Princes so near, and joined in their Interests, as also the
damages of War; after all well weighed, was of opinion there might be found
some means to accommodate these Differences with Reputation, preserving entire
the Liberty of the Republique, considering it was no season to take Arms. And
to this end he had charge to speak to them, as men ought to Friends, clearly
and freely, but with this Caution, not to do prejudice unto their Friend.
Wherefore he said freely to his Serenity, that as the King approved that no
Decree might be made whereby might appear the Suspension of the Laws, or that
they had not bin executed, or any other which might bring damage to the
public Dignity or Liberty, not any act which might remain in writing, or by
memory pass to Posterity: So again he considered that the Pope having
published the Censures in the sight of the World, it was necessary that he
should have some apparent reason to revoke them. But whereas the Republique
detested so much the Suspension of the Laws, which the Pope required, his
Majesty therefore had interposed: and seeing the parties so distant, he was
resolved to give testimony unto the Republique of his affection, (firmly to
maintain their Reasons of not coming to any Decree) and yet withal to give
some satisfaction unto the Pope: Taking this charge upon himself, to give the
Pope his word according to his desire but that the Republique should not make
there upon any Decree; with condition on the behalf of his Holiness, that his
word should not be otherwise understood to be given, but upon assurance that at
the same time he should take away the Censures; and on the part of the
Republique, that (the King taking this obligation upon himself) they should
render him this respect, not to do any thing in execution of the Laws, which
might give disco^tentment unto the Pope. By means of which temperament it
seemed unto the King that the Affair might be accommodated with satisfaction
to both sides, without wronging the Liberty of the Republique, and to their
contentment.

The Cardinal adjoined a long consideration, how in the beginning, in the
progress, and at the end of these Differences, all things had passed with so
much Reputation on the side of the Republique, as they could not expect more.
But the Time now counseled them to consider the dangers and damages which
might ensue for the time to come, such as all the World abhorred, as contrarily
the Agreement was universally desired. Wherefore it was not fit to reject a
motion by means whereof all questions might be decided with credit. When the
Cardinal had concluded, Mounsieur de Fresne Proposed, that the King seeing it
was necessary to give the Pope this word, who by all means desired this
satisfaction, and since it was meet to give it Him, who had (at the instance of
the King) condescended to this Treaty, this point ought not to be put in
difficulty, but to be holden as resolved: That it was not to the purpose to
examine whether it were reasonable, in as much as it was not proposed out of
reason, but only to give some pretext unto the Pope, that he might be able to
retire himself with some Reputation. Wherefore the Pope being constant to have
this word, and the Senate (rightly) judging it unjust to make any Decree, it
was needful to find some means to give it. For (to speak freely) whosoever
should consider the Decree of the Senate literally, which had bin read unto
them, where it was said, That in the use of the Laws they would not depart
from their accustomed piety, etc. They should see plainly that the Republique
reserved still to themselves Power to use them: and the Pope did not intend
that they should be used, but on the contrary should be, as it were, bound by
the word which the King should give him touching them: therefore that it was
necessary to declare themselves. If the Senate did mean that these words
should suffice to give assurance that the Laws should not be executed, and if
they did not use these words [in the use] to any other end but that it might
not appear in writing that they began again to execute them, then it was fit
at least to make this appear by some sign, so as the Cardinal might serve
himself of this Exposition: That it would suffice him if either by speech or
action they gave him a sign hereof, such as he might comprehend. Because,
before the King would give his word in writing, it behooved that he should be
assured that the Republique would not disauow it, and that he might not have
occasion to repent himself to have given it, and so to remain disgusted; it
being very much that the King should make the Pope contented with this false
money, this word being to serve only as a pure ceremony. Further, the King
said, that the Laws being prohibitiue, and consisting in nonfaciendo, they had
their Execution whilst things rested in suspense; having taken upon him to
work in such sort, that on the part of the Pope and the Ecclesiastiques,
nothing should be done to the contrary. And the King might be well able to give
this word without saying any more; as being certain that if the
Ecclesiastiques on their part should not make any enterprise in this regard,
the Ministers of the Republique should not be occasioned to come to the
execution of their Laws; so that as on the one side they should not be
executed, so on the other they should not be violated. And here the Ambassador
repeated, that although the King might give this word without the consent of
the Republique, in as much as it sufficed him to be assured by the Pope, that
no Ecclesiastique should give occasion to the execution of these Laws against
his Holiness, nor to the violation against the Republique, notwithstanding it
was necessary that the Senate should give him some answer. Fresne adjoined
moreover, that understanding how the Spaniards pressed to have the same word,
but in a more open and explicit fashion, the Cardinal had purposely thus
tempered his Proposition; believing it not to be convenient for the Republique
that they should rest obliged by the word of two Kings, specially since the
Spaniards would not content themselves with that moderate sweetness with which
his King would be satisfied. And he made instance that at least they would
resolve him by some intimation, because he saw there remained nothing else. For
touching the reestablishment of the Jesuits, he conceived there would be no
difficulty, since the K. did not doubt of it; being an ordinary thing in
Agreements, that they who have fomented the one and the other party return
again into their places: seeing especially that the Pope could not consent
without wronging his Reputation, that they who went out only to obey him,
should remain excluded. And he did not think that this difficulty could be
surmounted, considering that they had to do with a Pope stiff and heady, and
there being no particular cause why they should deny him this satisfaction.
That he was willing to speak of this point which had been passed in silence
by the Card through modesty, to the end that herein might be no impediment when
they came to the Conclusion of the Affair.

The Senate answered the Cardinal that the banishment of the Jesuits had
been decreed for causes so important, and with such formalities, that by the
Laws of the Republique, the Decree could not be revoked. And that when upon
Agreements the adherents of the one part and the other come to be
reestablished, those are not wont to be comprehended, who are otherwise guilty
of such offenses, as that they should be banished without the occasions in
question. And for that which concerns the Reputation of the Pope, touching the
restitution of those who were gone out upon his occasion, the return of them
would be granted, who had not committed other particular faults. For the rest,
the Senate said, that they could not but commend the good will of the King, and
of the Cardinal, and thank them both for their good advice: But for the
matter of giving any word touching the execution of the Laws, the Senate could
say nothing else, than that which they had so often repeated, that in the use
of them they would never depart from their ancient Piety and Religion, which
might suffice the King and the Cardinal in that point, adding that they would
communicate the same to Don Francis de Castro.

The Cardinal had a desire to have obtained more, and to have received an
answer more conformable to his proposition: nevertheless being come with
resolution from the Pope to acco^modate upon any terms the Contention, yet
with the most advantage that he might, he said, That although he wished to have
had answer more conformable to his demand, and though he had no great reason to
thank them for that he had received; notwithstanding since that the King was
willing to have all ended to the contentment of the Republique, he would
content himself, requesting them not to publish to any whomsoever this their
answer, but to conceal it secret, forasmuch as the Affair might be disturbed
by some Spirit envying the common good, and secrecy alone might much conduce to
a Conclusion. The Duke hereupon said, that of necessity they must needs answer
the pursuits of Don Francis, who having made the like and equivalent
propositions, must also receive the like answer, especially seeing he testified
a good intention. That nevertheless they would do it with such reservedness
and caution that the secret should not be too much published: That this ought
not to move the Ministers of the King of France, because it was a thing well
known to all, that all had been to gratify him, and all that followed upon
this Treaty must be ascribed to him. The Cardinal confessed that Don Francis
de Castro had a good intention, affirming that he would every where give him
this testimony: but he believed not, that he had in this Affair the like
power from the Catholic King, as had the Ministers of France from their King:
because the terms which they designed to use with the Pope, came from the sole
invention of his Maty, wherewith if others were acquainted he would willingly
unite with them: But knowing not whether others had the same instructions, he
judged secrecy necessary, requesting them to proceed with dexterity, and not
to utter all at once, but so to carry the matter as might best serve to make a
conclusion of this Business.

Notwithstanding these reasons the Senate remained firm in their purpose to
communicate all to Don Francis de Castro, as well because he had made the same
proposition, as because at the arrival of the Cardinal, he went to visit him,
and offered to unite himself with him, according to the intentions of the
Pope, and of the Catholic King, and of the Republique, so far that he said
unto the Cardinal, that he would fight under his Colors. To which the
Cardinal having answered, that he could say nothing herein, because he
expected a certain answer from the Republique; Don Francis much marvelled that
the Cardinal made difficulty of this Union, and was many times instant with
the Senate to declare unto him what answer that was which the Card. expected.
And although the Senate had imparted all unto him (whereof he was well
assured,) yet he iu^dged aright, that the Vnio^ was never the nearer: And
therefore he made instance separately, that for the honor of his King and of
Himself, they would accord him something further, not prejudicial. For
although they had formerly done much, yet that sufficed not: but when they
should accord a Suspension of the Laws for some Months, so as he had
proposed, all would be accommodated, provided that they did it speedily, to
the end that the Arms now in readiness might produce no scandal. But when
this last answer given unto the Cardinal was communicated to him, he said, it
was not so clear as he desired: But although the words were not so
intelligible as he could wish, yet it seemed to him that he might thence
infer, that the King might give his word for not executing the Laws during
the Treaty, and that so the understood them. But because he would walk safely
and with sincerity, he remembered them, that when he siguified unto them how
that the Pope would take away the Censures and conclude the Affair, so that he
had the word of the Catholic King, that during the Treaty the Laws should
not be observed; this he said presupposing the word to be clear and without
any veil. And though he believed that they would have it so taken, yet
nevertheless he wished it had been clearer. And howsoever he was content with
it, because he presupposed the Cardinal in like manner to be contented, yet he
could not engage his word in a thing uncertain, wherewith he knew the Pope
would not be satisfied: but only he would represent the estate of Affairs,
and see what the Pope would say. That he imagined the Cardinal to be contented
with it, because he had told him, he had brought an advice from his King, upon
which he expected the answer of the Republique, and that he would not be
distasted if the Cardinal could upon good conditions finish the business. He
added, that although this delay displeased him, which was caused by their
obscure answer, whereby the Affair might be prolonged, repeating many times,
although he desired more clearenesse in their answer, nevertheless he would so
understand it, that in virtue thereof he might pass his word; in the end
concluding, that he would expound their silence to be a confession.

To this last point the Duke answered, that the Senate spoke very clearly, and
in such sort that any one might understand them without any need of expositions
or conjectures; that they intended not in any fashion to desist from the use of
their Laws established with justice and lawful authority; howsoever they
promised to practice them with their accustomed equity and moderation, and so
as behooved the ancient piety and devotion of the Republique.

The Treaties were thus in such forwardnes, that there was, as it were, a firm
hope of an Accord, if on the contrary the precipitation of Count de Fuentes to
take Arms, and the commotion of the Grisons (which not only continued but
increased,) had not forced men to believe that the Spaniards wished War, and
that they entertained the world with propositions of Peace, when in the mean
while their factious Partisans continued to move evil humors, and procure
seditions, not only by false reports (which prevail much among base people,)
but further by gifts and presents, which corrupt those who cannot be deceived.
In Spain they observed the danger of these running rumors; therefore at that
same time when the King permitted the Count de Fuentes to draw out 10000.
Musketeers, he writ unto him withal, that seeing the danger of War by the
dissentions between the Pope and the Republique, to divert it he had declared
himself for the Pope, that he might merit well of the Holy See, and cause him
to condescend and accept the conditions which he refused: That to this purpose
he had sent Don Francis de Castro to Venice, where finding greater resistance
then he had thought, he had given him charge to unite his offices with those of
other Princes. But the difficulties still growing, he had been willing to try
the last remedy, which was to show himself interessed for the Church, and by
this means to take from the Republique their hopes grounded upon the Popes
feebleness. But forasmuch as this was sinisterly interpreted by some ill
affeoted, he was resolved to publish this his Deliberation (giving notice
thereof to his Ministers,) to wit, that they should not take decasious, how fit
soever, to so meant the War.

Among the Grisons, the Mutiners were now to the number of 2000 amongst whom a
bruit was cunningly seattered, that the Repub. of Venice had bought the passage
for 80000 crowns, and therefore they would know by whose hands this money had
passed. Upon which occasion the Resident of Venice finding himself not safe at
Coira, purposed to retire himself to Tosana. But the Muriners, without any
respect, came 200. of them into his House and stayed him, saying, That it was
no time to be going, but to give them account who they were that had received
the money from the Signiory of Venice, and passed to very insolent speeches;
whereupon the Resident was forced to retire himself. He made complaint of this
affront to the Council, requiring that they might be chastised; but in the
Council there was neither power nor virtue, the principal of them and most
courageous being absent, some having retired themselves because of these
stirs, and others being in the Valtoline or in Embassage Notwithstanding
those of the Council offered him a conuoy to conduct him to Tosana, with which
being on the way, he was encountered by a multitude of people, who constrained
him to return into his House, where he was guarded as a prisoner, not suffered
to write or receive a Letter: Only to sweeten a little this barbarous usage,
they gave him four Gentlemen to bear him company. Afterward a rumor was
raised that the Lorraines were in the field, and said that they would open the
passage by force if it were not yielded in amity; which renewed again the
mutiny, so as the multitude came with such fury to the Residents house, that he
could hardly be defended by his guard. The Partisans of Spain, although they
were bankrupt, yet ceased not to scatter money and put in Arms their
Adherents; but with all this they could not hinder, but that the multitude at
length gave care to better counsel, and was persuaded to expect the assembly
of all the Companies, and in the mean while to free the Resident, upon promise
that he should arrend the Assembly. It was the seventh day after he had been
forced that he was set at liberty; but by and by after followed a new
encounter. For the soldiers that had been levied for the service of the
Republique cited their Captains, and commanded them to give their pay; which
forced the Resudent to give the Captains 2000. Crowns for this effect, and by
that means the Sedition was pacified, and in the interim the Troops or
Companies were assembled.

In Spain, because the Negotiation of Don Francis de Castro did not succeed as
they desired, and since the Duke of Sauoy made continual instances to the
King, that he would approve his journey to Venice, they resolved at length to
give way unto him, although they held him rather a Soldier then a fit
instrument of Peace, thinking it also dangerous to deny him such a demand.
Notwithstanding they gave him an ambiguous answer, as believing not that he
would Treat conformably to the intention of Spain, but that as a soldier he
thought to be employed in the War by one of the Parties, rather then to agree
them. And because they began to suspect that the Pope relying upon the succors
of Spain would refuse too stiffly to admit a Concord, the Catholic King
advertised the Nuntio by his Ministers, that, to the end they might be more
ready in Italy, he had given order unto all the Captains (who were retired to
repose themselves in their houses,) that they should present themselves with
all the power they could upon the confines of France, and had also written unto
the Viceroys of Barcelona and of Navarre, that they should put all the Forces
they could possibly in the Forts upon the Frontiers. Nevertheless they
adjoined, that it would well become the Pope, for diuersion of these broils
and dangers, to support some small faults in his children, though to him they
seemed great. And a few days after on another occasion they told the Nuntio,
that the King should do more service unto the Apostolic See by repressing
the Heretics in the Low Countries, then by fomenting the troubles of Italy,
and that so much the more as the Pope should be assisted by Spain, so much
the more straightly would the Venetians league themselves with the enemies of the
Catholic faith: wherefore it was good advice, that the Pope should neglect
his own private interests for the universal good of Christendom. In
conclusion, to speak more clearly, they said, that it did not beseem the
Father of all Christendom to ground a War so cruel and pernicious to
Christian people, upon a King so pious, and that his Holiness would abase the
Apostolic Dignity, if he sustained by humane means the Authority which God
had given him. They said further, that it was meet to recompense the King with
some thing for the Declaration which he had made, since thereby he had drawn
upon himself so many enemies: aiming herein either at the Tenths of the Realm
of Naples, or at the remitting of the Fief. It is certain that this news
extremely troubled the Pope, seeing them when there was no need to make so
liberal offers, and in time of necessity thus to retire.

But in Lorraine, the Count de Vaudemont fell sick. Some attributed the cause
thereof to a wound which he had received in his head, chasing a Heart a year
before, whereby he lost a good quantity of blood; and others to the vexations
which he received by the importunities of so many in different places. In the
mean while, Aduices came from Italy, that the Dissentions were likely to be
accommodated. Montagu the Resident at Venice for the great Duke, writ unto the
Duke of Lorraine, that the Cardinal de Ioyeuse and Fresne had assured him that
the Accord would certainly follow their Negotiation; but that they kept it
secret, because being known, if it were not agreeable to all, it might be
interrupted. The Duke visited the Count de Vaudemont, and comforted him with
this advice, promising him that the Secretary Padauin would return contented.
And calling Him to speak with him upon this advice, first he excused himself
for deferring to Treat with him, because he was hindered by the Diet: then told
him that from Rome and from France he had certain advice that the Peace was
upon concluding. That the Preparations at Milan and Rome were slackened, and so
the occasion of the Levy ceased. And howsoever he had a charge to solicit
it, nevertheless things now being upon terms of Concord, he ought to surcease
until he had further commandment. That his inte^tion was very good, and that
he would not defer to prepare himself, but only to spare them charges:
praying him to represent unto the Republique this his good office and counsel
which he gave with sincerity. The Secretary thanked him, but withal wished him
to consider that oftentimes rumors of Peace were scattered, which in effect
vanish into smoke; and that the Pope was then farthest off, when he seemed to
be the nearest; That the Republique having yielded something, in stead of being
appeased he required yet more: That the Pope having published in Consistory his
final resolution to the War, vanting himself of the Assistance of Princes,
and naming a Legate, this had made the Republique to Arm for the common
repose: That the diligence which the Count had testified of his willingness to
serve them, had moved the Senate to send Him into Lorraine; That none knew
better their necessities than the Republique themselves, and that his Highness
ought to believe him, knowing well that the Senate would not cast themselves
upon needless expenses. Wherefore it was not to the purpose to write unto
Venice that the Levy might be deferred, but rather to take such order that he
might write that their Soldiers were ready in the field. The Duke replied,
that what he had said of the Peace was upon good ground, and that he desired
this satisfaction that he would write according to his counsel, especially
since the indisposition of the Count his Son might dispense with his
employment for some few days. Hereupon Padauin consented to write by an
express Currier, saying, he hoped that the Count being recovered, whilst they
expected an answer, would then take order to make the Leuy. To which the Duke
answered nothing; and not withstanding that many times, even by interrogations,
the Secretary was instant to have an answer, whether the Count did seriously
intend, as also the Duke his Father, to assist them, yet he could draw nothing
from them. The Count sent to see whether the Secretary were satisfied by the
Duke; to whom He answered, That he was to attend his recovery, that they made
prayers for his health at Venice, whither he had written, assuring the
Republique of his service; which gave the Count great comfort, and the Duke
thanked Padauin, saying, That he would acknowledge his Son owed his life
unto him.

About this time Criuelli, Chamberlain to the Duke of Bauier, arrived at
Nancy, bringing with him a Breue from the Pope, by which were renewed the
instances made unto the Count, to withdraw himself from the Service of the
Republique. He had Audience of all severally with contentment. The Count would
not be seen by him, excusing himself by reason of his indisposition; but some
days after being much importuned, he received him with condition, that he
should speak but little, and be content with a short answer, without replying.
He had then Audience, where he endeavored to move the Count by Reasons of
Religion and of State; To which the Count answered, that he had a care of his
Honor, which was in such sort joined with Religion, that they could not be
separated. Padauin met this Criuelli at the Church, who used to him courteous
words, saying, That the Duke his Master desired Peace, and that for this effect
he had appointed public Prayers, and that he proiected to go in Pilgrimage,
and that he hoped Peace would follow, considering that the Spaniards really
desired it, both for the affairs of Flanders, and for the Election of the King
of Romans.

SEVENTH BOOK.
Whilst Padauin expected an answer from Venice, Mounsieur de Bassompierre
arrived at the Court of the Duke of Lorraine, to speak by word of mouth with
that Secretary, and from thence to pass unto the Service of the Republique,
according as he had promised to the Ambass. Priuli. And he brought this news
unto the Count, that when he took leave of the King, his Majesty desired him to
tell him in his behalf, that he could not save his Reputation, if he failed the
Republique, much less find any apparent pretext to excuse himself. Further,
he gave him advice that the Duke of Guise offered himself to be his
Lieutenant, and that a great number of Soldiers were provided to got with him,
the King being willing to give license to all except his Officers. There was
one expressly sent unto the Count from the Canton of Schaffusa, who offered
Him a Levy of men, and all other commodities. Marinuille also returned from
Florence, bringing certain hopes of a Concord, which was further confirmed by
a Currier dispatched with diligence unto the Duke, with advice that the
Cardinal de Ioyeuse having received all contentment, was to depart from Venice
to go to the Pope But the Currier being come from Venice with answer, Padauin
complained unto the Count in the Name of the Republique, for that the Soldiers
were not ready as he had promised, and pressed him to make haste, in remedy of
his former slacknesse. The Count hereat was astonished, and answered that he
had done his duty before, if the Duke his Father had permitted him, with whom
it was meet to speak. Padauin replied, that he would do so, for so he had
order; but that he had first addressed himself to him, as to the Principal;
that he would retain the Currier a day or two, to the end that he might
absolutely send his answer, not of complements or excuses, but of effects. The
Father and and his Sons assembled in Counsel upon the answer which they were
to give. The Cardinal first began, and said, That their House had bin always
devoted to the Church, against which none of their Family ever carried Arms,
and that they ought not now to do otherwise; That this were to blast their
Reputation, and incur the universal hatred of Catholics, besides the
danger of running into Censures, which were terrible, setting before their eyes
the great Troubles of the Duke of Bar, for marying Madame Catharine, the Kings
Sister: And much exaggerating these Reasons, he concluded that they ought
openly to deny Padauin that which he desired, and that this might be a cause of
Peace, considering that the Repub. seeing themselves defeated of this succor,
would humble themselves unto the pope. The Duke of Bar was of the same opinion
with the Cardinal, adding withal, that it was fit to find some temperament
by which they might save the Reputation of the Count. The Count himself
considered on the one side, what had been told him from the King of France,
and from others who admonished him of his engagement; and on the other, what
had been written from Tuscany; and concluded that they should well weigh how
far he was obliged, for that he ought to prefer his obligation to all other
considerations. The Father said, that he felt in himself a very great combat;
for the Reasons of Religion and State did not permit that any of His should
take Arms against the Church, and especially when other Catholic Princes
would not do it; Besides, that the Wars of Italy would be the ruin of
Christendom. But on the other side, he desired to give some contentment to the
Republique; yet he preferred still the considerations of his House to all
others. Upon this ground he was resolved, since he could not satisfy them with
words, to abide all evil accidents that could happen, rather than give way to
this Levy. Wherefore, when Padauin came to the Audience which the Duke gave
him in presence of the Duke of Bar his Son, where He declared, that although
at Venice they greatly marvelled why the Soldiers were no sooner in
readiness, yet nevertheless they were persuaded that this default would be
recompensed with a greater diligence: The Duke answered, that he accounted the
Peace to be in a manner concluded, and therefore there needed no more words;
That the Republique having their Affair accommodated, the Censures would fall
on his House: That for this cause they ought not to bring molestation upon
others without any fruit; seeing that the more he desired to gratify the
Republique upon all occurrences, so much the more sorry was he that he could
not permit his Children to serve against the Church; That on other occasions he
and his Children would be always ready to employ themselves with all their
forces for the service of the Republique. Padauin apprehending the Negative so
clearly, judged it necessary to speak plainly, and said, That the reports of
Peace were without ground; that if they had been true, he should not have had
so many Commandments so often reiterated to solicit them, and although the
Peace might follow upon the Treaty, yet the Count denying the service which he
owed, might render it difficult, because the Pope hereby might be more hardened:
That the Republique had not pressed this Levy so much, if they had not
esteemed it necessary: That whosoever puts himself in the service of a
Prince, ought to obey, not taking upon him to judge whether that which he
commands be necessary and convenient, or not: That the fear of Censures was
but a vanity, because they knew certainly that the Pope would acknowledge his
error, and keep himself from the like hereafter: That if Excommunication were
valide in all cases, Princes were undone: That it was not meet to presuppose
infallibility in Popes, since God often permits wicked Ones for the
chastisement of the world: That the obligation of the Count by the consent of
the Duke his Father had been contracted in time of Contentions; wherefore if
he had no fear to promise it, he ought not to fear the execution of it. And
he adjoined, that the Duke having demanded so much respite, as they might write
and receive answer, he knew not how they could come to a refusal without
breach of word. The Duke answered, that he held the Peace for assured, and
every hour expected to hear of the Conclusion. After two hours audience,
where passed many answers and replies on the one part and the other, the Duke
continuing still to say, that he expected the Conclusion, Padauin told him,
that if they resolved to say nothing else they should declare themselves, that
he might immediately depart to provide else where for the service of his
Prince, since he could obtain nothing from Them that were obliged. Upon this
the Duke prayed him to wait three or four days. The next morning Padauin had
audience of the Count, who at the first fight told him, that he desired death
rather then to be in this estate, which he never believed would have happened:
That he could not dissemble his grief, for that he saw on the one side his
own engagement, and on the other the will of his Father, whom he durst not
contradict: That the Breues of the Pope, and the pursuits of many, especially
of the Jesuits, had put scruples into the Dukes mind, with he could not
abolish, being aged and subject torecciue impressions of terror: That he
confess of the Republique had just cause to complain of him for the money
which he had received, seeing he failed them in time of need; but he protested
that it was not his fault, and prayed Padauin to condale with him, and spoke
with such affection that tears fell from him. Padauin, comforted him and said,
That in adversity it was needful to use prudence, and that he must complain
of the Pope who sold away his reputation by means of his Father. He repeated
unto him the same things which he had said to the Duke, with greater vehomence
and confidence, exhorting him to make a new trial with his, Father to take
away all impediment, to the send that such an action, which would blemish his
honor, might not come to the knowledge of men. Upon these words the Count
promised to use all his power with the Duke his Father, but withal remembered
him that his Father by I enson of his years was feeble in body and mind, and
oppressed with the suggestions of diverse. Padauin saw well that all this was
naught but artifices; wherefore having waited the four days, he demanded
Audience to take his leave, which they prolonged, to serve themselves of time.
But in the end being constrained to dilcourer themselves, the Count proposed
this motion, That a Levy should be made upon promise that the men should not
serve against the Pope, and this only to take away the scruple of the Duke his
Father; obliging himself that when once the soldiers were in Italy they
should obey the commandments of the Republique without reservation. This
Padauin would not accept, that he might not violate the Capitulation, which was
to serve Contra quoscunque. So he resolved to pass into Suitzerland, presently
after he was advised where he might find the Deputies of the Cantons.

The Pope in the mean while during these Differences, neglected not any thing
which might sustain his Dignity. For having learned out of the writings of the
Venetians, that at Genoa was a Law altogether conformable to that of Venice,
which forbade Ecclesiastiques to purchase, he made instance that it might be
revoked. Which the Republique readily obeyed, to do a thing grateful to his
Holiness, and to show that the reuocation of their Edicts made the year
before, as we have formerly said, had proceeded from a free disposition,
believing also hereby to render the cause of the Venetian Republique more
odious. And upon the like instance of the Pope, they gave advice of this
reuocation in Spain by their Ambassador, which was esteemed in that Court for
an extreme affectation, whereby it appeared manifestly that herein they would
give example not only to Venice, but to Portugal also, to Arragon, and to the
King himself.

The Duke of Sauoy signified unto the Catholic King by James Antony de la
Tour his Ambassador Extraordinary arrived a little before in Spain, to give
advice of a Marriage concluded between his Daughter and the Duke of Mantua,
that he had accepted the Instructions of the Emperor to be Mediator of the
Differences between the Pope and the Republique of Venice. To which the King
answered in general terms; but the Duke of Lerma commended him for that he
obeyed the Emperor, that the King had so great a desire of the Agreement, that
he prayed God to grant him good success, that so good an effect might be
produced by his means. The Duke without expecting any further, published his
voyage, and gave order to his Court, to make ready. Whereupon at Venice the
bruit of his coming every day more and more increased, and the Duke sent to
Venice, John Baptista Soluro with Letters of credence of 27. of February, to
give notice unto the Senate, how the Emperor had sent to Turin the Marquis of
Castillon, to solicit him to pass to Venice for the accommodating of these
Differences: which being willing to undertake, as well to obey the Emperor, as
to serve the Republique, he was determined to defer no longer, but immediately
to begin his journey, hoping that the Republique would well accept his coming
and his interposing. That he had sent his Ambassador to this end, to certify
the Republique of his good will and of the diligence which he would use.
Audience was given to this Ambassadar on the 11. of March with a courteous
answer, that the Senate took in good part the coming of his Highness. For
this cause the Cardinal de Ioyeuse resolved to send a Gentleman to Rome, to
aducrtise the Pope what had been deliberated, and by the means of Alincourt
to pursue the business to a Conclusion. But whilst he was on dispatching, he
changed his mind, and resolved to go himself in person, and accordingly
departed the day following, which was the 17. of the same Month of March.

After the Cardinal was parted from Venice, the Marquis of Castillon,
Ambassador for the Emperor arrived there, and without any public and solemn
entry presented himself unto the Duke. Where having put him in mind of the
good offices which he had done him in Rome upon the beginning of these
troubles, to the end that the Pope might suspend his Monitory, howsoever he did
not prevail as he desired, for the evil disposition of the Affairs: He said
further, that he had always done the same in the Court of the Emperor, and
that the Emperor vehemently desiring to see an end of these controversies, had
designed the Duke of Sauoy to bring this good work to effect, with whom he was
willing to join himself for his great affection to the Republique, as well
for his proper interests as for those of his House. And that the Duke being not
able so suddenly to take his journey, by reason of the great Court which did
accompany him, the Emperor had commanded him who spoke to hasten his voyage to
give beginning unto the Treaty, lest by too much delay the Grisons might come
to Arms, which might put the Affair out of all hope of Pacification. That now
he was much comforted, understanding that the Senate in their wisdom had taken
a pious resolution, and found means that the Cardinal was gone with
satisfaction toward his Holiness, and that matters had received some
temperament. And he prayed his Serenitie that he would make him partaker of all
the particularities of the Affair, offering to cooperate therein in the name
of the Emperor to take away all difficulties which might remain: And upon
this presented his Letters of credence from the Emperor and from the Duke of
Sauoy. The Senate gave order to let him see the state of things, and in
particular communicated to him the answer last given unto the Cardinal. The
Marquis was in great perplexity, and doubted they had not communicated all
entirely, especially how far the Republique had condescended: but being further
assured that nothing had been concealed from him, he made instance that he
might carry unto the Pope some little further satisfaction obtained in favor
of the Emperor. But he prevailed nothing, the Senate telling him, that having
yielded so much as was possible without wronging their Liberty, they could
yield no more; and that he might, if he pleased, propose unto the Pope, what
had been accorded to the Ministers of France and Spain, and Treat the
Agreement upon the same conditions.

The Spaniards seeing the Card. de Ioyeuse arrived at Venice, did hold the
Affair in a manner for accommodated; but seeing him afterward depart without
obtaining any more then what had been yielded to Fresne and to Them, they
suspected either that the Treaty was broken, or that the Pope dealt deceitfully
with the King of Spain, having more secret intelligence with the French. And
Don Francis de Castro having written the deliberation of the Senate
communicated to him, sent speedily the copy thereof to Rome to the Catholic
Ambassador, who not only showed it to the Pope, but further published it
through the Court, to the end that all might know, that the French could promise
no more then they. But the Senate, to the end that the state of things should
not be diversely represented according to the affections of them that Treated,
gave advice of all to their Ministers in all the Courts of Princes, sending to
every one an extract of their last resolution.

Upon the arrival of the Cardinal at Rome, all the Court was moved, and every
one spoke thereof according to his passion. Some desired the Agreement, others
abhorred it: by some it was holden for concluded, others believed it broken,
and impossible. During some days at the first, the Pope was in such sort
distracted with diverse thoughts, that both He and his Ministers greatly varied.
Sometimes it seemed unto them that many points wanted in the Treaty, to come to
a good end: otherwhiles they believed that all might be composed. So that the
Pope being pressed with so diverse instances and opinions, he confessed to
Persons worthy of faith, that he found himself very irresolute and in great
perplexity. And he answered Alincourt (who knowing this irresolution of the
Pope, the third day after the arrival of the Cardinal, went to him to
complain of a rumor dispersed in Rome, that the Affair could not be
accommodated, or at least concluded on such conditions as the King his Master
had obtained, and that this was to deprive his Majesty of the merit of so
great an enterprise and so much pains as he had taken,) that though he were
vexed with many conflicts, in such sort that for three days space he had been
in a perpetual torment, having drawn from the Card. de Ioyeuse and the
Ambassador Castillon nothing but general words brought from the Venetians, he
was not withstanding resolved to a Concord, provided that they should make a
new essay for the return of the Jesuits. It is very certain, that many
Cardinals who did not like the Popes precipitation in coming so speedily unto
Censures, were then also displeased that he should revoke them without
obtaining his Design to make the Repub. submit. And Some amongst them did not
stick to mutine and combine, with resolution to contradict him in Confistory,
wherein they were encouraged by some who aimed totally to hinder the Agreement,
and by others to prevent at least the Card. de Ioyeuse that he should not be
the Author of it. That which was particularly Treated at Rome by the Cardinal,
and by the Ambassadors of the Kings of France and Spain, was not at all
communicated to the Senate of Venice; so that they knew nothing of these
Negotiations, save only so much as the Ambassadors Castro and Fresne spoke,
and that which has been written by the Card. du Perron, and by the Archbishop
of Vrbin. For that which was said by the two Ambassadors, it shall be declared
in due place. But the relations of the Cardinal and the Archbishop imported,
that it seemed unto the Cardinal de Ioyeuse coming to Rome to negotiate and
conclude the Agreement with the Pope, that there was no other difficulty but
that he could not promise the restoring of the Jesuits, which for many reasons
was arde^tly desired by his Holiness. That being assembled in counsel with
the Ambassador Alincourt and the French Cardinals, they had decreed to
represent this point unto the Pope with some temperament. That accordingly
after he had spoken of other points and given good contentment in a manner unto
the Pope, he said, That he could not hope to obtain by particular Treaty the
restoring of the Jesuits, but he knew a course by means whereof without doubt
their reestablishment might be obtained; which was, that his Holiness should
put in his hand a Breue with absolute power to revoke the Censures, which he
would carry to Venice, where having showed his power he would tell them he had
a charge to execute nothing but on condition that the Jesuits might be
readmitted: And by this means he hoped that when they saw at Venice that
nothing else remained but this only point, to accord all questions, they would
resolute to give him this contentment.

The Pope well rudged that his Honor would be much impaired, if he abandoned the
Jesuits, who had been chased (as he persuaded himself) for their obedience
to his Interdict; having also promised them that he would not incline to any
Concord, but with condition that they should be restored. Whereunto also was
joined another point of his Reputation, That if for two Men of the Church
imprisoned, he had made so much bruit in the World, it seemed to him that he
ought much less to endure the banishment of a whole Order. But the Cardinal
du Perron persuaded at length the Pope, telling him that if this were the only
point to hinder the Treaty, the general Cause which was in controversy, would
become the particular cause of the Jesuits, and not of the Apostolic See;
adding, That first of all it was meet to reestablish his own Authority at
Venice, which being once settled, it would be easy by that means to restore
there the Jesuits: wherefore, not to name them in this Treaty, was not
absolutely to exclude them, but only to defer their restitution. To confirm
his speech, he called to mind the example of Clement 8. who in the
reconciliation of King Henry the fourth, notwithstanding that he esteemed
highly that article of the return of the Jesuits, yet seeing the difficulty
of it, he was content to let it go, with hope to obtain in due time what then
seemed impossible; in which hope he was not deceived, having afterward easily
obtained what he desired. The Pope was content that the Cardinal de Ioyeuse
should do all he could possibly for the restitution of the Jesuits, without
insisting upon that point, seeing he could not for that time pass further.

But besides this, three other difficulties crossed the Treaty of the
Cardinal. The first, because the Pope would have Mounsieur de Fresne, the
French Ambassador at Venice, demand by writing in the Name of the King, and of
the Republique, that the Censures might be taken away, so as Don Inigo de
Cardenas the Ambassador of Spain had done: But the Ministers of the French
King would have this done by M. d' Alincourt his Ambassador at Rome, wherewith
at length the Pope was contented. As also that the said Cardinal, and M. d'
Alincourt, should give him their word in the Name of the King, that the Laws
should remain without execution, until the Accord might be effected. This the
Pope did not like on this fashion, pretending that they ought to say, that it
was with the consent of the Republique, and until the Accord was effected. But
the Cardinal de Ioyeuse having not received hereupon any word from the
Republique, as has bin said, could not say that it was with their consent. The
Copies of these Propositions, made by Cardenas, Alincourt and Ioyeuse are
scattered over the World, but how true or false they are we cannot say, nothing
of all this being communicated to the Republique, as also the Senate never gave
any word, excepting such as has been formerly related.

Thirdly, it was the Popes will, that following the custom of the Court, the
Censures should be taken away at Rome, believing it an indignity (besides the
vnusualnesse of the matter) which would much diminish his Reputation, and that
he should too far abase himself, if he should send a Cardinal to this
effect. But the Ministers of France very well considered that this was to
dissolve totally all that hitherto had been concluded, because without doubt at
Rome many things would be proposed by diverse Persons to hinder and trauerse the
Affair, and many new difficulties would be raised. And although all were
concluded, yet nothing could be executed at Rome, but in such form as might
argue the Senate of Venice to have faulted. Now at Venice it was certain, they
would endure nothing in the world which might imply that the Censures had been
valide. Wherefore the French, holding this point to be most essential, did so
well work the Pope, that he yielded no act should pass in Rome. They desired
further, that in the first Consistory his Holiness would communicate to the
Cardinals what had been deliberated; but he consented not to do it, only in a
private Audience he spoke with some thereof, with resolution to call four or
six a day into his Chamber, and take their opinions each one a part.

The Pope presupposed that the Prisoners should be rendered without
Protestation; but having understood that at Venice they were resolved to
Protest, he was upon the point to break off all, if the Cardinal du Perron
had not persuaded him to the contrary, saying, That if on this occasion he
ought to break, it would be more aduantageous to his Dignity that he should
break at Venice, for then the cause of this breach would be wholly ascribed to
the Venetians; whereas if he brake in Rome, it would be attributed to his
stiffenesse. By this means the Pope being settled, passed by this difficulty.

In the first Consistory which was made after these resolutions, all the
Cardinals were present, even those who for their indisposition were not
accustomed to come but very rarely, assuring themselves that the Pope would
communicate to them the resolution which he had taken, and some amongst them
were prepared to contradict. But the Pope after he had Treated some other
Consistoriall matters, did not speak hereof one word, only he heard them all
in private Audience (for six days space) speaking to them of this Affair, as
of a thing already done. Some in their answers commended the action with many
words, some with fewer; but some few opposed themselves, and others to raise
more difficulties represented new precautions. Some were of opinion that it was
better to send the Cardinal Borghese, and some others would have the Cardinal
Zapata joined with the Cardinal de Ioyeuse. But the Pope resolved in himself
not to depart from his first deliberation, nor from that which had been
concluded with Ioyeuse. Now remained only the form of the Breue, full of
extreme difficulties, the Question being at once to save both the Dignity of
the Pope, and of the Senate: a thing so much the more hard and knotty, because
it was without all example of former times. For anciently the Popes taking away
their Censures at the supplication of them that had been Censured, were able,
by inserting in their Breues their Repentance and acts of humility which they
had used, to make themselves formidable no less in their Pardons than in their
Thunderings. But in this business, the case was utterly different, wherein
they could not put one word to exalt the Popes actions, or in favor of his
Censures, but it would be sufficient to break the whole Treaty. Herein the
Cardinal devised a new and prudent temper, which was, not to expedite any
Breue, but to Treat all at Venice only by word of mouth, that he might not
bring to Venice any shadow of suspicion, and that it might be free to the Court
of Rome to publish that the Pope herein had done all with his advantage.
Wherefore following this advice, they dressed only an Instruction to the
Cardinal, to be subscribed with the Popes hand. His Holiness desired also
that some Ministers might assist the Cardinal, to see the Actions prescribed
in the Instruction observed, touching the consignation of the Prisoners, and
the abolition of the Censures: and to receive the Prisoners was named Claudio
Montano, a Criminal Judge at Ferrara. There remained yet a Notary to receive
the Acts, and to this effect were named many Notaries of the Chamber, but none
of them pleased the Cardinal, who foresaw what impediment the fashions of the
Court of Rome in such Acts might bring to the execution of the Treaty.
Wherefore he proposed that Paul Catel, his Domestical Chaplain, might be
created an Apostolic Protonotary, and employed as a Minister in these Actions
which was accepted by the Pope, who was most desirous to wind himself by any
means out of this Labyrinth, and accordingly he created Catel a Protonotary,
and subscribed the Instruction for the Cardinal, and dispatched him, so as it
was agreed. Of these Treaties they knew nothing at Venice, and as touching Paul
Catel, when he came with the Cardinal he was never acknowledged for a
Protonotary or Minister of the Pope, nor did appear in any other quality save
of the Caudatary (or Traine-bearer) of the Cardinal, neither was he ever seen
to do any other office. All this aboue-said has been taken out of the
Relations written from Rome.

But in Venice the two Ambassadors of France and Spain, spoke on another
fashion, the 29. of March. The first was Don Francis de Castro, who brought
news that things went well at Rome, the Pope being contented with the
principal point executed by the Ambassador Aiton, who had given to his
Holiness the word which he desired in the Name of the Catholic King:
adjoining that if the Cardinal de Ioyeuse had done the like, these Two had
given the main stroke to the business. He said also that he liked well that
the election of an Ambassador should follow upon the reuocation of the
Censures. And for the point of the Jesuits, that there would be no difficulty,
if they would speak clearly in that of giving word for the Suspension of the
Laws: but the Pope was constant in his resolution, saying, That in those
things which he desired, men used gilded or disguised words, but in those
which others willed, they spoke clearly. To this the Duke replied presently,
that the Senate had spoken clearly, yea most clearly, and that they did not
intend to be obliged to any thing, beyond or besides that which they had
expressly said.

The Ambassador of France after him reported, that the Cardinal being arrived
at Rome, had found the Pope informed in all that which he purposed to propound,
having known it first by others, and that hereupon his Holiness was much
cooled. That the Pope at length discovered to him how that Don Francis de
Castro had dispatched four Curriers, one after another, with advise that the
Cardinal had not received any more ample word then himself, and that the same
things which he had obtained of the Republique were to be seen in Rome in
writing. That he had nothing but general words, which did not only not
conclude that which his Holiness pretended, but even the contrary: whereby
they might see that the voyage of the Cardinal had not any solid foundation.
But that the Cardinal for all this, after he had suffered the Pope to say what
he pleased, had given him so good satisfaction, that he was appeased: and
already all had been finished, had it not been for that point of the Jesuits,
which the Pope maruellously urged. That his Holiness was contented with the
word given him in the name of the King by the Cardinal and Alincourt, although
he knew that they had it not from the Republique. But nevertheless perseuering
in his desire to have the Jesuits reestablished, the Cardinal knew not how to
avoid it, but rested in some fear lest the resolution hereof might cause delay
in the business.

The day following Don Francis de Castro returned to the Duke to bring News,
that by a Currier dispatched unto him with diligence from the Marquis d'Aiton,
he was advertised, that the impediment concerning the Jesuits was taken away;
for as much as the Pope, who till then had bin firm in his resolution rather
to break, having heard the reasons which he who spoke had caused to be
represented by a Gentleman sent post to Rome, was in the end contented to let
go that point in gratification of the King of Spain and of himself. That the
difficulties had been great, and he knew not whether other had helped to
surmount them; but he prayed that in recompense they would accord him a
Suspension of the Laws for a time. Whereupon Don Francis discoursed with much
skill and artifice, sometime demanding it in consideration of the Pope,
sometime to gratify himself, and sometime in favor of the King his Master.
Adjoining for conclusion, that at least they should accord it till his
departure. But the Duke remaining constant in the answer given before, he
showed a desire that this his proposition might be communicated to the Senate.
Wherefore upon the morrow the Senate decreed to give him answer, with thanks
for that which he had done in the exclusion of the Jesuits, adjoining that for
the rest, having said all that was needful, they thought it not necessary to
add any thing further.

But the 2. of April following, the Ambassador of France brought the News of
an entire conclusion of the Agreement, saying, that the Cardinal himself in
Person would bring the advice. Yet understanding that some others had
dispatched a Currier, he was willing to do the same. And that the Pope had put
so much confidence in him, that not harkning to the Propositions of others, he
was content to give him power to take away the Censures, which he would
accordingly execute upon his arrival at Venice.

The first care of the Cardinal after the Peace concluded, was to give advice
thereof unto the King who had sent him: but after this, he desired nothing more
then to advertise the Duke of Lorraine, as well for that he had instantly
requested him to this purpose, as because he knew how much it imported the
Pope that all Leuies of men beyond the Mounts should be stayed. The Duke
therefore having received the advice, sent for the Secretary Padauin, telling
him the News of the Agreement, saying he had received it by a Currier, with
Letters from the Cardinal de Ioyeuse and from the great Duke. Adjoining, that
(without respect to the Pope,) he was content that the Levy might be made,
excusing the negative which had passed, upon respects of Conscience and of
Religion: as also for the Interests of State, which caused his House to be
straightly united to the Church, besides the certain hope which he always had
of this Agreement, without which peradventure he had not been moved. Padauin
said but a little, to justify the actions of the Republique, and to condemn
the Ecclesiastiques, who aimed at a fourth Crown by submitting Princes unto
themselves. The Duke said, matters were now to be executed not deliberated, not
knowing before that Republiques could not better provide for their government
then by good Laws. The Count de Vaudemont testified herein very much
contentment, and promised Padauin to begin the Levy immediately after Easter,
adjoining, that it were good to cause the Suisses to pass first, the better to
facilitate the passage for the Lorraines. Padauin perceived very well that the
Design of the Count in making the Levy was to cover the loss of his
reputation, and to obtain of the Republique to be continued in the charge of
General of their Armies. Whereof He was further assured, when Monfieur de
Vadiot told him, that the Spaniards had offered the Count 15000. Crowns by the
year to draw him to the feruice of their King, to which he said the Count
would not give care, for the inclination which he had to serve the Republique.
And that in the former passage of matters he had reserved himself, lest his
Father should disadvantage him in his Testament: but it was not meet to think
the like of his Brother, who had his Estate proper and several, which might
have sufficed for the Levy which was desired. Vadiot added, that although the
Leuy had not been made entirely before the conclusion of Peace,
notwithstanding that which was done already had given reputation to the
Republique. He said further in particular, that the Duke had never consented to
ratify the Levy, unless that clause were taken away, Contra quoscunque. But
Padauin being well certified of the conclusion of Peace by certain advice
which he had from the Court of the Most Christian King, deferred to deliver the
silver appointed for the Leuy, until he were first assured of the passage of
the Grisons. In this mean while, neither Padauin nor any of his House were
admitted to Confession by any Confessor at Nancy, by the cunning sleights of
the Jesuits: but this News of the Accord being come, the Rector of the
Jesuits sent to him to excuse himself, offering to receive him to Confession
if he would promise to do nothing against the Pope. To whom he answered, that
having hitherto learned nothing in their School, he would not now begin in
this Case.

Likewise in Spain the certain News of the Agreement being arrived before
Easter, the Popes Nuntio advised the Ambassador of Venice that he should
abstain from the Communion at Easter, considering that shortly after he might
be present with the Popes permission. But the Ambassador would not receive this
counsel: on the contrary, he was confessed and communicated upon holy Thursday
by Francis Spinosa a Dominican, Prior of our Lady de Zocchia, having carried
the Canopy over the Holy Sacrament, and being admitted to all the
Ecclesiastical. Ceremonies of that day, and even to dinner with the Friars.
And it is likely that that Father did not this without the judgment and
consent of other Doctors, not only Theologues which taught him this, but also
of other professions, without whom in the Court of so great a King, none dare
undertake such enterprises.

The Cardinal desirous to bring his Treaty to an end, and hoping more easily
to obtain somewhat more for the Popes advantage during those Festival days
then at other times, made his journey with such haste, that in his passage by
Sea from Ancona to Venice, he exposed his life to hazard. He arrived on Monday
in the Holy Week, with great desire to finish the Concord before the Feast.
But the Affair would not admit so speedy expedition, and the Senate (who knew
well their own innocence,) did not esteem it meet to hasten matters, being
assured they were as able and fit to participate in Divine Services before the
Conclusion as after it. The day following, which was the 10. of April, the
Cardinal went to the Senate, and declared to them his charge, not making
mention of any Breue which he had from the Pope; and already men knew that he
had nothing else but an Instruction subscribed with the hand of his Holiness.
The Senate gave credit to the power, which he said he had from the Pope, (as
being one of the prime Cardinals of the Court of Rome, and a Minister of the
Most Christian King,) without showing any writings from the Pope at all. He
certified first the Repub. of the Popes good will, and his right intentions
carried unto the public good of Christendom, excusing the stiffnesse which
he had showed in the Treaty, as proceeding from a zeal to sustain the Papal
dignity. But that, for all the good inclination of his Holiness, the Affair
had been very difficult to conclude, not without danger of a breach, by reason
of the evil offices done by diverse persons. That in the end the difficulties
were restrained to two: the one, to send an Ambassador to Rome, before the
Censures were removed; the other, to reestablish the Jesuits. That the former
was easily ended, the Pope being contented that the Censures should first be
taken away: but the second was not in such sort accorded, but that he must
speak more thereof with his Serenity. Then he passed to explane the Conditions
and the form, how the Censures were to be taken away. The Conditions were;
That the Religious gone forth of the State by reason of the Interdict should be
restored, and their goods redeliuered. That the Prisoners should be consigned
without protesting: That the Protestation of the Republique should be revoked,
with all that had followed, as also the Letter written unto the Cities of the
State, which was dispersed. He made vehement insta^ce for the reestablishme^t of
the Jesuits, assuring them not withstanding that he could take away the
Censures without this condition, but using words very perswasiue and full of
affection, he said, that this would make an entire Agreement, as a thing
desired by the Pope for his reputation, by the Most Christian King, for the
satisfaction of his Holiness, and to him (who spoke) more dear than the gain
of a Kingdom, for the same Reasons: That he would counsel the Republique to
do it, that they might settle a firm and durable Peace. The Duke and the
College immediately answered, that the resolution to give the Prisoners to the
King to gratify him, without prejudice of the Authority of the Republique had
been accepted by his Majesty, and therefore could not now be called into
doubt: also that he should not hope in any manner to obtain from the Senate
the omitting of the Protestation, as also the restitution of the Jesuits was a
thing merely impossible, because of the great injuries at all times received
from them, and for the strait conditions with which their Banishment had been
decreed. After this, the Cardinal passed to speak of the form of taking away
the Censures, wherein there was some difficulty; For the Cardinal assuring
himself that the Republique would remain most constant in the confession of
their innocence, and affirmatively maintain that they had not in any sort
whatsoever incurred the Censures, accordingly that they were resolved to refuse
Absolution, because they had no need of it, would yet at least do some action
by which he might make the World believe that the Duke had received it. And to
this effect he proposed, to go to the Church of S. Mark, with the Duke and
Senators, and there to celebrate or assist at a Mass solemn or private, and
in fine to give a Benediction, saying, that by this his action of celebrating
before the Prince, or of assisting with him at a Mass, Men might see clearly
that the Censures had been taken away, by the Benediction which he had given.
This form pleased not, because it had some semblance of an Absolution, whence
men might infer that the Prince confessed he had been faulty. And the Duke
answered in plain terms, that as the innocence of himself and the Republique
was manifest, and without shadow of fault, so it was meet there should not
appear any sign of Repentance, of Remission, or Absolution. That it was well
known what had happened to many Princes on other occasions, to whom some acts
which they had done out of devotion and Religion, had been imputed and
esteemed to be so many acknowledgements of their faults. And that ordinarily
they carried in triumph the Conquered, and not such as had stoutly defended by
lawful means the Authority given them by God. And when the Cardinal said,
that the Apostolic Benediction ought not at any time, or in any case to be
refused by those who had it offered; Answer was made him, that this was true,
and that the Republique had never refused it, nor were purposed to refuse it,
unless when it gave occasion to believe a falsity; as in the present case, men
might be hence occasioned to believe that the Republique had committed some
fault, a thing contrary to truth, being most assured of their innocence.

Besides this which was Treated that day by the Card. for the space of four
days, they sent to him two Senators of the College, who treated upon the
points in question, and upon others which had some difficulty, touching the
form of taking away the Censures. The Senators said, that to the Republique
the word of the Card. would suffice. Concerning the Restitution of the
Religious which were retired, they consented so that it might be reciprocal,
and made with condition that the Pope also should receive to grace them, who
had persisted in the Service of the Signiory. For the Writings, they said, the
Republique would do with those which had been published in their favor, as the
Pope should do with his. And as for the Ambassador, after that the Censures
were taken away, they would elect and send one to reside according to the
Custom. For their Manifesto, that in like manner they would take it away,
after that the Monitorie, whereupon it was grounded, were taken away. And
touching the Letter written to the Governors and Commonalties, that many
Letters had been writ according to the exigence of affairs, but that they
were secret, neither was it reasonable that any should give Law to a Prince
what he ought to write to his Ministers and Subjects. That the Letter commonly
scattered was false, therefore it was not needful to speak of it, besides
that it was under the Dignity of a Prince to Treat about forged Writings.
Touching the Jesuits, that to speak of their return, was to put all that
which had been done in confusion, in as much as for certain the final
resolution of the Senate was, that they should be excluded.

On the other side, the Cardinal, saying he had charge from the King to
conserve in effect the Liberty of the Republique, and in appearance the
Dignity of the Pope, endeavored to persuade the Senate to receive a
Benediction, not for Absolution, but as an ordinary Benediction, such as the
Pope sends. For the Writings and their Authors, he said, he would not yield
any thing in favor of the Republique, because (said he) they are matters for
the Inquisition, wherein the Pope himself cannot intermeddle. He proposed
further, that they should send not one, but two Ambassadors, considering that
this grace done by the Pope merited an extraordinary thanksgiving He pressed
also, that they should publish a Manifesto with might revoke the former, before
the Censures were taken away. For the Letter which had been diuulged, howsoever
it was forged, yet some mention might be made that it was such by that act.
Further, he proposed, that it was meet to frame a Writing which should contain
the points which were accorded, saying he had brought a Formulary from Rome,
without making any mention of the Jesuits. For since they were not
reestablished, their exclusion at least ought not to be specified; yet if this
point should seem so important, as it ought not to remain ambiguous, that at
least the mention of their exclusion might be conceived in as fair terms as
was possible. But for the Protestation upon the delivery of the Prisoners, the
Ambassador Fresne decided the difficulty, saying, that they were for the King,
and to him, as to his Ambassador, they ought to be consigned; wherein he would
be contented to receive them with the Protestation which the Republique should
make, wherein the Pope nor any others were to intermeddle.

The other difficulties were again examined in full Senate the fourteenth of
the same Month, and then Treated with the Cardinal the three days following;
and at length all resolved after this manner;

That the Cardinal should declare in the College, without any other
Ceremony, that the Censures were taken away, or that he took them away, (a
thing which might be done nevertheless, though they were judged inualide:) And
at the same time the Duke should put in his hands a reuocation of the
Protestation. They concluded also upon the form of consigning the Prisoners
according to the advice of Fresne; that not any act should be dressed upon the
points of the Agreement; but that the word of the Republique on the one side,
and of the Card. on the other, should suffice. The reestablishment of the
Religious which had retired themselves was decreed, the Jesuits
notwithstanding remaining excluded, and besides fourteen others of the
Religious who fled not for obedience to the Pope, but to avoid the punishment
of their crimes, it being a matter of Justice that Seditious persons should be
banished the State. That no mention should be made of any Letter written unto
Governors, but only a Manifesto published for the reuocation of the
Protestation which was imprinted. And after that the Censures were taken away,
that they should name an Ambassador to reside with his Holiness. For other
particularities that they should not then be spoken of, but should be remitted
to be fairly Treated with the Pope. There remained only the form of the
Manifesto, to which purpose to agree upon the terms, the Secretary Marc
Ottobon was sent to the Cardinal and Mounsieur de Fresne, who easily consented
upon a tenor, save only upon those words where it was said, That the Censures
being taken away, the Protestation in like manner was taken away: the Cardinal
urging that they ought not to use the word taken away in the Protestation, but
revoked, which the Secretary would not yield, and reported the matter unto the
College. Who though they could not comprehend what subtilty might be intended
in the word Revoked, which the Cardinal would use, rather than that other
Taken away, notwithstanding this latter pleased them better, because it was
used on both parts, the word Taken away, being employed both in regard of the
Censures, and of the Protestation. But the Cardinal declaring that he could
not herein go beyond his charge which he had from the Pope, and the Senate
perceiving not any difference, lest they should seem to deny it only because
they were instantly requested, they condescended in the end that the word of
Reuocation should be used. And to show that all was done in one and the same
time, it was concluded, to say, The Protestation in like manner is revoked. All
these particularities being thus concluded and determined, and the Manifesto
dressed, they appointed the day the 21. of April, to give an entire
accomplishment to that which was determined, which was done in the manner
following.

The Cardinal was lodged in the Palace (sometime) of the Duke of Ferrara:
whither Fresne that morning went by times, and Marc Ottobon the Secretary being
come with two ordinary Notaries of the Dukes Chancery, the Officers brought
Marc Antony Brandolino Valdimarino, Abbot of Neruese, and Scipio Sarazin Canon
of Vicenza, Prisoners, entering with all their troop into a Chamber, where was
the Ambassador accompanied with his Domestiques, and some others of the family
of the Cardinal. And having saluted the Ambassador, they told him, that those
were the Prisoners, which conformably to that which had been accorded, the
most Illustrious Prince had sent to be delivered to his Excellence in
gratification of the Most Christian King; with protestation not to prejudice
hereby the authority which the Republique has to judge Ecclesiastiques. The
Ambassador answered, that so he received them. Then the Secretary demanded some
public instrument or act hereof to be made by Girolamo Poluerin and John
Rizzard the Dukes Notaries, in presence of those of the Cardinals Court, and of
the Ambassador, together with the public Officers. This done, the Prisoners
recommended themselves to the Ambassador, who with words of courtesy promised
them his protection, and going out of the Chamber with the company, causing the
Prisoners to be brought after him into a Gallery where the Cardinal walked, he
said unto the Cardinal; These are the Prisoners which are to be delivered to
the Pope. The Cardinal pointing to one near him, said, Give them to him, who
was Claudio Montano a Commissarie sent by the Pope to this effect; who touched
them in token of dominion and possession, and prayed the Ministers of Justice
which conducted them, that they would be pleased to keep them for him.

This Act thus finished, the Cardinal departed with the Ambassador, and both
went unto the Prince, who after Mass was gone with the Signiory and the Sages
into the College; where all being set as ordinarily, the Cardinal pronounced
these formal words; I rejoice very much that this happy day so much desired by
me is come, wherein I declare unto your Serenitie that all the Censures are
taken away, as in deed they are; and I take therein much pleasure, for the
benefit which shall redound hereby to all Christendom, and particularly to
Italy. Then the Duke put in his hand the decree of the reuocation of the
Protestation. And after some words of complement, the Cardinal prayed them to
send their Ambassador with speed to Rome, and so departed.

The reuocation of the Protestation was addressed unto the same Prelates to
whom the Protestation was directed, and in substance contained, That a means
being found, whereby the Pope was certified of the uprightness and sincerity
of the Republique in their actions, He had taken away and removed the causes of
the present differences: And also, as the Senate had endeavored always to
entertain a good intelligence with the Holy See, so they received much
contentment by obtaining the effect of this their just desire, whereof they
were willing to give them notice: adjoining, that on both sides all being
executed which had been agreed on, and the Censures being taken away, the
Protestation in like sort did remain revoked.

The Cardinal had determined after the Audience of the Prince, to go to the
Cathedral Church of S. Peter, there to celebrate Mass, and the Ambassador Don
Francis de Castro had entreated him that he might there assist; the rumor
whereof going through the City, very much people were there assembled early.
Wherefore many Masses were celebrated from morning till Midday, as also the
days before, both in that Church and in others, there was a great
frequentation of Masses and other Divine Offices, praying God that what was
Treated for the accommodating of so great a Controversy, might succeed to his
glory. The Cardinal going from the College, took his way to S. Peter's, and
at the same time the Count de Castro went to the Audience of the Prince to
congratulate with him. In the mean while, the Cardinal arrived at the
Cathedral Church, where for the multitude of people they celebrated at three
Altars, and expected a while the coming of Don Francis de Castro with Don
Innigo de Cardenas, always continuing Mass after Mass. At length the
Ambassadors being come, the Cardinal celebrated in the presence of an infinite
multitude.

The same day, after dinner a bruit was scattered, that that morning in the
College the Cardinal had given an absolution; which caused a great
coffeehouse to such as were zealous for the public Honor, who were
curious quickly to discover the original of such a bruit, with design to have
a remedy, (so fixed was that resolution in the spirits of the Venetians, to
show constantly that the Republique was not in any fault:) but this rumor was
suddenly appeased, because in seeking whence it might arise, they found it had
been scattered here and there by the French, who said, that all the Senators
of the College being assembled, and expecting, according to the custom, that
the Duke should first sit down, then after all to take their place in order,
the Cardinal made the sign of the Cross under his hood. Which being
understood, the general discontent was turned into merriment, for as much as
none is ignorant, that if this be admitted as an Absolution, the
Ecclesiastiques may give Absolution from their Censures even to them which
refuse it, or which do not desire it, that none can hinder it, that they may also
(following this doctrine) absolve men absent, and as it shall seem good unto
them: That if the Card. made the sign of the Cross under his hood, he might
have done it more co^modiously in his Lodging, this importing nothing to the
purpose. It was sufficient that the Interdict had not been observed for any
one moment, and that the Senate refused not only absolution, but even all
ceremonies which might have the least appearance thereof.

In the evening of the same day the Senate assembled, where they deliberated to
elect an Ambassador to go to Rome, to reside with his Holiness: and Francis
Contarini a Knight was elected, who had been sent by the Republique some
years before, with three others, to congratulate with this Pope for his
assumption to the Papacy. Thus was ended this tumultuous Affair, which seemed
impossible to be composed by Accord: and verily a great part of the good
success ought to be ascribed to the dexterity of the Cardinal, who omitting
pointilles and subtilties, did not say at Venice all that which the Court of
Rome had wished, whereunto he saw clearly they would never have consented.

Many were of opinion that it was meet to send Extraordinary Ambassadors into
France and Spain to thank those Kings who had interposed and employed
themselves for an Agreement, especially considering the quality of the
Ministers whom they had herein used, whereof the one was very eminent, as being
the most ancient Cardinal, the other as Nephew of the Duke of Lerma. This
advice pleased the general, as being grounded upon terms of gratitude, and
acknowledgment of obligation. Wherefore the Senate put it in deliberation,
where balancing the reasons which encouraged to do this, with others which
dissuaded it, because it was to give too much reputation to the Affair, and to
make the world believe that the Republique thought themselves well delivered
from a merited danger; this sole respect had so much weight, that they resolved
all with one voice, that it would suffice to do such a complement by the
ordinary Ambassadors. Likewise many expected in Venice they should make
bonfires, and other signs of joy, or at least ring their bells:
Notwithstanding, nothing of this was done, nor one bell founded neither at
Venice nor in any City of the State when the News arrived. Not that the Senate
and the Cities of the State were not very glad to be freed from the danger* of
War, but to the end that such signs of joy might not be interpreted to
signify some absolution which they had received, or the Republique thereby
conceived to have been formerly in a fault; which, as an untruth and falsehood,
they ever abhorred.

Moreover by order of Senate advice was given of this Agreement, and of all
that had passed, to the Ambassador of England, and to the Ministers of the
Republique in all Courts, and to the Governors of Cities in the State, and
particularly to the Secretary Padauin, who (besides this advice) had
commandment to dismiss the French and Lorraine Soldiers, and charge also
speedily to depart from Lorraine, and to go into Suisserland to make there a
Leuy of 3000. men. Afterward, the Senate writ Letters to the Kings of France
and Spain: but to the King of Great Britain they gave very many thanks, as
he merited for his ready declaration to assist the Republique with forces when
they should have need. Further, a Present was given to the Cardinal of 6000.
crowns of silver, and another to Don Francis de Castro of 3000.

At Rome the Pope had advice, how the Agreement was accomplished, how the
Cardinal de Ioyeuse had travailed therein, and the Protestation revoked; which
did not please him in that clause, That the Protestation was in like sort
revoked. As also it did not please the Court, who howsoever they approved that
which the Pope had done, yet they desired that, according to the custom, the
end had been with the victory of that See, which in matters of Affairs was
ever wont to be the Conqueror. And indeed, many offices and pursuits were done
by diverse persons, and for diverse ends, to raise herein some new difficulties.
But his Holiness abhorring these troubles, approved that which was done and
writ thereof to the Cardinal de Ioyeuse. And the 30. of April declared in
Consistory how the Accord was finished, and Peace concluded; The Cardinal
Colonna was forward to speak somewhat to the contrary, and the Cardinal du
Perron answered him in few words; and nothing was said further.

The advice of the Agreement being come to Milan, the Count de Fuentes made
show that he believed it not, and fained to be more active than ever in the
preparations of war. Which he did to the end that they of Milan might not
complain of the damages which they received, and lest the Soldiers knowing
that they must be disbanded, should make instance to be paid, especially for
that the Germans and Suisses had couenanted to have pay for three Months,
which would arise to the sum of 300000. crowns. In the mean while his purse
was empty, and he was indebted 50000 crowns to the Co^munaltie for lodgings.
But when the Secretary of Venice (by order from the Senate) gave him particular
notice of the Agreement, he answered courteously, nevertheless with small
contentment, and he could not contain himself when he was prayed from the
Pope to dismiss his troops but answered harshly, that he knew very well what
he had to do.

At Venice the Cardinal de Ioyeuse being advertised of the displeasure which
the Pope conceived by reason of some terms contained in the Manifesto, prayed
that they would somewhat temper the matter by their Letters which the
Ambassador should carry unto the Pope and to the Cardinals; exhorting the
Republique in the Name of the King to a good intelligence with his Holiness.

In Rome after this there was a bruit that the Pope would not rest contented
with that that had passed, for that having weighed all things, he found that
the Protestation was not revoked by the terms of the Manifesto; and that he
would not endure that any Religious should rest excluded, for as much as this
was to confirm the authority of the Republique to judge them: and therefore
that he menaced to retract all. That the Count de Fuentes did offer him 30000.
men to force the Republique unto that which he desired: all which bruits a
little terrified the Card. de Ioyeuse. But the Pope was far enough from any
such thoughts, on the contrary he designed Rimini to be his Nuntio at Venice.
And the Venetian Senate dispatched the Lord Contarini the 9 of May, with order
that he should go alone to Audience, lest any should think to lead him in
triumph. Presently after his arrival he had Audience of his Holiness, the
19. of May, where he was benignely received, the Pope testifying that he would
never after remember any thing that had passed, taking up that word of
Scripture, Recedant uetera, noua fint omnia. Also he exhorted the Senate since
they had in readiness so great an Army to think upon assaulting the Turk.
There was published in Print a sheet of paper, containing the Articles of the
Accord, full of notorious forgeries, whereof the Author was thought to be the
Cardinal Caetan, because it was certain that he sent many Copies to Milan,
with his Letters to Captain Sceuerolla; which was also yet more probable,
because he was also the Author of a Discourse made under the name of Nicomachus
Philaleteus, in matter and form much like the other. The foresaid paper was
carried into France, where it was prohibited by the commandment of the Most
Christian King.

The 2. of June the Nuntio arrived at Venice, where he was received according
to the ordinary custom.

Moreover, Don Francis de Castro quickly after the Agreement dispatched a
Carrier to his King, and gave him account of what had passed, which was
received in that Court with an extreme pleasure. The King thought himself
freed of a great trouble. To the Nobility it was very acceptable, not only to
see themselves delivered from War, but further because they hoped that this
example would moderate the purchases of Ecclesiastiques in Castile of such
goods as they call Patrimoniall di Radice, as they have been moderated in
Portugal and in Arragon: the thing being certain that within the last 40.
years the Regulars alone have acquired to the sum of 250000. Crowns in
goods, in that one Kingdom.

After that the Currier of Don Francis was arrived, came another Currier
expressly sent by the Senate, and carrying a commandment to their Ambassador to
do his complements to the King. And when the Nuntio received no order touching
these Matters for many days after, the Duke of Lerma made great complaint unto
him, that the Pope made small account of so great a King, who with so much
expense had maintained the authority of the Apostolic See. Order was also
given immediately to the Count de Fuentes that he should disarme, who either for
want of money, or for some particular design which he had, or because he had a
custom not to obey the first commandment, saying that they who are far off
do not see necessities, did not dismiss his Companies: on the contrary, he
put them upon the shoulders and charge of the Communalties. Of which grieuance
when they advised the King, praying to be eased, (the sole Communalty of Milan
being herein at the cost of 7000. Crowns a day) the King of Spain was forced
to write again unto him with his own hand, yet warily and not with absolute
command, lest he should hazard his Royal authority. But because it was come to
the knowledge of the King, that if the Count de Fuentes remained any longer in
Arms, there must needs follow some inconvenience, since he disgusted all the
Cities of the State by means of those Lodgings contrary to their privileges,
(although he pretended they owed him thanks for interrupting and violating the
Privileges of the great City Milan, without Sedition,) they took a resolution
to command him absolutely. For they of the Council (who did not like to see
any stirs in Italy,) considered that this Accord had not only delivered them
from the incommodities of a War full of great dangers, but was further also
profitable unto them for the Inconveniences which might have happened by the
humors of the Count, being giddy-headed and hard to be governed, and by the
Popes inconstancy, much wavering in his deliberations.

The 12. of May, Don Inigo de Cardenas gave advice unto the Duke of this last
commandment given to the Count de Fuentes, that he should presently by all
means disarme; and demanded passage through the Dominions of the Republique,
for the Germans under Madruccio, to return unto their Houses. Which was freely
granted, provided that they should pass in order, and without Arms. 1500. of
them desired to pass by the Grisons, but the passage being denied them, they
were constrained to take their way by the Lac de Guard within the State of the
Republique. It is certain, that the expenses made by reason of these motions,
and among the Grisons by Fuentes, amounted to the sum of 800000. Crowns, not
accounting the Charge of the Communalties of the Cities and Country, which was
inestimable.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. M.
DC. XXVI.


