Heavy news

Of an horrible earth quake which was in the city of Scharbaria in this
present year of. xlij. The xiij. day of June.

Also how that a city in Turkey is sonke^;

The heavy news contained in a letter sent out of Italy.
Right douty and well-beloved Lord I let you wit the pytieful new tydyng
and horrible earthquake, which I meselfe have seen, where I with my two
company(...) was at ynne by a town, which (...) about.xvi. mile from Florence,
a^^^s called Scharbaria, where we were ^^^ged over night. On the.xiii. da^
(...) June of this present year one ho^^^ before the break of the day, has
almighty God of his great mercy an^ fatherly love preserved us (...) from all
evil and (...) which we never (...) praise him. (...) that throu^^ (...) he
will always preserve us. For we may surely mark well enough by the wonderful
tokens that he has prophesied to come, and partly do now daily chance,
before our eyes, that the day of dome is at hand.

In the morning one hour before the break of the day did rise great and
horrible earth quakes: for there happened seven in the space of an h^ure, and I
with me two fellows were al^ three in sleep in the bed, in an ynne of the
suburbs, near to the gates, which was a great fortune for ^s that we were
not closed in.

The first earthquake.
The first earthquake was so fear^^ (...) ^ade so great a noise, that I (...)
^oughte at the first (...) ^yshynge that I (...) ^ut at the same (...) house
begin to cleue in sunder, and the chymeney with the thacke to fall, so that we
did fly contynently, and how we eskaped can not I tell: yet through the
help of God, did we eskape without hurt or harm of our bodies. But within
the city are nearehande sonke and broken all the houses, and some folk
peryshed. The churches and great howses are all fallen to the ground. The
people that was left in life did cry Misericorde with great chatterynge of
tethe, by reason of the fear, and ran out of the city into a moras ground,
where we were fled also with our ooste and his household.

Helas for pity, there was so pytiefull an outcrye and howlynge of men and
women, as I never did hear all the days of my life. Much people did lie
beside the stones and timber, which could not be help for fear: whether some
did run to them, that can not I tell: For I can not fully write unto you of
the horrible punishment and advertisement of God.

Farthermore did there rise at the same hour yet.vj. earthquakes more the one
after the other, which were so horrible at the first, that the earth did so
shake, as though it would have opened it self, and swalowed us all. It was so
calm wether, that one leaf of the trees did not move. The sky was so darck
and black, that I for my part did wait for the clerynge thereof every
twynckelynge of an eye. Summa every thing was much more, and more horrible,
than I can ever describe unto you. Nevertheless God gave grace, that the
darckenesse voyded, and the day came again, the wind began also to blow
again: wherefore we were glad and lauded and thanked God, which had so
gracyously showed his mercy to us.

After that did we ride to Florence, our Lord be merciful unto us: for I
believe surely that I have in deed seen an example of the domes day. The town
has yet left four hundredth and twenty heerthes or places for fire.

Good Lord what a pitiful cryenge and calling upon God was herd there. To
burn a town is not to be compared by this dolorous chance. God our Lord
grant unto us all his mercy, that we may by this earthquake amend and
convert us to his glory, and our souls health. Amen.

Like earthquakes have been at Florence, and in all those countries, but they
have not done so great hurtes save only that they have overthrown many
chymenies. This have I written unto you in hayste, because the Post could not
tarry.

An other new tydynge that is happened in Turkey.
IN Turkey (as I understand) is a city sonke into the ground, out of the
which is not one man escaped.

She lies in a plain contry, from the which the Turkysh safferon comes,
about a days journey from Solonichio, which is a renowned city in Turkey.
Thus fare ye well. In my nex writynge unto you shall ye have farther
certification of all things

Imprinted in Aldersgate street by Nicolas Bourman.


