The virtuous scholehous of ungracious women. A godly dialogue or communication
of two Systers. The one a good and virtuous wedowe, out of the land of
Meissen. The other, a cursed ungracious, froward and brawlinge woman, out of
the mountains. To the honor and praise of all good women. And to the rebuke
and instruccion of such as be impatient.

depiction of two women conversing by a tree

Proverb xix. b.House and riches may a man have by the heritage of his elders.
But a discrete woman is the gift of the Lord. Proverb. xxxi b. Who so fyndeth
an honest faithful woman, she is more worth then pearls. The heart of his
husband may safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoils.
Gwalter Lyn to the reader.
THe holy Apostle Paul to the Romans in the xv. writes that, whatsoever is
written before, is written for our learning and instruction. Wherefore in this
Dialogue christen reader, thou find a very godly communicatio^ between two
Systers.

Iustina a Godly wydowe out of the land of meyssen. Serapia a waywarde ungodly
married woman. This complayneth upon her husband, and wilful children. The
other instructs and conforteth her in patience, to be obedient unto her
wedded husband, and to bring up her children in the fear of God, with fair
words, and decent nurtour and correction, groundyng the same in the holy
scripture of God, and confirmynge the same by many goodly examples, for Iustina
is always minded to live godly, co^trarywyse Serapia, which bylyke received
that name at the font. And doutles, if honest and virtuous huswyues or wydowes
shall se, read or hear this dialogue, they shall strengthen their virtuous
minds in it. Again, if rude, in apt stubborn wives shall also hear the
same, they shall take occasion to know them selves and to amend their
conditions. Wherefore Christen reader, vouchesafe to judge, and understand the
same with a godly mind, and accept it for good, for as much as it is digested
after the simpelwitted nature and inordinate speech of women. And here in is
no rule prescrybed unto the good, nor yet any correction laid to heavy upon
the ignorant.

depiction of two women conversing by a tree Iustina

Serapia



IVstina. God speed my hartly beloved sister.


Serapia. oh it is good yt thou do ones come to me, but ye stately folks in
your country care not for us poor souls here without. In this country God
thank the good Iustina, thou art heartily wilcome unto me.


Iustina. My dearly beloved sister. God thank the, how can thou say, that
I am to stately for the, I have rejoiced heartily to come unto the, thynkest
thou also, that I care not for the, notwithstondynge that thou know well
enough, that I have always loved the before other of our systers, Therefore I
come to the now, to visyte the, and to se how thou do, Simplicius thy good
man, and thy louinge children.


Serapia. O how do verily, I could be content to take it better, with us is
nothing but labor and trauayll, and yet have nothing for it.


Iustina. Oh dear sister, complain not to I pray the, thank the heavenly
father, that he gives health unto thy loving husband and children which is
the greatest gift and grace of God, and also the costlyes treasure in earth.
Also let it not be tedious but pleasyng unto the, that God causes not al
things to succeed unto the, after thy ne own mind and will as unto the
ungodly, where of David says. I was grieved at the wicked, when I saw the
ungodly in such prosperyte, for they are in no parel of death, but are lusty
and strong. They come in no misfortune as other folk, neither are they plaged
like other men. Lo (says he) these are the ungodly, these prospere in the
world, and these have riches in possession, but be thou of good chere and
think that thou art in the nu^bre of the godly, and say with David, Psa.
xij. Number. xiiij. ii. Esa. l. b to. viijd
when I have the Lord. I care not for heaven nor earth, and compain not,
that it is labor and trauayll, with our labor and trauayll can we not live
in this world. Gene. iij. c
For the lord God has laid this curse and malediction upon the shoulders of
all men, in his wrath, even in Paradyse, that we because of our
tra^sgressions, must eat our bread in the sweat of our faces in labor and
sorrow. Thou nedest not to say, also that thou have nothing besides, thou will not be content with that, which God has given the, and yet gives daily,
where by I may perceive, that thou have but small trust in God.


Serapia. yea, the longer I trust, the less I have. The day has been, that I
had somewhat, but now all is gone to the devil.


Iustina. God save us from the Devil, good sister speak not so waywardely,
know thou not, that even as God is believed and trusted, even so is he had
and found? if thou believe that he will preserve the, thy good man and thy
children, truly he shall do it, and will do it with a good will, but if thou do
mistrust him, and be douteful in the matter, thinking that thou must prosecute
and bring it to pass, by thy care, labor, and pains, Prou.
than sends God scarcite. For whatsoever the ungodly fears the same comes
upon him. This does he for this cause, that we should knoweledge that he is
almightye, and that we of our own powers, without his grace ca^ do nothing.
i. Pet. a Mat. ^ c Luc. xi Psalm lv. c.
Therefore cast all thy care (says Peter, upon the lord, for he cares for
us, he will also (as David says) not always leave the righteous and them that
trust in him, in tribulacion.


Serapia. Thou say very well dear sister. Thou may trust in God well
enough for thou art rich, and have enough. But if the world were so hard
with the, as it is with me, thou should compain as well as I. For I se well
enough, when I sit long still, and care not, or do nothing, than have I
nothing, I must surely study and do for it, no man will bring me ought at
home, Also my husband is seldom at home, he goes forth about his busynes,
and cares not how I keep house with the children.


Iustina. With all thy carefulnes and seeking, shall thou preuayl nothing,
dear sister, remember the kind words of Christ, and print them surely in
thy heart, whereas he says. Matthew. vi. Luc. xij.
Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on, is not the life more worth then
meat, and the body more of valewe then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air,
for they sow not, neither reap, nor yet carry into the barues, and yet your
heavenly father fedeth them. Are ye not much better then they? Why care ye
then for raiment? Considre the lilyes of the field, how they grow. They
labor not, neither spinne. And yet for all that, I say unto you, that even
Solomon in all his royaltye, was not arrayed like unto one of these. Therefore
take no thought saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or where
with shall we be cloteth? After all these things seek the gentyles. Therefore
be not like unto the heathen, frettinge and vexing thy self, with such
unprofitable cares and thoughts, for the wise Solomon says, Careful
trauayll hurts, but blessed is he that trusts in the Lord. Mat. vi
Christ says further in the Chapter above mentioned. Seek ye first the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and al these things shall be
ministered unto you, for your heavenly father knows yt ye have need of meat
drink cloth and all these things. This conforte should thou truly take to
thy heart dear sister, and trust there to. I have such a strong confidence in
my God, and in these confortable words of Christ, that although I with my
poor fatherles children, had nothing at al, or as little as thou, how be it
thou have enough, and nedest not to compain, yet do I know surely, yt he
will not forsake me, but nourysshe me and my children, as the birds of ye
air, and cloth me as ye flowers and lilyes of ye field. That thou say, thy
husband goes and executes his office, is (...) unreasonable Pius my dear
husband (whom God pardon) did so likewise I thought, if he had not always
ben at home, nothing had gone froward. But now I know, that he did more with
one word, than I can do in a hole day, now begin I first to mysse him.


Serapia. No I can not tell what good he does, he is now so stubborn and
waywarde toward me and the children, that I know not, how it comes to
pass, or what he ayleth, he fretteth and vexes himself, in vain and for
naught. I think he will be stark mad or out of his wits.


Iustina. O good sister, I believe that thou art the greatest occasion of his
fretting and disquietynge, thou art to froward and obstinate, against him (as
I hear) thou do not suffer him a word, brawlest always with him, and
orderest him very evil, notwitstandynge he is an honest simple man, which is
loath to fight and brawle with the, as other froward men do. And also I
believe, and am sure, that he is no dronkarde, hoo remonger nor player.


Serapia. How a dronkarde, hooremonger, or player? if he were such one, Oh,
then would I have a stomach with him, I would pluck my self with him, as the
one devil with the other.


Iustina. Lo, now I perceive what is in the, and that thou art so stout and
waywarde against the good man. He has also desired me, to rebuke the gentely
for it, Oh said he, thou suffer no man to reprove the, also thou will not
hear him, speak he never so kyndely unto the, neither art thou willinge to
go to the word of God, or preaching, and also thou love not to hear him
read at home (which is a sign of an ungodly conversation) chydest with him,
evermore before men, bring not up thy children in the fear and correction
of God, angrest thy self unreasonably by and without a cause, disagreest with
thy neighbors. Should not this grieve thy good husband? I believe or a truth
that thou do grieve him sore with it.


Serapia. What care I for that? Although I am froward, seeing many spiteful
tongues do report it by me, so that I am no hoore as some be. Also I know very
well, that my husband every where makes his reports of me, what should I do
to him? should I call him gracious Lord? I would rather se him hanged. Well
well, I will one day begin a matter with him, that he shall not think.


Iustina. God forbid, let not such evil thoughts enter into thy heart, but
I perceive that (as Christ says) of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, Mat xij
now do thy fruits break forth, now art thou like unto vnblusshed
lymestone, which when cold water is poured upon it blows breaks smoketh
and burns unnaturally, even so do thou also, I have somewhat gentily
admonysshed and friendly reproved the (how be it I thought thou would have
taken it for none evil of me) but thou use ungracious words, cursest thy
good husband, whom by reason thou ought to keep in honor, be obedient
unto him, as unto the lord, and also be not thy husbands master (as Paul
teaches but be still, should not such ungracious, yea I will say also
ungodly words grieve thy good man, and provoke him to anger? Oh be ashamed, I
hear no man, that speaks evil by thy husband, but that he is good and
honest, gentle, courteous, and lives charitably with all me^, without any
contention or debate, glad to hear and to read the word of God, and to
further the same, and that the people are very favorable and louinge toward
him.


Serapia. I know that well enough, that the folles love him, and specially
some wives love him very well, thou nedest not to tell me thereof, but if I may
come ones to the right ground of the matter, thou shall se, what I will do,
also I pass not for his going to church, hearing of sermons, or reading,
the more he goes to Church or reads, the less I have, and sense Luther,
the new preachinge, the heretical books and readyng came up have I almost
lost all that I had, and I think I shall never have luck with him as long
as he lives, would god that the devil would shortly rid him out of the
way.


Iustina. By thy fruits it is known, what manner of tree thou art, o, do
thou not trust thy husband? and stand in fear of him, for other good
women? god save me, I take pitye upon the, that thou art such a wild and
stubborn woman, what will thou show thy self? of a truth I would not have
believed it, if any man had told it me, but thou come forth thy self with
such unmannerly communication before me, whereof by reason thou should
refrain thy self, what do thou then before other folks? Oh nay dear
sister do not so, know thou not that every man is his wives head, Ephe. v
i. Co. xi i. Pet. iij
and we wives ought to be obedient and subject unto our husbands in all
things, even as also God, has given unto the man in Paradise, the rule over
the woman, whereas he says. Genesis iij
Thou shall bow before thy husband and he shall have the rule of the. This is
the cause also (as Paul says) that we go attyred and have a power upon our
heads, i. Cor. ij
whereby we should remember, that we must live under the power and subjection
of the man. And therefore must I now (for as much as my loving husband, of
blessed memory, is dead) let hang my power or veil downewardes from my
head, whereby is signified that I am a wydowe, having no power or husband
that now has rule of me. Thou say also that thou do not pass upon thy
husbands going to Church, hearing of sermons, or reading, notwithstanding
that we have nothing in earth more blessed more profitable, and better, then
to hear and read the word of God, Matthew. iiij. Deute. viij
we are also nourysshed, and live by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of god, and not only by bread. Now if thy husband also should not
hear or read the word of God, where by all things are sanctified, and be so
froward, wild and vnmanered as thou, which fear not God, and can agree
with no body. Oh, what alyfe should that be? And believe me truly, yt thou,
thy children and the hole house, is sanctified and preserved of God through thy
virtuous husband, Co. vij
as Paul says, that the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, or
else should all things go to wrack with the.


Serapia. What should he sanctify me, if he might drown me in a spone full
of water, he would do it, he keeps me some time like a dish cloute, think
thou, that I suffer it? No I warraunte the.


Iustyna. Truly, thou haste a right name Seropia or Serapia, seldom or very
littell good, thou haste eue^ the name with the dead. But this I know of a
truth, and have perceived it, that thy husband, is but the gentle to good,
simple, and kind, and gives ye no strypes, keeps the reasonably and honestly
(wherefore he may well be called Simplitius) and when he does all things for the
best, and entreats ye most ge^tlyest of all then do thou soberate him with
spiteful words, that it is shame, should not this grieve him? should not this
frette and vex him? Pro. xij.
eue^ as also Salomo^ says, yt such a shameful, vngentill, vnmanered, waiward
woman, is a corruption in her husbands bones. And in another place says he. A
froward woman, wounds the heart, to wound the heart, truly greueth a man
sore says Solomon and gives counsayl, saienge that it is better to dwell in a
very bare land, then with such a chyding, Ireful and froward woman. In like
manner he speaks also of the good women saying, yt a reasonable meke and
virtuous woman, Pro. xij.
is a crown unto her husband. Such a good and discrete woman gives god, and
in another place says he. A gentle wife makes her husband glad, and
nouryssheth his bones, yea she is his wisdom. Prove. xviij.
And whosoever (says he) finds such a wife, finds a good thing, and
receives a wholesome benefit of the lord. Therefore dear sister, let not such
ungodliness and wickedness be spoken of the, for it is a great sin before God,
and before the world great shame, take the good women of the old Testament
for an example, be pacie^t as Lea, friendly as Ruth, true unto thy husband, as
Michell, the wife of David, measurable as Judith, meke as Hester, chaste as
good Susanna, and obedient unto thy husband, as Rebecca, Remember that thy
husband is thy lord, i. Co. xi Ephe. v
and thy head even as Christ is the Lord and head of the congregation, i.
Co. vij
and that thou have no power over thy body, but thy husband, and put thy trust
in God. And be of a lowly spirit, that thou may be called a daughter of
Sara.


Serapia. if I know the not, I should think, that thou were a waylysshe
woman, because that thou can talk so well, thou should serve well for a
preacher, thou art well seen in scripture, and depely learned, what has my
husband given the, that thou thus do chapter me, thou do it not of thy
self.


Iustina. Thou call it Chapterynge but know thou what Chapterynge is? In
times past was it, and is yet the use among the freares, that every frydaye
before dinner, they gathered them selves togeher in the chapter house, where as
every one severally was constrained to shryue himself and confess his fautes
openly, which he had committed thoroughoute the holy weke. After that did the
Abbot or Priour give a good discipline or correction, with rods unto such as
had deserved it, for their faults, And if the Abbot or prioure had perpetrated
ought themselves they were feign to suffer it in like manner etc.

The holy saint Paul, writes unto the Romans, Corinthia^s, Galathians,
Ephesia^s etc. certain Epistles, which are divided into Chapiters, wherein he
teaches the faith in Christ, and the love toward our neighbors, after
that he admonysheth them of the doctrine, which they had heard of him, at the
last does he also reprove them for certain errors that were among them, even
as I do now to the, but I trust that my chapter shall not be kept in vain
upon the, but that thou shall there by be amended, and wax good and virtuous.
I have also received no gifts of thy husband, yt I thus rebuke the, but I am
bound in conscience, and of charitable love, unto the and to all men, in this
case or in other like cases, if I se any man err, that I shall rebuke, and
chapter him for it charitably, if any hear me and amend for it, than have I
won his soul, In like manner art thou and al men bound to do the same also,
and if thou know any lack fault or error in me (where of I am not fre) thou
must also chapter me for it. I will follow the, and take it well in worth and
amend my fault.


Serapia. Did thou always talk so gently with thy husband? did thou
never anger him? nor curse him? I know that thou haste an hasty anger
raigninge in the. I am surely, thou did not always bake pancackes for him.


Iustina. Harken my dearly beloved sister, I will tell the, how I led my life
with Pius, my good man, (whom God pardon) and how he be stowed his life with me
Vvha^ the almighty God, after his godly ordinances had coupled us both
together in marriage, I htought likewise. Now must we labor, care, scrape, and
scratche, yt we may get our lyuinge in this spiteful miserable world, I
fared with my good man and family very hardely in meat and drink. I comme
seldom to any preaching, to hear the word of God. I would lend nothing to
no man, and thought always, that I must bring it to pass by my carefulnes,
labor and trauayll to wax rich, I thought not that God did care for me, or
made me rich. Also I know not the godly saying of Solomon, where he says.
It is very easy, and a light thing unto the Lord, to make a poor man rich,
neither had I at that time so much knowledge, and trust in God (which I will
speak thanked be god, without any boaste) as I have now, but when Pius my
louinge husband saw, that I was so earnest and sparyng, and thought by mine
own provision, without the help of god, to be made rich, he spoke unto me
gently with kind words. My loving Iustina, I se a great lack and fault in
the, It pleases my not that thou love not to go to the sermon, to hear the
word of God, have no trust in God, art unwilling to lend to any man, kepest
the house and family to hard, and wild be rich al to hastily, it will not
frame so, Paul says to his disciple Thimothee. i. tim. vi
They that will be rich, fall into temptacions and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown me^, into perdition, and destruction,
for covetousness is the rote of all evil. Thou should not be able to stand
before God, nor yet before man. But thus must thou do. First I will have of
the, that thou shall lose never a sermon, yt thou be desirous to hear ye word
of God, and when thou have heard it, that thou pray unto God for grace, that he
will vouchesafe, to give unto the faith, and the fruits thereof, that thou
may amend thy life, forgive thine adversary, be willinge to lend unto thy
neighbor. Although yt thou think yt thou shalt have nothing for it. God
is able to se ye paid again, be in charity with all men, strive with no man be
not lichtely provoked to anger (even as we wives are sone displeased) and keep
not thine own house, children and familye, to streighte, than shall thou se and
find, that god will daily bless the, and make thy partaker of his blessings
and benefits, as the wise Solomon says. The blessing of the Lord, makes
rich without trauayll, the same blessinge shall be confortable and profitable
unto us in soul, body, honor, and goods. etc. By such frendely words was I
moved, that afterward I followed him gently until his departing, after that I
went gladly to ye preaching, wha^ I had heard ye word of god, I be^ sought god
(as David) and said, Psalm. li.
O my god make me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast my
not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Then did
god hear me, and made me another woman than I was before, we lived merely
together god gave us goodly children, and goods enough for them, in somoche
also that I know not fro whence it came. Then did I perceive and se, that all
our care, labor and trauayll (without the blessing of god) is lost and in
vain, whereby we think to wax rich, whereas god gives not, there has no
man ought, as David says, Psalm. cxxvij
It is but lost labor, that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carfulness. For unto his friends, and unto these that
he favors, and also unto such as trust in him, does he give it slepinge.
Wherefore gentell sister follow not thy ne own mind and brain, but follow thy
husband, eue^ as I know that he is ready always to instruct the ge^tly, with
the word of God, and other charitable words. Fear God. Be willinge and glad
to go to the sermons, and to hear the word of God, beseech God for grace,
eue^ as I have done, be not waiwarde and angry at home with thy husband,
children and family. Be long sufferinge, patient, and strive not with thy
neighbors, and do unto every man, as thou would be done to, than shall thou
se plainly before thine eyes, and find, that God almightye shall send and
power his blessing upon the, and upon thy hole house, and shall give the more,
then thou shall need.


Serapia. yea thou speak well, if I had always leisure to go to church,
as well as thou and my husband, but I have somewhat else to do, I can not ones
go to church, but there is some hurt or myschiefe done at home, or else I lose
somewhat, or somewhat escapes me, which might find me the hole weke.


Iustina. Haste thou not heard a proverb, which sounds thus. The hearing
of a sermon loses nothing, geuinge of Alms impouerissheth nothing, and
evil gotten goods enrycheth nothing. And this proverb is true, as other
godly scriptures are. Thou say, that thou losest much, and that thou
endurest hurt and damage by thy going to church, that is even as much to
say, as what have I to do with god, his word or preaching, I must do my
busynes, preferrynge thy doing, and carefulnes before the word of god, as
though thy cause were more necessary. Oh nay dear sister, thou have heard
that nothing is lost, by ye hearing of a sermon. And believe me truly, if thou
were desirous and willing to go to the sermon, and did commend al thy
matter at home to God, it should go better with a great deal, and more should
be done, then when thou do scratche and rake so long at home. For we must
first seek then kingdom of God, and as then shall all other bodily necessaryes
be ministered unto us, but whosoever is ashamed thereof (says Christ) and
hears not me words, of him will I also be ashamed before my heavenly father.
Now have we nothing upon earth to do more necessary, neither is there any
thing commanded unto us more highly. Also we ought to accept none occasion
to hinder or let us from the hearing of the word of God, for therein are we
taught, the faith in God, and in Jesus Christ his son, and the love toward
our neighbor but how can we believe, says Paul, if we hear not the word
of God? how can thou believe, and put thy trust in god? love thy neighbor,
forgive thine enemies, or how will thou be saved, if thou hear not the word
of god? but if thou will obtain al these things, then go willingly to the
sermon, and hear the word of god atte^tyuely with diligence.


Serapia. Although men go to the church much and hear sermons daily, yet do I
se none that amendeth there by, the one can not aforde to the other, that the
sun shyneth upon him, and the world waxes worse and worse.


Iustina. Meruayll not at it that the world waxes evil, thou may not put the
fault in the preaching, or in the word of god, but in the hearers of it, which
believe it not, nor amend themselves for it. But let the word of god be
preached, when and where occasion shall serve, for it goes not forth ydel, it
finds some men, that believe it, and are amended through it, as the Lord god
says himself, Esa. lv.
like as the rain and snow comes down from heaven, and retourneth not
thither again, but wathereth ye earth makes it fruteful and grene, yt it may
give corn unto ye sower, and bread to him ye eats. So the word also, that
comes out of my mouth, shall not turn again void unto me, but shall
accomplish me will, and prospere in the thing, where unto I send it. Wherefore
let it not move ye although ye hole world be offended at it, hear thou the
word of god gladly and earnestly. Pray unto god for ye faith, live and do
thereafter, and forgive thy neighbor, so shall thou prosper also, as ye Lord
says, and al things shall amend with the.


Serapia. I could be content to se an amendment. But to be at one with them,
and to speak louingely unto those, that put me to hinderaunce, and help to
begyle me. I will not, I would rather se them at ye devil, I will nor can not
forget it, until I be avenged on some of the^.


Iustina. There do I perceive, yt as yet thou art no Christian, for thou will
not, neither can thou speak kyndly unto thy neighbor, nor be at one with
him.

Secondly, thou do asscribe thine aduersitye and misfortune unto men, and
not unto God, as though it were not the good and gracious pleasure of God, that
all things succeed not always after thine own brains, Thirdly, thou will
not forget, nor forgive thine adversary, but desyrest to be revenged upon him.


Serapia. I pray the hear me. I am at one with many folks, that do good unto
me and I again un to them, but yt mine aduersitye should come from god, that
can not I believe, in no wise I should be in rest long enough for our lord
god, if wicked people would let me alone. Also a wise woman has told me my
fortune, that many wicked people shall trouble me, and that I shall have no good
fortune as long as me husband lives, yet I must be at one with certain
persons for my husbands sake, until a time convenient, yt I may be even with
them, for the shrewed tournes, which they have done me.


Iustina. The good lord save me, do thou also believe southsayers, and old
miscreaunte witches? i. Re. xxviij. d
Truly it is highly prohibited of God in the scripture. In so much yt king
Saull sped very evil, for as much as he forsook god, and asked counsayl of a
witch, which had a southsayenge spirit. In like manner was also served king
Ahasia, which sought counseill at his Idol Beelzebub wherefore beware, that
thou give no crede^ce to any sothsayers, or sorcerers. Now harken unto me, I
can not forbear but that I must answer to these three points. First thou
say, that thou art at one and at peace with them, that do good unto the and
that thou do also good unto them, what manner of unity is that? where by a
man may perceive, that if any of them, with whom thou art now at peace,
should displease the, thine unity and co^corde should love be at an end with
the^. mat. viij Luc. vi.
And it is eue^ as Christ says, if ye love them, which love you, what
reward shall ye have? for the Publicanes and very sinners love their lovers.
And if ye do for them which do for you, what thank are ye worthy of? for the
very sinners do even the same. But I say unto you (says Christ) love your
enemies. Do good to the^ which hate you. Bless them that curse you. Pray for
them which wrongefully trouble you. Bless and curse not says Paull. Now
concludes Christ saying, unto him that smites the on the one cheke, offer
also the other. And him that takes thy goune, forbid not to take thy coat
also. Give to every man that asks of the. And of him that takes away thy
goods, ask them not again. He will not have that we shall only agree with
the^, which do good unto us, but also with them, that Imagine all mischief
against us, and hurt us, and that unto them we should do all good.
Secondarely, thou beleuest not, yt thine adversity and misfortune comes from
god, which causes al good things and evil things, as the lord god says
himself, I am the lord, and none other, which make the light, and cause the
darkness, which give peace and cause the evil, I am the lord which does all
these things. Saying god does al these things, how dare thou then put the
fault unto the wicked people, which notwithstanding, without the will of God
are able to do nothing, god does also conforte us whereas he says, I am your
conforter, who art thou the^ that art afraid of men? which notwithstondyng
are mortal, and of the children of men, which are delivered up as heye, and
forgettest the lord, which created the, which spread out the heaven, and
grounded ye earth. Even as also no man was able to hurt or endamage the good
Job, until god gave power unto Satan to prove him. Christ says also, Mat. x.
that we should not fear them, which hurt or kill the body, for all the
hears of our heads are nombred and none of them falls on the ground
without ye will of the heavenly father. He cares for us, and loves us so
much, that he says, He that touches us, touches the appel of his eyes. for
whatsoever happens unto us, be it good or bad, comes al by thy good and
gracious will of God. But who ca^ (says Paul) resist his will Therefore has
Christ taught us to pray unto the heavenly father. Mat. vi
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Therefore nedest thou not to
asscribe unto any man the good or evil which happens unto us, but only
unto God, which because of our sins sends us aduersitye. Thyrdely, thou
can (...) yt she was thrown down from a wyndowe and eaten of dogs. Me
thinks also, yt thou art to fearce and desirous of vengeance against every
man, and specially against thine own children, for when any of the^ does any
thing, which pleases the not, the^ do thou avenge by and by, and beatest
the^ to sore and out of due time, whereof the children become dulwitted and
fearful.


Serapia. I have such froward children, I believe yt there are no worse in all
this land, yea I think verily yt they are even young Deuyls, for none of them
will take any nourture, nor correction at my hand, neither does any of the^
regard me, I can not tell how to do with them, if it were not for my
husband, whom they dread sore. For if I should bring them up alone, truly
I would beat them all away from me.


Iustina. That thine, mine and other men's children, are wilful, and
stubborn, is not to be meruayled at. For it is given unto all men even by
nature from Adam, that all the minds thoughts and Imaginations of their
hearts are evil, and more inclined and prone to yt which is evil then to that
which is good. Therefore has God ordained and given to the children parents,
fathers and mothers, and also to all men Superiors, for to break our
wilfulnes, and our own minds, and to draw us to the fear, and honor of
God, and to all virtue and that we should live under their obedience. Therefore
dear sister instruct first thy children truly in the commandementes of God.
according as thou art bound unto them, and be gentyl to them. for wha^ they
are kept so hard and streighte and are brought up in such great fear, the^
become they fearful, wild and stubborn people, when they grow to age which
neither care for father, nor yet for mother, and if they grow up so, they are
also disobedient to all hyer powers. Paul teaches also, that we should not
bring them up, Ephesians. vi Coll. iij.
so straighly, and be not so hard unto them, move them not to wrath, and rate
them not least they be of a desperate mind, but bring them up with the nourture
and information of the Lord. Thou may not also be to soft for them, nor
suffer them to have the brydell to large, that they wax not wylfull, and
despise the and thy husband, as it was seen by Absolon, and more other wicked
children. Therefore has Solomon taught often, that we should keep our
children under correction, not sparynge the rod where as need requires,
saying. Pro. xiij
He that spares the rod, hates his son, but who so loves him, chasteneth
him betymes. And in an other place says he, Ecl. viij and xxx
if thou have sons, bring the^ up in nourtoure and learning and hold them in
awe from their youth up. Moreover ye scripture does set before us for an
Example and a warning, yt which happened unto the priest Ely and unto his
children, i. Re. iij
because that they were obstacle against their father, and he was to slack in
correctynge of the^. for it was their death, and destruction. Also thy
correction must be measurable, and not to hard nor tyrannous, but fatherlyke
and motherlyke as Sal. says. Pro. xix
Chaste^ thy son while there is hope, but let not thy soul be moved to slay
him. for great wrath brings hurt, therefore deliver him, then may thou
correct him more. Of such hard and unmeasurable correction, do we read an
Example in Titus Liuius, of a certain Senator of Rome called Lucius Manlius,
which did set forth a commandment, that noman should presume to fight with
the enemies without a further commandment, which his own son transgressed,
overcame and disconfited the enemies. Wherefore his father caused his head to be
strike^ of openly, not regarding yt he thereby had done good service to his
native country, and obtained victory, honor and peace for it. According as
we read, that Saul was also very hard unto his son Ionathas, for an
unreasonable cause etc. Thou should also set them to scole or else keep
the^ at their work, and let them not go ydell, whereby they may be occupied
and taught to forgette Idelnes in their youth, for when a man goes Idel, then
does he learn al evil, as lyenge, deceyuyng, drinkyng, playenge, dicyng,
loving, and such like. Therefore should thou always be doing with them, and
let them thereof, and specially thy daughters, that they do not chance some
where among evil company, and come to a shameful fall, eue^ as it happened
unto Dina, Eccl. vij
the daughter of Jacob. And the wise Solomon says and teaches, Genesi.
xxxiiij.
if thou have daughters, keep their body and show not thy face cherefull
toward them. But where as thou say that thou art not able to rule thy
children, and to bring them up without thy husband, there strikest thou thy
self with thine own swearde, thou saydest before, that thou had nothing to
do with thy husband, and dyddest not care (as I understood it) though he were
dead, for the which I pray God, preserve him long. O good sister, what a
poor life should thou lead with thy small children, thou know not yet,
that a good man (eue^ as thou have) is such a costly Jewel in a housse,
neither beleuest thou that a wydowe with many children, though she be never so
rich is such a poor desolate woman. Truly thine unprofitable and uncomely
words will move me to be angry, and to fall out with yt.


Sera. Oh good Iustina be not angry, I will now wax good, and set up another
head, though I should fetch it out of ye housse of dead me^nes bones, if I
knew in deed, yt I should chance of a better.


Just. Alas what should I do, how much instruccio^, admonicion, and gentyl
correction, I spend on the, al is in vain. For thou make eue^ a gest of it.
Thou should not (says Paul) let any filthy communication come out of thy
mouth, but ye which is good to edifye with all, Ephesians. iiij
when need is, that it may have faueour with ye hearers for of such, and of
every ydel or unprofitable word, Mat xij
must we give accomptes before God, at the day of Judgment. Therefore I
beseech the gentle sister. It is truly more then time, for a woman, full of
filthy and unprofitable communication, and without discrete manners (says
Solomon) is like unto a sow, Prou. xi
with a ryng of golin her nose.


Serapia. Do thou now first lyken me unto a sow, thou have comptrolled me
enough, cease now, and let us talk of an other matter. for I se well enough,
that thou haste no lust to tarry long with me.


Iustina. Who think thou would be glad to be with the, seeing thou chidest
and brawlest still, and noman can get a good word of the first I believe thy
good husband, that thou take never a word for good, neither of him, nor yet
of noman else, should not this grieve him? Verily I have seen in our
quarters, that such an indiscreet and froward woman, has brought her husband,
to dishonestlye. Wherefore refrain thy self from so doing, that there happen
not a worse thing unto the.


Serapia. Well let the matter rest here, I beseech the, forgive me good sister
Iustina, I will do it no more from henceforth I knowledge that I have been very
froward and evil, but I will now take upon me another life.


Iustina. For as much as thou do knowledge thine offense, and wilt amend
thy conditions, be it forgeuen unto the. Luc xvij
for Christ says, if thy brother or sister offend, rebuke him, and if he
repent and amend, forgive him etc. Therefore do it no more, do not anger thy
husband, neither chyde, nor brawle with him nor yet with other men. for
wheresoever enuyenge and strife is (says Saint James) there is unstableness and
al manner of evil works. Iaco. iij.
Iaco. iiij
Speak not evil behind other me^nes backs. Luce. vi
Pull not a mote out of any man's eye, as long as thou haste a beam in thine
eyes, that thou be not like unto the man with the two powches, whereof the
Histories do write.


Serapia. What manner of man was that? or what had he in his two powches? I
never heard of him before in all my life.


Iustina. ye will I tell yt, and it is good to perceive. Thus writes Esopus, yt
there was so^tym a substa^cial man, which did backbite the people very evil
and praised himself, having always two powches gyrded about him, the one
great, before him upon his belly, which he might se, the other littel, behind
him upon his back, which he could not se, Now whatsoever fautes or evil he
espied of his neighbors did he write up, and laid them in the foremost powche
upon his belly, in so much that the great powch waxed hole full. But whatsoever
he did back byte and slander him self of other, the same could he, neither
write up nor yet perceive, and the same laid he in the hyndermost powche upon
his back. Now when and wheresoever he came among company, he put always his
hand in the formoost powche, wherein he found always, all other men's fautes,
wherefore he spoke always evil of other men. But he could not put his hand
into his small powche upon his back, neither had he put any thing of him self
in it, that is, Luc. vi
he espied always a chippe or mote in his neighbors eye, but the great beam
in his own eye he could not perceive. And he was even a fellow like unto the
Pharisee in the gospel, which boasted and praised himself of his
ryghteousnes, and despised the poor publicane. Now may thou easily
understand the man with the two powches. Thou shall find them to sell painted
upon papers, bye one of the^, and let thy husband read it unto the.


Serapia. well I will mark it diligently, I se well enough that thou will tarry
no longer by my wherefore I desire the good sister Iustina, for as much as the
new year approaches, yt thou will leave me somewhat for a new years gift or a
toke^, whereby I may remember yt, as my dearly beloved sister.


Iustina. What should I leave the? Actu. iij
I have nothing, silver and gold have I not but suthe as I have, I give the
(says saint Peter) and of that will I also make the partaker.


Serapia. Whatsoever thou do give or participate unto me the same will I
thankefully receive, shute it up in my heart and keep it whylest I live.


Iustina. well, then will I leave thy some thing for a new years gift, and for
a remembrance, which shall be better (as David says) the^ many thousand
pieces of gold, I give and leave the Jesus Christ, the son of God, his holy
word, and Gospel, and the hoolsome doctrine of Paul.

I beseech the, put away from the thy former naughty life, and conversation,
by whose lusts and errors thou art corrupted, and renew thy self in the
spirit of thy conscience and mind, and put on Christ the new man, which is
shapen after God, in true righteousness and holiness, put away from the allyenge,
and for as much as we are members) speak truth with thy neighbor Be not
angry with thy husband, nor yet with other folks, and let not the son go
down over thy wrath, give no place unto the backbeter or devil, pleate the
cause of the poor and needful, Ephesians iiij
let no filthy co^municacion proceed forth of thy mouth, grieve not the holy
Ghost, let all bitterness, fearsnes, wrath, rorynge, and cursed speakinge be put
away from the, with all maliciousnes, be courteous and hearty to all men and
forgive thine adversary, even as God forgave the and us al, for Christ's sake.
Remember also, that thou without any delay, be willing and glad to go to the
sermons, and desirous to hear the word of God, And pray unto God for grace,
that it will please him to strengthen the same in the, and to increace thy
faith. Also be not only a hearer of the word, Jacob. i.
as Saint James says, but declare it also with ye deed unto thy neighbor,
that thou deceive not thy self, for Christ speaks him self. Blessed are they
that hear the word of God, and keep the same, that is, that they live and do
there after, according as the holy saint Paul writes unto his scoller Titus,
Tit. ij.
and commands him how he should teach and speak unto women, and so will
I also, right well beloved sister, desire and charge the, and leave the for a
remembrance, that thou walk and behave thy selves as becomes holiness, that
thou be no false accuser, not given to much drynkinge, but a teacher of good
and honest things, to make the young women sobreminded to love their
husbands, to love their children, to be discrete, chaste, huswyfly, good and
obedient unto their own husbands, yt the word of God be not evil spoken of,
and for to do all these things, desire God most hertily of his grace, and
believe without wauerynge, that he will give ye grace to perform the same and
as Christ says, whatsoever ye desire of the father in my name. I will do it.
And whatsoever ye desire (understand that which perteyneth to salvation and
Christen co^uersacio^) believe, and ye shall receive it. These and no better
things have I to leave the forthy new years gift or for a remembrance,
desyryng that thou will also lay it up, and keep it diligently in the coffer
of thy heart, then will God come, and give the a new heart and a new spirit
(as the Prophet faieth) then shall thou se, Psalm. li
that God with all his graces and blessings, will come upon thy, upon thy
husband, thy children, and all thy housse, and that all things shall prospere
with the.


Serapia. I thank the gentle sister, that thou have so friendly, rebuked,
taught, and instructed me, I will never forgette it while I live, and I will
diligently follow thy good counseyll, and I ensure the, that thou have done
more on me, with thy earnest exhortations, than all the priests and preachers
that ever I heard in this land, and thou art also better learned and more
expert in ye scripture the^ they this will I also report of the before all men


Iustina. Give not the honor and praise unto me, For all honor and praise
belongs to god only, as god says himself, I am the lord, that is my name,
I will give mine honor to none other. Unto him will we also asscribe, give,
and say all honor and righteousness, as the Prophet says. Dan. ix
Al honor is thine, and thou lord art righteous but we must be ashamed, and
al shame is ours. Therefore give the honor unto God, and not to me, nor to any
creature.


Serapia. Honor and praise be unto God for evermore, and I beseech the that
it will please the to pray unto god for me, that it will please him to let me
endure steadfastly to mine end.


Iustina. The holy saint James teaches us that we should pray one for
another, that we might all be saved, which I will also do truly for the, and
for all men, do thou so like wise for me. It is now time, I must be gone, my
heartily be loved sister. The merciful God bless the, and send the his
blessing. The grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with thy louinge
husband Simplicius, (unto whom thou shall pronounce my hearty commendations,
when he comes home) and with all thy familye, I commit the to the tuition of
God.


Serapia. God thank the my louinge sister, and God send the prosperity and
health, that thou may come home again in sauetie, I fear, that I shall
never se the again.


Iustina. I will (if God permit (come to the again shortly, fare well, the
lord be with the.


Serapia. And with ye also.


Iustina But yet or ever I depart (for as much as it comes into my mind) I
will give the a short instructie^, co^cerninge ye state of matrimony, which of
late I learned at a sermon declared upon a certain place of saint Ihons Gospel
which I trust shall be no less for thine edifyenge and instruction, then
that godly communication, which has been between us hitherto. And the said
sermon was grounded upon this piece of scripture contained in the second
chapter of saint Ihon, and sounds thus.

depiction of the wedding feast at Cana, featuring Jesus Christ (giving a
blessing) and Mary at a table with two men and a woman, while a servant pours
water from a bucket into one of five jars on the ground Johan. ij.



Johan. ij
THere was a marriage in Cana, a Cite of Galile, and the mother of Jesus was
there. And Jesus was called also and his disciples unto the marriage. And when
the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him. They have no wine. Jesus
said unto her, woman, what have I to do with the? mine hour is not yet come.
His mother said unto ye ministers. whatsoever he says unto you, do it. And
there were stondyng there, six waterpottes of stone, after the manner of the
purifyeng of the Jews, containyng two or three firkyns a piece. And Jesus said
unto them: fill the waterpottes with water. And they filled them up to the
brym, and he said unto them, draw out now, and bear unto the governor of
ye feast. And they bare it. When the ruler of ye feast had tasted the water,
yt was turned unto wine, and knew not whence it was, (but the ministers which
drew the water knew) He called the bryde grome, and said unto him. All men
at the beginnynge, setforth good wine, and when me^ be drunk, then that which
is worse. But thou have kept back ye good wine, until now. This beginning of
miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile, and showed his glory, and his disciples
believed in him.


Serap. What teaches us this gospel.


Iustina. Three points, first that ye state of matrimony is ye work of god.
Secondely. An example of the faith in Marie. Thirdly, an example of love in
Christ.


Serapia. How know thou, yt matrimony is the work of god?


Iustina. Out of the scripture, both of the old Testament, and also of the
new, and by experience.


Serapia. What says the old testament, of matrimony?


Iustina. The old testament declares, that god did institute, and ordeyne
matrimony, in Paradyse, in the time of innocencye, before all sin, and took
great diligence, pains and labor about it.


Serapia. What pains did he take in it?


Iustina. Gene. i.
Genes. i. it is written, that the high Majesty of God, did first Counsel
about the shapynge of man, saying, Let us make man, in our Image after our
lykenes, Gene. ij and xviij Sapie. x Tob viij Ecclesi. xxxiv. 1. Cor xv
And God shope man, even dust from of the ground, and breathed into his
nosetrelles the breathe of life. After that he counseled also about the
shaping of the woman, Gene. ij
saying. It is not good that man should be al one, we will make him an help.
And the lord caused a slomber to fall upon Adam. And he slept. And he took one
of his rybbes, and made it a woman, and brought her unto him. Then said Ada^.
Ec. xvij 1. Cor. xi
This is now a bone of my bones, and flesh of my fllesh She shall be called
woman, because she was taken out of man. mat. xix Mar. x Ephesians. v i. Cor. v.
for this cause shall man leave his father and his mother, and shall be joined
with his wife, and they shall become one flesh. Gene. i.
And God blessed them, and said unto them, Grow and increase, and replenyshe
the earth.


Serapia. Works god this work yet still?


Iustina. Yea verily, yet still, as christ says Johan v. Johan v
My father works hitherto and I work. God causes not only boys, but also
wenches to be borne, not for to sin hardely, but for an honest and virtuous
conversation, and for the preservation and mayntenaunce, of all mankind. Now
like as God provided unto Adam his wife, without his knowledge and help. Even
so does he yet in these days bring man and wife together, wonderfully without
all their minds and thoughts. Pro. xix
As it is written Proverb. xix. House and riches may a man have by the heritage
of elders, but a discrete woman is the gift of the Lord.


Serapia. Vhat speaks the new testament of matrimony?


Iustina.. The new testament shows that christ has honored ye state of
matrimony and that, he went with his disciples to the marriage in Cana of
Galile, illustrynge the same with a goodly miracle, tournynge water into wine.
To signifye thereby, yt he among faithful married people will also turn ye
water of trouble, in to wine of joy, if they walk in a good conversation,
live according to their vocacion and estate, and do that thing which is godly
and right.


Serapi. How can thou know by experience that matrimony is the work of god?


Iustina. That there in is much paynefullnes labor and vniustines, for such
are the works of god, that they seem always unto the old Ada^, sour,
bitter, and heavy. But God has ordained the same so, to the intent that man
should not be ydel, and by the reason there of fall into evil sinful
cogitacions, words, and works, but that he should always have occasion to
work and to do somthynge for to expel there by the evil thoughts, words,
and deeds.


Serapia. Is then Idelnes such an evil thing?


Iustina. Idelnes, is an occasion of many sins and blasphemies, Satan did no
small hurt to the Christianite, when he did put into the popes head, to
forbid matrimonye unto the spiritualtye for thorough so many ydell persons
has he filled the Christianite, with sins and abominations, as Sodom and
Gomorre.


Serapia. Is then labor such a costly thing.


Iustina. Yea forsooth, labor takes away from man, many evil thoughts,
words and deeds, it brings good occupieng, and keeps him healthful. It
brings to the table a hungry stomach, and to the bed a weary body. Therefore
does meat and drink savor well unto him, and sleep is sweet and acceptable
unto him. And also such one fulfilleth Gods commandment, where as he says.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Genesis iij



Serapia. What must one do which gives him self into the estate of matrimony?


Iustina. He must have a respect to three things, to faith, love, and the
cross.


Serapia. Wherefore to faith?


Iustina. That he believe, that matrimony is the work of god, and that god is
his good father, which can and will provide him of an honest mate. And when that
is done, the^ must he also think no further upon other, but co^tente him self
with her, which god has sent him,


Serapia. But how and if there happen any tediousnes in matrimony?


Iustina. Then must every one think thus. Behold, god has given me this
fellow, he knows well enough, what is good and profitable for me. if he had
given me another it might peradventure be nore to my hynderau^ce, then to my
furtheraunce. The will of the lord be done upon me. Truly where such
thoughts are, there can it not go amysse.


Serapia. Wherefore to the love?


Iustina. He must know that the Estate of matrimony is an estate of love and
peace, so yt therein the one must serve, help, and counseyl ye other, and that
there be nothing but service, help and comfort between them selves and after
that, toward their children, familye, and all men.


Serapia. How between them selves?


Iustina. Married folks must be peaceable, friendly, and agreyng, one with
another, not despisinge one another, but be true one to another faithfully
serve and succor one to another in prosperity and in aduersitye, in sickness
and in health even as God does send it. for God made not the woman of the
man's head, because she should not be master, nor yet of the fete, that she
should not altogether lie under foot. Genesis ij.
But of his side that she should be the man's helper.


Serapia. How toward the children and family.


Iustina. When god sends them children or familye, that they bring up the
same to the laud, honor, and praise of god, to the help, commodity, and
conforte of their neighbor yea for the welthe of the hole communalte. And
there shall they find both hands full of good works, yea all the works of
love, which God has commanded, may they show upon their children and
familye. God makes of that house, good married folks, a holy hospital an
elect monastery, yea a kingdom of Joy, Paradise and heaven, he gives his
blessing, and all goodness, health and salvation.


Serapia. How toward the cross?


Iustina. Married folks, must know that God has laid a heavy cross upon the
state of matrimony, both man and women.


Serapia. Which is the cross of the man?


Iustina. God said unto Adam. Genesis iij
Because thou haste herkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the
tree concerning the which I command d the saying, thou shall not eat of it
cursed be the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life. Thorn also and thystle shall it cause to grow unto the. In
the sweet of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread.


Serapia. Which is the cross of the woman?


Iustina. God said unto Eua, Genesis iij
because thou have herkened unto the serpente, and haste eaten of the fruytes
concerning the which I commanded the, that thou should not eat of it. I
will multiplye thy sorrow and thy conceyuyng. In sorrow shall thou bring
forth thy children, and thou shall stoop before thy husband, and he shall have
the rule of the.


Serapia. Is there any conforte in this Cross?


Iustina. yes. By the cross of the man is this conforte contained. In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, till thou be turned again into
the ground, out of the which thou wast taken. As though he would say. The
cross shall be temporal, and shall last no longer, then whylest thou lyuest.
Also it is but laid upon the body, and not upon the soul. Genesis iij
By the cross of the woman stands this consolacyo^. Thou shall bring forth
children, albeit with sorrow, and saint saint Paul says. i. Tim. ij. i. Tim.
ij
The woman was deceived and brought the transgression into the world,
notwithstondyng thorough bearing of children she shall be saved, if she
continue, in faith, and love, and holiness with discretion.


Serapia. Is the word of god also in the life of matrimony?


Iustina. Not only the word of god, but also the commandment, ordinance,
and blessyng of god, an honest life, a good life, a good conscience, and hope
of eternal life. In the life of the wicked, is nothing else, then the work,
commandment and ordinance of the Devil, their own will, destourbyng of ye
godly commandments, an ungracious shameful life, an evil conscience, and
expectacion of eternal damnation. The married can sheppe forth bodily before
god, and rejoice of their estate with a good conscience, I defy ye inverted
states of ye spiritualte, yt they dare be so bold, as ones to open their
mouths before god, but they must be confounded and become do^be before god,
for they ca^ not allege one lettere out of the holy scripture, whereby they
might confirm or defend their estate. if the popes tryple crown, the
Cardinals broad hatte, the Bisshoppes infula, the freares hode, the priests
shaven crown, and the Nonnes clare, had such a reioysinge and ground in the
scripture, as the wome^s keuerchief, and the begging bag of the spiritualte,
as the spade or pickare of Ada^. good lord, how would they boaste, cry and
rejoice, but Christ has prevented their boasting, and stands there, and
says, Mat. xv
In vayn they worship me, teaching doctrines, which are nothing, but me^nes
precepts.


Serapia. Where by is the faith perceived in Marye?


Iustina. Ioha. iij
When the wine failed, the mother of Iesue said unto him. They have no wine.
The good mother cares for the gestes, and would feign that al things were
well, and done honestly, and yet does she not pray with expressed words. for
she thought, it needs not to pray. He is so good of himself, yt he will
help, when he hears that there is lack. And this is also the nature of
faith, to adventure al things upon the mercifulnes of god.


Serapia. But what answerdyd Christ give her?


Iustina. He sent her away unkindly, and said unto her, Ioha. iii
woman, what have I to do with the, mine hour is not yet come.


Serapia. What does Mary then, does she leave it thus?


Iustina. No, she says now first of al to the ministers, whatsoever he says
unto you do it. So certain and sure is she, yt she believes, that her
well-beloved son Christ will not suffer her to lack, and even as she believes
so comes it to pass.


Serapia. What shall we learn hereof?


Iustina. When it seems unto us in our prayer, that god will not hear us,
then may we not yet despair or cease, but we must still go forward and
persyste. for under such a taciturnite is a sure conforte hydde^, under such,
nay lies a sure, yea, for so does god work he helps no rather, then when a
man thinks, yt all confort and succor is gone. Therefore is he called. The
right helper in necessities, which helps in due season


Serapia. Where by is the love perceived in Christ?


Iustina. That he prouydeth here such good wine, at this feast, he has
sufficiently declared by this example, that he will not put those in any
necessite, which give them selves, at his commandment, into the state of
matrimony, believe and trust in him, and follow their vocacyon, nor yet leave
them confortles. For behold, when the wine failed he made of water good wine.
Even so, if men dotruely and earnestly call upon him matrimony, he will also
take away all manner of penuryes, he knows well enough that in matrimony
fails, many things, now meat and drink, now raiment and shoes. Therefore,
if the married do that thing which pleases God, and seek first the kingdom of
god, he will never forsake them.


Serapia. Give examples of the scripture?


Iustina. Who fed the Patriarche Jacob, when he went over Jordan with his
staff, and came again with much people, children, cattle and goods? Genes.
xxxij
Gene. xxxij. Vho fed Joseph? when he was sold of his brethren, became he not
by the grace of God, a lord over al Egypt? Who fed the children of Israel in
the wilderness forthy years? Who provided here good wine? yea, who fedeth the
hole world with all creatures? Does not God it? Truly noman needs to refuse
matrimonye or to abstain from it for hunger or penuries sake. But let him take
the matter in hand, righteously, in the fear of God, and do according as his
office or occupation requires, let him work his occupation in the name of the
Lord, put his trust in God, and walk ryghteously in the syghte of his
neighbor, the^ shall he find of a truth, that god will hold on his side so
much as he did with Jacob Joseph, and with the Bryde and Brydegrome.


Serapia. But what say thou, of eating drinking, deckinge and trimmynge,
pypyng, playenge and daunsyng, is it (...) the word of god in the church. The
elders took it for a great earnest matter, namely, that they fetched there ye
blessyng of God, and the supplication of the Christen congregation, which in
deed is very necessary and requisite, in this estate. And whosoever takes upon
him the state of matrimony, needs well the blessing of god, and the common
prayers of the congregation. Seeing the devil never rests here, but
attempteth all manner of ways, for to stir up much mischief, and calamity
with infidelyte, aduoutrye, uncleanliness, and all manner of wickedness. All which
things God the father, and our lord Jesus Christ, ca^ and will hinder, and
let, unto whom be land and praise for ever and ever, Amen.


A fruteful Predication or Sermon of D. Mart. Luth. concerning matrimony, upon
this Text, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the xiij. Chapter.
Wedlock is to be had in honor, among all men, and the bed undefiled. As
for hoorekepers and aduouterers, God shall judge them.
Matrimony has always ben esteemed honorable, also among the heathen.
THe estate of matrimony has always ben taken among discrete and virtuous me^,
yea also among the heathen, for an honorable and laudable life, for
reasonable and virtuous people, have even of very nature a delight in it, when
they see, that two persons which are coupled in marriage, live together
virtuously and in unite, bring up their children in the fear of God, keep
them to virtuous nurtour, and honesty. And that the one succoureth the other in
necessities and aydeth him with word and deed, and wherewith so ever he can.
Contrarywyse, wha^ men live, without the estate of matrimony, in uncleanliness,
sin, and shame. Remember not their children, nor bring them up in good
nourtour, and yt ye one runs this way, and the other that way, like
noughtye packes, having no true love nor faythfulnes together. Such a
dissolute life is reputed, of all reasonable and honest men, even of nature,
wicked, and very pernicious.

The yo^ge and raw people despise matrimony.
Notwithstondyng mense right well, how the younger sort, and the common people
falls away, and abhors the state of matrimony as an heavy intolerable
burden. And such wild, careless persons, will always more love the dissolute
and fre life, then such a paynefull, virtuous, and laudable life in wedlock.
How be it plages and punyshmentes overtake them now a days very sore. for
besides that that such persons without wedlock, pollute themselves with
sins wilfully, and cause God to be enemy unto themselves, they are also
punysshed with bodily plages, that not only money and goods, does waste away
by such people, but also they must pay for it in their skins. For in such
filthy lyuinge, reign many manner of diseases and plages, sometime open shame,
and reuilynge, sometime also murder, and other calamityes.

Of such examples is the world full, whereby god shows a special earnest,
that he will have wedlock kept pure, and vndespised. But whereas some time
such temporal correctio^s follow not. And god permits the wicked persons,
to go after their own will, and to abide in reputacion, and healthful body,
and great goods, Even there is surely a worse turn to be attended, namely,
the wrath and indignation, of God in the world to come and the everlasting
damnation.

Some despise matrimony, because of great holiness
Like as now the mad young world abhors matrimony for such free,
wyllfull lives sake. Even so is it manifest of the other part, that the
Devil has blyndedsome in such wise, that they, of mere holiness, like as the
other of mere wilfulnes, have despised matrimony, and chosen a dissolute life
without wedlock. According as Saint Paul has prophesied. i. Ti. iiij
i. Timo. iiij That it shall come so far, that certain spirits of error
under the pretense of great holiness, shall forbid matrimony. As we se by the
Pope, and all his Bishops, Priests, freares and Nonnes, which forswere
matrimony, and will be called spiritual people, because they live without
wedlock and live not in a carnal state, as they judge matrimony. But in an
angelical or spiritual state, and have called them selves alone spiritual for
this cause, as though, they which live in the state of matrimony, might not be
spiritual also, as well as they?

This is the occasion, because that matrimony is so common, and has no
special regard before the world. Therefore have the popes blessed, or they of
the spirituality, refused such slyghte common life, and have taken some
special thing before them, which might be more regarded, then that a Citesen
sits at home with his wife fyndeth his children and family with sour
labor, and does such like things, according to his vocation. For this is
the nature of the world, whatsoever is common, the same does she not regard.
Again whatsoever is strange and not common the same does every man covet to
have. No man does count this for a special thing, that the sun shyneth
every day. Exodus x
But when the thick darkness continued so long in Egypt, then did they
learn undoubtedly, and find fulwel, that the sun and the brightness thereof,
is a glorious thing, and a fair great benefit. Also we count it for no
special grace when it rayneth. i. Reg. xvij.
But when there came no rain in the kingdom of Israel, in the time of Elias,
for the space of three years, and a half, then did they learn, that it was a
great benefit.

Even so happens it unto the holy state of matrimony, among the Papists
also, because it is such a common state, that every plowe man may come to it.
Therefore have the popes Spiritualtye despised such a common life, and have
invented and taken upon them, a special and sundry life, that might seem to be
of greater estimation, before the people. As Nicolaus de lyra says upon the
xij. chapter of Daniel. Upon the.xij Chapit. of Daniel writes lyra of
Antichriste.
That Antichriste shall not regard the love of women for this cause, that he
may make to him self a greater apearaunce of holiness. But what good ensues
thereof, it is evident. In so much yt by reason we should learn by their
example, yt matrymony is a glorious and an holy life. for as much as they are
punyshed with diverse abominable and horrible sins, even because that they
contemn wedlock. for they have in no point so hole, against all reason, and
nature misused themselves as in this point.

For as much now, Wherefore it is necessary to write of Matrymony.
as the state of matrimony, is abhorred of the workemongers or ypocrytes, and
raw people in the world, and is counted, either for a common and unholy, or
else for a hard and straight life. So is it necessary, to obtain out of the
word of god, a right vndersto^ding of matrimony, and to teach against such
false opinions what god speaks of the life of matrimony. To thinte^t that
first the young people may learn, wherefore matrimony is to be taken. After
that, that they may know also, how they shall behave the^ selves therein. So
that men abide not only by that that the world speaks and holds thereof
with her mad saints. But that which god and his word, speaks thereof.
Albe it, that the holy scripture is full of such sentences, where in the state
of matrimony is highly praised. yet will we nevertheless now at this time abide
by this saying. Hebre. xiij, which sounds thus.

Vvedlocke is to be had in honor, among all men, and the bed undefiled. As
for hoore kepers, and aduouterers, God shall judge them.

This sentence is good and short, which besides that, The true meaning of the
sentence. Heb. xiij
that she speaks greatly in the praise of matrimony, and threateneth those
sore, that despise matrimony, makes also an after thynkyng, why and wherefore
he will have this matrimony had in such honor. Notwitbstandynge that it is so
despised and abhorred in the world. And ye meaning of this sentence is this.
That wedlock is an honorable, goodly and costely thing. To the intent that all
they which are the rein, should hold and count their lives, for a noble,
honorable, and goodly garnyshynge. Appear it before the world as it will,
and ye world speak of it what she will.

This godly judgment of matrimony, as every man mayse, sounds far other
wise than the world has imagined thereof. for if the world did count
matrimony so precious and honorable, she would not flee from it, and live
without wedlock. But like as men haste them selves thitherwarde where they
look for some good costely things. Even so should they also snatche after
wedlock, with love and joy, and not defend themselves so from it with hand
and foot as the wild dieres against the dogs. for that the world does so
spurn at kycke at it, now ymaginyng this, now that is altogether a sign, yt
she neither knows Gods word, concerning matrimonye, nor yet believes the
same, or else she would apply her selves a little otherwise to it.

But what the occasion is, yt the world thus spurneth at the state of
matrimony is partly touched before, That noma^ will gladly be bound, and
fears that it might succeed vnluckely. Therefore shall it be necessary that we
also here in this part, seek, and declare the occasyon or cause: wherefore the
holy scripture boasts and prayseth wedlock so, highly and honorably. And
specially should the Christians well remember and ponder such occasions and
causes. To thin te^t that they might mete with the world, and be able to
defend matrimony against the evil speakynges of the world.

So is now the first occasion, that it may be proved by the word of god,
that matrimony was instituted of God himself, and planted in our nature.
According as the same is clearly described in the first Book of Moses. And
Christ speaks in the new Testament. Mat. xix. He that made man at the
beginnynge, made them man and woman, and said. for this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife. Again says he, whatsoever
comes together by the way of matrimony, the same has God coupled together
etc.

Let this be unto every man a glorious and great reioysynge, and praise of
matrimony, that it is not a work of man wrought by his own will. But the
work of God. unto the which god himself has created man. So that a couple
of wedded folks, before the face of God, with all truth may boaste them selves
of this, that they are in an estate, which is acceptable unto God, which God
himself has instituted and planted in nature. and whylest they live in such
estate, that they live in the work, yea also in ye right and proper pleasure
or delight of God.

The papists ca^ not rejoice of their state before God
This reioysyng has not the Pope nor his heap. For they can show no where, yt
God commanded the^ to live without wedlock. Wherefore then the contrary
part follows, whylest they continue without wedlock, that they live
without and against the word, will commandment, and pleasure of god, but in
their own will, which never can please God. Therefore when they have aduersite,
even as they do deserve, then is it impossible that they can have the conforte,
which the wedded men have, which can admonyshe God in all manner of adversities
and troubles and say.

O Lord god, The prayer of the married unto God.
this and another aduersite presses me. And thou know, that such trouble
happens unto me and comes upon me, even in the same state, which thou
dyddest shape and institute in Paradyse with man. Therefore help, that we in
this life instituted, shapen, and entretayned by the, may be delivered of this
and that trouble, and adversity etc. With such a prayer dare the married men
come before God, where as the other live in their own devotion contrary to the
word and will of God, and therefore they look for no conforte, neither can they
pray a right unto God.

Therefore when the Pope, and his unmarried sort, laud and praise much their
monkerie and Celibate life. The^ laud and praise thou much more this life of
matrimony, whereon hangs this glorious name and tittel, that it is a godly
life, shapen and comuaunded of God, and his word, which no freare nor priest
shall be able at any time to boaste of his Celibate life.

This is now the first, and also the greatest occasyon, yt wedlock, as the
text says, is to be had in honor. for as there is no thing without nor
above God, even so can there also be nothing more excellent nor better upon
earth, then that which he himself did shape and ordeyne. As the text makes
mention in the first book of Moses. Gene. i.
And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was exceeding good.
Among these shapen things which were all exceeding good, is also wedlock.
The celebate life is not among them, but the Devil has invented it, if me^
will hold it for a gods service, and compel the people thereto, as the Pope
does.

The other cause is, that god has not only instituted matrimonye. God has
specially blessed matrimony.
But also he has given his blessyng, thereunto. The same blessing stands not
only barely in that, that god gives children for there be also children borne
out of wedlock. But ye god has a delight and pleasure in the right children,
and in the hole confederation, and gives grace, that they be well brought up,
well nourysshed and preserved. Therefore sets the.Cxxviij. Psalm. Cxxviij
psalm me also this among the blesssynges of the godfearynge people which live
in wedlock. That they eat of the labors of their hands, and shall se their
childers children. That is, godfearynge people lyuinge in wedlock shall have
this blessing, to their sustentation and children that they shall remain and
prospere. Contrary to the which, in the Celibate life, money and goods
vanyshe and waste away, and all manner of calamity follows.

This should also by reason move us, that we might get lust and love
toward this state, Wherefore there is many times in wedloc littel prosperity
and health.
seeing we find therein not only the will of god, but also al manner of
blessings. And there must needs be small felicity, and health looked for,
among those that despise such conforte and promise of God, and prefer their
fre and wylful life. It is also to be feared, lest the wrath of God might be
so kyndled against those yt do long continue in such despisynge, that
although they should at the last give them selves to the state of matrimony,
they should neither have prosperity nor health. Even as it comes to pass
oftentimes, yt men through ungraciousness and other unhappiness in youth, without
wedlock deserve and cause, that they have but few good days in wedlock, and
that both the woman and the children fare amiss. for as it is mentioned
before, God will execute such judgment upon the state of Matrimony, that all
they shall be punysshed, that live in uncleanliness, and give occasion of
offense. Therefore shall the young people prepare the^ selves by times toward
it, and keep themselves in the fear of God, and in clenlynes, To the intent that
they themselves do not hinder and keep back ye blessyng, which God has
ioygned with matrimony.

The greatest sainetes that ever lived (few except) were waryed
The third cause, yt wedlock is to be had in honor, is this, that in this
state for the most part the greatest saints have ended their lives, as the
hole old and new testament withnesseth. But if thou will know, why they have
all lived in wedlock, I can show thy no better nor surer reason, tha^ that
all Godly men, have always ordered and kept themselves after the will and
word of god. And for as much as god himself has instituted and commanded
Matrimony. So have they as obedyent Persons, which had need of such ordinance
of god, given themselves willingly and gladly into the state of matrimony for
gods and their needs sake. Not regardyng, that the world and the common people
loved more the fre and wilful life.

Now, this is not a small reioysynge, that whosoever is coupled in wedlock,
may say with a fre and bold conscience, that he is eue^ in the same state,
wherein the Patriarchs, Prophets, the holy Apostles and other saints most
commonly have lived, whereas contrarywyse the celibate life, was first begone
of certain heretykes, because they would make them selves thereby a sundry
pretense and color of holiness. The pope a father of al hipocrisye.
And was afterward confirmed of the Pope as of the Archefather of all
hypocrisye, and boasted for an holy life.

He that will be a Christian, and can not live chaste, ought to marye.
For as concerning John the Baptiste, and other such like, which for the
kingdom of heavens sake, as Christ does call it, did abstracte themselves
from wedlock, it has a sundry meaning. We speak here in general, of all
them, that will be Christians, and can not live chaste out of wedlock. Unto
those it is very confortable that they se before the^ examples of so many
great saynctes, which have all lived in wedlock, and have gone before us in
this holy order. Truly this is a great praise to wedlock. for who would not
rather be found among such a company of holy men, in like life estate and
conversation with them, then by the Pope, and his hole flock, which in this
and in other affairs live so manifestly against Gods commandment, and the
examples of his saynctes.

The fourth occasyon, wherefore wedlock is to be had in honor and reverence,
and not in contempt, is this. That without wedlock, To live without wedlock
escapes not without sin.
we can not well live without sin, and in a good Conscience. for thus says
Christ, whereas he speaks of them that live without wedlock. mat. xix i.
cor. vij
Al men can not co^prehende this saying. And saint Paul commands, To
avoid fornication, let every man have his wife. For through the original sin
is the nature of man weakened and destroyed in such wise, that very few me^
out of wedlock ca^ live in a good conscience. Seeing then that matrimony is a
remedy which god himself thereto has shapen and ordained, according as his
word declares that we stand in a good conscience, and may live chaste. Who
will be so rude and indiscreet that he will repute this estate unholy, as the
Pope does?

But as it is above specifyed, he has received his reward. And to the intent
that every man should esteem the papists for holy men, they have forsworn
Matrimony and fall thereby into the greatest sin, and shame, in so much that
of their abominable living the hole world does sing and say. They are well
served, why do they so frowardly despise the creation and ordinance of god?
And we must also for this cause have wedlock in honor and in high reputacyo^,
and thank god highly for this mean, which serves us for this end, that we
pollute not ourselves through horedome and such other uncleanliness, and so fall
into the fearful Judgment of God, whereof we shall entreat more hereafter.

Vvedlocke is full of good works
The first and last cause is this. That wedlock also therefore is to be had in
honor, because it is such a life, which, if it be kept accordingly, is
thoroughout full of good works. for even the love which is between man and
wife, is one of the special good works, which God has commanded and left
remaining in nature, and helps with his holy Ghost that we do perform them
a right, and fainte not in the^. Therefore exhorts also the holy Saint Paul
to such love whereas he says. ye men love your wives, and be not bitter
unto them. Coloss. iij. Colo. iij Ephe. v
And to the Ephesians in the.v. men ought to love their wives as their own
bodies. Therefore whosoever takes sure hold on such love, and suffers
neither noisome lusts, wrath, nor any other thing to turn himself away
from it, does a right good work and acceptable unto god. for here is his
word, which commands the this thing. Thou shall love thy wife, and not
love flightely. mat. xix
But as christ repeteth the same again in the gospel. for this cause shall a
man leave father and mother, and clean unto his wife.

The matrimonyal love is a gods service.
Where are now the shameful Papists, which abhor wedlock as a carnal
estate, as though God could not be served in his kind of life. Notwithstanding
that the love, without the which wedlock can not endure, is a greater and hyer
gods service, which god, as we hear, requires so earnestly of us.

The love of the parents toward their children is also a Gods service.
Moreover the love and faythfulnes, which the Parents bestow upon their
children, namely, that they nourysshe, clothe and bring them up in labor and
in the fear of god, keep the^ to learning, take heed to them and keep them
in their sickness, watching, listing, laieng, covering, washing the^ and
whatsoever there is more of such like, is also a costely work and acceptable
unto god, which the married must use and do daily and hourly, and almost every
moment. Now should we remember a right and learn, such our own life and
conversation, that these are before God mere good works. Then should we not
only be so much the lustier to matrimony, and to such works, although they
are also paynefull. But also pacienter confortabler, and bolder although
sometime it prospered not all of the best. for if the married remember and
ponder their estate, and their life a right, and order themselves godly
therein, then must needs their hertes, eyes, hands, and fete stick full of
good and holy works every hour.

But there lies that mischief, where of I have spoken before, that because
these works are so general, and small, they are not regarded. Again,
whatsoever apeareth glorious, and braggeth forth boldly although in it self
it be not worth a straw yet is it taken for honorable and great. As we see
by the Popes ceremonies, and his gods service, notwithstanding that the least
work in wedlock, is better in it self, then all their gods service. for in
wedlock do men abide in the word and commandment of God. And god will that
the one shall gladly serve the other even from the heart.

This is done in wedlock without ceassynge. The service of the married one to
another are good works
if a child be sick, then are the elders sick and sorry for him, if the man be
sick, then is the wife encombred even so sore as though it were her own
smarte, or disease. There is the diligence, care, faythfulfulnes and love most
purest and from the botome of the heart, and it is not tedyous unto them, for
they delight and long still after this how ye one might conseyll, help, and
amend the other, and withstand the aduersitye. Again whereas it succedeth
prosperously in trauaylyng of child, or otherwise in their own danger, or
necessite of the children. There is a hearty, pure, and perfect joy. It ca^
not go so well with the one but the other reioyseth of it even at the heart and
wysseth unto him much more. Who wilsaye now, yt were as yt hertes do agree
so goodly together, in joy, and in heaviness, that there are not mere good
works of love? Contrarywyse in the Celibate life does God neither delight in
love, nor yet in woo. Although in it self it is a strawen love, which every
hour is broken and rent a sunder of one word only, when the one does but
look awrye upon the other.

These good works of wedlock remain at home in the housse, The state of
matrimony gives discreteper sons to all estates.
among them that be married, and their children. After them follow first of al,
the right great good works, that out of this estate, as out of a well
spring, come all manner of persons, by whom laud and people are governed
and defended, the churches provided of preachers, and other ministers and all
offices in the world, and in the kingdom of our Lord Christ are executed.

Forseyng specially in wedlock the children are nouryshed and brought up to
the fear honor, and glory of god. So must it needs be granted, that
wedlock is occasion, and beginnynge of all such benefits. Notwithstanding
that many wilful persons do grow up among them. The fault thereof is not in
wedlock, but in those wicked ungodly persons that will not order themselves
in wedlock, according to their bounden duetye, for whosoever does begin it
in the name of god, he shall also prospere in bryngyng up of children, and in
other things.

In wedlock is much labor and trauayl.
But that men will say. In wedlock are many manner of encombraunces, sorrows,
dangers, and heuinesses, from the which men shall be free out of wedlock,
where as every man has no more to care for, but his own boby only. Now let
it be so, yet ought this occasion to fear no Christen man from the state of
matrimony. For first although thou werest unmarried. yet for all that shall thou
not escape all fre, for thou must nevertheless aue^ture and suffer all manner
of aduersityes. When any hynderaunce happens unto yt, sometime in thy body,
and life sometime in thine honor and goods. And such a cross shall be so
much to heuyer for the, if thou be out of wedlock and alone, as the holy
scripture says. Woe be unto the man, which is alone, for if he fall, there is
no man to help him up again.

Secondarely. All be it yt in wedlock there is more danger sorrow and
vexation, then else where yet ought not to matrimony for this cause to be
despised and eschued. For it is profitable and good for us, that God comes
upon us with his cross, and that we be proved al manner of ways, for out of
te^ptatio^ and probacion, do we stand in great danger. We wax sturdy, and
contrary to the word of God cold and slothful to prayer and other good
works, for as much now as wedlock it does full now with the woman, now with
the children, now with the familye, wedlock is the scoolehous of the
christians,
now with the occupyenge, and other al manner of necessities and perilles
wedlock is unto the Christians as a Scoole, wherein they are godly instructed,
that in tribulation and adversity they faint not, nor be discouraged. But open
their hertes to god, pray and desire help

This is also a good work, wedlock causes to pray and to trust in God.
whereunto wedlock gives occasyon very often, for even for this cause, yt
much trouble and calamite falls in wedlock, the married me^, if they be else
godfearyng and right Christen men, are driven to prayer, that they pray
earnestly, trust and hope only to the help and grace of God. When then such
hope is performed, even then do there spring up other and good holy works,
that men do thank God for his help and grace, that men praise his
bountifulnes, and conforte other men, likewise in the same. All these things
are mere gods services, and exceeding good works, which wedlock ministers
daily unto our hands, that the faith and prayer cease not. But must be
continually occupied, whylest now joy, now sorrow, then necessitye, help
and delyueraunce appear, which either give occasyon to thank, or else to
pray.

Therefore says the text here well and truly, yt wedlock is a noble
honorable and costly life, which god has not only ordained, and endued with
his blessyng, and also all saints have praised with their lives and
conuersations, as a glorious work of god, leauyng us an example. But wedlock
is also to be praised for this cause, yt it sticks thoroughout full of good
works, as is now rehearsed. Matrimony is full of good works
That a married man and a married woman, ca^ do nothing within the house of so
small reputacion, belonging to the housse keeping, or bringynge up of children,
but that it is a holy work, and acceptable to God, and that it is done after
the word, will and ordinance of God, wherefore prosperity and wealth must needs
be accompanied with it.

Christ honors the marriage himself. Ioha^. iij
Therefore has Christ him self matrimony in such honor, that he comes
personally, with his dearly beloved mother and Apostles to the marriage in Cana,
in Galile, and there manifests himself with a glorious miracle by tournyng
water into wine. To the intent that he there by would signifye both, yt he
loves the state of matrimony, and that he will give his blessing therein. This
blessing shall always remain among the married, as far as they as the
C.xxviij. Psalm. Cxxviij
Psalm says, fear God, and walk in his ways. Forwhereas men will despise
the word of God, live in sin wittingly, and use not the love, which in
especial ought to be between man and wife. But will chyde and brawle, one with
another fight and use all manner of frowardenes. There is it no marueyll that in
the stead of the blessing, follows infelicite, and all manner of calamity. for
what goodness is there to be hoped for, where as no fear of God is, yea where
God is refused, and thorough many manner of sins the door is bolted for him
and his blessings?

Therefore says not the text here so slightly, ye wedlock is to be had in
honor and price. What the undefiled bed is
But he adds also thereunto this word, and the bed undefiled. Whereby he
will set forth in picture, how wedlock shall be kept, which he has praised
so highly. And first he forbids utterly the right defylynge of the bed in
wedlock, among the Christians, that men beware of horedome and aduoutry, as he
does call it hereafter. for this is the grossest and greatest defylyng of the
bed, whereby the laudable and honorable state of matrimony is polluted, and
the ordinance of God divided. And occasion is given, to all aduersitye, here
bodily, and here after perpetually.

Moreover it may also be called defilynge of the bed, Other defylynges of
the bed of matrimony
whatsoever gives occasion, that the hertes between man and wife be withdrawn
the one from the other, and are moved to dissension, hatred and other unkind
conversation. for out of this follows commonly the gross defilinge whereof we
have spoken a littel before. if now man and wife will keep their bed pure and
clean as has been said, the^ must they eschew all occasions, whereby they
might be moved to frowardenes and to displeasure. Not be wilful nor arrogant,
not interpretate every thing for the worste. But the one must bear with the
other, and suffer a word, not only to entretayne fre^dshyppe and amitye, But
also because we know that it is the will and pleasure of god, and that the
word and commandment of God requires the same of us. for as soon as the
hertes are bittered the one against the other, So has the Devil found a holl
ready, that without any labor he can rent matrimony a sunder again, and put
it to trouble, in so much that also the bodies are separated.

Therefore, here must be used the discretion between man and wife, where of S.
Peter speaks.i. i. Pet. iij.
Petri. iij. That the men should dwell with their wives according to
knowledge, geuynge unto them honor as unto the weaker vessel, that their
prayers be notletted thorough stubbernes and bitterness. for it is the office of
a man, as of the head that he shall not rule Tyrannously, but discretely,
according to reason, and sometime wynke and bear with the weakness which
specially reygneth in the woman kind, considering their fraylnes, and not
their iniquyte or wilfulnes.

Contrarywyse it shall also be the womans part, Exhortation to the women.
to knowledge such their natural weakness, and suffer the same not to much.
But refrain themselves with all diligence, yt not thorough much and immoderate
repetinge, the husband be moved to just anger. An amiable word and obedyent
stylnes, may quench much debate, and hatred, whereas else, out of pratynge
and murmuryng again, there might follow anger and strypes, and besides that
al mischief.

Where now these two points are between man and wife, Two principal points
of the married.
that they be chaste and circumspecte, and fre^dly one to another in word and
deed. There is wedlock, as the Epistle to ye Ebrewes in this place does call
it, a noble worthy and honorable conversation, where in not only men of
understanding do delight, but also God himself in heaven, with all his angels
and saints. But whereas there is a fault in either of them, that is to say,
that either through aduoutry and hooredome the bed of matrimony is defiled,
or else by the reason of unkind, and wild conversation and dwelling
together, the hertes are moved one against another, there is it not to be
feared, that God will come as a judge, and punyshe such ungodliness and
inordinate living. for here is it written, as for whorekepers and aduouterers,
God shall judge them.

For as much now as the Devil specially seeks between man and wife to move
them, either to horedome, or at the least to sow discord and variaunce
between them, we ought not only to fight daily against this temptation, with
an earnest prayer unto God, and to seek remedy at his hand. But also to keep
and use our selves there to with al diligence, yt we our selves give none
occasion unto such crafty work, and prete^se of the devil. for this is not
the smalest part of the godly blessyng, where such dwelling together in
wedlock, is preserved in continual unity and amitye.

And the married need not themselves, The married couple should not make their
state bitter themselves
by vngentel behave our or words to give occasyon of malice or evil will
between them. for they shall find every day occasyon enough, unsought and
unlooked for, where by they shall be moved and provoked to indignation, hatred
cursynge and other ungraciousness. So that they shall have always enough to do,
for to resist and let the Devil of his purpose, both by prayer and also by
circumspecte discretion.

Therefore is it a good and godly ordinance, that men wysshe unto the new
married coupple, the blessing of God before the hole church, and make a common
supplication for them, that they may begin the state of matrimony in the name
of God, and that it may prospere with the^. The congregation should pray for
the new married couples
for to bye this blessing, if it were to selle, men should spare no money But
now does it the church without money, nevertheless some men be so rude, that
they would rather be without it. But we may let them alone. for they that are
Christians, will so much the bolder give themselves into the state of
matrimony, even for this common prayers sake.

For wedlock, if the holy bed remain undefiled, is an honorable and
excellent estate, for as much as God himself has ordained and instituted it,
and also given his blessyng thereunto, and in general the Examples of al
saints do teach us this life, where in we have every hour aboundauntly, al
manner of occasions to serve god and our neighbor, as we have heard before.

If now any man thorough this honorable predicatio^ will not be moved to the
state of matrimony, The aduouterers and hoorekepers god shall judge them
let him be moved yet by this, that the text speaks wish manifest words, of
the^ that live out of wedlock, or otherwise in uncleanliness. The aduouterers
and hoorekepers shall god judge. for here do thou hear, although there
were no man in earth that knew such uncleanliness of the, or could punysshe the
same, that yet thou shall not escape. But thou must come before the judgment
of god, and he shall judge the according as he fyndeth the. And thus says
saint Paul, i. Cor vi
i. Cor. vi. Be not deceived, for neither fornicatours, neither aduoutrers
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Here does he pretely touch the thoughts, which stick in many men, which
think that it is not a special sin, to live out of wedlock, and yet to
use uncleanliness, According as we se, yt the world thoroughout cou^teth this
sin but small, but will thou know, if men will not be converted, what the end
shall be: Then harken to this. Thou shall not inheryte the kingdom of God.
This shall be the judgment of God, over the aduouterers and fornicatours.

Now remember thou, what thou shall keep, when thou haste lost the kyngedome
of God. Therefore let every man be ware of this judgment of God, and take heed
in time, that he may amend his life, and eschew vncle^lynes. Otherwise,
although there followed no temporal correction, yet shall not the judgment of
God be left out. for there is dubble sin, that men eschew matrimony for a
tryfle, and defyle themselves with sin the longer the more contrary to the
will of God. There upon must needs follow the judgment of god, for here is
none other mean nor cou^sayl, but that thou leave such uncleanliness, and give
thy self into this state of wedlock. And so not only praise this state high
and honorable, with words, but also with the deed, and keep the bed of
matrimony undefiled, through chastity, and gentell conversation and dwelling
together.

This be said for a warning, and instruction, not only for the young peoples
sake, which yet shall come to the state of marriage. But also for their sakes,
that are in wedlock all ready. That they both may know, wherefore they shall
take wedlock, and how they shall behave themselves therein Godly. To the
intent that God be with them, with his blessing, and that they may have a
good conscience thereby, which God grant unto us all.

AMEN.
A brief Exhortation unto the married couple, how they shall behave themselves
in wedlock
Wherefore god did institute wedlock.
YE know out of ye word of god, whence matrimony has his beginning, namely,
that it is an ordinance of god, that the man and woman should dwell together,
and spend their lives one with another. first for this cause, that by this
means the sin and the flesh should be let, and yt we might live in a
good conscience. for god has sharply prohibited horedome and uncleanliness, and
punished the same grievously, as we se in all historyes and by daily experience.
Secondely also for this cause, that the kingdom of god, and y^ church may be
enter tained, not only by this, that god through his blessyng sends children
in wedlock, But also, that the children are educated of the married men, and
brought up in the word and fear of god, to thinte^t that ye knowledge of god,
and the right gods service may always come from the one, upon the other, by
inheritance, and by the means thereof, many may come to salvation.

Wherefore, God so to be thanked for matrimony
seeing wedlock serves against sin, and for the increassynge of the
kingdom of god, So ought ye, and all they that come to the State of
matrymonye, to thank god with all your hertes, for this grace, that he has
given you such a heart and mind, that ye have no lust to uncleanliness, and
sin, as the ungodly world. But fear god, and desire to eschew all
uncleanliness: for this is a great grace, seeing this example is manifest, that
Satan has so many manner of snares, where by he keeps the hertes, yt they out
of wedlock continue in sin, and in an evil conscience. But what judgment
shall follow them that use such vnclenlines, declares saint Paul.i. i. Cor.
vi
Corin. vi. Neither fornicatours, neither aduouterers shall inherit the
kingdom of god, from this fearful sentence, are ye (thanks be to God) now
escaped, if ye keep your selves together, and dwell together, according to the
ordinance of God.

But yet ye shall not be with out fear: the wicked enemy lays wait, for man
and wife.
for the wicked enemy, seeing, he could not hinder your hertes, and your
Godly purposes, He shall undertake and attempt other ways, to come to you,
and to divide such matrimonial dwelling together, or at the least, to make it
heavy and paynefull. And this is specially his pretense, to study how he may
pluck the hertes away the one from the other that even as now ye have lust
and love one to another, he may raise lothsomnes and enemitie.

And the devil fyndeth by us a great advantage, for this his purpose. For
there to are we used even from our youth, through sin, that eueryone would
feign have right, count his brain for the best, and be unwilling to give
place, or forbear the other. But this serves not for an unite, but for
discord, wherefore the married couple must beware for it, with all diligence,
and earnestly pray unto God for his holy Ghost, that he will so govern them,
and so knytte their hearts together, that the wicked enemy may not sow his
sede between them, and separate the hertes a sunder.

Such a prayer is hyghly and very necessary, They that line in wedlock must
pray God that they may live in unity.
that it may go so daily with them, that are in wedlock, and that always the
one pray for the other, that it will please God, to defend them from such
enormyties. But because that there are few men, that remember the same, and yet
fewer that do it, and pray earnestly, Therefore do we se, how the Devil has
his play, that there are very few of such men, among whom hatred chiding,
cursynge, brawling, reuylynge, and fighting is not used.

And they se not, that the Devil would feign have it so, and that it comes
by his instigation, or else they would not only pray against it, but also
endeavor themselves to resist the subtle assaults of the Devil, and to give
no rowme to wrath, if it would stir the^ to brawling or to fighting, for it
is the right work of the Devil: which if me^ will follow, the matter will
wax worse and worse, and one myschief will bring in another.

For this is true without doubt, that through such beginnynge, the Devil
brings it to that pass, that at the last, the hertes separate them selves
one from another, and that the love vanyssheth away quyte. There must needs
follow then a wretched life, where as a couple should be together, and yet ca^
not endure together, and yet is this plage vety common in the world. But whence
comes she? The people regard not the enemy the devil, and therefore they
pray not, that god will withstonde and resyste him. And they themselves know
not, wha^ they frette, crake and face, and will not forbear one another, that
they do but give rowme to the Devil, for to accomplish his purpose. Now if
thou wylt he defended from such mischief, and desyrest to possess a
peaceable, amiable, and agreeable wedlock with thy bedfellowe, Then learn to
pray unto God for it, that it will please him, through the holy Ghost to rule
your hearts, to with stand Satan, and to keep you in unity and concord.
Next unto this prayer, must also be used a synguler diligence, Whereof Saint
Peter teaches i. i. Pet. iij
Pet. iij. Ye men, says he, dwell with your wives according to knowledge,
giving honor unto the wife, as unto ye weaker vessel and as unto the^ yt are
heirs also of the grace of life, What the man ought to do.
yt your prayers be not let. This commau^deme^t goes specially upon the man,
yt he shall begin, and ^^e to it, yt unity and love may be entretayned in
wedlock and this is brought to pass ^n this wise, yt he rule with discretion,
and not with extremity take the woman a^ the worste in every thing. A good
cause why? For the woman is a weak creature, and has not such a courage nor
strong heart as a man: They are sone tempted, and pricked at the heart, and
are sooner moved to mirth and sorrow, then the me^ne. This ought a man to
consider, and be not hard against them, but sometime he must dissemble somewhat
and wynke at a fault, and help it with a fair word,

But this discretion takes the world for a wyuysh thing, and thincketh that
it becomes well, a man to be angry, and to fight well S. Peter sees well
enough, How men should give honor unto women
what becomes the man best, and wherein he ought to be most diligent. He
bids not to stryke. Use discretion says he. And that which is more, he
bids the to give her, her honor, that is, to favor and forbear her for
this cause, that she is a weak vessel, she has a faint weak and fearful
heart, and is brought alofte and moved to wrath with one word. Learn this and
forbear, therewith shall thou not only keep unity, But also overcome the
heart. For with fair words is always more gotten among reasonable tolkes,
then with strypes.

But he that will nothing forbear a woman, but will be always cursyng and
fightinge, and doing such like things, what good does the same? He helps
the Devil to accomplish his work, that where as unity, love and joy ought
to be, eue^ there grows enemitie, hatred and envy. This is in it self a
heavy case, and douteles the greatest inconvenience, that can come to man's
hand in worldely matters.

But there is yet another let, Discord and malice hyndereth prayer.
whereby prayer is let or hyndered. For wheresoever is discord, there can
be no right prayer made. For the Pater noster, or prayer goes not for us
alone, but for the hole world. And specially we comprehend there in, that we
will forgive them that trespass against us, as we would that god should
forgive us. How can such contentious persons do? How ca^ they pray for
other, where the one is so bittered against the other? And when the prayer for
the^ and other is lost, what conforte and defense will they have then? Seeing,
we can none other wise, but by prayer escape from the Devil. And also have no
conforte and help in all manner of necessities, whereon we may take hold.

Lo, into such temporal and spiritual calamities do thou bring thy self,
when thou wylt be indiscreet, and use no discretion. But even as mad horses,
stryke and byte about the. Saint Peter does not bid it the: But the Devil
does love it: therefore beware of it: Thou can be a man well enough, although
thou stryke not so about the, and suffer of thy bedfellowe a word or two.
This ought the man to do, and it is acceptable unto God, and it brings to man
and wife to themselves al goodness, and al manner of blessings into their house.

But what shall the woman do? Shall she abuse such forbearyng and discrete
conversation, and do always what she lusts? No, this were al so contrary to
the commandment of God. For saint Peter also preaches unto the^ on this
wise. i. Pe. iij. How the wives ought to use themselves
Let the wives be insubiection to their husbands. To be in subjection, is not,
to rule and command. This ought a woman to do over her familye and children.
But to her husband she must be in subjection, suffer to be commanded, and
follow. This is also a great point, which to concord helps very much, when
a woman looks on her husband, endeavors herself to know and accomplish
his will, and does that thing, which she knows to be his pleasure. And
eschueth that thing, which she knows, that he loves not. For by this does
she win her husbands heart, that he has lust and joy to come home again
to his wife. Co^trarywyse when the wives be disobedyent, self minded, froward,
the man abhors his own house, thinking, when he comes into the housse, yt
he must go to the battle and among his enemies.

But now it is not well possible, but that sometime such things must needs be
seen. For we are al frayl and vnparfect, specially the women, more then the
me^: therefore the woman must beware, that she continue not in obstinacy and
disobedience. But knowledge her trespace and say, Good husband, this and that
word escaped me in mine anger. I pray you, forgive it me, I will do it no
more. This ought the women to do in especial, because they are most fauty.

The wives must be to subjection to their husbands.
And to this doing shall not only the commodity drive them, that by the reason
thereof they might live in quiet and unite: But also the strayghte
commandment of God: Whereof saint Paul speaks. Ephe. v
Ephesi. v where he says. Women submit your selves unto your own husbands
as unto the Lord. For the husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the
head of the congregation. Therefore as the congregation is in subjection to
Christ, Likewise let the wives be in subjection to their husbands in all
things.

Item let the wife se, Ephe. v
that she fear her husband. There see thou, that it is even so the
ordinance of god, that thou shall knowledge thy husband, as thy Lord and
Master, and honor him with fear and obedyence. i. Pet. iii
And saint Peter says in the place above mentioned. That in the old time the
holy women did tyer themselves, not with silver and gold, but that they
trusted in God, and were obedyent to their husbands, even as Sara obeyed
Abraham, Gene. xviij.
and called him lord, whose daughters ye are, says Peter, if ye follow their
example.

The pains and trauayl of the women.
This saying should the wives mark in especial. It is very true, that the
most pain in wedlock goes over the wives, they lose their liberte, and must
suffer great calamity and miserye in wedlock, with bearyng of children, and
with nourysshyng and bryngyng them up, whereof they should be fre, if they
were not in wedlock. Notwithstanding here says Saint Peter: yt this was the
tyeringe of the holy women, that they did put their trust in God: that is: They
did not abhor wedlock for such disquietnes and necessities sakes. They gave
themselves gladly into it, and trusted in God: that is: they had to God this
confidence, that he should help them, and therefore they called unto him for
help. This do thou likewise, the^ art thou goodly garnyshed and tyered before
God, all his Angels and Saynctes. The attyreme^t of the fairest women.
And nedest not from thencefurth to look for good works. Be obedyente unto thy
husband, take, charge of him, have respect unto him, and look what he desires
and will have of the. Herewith do thou serve God, and entrtainest peace and
unity in thy house.

Furthermore, it shall also come to pass, that god with his grace and blessing
will be with the and thy wife, and will cause al goodness to happen unto you, as
the C.xxviij. Psalm says. Psalm. C.xxviij
Blessed is he, that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. Thou shall
enjoy the labors of thine own hands O well is the, happy art thou: thy
wife shall be, as a fruitful vynearde round about thy housse. Thy children
like the olyue branches round about thy table. Lo, thus shall the man be
blessed, that fears the Lord:

Therefore learn now, thus to guide yourselues in wedlock, then are ye always
provided. From the Devils snare, as from the uncleanliness out of wedlock are
ye escaped, in so much that before God ye may have a good conscience: for he
himself has ordained this state of matrimony. And seeing ye pray daily unto
God, that it will please him to assiste you daily with his grace, and keep you
in love and unity. And also use your selves to this, with a special diligence
that ye be still and peaceable and take well in worth the daily transgressions
and faults one of another. Therefore shall your dwelling be frendely and
loving, that ye shall have lust and joy thereon.

Man and wife may pray in aduersitye.
And although the Cross, which undoubtedly shall not abide out, do overtake you
that now here, now there happens some misfortune, and that it prospers
not well, then may ye yet lift up your hands together in such a common
necessity, and cry to God, for help. And the promise is even there at hand,
which Christ pronou^ceth Matthew. in the xviij. Mathe xviij.
of two of you shall agree in earth upon any manner of thing, whatsoever they
shall desire, it shall be given them of my father which is in heaven. Wherefore
would thou then abhor necessite, seeing help is promised unto the, and it
fails in nothing, but that thou and thy wife as a right and hole church of
God pray for it? Also thou know this, that it behooves us Christians, to
bear the Cross.

Therefore thank God for this grace, as I have told you at the beginning, that
ye are come to the holy state of matrimony: And pray, yt god will rule and
govern you therein, and preserve you from sin and all inconveniences. And
specially do your diligence, that ye suffer not Satan to crepe in, through
anger, and obstinatie: That your prayer ye highest confort, be not let, and that
ye may cry to god for help in all necessities, and keep his blessing, grace,
protection and defense, until god bring you with youres to another and better
life. Where unto help us the grace in Christ.

AMEN.

