A DISCOVRSE Upon the Reasons OF THE RESOLVTION taken in the Valteline against
the tyranny of the GRISONS and HERETIQVES. To the most Mighty Catholic King
of Spain, D. PHILLIP the Third. Written in Italian by the Author of The
Council of Trent. AND Faithfully translated into English. With the Translators
Epistle to the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for William Lee, at the Turks head in Fleetstreet, next to
the Miter and Phoenix. 1628.

TO THE KNIGHTS, BARONS AND BVRGESSES of the House of Commons, assembled in
Parliament.
THings compared, though contrary, or alike in nature, do illustrate one the
other: Contrariorum and similium eadem est ratio. Just. Just.
And therefore, to discern the strengths, counsels, and ends of diverse
Kingdoms, the straightest rule is comparison of their actions, government, and
foundation: All Monarchies and Republiques which have an end proposed, whether
to enlarge, or preserve their Dominion, most effectually work to their own
ends, because such operation is natural; Polib:
Is quino^it quaenam sint vniuscuinsque Rerumpublicarum principiae naturalia,
etiam incrementum et florentissimum statum, ac mutationem, and finem potest
cognoscere.

A wise and rational Historian comparing and censuring diverse Commonwealths,
why one subsisted, and others decayed; and how the one prevailed upon the
other; examined the forms and institutions, their designs, and ends, and what
was possible to be built upon them. That of Plato he esteemed incapable of
comparison, other then as a Statue to a man, which had excellent art, without
life. Athens and Thebes were not vnderlaid to bear any adversity: But when
they were most like to rise, the temperature of their policy was insufficient
to allay the abundance and increase of humors, and the growth was too sudden
and heavy for the foundation: when they began to shake, their root had no
earth. The Lacedemonian, to subsist of it self, to oppose foreign violence,
to need nothing exotique, to live in peace, was in all perfection instituted.
Caeterum ad parandum sibi in vicinos dominatum, to extend their Empire, even
their own foundation was an impediment. A blessed state, if Ambition were
banished the world; but defective to absolute safety: For no defense is
secure, that cannot offend. Therefore, as soon as that State began to affect
conquest, and to raise Armies, they found in their constitution, that the Laws
made to keep them happy, Plat^.
were too narrow to hold others in servitude: and their untried felicity
blinded their judgment, to ouer-value their own abilities. Qui vitam
instituisset contra naturam, merito etiam contra naturam fato functus est.
Polib.


The Carthagenians and Romans had larger ends, and a broader foundation, like
abilities and aptitudes to effect them, which were Imperium mundi. And though
all Commonwealths do conuenire in aliquo medi^, yet they which design quiet
possession of their own, and usurpation of the Estates of others, are at both
ends utterly repuguant.

The reasons why the Romans prevailed upon Carthage Polib.
being alike instituted, are another consideration, the manner of building, the
constancy, virtue, and goodness of Instruments are great differences. In these
the Romans excelled* and perhaps in the youth (for every State has an Infancy,
a mature, and a decrepitage) and consequently soonest arrived at their ends.
But that wherein most effectually they prevailed, was in Counsels; in which
they had advantage in the form of their government: For the people in
Carthage, in all deliberations, had too much authority, which bred delay, and
hindered secrecy; whereas in Rome, the Senate and Optimati, Tacit.
experienced and wise men, only resolved. Imus ad bellum, non omnes Nuncios
palam audiri, Polib.
non omnia consilia cunctis praesentibus tractari, ratio rerum, aut occasionum
velocitas patitur. Victoria consilijs, and ratione perficitur.

From these Considerations a Consequence is deduced, that when any two great
Kingdoms fall into a war, that which will prevail, must consider the ends
of the other, and the ways and means wherewith they are prosecuted, and to
them must apply all industry, and direct opposition. In the ends, as there is
great difference, so there is great advantage by the^: because active things,
etiamsi agendo repatiantur, weare-out passive, though of equal strength and
hardness, as the iron that strikes, in time batters that which suffers.
Commonwealths that design conquest, and are always attentive to watch
occasion, get ground upon the modest, more by vigilance then force: and fraud,
which is a terrible instrument, does ever accompany Ambition. Counsels vanquish
Arms, as spiritual things are predominant upon material, and as fire
dissolues the fastest metals: and those Counsels are most preualent, which are
united in one head, and issue from one fountain.

Therefore rising and increasing Empires are dangerous, if they once grow
great, and must be resisted in their ends, and in their counsels: single
defense is not sufficient: troublesome neighbors must be made passive, to
abate their reputation, which the spirit of action presupposes.

To apply these premises, having read with pleasure the following Discourse of
the Reasons of the Resolution in the Valteline; and being at leisure, either to
sleep, or wast in mine own meditations, I thought it would be a good
recreation, and not unacceptable to my loyal Countrymen, to teach it to speak
as plain English, as it does truth; and finding the whole scope of the Author
(an Author of great worth, and greater works) to be an information to the
World, of the dangerous increase, and ambition of the house of Austria: and, if
possible, to read the King of Spain a lesson, not to be learned, but under a
Rodd of Iron, that in time necessity would open the eyes of all Princes, to
oppose his secret project of Universal Monarchy; I believed that some profit
might be gathered out of this foreign Garden.

I will suppose that this Theme is sufficiently handled; and that there are few
practiced in the world, who will deny it. The witnesses are great and evident;
India unjustly usurped; Sicily surprised by treason; Naples by breach of
Contract; Millan held by Intrusion; Navarre by excommunication of the lawful
Prince; Portugal oppressed by the Sword; Con^stag.
and the Pope refused to judge either competently, or as Arbiter, the pretenses
of Parma and Braganza, when it was possible in temporal Causes, his spirit
might err in not adoring Spain: The Valteline possessed under the color of
Religion; The Palatinate and the States of Cleue seized by auxiliars, and kept
for Debts forced upon the Proprietaries, which they desired not to borrow:
Wesell stolen in a truce; and the Rhyne passed over under the favor of a
Treaty; Embden attempted; Venice conspired; Piemont assaulted; France twice
corrupted into Combustion, with holy leagues and open Arms: and England
practiced, and invaded; And to be able to do any, or all these, a scelerous
peace sought with the Turk, to whom, in truth, Spain is only a true friend.
These are such a Cloud of witnesses, as no modesty will oppugn them.

Which being now manifest to the world, and that it is expected every wise
Prince and State will consider, nunc meares agitur, I also have presumed to
warn diuisos ab orb Britannos; who being separated from General Commerce by
the Sea, which is our wall, true Information may be kept out, as well as
Enemes.

To which purpose, without any malignity or willing offense, I must look one
age back; For in the former, Alas, the Kings of Castile were good Neighbors,
and were content not to be supplanted by their own Moors, mingled with their
Subjects, both in house and blood.

England has been the special and most advantageous mark at which this new
Monarchy has aimed, since cupido dominandi outgrew Conscience, and all laws
of Justice; England, the Queen of the Sea, and Lady of Traffic being
conquered, half of the whole is done. England has more hindered this
unnatural growth, then all Europe; it is then out of question, that the
wisdom of Spain, which never erreth in the way of greatness, loves and
hates no kingdom so much, as England.

When Don John of Austria had won the famous battle of Lepanto, Raphael
Pereg.
and therein laid to himself a foundation of advancement, and had gotten
possession of the City of Tunis; the Spanish Council, foreseeing the rising
Star of a new Monarchy, though in their own Princes blood, rather resolved
to raze, and destroy that Town; and accordingly gave order to the General.
But he, who had higher thoughts, fortified it, and solicited the Pope Pius
quintus, to intercede with the Catholic king, that the Title of that kingdom
might be conferred upon him, to erect a fresh opposite to the Ottoman Empire.
The king of Spain, jealous of any Concurrent, utterly refused this honor to
his own Brother: and suddenly, to exercise his great mind upon some subject of
his private service, sent him Governor into Flanders, where he was as like to
break, as rise; The young Prince, whose fathers blood boiled in his veins,
discontent to be shut up in so narrow a Compass, fell upon a new practice, to
conquer England, and procured so far with the same Pope, that he dealt
earnestly with the Catholic King, to consent to that Enterprise, and to
contribute Aids for the Execution, in favor whereof his Holiness had already
granted him Bulls, Breues, Money, and the secret Inuestiture, though this
Project in the manner was not acceptable to King Phillip, that the Pope should
give that away, without first consulting with him, which he had embraced in
his own thoughts, yet he yielded and promised to assist Don John in the
Invasion of England; So much more he thirsted to deprive a Christian Prince of
an ancient Inheritance, then to keep a great Kingdom, opportunely seated to
annoy the Turks, from his friends, the Ottomans; I will not Physically
conjecture what blood begat this Counsel; but propose it, as a worthy and
great Consideration.

The attempt of the Duke of Medina, and the invincible Armado, was a fruit of
the same root; But that the sword might not seem to cut through all Justice,
to corrupt the minds of the ignorant, and to satisfy the doubtful and
scrupulous, a counterfeit book; Dolman.
under a counterfeit name, was published, discussing the several titles of
England, and seeming to give every one their own right, it cunningly
insinuates, that the reasons of the Infanta Isabella were more pregnant then
all the rest, which could not come into question until Sixteen Princes
successorily reigning, were condemned for Usurpers, one of whom her father had
married and by her taken the title of England. But God fought for us; Tonante
in coelis Jehovah, Psalm: 18.
and Excelso edente vocem suam, grando, and prunaeigneae: it a emittens
sagittas suas, dispergit, and fulgura iaculans, fundit illos.

When fained Titles were foolishness before God and men, and the Chariot
wheels of the Enemy were taken off, outward force not prevail^ng, Religion, and
the defense of that, as the last refuge and Sanctuary of Ambition, was taken
up, and a holy pretense advanced to practice Treason and Rebellion in Ireland.
To this end, the E^rles of Desmond and Tyron were thrust out, and maintained in
defection, against their natural Prince; and as soon as their actions were
worth the avowing, Aids, and Supplies were openly sent from Spain, and that
Kingdom doubly invaded, by Conspiracy, and Arms. But Kinsale is a famous
sepulcher of their honor: that Climate perhaps having as natural an Antipathy
to Cholerique complexions, and Intruders, as to noisome and venomous beasts.

I purpose not to enumerate private and clandestine minings and machinations:
These three notorious examples will prove the general Assertion, That Spain
does aspire the subjection of Europe by the first ascent of England: yet to
show more clearly the wiles and religious Counsels, wherewith this Design is
pros^cuted, it will be no unprofitable digression, to reveal to the world the
Negotiations of this Monarchy with the Ottomans, when either it has been in
want, or fe^re, or preparing for some new Attempt; Catholic ways, which the
Lion has never trod in the Desert, nor the Vulturs eye seen in the
wilderness.

It is one of the Vaine-glories of Spain, that they hold no correspondence,
nor ever made any peace with the great Enemy of Christendom, calumniating and
reproaching all other Princes and States, who, for utility of Trade, maintain
a Civil Commerce with them: But wise men will discern the fallacy, and
difference between those, who, according to the liberty of the laws of God
and Nations, do only traffic and communicate the abundancies of their
Countries, with Infidels; and others, who will have no exchange nor
intercourse, but under the condition of dividing the world, and oppressing, by
mutual consent, of all Princes. And such a Peace and opportunity the Spaniard
has offered, and sought of the Emperor of Turkey: And if this be not
sufficient, to return the ignominy cast upon others; Let it be weighed
uprightly, and it shall appear, that all the correspondence and trade of all
the Princes in amity with the Grand Signior together, does not bring to him
half the profit and security, as the dissentions and Intrusions of the House
of Austria, wherewith they keep all Christendom in continual fear, or war.
Whereby that common Enemy lives in safety, and at ease, watching advantages
upon all, indifferently.

About the time that Phillip the second (the holy League to deprive Henry the
Fourth of the Crown of France, failing him) in the Reign of Mehemet, Grand
father of Morat now living, a certain rich Portugal Jew, Don Aluaro Mendes,
resident in Constantinople, pretending occasion to send another of his Tribe
called Iehuda Serfati, upon private affairs (but practiced by the Ministers of
Spain) into that Country; as soon as he arrived at the frontire, by the Kings
order he was created an Ambassador from the Grand Signior, and conducted in
that quality to the Court, and a Counsel held, in what manner to give him
audience; His name was already changed to Don Gabriell di Bona-Ventura, his
Instructions drawn by a Iunto for the purpose; and thus he was showed abroad,
defrayed by the King, and his Message published, that he was employed to offer
Peace and friendship from the Turkish Emperor.

When this Scene was acted, he was sent back with true Letters of Don
Christofero di Mora, and the Secretary Catagna, to the great Vizier, and for
his better security, a safe Conduct and Credance was given him, signed by the
King Yoel Rey.

Passing by Sicily, by Catholic Order, Forty Turkish Slaves were delivered
him, to present at the Port, in earnest of the Spanish and Ottoman amity;
Letters also of credit for good sums were furnished, to enable him to spend,
and procure answer from the Grand Signior, and favor of the Vizier, Mufti, and
other of the great Officers.

With which Orders and Arms being arrived at Constantinople, he used all
means, with all men, to induce an acceptance of the Peace, urging and
demonstrating the earnest affection, and desire of the King of Spain to
conclude it.

But this practice being discovered by the Ambassadors resident at the Port,
and others not too well affected to Spain, the falsehood was made appear: and
Don Gabriel by the great Vizier was clapped in prison, as a Counterfeit and
Impostor.

In a few months this Vizier was displaced, and another advanced to his
Office, and, as it is a common rule with them, to run a contrary course to
their fallen Predecessors, without examining the merits or causes: this Jew was
set at liberty, and all his actions and Letters approved, as true and
authentical; And thereupon Petition made to the Grand Signior to inform the
Negotiation; and by the counsel of the new Ministers, it was admitted, and
accepted, and answer granted to the King of Spain, that seeing he had showed
so much affection to peace, and to enter into a sincere Correspondence with the
Port, especially by the charitable liberty of so many Mahometans freely
presented; that the Gates of the Ottoman Empire were always open to whomsoever
did seek their friendship: and that Ambassadors might securely come to treat
and conclude it.

With these Letters to the Catholic King, and others to Don Christofero di
Mora, and the Secretary Catagna from the Vizier, Don Gabriel was dispeeded with
two Messengers of the Port, by the way of Wallachia to the confines of the
Empire, purposing to take his journey through Germany.

But Rodolphus being then in war with Sultan Mehemet, he was stayed, and
examined on the Borders; To free himself, he fained that he had Letters to the
Emperor; whereupon all his papers were seized, and sent to Prague. His
Imperial Majesty very discontent, and jealous of such Treaties between Spain
and Turkey, without his communication, and in such a Coniuncture; gave order,
that the Jew should be brought to Vienna, and kept in close Prison, until he
had some advice from Madrid. The Catholic King, finding diu non latere
scelera, to save the honor of his private Designs, denied the fact, forsook
and protested the poor Don Gabriel, who miserably there ended his life,
conassai mala-ventura. It may be collected, that the Spanish ends of this
Treaty were such as durst not abide the light, seeing they might not be
trusted to the nearest friend; and it was judged great modesty, to be ashamed,
and the part of a good Christian, to renounce secret practices with Turks, by
the mediation of Jews, but of an ill Master, to leave and abandon his Servant.
Such Vessels in the hands of Princes are formed for honor, or dishonor, as
their interests counsel them.

In later times, the extraordinary Ambassadors of the Emperor, treating at
Constantinople the frontire Affairs, and accidental Breaches, another
ouerture was by them made in the name of the King of Spain, and the best
argument ^sed was, that the world knew but two great and Imperial Families,
Austria, and Ottoman, who if they were reconciled, might make another Division
of East and West: The rest, it is more humanity to conceal, then
Christianity to negotiate.

This last year a Bolognese was sent from the Vice-King of Naples, in pursuit
of the same Design; and counterfeit Letters printed in Spain, with a
Catalogue of impossible presents, pretended from the Grand Signior, to beg
peace, and spread abroad, to add reputation to his Armies; as if the world
would tremble at a smoke: And though this Engine returned fruitless, yet
Spain is not hopeless. They know the ease and advantage they should draw, by
security on this side, to have all their Galleys at liberty, to shut up the
Straights, to hinder traffic, and to succor Genoua; and their Garrisons of
Calabria and Sicily free, to be employed in their other necessities. And here
it cannot be ouer-passed, that while Spain did negotiate this Peace, doubting
not to effect it, the same instruments were employed with moneys and Letters,
to excite the Cossacques (though in prejudice of the Peace of the King of
Poland, allied to the House of Austria by a double marriage) to invade the
Bospherus, that the Armado of the Grand Signior might necessarily be kept in
the blacke-Sea, for defense, whereby the Spaniard, by a fine Art, does enjoy
half the fruits of the Peace, without obtaining it: These are a model of the
ways and counsels of the Spanish Monarchy.

If the King of Spain envied his Brother the Conquest of a Mohammedan kingdom;
and treat underhand with the Turks, without respect or knowledge of the
Emperor; If he solicit the seeds of a war between Poland and the Grand
Signior, under the color of a peace, without care of the utility of that
Crown so nearly to him allied: It may be concluded, that ambition of
universal Monarchy, is only able to extinguish all obligations, both of
Religion and blood: Because, Si violandum jus est, Eurip.
imperijgratia violandum est, alijs rebus pietatem colas.

If the first step to this sole Empire be the Conquest of England, as the
Designs of the Enemy, from who^ some lessons are best taught, and their
Counsels to their own ends do clearly demonstrate, and the resolution of
diverse Iunto's have laid for a foundation: It is happy for England to foresee
the blow, and to provide timely to prevent it: and not be bound to the
disadvantage of making a desperate Bett, when the adversary shall call, and the
game irrecouerable.

These Demonstrations admitted for true, the next Consideration will be, by
what means most effectually and virtually to work a just defense; Wherein if
the Ends, Counsels, and Ways, whereby Spain has in few years advanced, be
observed, they will reflect a true light upon the contrary, how they may be
humbled.

The end of Spain is Universal Monarchy, conformable to the Romans in all;
but the noble contempt of Treasons: Herein, and in Counsels, they have
advantage of us. It must then be concluded to oppose this end, we must resolve
the like, and pursue it with the like ways, and Counsels, (except only the
ways of Darkness) to take from them those rank parts, which nourish this
Concupiscence.

To discover the right line of this opposition, it may be enquired, what Spain
did advance in the last war, in the blessed days of the glorious Queen
Elizabeth, either upon England, France, Germany, Italy, or Holland, and the
total sum shall be found nothing. Whether they lost in Flanders, or of their
own, is not the question, for the war was in the end defensive, and he is
beaten, that assailing conquers not; But that the Indies were not able to
supply, nor appease the mutinies of his Soldiers, nor to pay the Interests of
Genoua, and that they had lost all Reputation, and sought peace on all sides
precario, Hoochstrat, the Electo's, their Bills protested, their trauailng
Friars, their own Ambassages and the World, are irrefutable witnesses.

To account what they have gotten in these latter years of Peace, only by
peace, besides the daring so bold an Act, as to expel many Millions of inborne
Enemies, and thereby raising another Indea of treasure for a designed war, at
the spring tide of their full Coffers, would, if it lay together, make a
competent estate for a moderate Prince. Somewhat in this point has been
touched in a general enumeration, but particulars do fully instruct. Alarache
in Barbary, to strengthen their South Coasts of Spain, and to help to shut
up the Streights of Gibralterra; Acon, under the Imperial Colors deprived of
the liberty of Conscience, the Reformed Magistrates banished, and the City
reduced to their Devotion; The non Plus Vltra of the Rhyne, 40 years defended,
sliptouer; and thereby Wesell, the Retraict, and Sanctuary of our Religion,
made the Spanish Garrison; Gulick, and the Inheritance of the Heirs of Cleue
possessed under the title of protection, and kept as a pledge; The Palatinate
distributed to their Dependants, but the Ports and Fortresses of Importance
held in hostage; And thus Holland surrounded; The Valtoline blockt-vpp; The
Crowns of Bohemia and Hungary intailed, and the Nobility spoiled of their
privilege of free Election; The Euangeliques universally exiled and oppressed;
And all Germany trembling under the example: These are the fruits of a Spanish
peace. If the slumbring Lion bite so mortally, what shall he do, enraged
after his pursued Prey? And if in peace, contrary to the nature of peace, such
achieuements are obtained, that the ship of Spain run in the night so many
leagues, while the Pilot seems to sleep; It is evident, in peace and War
they have one end of Conquest. Seneca.
Sapiens non semper it vno gradu, sed vnavia.

From these examples we must learn bellum vtiliter inire, and prosequi. I
will not presume to understand where the Spanish Empire is most sensible and
weak; but exhibit some general rules, that Rivers are only to be prevented
of their waters, by stopping or diuerting their fountains. Egypt depends upon
the courtesy and pays tribute to the King of Ethiopia to give leave to Nilus
to water it. The body is soonest reduced to a consumption, by destroying the
Liver, the Indies of blood; And then demonstrate these axioms by a few Roman
and Spanish Parallels, what they did, and what they suffered, and leave the
application to Active men.

That Princely People had no Indies, but their Virtue; Rome and the Senate was
all; while they carried their Armies abroad, they had no returns but victories
and triumph, and they could loose nothing, except men, that sold their lives
dearly. But when their Emuli the Carthagenians, discovered by their Invasion
of Sicily, that their ambition had no limits, and considered that while they
fought for their own ground, they could get nothing, but blows; They resolved
to send Haniball to the Gates of Rome: where he reduced that Empire to nothing,
but a College of brave old men, prepared to dye in Majesty. Eighteen years
this glorious Captain trod on the spoils of Italy, and doubtless had
finished that Dominion, and in that day, in which he turned to Capua had supped
in the Capitol, Hor.
Si quemadmodum sciret vincere, sic vti victoria scisset. From whence grew the
proverb* Capuam Hanibali, Cannas fuisse. We must not trust in errors, nor hope
this Courtesy of our Enemies.

When the young Scipio revived the hearts of the Romans by undertaking the
Province of Spain, where his Father and Uncle, and so many Legions were
buried, he found three Armies greater then his own, Polib.
to oppose him. Vulgaria omnia consilia, and quorum venire in mentem cuiusuis
poterat, omisit. To fight with all at once was impossible; to begin with one
desperate; the other two were at his back, entire, vincendo, vinceretur. And
fortune must not be often tempted; But when he fell upon the consideration,
that new C^rthage was the fountain from whence all the divisions were
supplied, the Port, and harbor of succors, he resolved, omnes vna aggredi; by
taking that City, to dry up the streams at the spring head; Thus the Enemies
retraict and storehouse became his, tota Regio in vna vrbe superataest, and he
changed the face of the whole war, by one deliberation, and was victorious
without the uncertain trial of Battle, dubium an vtiliori falicioriue
concilio.

Lastly, when there was no other way to retire Haniball out of Italy, this fate
of Carthage undertook to transport the war to their own doors; and then,
he that never refused to fight, treated, sought peace, and almost confessed
that he was vanquished; then he made that pitiful oration, the most
inglorious of all his Acts: Hanib. ad Scip.
Si nunc esset integrum, optaturum se fore, vt neque Romani quicquam vnquam
eorum quae sunt extra Italiam, nec Carthagenienses, eorum, quae extra Affricam
concupiscent. To this moderation must Spain be reduced. Haniball knew he
might safelier have lost all his battles within the Alps, then one at the
gates of Carthage: In them he adventured nothing, but the superfluity of
youthful blood, which en gaijete de coeur, sought their desteny in the field
of honor. But now the Commonwealth was at stake, and they played their
Altars, Liberties, Wives, and Children, at one game; Haniball, to avoid this
desteny attempted Italy, to wast Rome at their own charges. But Scipio had
learned that wisdom of him, which himself could not use, and finished at
once a double war: and the Spaniards imitating the one part, shows us the
way to take the other; Spain, while it was a single Kingdom threatened no
body, and in Spain litl e is to be gotten, where me ate must be supplied, and
a victorious Army may starve. Therefore, that not being the root, it must be
sought from whence this evil of ambition arises: and as in natural Bodies,
there are other parts, besides the head and the heart, which being cut off, or
wounded, cause desolution, so it is possible to find a way to weaken that
Monster, which cannot be killed at one blow.

Great preparations at mighty expenses give too great warning, are subject to
many accidents and hazard too much reputation. And if one State know any one
Design that may much annoy the Enemy, it is like the other is not ignorant of
their own weaknesses. Wise Gamesters play not all at a Cast, the By, often
helps the Maine. Therefore, both rule and example has taught us, that Spain
is more easily wasted, then any part of their Christian Dominion conquered,
while the stream of money is open, and vndiuerted. But if this long and sure
course threaten also a reciprocal Consumption, yet that war in Europe will
be most profitable for us, which shall be made nearest our own Kingdom, both
for the keeping our forces united, and at hand, and for the easiness of
supplies in all Events; and out of Europe, by a Royal Action, it is not
impossible at one stroke, to behead the Indies,

To oppose them in their Counsels we must first observe what they are, Pierre
Mat.
Espagne practiquant tousiours sa vieille maxim de se maintenir par la querra
de ses voisins.

Sedition, separation, and disunion are the dangerous weapons wherewith they
prepare to themselves easy Conquests, and these Arts have their first
efficacy under the pretense of Treaty, then is the Spaniard most to be
suspected, Tacit.
because they know how hostibus prodere prima belli tempora, and if they can
raise any jealousy, or variance, to remove any one, all are weakened; rebusque
turbatis, malum extremum discordia accessit. The contrary then, which is a
firm and constant League, is only powerful, and able to arrest them. In the
Colleagued war of the Commonwealths of Greece against the united power of the
Spartans, some of the Confederates, who lay next the danger, beginning to
waver, this sentence of their common safety was given, Polib.
vnicam spem superesse video omnibus, agri sui longum tempus possidendi, si
Epaminondae consilio vsi, omnium temporum, omniumque rerum societatem sinceram
inter se colant: To hope to divide indivisibile is lost labor, the Designs of
Spain are one, united in the head, in genere generalissimo, the House of
Austria, which cannot be distracted. They have no other maine and important
adherent, but the Pope, and his Ecclesiastical Dependents, and these also make
but one, and meet in the Center, concurring in common and mingled ends. And
they greatly err, who suppose, that it is ever possible to find a Pope
impartial for Spain, or to favor any other Prince against them. Let Urban
the Eighth serve for an example, raised and fed by France, yet fallen to their
enemies, per ragione di stato. One fresh and pregnant instance will discover
both this unity, and the advantage of Spanish Counsels. When the Treaty of
Madrid for the liberty of the Valteline was not performed, and roundly pressed
by the French, some difficulties remaining, to prolong the possession, the
Forts of that Valley were, by consent, delivered to the Pope, tanquam communi
Patri in Deposito.

This seemed very equal, but the French were ouer-reached; For they hoped upon
the justice of their Cause, and that a sentence would timely be given for them,
which was impossible: For the Spaniard was content, that the Deposition should
remain for ever to his use; and he knew that the Pope, by accepting it, was
engaged never to surrender to the Grisons, because the spiritual Father could
never deliver his Children (behold another title) to the subjection and will of
Heretics: and if the French should at last use force, his Holiness was
doubly entangled, both in honor and conscience, to unite with Spain, to
maintain his Depositation. This the French did not foresee, and fell upon a
disadvantage to recover it from the Pope, a matter of dangerous consequence.
Who, at last, takes Arms in the Cause, as the World knows. But when both the
Pope and Spain saw such a general storm, and Colleguation, and foresaw, that
there was no remedy but to lose it by Arms, which being victorious, might
quarrel with Millan, or find new objects of their disdain, they resolved
rather to surrender it, and to seem to yield to Justice. But who must do it?
The Pope by no means can consent to deliver part of his flock to wolves, so
his Embassage protested in France, therefore, by secret conniuence and
agreement, the King of Spain does suddenly seal the old Articles, and makes
the Transaction before Barbarini shall arrive, to save the Popes honor: For a
temporal Prince may salua conscientia restore Heretics to their temporal
rights, which the Pope, a higher pretender, over soul, body and goods, cannot
do. By this cunning they hope to separate the Princes united, the quarrel
being, in outward appearance, ended; and by this Intelligence it is evident,
that the Spiritual and temporal serve one another, and take turns, and shift
Interests, for mutual advantage. But if examples prove not categorically let
it be considered, that the spiritual and temporal Monarchies, affected by
Rome and Spain, have such mutual interest and affinity, and are so woven one
within the other, that though natural affection, or other respects of
gratitude, may for a time retard, and perhaps strive against an open
declaration, yet when necessity exacteth a resolution, the essence and mystery
of the Papacy will prevail: It must forsake father and mother, and cleave to
this double supremacy; for Rome and Spain must stand and fall together.

To proceed, when the Romans first transported their Legions into Greece, they
were called in by division, to restore that show of liberty to a part, which
they absolutely took from all Greece. Separation and disunion by them
fomented, opened a Port to a Dominion, which united, was like their Phalanx,
not to be broken. And certainly this day, the Spaniards have more hope to
divide the Princes colleagued, then to vanquish them: To which use, they have
two dangerous Instruments, Money for the Traitor, and a Pope for the
Conscience. It is observed, that Spain will buy Treasons dearer, then other
Nations do Faith; Omne scelus externum cum laetitia habetur. Tacit.
And another notes, that with a bit of parchment, the Pope will reduce any
Kingdom to him disobedient, to the State of Navarre, when the true King John
Albret, and Queen Katherine were expelled, l'excommunication du Pape Iules 1.
Pierre
aquant eu plus de forces que les arms de Castille. Math.
And they are not ashamed to glory with Philip of Macedon, another oppressor,
that the victories gotten with words, are more sweet then those of the Sword:
For every Soldier can fight, and share the honor, but Arts and deceits of
Treaties, are only proper to the Prince and his Counsel.

I will not enter into a search of the Treaties of Spain, nor how they are
maintained; I will not censure Equivocation, nor rip up our own wounds: only
I may have leave to note, that anciently some States were branded, there was
prouerbially Fides Punica, and Foedus Locrense; and therefore I admonish all
good Towns, which capitulate to have no Cittadell built within their walls, to
provide, that none be built upon them.

By what blood, I know not, the Kings of Spain are become heirs unto Francis
Sforza Duke of Milan, of whom, when Jews the Eleventh of France, pressed by
the Confederate war du bien public, wherein his brother, the Earl of
Caralois, and the Duke of Bretagny were engaged, desired aids of money, he
supplied the King with a good Counsel, Comines.
to agree to any conditions, with any of the League, to disband, or to sow a
jealousy among them; preserving only his Arms entire, with which, when they
were separated, he might humble them singly, at his pleasure; adding, that
Princes lost no reputation, when they attained their ends. The History is
vulgar, and the success of that advice, was, the flight of the Duke of Berry,
the stain of Charles of Burgundy, and the beggary of Bretagny. I am persuaded,
the Spaniards have concocted the Doctrine, and would come to an agreement with
any of the Leagues, to disunite them: and the Breach once made is not easily
repaired. Perhaps in this Coniuncture, they would (if honor would suffer it)
consent to make a general peace, until Arms were deposed; But here is the
present danger, to loose an opportunity, not to be recovered in many years.
The Counsel of Spain does know at how great expense of time, and charge of
Ambassages, these Leagues have been composing; which once dissolved, and
lulled asleep in security, would slowly return to the present perfection.
Therefore there is great Caution to be used, in giving ear to the Enchantments
of a Spanish Treaty: For some lie nearer punishment, some make easier
Conditions, but all singly, shall feel the revenge of their particular
Interests, Polib.
in the general offense, Occasion enim tu^^itati, ^os vltum ineunt, qui per
occasionem temporum ipsis nocuerant. The truce that Amilcar gave the Romans,
Idem.
when the Insubrian and Alpine Nations hung over them like a Cloud, Vt ne
patriam retinere sine periculo potuissent, did more advance their future
Empire, then the three Battles of his son Haniball did hinder it, because
he gave them leave to grow, and to have no Enemy but Carthage; Therefore I
have resolved, there is no safety in any sudden accord, ^or profit in accepting
wasted Countries, until some ambitious blood be let out, and the Spanish
Realls consumed, and that Nation, and all the World brought to know, that it is
possible to resist their greatness, and to abate their pride, and that in
themselves they are truly humbled. Polib.
Hoc igitur, si quid aliud qui Remp: regunt solicit obseruandum meminerint; vt
quos animos esserant qui in gratiam positis inimicitiis redeunt, aut nouam
amicitiam ineunt, ne ignorent quando temporibus cedentes, quando victis animis
pacis conditiones amplectantur: vt ab illis quidem, seu temporum suorum
Insidiatoribus, semper sibi caueant.

But seeing the end of all just war is a good and safe peace, qua nihil
pulchrius, nihil vtilius, and the means thereunto treaty, and the assurance
thereof, public faith; when it shall be necessary to negotiate a
reconciliation with Spain, Let it be accepted for a Rule, and foundation, that
the one part is never secure what the other would have, esse dolum, quia
credidit hostis, and when all reasons of State are narrowly enquired, and
outward Counsels waighed with vtile and honestum; yet there is a secret fit to
be revealed, That the Kings of Spain have a Council of Conscience, which may
approve, or annull all that is, or shall be transacted, and dormant
dispensations, which have reference to Contingences in ordine ad spiritualia,
to continue or dissolve all Conclusions: and this Retraict is formed like wax,
to take the Impression of the present aspect and necessity of affairs.

In the last treaty between France and Spain, in which Amiens was surprised,
when King Phillip saw the vigorous resolution of Henry the fourth to recover
the Towns in Picardy by the sword, and that he had given express Command to
the President de Silerye to consent to no Conuention, so long as one foot of
ground vnsurrendered, remained in the possession of the Spaniards considering,
that the bounds of that Province were the entrance into Artois, Pierre
and that victorious Armies extend their pretenses with prosperity, Math.
especially the Title of Sovereignty inuiting, and justifying that progress,
he consulted first, his Council of State, for the restitution, who, loath to
remit any thing of their stiffnesse, interposed the respects of honor, and so
it was necessary, not to confess inability to keep them; but the wise King,
knowing, to contend might draw the quarrel into the bowels of Flanders,
resolving both to prevent the occasion, and to save his reputation, called his
Council of Conscience to deliver their opinion, who concluded, that he could
not by the Laws of Religion usurp, nor dye with quietness of soul, if he
restored not to every man his own: and so those places were piously
surrendered, which could not safely be maintained; But Conscience extended no
further, then present question.

When the same Catholic King found it necessary, for Spanish reason of State,
that his own brave and eldest son should dye, Nature; and honor both,
contended against the Sentence; but obligations were pretended, and found,
above humanity, as the Act was without humanity. The Council of Conscience,
and to these a Iunto of Divines were added, to resolve the tender Conscience of
a Father, whether he might with safety of Conscience pardon his own Child of
offenses not yet fully published and therefore for ever suspected. Id^m.
These Ephori pronounced with weeping eyes, que le salut de son peuple, luy
deuoit estre plus cher, que celuy du son filz, and the geatest favor the
Prince could obtain, was to choose his death, that which was preferred and
enjoyed by Caesar; and facinus intragloriam fuit.

Before Alua appeared near Portugal with his Army, the Duke of Ossuna and Don
Christofero di Mora, Cones.
were employed to buy a party for the Catholic King, and they promised
mountains of Gold, to withdraw some of the Lords from Don Antonio. When the
kingdom was settled, these did demand their recompense, and pleaded their
Contracts in the name, and by virtue of the Kings order: Who remitted them, not
to the Counsel of State, for they must justify their own Acts, but to that
of Conscience; Who gave sentence, that if the Crown belonged to Don Antonio,
they could not rightfully confer it upon Phillip. If Phillip were the true
heir, the Petitioners could not sell their Allegiance to their own Prince,
for money, so that both ways they were judged Traitors, and their expected
reward was changed into a shameful pardon. I conclude, Nothing is sure,
without the approbation of this Court of Conscience; Nothing so unsure, as what
Law, or equity is the rule thereof. Therefore, that Peace only will be secure
with Spain, which the two Counsels of State, and Conscience shall together
resolve, to be profitable, because necessary.

To reduce this Discourse to a brief Conclusion, If right judgment of all
States arise from their ends; If their Counsels direct the way to discover
them, and both being discerned to affect Conquest, must be actiuely opposed,
lest they prevail upon a suffering modesty; If the ends of Spain are
apparently Universal Monarchy, and all their Counsels, by Negotiations,
infamous, and unchristian, or by practices of fomenting Treasons, and divisions
among their neighbors, are directed to attain that end; If the Pope must be
always obsequious for the affinity of their common ends; If there be no
security of Peace, but in their poverty: What other resolution can be
proposed, then that a lively war must be transported to that part of the
Dominions of Spain, which being separated and cut off, the ancient modesty,
and natural constitution of that Kingdom may return, to be glad to live in
Peace, and eat quietly their own Figs and Olives. And because in great
diseases, as well blood and ill humors must be diuerted, as the main Cure
intended; so it will be requisite, more for expedition then necessity of
health, to imitate other States in thrift. France in times past, had Scotland,
England, Burgundy, and Navarre; Spain their own Moors and Barbary, every
kingdom had a back-friend upon their Enemies. Such may be found upon the
weakest side of the House of Austria, Port d' Atras, drawn from their own
Confessions, that though the Palatinate be conquered, Hungary and Bohemia will
never be secure until the Hills of Transylvania be made the Bulwark of their
Empire. But this would be too large a Digression.

There remains only of my purpose, to prevent a Question; why I have chosen
to dedicate, by this Epistle, the ensuing Translation, to you most worthy
Senators of the House of Commons. For this boldness may be subject to various
misinterpretations. No man will suspect me of so great arrogance, as that I
hope to teach you any thing you do not know. But seeing your own wisdom did
first foresee the necessity of a war with Spain, and your own zeal to the
honor of your King, did counsel to undertake it, I thought such foreign
Meditations as these, concurring with your own thoughts, might also animate
and nourish in you a spirit, and generous Resolution, vigorously to maintain
it. You know how much of the good success of great Actions depends upon
reputation, and they have advanced much, who have gotten opinion. As
Astrologers make their judgments upon the first minute of time in Natiuities,
so does the world prognosticate of the happy successes of Princes, by the first
coniunctures in their Kingdoms, and their first actions abroad: Therefore
instandum fame, nam vt prima cessissent, fore vniuersa. You know, Tacit.
Moneys are the sinews of war, Idem.
Neque arma sine stipendijs, neque stipendia sine tributis, haberi queunt. If
you now restrain your liberal hand, you expose your Prince to dishonor, and
your Country to Consumption. It is Time only that will macerate England, when
without traffic and exchange, and that especially of Germany, our own
treasure must be exported to pay foreign Armies. Qui cito dat, bis dat, Seneca.
and it is ill husbandry to do that sparingly, which cannot be well done but
at once and speedily. It will be time to be thrifty in the members and
particulars, when the Head and the whole State is safe. And if you defer
until a lingering war has exhausted you, Remember that which remains will
not suffice, because sera in fundo parsimonia; non enim minimum, Idem.
sed and pessimum remanet.

Your humble Servant Philo-Britannicos.

THE REASONS OF the Resolution lately taken in the Valteline against the
Tyranny of the Grisons and the Heretics.
THe miseries of the unhappy Valteline, are now at last so notorious; so
intolerable are the barbarous oppressions, and tyrannies, that the inhabitants
thereof do suffer, as slaves under the Grisons, their pretended Lords and
Superiors; that they ought certainly to stir up great compassion in the
minds, and for their relief also, the force of Princes, and people far
removed; And seeing this, contrary to all expectation and equity, is not to
them administered; now, that of themselves, with the means given them almost
immediately from the hand of God, they have procured to free them from so sharp
a bondage, they might believe, that for their justification in that action
before the World, there needed no other diligence: Nevertheless, seeing the
malice of perverse Ministers, the tongues and infernal pens (with which
Tyrants serve their own occasions) have too great credit with the vulgar, to
obscure any truth, how clear soever, to calumniate Innocence, and to procure
hatred, it has been thought fit, to publish this Treatise, by which all men
may be informed briefly, and truly, that what they have done, is not only
right, by all Divine and Humane law, but worthy to be approved with high
praises, of men judicious, intelligent, and well affected to Justice and
Christianity; and to be protected by all States and Princes.

Omitting therefore colors, and artifice of words, proper to those ministers,
who study nothing, but to deceive: Every one does know, that all which a
Subject can pretend, consists in Soul, Life, Honor, and Goods; Of all these,
nothing remained to the miserable Valtoliues, wherein they were not extremely
oppressed, and tyrannized.

Concerning the Soul, it is sufficiently known, that the Inhabitants of that
Valley were anciently bred, and nourished in the holy Roman Catholic faith;
That therein, are many beautiful Churches, dedicated to the blessed Virgin,
and other Saints, favored by God with graces and miracles, and therefore
frequented by the devout concourse of sundry Nations, to the great comfort and
benefit of the People, who were by the Catholics to them admitted, in them to
celebrate Mass, and Services, for the health of their souls, according to the
holy Roman Rite. But now these Barbarians, given up in prey, to the most
perverse Professors of every Heresy, and particularly of Caluinisme, have so
with all their industry wrought, that this poison has slided, and infected the
whole Valley; from whence it may more easily spread into the bordering parts of
Italy. And although first they did not apparently show to take from the People,
the use of their ancient religion, yet their actions manifestly were thereunto
addressed; seeing by their Decrees, they gave power to the Heretics, to
profane the old Catholic Churches, with their Preachings, and Burialls; and
do take away the revenues left to Catholic Churches for Masses, and other
offices, which they transfer to heretical Ministers; That they enforce
Catholics to built them Churches; That they extinguish wholly Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, depriving the Catholics of the publication of Indulgence, and
Jubilees, and of Entrance into Orders, taking away all their Goods; and from
the Pastoral Cure of their Bishop, Not suffering any to obey him, nor that he
should come to visit or comfort them; That they permit the Heretic Ministers
openly to tread down the Sacraments of the Catholic Church, and if any
oppose, he is suddenly, and barbarously punished in life and goods; That they
exclude out of the Valley, almost all the orders of Religion, admitting on the
other part, indistinctly, heretical Ministers, of all Nations; That they erect
Seminaries and lately heretical Colleges, assigning them the profits, tithes,
Canonryes, and Benefits taken from the Curates and Catholic Church. O^ all
these, there are passed Decrees, Statutes, and open Edicts; And of Cases
particular, there are public Acts whereof the memory is too fresh, and
renewed by most cruel death inflicted on Catholics, and Religious men, in
the most Infamous manner imaginable. Now what else is this, but to use manifest
Tyranny over the souls of the Catholic Subjects, to take from them those
helps wherewith they advance their salvation, and their way to Heaven, and to
enforce them to embrace a new Religion which leads them down to Hell? The
cause too much declares it self, there is no need of greater exaggeration to
make it mani^est, and to show it more intolerable.

In the rest, to demonstrate the wretched estate of the said Valley, it shall
suffice, simply to represent the manner of Government used many years past; it
shall be sufficient to say, that it has been given only to him that would
offer most money, without any the least Consideration of abili^ie or other
parts necessary to such a charge; and that the Commissaries sent in appearance
to remedy the forepast injustice, were of the same quality, and sometimes
worse; Insomuch that both the one, and the other had for their aynie, and
thereto only did attend, to get their charges, and to heap up, by all
imaginable means, so much Gold that therewith they might return to their own
houses enrich't for ever.

From hence it proceeded, that the lives of poor Innocents were a thousand
ways ensnared, and often taken away with open injustice, at the instance of
their Enemies, who with great sums of money bought them, and sometimes after
sharp Imprisonment, and other torments, hardly were dismissed naked, by the
price of all their substance, which remained openly to the Officers without any
shame, in so much security, that the miserable oppressed, both in life, and
goods, durst not thereof lament.

By the same means, the estate of the Subject in Civil Causes was always in
great danger: For the Magistrates being publicly mercenary, it often happened
that some did loose by an unjust sentence dearly bought of the Adversary; and
others, to preserve them against Injustice, were forced to present a great part
to the Judge.

No Sentence although confirmed and passed in Judgment, whether Civil or
Criminal, was ever secure; because the Successor, to dig out money, did renew
the trouble to the partty acquitted, and for a new price did often racall
without any respect, that which of others, though justly, had been judged.

Safe-Conducts were broken at their pleasure, and public faith with vain
pretenses violated, to deprive life, that by such death, they might enrich
themselves. Laws and Statutes were not now with arts, and Stratagems deluded,
but openly despised, and trodden under foot, as if all had been freely given
to them in prey.

Orphans and Widows, and others of that Condition, so much recommended, both
by divine and humane law to the protection of Princes, and Magistrates, as
unable to help themselves, by infamous means; did remain wholly exposed to
the avarice of ravening wolves, to the extreme grief and compassion of good
men. On the other part, it often occurred, that those wicked men, which had
offended others, in life, goods, and honor, being fallen into the hands of
Justice, in stead of exemplary punishment, were for great bribes, sometimes by
unjust Judgment absolved, sometimes under color of feined escape, let free
out of prison to the great oppression and affliction of those, whom they had
wronged.

There were seen numbers of infamous persons, gracious with the officers of
Justice, and by them rewarded, only because they served as Instruments, many
and many ways, to betray the life and goods particularly of Catholics; From
whence did often follow the destruction and ruin, now of one, now of another
family, always of the most ancient, and honorable of the Valley.

Lastly, who shall well consider that which the Sicilians did for three years
suffer in the Roman Common wealth, under the government of the infamous Verres,
shall find that the unhappy Valtelines have endured much more, a longer time
from the hands of so many, worse then Verres; and perhapps shall not find, any
other government so infamous, and which so well resembles that, as this of the
Grisons in the Valley, which should more clearly be manifested, if it were here
necessary to represent all the Cases, and their circumstances one by one, as it
was for Cicero, handling his Cause for ends far different from ours.

That which makes our Case more full of compassion, is, that when the miserable
oppressed, have attempted the refuge of their Superiors for remedy against so
many Tyrannies, and Acts of Injustice, the officers themselves, have opposed
with seuerest banishments, and imprisonments, those, who for the public good
intermedled, and when it has happened, that all Impediments vanquished, the
Procurators of of the Valley have arrived at the Community of the Three Leagues,
and have informed particularly their many, and excessive grieuance^; in the
end, after having received, in diverse places, such affronts, that scarcely
Slaves could suffer, they have rested deluded, without effect, or any provision.

These things without doubt, are sufficient to take away all hope, ever to
find, under that government, any ease of so many miseries. But there are other
accidents thereunto added, whereby the Subjects are brought into utter
desperation. The Assembly in the town of Tosana, is already notorious, which
was applied to nothing else but the destruction of good, and Catholic men, as
well Grisons, as Valtelines. In the Diett there called, many banishments, and
many Capital Condemnations were decreed: amongst which was that against Nicolo
Rusca Archpriest of Sondrio, a Priest of most innocent life, and a true Martyr
of Christ, tormented and put to death, with all cruelty, and possible infamy,
without any other fault, then being a good Catholic, and a priest. Now these
Injuries and Cruelties having necessitated some Catholic Communities, to
seek redress of so many evils, using their utmost force; they obtained that
these Sentences being reuiewed, were, as barbarous, and most unjust, revoked.
But a little time the remedy lasted, because those people, stirred up by the
fury of their Ministers, and which more imported, moved by the practices and
moneys of that Neighbor Potentate (who per ragion di stato makes any thing
lawful, how contrary soever to the honor of God, and maintenance of his holy
Catholic faith) returned to reassemble in the City of Tauos, where, in their
new Diett, they have not only reconfirmed all the evils of that of Tosana,
but added others, making Heads of the Persecution, and Executioners of their
Arrests against Catholics, the same heretical Ministers, and by this
occasion their tyrannical government is so visibly established, (particularly
by the Assistance and purse of that Potentate, the principal Cause of so many
evils to the Christian Common Wealth) that the Subjects can expect no other,
but a declination to a worse Condition, and suddenly to arrive at the height
and extremity of all evils, now already approaching.

Admitting what has bin already co^pendiously delivered, yet in such manner,
that the Reader can never apprehend the degree, whereto their tyrannical
government was truly ascended, that seeing, as was in the beginning said, all
divine and humane law did permit the Valtolines, to withdraw themselves by all
possible means from so great a Tyranny, it will appear so clear to every
one, that it will be too much vanity to heap up reasons, proofs, and
authorities, in a matter in it self undoubted, even when it were discussed
between true Subjects, and Vassalls, and their natural and absolute Lord.

But now by so much more shall it appear lawful, when two things shall be
considered; the one, that the ancient Capitulations of the Valley with the
Grisons (following the end hereof) do show rather a confederation between
them, then a true subjection; and do speak in such sort, that the Empire
exercised by them in the Valley, is discovered to be a mere usurpation;
particularly, the Valtolines do bind themselves to the Grisons, with
limitation to things lawful and honest; besides, the obligation is made jointly
to the Bishop of Coira, and the Three-leagues; where now, these Tyrants having
de facto excluded with Sacrilegious exulation, their Bishop, have alone usurped
that, which neither to them, nor him, was granted. The other thing is, that
whatsoever the Valtolines yet have done, has been prosecuted only with
Intelligence and help of the sounder part of the Grisons themselves, and not
to rebel against their Lords (for such certainly the Three-Leagus never were)
but simply to reduce themselves to the true State declared in their
Capitulations, so far forth as the mutations, alterations, and other Accidents
would permit them.

The Agreements between the Bishop of Coira, and the Community of the Three
Leagues of the one part: and of the Valtoline of the other, in the year 1513.
Which appear by the indented Instrument at Iant of the Grison League, kept in
the Rolls of Coira.
PRimo, quod homines vallis Tellina, and Communitatis Tilij velint, and debeant
Reuerendissimo Domino Episcopo Curi^nsi, and tribus Lighis, perpetu^^
temporibus, i^ omnibus and singulis licitis, and honestis. parer^, and obedire.

Secundo, quod praelibati homines vallis Tellina, and Communitatis Tilij sim,
and esse debeant, nostri Vlz: Reuerendissims Domini Episcopi Curiensis, and
omniun^ trium Ligarum cari, and fideles Confoederati, and tales permanere and
pro tempore quo necesse fuerit, ad Dietas nostras vocari, in Concilijs
pariformiter sedere, and consulere omne id, quod eis Communitatibus magis
expediens videbitur: and quando ad Dietas sic, and pro^t supra, vocabuntur,
^unc debeant de quolibet Tertierio, and Communitate Tillij, vnum mittere
Consiliarium.

Tertio, quod homines vallis Tellinae and Communitatis Tilij, gaudeant and
vtantur eoru^ priuiligijs and antiquis consuetudinibus, si saltem fuerint de
iure laudabiles and Deo consonae.

Quarto quod praelibatus Reuerendiss. D. Episcopus Curiensis, and omnes Lighae
sint and esse debeant, dictis hominibus vallis Tellinae and Communitatis Tilij,
adiutorio and consilio erga Caesaream Maiestatem and Du^atum Mediolani, aut
alibi, vbicunque oportuerit, and liberi fiant ataleis, and similibus, vti
homines trium Ligarum.

Quinto, quod homines vallis Tellinae, and Communitatis Tilij teneantur,
singulis annis dare, and soluere Reuerendissimo Episcopo Curiensi, and omnibus
tribus foederibus, Tainenses mill, in promptis denarijs, persoluendos per
quemlibet, seu quoslibet, habentes bona in dicta Valle ad ratam bonorum suorum,
exemptum, and non exemptum.

TO THE MOST MIGHTY CATHOLIQVE King of Spain D. PHILIP THE THIRD.
Sacred, Royal, Catholic Majesty:
THE Manifest printed in the name of the Valteline, wherein the Reasons of the
Resolutions* lately by them taken against the tyranny of the Grisons and
Heretics, are alleged, has given great scandal to all wise men, who easily
do comprehend from whence, and why it was put to the Press, the Valtelines
having no notice at all, much less any part therein. Whereupon, having
proposed, seriously to discourse, and to bring to light, that truth, which
others do endeavor to wrap up in darkness; I have thought it an act of
Justice, and of no little service to your Majesty, whose mind truly
religious, it may be feared, lest it become deceived with a false appearance of
Piety and Religion, with which the Devil, a perpetual enemy of Princes well
inclined, uses oftentimes to transform himself into an Angel of light, and
to offer his help, as a guide, in the right path of Justice and honesty, to no
other end, but to draw them without discovery, into the crooked way of
iniquity and tyranny. But the better to ground my Discourse, I will begin
somewhat high, and imitate that good Architect, who purposing to build a strong
Tower, by how much he designeth to raise the top, so much lower he lays the
foundation.

That of Religion, (o Sacred, Royal, Catholic Majesty) is certainly a very
powerful object, the which, though feigned and disguised, ever raises a great
commotion in the minds of them, who thereof make profession. For this cause
many Princes of the world, either by the counsel of ill ministers, or through
the greediness of their own desires, wherewith they embrace Provinces,
Kingdoms, and Empires, and yet not satiated, when they want all other just
title to make war, and to seize by violence, that which they cannot pretend
by Justice, suddenly they take the pretense of Religion, under which Cloak,
they do not only seek to cover their unjust Actions, and to make them
appear lawful and holy, but therewith they inuit all men to favor their
attempts. Many times also with an affection of holy zeal, with true and
unfeigned Religion, with most just and honest Titles, they undertake some
Enterprises truly holy: But the Devil, who still practices to draw poison
from the fairest flowers, and serves himself with good, for an instrument of
evil; in the end reduces that very Religion to proper interest; that zeal of
Piety he conuerteth to zeal of Ambition; and the most just Titles, he uses
to the service of Tyrannical Monarchy. Therefore, where ordinarily the
question of the Acquisition of States is handled, a just Prince ought very well
to consider, if he have lawful cause, and honest right to possess them; and
where he knows no other Title, then that of Religion, much more he ought to
be advised, that it be not a fair and honest Cover, of a foul and wicked
Covetousness.

Don Pedro the tenth King of Aragon, and third of that name, having raised the
greatest forces in his power, passed therewith into Africa, to make war upon
the Moors, the ancient enemies of our Christian Religion: For which holy
purpose he received great Aides of money from S. Lewis the most Christian King
of France: What more worthy action could he have undertaken? Who would have
found occasion to blame him? yet under the herb lay hid the Serpent. Josephus
Bonfilis Hist. Sicil. par. 1. li. 8. Gonzalo de Igliescas Hist. Pontif. par. 1.
lib: 5. cap. 45. M. A^ton. Sabel. p. 2 E^^ad. 9. li. 7.
This King had sometime before sent into Sicily John Procita, who offended by
Charles of Anioy his Lord, desired to be revenged, disguised in the habit of a
Friar, to stir the minds of that Nation to rebel, who, for some ill usage
did show themselves distasted with the French Government. John Procita effected
his business: The Rebellion of the Sicilians, and the destruction of the
French followed. King Charles armed for the recovery of his lost Kingdom, and
the Rebels to resist him: In the mean while Peter of Aragon (that scarcely
having touched the Coast of Africa, was retired to Sardinia to be nearer
Sicily) observing the time, and occasion of his design fitting, suddenly went
to Palermo, where he was received with great joy and gladness, and published,
and proclaimed King of the Siciltans, who flocked to him from all parts of the
Island. See now your Majesty with what insidious and cursed Art, under the
color of Religion, the King Don Pedro faining to have taken Arms against the
Enemies of Christianity, took that Kingdom from a Christian King, and foedary
of Holy Church; and which is more, with the help of that Gold, which he had
received from the most Christian King, right Brother of King Charles. Whereupon
the blessed Pope Martin the fourth, a man of renowned sanctity (of whom, as
the Spanish Pontifical, and other Histories do report, Igliescas vbi supra.
were seen many miracles after his death) did excommunicate and deprive him of
his Kingdoms, and absolve his Subjects of their Oath of Allegiance, giving
power to any Prince to persecute him, as a common Enemy. Perhaps the holy
Bishop thought that, with this rigor, the King Don Pedro would be brought to
acknowledge his error, and to restore what he had ill gotten: But it proved
without any fruit; for he which made it lawful, unjustly to usurp the rights
of others, did little fear Ecclesiastical censures for their restitution.

And what more Catholic, and more pious Enterprise could be imagined, then
that of India, for the enlargement or the sacred Gospel? What iuster title,
then that which the highest Bishop Alexander the Sixth did grant to the
Catholic Kings Ferdinand, and Isabell, in the new world; ordeyning them as
supreme Emperors, over those Kings and Infidel Kingdoms? But after, what
thing was more unjust, then the Conquest of the immediate Dominion of those
Countries? I call it a Conquest, to enter with war, to subdue the people,
before they were allured with the peaceful voice of preaching and to take away
the life of lawful Lords, and Natural Princes, to usurp their States,
notwithstanding they did not hinder the promulgation of the Gospel, but rather
were ready to receive the holy Faith. And it is a certain truth, that when
also they were not converted whilst yet they did not oppose the progress of
Christian Religion, they could not be, by the way of war, subjected: that
being contrary to the will of Christ, who said, Speciosi pedes Euangelizantium
pacem; And much less could they be spoiled of their Dominion, seeing the same
Christ, when he came into the world, did declare, that the empire also of the
Gentiles is just, and lawful, commanding even his own Apostles to pay tribute
to Caesar. Neither is it to be believed, that the Pope, when he granted to
the Catholic Kings, the Soueraign Empire of the Indies, had any thought to
prejudice the immediate Dominion of Gentile Princes, because he could not do
it. The which the great Atabaliba, King of Peru did know by the only light of
nature, to whom Friar Vincenzo di val verde, made the most sottish and
abominable oration to reduce him to the holy faith, that could be imagined:
amongst other Curious things which he spoke, this was one.

El Papa, que oy biue, dio a nuestro potentissimo Rey de Espana, Emperador de
los Romanos, Igliescas p. 2. lib. 6. c. 26. Sect. 14.
y Monarca del mundo, la conquista destas tierras: El Emperador embia agora
Francesco Picaro a rogaros seay^su amigo, y tributario: y que obedezcays al
Papa, y recibays la fee de Christo, y creays en ^lla; porque uereys como es
sanctissima, y quc la que vos agora teneys es mas que falsa. Si esto todo no
haz^ys, sabed, que os hemos de dar guerra: y os que braremos los Idolos; y os
sor caremos a que dexeys la Religion di uuestros falsos Dioses. That is.

The Pope this day living, has granted our most mighty King of Spain Emperor
of the Romans, and Monarch of the World, the Conquest of these lands: now our
Emperor does send Francesco^ Pisaro, to desire you to be his friend, and
Tributary: to obey the Pope, to receive the faith of Christ, and to believe
therein, because you shall see, that it is most holy, and yours most false. If
you do not all this, know, that we must make war upon you: we will break
your Idols, and enforce you to leave the religion of your false Gods.

Who ever heard a holier and wiser Sermon?

Como si el hijo de Dios, que murio per cadauno dellos, Vescouo di Chiappa nel
lib della d^structione di India.
ouicra en su ley mandado, quando dixo, Euntes docete omnes gentes; que se
hiziessen requerimientos a los insieles pacisicos, y quietos, y que tienen sus
tierras propias; y si no la ricibiessen, luego sin otra predication, y dotrina,
y si n^ diessen a si mesmos al scnorio del Rey, que nunca oyeron, ni vieron,
espetialmente cuya gente y mensaieros son tan cruel^s, tan desapiadados, y tan
horribles Tirannos, perdiessen por el mesmo caso, la hazienda, y las tierras,
la libertad, las mugeres, y hijos, con todas sus vidas; que es cosa absurda, y
estulta, y digna de todo vituperio, ^scarnio y infierno.

That is:

As if the Son of God, who dyed for every one of them, had commanded in his
holy Law, when he said, Go and teach all Nations, that only intimation should
be made to peaceful and quiet Infidels, which had their proper Lands; and if
they did not presently receive the Faith, without other preaching, or
instruction, and should not submit themselves to the dominion of that King,
whom they never saw nor heard, whose messengers are so cruel, so impious, and
so horrible Tyrants; that they should lose, for this only Cause, their goods,
lands, liberty, wives, children, and life; which is a thing unreasonable,
absurd, and worthy of all reproach, infamy, and it Hell self.

Thus, wisely speaking of the same matter, though upon another occasion,
discourses the Reverend Bishop of Chiappa, a principal City of New Spain in
the Indies, called Friar Bartholmy dalle Case, by Nation a Spanyard, by birth a
Siuilian, but zealous of Justice, and a friend of truth, in his book of the
destruction of the Indies.

But returning to our Subject; The King Atabaliba was justly scandalized, and
grievously moved, at this so learned preaching, that answering to every point,
amongst other things he said these words.

Obedecer al Papa no me esta bien; porque deue de ser loco; puesda lo que no es
suyo, Igliescas vbi supra.
y me manda dexar el Reyno que yo herede de mi padre, y quiere, que yo le d^ a
qui en no conosco. That is.

To obey the Pope is not good for me, because he must needs be a fool,
seeing he gives that to another, which is none of his, and commands me to
leave that Kingdom, which I have inherited from my father, and would, I should
give it to one, that I know not what he is.

He could not certainly answer more wisely, according to the Proposition; which
was also false; Seeing the Pope was not so void of Judgment, to have granted
any such conquest to the Catholic King, or any other, especially by the way
of war, as the holy Preacher with threats, did affirm; being in it self,
unjust and wicked: And therefore the aforementioned, Bishop of Chiappa
earnestly defending the truth, did send upon this matter thirty propositions to
the Royal Council of India, printed in Civil in the year 1552. In the 23
whereof, he thus speaks.

Soiuzgallos primero por guerra, es forma, y uia contraria de la ley, y yugo
suaue, Vescouo di Chiappanelle. 30. propositione.
y cargal^gera, y mansedumbre de Jesus Christo. Es la propia, que lleue Mahoma,
y lleuaron los Romanos, con que inquietaron, y robaron el mondo. Es la, que
tienen oy, los Turcos, y Moros, y que comenca a tener, el Xarife. Y por tanto,
es iniquissima, tirannica, infamatiua del mellifluo nombre de Christo,
causatiua de infinitas nuebas blasfemias contra el verdadero Dios, y contra la
religi^n Christiana; Come tenemos longissima experientia, que se ha echo y oy
se haze, en las Indias, porque estimande Dios, ser el mas cruel, y mas iniusta,
y sin piedad, que ay en los Dioses; y por consiguiente es impeditiua de la
Conversion de qualesquiera Infieles, y que ha engendrado impossibilidad de que
jamas s^an Christianos en a quel orb, gentes infinitas. That is.

To subdue them by war, is a form and way contrary to the law, to the sweet
yoke, to the easy burden, and to the meekness of Jesus Christ; It is the
same which Mahomet, and the Romans did hold, wherewith they did disturb and
violate the world; it is the same which at this day the Turks and Moors
maintain, and the Xerif does begin to practice; and therefore it is most
wicked, tyrannical, infamous to the glorious name of Christ; the cause of
infinite and new Blasphemies against the true God, and Christian Religion, as
we have by long experience known, to have been, and yet, used amongst the
Indians; For they have an opinion of God, that he is the most cruel, the most
unjust, and merciless of all other gods. And by Consequence, it is the
hinderance of the Conversion of all sorts of Infidels, and has caused an
impossibiltie, that multitudes of People should ever become Christians.

In the last proposition whereof, he concludes.

De todo lo susodicho en fuerca de consequentia necessaria se sigue, que; sin
periuycio del titulo, y scnorio soberano, que a los Reys de Castilla pertenece,
sobrea quel orb de las Indias, todo lo que en ellas se ha echo, ansi en lo de
las iniustas y tirannicas conquistas, como en lo de los repartimientos, y en
comiendas; ha sido nulla yde ningun valor, ne fuerca de derecho. That is.

From all the fore alleged matters, it is necessarily inferred that without
prejudice of the title, and Sovereign Dominion, which appertains to the Kings
of Castile in that world of India, all that has been done, as well concerning
the unjust, and Tyrannical Conquest, as the Divisions, and Commenda's, is void,
of no value, and unlawful.

And in the seventh Rule of his Confessaries, the same good Prelate utters
these words:

Todas las cosas, Vescouo di Chiappanel Consess^ionari^.
que se han echo en todas estas Indias, assi en la entrada de los Espanoles en
cada provincia dellas, como en la s^jetion y seruidumbre, en que pusieron estas
gentes, con todos los medios y fines, y todo lo demas, que con ellas, y cerca
dellas, se ha echo, ha sido contra todo derecho natural, y derecho de las
gentes, y tambien contra derecho diuino; y por tanto, es todo iniusto, iniquo,
tirannico, y digno di todo fuego infernal; y por conseguiente, nullo, inualido,
y sin algun valor, ni momento de derecho.

That is:

All things which have been done in these Indies, as well in the Entrance of
the Spaniards to every Province thereof, as in the subjection, and ^e^uitude to
which they have reduced this People, with all the means, and ends, and all
that besides, which therein, or concerning them, has been done, is against all
Law of Nature and Nations, and contrary to the Law of God; and therefore it is
wholly unjust, wicked, tyrannical, and worthy of Hellfire, and by consequence
annihilated, inualid, of no force, nor iuridicall power.

Certainly ( Sacred Majesty,) The Assertions of this Prelate are such, that
they strike honor only in hearing, and almost resemble open Maledictions of a
mind subdued to Passion: But who shall diligently read all his works, and
shall consider distinctly every circumstance, shall clearly know, that these
are apprehensions of truth, expressed with an holy zeal, free from all p^ssion,
or interest, only in the defense of right.

Friar Bartholomy dalle Case spent the most part of his life in India, Forty
nine continued years (as himself affirms) he saw that which therein was
done; and Thirty four years he labored in the study of holy Laws, to be well
instructed in the knowledge of Justice.

He affirms nothing which he does not learnedly prove.

All his works were directed to his own King, and the Royal Council: before
whom more then once he appeared in person, to entreat of this Business. Who
can then believe, that he durst say that which was not apparent truth? Men use
not to speak ill of Princes to their own faces. Ignorance of the fact, or of
the Law cannot be objected to him, so much practiced, and who had so long
studied these matters. Argument of affection, or of passion, cannot be imagined
in a Prelat of most exemplar life, who renounced his Bishopric, only to
assist in the Court of his Prince, in the defense of a People, from any
interest in him as far removed as our world is distant from theirs. From
whence of necessity it must be said, that only the love of truth did move him,
and the invincible reasons wherewith he maintains all his Assertions, do most
clearly demonstrate it. So that your Majesty, who is as much a lover of truth,
as of God; considering with a (...), all the fore-alleadged discourses, will in
the sincerity of your conscience, conclude that which in the beginning was
declared; That Enterprises undertaken only for Religion, are often reduced to
proper Interest, and that Titles, Dignities, and Authorities, granted, with
most holy zeal, by the Vicar of Christ, have been peruersly abused.

It is very true, that this good Prelatate has indeauoured to excuse the
Catholic Kings, by saying that the above mentioned evils, were against their
Intentions, clearly expressed in many orders, and holy instructions, given to
those crooked ministers, who observed no part of them.

But this excuse is not admitted of wise men, yea rather confuted with most
strong Reasons.

First, because it has not been found, that the Catholic Kings did ever
punish any of those Ministers (unless perhaps some for Rebellion)
notwithstanding their wickedness was manifest unto them, which the foresaid
Bishop does more then once affirm.

Secondly, because so many iniquities by them committed were never retracted;
in particular, the Divisions of the Commenda's, upon which the said Author does
exclaim, even to the Heavens.

Lastly, because the immediate Dominions are encorporated universally and
particularly with the Supreme Dominions, and this is evident in fact, all
faculty being taken from them, which had it to choose their Prince; and the
inheritance, from them, to whom the estates by succession did appertain; of
whom some miraculously escaping alive, in that destruction of the Indies,
(lamentably by this Bishop described) were transported into Spain, lest by the
love of their Natural Subjects, they should aspire to recover that, of which
against reason, they were deprived. And yet to this day, the Issue of that
great Motezuma Emperor of Mexico, do live in the Court of your Majesty,
prohibited upon pain of life, to go out of Castile. From which most true
reasons, the wisdom of your Majesty may easily comprehend, how little the
aforesaid excuses (...) prevail, and how great Account, the Catholic Kings
have to render to God, of the usurpation of the immediate dominion of the
Indies under pretense of amplifying the Christian faith.

The religious zeal of the King Don Phillip the second, father of your
Majesty, cannot inconsiderately be ouerpast; when, invited by the Pope he
took Arms against Henry the fourth, King of France: The cause of Christ was
in question, against a public Heretic, and Enemy of Christ. It was
expedient that the sacred Catholic King, Protector of the Church of Christ,
should abandon his own Affairs of Flanders to defend that of Christ. The
which Heroique Action (the* fruit of perfect virtue, which is rarely found
among Princes of the World) did beget, in many, wonder, and incredulity, and in
others, it caused too malicious suspicion.

Algunos ( says the Spanish Bishop) que juzga^an la virtud agena por la
malitia propia, no querian creer, ^auia Pontif. par. 3. vita di Grigor. 14. C.
9.
que el zelo de Rey Catholico fuesse tan grande che desamparando su haziend^
propia, ^on tan gran costa fuesse a remediar la agena.

That is,

Some, who judge the virtue of others, by their own malice would not believe,
that the zeal of the Catholic King could be so great, that leaving the care
of his own business, he should, at so immence Charge, relieve the necessity
of others.

Behold the wonder, and the incredulity.

Otros ( as after follows in the history) que no bien conocian la Religion y
Christianidad del gran Filippo II. ^auia p. 3. vita de Innoc^ntio 9. C. 9.
^ondauan en esta jornada un gran edificio, diz^endo, que se queria hazer Rey
de Francia; o ponelle de su mano; assegurandosse ensus Estados comarcanos; y
sacando a bueltas no pequeno interes.

That is,

Others that did not well understand the Religion and Christianity of the
Grand Phillip the second, did from this undertaking lay the foundation of a
great building; saying that he desired to make himself King of France, or to
place a King of his own dependence, hereby assuring his own neighboring
States, and drawing to himself no little advantage.

Behold the malice, and that truly very great, against that most innocent
Monarch, who did clearly show, to have no other interest, nor further desire,
then that the Catholic Religion should not be utterly ruined, as it was
freshly threatened in the Kingdom of France.

But what cannot the Devil do? Saints and Heremits are rarely secure, much
less Princes in Courts. Scarcely has Henry begun, inspired by the holy
Ghost, to show himsefe willing to be reduced to the womb of holy Church, to be
truly a most Christian King; when the Catholic fell upon a Council, by no
means to consent that he should be King of France. And yet to him the Rights
of that Kingdom did appertain; nor for other cause was the opposition, but
for being an Heretic; whence the impediment being taken away, it was most
unjust any longer to withstand him. But it was whispered in the ears of the
Catholic King, by certain Machiauells, rather then Disciples, that the
Coronation of Henry might bring some danger to his Majesty for the kingdom of
Nauarr, and the County of Burgondy, upon which States the Crown of France has
pregnant pretensions; and that his Majesty had cast away in vain, so much
Gold, and spent so much blood of his people in that war.

Therefore.

Latarde antes ( so says Bauia) que hiziesse la absolution, Pontif p. 4 vita
de ^le. 8. Cap. 56
el Duq^e de Sessa Ambaxador del Rey Catholico, de su part, hiza al Papa
protestacion, que la absolucion, que su santitad pensau a dar a Enrico, no
perjudicasse al derecho de su Rey ^n lo toccante al Reyno de Nauarra, y Contado
di Borg^na, ni a los gastos que hauia echo en la conservation della fee
Catholicho, en el Reyno di Francia, y a instantia y requesta del: y que no
pensaua dexar las armas hasta cobrallos. O yo el pontifice atenta mente la
pret^stacion; y tomo della el Duque instrumento publico. Auertio antes a sua
Santitad, de algunos inconuenientes che temia, hauian de resultar de la
absolucion, que tenia determinado dar a Enrico.

That is,

The Evening before the Absolution should be given, the Duke of Sessa,
Ambassador of the Catholic King, on his behalf protested to the Pope, that
the absolution which his Holiness intended to give to Henry, should not
prejudice the Reasons of his King* in that which concerned the Kingdom of
Nauar, and the County of Bourgundy, nor in the expense which he had made for
the Conservation of the Catholic faith in the Kingdom of France, at his
instance and request, and that he determined, not to depose Arms, until he
had recovered them. The high Bishop attentively heard the Protest, and the Duke
took thereof a public instrument, having first advertised his Holiness of
some inconveniences which he feared might result from the Absolution, which
was purposed to be given to Henry.

These Protests did appear, to men of sound judgment, ill grounded
prentences, and the alleged inconveniences false foundations of that great
Building, which those malicious above mentioned did figure to themselves. They
said it was requisite to the strict Christianity, which the Catholic King
professed, (all humane Interest deposed) to advance with all his spirits, the
conversion of Henry, and to exhort the high Bishop, affectionately to receive
the prodigal Son, seeing he was returned penitent to his fathers house, and
to take into his Arms the strayed sheep, which he had now found, to carry
him to the Sacred sheepfold of Christ: They did blame, as a work very (...)
Catholic, but rather as a suggestion of the Devil, to attempt the hinderance
of that Absolution, which only he ought to have procured, for the quiet of
France, and the public good of Christendom, which if it had not succeeded,
might have wholly allenated that Kingdom from the Church, as the like had done
in England: They did consider that it was wide of the purpose to fear any
prejudice in the kingdom of Navarre, and the County of Burgundy, seeing the
Absolution did not derive any more right to Henry, then that which any other,
which should be King of France might have.

But above all, the pretensions of the expense made in the war, did give them
greatest scandal. They discoursed; if only for the love of Christ, the
Catholic King had disbursed that money, why was he not content to have Christ
his Debtor? But how a Debtor? if he does enjoy of the Patrimony of Christ,
above Three Millions yearly Revenue, granted him by the Vicar of Christ, of
Tenths, Subsidi^s, and Croysado's, and other means, with condition to employ
them against the Enemies of Christendome^ why takes he no^ pen in hand and
comes not to a distinct Account, of the Receipts and Issues, well balancing il
dare; con l' hauere, and he shall find himself not Creditor of one Mara^edi,
but certainly Debtor of many and many Millions, spent, not according to his
obligation, for Christianity, but for the interest of his own private Estates?
What then does he pretend? Why then does he not lay down Arms? Upon what
has he fixed his thoughts? To what end does he aspire? If he prosecute this
war, he prosecuteth an unjust war; How does that correspond with the zeal
of Religion, for which, only at first he undertook it? What change is this?
Certainly it proceeds not from the right hand of the most High. But be it
so, let him follow the war, at his own pleasure, there is no remedy, Henry
shall be absolved, and shall be King of France; Does the Catholic King
perhaps hope, with his own forces, and by strong hand, to deprive him? If he
was not able, with the union of so many other Princes, to hinder him from
taking possession of his Kingdom, how shall he now be able to expel him,
having set sure footing in his Throne? He attempts a dangerous Action. Here
they proceed with witty and politic Consideration, that a good issue of this
war against Henry, not ensuing, he should be sure to acquire a powerful,
and perpetual Enemy, that might in time make Spain to tremble within her own
bowels; and the Prophecy had well near been verified, (the whole world
knows it) if a violent death had not interposed to^stay him. But this yet,
which perhaps was foreseen, they did judge insufficient to free Spain of the
danger; Seeing the offense of the father, and with the offense, the disdain,
might descend to the Son, his Successor, as soon as he^ came to ripe age,
and should fall into consideration, that the Catholic King had done his
utmost, to keep him from being King of France, when he indeauoured to take
the Crown from the head of his father: and that if his father, in despite of
Spain, maintained himself King, he also in despite of Spain, might enjoy
his fathers Kingdom. But all these considerations, which certainly were very
great, before any other conceived them, were resolved by the most wise King
Phillip, who by common Judgment was the Solomon of his time; From whence for
the same reasons, that others did judge it requisite to leave the war, he
esteemed it necessary to prosecute it. Seeing he knew he had so grievously
offended Henry, that he could by no other means, secure himself from his
disdain, but only by opposing him to become King of France: Wherefore seeing
the cause of Religion did cease, it was expedient to fasten upon some other
pretense; to resist (with his Holiness) the absolution, and in France, the
Coronation; and to prove, if it were possible (already reason of State had
insinuated that great building of the Malicious) to make a King of his own
fashion, as he had already caused to be propounded in Parliament.

Tarde se desengana el desseo de mandar, y ser Rey; Bauia p. 4. vita de Clem.
8. C. 30.
Por esto aunque con ^enos brio, no desistian los pretensores. Proponia el
Duque de Feria al Serenissima Infanta de Espana Dona Isabel. Afferma^a
de^ersele el Reyn^, porque, hauiendo faltado la linea masculina de Hug^ Cape^o,
eraquien tenia meior derecho a la Corona, como hija de hermana mayor de Enrico
III* vltimo Rey de Francia. Y dezia con esto, que el Rey Catholico su padre, la
ca saria con al un principe Frances; con que, el nombramiento del tal, quedasse
en su elecion.

That is.

The desire to command, and to be King, was slowly cleared from all doubt: For
this cause, though with less boldness, the Pretenders gave not over. The Duke
of Feria did propound her highness Donna Isabella, Infanta of Spain. He did
affirm the Kingdom to belong unto her, because the Masculine Line of Hugh
Capet being extinct, the best title to the Crown was deuolued to her, as
daughter of the eldest sister of Henry the third, last King of France; And
withal, it was said, that the Catholic King her father would marry her to
some Prince of France; Provided, the nomination of that Prince might rest in
his Election.

Further.

No solamente estaua propuesta la Enfanta de Espana a la Cor^na di Francia,
Bauia vbi supra.
si no tambien el Archiduque Ernesto de Austria, h^rmano de Emperador.

That is.

Not only the Infanta of Spain was proposed to the Crown of France, but the
Archduke Ernestus also, brother of the Emperor.

The French Lords did rest astonished at these so handsome propositions, and
grew wary of the danger, wherein the King of Spain had entangled them: whilst
he professed to defend the Catholic Religion in France.

Por estas razones* y otras, iuntamente con las maquinationes, Bauia vbi supra.
y negociaciones, que se descubrian, determinaron en la Assemblea, o Cortes,
que el Duque de Vmena, como Lugartinient^ del R^yno, procurasse impedir
^ost^atos, que y ase descubrian: paraque en ninguna manerase eligiesse a la
Carona Princessa o princip^ estrange^o; anulando qualesquier tratos, que hasta
este punto hu^tessen echo: y qu^ guardassen las leyes fundamentales del Reyno,
en lo tocante a la elecion de un Rey Christianissimo, y Frances.

That is.

For these and other Reasons, together with the Machinations and practices
which were discovered, it was determined in their Assembly, that the Duke du
Main, as Lieutenant of the Kingdom, should procure to dissolve the Treaties,
that already were unmasked; because by no means, a Princess or Prince
S^ranger should be elected to the Crown, anulling whatsoever Treaty, which to
that day had been begun; and that the fundamental laws of the Kingdom,
concerning the Election of a most Christian and French King should be observed.

Now, let your Majesty see, from the contexture of the forementioned matters,
to what terms the most holy zeal of the King Don Phillip your father, was
reduced, and how the fair beginnings, for sincere Religion, were perverted,
only into an undue end, of reason of State; For which also, the war, after
the Absolution of Henry, did continue, until the most blessed Clement the
Eight did introduce the peace.

I could allege to your Majesty many other examples upon this Argument: but I
esteem these three, so notable, that they are enough with advantage.

There may perhaps be some, who will reprehend me, that I have only
exemplified in the Kings of Spain, where I might doubtless have been
furnished from Princes of other Nations, and will accuse me as a man of little
Judgment, and manners, that speaking with your Majesty I have presumed to
mingle my tongue in the Actions, of the never enough praised Don Phillip the
second, your father. I would they should consider, that domestique examples
move much more then foreign; from whence, as noble minds do, with all
possibility, endeavor to immitate the Actions worthy, of their famous
Ancestors; so, by all means they do endustriate themselves, to avoid that,
which in their Predecessors was judged worthy of blame; And, seeing that they,
though Princes of worth, and eminent virtue, did sometimes stumble upon
unbeseeming Actions; they do learn not to presume too much upon themselves,
and to be very watchful, not to fall, where others slipped; and considering,
that being their Descendents, they should not esteem themselves better, but
rather worse, then they; seeing in descending, nature does loose, as virtue
does increase by ascending. Wherefore, if by nature they are Descendents, they
shall grow worse, and only ascending by virtue, they may make them themselves
better. I then, speaking with a Catholic King of Spain, to admonish him of a
snare, now with so much fair and hidden Artifice set before him, that easily
he might fall therein; how could I better do, then to show him, where his own
Progenitors, most wise and Catholic Princes, have fallen headlong into like
disorders?

It is necessary ( said the great Henry of France) to show the errors of
Princes, Pirre Mathiew: en la vie du Mons: Vill.
that they which succeed them, may not err in the same, wherein others did
loose themselves.

I have then purposely taken these examples of the Kings of Spain, as more
helpefull to your Majesty in this present matter, then any other, which might
have been produced; and have ever confirmed them with the Authority of
Spanish writers, to avoid the blame, either of falsehood, or Calumny; And
because they may be of greater credit, and more efficacy, in the sincere mind
of your Majesty.

To whose consideration, I at last come to represent* That the Rising of the
Governor of Millan against the Grisons in the Valteline, under the like
pretense, did apparently tend to the same end, though shadowed, in the
Manifest, much wide of truth, of which I shall now discourse, published (as it
was voyced) by the people of that Valley, but in truth by the Ministers of your
Majesty, of whom, if your Majesty be not more then heedfull, you shall be
certainly induced to such Actions, that being added to the other three
Narrations of your Ancestors, will serve for an example to Posterity, of an
impious and wicked Enterprise, under a Religious and godly veil.

Returning to the Discourse; I say, that the causes of publishing that
Manifest, were Three.

The first, to insinuate to your Majesty and the World, that the People of the
Valteline, being tyranni^ed by the Grisons, were of their own free and
voluntary determination, and not by others induced, fallen into Rebellion.

The second, to persuade your Majesty and the World, that your Ministers had
justly undertaken the protection of those miserably oppressed, and, that it was
consonant to the greatness and goodness of a Catholic King, not to abandon
those, who refuged to his defense; So formerly, Don Pedro of Aragon, Sabell.
Enead. 9. li. 7.
Non potuisse se aiebat Siculis indigna ferentibus, opemque suppliciter suam
implorantibus, non auxilio adesse; yet it was he that seduced them into
defection.

The third, to render the poor Valtelines by so shameless a writing, so odious
to their own Lords, that they should despair, of ever obtaining pardon;
whereby they might rest the more obstinate in their Rebellion, and willing* in
any sort to subject themselves to the Dominion of your Majesty, for fear they
should return into the power of the Grisons.

The first is clearly expressed in the Manifest, which turns all things to the
justification of the rebellion of the Valtelines: the other two, which are
extracted from the intrinsique thoughts of the heart, might appear
Imaginations of my own fancy, if the matter it self did not approve them; But
arguing securely, from the effect to the Cause, true, and not imaginary
Conclusions may be deduced: To this then I inuoke, with all my spirits, the
attentive mind of your Majesty; for when I shall have demonstrated, that all
the Reasons of the Manifest are ill grounded, and false, and what the truth of
the business is: it shall together appear, that the Gauses of said Manifest
cannot be other, then those above specified.

The Reasons drawn to excuse the Rebellion of the Valtelines, are reduced to
two Heads.

Religion and Tyranny.

Upon these are made great Amplifications, but all is affirmed without proof;
A manifest sign, that it is spoken without foundation.

Concerning Religion; it is said that the Grisons utterly have taken from the
Valtelines the liberty of Conscience, and have procured, that all should be
infected with Heresy, showing, in every occasion, favor to Heretics, and
the contrary to Catholics, upon some of whom, they have inflicted most cruel
and infamous death, only in hatred of the Religion. I repeat not every
particular; It is sufficient to take this Maxim, to which all other matters
are reduced, and in the Manifest may be distinctly read.

Concerning Tyranny, it goes painting out a kind of government of the Grisons
in the Valteline, like to that, which hertofore Verres used in Sicily: and, to
speak more modernly, like to some, practiced as well by the Ministers of your
Majesty, as of your Predecessors in their States of Italy; as by this
discourse you shall fully understand; perhaps with some notable benefit to your
poor Subjects, who are waiting some ease, from your Royal hand.

But before we discourse particularly in these two points, it is fit to
consider, That the Grisons, though divided in two Religions, Roman and
Euangelique (may it please the divine Majesty that in time they may all agree
in the unity of the true Apostolic) yet, in all matters, in respect of the
public good of the State, thee have constantly stood united in the politic
Government. With which Concord they have so many years maintained themselves
free Princes vndependent of other, and highly esteemed of all; For which cause,
we know with how much diligence and charge many great Princes have sought
their friendship. But of late years, in this part, some Ministers of your
Majesty, malignant to see them colleagued, now with France, now with Venice,
moved with an immoderate zeal of your service, to which they supposed that
such Confederations might bring somepreiudice, and judging it most important to
your Crown, that you only should have the free passage through the straights
of the Valteline into Germany, and that to all other Princes, they should, at
your pleasure, be shut; have gone contriuing Inventions* and insidu^us
Artifices, to divide the Grisons, as well in the politic government, as in
Religion; to the end they might easily slide into utter ruin.

To this effect, the late count de Fuentes, Governor of Millan erected that
Fort, which to this day bears his name, so prejudicial, as nothing more, to
the State of the Grisons; Having first with money corrupted some of the chief
of that Country, to the end, that if the Lords would oppose themselves, they
should with various Arts be disturbed; as it came right to pass by the labor
of Io: Baptista Preuosti, Pompeio, and Rodolfo Planta; Nicholo Rusca, and
others, noted in the Manifest of the Grisons, of the year 1618. Instantly
after which, Don Pedro de Toledo, Governor of Millan, in the year 1617. did
attempt to make a perpetual league with the Grisons, upon Articles molded by
the Lord Alfonso Casale, Ambassador of your Majesty in that Republique, after
his own fashion; In which there was nothing inserted in the favor of the
Grisons, but a delusory promise to demolish the fort of Fuentes; wherewith, it
seemed to him, that they should condescend to all other things, how contrary
soever to their liberty. The same men, who did favor the building of the
Fort, did not fail to advance also this Confederacy, persuading many, that by all means it ought to be embraced; but the crooked practices of these Patriots,
Enemies of their Country, being to the Grisons discovered, they would not
accept these Capitulations; but forming a luridicary, and Capital Process,
against these Rebels, they found so many Machinations, treasons, and other
wicked Actions by them wrought, that proceeding to Justice, it was requisite,
with Banishments, and death, to give them deserved punishment; From that time,
till now, that they remained exiled, aided with money by the Ministers of your
Majesty, with which they proceeded, maintayning fresh practices with their
friends and adherents, and corrupting many others, they have solicited
continually to sow dissension among this people, thereby to raise some
insurrection, as finally has succeeded in the Valteline. The truth of all this
is clearly collected from the forealleaged Manifest, of the Actions of the
Grisons, in the year 1618. to which Credit cannot be denied as the Ministers
of your Majesty desire, seeing the things therein related are matters of fact,
and iuridically approved, where these affairs have been handled without
passion, or respect of persons; as every dispassionate mind, by the reading
thereof will judge.

The intent then of your Majesty's Ministers was not, to establish a
Confederacy with the Grisons; which had it bin so, they would have procured by
lawful ways, and upon Conditions reasonable, as other Princes used: and not
by interuention of particular persons, corrupted with gifts, and upon Articles,
so unsavory, as among them are seen. But their purpose was, so cunningly to
frame them, that they should not be accepted, because, being promoued by the
factious party of men corrupt, and rejected by the sound part, dis-interressed,
and lovers of the public good, there might arise a discord, sowed by this
art, to cast these people into Confusion, so that from their division,
according to the Gospel, the desolation of the State, might follow; For the
Ministers of your Majesty, fomenting one part against the other, did hope to
oppress both the one and the other, and highly to merit of you by enlarging,
in what way soever, your Empire.

This Artifice ( O Sac^ed Catholic King!) to disunite Subjects from their
Princes, to send them into destruction, is most proper, and practiced by the
Ministers of your Crown; and who would here recount, how often, and in what
manner, they have plotted disunion in the Kingdom of France, should weaue a
large History. The French Lords do well know it, and it is a common opinion
amongst them, who best understand the Affairs of State, that if all the
Hugonotts of France should be reduced to the Catholic Religion, the Spanish
Ministers would therewith be grievously displeased; seeing that of them they
make principal use, as of most dear friends, to embroile that Kingdom,
whenever they have any doubt, that the French may move his forces to the
damage of Spain. And they do glory, not to fear at all, the Arms of his
most Christian Majesty, not because the are inualid, but that they know the
way to keep them busied, at their pleasure, in his own house: Which therefore
being well considered, might produce a contrary effect. For, if the most
Christian King shall once resolve himself, to carry the war abroad, he shall
rest most secure, and quiet, within his own Kingdom. The great and warlike
minds of the French Nobility, borne to Arms and Enterprises, cannot lie
wasting in Idleness; While they have not elsewhere to be exercised, it is no
wonder that at home they may be easily excited to tumults. But if they shall
be employed in foraine Actions, they will run greedily to victories and
glory, of which they are most ambitious. And will desire, like wise men, that
their own Country should rest in peace, to be the more able with their Sword
to subdue others: not will they suffer themselves to be disturbed by the
treacherous machinations of them, who affect their ruin.

But this is spoken by the way, by occasion of the like stratagem at present
used among the Grisons; the which seeing it has begun to take effect in the
Valteline, the Governor of Millan is le^pt into the field, not with intent to
favor, but to oppress the party risen; yet to give another relish, Preposing
still this axiom of Machiauell, that feined Religion does much advantage the
Actions of Princes: he would make the world believe, that he was moved with
piety to take the protection of the miserable Valtelines, oppressed (as says
the Manifest) in Religion, and politic life. Of which two things, it is now
requisite distinctly to entreat.

The Grisons do pretend, that if God when he created man, left him in the
state of free will, the Conscience ought to be free, no man being able to take
away that, which is the gift of the Divine Majesty. They esteem their
Condition to be most wretched and miserable, who are violently forced to
profess to believe that, which their Conscience truly does not believe: and
therefore they require liberty of Religion. They are divided into Roman, and
Euangelique, every one follows that part, to which his Conscience enclineth
him. Every one does believe he believes well, and sins mortally when he does
transgress from that ancient Institution, wherein he was borne and bred:
Violence is done to no man. In the public Government, as well the one, as the
other, do participate without any Distinction.

Now the Ministers of your Majesty say, (as may be read in the Manifect) that
the Professors of the Romish Religion have no more liberty to follow their
true says, because the contrary faction does tyrannously oppress them; And
here they allege many violent Actions; which if in case some are true,
certainly they are not happened, but for grievous Injuries and offenses first
done by the Romanist^ to the Euangeliques: but the truth is, that the most part
of them are false, and the effect to this day, has showed it to be most false,
that ever the Euangeliques did attempt to oppress the Romanists; Upon which,
for better illustration, we will with reason discourse a little in the favor
of truth.

These two Factions, Roman, and Euangelique, either are equal, or the one is
superior to the other; If they are equal, and every one do persist in their
own opinion, (it being certain that in their Di^ts, called by them Dritture,
the Ministers of the one, and the other, equally are assistant) of necessity
it must be said, that when any thing is handled, which does prejudice the one,
or the other, there can never be any agreement. But seeing they do accord as
it appears by the Diett of Tosana, in the year 1618. in which so many
Rebels, as well Romans, as Euangeliques without all respect were punished;
Then it must be concluded not to be true, that they practice one to prejudice
the other; Then it is false, that the Euangeliques do oppress the Romanists.
But who shall say that the one is too strong, and does persecute the other? How
is it, that in so many, and so many years, that part has not usurped the
absolute dominion? If the Roman prevail, how do ^hey consent, that their
Clergy men should be ch^stised, and as your Majesty's Ministers affirm, in
despite of Religion? If the Euangelique be superior, how can it stand, that
putting to death the Archpriest of Sondrio, and exiling the Bishop of C^ira
for being of the Roman Religion, afterward they admitted another Bishop, and
another Archpriest of the same Religion? And why did they condemn only those
two, and not many other good and truly religious men, of which in that State
there are multitudes? Let it be then said, not to be a truth, that the
Euangeliques do persecute the Romanists.

And if the aforesaid Clergymen have suffered; the trespasses by them
committed, in communem patriam, did cause, that, with Common consent, as well of
the Catholic Romans, as of the Euangeliques, they have been punished: as it
is notorious by the aforementioned writing of the year 1618. And that it was
not done in the hatred of Religion, may more clearly from this be discerned,
that amongst the accused and condemned there were many more Euangeliques then
Romans. Whence it is evident, that with all integrity, and without any
respect, those of the Euangelique faction, have only aimed, not sparing
themselves, at the administration of Justice: And Rodolfo Planta, that then was
banished, as is known to all men, was not only an Heretic, but a principal
Head of the Heretics.

With two things about this Subject the World is greatly amazed and
scandalized: The one, that the Ministers of your Majesty in the Manifest
printed by them for the Valtolines, have dared to give the title of a true
Martyr of Christ, to the Archpriest of Sondrio, a man blood-thirsty, and a
Traitor to his Prince; whence it appears, that only for being their favorer,
he obtained the merit, to be Canonised for a Saint. The other is, that they
have always held so strict Intelligence with Rodolfo Planta, and other
principal Heretics, and have favored, and stipendiated them, both before
and after their Banishment, and have made use, and yet do use them continually
in matters very indecent. Neither do they make at all scruple of Conscience
thereof, though they publicly proclaim themselves Protectors of the Religion,
and perpetual Enemies of all Heretics; If the wonder and Scandal be just,
I remit it to the Righteous Judgment, and prudent mind of your Majesty.

I expect, that convicted with the force of these reasons, some should step
forth, and say; That when notwithstanding the Euangeliques do not seek to
oppress the Romanists, and do suffer every one to live to himself, yet by
all means it is requisite to extirpate the ill race of Heretics, Enemies to
holy Church. I unwillingly enter into this particular, but of force the matter
requires that somewhat therein be spoken. I do believe, and I think am not
deceived, that to punish Heretics, the Ecclesiastical, authority is
necessary: How then will the Ministers of your Majesty intermeddle in that,
which to them appertains not? And who will not say, that greediness to vsu^pe
the State of others, does move them also to vsurp the Ponti^icall Jurisdiction?
O God if yet they did use it well! Holy Church does continually pray for the
extirpation of heresy; not so of Heretics; But those Ministers, with too
much excess of holy zeal, will first vsurp the Estates of Heretics, and
destroy their persons, thoroughly to root out their heresies.

Quid saeuiunt, vt stultitiam suam dum minuere volunt, Lact. ipst. Diu. li. 5.
C. 20.
augeant? long diuersa sunt carnificina, and pietas; nec potest, aut veritas
cum vi, aut Iustitia cum credulitate coniungi.

Here a Consideration comes into my head, which makes me astonished. The
Euangeliques among the Grisons (so your Ministers affirm, and I believe it)
are the superior party. These, as we say are impious, wicked, and our
Capital Enemies, they desire our harm, and our utter ruin. They might
perhaps, have been able, with little difficulty, with their own force, and
with the aid, of those of Zurich, and Berne, obliged to them, by love by law,
and particular Confederation, utterly to ruin, destroy, and annihilate the
Roman faction, in their Country, and to become Lords alone of the whole
Dominion: And yet these wicked, these impious, these Enemies of the true faith,
have had so much humanity, that they have abstayned; and have been contented,
that the Roman Catholics live freely and quietly among them, and to have them
friends and Companions in the politic Government. And those of Zurich and
Berne, no whit better then the Euangelique Grisons, have never promoued, nor
counseled them to Alterations; On the contrary, the true Sons of the holy
Roman Church, instructed in the meekness, patience, and benignity of Christ,
Men charitable, pious, and holy, do make it lawful to rise against those, who
molest them not; to rebel from those, who admit them into fellowship of
Government; to procure the loss of State to those who being able, have never
attempted to expel them out of the State. And the Ministers of your Majesty
who profess to be the most true Catholics this day living in the World, are
they, who instigate, foment, and aid, yea who principally do opperate, in
these so honest Rebellions: and with war, fire, and ruins, do pronounce,
that it is requisite to defend the holy Religion.

O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant; Lactant. vbi supra.
fentiunt enim nihil esse in rebus humanis Religione praestantius, eamque summa
vi oportere defendi; sed in defensionis genere falluntur. Defendenda enim
Religio est, non occidendo, sed moriendo, non saeuitia, sed patientia, non
scelere sed fide; Illa enim malorum sunt, haec bonorum: and necesse est, bonum
in Religione versari, non malum; Nam si sanguine, si tormentis, si malo,
Religionem defendere velis, iam non defendetur illa, sed polluetur, atque
violabitur. Nihil est enim tam voluntarium, quam Religio; in qua si animus
Sacrificantis auersus est, iam sublata, iam nulla est.

The Politicians say, that, Salust. de con. Catil. li. 1.
Imperium his artibus retinetur, quibus initio partum est. So is it consequent
to say of our Religion; the which was planted, not by killing, but dying, not
with cruelty, but patience, not in wickedness, but faith. With these Arts
Christ laid the foundation, with these the Apostles and those holy fathers of
the Pri^itiue Church did build upon it, and since their Successors from these
ways have declined, it is diminished, restrained, and in many places utterly
extinct: Religion is more free then the will of man, because the forced will,
remains still a will, but enforced Religion, is no more Religion; for in the
will, the Act is regarded, and in Religion the mind: And therefore, If the
mind of the sacrificer be auerse, the efficacy is taken away, and annihilated.

Then the Ministers of your Majesty do err in these their cruel proceedings
against Heretics: They too far wander from the path in which Christ has
guided them: Let your Majesty be advised, not to suffer your self to be
drawn into the same error, by giving them faculty, and power, to prosecute so
bloody Enterprises. Command them by your Royal authority, to leave so
preposterously to favor Christian Religion: For now the world does know their
ends, and Christ himself does hate, detest, and abhor them: And when they
shall endeavor to persuade you otherwise, be not easy to give them credit,
seeing (as I have already showed) under holy pretenses, they do counsel
Deuillish actions. Let your Majesty give full credence to their Aduices, when
they shall persuade you to employ your forces against the Mahometans, Capital
and continual Enemies of Christianity: when they shall say, that therein you
ought to spend those many Millions which you draw from the Church for that holy
end, when they shall excite you to dress your Fleets and Armies to recover so
many Provinces usurped by Infidells upon miserable Christians. But why do I
say recover them? I tremble (O Sacred Majesty) to speak it, but it may not be
passed in silence. I fear that they rather will counsel you to take from the
Christians; Arzila in Africa enforces me to speak, wrested from the
possession of the Portugalls by the King Don Phillip the second, and given to
Muley Achmett, King of Marocco. I well know what they will answer, that he gave
it because he could not defend it. But if a King of Portugal did keep it, how
can it be, that a Monarch of Spain, of the new World, and of so many other
Kingdoms and Provinces should be unable? No, no, we are not deceived: how
matters did then pass with the Portugalls does too clearly show the truth,
Phillip did fear that Muley might succor Don Antonio, who did claim the
Kingdom of Portugal, wherefore to extinguish that Christian King, the
Ministers did persuade King Phillip, with the price of that City, to buy the
friendship of that Infidel: Consider now your Majesty this perfidious
Counsel; the which drew King Phillip into so evil considerations, (though
otherwise an excellent Prince) that he became publicly reproached; Giou.
Hist. li. 34.
and it was said, that he had learned this liberality to Barbarians of the
most famous Emperor his father, Charl^s the fifth: Iglies. vit^ de Paolo. 3
lib. 6. C. 27 sect 1.
who after the Conquest of the City of T^^us in Barbary, did presently render
it to the King Muleasses, which he would not have done, if it had bin taken
from any Christian Prince; Giou li. 37. Iglies. nel Capit. preditto. sect. 9.
As he refused to restore Castle nouo to the Republique of Venice, recovered
from the Turks, at the instance of that Commonwealth, and with the aid of
their own Armado, although by particular conuention thereunto obliged. Then
again I say, let your Majesty take heed of the false Counsels of your Spanish
Ministers; who, where reason of State is in question, would have Princes
utterly deprived of Conscience.

Antonio de Leua discoursing, Gio. Boteras detti memorabi^^. l. 1.
by occasion, with Charles the fifth Emperor, concerning the Affairs of Italy,
did persuade him to put to death this, and that Prince, and to take possession
of their States, and to make himself Lord of all. The Soul? answered the
Emperor; What? replied Leua, has your Majesty a soul? then renounce your
Empire.

This was truly too shameless an Impiety of Leua: such, I am sure as none of
your Ministers would dare to propound to your Majesty; for knowing the great
goodness of your most Catholic mind, they should be sure to incur your
Royal Indignation. But it does not therefore follow, that they preserve not in
their heads the same rules, and that they do not thereby govern all their
Actions, and thereunto conformable, address all their Counsels, the which are
so much more dangerous, in as much as they cover them under holy pretenses, as
at present in the war against the Grisons. Wherefore your Majesty has so
much more cause to fear, and to take heed, and so much more reason to accept
in good part this Advertisement.

But to return to our Matter; Let your Majesty consider that to punish
Heretics (as already I have said) is not the office of a secular Prince; And
therefore your Ministers do ill to put their Sickle into another harvest, and
so much the worse because they know it. And to deceive the world, they make it
lawful without the Pontifical authority, to advance he standard of the high
Priest, to justify a war which they know to be unjust; Wherefore his
Holiness, whose Jurisdiction is directly offended, ought not, and cannot bear
it. And if he have, and do suffer many other things; in the end a long abused
patience is converted into a just anger. Besides, let your Majesty be advised,
that all Heretics are not to be treated as Rebels, with extreme ^igour, but
only those, who borne within the womb of the Church, by their own malice
have revolted; these which are borne, nourished and brought up in the Sect of
their Parents, it is true, they err, but under an excuse of well doing; they
err it is true, but they know not their error: they are more worthy of
Compassion then of penalty, they deserve help, and not punishment.

Multum enim interest inter illos qui in ignorantia sunt, Chrisost. 1. Math.
Homil. 49 c.
and in ignorantia perierunt; and inter ^os, qui in veritate quidem nati sunt
propter aliquod autem mundiale, scientes, ad mendacia tran^ierunt, and
perierunt in cis, and pereunt. Illi enim forsitan aliquo modo habebunt
remissionem, isti antem nullam remissionem habebunt, neque in hoc s^cul^, neque
in futur^; quoniam ipsi sunt qui blasphemauerunt in Spiritum Sanctum; Illi enim
iudicandi sunt, quia veritatem non quaesierunt, isti autem condemnandi, quia
spreuerunt. Leuior enim culpa est, veritatem non apprehendere, quam contemnere
apprehensam.

Let Preachers then be sent to instruct them, let gentle means be used, that
they may hearken unto them; Let prayers be continually made for them, and after
leave the care to God, to illuminate them, in the holy ^aith; seeing that faith
is the only gift of God, which he freely gives, not given by Mars, nor by the
means of war,

God did command that the Foxes, which destroyed the Vines should be taken,
Cant. c. 2.
not slain; Capite nobis Vulpes parnula^ quae demoliuntur Vineas.

Et si iuxta allegoriam, S. Bernard tom. 1. In Cant. ser. 46.
Ecclesias, Vineas: Vulpes, Hereses, seu potius Haereticos ipsos intelligamus,
simplex est sensus; us H^retici capiantur potius quam effugentur; capiantur
dico, non armis, sed argumentis, quibus reffellantur eorum errores: Ipsi vero,
si fieri potest, Ecclesiae Catholicae reconcilientur, reuocentur ad veram
fidem; haec est enim voluntas eius, qui vult omnes homines saluo^ fieri, and ad
agnitionem veritatas per^emire: And a little after; Quod si reuerti noluerit;
nec conuictus post primam iam, and secundam admonitionem (vtpote qui omnino
subuersus est) erit secundum Apostolum deuitandus.

This is the way ( o Sacred Majesty) to proceed against Heretics, which this
holy man does teach, and not that by the rigor of Arms which your Ministers
practice. Esteem it a truth, that to use cruelty against Heretics, does
ever make them more perverse; And if this in no place should be done, much
less there where Heretics and Catholics are together mingled, with
liberty of Religion; because our persecution of them for Religion, does teach
them to do the like, as well for preservation of their own, which they esteem
as good as we do ours, as for the security of their States and lives. From
which so many losses have happened to the Church of God, that it is a
consideratition worthy of many tears. Poor Germany, into what state is it
reduced by this occasion? which perhaps (but why do I say perhaps) certainly,
certainly, had bin in much better estate, if therewith, other proceedings had
been used. I call not England to witness, the story is too notorious. What
has ruined Flanders but a will to introduce with too much rigor, the Spanish
Inquisition? And the City of Naples, for the same cause has it not fallen
into general tumult? which, if it had further proceeded, to day, by Gods
grace, it remains Catholic, that perhaps we had found, with all that noble
Kingdom, full of heresy. May it please the Divine Majesty that the present
war against the Grisons prove not a fire of faith and Religion, in all Italy.
The Devil has prepared the wood, the Ministers of your Majesty have kindled
the flame. If presently there be not some ready to extinguish it, this paper
(God make me a liar) which some will esteem foolishnes, and others call
malignitie, will perhaps be found a Prophecy from heaven. But of this enough
has been said; let us proceed to the rest.

The second head of Tyranny does follow: Great matters are related in the
Manifest, printed in the name of the Valtolines; But seeing there is not one
particular case objected, nor any thing proved, it might be said the whole is
false; but we will not use that advantage, because we know many things are
most true.

Lucio da Monte, with the money of foreign Princes supplied him by Pompeio
Planta, to the sum of two thousand florens distributed among particulars, did
procure the office of supreme Provincial Judge of the Grison League, binding
himself to administer that charge, not according to right and Justice, and the
liberty of his Country, but conformable to the will of the said Planta. Whence
it is confirmed for truth, that the Government was conferred upon him, who did
offer the greatest price; that from thence a thousand Tyrannies did proceed
against the goods and lives of the Subjects, there is no cause to doubt: seeing
this is the way to riches, and he that buys an office, pretends to have right
to sell it, in selling Justice; as it was once said of that good Spanish Pope,
who by force of money ascended to the Chair, did dispense for moneys all
Rights of the Church.

Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest. Here I could open the eyes of your
Majesty with a like abuse in your own Court, and tell you, that los Alguazile^,
or as we call them Marshals, or Captains of Serieants, pay for that charge
five or six thousand Ducats; Los Escriuanos, or Nota^ies of Magistrates, pay,
some eighteen, some twenty thousand Crowns; los Alcaldes, or speaking in our
own Idioms, the Criminal or Civil Judges do not pay a certain sum, but
they never climb to that degree without bestowing large donations upon the
Fauorits of your Majesty. What may then be said of Governors, and Vice-Kings,
which you send into remote Provinces? All the Court does know, and the
Provinces are not ignorant, that no man, gratis, does obtain these honors,
but they all pass in the Common way. Your Majesty may well believe, that your
Ministers are not so zealous of the weal public, profusely to expend their
own, to go and weary themselves, to govern others, though in the most
eminent dignity. Whence you may firmly collect, that they propose to disburse
at Interest, and so provide that the poor Subjects pay them an annual
Tribute, not of five, ten, or twenty, but of a hundred for a hundred, and
sometimes a thousand; and that at the end of their Government, they do level
the Capital. I could read in Cathedra upon this matter, as that which I have
seen with mine own eyes, and whereof in part to my great loss, have had
experience. But being a public thing, it behooues not that I weary my self
therein. I return then to the Tyranny of the Grisons.

Pompeio Planta above mentioned, did usurp the power of Magistracy in the
Praefecture of Forstenau: binding all the officers not to intermeddle in any
Cause of Importance without his knowledge, or of Redolpho Planta, his Brother.

This man, who was Provincial Captain of the Valtoline and Criminal Judge of
Zernez, and of the bordering Communities, did vsurp the power of Magistracy of
the three Leagues, exercising therein most great Tyranny in general, and
against particular men, and did arrogate to himself, to judge the laws, and
to choose them only Judges, who to him were pleasing, and whosoever would not
concur with him, was suddenly deprived; In which course, attempting to do
violence in the upper Agnadina he was the cause, that six persons did loose
their lives.

He did falsify the Statutes and ordinances of the Country in his
Jurisdiction, adding and diminishing them, as to him it turned best to accom^t.

He d^d bind the S^biects in many Communities and free Prouince^ with various
corruptions and presents to elect into many offices, men upon him dependant. Of
which his followers, he after made use to break the laws, to excite
Commo^^ons against honest men, and to govern all with violent Tyranny (...)
his own disposition.

Upon delicts o^ little consideration, he gave most rigorous sentences,
Converting them after into great Ransoms, to whosoever would redeem his
vexations.

When he had punished some Delinquent, he found occasion to entangle many
Innocents, saying, that the guilty had accused them o^ Confederacy, or somewhat
else, and enforced them, if they would avoid his persecution, to compound with
him in great sums of money.

In Agnadina he did sh^rpen (...) quarrels and factions, even amongst Kindred,
fomenting them with men and (...); whereof followed many wounds and many deaths.

What avails it particularly to recount the Tyrannies used for many years by
him and his Brother in Agnadina, Valteline, and other places: And who is able
to search the truth of infinite others, practiced by their ad^erents and
followers? In sum Pompeio* and Rodolfo Planta have been Tyrants themsel^es,
and Heads of Tyrants, from them, and by them, all those Cruelties of the
p^o^le, which in the Manifest written in the name of the Valtelin^s (...)
exaggerated, have proceeded: without contradiction they are too true, we do
not deny them.

But let it avail to speak the Truth: and who, by your favor, are (...) b^t
factious m^n, and Dependents upon the Ministers of your Maiest^e? From whom
have they received the moneys to support then Tyrannical Authority, but of
the Ministers of your Majesty? who has constantly comforted them in their
wicked Actions, but the Ministers of your Majesty? Then it must necessarily
be concluded that the Ministers of your Majesty are they who have seated
Tyranny in the Valteline, and in other parts of the Grisons, following the same
design above mentioned, to breed Confusion, Disunion, and final destruction
of those People, to the enlargement of the States of your Majesty; and all
these workings have been carried in a manner so artificial, that though the
Grisons did see many things ill done, they could not apply a remedy, because
they knew not from whence the evil did arise. So great was the Tyrants power,
that there was none found who once durst witness a truth. But at last when it
pleased God to bring it to light, the Grisons did not neglect to use all
diligence to dig up the evil by the Root. The Brethren Planta's, fled,
Conscious of their own Iniquity; whereby not being able to apprehend them,
they were punished in such sort as was possible, by most sharp exile. Look
upon the writing so often alleged, of the Acts of the Grisons; where more
distinctly every particular may be read.

But for a demonstratiue proof of the aforesaid matters, all the world does
know, how these Brothers Planta's, after their banishment, were always
favored and sustained by the Ministers of your Majesty; how at their
Instigation, and with their help, they wrought the insurrection of the
Valteline, and how, as yet, they negotiate worse actions.

Here are three things, fit to be advised your Majesty.

The one, the Deceit, which is obtruded by your Ministers.

The other, the Reproach which they bring to your Royal name by insidious
Complots, which they always extend to other Potentates.

The last, is the Impudence wherewith they seek unworthily to wound the name
and reputation of good Princes, against whom they have often provoked the
Predecessors of your Majesty, and sometime your self, and still do attempt
earnestly to induce you to actions little reasonable, making you believe, not
that they are only just, but holy.

Upon this first we shall have little cause of discourse, seeing from the
fore-alleaged matters it is evidently collected, that the Grisons do not, nor
have not tyrannised their Subjects, neither concerning Religion, nor in the
politic life.

That all the Tyranny which was used in their State, was treacherously induced
by the Ministers of your Majesty, and that the Rebellion of the Valtelines was
not free and voluntary in them, but practiced, procured, and in a manner
enforced by those wicked Arts, I have fully demonstrated. If then your
Ministers, to promoue your pious and religious mind, to embrace the protection
of the Valtelines, and to deprive the Grisons, of their Dominions, would make
you otherwise believe, who knows not the fraud? who sees not the deceit? It
is superfluous to enlarge, because it is too manifest.

I come to the second: It is certain that the actions of Ministers are
attributed to their Princes, and with reason, seeing it is supposed that they
dare not, cannot, as they ought not, to do any thing which is not to them
either committed, or permitted; especially to contriue any great practice,
either secret, or open against other Princes. If then a Vice-King of Naples
has once surprised some Castles of the Pope, which after with difficulty were
restored: If another did rob the Merchant Galleys of Venice, which yet they
have not restored; If a Governor of Millan did once attempt to take Casall of
Montferat, a City of the Duke of Mantua by treason, and the Castle of Bresse
from the State of Venice; If another did leap out to ransack the land of
Cremasco; Another did procure to betray the City of Crema subject to the
Senate: If one of your Ambassadors, with intelligence of the Viceroy of
Naples, and the Governor of Millan, did machinate a most detestable
conspiracy against the City of Venice it self: If now the present Governor
of Millan has caused the Valtelines to rebel from the Grisons: And if all
these things have been done, with the Arms, the men, and the money of your
Majesty, and in times that you have professed to be a good friend both to the
Grisons, Venetians, Duke of Mantua, and the Pope, the world cannot imagine
other, but that your Majesty has given these orders. From whence it is
publicly spoken, that the King of Spain does attend to nothing else, but to
raise Rebellions, to con^ri^e Conspiracies, to solicit treasons, to ransack,
rob, and ass^ss^^ate his friends. Thus by the means of his Ministers, his
Royal name, without any his own fault, is stained with Infamy. I call God to
witness, that I thus speak, because I so certainly believe of your Majesty;
who deriuing your birth from the most noble German Nation, which by nature is
free, single, and of a mind far estranged from frauds, deceipts, and
treasons, and are descended from the most famous house of Austria, which has
still produced Princes magnanimous, adorned with high valor, and true virtue:
It is incred^ble that you should ever incline the greatness of your mind to
Actions so unworthy. But all men are not able to distinguish of Nations, nor to
know the qualities of Princes; whence the greatest part, hearing the name of a
King of Spain, do believe, that it is spoken of a Spanish King, and do judge
that he also is such, or rather worse, then are his Ministers. This is an
ordinary form of Argument. Thus spoke the Indians, when those first
Conquerours entered among them.

Diziendoles, que se subiectassen a ellos, hombres tam inhumanos, Ves^ouo de
Chiappa li de destrutt. dell^^ Ind^as.
iniustos, y crueles en nombre del Rey de Espa^na, incognito, y nunca j^mas
dellos oydo, estimauan, ser muy mas iniusto, y cruel, que ellos.

That is.

Saying, if they should be subjected to them, men so inhumane, unjust and
cruel, in the name of a King of Spain, to them unknown, of whom they had
never heard: they did judge, that he was much more unjust and cruel then they.

The same Argument they made against Jesus Christ, our God; because finding the
Spaniards, who called themselves Christians, Ves^. de Chiap. nel. pr. 23
to use Injustice, and horrible Tyranny, they did draw a consequence that the
God of the Christians (as was formerly said) was the most cruel, and the most
unjust of all other Gods. Let not your Majesty then wonder that your Royal
name is, without your fault, but not without cause, reproached: neither be
troubled, or displeased against the^, who have reason much too great, and to
the world too too apparent, to blaspheme it. But he grieved and angry at your
own Ministers, who by their evil demeanor give subject to all, to scandalize
and abhor it. And in as much as your Majesty lives jealous of your reputation,
be pleased gratefully to receive this Advertisement, which you will know to be
most important, and may be unto you not a little auaylable.

I pass to the third: It is a thing almost ordinary with them who practice
evil, under the show of goodness to make the world believe, that others also,
when they do good, work iniquity. For the Actions of the one and the other,
being in themselves contrary, those of wicked men cannot be approved for good,
unless those of good men be condemned for wicked; whence, upon their reproach,
they pretend to build their own glory.

The Ministers of your Majesty blame the Grisons for punishing the Brothers
Planto's, and other Rebels, and calls this chastisement, Tyranny: because they
would have it said, that they having still ^auoured and supported them, had
done a just and compassionate action; which certainly the grave Poet would not
have approved, who wisely said, Benefacta male locata, malefacta arbitror.
Ennius.


Rather to speak truth, this is the height of iniquity. Totius enim
iniustitiae nulla capitalior est, quam eorum, Cicer. ess. li. 1.
qui cum maxim fallunt, id tamen agunt, vt viri boni esse videuntur. Among
Tyrants, to punish the good, and reward the wicked, are acts of justice and
piety: as contrarily to punish evil, and reward good men, is esteemed Tyranny
and wickedness. These are just the terms, which the Ministers of your
Majesty speak, and use in this occasion; while they would make show to do
well in cherish^ng the Rebels of the Grisons, and that these have done evil to
punish them.

Now what may the world (...)?

To this they add, that the Grisons have exercised this Tyranny by the
practice and money of that neighbor Potentate, who for reason of State does
make any thing lawful, how contrary soever to the honor of God, and the
maintenance of his holy faith; and who is the principal Instrument of infinite
evils to the Christian Commonweal; Now, who does not laugh at this so
foolish Calumny? Doubtless the Grisons had great need of the practices and
moneys of some great Potentate to punish half a dozen Rebels and Traitors,
part in prison, and part fled. And who does not wonder at so much
shamelessness? It had been enough, if that Potentate under the pretense of
Religion, and Godliness, had done any of those many Villainies which were
committed in India, to describe him in so handsome colors; But who will not
praise that great modesty, which would not by name declare that Potentate?
Truly it deserved great praise, if it were not known, that extreme hatred
did abhor to name him.

But who does not understand it? This is that Potentate, which was borne in the
womb of the Holy Catholic Roman Religion; This is that Potentate, that in
twelve hundred years has never embraced other faith, other law, then that of
Christ; This is that Potentate, who since the Roman liberty was lost, has
ever maintained liberty alive in Italy; This is that Potentate, which alone,
with just an honorable titles both by land and Sea, has largely and
gloriously extended his Empire. This is that Potentate, who has made with his
blood, a Counterscarse to Italy, and with his treasure so many ages, has and
does defend it from the Rapine of the Barbarous Enemies of holy faith. This is
that Potentate, which hates and persecutes all Tyrants, and loves and protects
with all his power, lawful, and just Princes; for which only, it seems he is
so much hated and persecuted, by the Ministers of your Majesty; A glorious,
and renouned Potentate, whose most noble Actions, exalted to the Heavens with
immortal praise of the histories of all Nations (I do not decline those of
Spain) who dispassionately honor Virtue with Truth, are abundantly known to
your Majesty. From whence you may well comprehend, that if your Minsters do
seek unworthily to blemish that their glory with defamations, they do it out
of intestine hatred, which by natural instinct they bear to all, who are not
to them conformable; in one thing only just, upright, and sincere: that they
are no Accepters of Persons, but without any partiality deal alike with all
men. And if the Pope, the true Supporter, upon whom Christ our God has founded
his holy Church, shall not to their will conform, they will say, that he is
an Apostate and an Heretic; and when yet they dare not so much, under other
pretenses they will call him unjust, wicked, Disturber of the public peace;
they will esteem him Enemy, invade his State, sack Rome, beseige him in his
Castle, take him prisoner, impose upon him a grievous ransom, as if he were
Slave and they Turks; They will by necessity force him to sell Chalices and
Crosses, to redeem himself: and not therewith content, they will have
Cardinals in hostage, the Castle in their power, Indulgences for the purse;
and yet more, if more were to be found.

I durst not certainly say these things to your Majesty, if in times past they
had not happened: They did thus handle in the Reign of Charles the fifth,
Iglies. lib. 2. C. 26. Sect. 8. C. 30. Sect. 2.
much against the will of that Religious Emperor, Clement the seventh: and
would readily have done the like under King Phillip the second, father of your
Majesty, when they raised war against Paul the fourth, and took from him
V^letri, Tiuoli, and Ostia, if the King of France, truly most Christian, had
not diuerted their fury, and the Catholic King apprehended a conueniencie,
suddenly to accommodate his differences.

Sacred Catholic Majesty, if these things are all true, as surely they are;
reasonably it may be doubted, that like actions will proceed from like persons;
wherefore, to the end you easily may, as you earnestly desire, vndeceiue your
self, and free your name from scandal, and other Princes from calumny, and
the unworthy injuries of your Ministers, which are the three Aduertisements by
me proposed, it will not be out of the purpose, to set before your eyes some
particulars, which under your Empire are done as lawful, which by all good
Christians are held abominable. I implore from a benign Prince attention, and
in at^ention, benignity; so that my words may pass without molest^tion of
your Royal mind, that receiving them with a righteous temper, as they are by
me uttered with hearty affection, I am assured they shall not end without some
profit.

The Ancestors of your Majesty have established in the kingdom of Sicily a
supreme Monarchy, both in the temporal and spiritual; so that your
Vice-Royes dispense not only Offices and Benefices, but also Excommunications
and Indulgences; and who will then wonder that the Duke of Sessa does publish
Iubilies? The great Cardinal Baronius has fully written upon this Subject,
and with Evidences invincible showed the unjust possession of that Kingdom;
and that neitheir your Majesty can hold, Baron. To 11.
nor the Pope grant it. If your Ministers had found the least apparent reasons,
to answer and confute the doctrine of Baronius, as they did of the passage of
St. James, into Galitia, they willingly would have done it, An. Christ. 1097.
but failing thereof, they had recourse to the fire, and caused the Eleventh of
the Baronian Annalls to be publicly burnt, Vrb. 2. 10.
and did prohibit it upon grievous pains, to all your subjects; so
dexterously working, that your Majesty believing your self lawful Lord, or
at least possessor bona fidei, might as you yet continue to usurp the
spiritual jurisdiction in that Kingdom; as if betwixt you and the Pope, the
Apostolic jurisdiction were equally divided: What this action may be called,
let others judge.

But proceeding further, they have also induced your Majesty to arrogate, not
an equality, but a Supremacy upon the high Priest. So that in the Censures
which his Holiness, or his Nuncio, or others with his authority do send
against particular persons into Castile, these men refuge to the Royal
Council, aggravating the cause of violence, and ^he Council does usurp
cognition over such Censures, and do command de facto, their suspension,
until the alleged violence be determined; and under this pretense,
oftentimes causes an absolute Reuocation, that in them there is no further
proceeding. In Spain, Hieron. C^uall^s Tract. de Cogni^. per viam violent. in
cause. Eccl. and int. person* Eccl.
not many years since were publicly printed books of Lawyers that your
Majesty, and your Royal Council has this authority, and may justly use it:
Which doctrine has greatly scandalized the world, as well for the person that
wrote it, who professes to be Christian Doctor, as for your Majesty, which
does admit and serve your self by it, and yet are the Catholic King: but
much more, in respect of the highest Bishop, who sometime deceived by sinister
Informations, and malignant suggestions of certain wicked Hypocrites, is seen
to fulminate most heavy Censures, and to threaten horrible war against great
Potentates, who rightly understood, have not at all offended his reputation,
nor his Ecclesiastique Jurisdiction: Nevertheless he does at present bear
these high injuries, with so much scandal of Christianity, and so great
diminution of his authority. Some judge that this is not done without a
mystery but let him declare it that understands it, I will divine no more.

This sufferance of the Pope, and greediness of the Ministers of your Majesty:
who presume to do always absolutely well, when they amplify in any sort
perfas, and nefas, the Royal Jurisdiction, has caused, that after having made
you equal to his Holiness in dispensing Ecclesiastique Affairs in the kingof
Sicily, and superior in censuring the Pontificiall Censures in that of
Castile, they have also claimed, that you may assume the authority of the Holy
Ghost in the Conclaue of Rome for the election of the high Priest; so it comes
to pass, that Abissus abissum inuocat. Let in prevail to speak truth, o
sacred Catholic King; and what else are those great Pensions, I will not say
that your Majesty gives, but which your Ministers make you give (because you
give not but according to their Counsel and persuasion) to so many Cardinals,
but Simoniacall bribes, wherewith they intend to buy their voices to elect Popes
to their Content, and to exclude those who are not of their humor? And
although this is not done by way of Contract, yet enough for advantage to him,
who looks upon the intention, though cloaked, yet too well known to the
world; And I am assured, that when they counsel you to give a pension to any
Cardinal (here I call to witness of truth the inward Conscience of your
Majesty) they do not bring to your Consideration, that he is a man of good
life, and poor fortune, or that he well uses Riches, dispensing them to the
poor of Christ, that he builds Hospitalls and Monasteries for needy, and
religious persons; but they set on the frontispice, that he is a Prince
Cardinal, great in blood, great in authority, great in dependence, that he is
a Subject capable of the Papacy, that he is affectionate to your Crown, that
he will ever remain your devoted servant, and obsequious to your will, and
such other like; None of which concern the good of the Church, the honor of
God, nor the fruit of Christianity; but all addressed to the satisfaction and
Interest of your Majesty. I say not now, you do ill to give pensions to
Cardinals; rather, it is well done, you ought to do it, seeing you give them
nothing of your Royal Patrimony, but Ecclesiastique goods, which are the
Patrimony of Christ, and cannot better be dispensed then to those, who are
the Pillars of holy Church; The evil is, that with this Interest it is
purposed, to oblige them to your will, so that, at your pleasure, and not
according to their Conscience, and Inspiration of the holy Ghost, they should
give their suffrages for the Election of the Pope.

Moreover, it is known in the Court of Rome, and though Histories mention it
not, yet the memories of men preserve what was practiced with the Cardinals
their Confederates, in the choice of Urban the Seventh, and Gregory the
Fourteenth, by the Ministers of the King Don Phillip, father of your Maistie;
who glad of the death of the most holy Pope Sixtus the fifth (a death desired,
and by common opinion also, by them procured) and fearful of the danger, that
another of like thoughts should succeed him, they did embroile the whole
Conclaue, least any should ascend to the Papacy who was not trusty, and
favorable to the Crown of Spain, as if to the Interest of Spain, the good
of Christendom ought not to be preferred.

Urban the Seventh did succeed Sixtus, who in thirteen days died. After
Urban those of the Spanish faction by all means would have the Cardinal
Palioto Pope; But God did ordain, that Sfondrato, called Gregory the
fourteenth was chosen.

This Election made upon the fifth of December, 1590. (your Majesty may observe
a most Christian and wise Act of your Catholic father) the King Don Phillip
who was consenting to the Negociations of his Ministers, dispatched in the
Month of June following, 1591. to the feet of his Holiness, to ask pardon
and absolution of the Censures into which he was fallen, by intermedling of his
Ministers in matters of the holy Conclaue. An Act as I have said, most
Christian, because it was an amends of the error committed, and most wise,
because it served as an insinuation by that humility, to be reduced to the
grace of the new Pope, who could not but be distasted, as he was, with the
workings which he had seen, scand^lized.

Thus the Ministers of your Crown ( O sacred Catholic King) do negociate in
Rome, only presuming by means of Pensions, to hold the Cardinals in bonds;
With which practices the unity of the Church seems almost to be divided,
from whence there is nothing else heard of, to the great shame and destruction
of Christianity, but factions of French, and factions of Spanish Cardinals.
And although the French Lords, do not intend particularly to oblige any
Cardinal unto them, but leave all in their liberty; Nevertheless those are
called of the French faction, who by Pensions, or other Interests, are not tied
to depend on the Spaniards, and for them to make a faction; And therefore there
is nothing else done, but scrutiny, which of those parties are like to prevail
in the Conclaue, at the Election of a new Pope.

I speak so clearly, and so truly, that I am bound to confirm it by their
own Spanish Histories. Of the Election of Innocent the eighth, who succeeded
Gregory the fourteenth, it is recorded that it passed without any
contradiction, Bau. p. 3. vita de Innoc. 9. C. 1.
because the Spanish faction (says Bauia,) which consisted of 29 Cardinals,
and that of Montalto which exceeded 20, did easily unite together; But what
shall we say of the negociations made in the Conclaue, after the death of
Innocent? I will allege the formal words of the History to obtain the more
credit.

Por hallarse muy poc^ conformes, Bau. p. 4. uita de Clem. 8. C. 1.
las dos principales prouincias de Europa, Espa^na, y Francia, a las quales,
co^^o a cabe^a^ sellegan las demas, esta misma division auia en el sacro
Collegio; queriendo cadauno faborecer a la part, que la razon, o aficion le
obligaua: That is,

By the great inconformity of the two principal Provinces of Europe, Spain,
and France, to which, as Heads, the rest do adhere; the same Division was in
the sacred College, every one desiring to favor that part, to which reason or
affection did oblige him.

Behold a confession of the factions, which I mentioned of the French and
Spanish Cardinals; But because at this time France was without a King, and the
war was made against Henry the fourth, the French faction had little credit,
whence it was judged, that the contrary part was easily able to create a Pope
dependant upon the Catholic King, which much imported to the perfection of his
affairs. That which makes me astonished, is, that his Majesty who had
acknowledged his error to have busied himself in the former Election of Popes,
and had with so great submission demanded pardon of Gregory the 14. should in
this occasion suffer himself to be drawn anew into the same error; And if the
History lie not, your Majesty also who was then Prince of Spain, did therein
concur; The Cardinal Santa Seuerina a Neapolitan, who, says the Author,

Era vassallo del Rey Catholico, Bauia vbi supra.
y tan querido de los dos Philipos padre y hijo, que siempre procuraron ponelle
en la filla de S. Pedro; como lo haz^a aora el gran Filipo II per medio de su
Embaxador:

That is:

Was a Vassal of the Catholic King, and so greatly beloved of the two
Phillips father and son, that they always solicited to place him in St.
Peter's Chair, as at this present the great Phillip the second did, by means
of his Ambassador.

And it follows in the History, that the Ambassador, which then was the Duke
of Sessa, was the last that went out of the Conclaue, when it was shut up; and
that if he had stayed within, as he was persuaded, he had secured the
Election of Santa Seuerina: But in respect of modesty, he would depart, lest
it should be believed, that it was managed with little liberty; a modesty
(well observing the History) which was no virtue, but a wariness proceeding
of fear, and confidence: of fear, that other Princes would accuse the
Election of Spanish violence; and of confidence, to have so well disposed all
matters, that his absence could not be prejudicial. For these respects then,
he came out, but within the Conclaue.

Hazia en este intento Madruccio con el fabor de Espana, grandes diligentias
pensando ga^ar alguno de los Eccluyentes, Bauia vib supra, Ca. 2.
para santa Seuerina,

That is:

To this end Madruccio, with the favor of Spain, used great diligence, hoping
to gain some of the Exclusiues for Santa Seuerina.

Thus was it negociated by the Ambassador and Cardinals partial, as the
Catholic King pleased: But Divine disposition prevailed, which wrought the
Assumption of Cardinal Aldobrandino to the Popedom, called Clement the Eight:
a Bishop truly holy, such as the service of holy Church required, and happily
given by God, and not by any Prince of this world.

This Conclaue was long, disunited, contencious, full of distasts, and just
such as must be, where humane, accompanied with Deuillish power, does oppose
the Divine will; and in some other Coniuncture might easily have caused a
Schism in the Church of God, only by the extraordinary and obstinate
Negociations, which for Santa Seuerina were used. Of which it seems the new
Pope Clement was not free of suspicion, who would that that Cardinal should
resign all pretension which he might have to the Papacy; Bauia vbi supra.
A diligence esteemed important, though Bauia call it superfluous.

From all these premises ( O Catholic and most mighty Monarch) the world does
draw one of these two most necessary consequences; which are, that the
Spaniards either believe not in God, or presume to be able to do more then
God. Because, if they believe in God, they ought to know, and hold for faith,
that the Election of a Pope, although made by mediation of men, is the work of
the Holy Ghost: And if they so believe, and nevertheless attempt, that the
Pope should be chosen according to their will, then they presume to be able to
deprive the Holy Ghost of that authority, which only to him appertains; who
can find a mean to reconcile those extremes? first the fire shall be
reconciled to Ice; Light to Darkness, Hell to Heaven.

Sacred Majesty, I can do no less then speak clearly, and if God be Truth
it self, God now does speak by my pen; This is one of those things which
destroy the Holy Church; And a Catholic King, who is obliged to succor it,
ought not, in such a manner, concur to ruin it; I could add many other
things, but because truth produces hatred, a cursed son of a blessed Mother,
I doubt that even these few glanced at, will be ill understood. And now I
forwarne this my writing, that for speaking truth, it shall be condemned. Be it
as it will, I by so much more shall esteem to have done my duty, by how much
others shall do against their duty, And God shall be the Judge.

But I am too far wandered, transported with a just and holy zeal from my
purpose, though not beside the purpose; And I pray God, it be not fruitless. I
return then to the principal matter of the Valteline.

That it should be lawful for subjects to rebel from their natural Prince,
to deprive them of their Estates, under colored pretenses, while for just
cause, they have not intimated a war; I do believe there is no man of
honesty, who is not ashamed to affirm it.

That it is lawful to Subjects, though ill entreated, to rebel, only some
Heretic, Epist. 1. Cap. 2.
who denies to holy Scripture, can speak it; St. Peter the Apostle manifestly
saying; Serui subditi estote in omni timore Dominis, non tantum bonis et
modestis, sed etiam dyscolis; Haec est enim gratia, si propter Dei
conscientiam, sustinet quis trist itias, patiens unjust.

But that it may be lawful to embrace them, when it shall happen through the
occasion of ill usage, that they of their own will do rebel, there are yet
some date maintain it; absolutely professing that all good Princes are bound
to succor the oppressed, and that the condition of the miserable should be too
wretched, if they might of no side hope of aid; But to understand this case
with Judgment, it must not be discussed with these universal propositions,
which only show a certain Equity; but it is requisite to reduce it to
particular and proper terms of Justice. Distinguishing then; we say, that
that Prince, to whose protection the rebelled people of another Prince have
recourse, either he has right of some action over them, as the Subjects of
the vassalls of his Feudatory, or he has no right of action whatsoever. If he
has no Action, neither can he receive them into protection: Because, if People
(though ill handled) do contrary to the Divine Law, to rebel; against the
same Law he sins, who does favor and protect their Rebellion. If a Thief
do ill to rob, it cannot be said that he does well, who does assist, to
share in the theft. If a murderer do ill to kill, it cannot be said, that he
does well who receives him, that Justice may not punish him; And who can then
say, that a Prince does well, to enterraine the Rebels of another: If these in
rebelling, absolutely do evil?

Unjustly then have the Ministers of your Majesty done to intermeddle in the
Valteline, when yet it were true, that of themselves they had rebelled; much
worse, when even they, as is demonstrated, have with wicked Arts induced them
to Rebellion: But it shall be the worst of wickedness, if, contrary to all
Justice, they will now possess it by main force, as they show to desire to
do, seeing therein already they have built forts, and that your Majesty does
consent and approve it; of which the World will judge that you more esteem
your own Interest, then all humane and Divine laws; which God forbid.

Only the supreme Prince can hold in himself such sort of Dominion, over the
Countries rebelled from his feudatory. But when yet they have not rebelled; and
were ill governed, he may, and ought to deprive the Prince his Vassal: because
the inuestiture of the fee is not granted for the peoples ruin, but that they
should be governed with Justice; wherefore if the feudatory use injustice, and
ill entreatment, he falls from his Jurisdiction, and the Sovereign Prince may
thereof deprive him; and not doing it, being able, he shall be a wicked
Prince, and no less guilty of the evil before God, which he suffered his
feudatory to do, then he the feudatory himself is, who acts it.

Now let your Majesty apply this doctrine, which is wholly conformable to
reason and law, to the Actions of your Ministers, to the condition of your
Subjects, and to the right of other Princes over your Estates in Italy; and you
shall clearly see, how your Ministers are damnable, your Subjects miserable,
and how much other Princes are obliged to relieve them; My words perhaps will
seem bitter, but I beseech your Majesty to consider if they be true, and
finding them so, to take them in good part, as bitter medicines, fiery
Cauteries, and sharp lances use to be gratefully received from the hands of
Physicians and Chirurgions, to procure health; and be assured you shall find
them most profitable; because your Majesty fully informed of the truth, will
correct your Ministers, comforts your Subjects, and ease other Princes of the
necessity to use their supreme Jurisdiction.

The Cause of Subjects and of Ministers are together united, because those are
governed, and these Governors; whence, as Correlatiues, they go paripasso; I
will then briefly represent to you Majesty the Government of your States in
Italy so far as is expedient to the present matter.

The State of Millan in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, began to be
ill entreated; from whence that sad, lamentable, and despairefull Embassage,
which they sent by Baptista. Archinto to Nizza is recorded, who only because
he did lament, in the name of his afflicted Country, was received with an ill
eye, sent back without remedy, and by the Imperial Ministers, at his return,
sharply reprehended; which might have occasioned the Rebellion of that people,
if they had found any better Prince who would have received them.

Haec vbi sub ipsum Caesaris a Nicea discessum ex legatione renunciata, and per
vrbes Cisalpinae Galliae evulgata sunt; Iouius Hist. lib. 37.
vsque adeo tantum ex rei indignitate odium Caesari creuit, vt omnes, ex rerum
desperatione facile defecturos appareret. si mitior and clementior, qui
dedentes reciperet, Dominus offereretur; immoderatis siquidem, pace, belloqu^
tributis oppressi, noua etiam, tum menstruae exactionis onera pertulerant; quae
nunquam desitura boni mortales crederent, donec viueret Caesar, atque Italiae
Imperio potiretur.

After also, a second time, when Strozza Pallauicino Vis^nti, who made war
for the King of France; approached to Millan, all the Imperial Ministers held
that City as bad as lost, only because it did feel the yoke of Spanish
Dominion too violent and heavy.

Assiduis atque intollerandis trubutis alienata, Iouius lib. 45.
parata, credi poterat, ad nouandas res, vt inuistum, and pergraue Hispanici
Regni iugum excuteret.

If from that time to this, their grieuances are diminished, or augmented, your
Majesty best knows.

To what terms that State is at this day reduced, who does not know, let him
consider this, that already many and many years it has suffered great numbers
of Spanish Soldiers lodged in the houses of poor particular men, at
discretion; D^scretion of Soldiers, and Tyranny, are one and the same thing;
who has not proved it, let him pray to God first to die, and he shall die
happier, then ever to have proved it. And let him be content to believe for
faith, that under such discretion, goods and honor are dispatched, and hardly
is life secure.

I pass over the burden of new Tributes, I leave the Rapine of Ministers, who
like blood-suckers have exhausted the veins of that plentiful body, because
in comparison of lodging Soldiers at discretion, I esteem all to be nothing;
and he who is able to endure to see them eat the sustenance of his poor
family, and that which exceeds all other Tyranny, to grow familiar with his
wife, daughters, and Sisters, it may be said, that he is grown insensible of
any injury. I remember to have read in the wars which were so sharp between
the Venetians and Genoueses, that these did take a City of their Enemies, and
held it the space of ten years subjected to discretion: whence it is
credible, that besides other matters, they did dispose of their wives,
according to their pleasures; for which cause, to this day, though now two
hundred and fifty years are ouerpast, there cannot be done a greater Injury
to those people, then to call them Genoueses Bastards: and notwithstanding that
stain, with length of time, and the continued peace of that City, which never
since felt the offense of Enemy, has been oftentimes worn out and washed
away, yet upon every occasion they resent the only memory of that ancient
Injury done to the honor of their women, which seems indelible, and eternal.
If I then say that the greatest of all the Tyrannies which the State of Millan
does now suffer, is to have their wives at the Soldiers discretion, I shall
not speak much wide of the purpose, because it is a matter very likely, that in
times to come, the Millaneses may be called Spanish Bastards; If this be
tolerable, let your Majesty consider.

We proceed to Sicily; Let it not be grievous to your Majesty that I speak
this truth; that if this day, there were any other Prince as ready to solicit
the destruction of Spaniards, as there was once a Spanish King to procure that
of the French; suddenly and easily we should see another Sicilian Vesper: the
causes are the same, and are not newly begun; Let the Insurrection of Messina
be remembered, then when the Vice King Don Iuan de Cardona, Joseph: Bonfigl.
Hist. Sicil. p. 1. lib. 10.
would oppress that Kingdom with intolerable Tributes. And let it be
considered, with what pride, and with how great disdain he used the Messinesi,
because they defended the liberty of their Kingdom. For which cause, justly
provoked, they did generously to his face, vpbraid him, that he acted another
Phallaris, another Dionisius.

Don Vgo de Moncada (who would not start, only to hear this name? this was
that impious man, that sacked Rome) was also Viceroy; how can it be thought,
that he handled them? Let us observe the words of the History.

He was by Nation a Catalonian, Bonfigl. p. 2. lib. 1.
by birth a Barcellonese, a man most ambitious, greedy of Riches, and
immoderately inclined to dishonest Luxury; He governed Sicily with Cruelty,
Avarice, and Impudent lust; He neglected so far to punish the falsifiers of
money, until depriving it of Commerce, he impouerished that Kingdom; and
that which more imported, he made public Merchandise of Grain, insomuch, that
he exhausted Sicily, and of a most fruitful Country, reduced it to the want
of bread. Covetousness was accompanied with other notorious vices, so that he
became to the nobility and people hateful; which being known unto him, when
the death of the Catholic King was published, he durst not appear abroad
for fear of receiving some notable afront.

Here the Author proceeds to the Insurrection of that Kingdom against so
strange a Monster: who disguised in the habit of a Servant, saved himself by
flight, and after got away to his King in Flanders. In whose place was sent
Hector Pinatello Earl of Montel^one, who by public Decree would ratify all
the Acts of Don Vgo, how tyrannical soever. Whereupon the People (who instead
of remedy, saw the mischief confirmed) made a new Commotion in the City of
Palermo, and the new Vice-King was enforced to escape to Messina, until the
Commons by the Nobility appeased, and many Spanish Soldiers supplied him from
the King, he became strong, and was able to vent his rage, as he did, with
extreme rigor, upon the mutined. And Don Vgo de Moncada, who had so ill
entreated the poor Sicilians, in stead of punishment, was rewarded with great
riches, and honored with the standard of Captain General of the Sea.

They, who at present live, by tradition of their old men, and for as much as
themselves have proved, do testify before God, that that kingdom has
continually suffered grieuances, and cruel extortions, but that the people had
almost utterly forgotten them, when they felt the heavy yoke of the Duke of
Ossuna, because in respect of extreme evils, moderate may be called
goodness. They exclaim to the Heavens, that he has left the wretched Sicily,
desolate, and rooted up. They complain with miserable outcryes, to have more
then once sent into Spain to lament to your Majesty, and always without
fruit: And since, they remain wholly confused, and astonished with the
consideration how he, like another Don Vgo, in stead of receiving punishment,
should be honored, and recompensed with the charge of the Vice-King of Naples.

And now it is time to discourse of Naples it self: I should undertake a great
work, to recount that which I have seen and tried, and perhaps I might seem
as passionate, I will then mention only that, which I have found in Histories,
and that which the Kingdom, with full voice does proclaim.

It was practiced lately in Naples to introduce the Inquisition al vso de
Spania: Igles p. 2 l. 6. c. 27 Sect. vlt.
The people cried out, there was no need of so great rigor, Bonfigl p. 2 l. 4.
because (by Gods grace) that Kingdom was not full of Moors, and
Speudo-Christians. The Vice-King insisting on his purpose, began to use force:
the people instructed by nature, armed to oppose against such violence. The
Pope, informed of the business, commanded the Vice^Roy, in virtue of holy
obedience, to be quiet, and he well may do it, both as Prince of the Church in
respect of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and as temporal Prince, that Kingdom
being the proper feude of the Sea Apostolic: yet for this the Vice-King would
not d^^ist, but with small and great Artillary attempted to bring his purpose
to effect. All the City rose in uproar, Many houses were leuelled with the
ground, and men not a few slain. But sooner he might destroy all, then those
generous minds be subjected to his will: so that he did great harm, and
obtained nothing. Who shall well consider these Actions cannot be persuaded
that Christian zeal transported the Vice-King to intermeddle in Ecclesiastique
Jurisdiction, and to desire to burden that people with a yoke, little
needful, and less reasonable, against the will of the Vicar of Christ,
Sovereign Prince as well in Temporals as Spir^tualls in the Kingdom of
Naples. From whence it must be concluded, that under that pretense the Viceroy
had some other end, which certainly could not be, but little for the good of
the Subject.

I know not how to excuse of Tyranny that Action in the year 1^85, Bau.
Pontif. p. 3. vita Si^^o. ^. ^. 5.
when the officers drew out of that kingdom so great a quantity of Corn, to
send into Spain, that although the year were most abundant, the poor City
of Naples did perish of famine. A Cruelty, indeed horrible, to take from the
Neapolitans their own bread, to feed their Spaniards. Therefore not without
cause, that people, conducted by necessity to desparation, rose all in tumult;
from whence the Vice-King, (this also was a Duke of Ossuna) took after,
occasion, to ven^ his fury, putting to death forty, sending to the Galleys a
hundred, and exiling infinite numbers.

The present State thereof imitates that of Sicily, as the Duke of Ossuna
succeeded in that Government, after Sicily; To perform my promise, I will say
no more, let that Inscription no less true then compassionate, by the Kingdom
it self published to the World, speak; which shall remain of that Duke a
perpetual, and famous Elogie.

Miserescite. Exteri. Exhorrescite. Posteri
Petrus. Gironus. Dux. Ossunensium
Natione. Hispanus. Genere. Perduellis. Religione. Turcicus
Italici. Dalmatici. Germanici
Fax. Cruenta. Bellorum
Non. Vnius. Siciliae. Verres
Neapoli. Pollutis. Templis
Conspurata. Nobilitate
Depredato. Aerario
Monito. Mauro. Accersito. Trace
Veneta. Vrbe. Per. Insidias. Ad. Excidium. Tentata
Regis. Simplicitate. Per. Corruptos. Aulicos. Diu. Multumque. Delusa
Hospitum. Manubiis. Per. Triennium. Ditato. Milite
Compulsisque. Populis. Ad. Eorum. Stationes. Redimendas
Foedata. Infandis. Exemplis. Ah. Nimis. Ad. Infandu^. Prona. Ciuitate
Nobilibus. Aliquot. Adse. Vario. Qua. Munere. Qua Vaframenta.
Pellectis
Largitionibus. Et. Vanis. Spebus. Plebe. Delusa
Atque. Eorum. Seditiosissimo. Bis. Extra. Sortem. Renunciato.
Tribuno
Denique
Frustra. Vetatis. Armis
Tentatis. Arcibus
Et. In. Armatos. Ci^es. Per. Triduum. Circumducta. Acie. Scelestoru^
Opportuno. Successoris. Aduentu
Cedere. Solo. Et. Salo. Compulsus
Aurum. Nostrum
Quod. Hic. Corrasit. Nequiter. Alibi. Lasciue. Sparsurus
Prouinciae. Neapolitani. Heu. Quondam. Regni
Inermes. Enerues
Populorum. Deglubiti. Greges
Palantes. Balantes
Teterrimas. Suas. Clades
Ignotas. Regi. Longinquo
Et. Torpenti. Fascino. Sando^allico
Pagella. Et. Calamo
Quae. Sola. Sunt. Reliqua
Representant. Vrbi. Et. Orbi
Miserescite. Exteri. Exhorrescite. Posteri.
In so woeful manner (sacred Majesty) Naples does lament; No less does Sicily
grieve, and Millan equally complain. But of all their vexations, the unhappy
people are afraid to speak; All their injuries, with open voice, it is not
lawful to express. Scarcely they dare publicly bewail their extreme
miseries; whence their hearts are more corroded.

Tacitus moeror, and luctus; I^st. lib. 8.
verentibus ne ipsae lachrymae pro contumacia habeantur; Crescit dissimulatione
ipsa, do^or; hoc altius dimissus, quo minus profiters licet.

Of these three principal Provinces of Italy under the government of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, I find recorded in History, that,

Insubres ex opulentissimis ad egestatem red^cti, I^v. Hist. lib. 39.
dinq^e, vel in pa^e inamter vexati, frustra apud surdas Caesaris aures
praesidum acerbitatem querebantur. Neapolitanum vero Regnum quo nihil
spoliatius vnquam fuit, euersum exutumque omni pristina dignitate conciderat.
Et in Sicilia, cum annuis Tributis, tum nouis rei frumentariae vectigalibus,
and frequentibus Hispanorum aestiuis, hybernisque euastata, occasio potius
rebellandi, quam consensus, deesse videbatur.

But, certainly, certainly, they are in much worse estate at this present. I
believe not ( O sacred Catholic Majesty) that there is any Prince in this
world, who, for reason of State, does not sometimes slip into some indecent
Action, because it may happen, that the Judgment and the will are surprised;
the one perverted, the other blinded with passion and interest.

To the conditions of Princes their Ministers ordinarily do conform; for these
are their eyes, ears, hands, and feet; and therefore, as is formerly said, the
Actions of Ministers are attributed to themselves the Princes; Let us then say,
that Ministers as well as Princes, may, and do also err, either by ignorance,
or passion, or of pure malice; But in all Christendom, I certainly believe,
that there have not been, nor are found, any Ministers, of any Prince, or
Republike whatsoever, who have committed so great errors, nor used so many
wicked dealings as the Spaniards. Let your Majesty consider the few in this
discourse alleged, which are scarce the thousand part of those in history
recorded, and be pleased with attention to read what they have done in India,
faithfully described by the aforementioned Bishop of Chiappa; And you shall
clearly see, that to this truth there is no reply; and with great grief of
heart, you will compassionate the condition of your miserable Subjects; you
will abhor the execrable Actions of your Ministers; and as a true Catholic
Prince, will provide to the whole convenient remedy: which if you shall not
do, then that right of other Princes, which I have pointed at, will take place.

Your Majesty does know that Millan is a feud of the Empire; Naples and Sicily
of the Church; Therefore the Pope and the Emperor, when their Subjects in these
States are not governed with upright Justice, are bound in conscience to God,
either to resume the immediate Dominion, as they have the Supreme, or to
provide another Prince, that rightly and justly may govern; depriving your
Majesty of the Inuestiture of those feudes, which will be escheated by the
Injustice of your Ministers, by you tolerated. And if at present it may seem,
that the State of Millan is secure, the Emperor being of the house of Austria,
and your near kinsman, and that you fear not Naples and Sicily, knowing the
high Bishop most inclinable to your favor; yet in many respects, there
remains much whereof to doubt; The affection of the mind, and the alliance of
blood, with some other interest joined to the one, and the other, are
considerations that can do much: But the love of Heaven, and the fear of
Hell, and the infallible Judgment of God, which will give the one, or the
other, as I believe, may much more prevail: So that at last, the Pope, and the
Emperor will have more care of their own souls, then of your Majesty's
satisfaction; I add, that the Empire, and Popedom, are Elective
Principalities, and no^ hereditarie, whence if the present Bishop be
obsequious to your Majesty's will, perhaps his successor will be contrary. And
though now the Emperor be an Austrian, in short time an Enemy of the house of
Austria, may succeed him; who finding so just occasion, will certainly bereave
your Majesty of your feudes: and when neither of these would, I may say, God
will do it, and might alleadg the authority of holy men, and prophesies of
Sacred Scripture, but I will omit them as superfluous; only this I will add,
that when all other danger should fail, you ought greatly to fear the heavy
dislike of all your own Subjects: Senec. Thabai. Acta. 3. sce. 2.
because inuisa nunquam Imperia retinentur diu.

Let your Majesty then consider (to close up this Discourse) how your Ministers
bring your States of Italy into extreme peril, both in respect of your
Subjects, by their manner of Government, and with the machinations which they
continually weaue against other Princes; And if ever Emperor or Pope should
take Arms against you, you may be assured to have all the Princes of Italy,
and perhaps of Europe, your Opposites, because the interest of State has
opened their eyes.

Let your Majesty imagine to ouer-heare all the Italian Potentates, after this
manner to discourse among themselves.

Now what do we do? Why do we not oppose him, who with a thousand frauds
does aspire our ruin? The Spaniards possess in Italy, Millan, Naples, and
Sicily, besides many lands wrested from poor particular Lords, as Monaco,
Piombino, Corregio, and others, and yet are not content; If now they become
Masters of the Valteline, whereby they project to shut up the passage of
stranger Nations called to our service, and to keep it at pleasure, open to
join with theirs, the German forces of the house of Austria.

By this union they promise themselves utterly to bring to nothing the power of
the Republique of Venice, the which being removed, they hope in Italy to find
no other resistance: so that thereof they will soon acquire the absolute
Monarchy.

Vt sunt impotentia, Iou. Hist. lib. 10.
atque imperandi auida ingenia Hispanorum, qui quum semel irrepserint, ad
summam semper potentiam cunctis ^^tibus contendunt.

Then would they expect, that the Pope should be Chapleyne of the King of
Spain, and we inferior Servants of his Royal house; we are too sure, that
this is the Intention of the Spanish Ministers: Already we see, in what
treacherous manner they seek to effect it, and we stand still, with our
thumbs under our girdles: too late we shall repent, if soon we do not
resol^e. Here, returning their thoughts upon your Majesty, in whose name your
Ministers work, they proceed, meditating the same conceit in these words.

Phillip King of Macedon, who always with snares, with treacheries, with
sacrilege, attentive to enlarge his Empire, being by the Thebans chosen
Captain of their Army against the Phocians, who robbing the Temple of Apollo,
with sacred treasures had armed to make war on Thebes, under the show of
piety and Religion; readily accepted the charge and Enterprise, and at the
first Encounter, overcame the Enemy, whence he was celebrated with Immortoll
glory.

Incredibile, Just. 8.
quantum ears apud omnes nationes Philippo gloriam dedit. Illum vindicem
sacrilegi^^ illum vltorem religionum. Quod orbis viribus expiari debuit, solum,
qui piacula exigeret extitisse dignum. Itaque Diis proximus habetur, per quem
Deorum Maiestas vindicata sit.

But finding himself victorious and powerful, he discovered his dissembled
piety, and feined Religion, breaking his faith with those, who had made
him-their Head, and subiecting that friendly City, like an enemy, which had
made him a Conqueror.

Veluti timens, ne ab hostibus sacrilegii vinceretur, Just. paulo infra.
Civitates quarum paulo ante Dux fuerat, quae sub auspiciis eius militauerant*
quae gratulatae illi sibique victoriam nactae fuerant, hostiliter occupatas,
diripuit.

By degrees discord among the Grecians always increasing, he faining to help,
now one, now the other side, in the end deceiving all, usurped to himself the
whole Dominion of Greece.

Behold now (say the Italian Princes) behold another Phillip King of Spain,
wholly like to that of Macedon, who meditates nothing else but to subdue Italy,
as the other had subjected Greece; and entering with the same pretenses of Piety
and of Religion, using the same Arts of Deceit, and Treason, does propose the
same ends of absolute Monarchy, whereby he may, in time, be celebrated with the
same Encomium as was the other, and it shall be said:

Philippus Rex Hispaniarum, veluti e specula quadam libertati Italiae
insidiatus, Just. ubi supra.
dum contentiones Ciuitatum alit, auxilium inferioribus ferendo, victos pariter
victoresque subire Regiam seruitutem coegit.

They conclude the blow is foreseen, we shall be very unwise, if we be not
able to defend it.

But the English, French, Germans, and other Nations, do noe think
themselves free of the danger, rather they hold for certain that the
progresses of the king of Spain, in Italy, are preambles to their ruin, and
they remember, that the Romans, after the conquest of Italy, did subdue the
world; Wherefore our defense is their interest, and we and they for this
common interest, are bound, by common consent, and with united forces, to
resist, yea to suppress the Spanish Armies, Va. Max. l. 2. c. 2
quae oppressurae sunt, nisi opprimantur. And if perhaps some do not believe
that the Catholic King can have so greedy desires, let him well consider that
which his Predecessors have done to those many Kings, and mighty Princes of
India, and from example of others, let him learn to look unto him; Foelix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum. These ( O sacred Catholic Majesty) are
the discourses of the Italian Princes, not Chimera's of subtle wits, but
extracted from the firm foundation of Histories, and from the Actions
discovered of your Ministers.

The Religion and Piety is known, they are disguises to make the vnuist
usurpation of the Estate of others to appear fair and honest, and that, in
truth, Libido dominandi, causa belli habetur. So Don Petro of Aragon usurped
Sicily, the Catholic Kings India, and Don Phillip the second attempted to get
France; under the like pretense the Ministers of your Majesty have now
surprised the Valteline, the which was not otherwise rebelled of their own
will, because it was tyrannized in Religion, and in the public government,
as is spread abroad, but induced to Rebellion by the Dissentions in^idiously
sowed by the Ministers of your Majesty, and by the tyranny which themselves
have introduced, by means of those Traitors Pompeio and Rodolfo Planta, and
others on them dependant. Your Majesty becomes deceived by such as make you
otherwise believe, and in stead of persuading you to a just war against the
Turks, who are your perpetual enemies, and work so great spoils to
Christendom* particularly in your own Estates, do from that divert you,
urging you with terms of Religion, cruelly to destroy with force of Arms the
Gri^ons, as Heretics; whose Conversion should benignely be produced, by the
sweetness of preaching; With this and other evil actions your Ministers
without any your fault, do bring great reproach to your Royal name; Wherefore
you ought justly with them to be enraged, and the more, seeing they practizing
so wicked actions, seek to defame all good Princes with detracting words; And
if your Majesty does not refrain the tongues, and hands of your Ministers,
they will yet say, and do much worse; not only against Secular Princes, but
against himself the High Priest, to whom they desire your Majesty should be
equal and superior; and that also you should usurp the authority of the Holy
Ghost in Election of Popes, that they may on you depend. In brief, they
pretend that your Majesty should be sole and supreme Monarch of all Italy, and
do believe, that thereunto the Dominion of the Valteline is the direct way,
the which cannot by you justly be kept, though it were true, which is not,
that of themselves those people had rebelled; but you are obliged to restore it
to their own Lords, having no action in any kind upon them, as a supreme
Prince should have over his feudatory. The which if it shall be well considered
of your Majesty, you will know not only the Injustice, which your Ministers
desire to do, in snatching against equity, the Estates of others, but also the
danger whereinto they thrust your own Estates in Italy the which being
continually governed with violence, extortions, and manifest Tyrannies of your
Ministers, do induce a necessity (if they love their ^oules health) in the
Pope and the Emperor, their supreme Princes, to deprive your Majesty of the
Inuestiture, and to transfer it to another, who may justly and mildly govern
them: And if ever it shall be thus resolved, your Majesty shall find all the
Italian Princes your opposites, who from the surprise of the Valteline, are
confirmed in this opinion, that the Spaniards project, suddenly to subdue all
Italy; and referring the action of Ministers to your Majesty, do conclude,
that you certainly aspire, to make your self thereof sole Monarch, as in times
past Phillip of Macedon did of Greece; and after the Conquest of Italy, that
you have fixed your thoughts upon the Monarchy of the World, as did once the
Romans. Wherefore it is the Common Interest of all the Princes of Europe, to
oppose your Arms, that they do not in this our World, that which your
Ancestors have done in the new world of India.

All these matters I have hitherto discoursed, and fully declared to your
Majesty, not with intent, as others have done, detractingly to inueigh, to
stain your Reputation, and to excite against you universal ha^red: but with
purpose freely to discover that truth, which never or rarely is brought pure,
sincere, and chaste, to the ears of Princes; but violated, corrupted, and
adulterated, by those, who by indirect ways, without merit, seek to acquire
Grace.

I know that your Majesty fears God, loves Justice, hates Tyranny, is
content with your own, does not covet the goods of others, does prize your
own name; desires Peace, abhorres War, wishes the good of your subjects, the
quiet of your neighbors, and the concord of Christendom. Whence I am secure,
that taking in good part my words, and weighing them in the just balance of
your great prudence, you will not, that Truth, who is the Daughter of God, sent
from God, and speaks in the name of God, should return back without any
fruit; Let your Majesty then command your Ministers, to change their works,
and thoughts, that the Affairs of Italy may be reduced to quiet and
tranquillity, and that the World, from the effects, may know, that your Majesty
is a just Prince, and a true Catholic King.

FINIS.

