A RELATION SENT TO THE FRENCH King by the Marshall de Schomberg, of the Fight
between the Army which he commands, and the Army of Mounsieur the Duke of
Orleans, near to Castelnau-d' Ary the first of September. 1632.

The names of many great Mounsieurs, Captains, and Commanders slain of the
Duke of Orleans side, and some of the Kings side.

Translated out of the French Copy Printed at Lions.

Another famous overthrow since given (by that valiant old Protestant Soldier,
Monsieur de la Force, with only 800. Foot, and 400. Horse) to 3000. Foot and
400. Horse of the Duke of Orleans, under the Command of Delbeuf, one of the
House of Guise.

LONDON. Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne 1632.

A RELATION SENT TO THE KING by the Marshall Schomberg, of the Fight between
the Army which he commands, and the Army of Monsieur de Orleance, near to
Castelnaud' Ary the first of September. 1632.
I Have already sent word unto the King with speed (of the which the Lord Le
Ferron was the bearer) how the Castle of St. Felix de Carmaine, having been
surprised by his Enemies, and the Town which had barricadoed it self against
the said Castle, having demanded assistance of me, I have been bound to
engage the Arms of his Majesty in the siege of this place, although that (as
he knows) I had neither Canons nor necessaries, very few of the Infantery,
and saw Monsieur the Duke of Orleans drew near toward with the most part of
his Forces, but I judged it so important, to cause to be known at the entrance
of his Majesty's Arms into this Province, that I would not refuse to give
protection to people that would serve him. As I passed over all these
considerations, and God has so favored me, that after I had held the assieged
compassed as strait as might be, the twelfth day, which was the last of
August, they were constrained to Capitulate, and to depart out of the place the
first of this Month. I sent to the King the Capitulation, and humbly entreated
his Majesty to command, that the pardon which I have promised to these people
might be sent unto me. I have left in the Castle one Company of the Regiment of
Chamblay, and committed the keeping of the Town to the Inhabitants. Monsieur
de Roques will certify his Majesty of the importance of the place, and that
it was of such a consequence to reduce it to his obedience, as without this all
the little Towns of Lauraquez, would never be kept in their obedience. The
happy end of this enterprise has produced effects far more advantageous,
which were, that this has obliged the Duke of Orleans and the Duke of
Montmorency to set forward themselves with all diligence to succor this place,
with 3000. foot, and 2000. horse. Many voluntary Nobles, and three pieces of
Canon, whereof having notice, and that they were but three miles off us, I
resolved with the advice of the Marquis de Breze, who made me the first
proposition thereof, that at the same hour that the Capitulation of St. Felix
should be finished, that I would go directly to the enemy, with two designs,
the one to Combat with them, the other to save Castelnau d'Ary, which they
made full account was theirs. The place of St. Felix being succored, or
failing to follow their Army. Our determinations have (thanks be unto God) so
prosperously succeeded, that arriving half a mile from this Town, the Marquis
de Breze, who conducted the head of the Army, certified me, that he saw that of
the Enemy on the left hand within two Musket shot of our way, and that he
believed, that they being to pass a River, whose banks were inaccessible,
upon a very long bridge; the design of the enemies was to suffer half of our
Army to pass, which contained but a thousand horse, four Companies of the
Regiments of his Majesty's Guards, and six of those of Chamblay, and then to
set upon the Arriere guard, and that there was upon the same River a good
passage two thousand paces higher, where if I pleased he would cause the
Avant-guard to pass over. I commended his judicious advice, and told him that
he could not do better than that he had propounded; We had gained the
passage, and half of the Army was on the other side the River, before the
enemies could judge what we would do, in such sort, that all the troops
passed over, without the advancing forward of one man of the enemies to come
unto us. The River being passed, we set our selves in Battaile-aray in a great
Field, and set all the baggage upon our right hand toward Castelnaud' Ary. The
enemies seeing they had failed of their design, resolved to pass the River,
and to come lodge upon our way of Castlenau d' Ary, in places very advantageous
for the Infanterie; which seeing, I resolved to get before them, and place the
Army of the King between Castlenau d' Ary and the enemies, to charge them
when I should see part of their people passed on this side the River. The place
of Battle which I sent the Lords de l'Isle and Espenay to view, seemed the
fairest place in the world; the which they having described unto me, I caused
the Army diligently to set forward, and we had not leisure to set our selves
in order, when seeing the enemies would have passed in great haste, I resolved
not to defer, Charging them, and the four Companies of the Regiment of his
Majesty's Guard having separated the body of the Battalia into two parts, the
one to take the right hand of our Cavallerie, and the other the left; and the
two hundred and fifty men of the Regiment of Chamblay being near the said
Battalia on the left hand, I caused the Avaunt Couriers to set forward, and we
marched forthwith against the enemy, who were encamped along the highway in
houses and in ditches very advantageous, the discharge of the Infanterie being
made, and likewise that of the enemies, our Cavallerie (in the front of whom
the Marquis de Breze placed himself) would go unto them by the right hand and
by the left, but the most part of them met with so great ditches, that it was
impossible for them to pass.

The Carabins found a way more to the purpose then the other, and passing the
first made their discharge upon their enemies, which so strongly resisted them
with their Infantery, that they could not proceed further; Arnauld and Bideyran
valiantly behaved themselves therein, and the last has slain the Lord de la
Feuillade.

During these actions on both sides, Monsieur de Lauriers and de Beau-regard
Champron, who sought a passage for to depart out of the field, and to enter
into the way, found the passage very hard, and nevertheless resolved with
themselves, to adventure into the way, where being descended, with the son of
the said Laurier, and twelve or fifteen of their companions, the Duke of
Montmorancy came to charge them with an hundred Gentlemen; They withstood the
shocke, where the said Duke was hurt, the Count de Rieux slain, and four or
five others borne to the ground; our Musquettiers discharging upon the
Cavallery, drove many of them from the fight, in such sort, that in an instant
the Duke de Montmorancie was abandoned of all those that followed, except four
or five, the which he seeing, and being incensed with his wounds, he found
means to depart out of the way, with those few that remained with him, and
entering into the field, met my Company of men of Arms, gave and received some
blows by sword and Pistol in passing, and proceeded forward until he came
before the Troops of the Guards and Chamblay, where he being shot at by many
Musquettiers, his Horse which had been already very much hurt by Monsieur de
Lauriers fell, and he upon him, where he was taken by the Officers and
Soldiers of the Regiment of Guards.

The place as I have already said before, being found so hard for the
Cavallery to pass, Monsieur the Marquis de Breze, and my self thought it
fitting that having made one so successful encounter, wherein were slain so
many men of quality, it was not necessary to hazard a second, and we having
remained an hour on our place of fight, without any show of the enemies
advancing forward.

I commanded that they should begin to retire themselves toward
Castelnau-d' Ary, causing to retreat also the Companies of the Guards, and
those of Chamblay.

The enemies moved not from their station, and I am come to lodge with all the
Troops in the Town and Suburbs of Castelnau d' Ary, Monsieur the Duke of
Orleans was present at the fight, notwithstanding they sought to hinder him.

The intelligence which I have is that the taking of the Duke of Montmorancie
does so astonish their Army, that the most part of those of Lanquedock retire
themselves; and as for the Duke of Orleans, he is gone with the rest of his
Army toward Besiers.

I suppose there was never seen a Skirmish of so small durance, wherein so
many men of quality were slain, wounded, and taken Prisoners.

Those which are come to my knowledge, are the Duke of Montmorancie, wounded in
seven or eight places, and taken prisoner.

Monsieur the Count de Moret, shot through the body with a Musket, whereof he
is thought to have dyed.

The Count of Rieux slain.

The Count of de la Feuillado slain.

Monsieur de Puylanrens hurt in the arm but slight.

Monsieur de S. Florent hurt and taken prisoner, and since dead.

The Chevalier de Rare hurt and taken.

Monsieur de la veue Cornet of Sauueboeaf prisoner.

Monsieur de la None, dead as it is said.

Monsieur the Count de Bueil hurt and taken.

Monsieur de Rochedagon hurt.

Monsieur de Ovailly, Captain of the Guards to the Duke of Orleans, hurt in
the face.

Four Captains of the Regiments of Lanquedock slain.

There are diverse other by the report of the Country people, which were carried
away in four Wagons, whose names are not yet known.

On the Kings side.
There are none found to be hurt but the Lords of Beauregard Champron, with a
Pistol-shot, and Beauregard Blanchfort, assistant of the Camp, who had his
right arm broken with a Musket.

Monsieur de Meneville and de Gade, Lieutenants of the Guards, slain.

Five or six light Horse of diverse Companies slain.

Twenty Horses slain and hurt.

The prudencie with which the Marshall de Schomberg has conducted, and the
courage which he has showed in the execution of this action, is not to be
expressed.

Monsieur the Marquis de Breze, and many others which write thereof, report
that they never saw a General more vigilant nor judicious, upon occasion more
bold in the execution, wherein he is also no less careful in the conservation
of persons which he commands there of his own.

Lions the 18. September.
THe Kings Forces under the command of Monsieur de la Force in Lanquedock,
being possessed of the Town of Bocaire, and laying siege to the Castle which
was possessed by the Forces of the Duke of Orleans, which said Castle would be
very advantageous to the King, if he could gain it. The Duke of Orleans
understanding that the Kings forces had laid siege to the said Castle, resolved
to relieve the same with all speed, specially considering the said Castle was
but poorly provided either of Munition or Victuals to hold out long. Wherefore
he caused 3000. Foot and 400. Horse to march toward it, with all manner of
provision, both Munition and Victuals for relief of the same, under a young,
valiant, and vigorous Commander, called the Duke* Delbeufe, who made little
account of any resistance that the King had there to hinder his purpose. On the
other side, that old and well experienced Soldier (though fourscore years of
age, and whose Army did consist but of 800. Foot and 400. Horse) understanding
of the setting forward of his and the Kings enemies (with so great and far
exceeding a number of Foot, and so well provided to offend) thought it not fit
to continue in the Town, and only to make resistance by way of Defense. Now
this brave Protestant Commander (who had been always faithful and
serviceable to his Prince) would not in his last days suffer either in Honor
or fidelity to his Prince, speedily draws all his Forces out of the Town,
and goes to meet with his enemy, with his 800. Foot and 400. Horse. Upon the
approach of both Armies, the encounter was furious and blouddie, and continued
long doubtful, till at last the Army of Duke Delbeufe was quite overthrown,
and only himself and two more escaped with their lives, all his whole Army
being either killed or taken prisoners. I think the like Victory has not been
obtained in the memory of man. Upon this, De la Force returned again with his
prisoners and baggage to his siege of Bocaire-Castle, where it is supposed the
said Castle will not long hold out, but not only that Castle, but also all
those places which held out against the King, will likewise yield themselves.

It is reported that the Monsieur has sent to the King his brother, to desire
the life of Montmorancie, and that he may be restored to all his Honors and
means; which they say, the King has granted him. It is hoped, that there will
be some accord made between the King and him very shortly.

FINIS.

