THE HISTORY OF THE INQVISITION: Composed by the Reverend Father PAUL SERVITA,
who was also the Compiler of the Council of Trent. A Pious, Learned, and
Curious Work, necessary for Counselors, Casuists, and Politicians.

Translated out of the Italian Copy by ROBERT GENTILIS.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, for Humphrey Mosley, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Princes Arms, 1639.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe hidden Treasure never availed any, as Solomon the wise said. This present
Book, like to a great Treasure was always much Esteemed by the best
Politicians, but it lay hidden because it went notabroad, but in a Manuscript,
and came only to the hands of the Governors of the Venetian State, and of
some few foreign Princes, who by especial favor were made partakers of it.
Now a liberal hand which desires the common good, by means of my Press,
has communicated it to the world, that every good States man may participate
of it. Receive it with a cheerful countenance, and believe it will not a
little profit thee and others. Farewell.

The History of the Inquisition, and particularly o^ the Venetian. With the
Motives which caused that most Renowned Commonwealth of Venice to make diverse
Ordinances touching this matter.
To the Most Renowned Duke of Venice: F. P. V. S. wishes all happiness.

PERFORMING with all due reverence the command laid on me by your Highness to
draw unto a head, and set down in order all matters which concern the Office
of the Inquisition against Heresy: I have found all things so well ordered in
times past, by the Counsels of this most Renowned Commonwealth, that there
needs no other thing to be done, but only to put together that which on
diverse occasions has been determined, bringing to pass that which was
deliberated by the most excellent Council of Ten, and in the year 1550. the
22 of November, the 8 Chap. vid. that throughout all the Venetian Dominion
should be an uniforme proceeding, and conformable to what is observed within
this renowned City: As also it was agreed upon between Pope Julius the third,
and this most illustrious Commonwealth, in the year 1551. Chap. 18. 19.

Which in my respectfull opinion may easily be done, if the orders made upon
several occasions be reduced unto Chapters, and thence as it were a
recapitulation framed, wherein shall briefly and summarily be set down so much
as is necessary to be observed, and Copies may be given either of the Heads
alone, or joined with the aforesaid determination it shall seem best.

I will first gather the Heads, then will I add the considerations and causes
for which these Orders were first established to the Honor of God; for the
which it is also necessary to continue the keeping of them, for the maintenance
of holy Religion, and public quietness.

CHAP. I. THat as in Venice by a public and ancient decree there are deputed
three Senators, Inquisitors against Heresy, to be present at all which is done
by the Friars Inquisitors; so in other Cities of the State, the Governors
shall be present at the framing of Processes made by the Inquisition. CHAP. II.
That the Governors of the Cities, having some lawful let to hinder their
presence, they shall cause the Podesta his Deputy, or some other of the Court
of Justice to supply their place. CHAP. III. That no Governor, having any
intimatenesse with Rome, shall be an assistant to the aforesaid framing of
Processes. CHAP. IV. That the Assistants Office shall be only to be present,
without doing any thing else, and if any doubt arise, to make it known to the
Prince. CHAP. V. That the assistants shall not swear faithfulness or secrecy
to the Inquisitors. CHAP. VI. That the Governors shall from time to time give
the Prince account of what is done in the Office of the Inquisition. CHAP. VII.
That the same Governors shall give notice to the Prince, and the Ambassador
of Rome, of the death of the Inquisitor, or of the occasion of changing him.
CHAP. VIII. That the Governors shall not admit of any Inquisitors in the
Cities by them governed without the Princes Letters. CHAP. IX. That the
Governor shall assist not only in Seular men's causes, but also in
Ecclesiastical and Regular men's, though they were of the Inquisitors
Monastery. CHAP. X. That the Governors shall not suffer any act to be made
after denuntiation without their presence. CHAP. XI. That although the
Inquisitors should impart the business to them, yet the Governors should not
forbear to be present thereat. CHAP. XII. That the Ecclesiastical persons
having framed a Process without their assistance, the Governors shall cause
it to be framed again before them. CHAP. XIII. That they shall do the like,
though the Process were to be sent out of the State. CHAP. XIV. That in the
Process, mention shall be made of the Governors assistances, or their
Deputies. CHAP. XV. That no Decrees, or Precepts, which come from out of the
State, shall be put into any Processes. CHAP. XVI. That neither the Processes,
nor the Prisoners shall be sent out of the Dominions, without the Prince have
notice of it. CHAPT. XVII. That the Praetoriall Vicar, or other of the Court
being assistants shall not be Consulters. CHAP. XVIII. That the Governors
shall not suffer the imprisonment of any, before the Process be framed. CHAP.
XIX. That they shall not suffer the Inquisition to meddle with Enchantments,
and South-Sayings, if they do not contain Heresy. CHAP XX. That they shall
do the same by Herball Enchantments, Witchcrafts, and Sorceries. CHAP. XXI.
That ordinary blasphemies shall not be judged by the Inquisition, nor wounding
of Images, nor irrisions committed by singing of Psalms or impure Letanies.
CHAP. XXII. That the delict of having two Wives shall not belong to the
Inquisition. CHAP. XXIII. That the Assistants shall not suffer the Inquisition
to meddle in cases of Usury. CHAP. XXIV. That the Jnquisition shall not in any
cause proceed against Jews or Infidels. CHAP. XXV. That the Inquisitors shall
not proceed against the Greeks. CHAP. XXVI. That he that shall be thought to
have done against the Faith beyond the Alps, shall not be cited by Criers, nor
by affixment of Scedules. CHAP. XXVII. That the Inquisition shall have nothing
to do with the goods of condemned persons. CHAP. XXVIII. That no Bull shall be
published by any Order from the Congregation of Rome without the Prince his
License. CHAP. XXIX. That the Inquisition shall not cause any prohibition of
any sort of Books to be printed, without the observing the conditions of the
agreement. CHAP. XXX. That the Inquisition shall not command any that is of a
Secular Art, or profession. CHAP. XXXI. That the Inquisitor shall not cause
Artificers to be sworn unto them. CHAP. XXXII. That the Inquisitor shall not
make any Precept or Monitory for the Commonalty, or for the Judges. CHAP.
XXXIII. That the Inquisitors shall not publish any Edict, containing more than
the six ordinary Heads. CHAP. XXXIV. That cases which shall happen in Towns
or Villages shall be decided in the Cities to which they are subject. CHAP.
XXXV. That a case happening in a place whereto no Inquisition properly
belongs, the delinquent shall be sent to the place where he is questionable
for spiritual matters. CHAP. XXXVI. That contumacious persons shall be
banished, either diffinitively, or for a time, as it shall seem best to the
Inquisitors. CHAP. XXXVII. That the Inquisitors shall make such Proclamations
as they shall please against such as are escaped out of their Prisons. CHAP.
XXXVIII. That those which are Inquisited or Cited for Heresy, flying within
the State, shall be condemned for four years to prisons separate from other
Prisons. CHAP. XXXIX. That the Inquisition shall punish false accusers, and
false witnesses, when the false-hood appears by the same Process, otherwise
it shall belong to the Governors.
BEhold here most illustrious Prince, the sum of all the aforesaid nine and
thirty Chapters, now rests to show unto your Highness the reason of them
all: but first that we may discourse more soundly, it will be needful for me
to relate when, how, and for what cause the office of th'inquisition was
instituted in Christendom; and at what time, and in what form it was admitted
into this famous City of Venice.

Beginning therefore from thence I will say, that although Heresies by Divine
permission, were sown in the World, for the exercise and trial of good
Catholics, even in those times as the Church began, etc. after our Lords
Ascension, yet the particular office of th 'Inquisition against Heretics, did
not begin till after the year one thousand two hundred.

The Holy Apostles left for a remedy to this pestilence, that the Heretic
should be ad monished once or twice, and that perishing in his obstinacy,
Catholics should separate themselves from his fellowship, and excommunicate
him. Nor was there any further proceeding until Constantines time, who
embraced the holy Faith, and was after imitated by his successors. Then amongst
other things the Saints taught Princes, that they having two callings, the one
of Christians, the other of Princes; were bound in both of them to serve God as
Christians, in observing of the Divine precepts, as every other private Person;
but as Princes, serving his Divine Majesty with well ordering of Laws, and
directing their subjects to Piety, Honesty, and Justice; punishing all such as
transgress the Divine Commandments, and especially those of the Decalogue:
For those that sin against the first Table, which concerns Divine honor,
are worse than they who sin against the Second; which concerns Justice among
men: Wherefore Princes are more bound to punish Blasphemies Heresies, and
perjuries; than murders and thefts: For this cause were diverse Laws made
against Heresies, which are Registered in the Justinian and Theodosian Codes,
imposing upon the guilty pecuniary mulcts, banishments; privation of part, or
of all their goods, according to the circumstances of the offense, the
execution of which Laws was committed to their secular Officers.

Every criminal Judgment has three parts; the Cognizance of the cause of the
delict, the Cognizance of the fact; and the sentence. In the Judgment for
Heresy, the Cognizance of the reason is, whether such an opinion be Heretical
or no: The Cognizance of the fact is, whether a Person so accused, or
denounced, has defended or held; or showed any token of holding that opinion:
The sentence consists either in absolving the guiltless from an imputation,
or condemning him that he is found guilty. The first Cognizance, what opinion
is Heretical, was always Ecclesiastical, neither can it any way belong to
the secular Power; and when in those days there grew any difficulty upon some
opinion, the Emperors did require the judgment of Bishops; and if need were
did call Counsels: But the Cognizance of the fact, whether the accused Person
were innocent, or guilty, that he might have the punishment ordained by the
Laws; and the sentence of Condemnation, or Absolution, did all belong to the
secular Power.

Some of the holy Bishops and Prelates of those times, after they had declared
what opinions were Heretical, and had separated from the Church as
excomunicate, and anathematized those that did hold them; enter-medled no
further, nor durst give notice thereof to the Magistrates; holding it to be no
work of entire Charity. Others having perceived, that fear of the secular
Magistrate did overcome the pertinacy of the obstinate, and did work that,
which love of the Truth could not do; held it as their duty to make known the
Heretical Persons, unto secular Judges; together with their erroneous
opinions, and to excite them to put the Imperial Laws in execution: But
because sometimes a Heretic Preacher did cause some notable trouble, the
Judges regarding the sedition more than the heresy, did proceed also to
Capital punishments; the Churchmen did in these cases forbear to appear
before the tribunal, and did always use unfeigned exhortation to the Judges,
that they should inflict no punishments of blood upon the delinquents. St
Martin in France excommunicated a Bishop, because he had accused certain
Heretics to Maximus Usurper of the Empire, which by him were put to death. St
Augustine also most zealous of the purity of the Church, to clear it of this
evil seed; did often and earnestly desire the Proconsuls, Counts, and other
Imperial Ministers in Africa, for to execute the Princes Laws; and would make
known unto them the places where Heretics held their conventicles, and did
discover the Persons: But always when he saw any Judge inclined to proceed
against the life, he earnestly prayed him, by the mercies of God, by the love
of Christ, and such like urging entreaties, that he should desist from
punishments of blood: And in an Epistle to Donatus Proconsul of Afric, he
tells him plainly, that if he do persevere in punishing of Heretics, with
the loss of their lives, then the Bishop would forbear giving notice of them;
and not being made known by others, they would rest unpunished, and the
Imperial Laws unexecuted: Whereas proceeding mildly and without bloodshed,
they would have bin vigilant in discovering them; and notifying of them for the
Service of God, and execution of the Laws.

In this manner were things handled in the Church, for causes of heresy under
the Roman Empire, until the year of our Salvation 800. when the Eastern
Empire being divided from the Western, this form rested in the Eastern
until the end of it.

In the Western, the Princes needed not make any Laws, nor take much care
about this business; seeing that for the space of three hundred years, from
800. to 1100. there were very few Heretics found in these parts, and when any
case did happen (which chanced but very seldom) the Bishop did Judge of it, in
the same manner as he proceeded against Ecclesiastical Persons; as against
infringers of the Holy Days, breakers of Fasts, and such like, judging and
punishing them themselves, in those places where they had jurisdiction granted
them by the Princes; and where they had not the like power, they did implore
the secular aid to punish them.

After the year 1100, by reason of the continual unkindnesses, which for
fifty years before had bin between the Popes and the Emperors, and lasted
afterward for a whole age, until 1200. with frequent Wars, and scandals,
and the little Religious life of the Clergy, there did arise an infinite number
of Heretics, whose most common heresies were against the Popes Authority: In
those days the plague of heresy grew so fast, that where the multitude
exceeded, there was a forced tolleration: A Bishop where he could, did proceed
in those causes: the Popes of Rome did with frequent Letters exhort, and excite
them to their duties: neither until the year 1200 was ever heard the name of
the Office of the Inquisition, or of Inquisitor against Heresy: But the
Bishops and their Vicars being little able* and less diligent to perform that
which the Popes desired, and had been necessary to have been done, there were
in those days most opportunely instituted the two Religious Orders of St.
Dominick and St. Frances, which in short time were filled up with the most
zealous and learned Persons of that Age, altogether given to the maintaining of
the Church of Rome, and the Pontifical authority; whom the Popes using against
Heretics, they sent them to Preach, and to convert them; to exhort the Princes
and Catholic Nations to persecute the obstinate, and to inform themselves in
each place of the number and quality of Heretics, of the Zeal of the
Catholics, and diligence of the Bishops; and to bring their relations to Rome,
from whence they had the names of Inquisitors: Yet had they no Tribunal, only
sometimes they would excite some Judge to banish or punish those Heretics
which they found: sometimes they would stir up some Potent men to take Arms
against them; some times they did excite the people, sowing a cross of red
cloth upon the garments of such as would dedicate themselves to such an action,
and would unite them, and bring them on to the extirpacion of Heretics; and
this lasted for the space of fifty years: viz. until the year one thousand
two hundred and fifty.

This enterprise of the Fathers Inquisitory was much furthered by the Emperor
Frederick the Second, who in the year 1244. being in Padua, set forth four
Proclamations concerning this matter, receiving the Inquisitors into his
protection, and imposing the penalty of fire upon obstinate Heretics, and upon
penitent ones perpetual imprisonment, committing the Cognizance thereof unto
the Ecclesiastical Persons, and the condemning of them unto secular Judges:
and this was the first Law that imposed punishment of death upon Heretics,
which Law (by reason of the cruel discords that arose in those days, between
the Emperor and three Popes successively) did not bring forth that good effect
of rooting out the sprung up Heresies, but being all busied in Wars and
dissentions, as well the Popes and other Prelates, as the Emperors and his
Ministers; Heresy had time to take root and increase. Finrlly, the Emperor
Frederick dying that same year, and the business of Germany being in a
confusion, and Italy in an Interregnum which lasted three and twenty years;
Pope Innocent the Fourth, remaining through the death of the Emperor as it
were Arbitrator in Lombardy, and some other parts of Italy, applied his whole
study to the rooting out of Heresies* which were much increased in these late
troubles: and having considered the good the Dominican and Franciscan Friars
had done in this business.

Through their diligence, having no respect of persons or dangers therein, he
held it as his only remedy to employ them, not as before only to Preach, and
assemble men marked with the Cross, and to do extraordinary executions, but
with giving them a stable Authority, and erecting them a firm Tribunal, which
should have care of nothing else. To this, two things opposed themselves: the
one was how they might without confusion take away cases of Heresy from the
Episcopal jurisdiction, which had always judged them, and set up an Office
proper to them alone. The other thing was, how they might exclude the secular
Magistrate, to whose judgment was committed the punishing of Heretics by the
ancient Laws of the Empire, by the last Laws of Frederick, and by peculiar
Statutes which each City was forced to make, for fear of overthrowing her
government in those great tumults. To the first inconvenience the Pope found
this remedy, which was to make a Tribunal, composed of the Inquisitor and the
Bishop, in which the Inquisitor should not only be chief, but, all and the
Bishop should have little more than a name in it; and also to give some
appearance of Authority to the secular Power, he gave him leave to appoint
Officers to the Inquisition, but to be chosen by the Inquisitors themselves; to
send with the Inquisitor, when any of his Assessors did go about the Country,
but of the Election of the Inquisitor himself, to apply one third part of
goods confiscate to the Commonalty, and such like things, which in show made
the Magistrate the Inquisitors companion, but in substance his Servant: There
remained to provide money for expenses which would arise, in keeping of
Prisons, and feeding of Prisoners, for which it was ordered that the Comminalty
should pay: And so it was ordered, he being in Brescia in the year 1251, and
the Dominican Friars were deputed Inquisitors, in Lombardy, Romanie, and Marca
Trivisana. Seven Months after the Pope writ a Bull to all the Governors,
Counsels and Commonalties of those three Provinces, setting them down one and
thirty heads which they should observe, for the prosperous success of the new
Office, commanding that they should be Registered in the Commonalties Statute
Books, to be inviolably observed. Then he gave the Inquisitors power to
Excommunicate and interdict them, if they did not observe them. The Pope did
not at that time extend himself any further, to bring in the Inquisition into
other places of Italy, or without saying that those three Provinces were most
under his eyes, and best of him beloved: but the chief cause was, because in
these his Authority was great, they having no Prince, and each City governing
it self; wherein the Pope had also a part, because he had assisted them in
these last Wars: Yet for all this the Edict was not easily received,
whereupon Alexander the Fourth his successor, seven years after vid. in the
year 1259. was constrained to moderate and renew it, Commanding the
Inquisitors nevertheless, with censures to force the Governors for to observe
them. For the same cause Clement the Fourth, six years after that, vid. 1265.
did renew it in the same manner; yet was it not fully executed, so that four
other ensuing Popes were constrained to employ themselves in over-co^ming those
difficulties; which thwarted them in causing the Office to be admitted in some
places: These difficulties did arise from two heads: The one was the undiscreet
severity of the Friars Inquisitors, their Extortions, and other grievances: The
other was because the Commonalties did refuse to bear the charges: therefore
they resolved to lay down that pretense, of having the charges borne by the
Commonalty. And for to temper the excessive rigor of the Inquisitors, they gave
some part of Power more unto the Bishop, which was the cause of bringing in the
Office with less difficulty into these three Provinces of Lombardye, Romanie,
and Marca Trivisana, and afterward into Tuscan; and so it passed into Arragon,
and into some Cities of Germany and France: it was not brought into the
Kingdom of Naples, by reason of the small correspondency which was between
the Popes, and the Kings of that Kingdom.

It was soon taken out of France and Germany, some of the Inquisitors being
driven out of those places for their rigors, and extortions; and other some
going away for want of employment: For which cause they were also reduced to a
small number in Arragon, since they had not yet penetrated into other Kingdoms
of Spain.

In the year 1484. the Catholic King Ferdinand, having extinguished the
Kingdom of the Mahometans in Granata, to purge his, and his Wife Elizabeth's
Kingdoms from the Moors and Jews newly converted, erected with the consent
of Pope Sixtus the Fourth, a Tribunal of the Inquisition in all his Kingdoms
of Spain, Sicily, and Sardinia which were by him possessed, in the form which
it lasts into this present; by which Tribunal are judged, not only these
which are accused of Mahometisme, or Iudaisme, but also of Heresy. The form
which was then brought in, and does yet last, is, that the King names an
Inquisitor General throughout all his Kingdoms to the Pope, and his Holiness
does confirm him; and for the rest, the Court of Rome is not admitted to
entermeddle any further. The Inquisitor named by the King, and confirmed by the
Pope names the particular Inquisitors in every place, which nevertheless
cannot enter into their charge without the Kings approbation: The King also
deputeth a Council or Senate upon this business, in that place where the
Court is, of which the supreme Inquisitor is President: and this Counsel has
supreme jurisdiction, consults of all the businesses, makes new Orders when it
sees any need; determines differences between particular Inquisitors,
punishes the defects of the Officers, hears the appeals, and does not put
them over to any oath: But the King hisroyal Council, would have the
Inquisition to be brought into the Kingdom of Naples, and subjected to that
of Spain, as also in Sicilio, Sardinia, and the Indies: and the Court of Rome
would have it depending from it, alleging therefore, besides the Pontifical
spiritual Authority, the Temporal superiority which the Pope has in that
Kingdom. In the year 1547. Don Frederico di Toledo being Viceroy there,
would overcome these difficulties and came to execution; which thing excited
such a commotion and sedition amongst the people, that it was almost grown to
a War between them and the presidiary Spaniards, and the Spaniards getting
the Victory, being Masters of the Forts, the tumult was quieted, and the
principals were punished, some with death, and some with exile: Yet he left off
his enterprise of bringing in the Inquisition, not so much for fear of a new
tumult, as through the effectual intercession of the Pope and Cardinals; the
thought of bringing to pass this their intent, remaining still in Spain, and
in Rome a resolution to oppose it; so that to this day there is no Inquisition
in all that Kingdom, and if that any case happens, it is dispatched by the
Bishop, or else it is delegated from Rome to some other Prelate, who
notwithstanding does nothing unless he have first leave from the Viceroy. In
the Low Countries, since the springing up of the Lutheran Sect, the Heretics
were punished by the secular Magistrates, without any other Office of
Inquisition; sometimes with death, sometimes with banishment, which Magistrates
relenting from their rigor by reason of the multitude of Heretics, in the
year 1550. the Emperor Charles the Fifth resolved to bring in the Inquisition
after the Spanish manner, and thereupon published a Decree; but being
advertised by Mary Queen of Hungary his Sister, and Governesse of those
States, that all the foreign Merchants would be gone, and the Cities would
be without Traffic, he declared by another Edict, that the Inquisition should
have no power upon strangers; and for the Natives, he did much mitigate the
form of it, yet was it not put to execution according to the Emperors mind,
but only unperfectly: and the punishing of Heretics for the most part rested
in the Magistrate, and slackned continually more and more: Wherefore Philip
King of Spain tried in the year 1569 and the years following, again the
bringing in of the Spanish Inquisition after diverse ways, but could by no
means establish it by reason of diverse resistances, till that in the year
1567 it was by force of Arms established by the Duke of Alva, and being
brought in, immediately succeeded the Wars, and was still more and more
restrained, both in scope and Authority, until it was brought to nothing, in
which state it remains at this present.

The beginning of the Inquisition of Venice.
THe Renowned City of Venice by Gods Grace kept it self untouched from the
contagion of Heresy; at all times before the year 1232. which thing is
manifest by this, that at the promotion of Duke Giacemo Theophilo, in the year
1229. in which mention is made of the form of proceeding, and of the
punishments and chastisements of many sorts of offenders, Heresy is not named:
And in the year 1232. when the same Duke published the Statute, wherein is
ordained the punishment for many offenses, and especially of misdeeds, and
charming by Herbs, there is no mention made of Heresy, as certainly there
would have bin if the City at that time had felt any such plague. But after
that Pope Innocent the Fourth tried to deprive the Emperor Frederick the
Second, of the Empire, Kingdoms, and States which he possessed, and a great
part of Christendom being thereupon in Arms, and all Lombardic in debate with
the Marca Trivi^iana, and Romania, then divided into favorers of the Pope, and
of the Emperor; they were then infected with diverse perverse Opinions, and
retiring themselves to Venice, to live in security: the wisdom of this
Government in the year 1^49. found a remedy to guard the City, from being
infected with that contagion that the rest of Italy was; wherefore they
determined to choose honest discreet and Catholic men, to inquire against
Heretics; and that the Patriarch of Grado Bishop of Castello, and the other
Bishops of the Dogie of Venice, from Grado to Caverzere should judge of their
Opinions, and those that by any of the Bishops should be given out to be
Heretics, should be condemned to the fire by the Duke and Counselors, or the
Major part of them: which things are seen in the promotion of Duke Marino
Moresini in the year 1249. But for fear least the death of some Bishop should
interrupt the business, it was added in the Commission of Diacomo Contarine,
Duke, in the year 1275. that the same should be done to them which were given
in for Heretics, by the Episcopal Vicars, in case the Bishops were dead. This
institution was just the same as that which is contained in the Body of the
Civil Law, and was used in the Roman Empire: For first, the Cognizance of the
fact belonged to Lai Judges, deputed by the Commonalty to enquire against
Heretics, who once discovered, is to be Judged by the Bishops whether their
opinion did agree with the true Faith; which done, the Duke and Counselors
made up the sentence, not as mere executors, but as true Judges; which
plainly appears by those words, or by the Major part of them, which words
cannot be spoken of any but such as have decreeing voices.

Notwithstanding, the instant requests of Pope Innocent, Alexander, Urban, and
Clement, and seven other Popes their successors; the most renowned*
Commonwealth, could never be persuaded to receive the Office of Friars
Inquisitors, instituted by the Pope. The secular sufficed it, instituted by it
self, and brought forth good fruit for Gods Service.

They had before their eyes the frequent disorders which were bred, by reason
of this new Office, in those Cities where it was: because the Friars
Inquisitors often in their Sermons did excite the people, and marking them with
crosses, did work their revenges upon their enemies under the name of
Heretics, and also other innocent persons were under that name oppressed by
them, as desired their goods; one in Milan in the year 1242. the other in
Parma, in the year 1279. which had like to have been the ruin of those two
Cities; the formal order of this renowned Commonwealth is to hold with old
and approved things, and the disorders of other places did force it to keep
that Office, which by themselves was Instituted in the year 1249. as it is
said before.

But Nicholas the Fourth coming to be Pope, being of the order of your Minor
Friars, he to bring to pass the determinations of his predecessors, and to
advance the Friars of his own order, to whom he was greatly affected; did so
instantly entreat that it was resolved to receive the Office, but with such a
limitation, that it should not be able to breed any scandal; and therefore
order was taken, and having called together all the Councels of the
Commonwealth, it was determined that the Duke alone should have power, to give
aid to the Inquisitors, to exercise their Office; and that there should be
money deposited out of the common Treasure, with an over-seer who should lay
out the expenses for the Office, and should receive all the emoluments and
profits that should arise out of it.

This determination was signified to the Pope with a public mandate of the
said Counsel, and the Pope having seen and examined it, was content
therewith, and did exhort them to follow it. And of all this he framed a Bull
given at Rieti, the 28. of August, in the same year 1289. inserting in it the
foresaid determination of the greater Counsel, made the fourth of the same
month: And this is the beginning in Venice of the Office of th 'inquisition
mixed of secular and Ecclesiastical Persons, as it continues to this present.

Here it is necessary to stop, and consider that the Office of the
Inquisition within these Dominions, does not depend from the Court of Rome, but
properly belonging to the most renowned Commonwealth, undepending, set up, and
constituted by the same, and established by contract and agreement with the
Apostolic Sea; and therefore ought to be governed by their own Customs and
Ordinances, without being obliged to receive Orders from any other place,
whereof there be four most clear reasons.

The first because that although Innocent the Fourth, and other succeeding
Popes made Orders for the establishing of the Office of the Romish Inquisition
in every City, yet those orders had no place in this Commonwealth.

The second, because the Office of the Inquisition is not instituted by virtue
of any Popes Bull, but by the determination of the greater Counsel.

The third, because that Pope Nicholas did only give consent to that which was
determined by the Commonwealth.

The fourth, because that the charges, and the profits were the Commonalties,
and not the Church-mens; wherefore they, in as much as belonged to the Office,
did depend on the Secular Institutor. The expenses which were made were no
small matter; for (besides extraordinary ones for taking men, and the food of
Captives) the Inquisitor had for his stipend twelve Ducats of gold a Month,
which now would be above six and thirty Ducats.

And this truth, that the Office is Venetian, and not subject to any others,
appears by an accident which happened some twelve years after the first
institution of it, vid. in the year 1301. when Friar Antony, Inquisitor, made
a Monitory, unto Peter Gradenigro, Duke, that he should swear to observe the
Papal and Imperial Constitutions against Heretics. To whom the Duke answered
by a public writing, that he was not to take any other oath, since that in
his promotion to the place he had sworn to as much as was agreed with Nicholas
the fourth; neither was he to be tied to any other Apostolical or Imperial
Ordinances, because they were not conformable to that agreement, and the
Inquisitor withdrew himself from his attempt, and yielded. I do not find
when the three Inquisitors, which were to assist in the Prince his name, were
first preferred: But it is likely that they were deputed by him, and the
Counselors in the beginning, as, well because there being nothing to the
contrary remembered, it ought to be so supposed: as also because that before the
erecting of this office of the Inquisition, mixed of Secular and
Ecclesiastical; there was theoffice merely secular, to which Noble men were
raised to inquire against Heretics, as it has been above rehearsed; whence
it may be presumed that the election and name continued.

The Exposition of the first Chapter.
WHerefore holding this for firm truth, in the first Chapter it is said; that
as there be three Assistants to the Office of the Inquisition in Venice, so
ought the Rulers assist in the subjected Cities, which ought to be ruled
according to the Laws and customs of the City which commands, unless it be
in those particulars, which either by privilege, or the prince his grace, are
granted unto each City. And likewise the liberties and immunities of the
commanding City, are communicated unto the above named, as soon as they enter
into that subjection: and this is observed in all Kingdoms and States. And
only this legal disposition and custom is sufficient to make lawful the
assistance of the Rulers, throughout all the Dominion.

But besides the legal disposition, there is also a particular agreement made
with the Apostolical Sea in the year 1551. The occasion of which was, that
the most excellent Council of Ten, and those joined with them, having put the
Representants in mind of their duties, least through negligence some abuse
might be brought in, writ to all the governors that they should be present to
the forming of Processes in the Inquisition. The Court of Rome reputed it to be
a novelty, with prejudice of the Ecclesiastical authority; and Pope Julius the
third complained of it to the Ambassador, saying that it was against
Pontificiall decrees, and that he thereupon would make a Bull. The Ambassador
answered, that it was not a thing newly determined, but most ancient, and
renewed to preserve the jurisdiction, and not to assume unto themselves any
part of that which belonged to the Church, but rather to aid it. The Pope was
content with the answer, and added, if these Lords will be Coadjutors, may they
be blessed, but if they will be co-judges, we cannot endure it. And the Pope
reputing it to be a business which ought to be sounded to the bottom, and
not to be contented with words; especially seeing the great stir that was
amongst the Cardinals: wherefore he sent Achille Graffi, the Elect of
Montefiascone a purpose to Venice, to whom he gave a Commission the sixth of
August, 1551, with these words: We send you to make some agreement touching
the proceedings in causes of Heresy; it is held, that the Assistance of the
Secular power is necessary within that City and Dominion, we do not disprove
of it, so that it be without intruding themselves into the Cognizance of
sentence, and a little lower, we will be contented with any form pleasing to
that Commonwealth, so it be citra cognitionem and sententiam.

The express Nuntio being come to Venice, it was an easy matter to accord,
because that both the parties did mean the same thing; wherefore it was
immediately agreed in four Articles.

The first, that the Governors shall be present at the framing of Processes,
and to all that which the Inquisitors or their Deputies shall do.

The second, that the Inquisitors, their Deputies, and Governors, may have
liberty to call such Doctors as they shall think fitting, according to the
quality of the cases.

Thirdly, that any causes happening in Castles or Towns, shall be dispatched
in the principal City, by the same Orders.

The fourth, that the Governors shall once a week at least be with the
Inquisitors and Deputies to attend upon this business.

Conformablie to this agreement the 26. of September, Letters were sent to all
the Governors, and to Rome. The Pope having seen this agreement, approved of
it, and gave order to the Bishop of Ravello his ordinary Nuncio in Venice, that
he should write the same to all Inquisitors and Deputies of the State, warning
them also that in all Acts, Decrees, and Sentences which should be made in this
business, in the presence of Governors, the Notary thereunto deputed should
write this clause, vid. Cum assistentia and presentia Clarissimorum Dominorum.
N. N.

The first agreement treated of with Pope Nicholas, in the year 1289. and this
last one also, each by it self are sufficient to show, but both joined
together do plainlier show, that this authority cannot be taken away by any
Bull, or Decree made in any manner by any Pope whatsoever. He that grants a
gift, may upon occasion revoke it, but that which is covenanted and agreed
upon, is irrevocable; so that no Decree whatsoever made at Rome, ought to
stir it, as that which was made by Gregory the 14. in 1591. declaring that
Heresy being an offense purely Ecclesiastical, the Secular power ought not to
inter-meddle therein. And although some Popes did try to derrogate from that
agreement, as Pope Leo the tenth said to that purpose: Notwithstanding any
Customs confirmed by the Apostolic Sea, such derogation cannot comprehend
our case; for to confirm is one thing, and to covenant and agree is another.
And if it should say, notwithstanding the agreements made with the Apostolic
Sea, it were a Nullity; for it is a contradiction that a thing should be agreed
upon between two, and that it should be subject to the sentence of one alone.
It is certainly to be believed, that the Court will still try by all means to
exclude the Secular, and draw wholly under itself the Offices concerning
Heresy, which are in this State. But no act of any other can bring it in
question, or cause any prejudice: so that the prejudices do not come from this
side through negligence in the Execution. Wherein we may take example from
Spain; where the form of the Inquisition being subject to the King,
established by an agreement made in the year 1484. the Spaniards have refused
to have it altered by any Bull or Order made at Rome. It was not an act of
great honesty when they printed the Directory at Rome, in the year 1584. to
add unto it the aforesaid brief of Pope Leo the tenth, directed to all
Bishops and Inquisitors within this Dominion: wherein (upon some notable cases
which happened in Valcamonica) that Pope writ, that the Secular Magistrate
shall have nothing to do with the office of the Inquisition, and shall be
only tied to execute the sentence, without any other business; which brief
they ought not by any means have printed. First, because they had it not out
of an authentical place. Secondly, because at that time it was not put in
execution, nor peradventure seen, whereof a manifest token is, that the said
Brief being Dated the fifteenth of February, 1521. after the Roman manner,
some thirty, days after, vid. the twentieth, and four and twentieth of March
the most excellent Council of Ten (to resist the innumerable extortions done
by the Clergy) ordered, that notwithstanding the Sentences pronounced by the
Inquisition Office, the Bishop of Limine, with two Doctors deputed by the
Governors, the Processes should be new made, and carried to Brescia, and there
judged in the presence of the Governors: Whereunto the Nuntio also consented,
and so it was accomplished; which shows us plainly, that the said Briefs of
Leo the tenth, either is not true, or is not to be seen, or did not take
place, and therefore ought not to be printed, especially seeing that the
agreement made with Julius was since that time. But as the Court of Rome will
never desist from nourishing her pretense, so it shall be fitting to watch for
to resist, that negligence may not prejudice the business, never putting to a
treaty a thing already so firmly established: because the very putting of it to
a Treaty in the year 1551. if the success had not been good as it was, would
have been a great prejudice to the agreement made in 1289. But that besides
the lawfulness and righteousness of this sentence, it is also necessary with
skill to preserve it; both private and public respects do manifestly show:
For the power which God gives the Prince, is not a gift given for his use
alone, which he may let fall to decay without sin, but though it comes
immediately from God, yet is it given for the peoples benefit, so that if it be
diminished, it remains not so sufficient for the good and entire government,
and the subject receives wrong, and the Divine Majesty is offended.

Although the Prince is not bound to his Subject to govern him, yet to God he
is, and the protection which he has of him, though toward the subject it be
a favor, yet toward God it is a duty, which cannot be performed, without
preserving whole, and not suffering to be abated the public Authority. The
Office of the Inquisition as it is more holy and needful than others; so (if
it be not well handled but abused) it, is more burthenous and hurtful: Where
it is in the hands of just and prudent Churchmen, they should be encouraged to
continue so, by looking to them and observing of them, for the opportunity of
having power to work after ones own fancy may cause a Saint to over-runne his
course: But where the administerer has all his requisite qualities, it is
necessary to withstand his excesses. In times past it has been seen that
Subjects have been burdened with excessive rigours, by those who under a show
of zeal, have sought to make way for their ambition, or to get unto themselves
that which belonged to others. Therefore it is needful to mark, that avarice
or ambition should hurt no particular, but a good Father, and of a good
conscience should seek a remedy for it: the indiscreet zeal which she causes
to be in persons that are not conversant in worldly affairs, has need of
such a bridle. In public affairs also, the effects of ambition avarice or
indiscretion are no less dangerous, for when a Potentate has not the favor
of him that commands in Ecclesiastical causes, Religion is made a pretext to
oppress him. In the year 1322. Pope John the 22. published a severe monitory
against Matthew, Vicount, Lord of Milan, condemning him of Heresy, and under
this pretense commanding the most famous Commonwealth, that it should hold no
commerce with him, nor with his subjects, although he had no other cause
against the Vicount, but that he took part with Lewis of Bavaria, Emperor,
the Popes enemy: And the same year, the most Reverend Guido, Rangoni Bishop of
Ferrara, and Friar Buono Inquisitor, did admonish the most renowned
Commonwealth: that there should be no commerce held with Rinaldo and Obizo de
Este, or their adherents and subjects, because they had condemned them for
Heretics: neither was there any other cause but that they had recovered
Ferrara, which was possessed by the Popes. In the year 1355. Malatesta, and
Galeotto Maltesti, holding the City of Rimini, Pope Innocent the sixth,
commanded Venice, that no commerce should be held with them, or with their
adherents, because he suspected them to be Heretics. The same Pope the same
year, used the same manner with the most famous Commonwealth, against
Francisco Ordelafo, by reason of the Dominion of Forli, and Gulielmo Manfredi,
because of Faenza, caused also the Crociata to be preached against them. Yet
all these great stirs and condemnations of Heresy vanished into smoke, so
soon as the accused were contented to acknowledge those Lands held in
disputation from the Pope; A clear and undoubted document to show us, that the
imputation of Heresy was but only to oppress them, and perforce bring them
to yield to the fore designed humane changes.

But to come to Modern things, In the discords which Paul the Fourth had with
King Philip the Second of Spain, which were of temporal businesses: That Pope
as well in consistory, as treating with Ambassadors of Princes, always was
wont to say, and reply that the King, and the Emperor his Father were
Heretics. It was also seen in these late occasions, that those Books which
were writ in favor of the most renowned Commonwealths cause, were forbidden
by the Romish Inquisition, and others ofth 'Ecclesiasticall State, under the
color of Heresy, although the things treated of were merely temporal, and
approved by all Christian Kingdoms: And Cardinal Bellarmin having some years
since set forth a book, wherein he subjects Princes to the Pope in temporal
affairs; he dares therein handle as Heretics, all those who say that the
Prince in temporal Causes, has no other superior but God only; although that
four of the five parts of Catholics do believe it: Which things cause us to
believe, that since some men's malice do make use of this Office for humane
ends, which are not very honest; it is needful to look how it is used, and
not suffer them to take such footing, whereby they may abuse it: Because then
upon occasion, when one would take order therein, it is found to be too late.

In Milan where the Inquisition has great Authority, there happened about
1580, a dangerous case. Cardinal Boromeo (who afterward was a Saint) visiting
of some places of the Diocese of Milan, and subject to the Suissers, went
ordering many things, which bred some suspicions in those States; wherefore
they sent an Ambassador to Milan, to require the Governor to cause the
Cardinal to come back from those places, least some alteration should happen.
The Ambassador went to Milan and alighted at a Merchants house, that he might
the more commodiously go and do his Embassage. The Inquisitor heard of it,
and immediately went with his Officers and carried him bound to Prison to his
covent. The Merchant reported what had happened to the Governor, who presently
caused the Ambassador to be set at liberty, honored him, and heard him. The
Swissers who had no sooner notice of imprisonment then of his delivery, said
openly, that if the news of his imprisonment had come alone without that of
his deliverance, they would have imprisoned the Cardinal, to whom the
Governor sent word of what was done; The Cardinal yielding to necessity went
away, and the new inventions were revoked.

These dangers show that not only malice may cause inconveniences, but
impudency also, and undiscreet zeal: Therefore it behooves to watch carefully,
that the power of meeting at all actions of that Office be not diminished,
which God by his Providence has hitherto preserved, and by which means all
public dangers and oppressions of the Subjects may be withstood.

It being then plainly shown that the Office of the Inquisition is not
ancient in Holy Church, and that within this Dominion it was instituted in the
same form as it is now used by the Commonwealth it self, as an Office
properly belonging to it; and established by agreement with the Apostolic
Sea: and the reasons being unfolded which did move to this deliberation, and
the necessity which binds to keep inviolated the form always established,
With these considerations the grounds of the first Chapter are sufficiently
unfolded and proved.

The second and third Chapters need not be any better declared or proved.

The Exposition of the fourth Chapter.
THe fourth Chapter, wherein is set down the charge of the Assistance, which
ought to be in four cases, requires some considerations.

The first case, to execute the just determination of the Judges, cannot be
called in question. The second and third which are to hinder their resolution
of usurping temporal Authority, either with a headstrong, or a manifest and
unjust oppression, and in doubtful cases to make them surcease and advise, are
no less needful then the first: And for proof thereof, we need not
allege any other Text, than that of the Popes of Rome themselves. Clement the
Fifth in his General Counsel of Vienna (and it is Registered in the body of
the Canon Law De Haereticis. Cap. 1.) having heard complaints of many
Inquisitors, because they extended the Office of their power beyond their
assigned bounds, which proved to the wrong of the faithful, (whereby it was
needful for the glory of God, and right carriage of the business, to make
diverse provisoes) gave diverse rules to withstand the disorders which were
brought in. Clement the sixth also, gave a Commission to Bernard Cardinal of
St. Marco, his Legate in the Churches Territories, to enquire of the excesses of
the Inquisitors, and to do Justice to them who should complain of them: Which
teaches us plainly, that in all times there are faults committed, which have
need of remedy, unless they be at first withstood.

But grant that no Inquisitor should exceed the bounds of his power, yet that
is not so well ordered, but that it is needful to guide it with a great deal
of wisdom. To make this appear it shall suffice to understand what was
Printed, in the Directorie in Rome, in the year 1584. which is orderly
Translated out of the Latin. If the Inquisitors would use all the Command they
have within their power, they might easily raise seditions every where: And
these words are written purposely to admonish Inquisitors; that although a
thing shall seem just unto them, yet when it is dangerous they ought to take
advice from Rome. But here we must not conclude so, because Rome being far,
and busied in her own affairs, cannot well judge of others dangers. But these
confessions of the Court of Rome, show it to be necessary for all that will
keep their Dominions in peace, and protect their Subjects, to have a diligent
regard, and cunningly moderate that power, which in it self is confessed to be
exorbitant, and many times chances to be exceeded and abused.

In the year 1518. there were a great number of Enchanters discovered in
Valcamonica, and by the little care of the Governors of Brescia, the judging of
them was left to the censure of Churchmen. Thence grew such exorbitant
extortions, and complaints of the oppressed, that the most excellent Counsel
of Ten was forced to disanull all that which they had done, and send for all
the Bishops Vicars, and Inquisitors to Venice, and cause all those businesses
to be reviewed by the other Judges, with the Assistance of the Governors: yet
for all that was that people hardly pacified from moving of Sedition.

The extreme seditions raised in Rome after the death of Paul the 4 are not yet
out of memory, wherein the Prisons of the Inquisition were by the people
broken, and the building with all the writings burned. And likewise the danger
the City of Mantua was in, the year 1568. which thing it is impossible to
hinder, if the Magistrate, whose charge it is to look to the repose of the
City, do not stop excessive and headlong determinations. And if upon any
doubtful, or dangerous business he causes a stay, it cannot be thought a
prejudice to the Ecclesiastical, since by surceasing they may the better
deliberate, and that hinders not the business from being achieved with
greater maturity. Whereas if a dangerous case should be suffered to run on,
and the event should prove evil, either it could not be remedied, or not
wholly, The Prince advertised thereof, may either by his own authority, or by
sending to the Pope, pass over some things with quietness, which without his
knowledge would have but a bad issue.

That fourth part of the Chapter. vid. that the Rectors and assistants shall
with dexterity egg on the Inquisitors to execute their office, if they were
negligent therein, is most proper to the Secular Magistrate. First, by St.
Augustines reason who says, that it belongs to their office to punish
offenses which are immediately against the Divine Majesty, as blasphemies,
Heresies, and Perjuries, more than those who offend men. And besides that,
because Heresy does not only offend God, but bring notable disturbances to
the public peace, the care of which resting upon the Magistrate, who is
chief in the City, he cannot let it run in danger of being infected, but he
must fail in his duty. The Inquisitors ought to look to keep the people
clean from Heresies, for Gods service only. The Magistrate both for Gods
service, and for the good of the public government; and therefore as one, on
whom the care most lies, he also ought most to watch, and to incite others:
Neither can any one oppose this, by saying that Secular men, though they be
Magistrates, yea, and Princes also are the Children, and Ecclesiastical persons
are the Fathers, and that it is not fitting that the Child should presume to
control and admonish the Father, for the equivocation and cavil is
manifestly seen in it. In a City there is a Son, who is a chief Magistrate,
he in household and Domesticke businesses shall be subject to his Father, but
in public and Civil businesses he shall be superior. Ecclesiastical
Persons are Fathers in Christ, so that a Magistrate ought to be subject unto
them in household things, which belong to the House of God, and from them to
receive the Doctrine of Christ, and the Divine Sacraments, which are household
things, in which the Son is subject to the spiritual Father. But in public
businesses, as punishing of offenses, and peaceable civil living, Spiritual
Fathers are subject to the Son who has the charge of it, as he is a public
Magistrate. And if an Ecclesiastical man has any power or jurisdiction to
punish any offense, he has it from none but the Prince, to whom only God has
given it.

I have said before, that in a Judgment there are three parts, the Cognizance
of the reason, vid. which doings are Heretical, and this is purely
Ecclesiastical; the Cognizance of the Fact, vid. what persons are guilty, and
the sentence: these two last are temporal, and in former times under the
Roman Empire, exercised by the Secular power, and now lost. There are also
left to Ecclesiastical persons by the grant of Princes, the most renowned
Commonwealth, which did exercise that power from the year 1249. until 1289.
that year granted it to the Inquisition office, managed by Ecclesiastical
persons, but with Secular assistance: If Ecclesiastical persons should fail
in their duties, the power would return to him who gave it, without depriving
himself of it. Wherefore it is no wonder if the Secular Person ought to be an
over-seer of him that exercises a charge which he has given him, in
admonishing and egging him on as far as it shall be decent for them both.

The Exposition of the fifth Chapter.
THe fifth Chapter, that the Governors and Assistants shall not swear
faithfulness, nor secrecy to the Inquisitor, is highly to be considered of,
since that by such an oath they should cease from being representants of the
Prince his person, and become the Inquisitors Ministers.

It is clear, that whosoever swears faithfulness, or secrecy, especially
without exception, is bound to perform it to him that he has sworn it, not
regarding any other man's interests; so that the Representant could not oppose
himself against any act of the Inquisition, although it were contrary to the
Princes respects, nor give him notice of things happening in that office,
without breaking his Oath. But the public representant, even when things are
treated of that do belong to the Inquisition Office, must not aim at any
respects or commands, but only the Princes: wherefore he cannot swear
faithfulness or secrecy to others.

Where the Inquisitions Tribunal is merely Ecclesiastical, Secular men do
come in as Counselors, or sometimes Fiscals, or Notaries, or other Officers,
which do swear to the Inquisitor. But that is because those Secular men which
are so present, are dependants, and subject to the Ecclesiastical. Now in this
state the Tribunal is mixed, not for Secular Counselors, or other Officers, but
only for the Representants public assisters, who depend not from the
Ecclesiastical, but are superintendents in the Princes stead.

The Ecclesiasticals for these many hundred years, have no other aim, but to
usurp the temporal jurisdiction, and have purchased a great deal of it with
great disturbance of sundry governments, and at this present they aim at it
more than ever, and in particular, for the Inquisition in this State and
Commonwealth, they do bend themselves with all their cunning to draw it to
be wholly Ecclesiastical, which they would at last bring to pass, if they
could bring in this Oath, making thereby the Representant their Officer. And
this being once brought to pass, the seruples of the one, and the small
understanding of the other, the Offices which would be done by means of the
Confessors, would work so, that Romes and the Inquisitions ends, would be
preferred to the public ends, or at least would raise such powerful doubts
in the mind, that they would never let any thing be well done: which voydeth
also an answer that seems might be given, vid. That the Oath might be
received, reserving to the Prince his ends. Answer, which takes not away the
dangers: For the aforesaid things would so trouble the minds of men, that they
would never give way to the sound understanding of it. But to color their
attempt, the Inquisitors say two things: One, that Frederick the second,
commanded all Consuls and Governors of Cities to swear The other that the
King of Spain swears. But Frederick did not command that they should swear
to the Inquisitors, for (as we have showed before) the Office of the
Inquisition was not then begun, but that they should swear in public to him,
to be careful in rooting out of Heresies, which had taken root. The Consuls
and Governors did not then go into the Office of the Inquisition, with
Ecclesiastical Persons, but they alone with the Imperial Authority did
condemn Heretics, and swore to the Emperor to do it faithfully: and
besides, this form lasted but a little while, and John Andrew, a famous
Canonist, who flourished in the year 1300. witnesses, that in his time that
Oath was already grown out of custom. Philip the second King of Spain,
brought in the custom of taking a public Oath, (not to the Inquisitors but
to God) that he would never suffer Heretics to live at freedom within his
Dominions, which is no Oath of faithfulness and secrecy to the Office (which
depends on the King, and is commanded by him) but a promise to God, and a
taking away all hope from the Subjects of obtaining from him any liberty of
Conscience. In the same manner the ancient Dukes of the Venetian Commonwealth
at their promotion, did swear to punish Heretics; but it was not an Oath to
the Inquisitor, but to God and the Commonwealth. The equivocation consists in
this, that it is one thing to swear absolutely, and another to swear to such
a one, and this is that which signifies subjection to him that gives the
Oath. The public representant can not swear to any but to the Prince, as he
cannot be subject to any one else. For which reasons it shall always be
necessary, to have a regard to this fifth Chapter, not as a summary point, but
a point of great importance.

The Exposition of the sixth Chapter.
TO give the Prince notice of what happens daily in matters of Heresy, as it
is contained in the sixth Chapter; is a thing of Divine Service, and necessary
to a good Government, where the Inquisition is in the hands of Ecclesiastical
Persons only, they do not suffer the Prince to know any thing that is done in
that Office. In this State where the Judgment is mixed, as their aim is that
the Assistant (since they cannot exclude him) should become their Officer, so
they use their best endeavors to make him keep secret what is treated off,
making it a charge of Conscience if any thing be revealed without the
Inquisitors leave: With this maxim, that causes touching Faith, must remain
with the Judges of the Faith.

Amongst other perverse Opinions which this our unhappy Age is full of, this is
also preached, that the care of Religion does not belong to the Prince, which
Opinion is colored with two pretenses; the one that since it is a spiritual
and Divine thing, it belongs not to Temporal Authority: the other because
the Prince occupied in greater businesses, cannot attend these affairs. And
certainly it is a thing to be admired, how the world is changed: In other
times holy Bishops did not preach, nor recommend any thing more to Princes,
than the care of Religion; they warned them of nothing, nor modestly rebuke
them for any thing, more than for the carelessness in it, and now nothing is
more preached too or persuaded. The Prince then, that to him belongs not the
charge of Divine things, though contrariwise the Holy Scripture be full of
places where Religion is recommended to the protection of Princes, by the
Divine Majesty; which also promises peace, and prosperity to those States
where Piety is favored, and desolation and destruction threatened to those
States, where Divine things are held as alien. Examples thereof do abound, but
because this Treaty will not suffer a long rehearsal of them, I will only
say, that David being entered into a Kingdom out of order both internally, and
externally, and being very busy both in Wars and in framing a politic
Government; nevertheless did set his chief care on matters of religion.
Solomon entering into a quiet and exceeding well ordered Kingdom, regarded also
Religion, more than any other part of Government: The Princes most applauded in
former Ages, as Constantine, Theodosius, Charlemaine, St. Lewis, etc. The
chiefest praise they had was, to have made it their chief travail to protect
and rule the affairs of the Church. It is a great deceit to set forth this
part as a thing of less moment, and to be left out for to look to other
things: Since the neglect of this to provoake the Divine Wrath, daily
experience in these days shows us, that a State cannot stand untroubled,
where change of Religion comes: And these which counsel Princes to not
meddle with Church businesses, say nevertheless upon other occasions, that
true Religion is the foundation of States. It were a great absurdity holding
this to be true, as, it is most true, to leave the total care of it to others;
under pretense that they are spiritual, where Temporal Authority will not
reach; or that a Prince has any greater employment than this. It is manifest,
that as the Prince is not a Praetor, nor a Prefect* nor a Proveditore; So
likewise he is no Priest, nor no Inquisitor: But it is also certain, that he
is to over-see with keeping in awe, and causing to do their duties both the
one and the other. And here lies the deceit, that the particular care of
Religion, is proper to the Officers of the Church, as the Government of
Temporal things is proper to the Magistrate, and the Prince himself ought to
do neither the one nor the other; but is to direct all, and to take heed that
none do fail in his Office, and to amend the defects of Officers: this being
the Prince his charge as well in matters of Religion, as in any other part of
the Government. And as in other matters for to manage well that part which is
proper unto him, he is to be informed of all occurrences: So ought he
particularly to be advertised of all that happens in matter of Religion. The
Inquisitors of Italy do particularly send word to Rome by every Post, what is
done within their Office; much more ought an account be given to the Prince,
whom it more concerns to know it. It were very expedient, that all things
which are treated off within the State, should remain therein; as it is
observed in Spain, which give account to the King only; and send advice no
where else. But because that were a hard thing to obtain, let it for this time
suffice, that it be known to the Prince, when it is known to others, who are
not so much interested therein.

The Exposition of the seventh Chapter.
THe seventh Chapter was ordered by the most excellent Senate, because that the
Ambassador of Rome might do that good Office, as that the charge of
Inquisitors might be given to the Natives of this Dominion, because they are
best instructed in the occurrences of the Customs, and conditions of the
Country; and bear a greater affection to it whence it is presumed, that with
greater Judgment and love, they will employ themselves in that Office, which
above all others requires Charity and discretion. One cannot without wonder
consider, how that all the Inquisitors within this Dominion at this present are
strangers, and the Natives are not employed neither in this State, nor in other
States: yet is not this Country so barren but that it brings forth men of
understanding, as well as any other part of Italy: What should be the reason
then, that these should be reputed all unable both for this Dominion, and for
all others if one will seek for examples beyond the Hills? there is no
Inquisition there, but only in Spain, where they are all Spaniards. In the
State of Milan the Natives are not excluded, and others, to whom the Office is
given, are not less depending from that Prince then the Milanenses themselves.

In Tuscan, Pius the fourth attempted to give the Office of the Inquisition to
the Friars of St. Dominicke, and Cosmo the great Duke would not consent,
because those of that Order took part with the enemies of the house of
Medices, when they were driven out of Florence, in the year 1494. which
reasons and examples show, that there ought account to be made in Rome, of
those recommendations which shall be made of the Fathers, that are subjects to
this State; and that their Piety toward their Prince and Religion, the
Christian life of the people, and the devotion of the Fathers themselves
toward their Natural Prince and Country, may not be prejudicial to them.

The Exposition of the eight Chapter.
THe eight Chapter that none shall be admitted to execute the charge of
Inquisitor, but with the Prince his Letters is very convenient. The same
directory commands, that first of all the Inquisitor should present himself
before him, and should receive Letters directed to the public representants
in that place where he is ordered to execute that charge; and reason allows
that no manner of jurisdiction be exercised without public knowledge; yea, at
other times Popes did send Inquisitors with Apostolic Letters directed to the
Prince, wherein they entreated him to favor and protect them, and now they do
the like at the institution of every new Bishop. Now the Congregation of Rome
deputes Inquisitors with Patents and instructions, as if they were sent into
some of their own jurisdictions, and this cannot be helped, but it is
necessary to keep a foot the presenting of the Patents, it being a due
acknowledgement of the Prince his Superiority, and because it will also serve
for two things. The first that one may mark whether the Patents be made in the
wonted form, or if there be any new clause added to it, because that in case
then were any prejudicial novelty, it might be withstood with fitting means:
The other is, that if there were any request made, that there should be an
Inquisitor who were a Native, and trusty, and that just request should not be
granted, they might then by delaying the Patent, reply, and triplicate the same
request with greater instance. And although some accident might happen through
which the public wisdom should finally Judge it fitting to assent unto the
will of Rome, and receive the stranger; it might work at least so much as that
the Court of Rome, for the time to come, would proceed with greater respect,
and the same foreign Fathers, would refuse to accept the charge, seeing the
difficulties which had happened to the others.

The Exposition of the ninth Chapter.
THe ninth Chapter that the assistants should assist to the Judgment, although
the guilty were Ecclesiastical, is a legal position and necessary to be
observed. It is not credible that the Secular assistance in that Office was
brought in, in regard of the Persons of the questioned, this in times past has
deceived many who were persuaded the Person of the questioned appoints the
place of Judgment, misunderstanding that Maxim, Actor sequitur forum rei,
which is meant of private interest, where trial is to be between two
parties, which their Persons be not both subject to one Judge, the judgment
place shall be before him to whom the Defendant is subject: But where there is
no private interest but a public respect, the Person is not looked after, but
the cause: and though the Person be Secular, yet if the Cause be
Ecclesiastical, the Ecclesiastical Judge shall judge it: So in these days,
Matrimonial Causes are esteemed to be Ecclesiastical, and therefore though
the Person be Secular, yet are the Causes Judged by the Bishops. So Causes
that are purely Secular, as the administration of public Offices, Causes of
plenty, of health; offenses which trouble the public rest, do belong unto
the Secular power, although the Persons be Ecclesiastical. If the offense be
mixed, there is a mixed Magistrate instituted, to whom without attending the
quality of the Person, belongs to judge all matters of that kind. And because
that Heresy does corrupt true Christian Doctrine, it is an Ecclesiastical
offense; and because it disturbeth the public rest, it is Secular: therefore
there is a mixed Judgment Seat appointed, with an Ecclesiastical judge, and a
Secular Assistant: And in the practice of it, there is no repect had of the
questioned Person, for then the Ecclesiastical should Judge the Priests and
the Friars, and the Magistrate should Judge Secular men: But the Heresy of the
Secular man is as much against the Catholic Doctrine, as that of a Clarke;
and a Heretic Priest, or Friar troubles the public Government as much, or
peradventure more than a Secular one. And as the Secular office appointed
concerning Corporal health; and if it find an Ecclesiastical person bringing
in of infected goods, he does not put over the judgeme^t tothe Ecclesiastical
judge, but burns the goods, and packeth away the suspected person, because
the public temporal good is in uestion: so the mixed office of the Inquisition
does not put over an Eclesiasticall Person, but judges it, because that the
public good, both spiritual and temporal is treated of. And this is further
confirmed because, that though offenses committed by Regular Friars are
punished by their own superiors, yet they cannot entermeddle in cases of
Heresy, but go to the Inquisition without regarding that the person is a
regular. It is yet made more manifest in that, that cases of Heresy, being
more against Ecclesiastical Persons, than Secular ones, in the agreements made
with the Apostolical Sea, especially in the year 1551. they of Rome would
have made that exception, which being not made, shows that they have not held
the general Rule, vid. that the Secular should meet in all cases. This ninth
Chapter, besides that the justice of it requires the keeping of it, ought also
for diverse other respects with all diligence be put in execution. First,
because we have showed above, how necessary it is to a good government, to have
the Prince know of all occurences that happen in such matters, for the great
importance of maintaining Religion. But if the Assistant should not meet at
judgments against Ecclesiastical Persons (and these are the most important,
most dangerous, and most frequent) then the state of Religion within his
Dominion should not be known, which would be most absurd. Secondly, seldom
happens a case of Heresy in an Ecclesiastical person, but a Secular is a
confederate in it, in which case one would not know what to do; for to divide
the Contents of the cause it is impossible, to leave a Secular person to a
judgment merely Ecclesiastical is more unfitting. There remains nothing
then but to have it judged before the ordinary mixed Tribunal: and
questionless if this way were once given, under diverse colors of annexed,
connexed, dependent, and emergent, the Secular would be altogether excluded.
Therefore according to reason, the most wise determination of the Senate named
in this Chapter, ought to be observed.

For proof of the second part, vid. that the Assistants shall be present at
the framing of Processes, though the Denunciations be given in other places, we
must suppose the style of that office to be approved by continual custom, and
also by reason. For if a person be denounced at the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, who has his dwelling in another place, and that he be not
personally under that jurisdiction, the Inquisior receives the Denuntiation,
examines the Witnesses, and frames the Process, as far as may be done in
that place, and so framed, he sends it to the Inquisitor of the place, where
the delinquent lives, that the cause may be prosecuted, and he dispatched.

It happened in the Year 1610. that Father Avaroldo, a Capuchine was denounced
at Rome for a certain opinion concerning Antichrist, and from that Inquisition
was the Process sent to Brescia, where the Father was. The Inquisition of
Brescia proceeded in the cause without the Assistance, and answered the
Governors (who hearing the event did find themselves agrieved with it) that
the Governors ought not to assist, but only in causes which were begun at the
proper Tribunal, but not when the Denunciation was given at Rome. If this were
admitted, it would not only be against reason, and the lawful custom, but it
would also be a secret to take away quite, and with ease the Assistance. The
Inquisitors to take away that bond of having Assistants, to increase their own
authority, and to do the better service to the Court of Rome, would work with
the Denouncers, under fair and appearing colors, that the Denuntiation should
not be given into that office, but at Rome, which would be easy, being content
to do it either by Letter, or Petition; and in this manner, in all causes the
Secular should be excluded. But the legal definition is, that as every office
or Inquisition receives Denuntiations against the absent, according to their
own Rites, Forms, and Customs, so the proper office frames the Process, and
gives sentence according to his. It was needful to take notice of this
particular, for fear least any deceived with shows, should be carried away to
a public prejudice, it being to be held for an infallible rule, that the
public representant must assist to every act done in that office without any
exception.

The Exposition of the tenth Chapter.
THe tenth Chapter, that the Representants shall assist at all the Acts of the
Process, is necessary for the taking away of diverse abuses which are brought
in, for in some places all the informative Process was made without any
assistance; in others the whole defensive; and in others, after the
denuntiation received, by the Inquisitor alone, and the Governors were called
to the examination of witnesses: All which ways were prejudicial, since
things once done are alleged by example, and so they go on from the first to
the second, and in process of time a custom is established, which afterward
has the force of Law: But that which is of no less moment is, that it being
the Assistants charge to give the Prince notice of all occurrences, and to
protect the Subject, if he were oppressed by the Ecclesiastical, he can do
neither the one nor the other, without he know the whole Process. The least
particular alters the whole cause, neither can a business be explained or
understood, unless all the circumstances be known.

The Exposition of the eleventh Chapter.
IN the eleventh Chapter is said, that for the aforesaid Reasons, they ought
not to leave out any act, under pretense of slightness, for there is nothing,
be it never so small, that may not be the cause either of absolving or
condemning. And it is added, that they must not be content, although the
Inquisitor ask him leave, because that though the principal, who ought to be
present at an act, may give way that it may be made without his presence. Yet
he that is to be present in another man's stead cannot do so. It cannot be
denied but that it would be a great deal more ease for Rulers (especially
being occupied in many businesses which the government of a City brings with
it) to be present at the Inquisition, or absent when they would: but no
jurisdiction is maintained without labor. The Court of Rome in these affairs,
because the Inquisition business should not be carelessely handled by reason
of extraordinary employments, has given it to persons that have nothing else
to do, and for their lowness hold it as a great honor to exercise the place.
The Prince whom it most concerns to have matters of Religion well governed,
thought more decent to employ eminent Persons therein, and such as he may
trust, and therefore he expects care out of the faithfulness of his
Representants, though they be employed in other affairs.

The Exposition of the twelfth Chapter.
THe twelfth Chapter unfolds the manner and remedy that must be used, in case
an act were made against the due form, and that is by setting businesses
again into their first estate, with such pleasing remedies as shall be
requisite.

The Exposition of the thirteenth Chapter.
THe thirteenth Chapter, which treates of Informative Processes, which are to
be sent into other places, is no less to be considered of, and requires an
exquisite diligence for Inquisitors, sometimes at the request, and for the
interest of their superiors, make some secret Processes against the reputation
of good men, examining such as they are confident of, who for the most part are
evil persons, giving them out for sincere ones, and men without exception, and
upon them Processes are likewise in other places secret sentences framed, to
take away the reputation of them that are questioned, and sometimes to do them
further wrong. In the year 1590. by reason that some subjects of St. Mark
went into France to the war against the League Friar Albert da Lugo,
Inquisitor of Verona, framed such a Process against the most renowned
Commonwealth it self, as if it favored Heretics, examining persons of very
ill quality, and known to him to be such, yet in the end of the Process he
much commended them, to make their credits good. The good Father could not send
it whither he intended, but was discovered, and punished as the qualities of
the times would suffer, though not so much as he deserved. In these last
troubles, in the year 1606. there were many framed against Senators, and
public Representants, and other persons, which truly is a great abuse in
that office, which should never swerve from sincerity. And the greater the
abuse is, the more ought the Representants to be wary, and not suffer any
Process to be made, neither at the request nor command of any in their
absence: and when they discover any attempt, to show themselves touched by it
in such sort, as it may be a bar to any such actions, and also give good
heed to all the Inquisitors proceedings, to discover and hinder them.

The Exposition of the foureteenth Chapter.
THe foureteenth Chapter to labor that in every Process should be noted the
Assistance, has no difficulty in it, because, as it is said before, the Bishop
of Ravello the Apostolical Nuntio, in the year 1551. did write it to all the
offices of Inquisition in the State.

The Exposition of the fifteenth Chapter.
THe fifteenth Chapter, that in the Process there shall be no Decrees inserted
by any foreign authority ought to be exquisitely observed: For most part of
the Inquisitions out of this State are reduced to such a form of proceeding,
that the Inquisitors do every foot write to Rome, and from thence receive
orders what they shall do, so that at last it is as good as if the Process
were framed at Rome; and so they free themselves of the bond imposed upon them
by the Canon Law to consult of their affairs. In this State they have not yet
attempted this frequent and subtle abuse, but only in some particular case, to
favor, or disfavour some one. It may be thought they write to Rome for
Justice, or for some good intent, whence they receive orders of what they will
have done; and the Inquisitors to curry favor with a ready obedience, put it
to execution: and they themselves will sometimes, to avoyde some contradictions
of the Bishops Vicar, or some Counselors, procure Letters from Rome, and by
that means overcome the oppositions. This produces two evil effects, the one
that it takes away the authority of that Tribunal, making it subject to him to
whom by reason it ought not to be. The other, that he who is questioned is at
more trouble, and more cost in defending himself. The most excellent Senate
has always endeavored that the authority of their Inquisition office should
not be diminished, being as requisite for a good government as any other
public ordinance. In Rome the Inquisition was not above that of other places,
but applied it self only to that City, as others did in their Cities. The
Pope indeed was superintendent and overseer of them all, maintaining
nevertheless the agreements, immunities, and lawful customs of every one,
and so it continued until Paul the third, who did institute a Congregation of
Cardinals in Rome, giving them the Title of Inquisitors General, who
nevertheless do not command the Inquisition of Spain, which by agreement was
first instituted: So likewise they ought not to take away the authority of this
States Inquisition: also instituted by agreement some hundred years since.
Which thing I have considered for to conclude, that it is not reasonable that
Inquisition should take that which belongs unto this. And in effect if the
Romish Inquisition should meddle with those causes which are handled within
this state, as it does in other places, it would be as much as to reduce them
all to Rome. And to speak in plain and restrained terms, as by Law every
act which the Inquisitors make, without the Assistance, are void, so those Acts
cannot be of force which are made out of the State, being made without the
presence of the Assistants.

And if those Cardinals should be sent by the Pope as Inquisitors into this
State, they would not be suffered to do any thing without the Magistrates
presence, and that which were so done, would be void, much less should they
have leave to do it at Rome. That hinders not, but if that Congregation, as
consisting of principal Cardinals, should write any thing: But that those
Letters should be received by the Inquisitors with all due reverence, executing
also that which they desire, so there were not some powerful reason to the
contrary, but always it should be done observing the Style of the Office,
that is, framing the Decree in the name of the proper Judges with the
Assistance, not mentioning in the Process that it was done by order from else
where. And if that particular Writing from Rome were not agreeeable to the
customs of the Country, and the particular circumstances which ought to be
looked upon, and should seem so to the Judges, and other Consulters, it will
not be incongruous to reply to Rome. The Assistants notwithstanding ought not
to meddle with this, neither are they to know whether any Order come or no from
Rome, whether that which is required from Rome, be put, or not put in
execution, but only to assist to what the Inquisitors do, not using any other
name but that of their own office.

The Exposition of the sixteenth Chapter.
THis sixteenth Chapter, in that part which touches the not sending Prisoners
out of the State, is clearer than the light; since Prisoners are transmitted
out of one place into another either for Execution, when both places are within
one Prince his Dominions, or from Prince to Prince by agreement between them,
or for gratification; and in all these cases the Transmission is made only,
because offenders should be punished in the place where the offense is
committed. But in case of Heresy, the Doctors say that the punishment cannot
with reason be required in any particular place, as well because the Heretic
sins against God who is every where, and also because that wheresoever he
goes holding his perverseness, in all those places he sins; wherefore in
what place so ever he is punished, he shall be said to be punished in the
place where he offended. On this reason is grounded the common opinion, that
those who are guilty of Heresy, are not to be transmitted: and indeed, the
custom is every where to punish Heretics where they are restrained, and not
to send them from one Inquisitor to another. Only the Court of Rome, for her
own interests, easily, and often does call unto it self the causes, and
causes the Prisoners to come to Rome, though the offense have not been
committed in that City.

The most renowned Commonwealth, as it has not consented to the drawing away
of Causes, so has it not granted the transmitting of Prisoners; but has
determined that they should be judged where they are imprisoned: it being
certain that in doing otherwise, they should utterly take away all the
Authority of the Inquisition-office in their Dominion, within which there being
Bishops, who in goodness and worth are inferior to no other, and Inquisitors
deputed by the Court of Rome it self, and the Cities abounding with learned
men, who may be received for consulters, there is no reason but that any case
may be as well examined and decided there, as in any other City whatsoever. If
it were to do God greater service, that Prisoners should be sent to Rome, it
were fit that, throwing all other respects to the ground, this only only
should be aimed at: but to show that it is not so, I will only bring one
example which happened heretofore, in the year 1596. at the instance of the
Inquisitor of Rome.

There was imprisoned in Padua one Ludovico Petrucci, a Senese, and the
Inquisitor of Rome, being according to the custom of the Inquisition, to send
those Evidences which he had against him to Padua, he required the contrary,
vid. that the Prisoner should be sent thither, and to that effect used many
persuasions to the Ambassador which was in Rome, and caused many to be used by
the Nuntio in Venice. The most excellent Senate answered diverse times to this
effect, that it was not convenient to alter the excellent Institution of this
Dominion, which was to dispatch questioned Prisoners, where they were
restrained: that on the other side, for the Inquisitor to send to Padua, what
was found against the Prisoner, that so he might receive due punishment was a
thing just, usual, and without any opposition. Many were the replies and the
answers always to one effect, and these dealings lasted five whole years,
Petruccio remaining still in Prison, At last, when they perceived at Rome that
they could not obtain him, in the year 1601. they writ to Padua, that the
said Petruccio should without any more a do be set at liberty, which was
accordingly, leaving a great doubt in men's minds what offense that might be,
which was rather to be left unpunished, than made known to the Inquisition of
Padua.

To this Accident which happened, I will add what the Directory of the
Inquisitors speaks of the causes of the Inquisition, which are handled in that
Court: of which speaking, after it had related diverse inconveniences, it
concludes: In this Court Causes are handled with much tediousness, many
miseries, labors, and expenses, insomuch that those which are questioned, care
not for coming to the Court, to treat of their Causes, if they do not rrust
to a full purse, or to great favors. These are the words of the Directory; it
is credible that Justice is administered with greater sincerity now then it was
in those days: but there withal it is to be held for a certain, that there
is no less goodness and sufficiency within this State, and that Causes may as
justly and as rightly be handled here, as in any other place, so that it is not
needful to let them be judged else where, who are imprisoned within this
Dominion.

The other part, to not send Processes else where, is grounded upon that which
is said before in this Chapter, and in the president for if the prisoners ought
to be judged within the State, and the judgment ought to be made by the same
Tribunal, and not received from any other place, there remains no cause
wherefore Processes should be sent forth. True it is that one ought to
distinguish between Processes framed against those that are restrained here,
or against those that are cited, and those that are contumacious, for these are
they which are not to be revealed else where: but examinations or other acts
made at the request of another Inquisition against any one that is restrained
there, or has committed any contempt against it, as acts not belonging to this
Dominion ought to be sent to whosoever requires them But: yet the Assistants
ought not by any means to suffer any such acts to be made without their
presence, as it has been said in the thirteenth Chapter; and because that the
Inquisition should do all as it does, as a mixed Office, and not as merely
Ecclesiastical.

The Exposition of the seventeenth Chapter.
THe seventeenth Chapter that the Praetoricall Deputy, nor any, other Person
assisting in the Governors place shall not be a Consulter, arises from what
is said before, because it may often chance, that the Governors busied may send
some other of the Court, who if he should do the Office of a Counselor,
should in the Process be set down for such a one, and by consequent as a
Minister of the Office, a thing which does not befit an Assistant, and would
bring in a Custom, through which Assistance which is a Superior thing, would
be turned into Counsel which is an inferior thing.

The Exposition of the eighteenth Chapter.
THe eighteen Chapter that restraint shall not be granted, but only in cases
merely concerning the Inquisition Office, and in a Process framed with
Assistance, and that in a doubt full case account be given to the Prince
wants no proof; since that the same Canon Law has ordained, that the
Inquisition should not assume any cases but of manifest Heresy: yea, the Law
being, that any Judge may have power to declare, whether a doubtful case do
belong or not belong to his jurisdiction, the Doctors say that the Inquisition
cannot do it, but only assume those which are clear, and to leave the
doubtful ones for the ordinary Judge, to determine whether they belong to them
or no. But as this Chapter has no need of proof or declaration, so has it
need of careful observance. It is a thing frequent, yea and ordinary, that a
Judge whose jurisdiction is limited, seeks as much as he can to enlarge it,
disabling the general Jurisdiction, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. And
this comes as well through the natural inclination which all men have as
near as they can for to command, as also for the profit which the Office
receives: Wherefore if the Inquisitors do extend themselves beyond their
natural duty, they are most to blame that do suffer it, though sometimes with
a good intent, yet never with wisdom. Some believe that the more they suffer
that jurisdiction to enlarge it self, the greater Service they do to God, and
believe it is a favoring of Religion: Others with a good zeal have suffered
the Inquisition to assume unto it self, blasphemies and Enchantments, and some
others usury also, hoping that through the credit and severity of that Office,
they would be the easier rooted out. But the event has shown, and will ever
show the contrary; yea, the Service of God is diminished, offenses take deeper
root, and the Office loses its reputation. And if at any time the leaving of
the Inquisition, a cause which did not belong unto it has proved well for the
present, it has afterward caused so many and so grievous evils, that the
Secular Magistrate has been forced through mere necessity, to reassume the
Cognizance of those offenses, which with small discretion he had left to the
Inquisition, not without many controversies, and contentions of jurisdictions
between that Office and the proper ordinary, accompanied with many confusions.
We must not think that the restraining of the Inquisition Office within the
due bounds, the not suffering of it to assume any Cases, but those which
manifestly belong unto it, and to proceed with the presence of them who ought
to be there, and other like modifications, to be a diminishing, or an abusing
of it: but contrariwise this is a way to extol it, to make it the more to be
respected, and to preserve it perpetually. In those Countries where heretofore
it was, and now at this present it is driven out: it has been for no other
cause, but only because they have assumed so much to themselves, that it was
intolerable to the people. Every one does willingly endure a reasonable bond,
but from an excessive one, every one will seek by all means though indirect,
to free themselves. The ancient History of the Gordian Knot, which, because it
could not be untied, was cut to pieces, is to be applied to all humane ties
and bonds, which if they be of such a sort, that those which are unjustly
bound, may free themselves by ordinary way of Justice, then they are suffered,
but if there be no ordinary means, then they run to extraordinary ones, as
seditions, and other plagues: Wherefore it is verily to be believed that it is
doing of God good service, for to restrain that Office within the due bounds,
which is so necessary for the preserving of Religion, and that to grant it
exorbitant Authority, thinking it to be a favoring of Religion, is an
undiscreet zeal, prove to end in the dishonor of God; damage of Religion,
and public confusion. And in this most happy estate, with much service to
God, it has bin preserved through the orders which the renowned Commonwealth
has made from time to time, to withstand the abuses which were creeping in, by
enlarging the Authority more than it ought to be. And as long as the same
orders shall be kept, and remedies found for other abuses which should daily
grow, it will ever be preserved with the same fruits.

The Exposition of the nineteenth Chapter.
THe nineteenth Chapter that Inchanters, and Sooth sayers do not belong to the
Inquisition, is without any difficulty, for the same Canon Laws do forbid the
Inquisitors to meddle with them, unless they do contain manifest Heresy.
And it is the more needful to perform this, because that those who are
accused for such offenses are women, or other weak brained Persons, who had
more need to be taught or instructed by the Confessor, than to be punished by
a Judge, and especially if they be persons of quality, whom it is not fitting
to carry before Tribunals; with scandal and disturbance of the family. The
same care is to be had, that they meddle not with Witch-crafts, as is said in
the twentieth Chapter, which Chapter needs no Exposition.

The Exposition of the one and twenty Chapter.
THe Inquisition ought not to Judge of ordinary Blasphemies, since both the
Canon and Civil Laws, and the custom of all the world have decided that they
do not belong to the Inquisition; neither does any one doubt of it, seeing the
plainness of the Laws: as for the hurtful witches, the most excellent
greater Counsel ordered that they should be punished by the Magistrate; for
Ecclesiastical punishments, are not sufficient chastisements for so great a
wickedness. The same reason did move the most excellent Senate to determine
the same in cases of heretical blasphemy in the year 1595. which deliberation
was very mature, and after advice taken of the Consulters of that Age: which
two determinations do not take away nor hinder the Cognizance of the
Inquisition, for the quality of suspicion of Heresy; but leaving that
circumstance to the judgment of that Tribunal, they only punish that offense
which would otherwise remain unpunished; the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
having no punishment answerable to it. Which thing is no let to the Office of
Heresy, but a chastisement for the injury done to God, and the damage done to
the neighbor. Some Inquisitors would have not only the punishing of Heresy,
but also the misdeede; and the blasphemy to be left unto their judging, and
they give two reasons for it: The one is, that when in the offense there is the
principal and the accessory, the principal draws the other unto it: but in
heretical blasphemies, suspicion of Heresy being the principal, and
belonging to the Inquisition, the blasphemy also ought to belong unto it which
is but the accessory. The other is because it seems too cruel to them, to
have one offense punished with two sentences; and do allege the common
saying, that there are not two Judgments allowed, against the same fault; but
these oppositions are easily answered. The first, because that suppose the
suspicion of Heresy were the principal (which thing St. Thomas does not
allow) yet nevertheless it is not necessary, that it should draw the blasphemy
along with it, since they are not so connexed together that they may not be
severed, and that one may not have judicial knowledge of the one, without
knowledge of the other. but the Secular may very well admit the Persons, and
examine him that is accused concerning the injurious words uttered against the
Divine Majesty, without going any further to examine what is his belief, and
what he bears in his mind. Therefore there is no such connection between
the blasphemy, and the enquiring of the Heresy, but that they may be
separated, and each judged in the right and competent Court. The like is to be
said when holy and Divine words are had in derision, as in transformed Psalms,
in which the Secular takes notice, only of the injury done to God, leaving it
to the Inquisition, to seek whether it may thereby be supposed that the
offender has a perverse belief. And in the offenses done against holy Images
with wounds and other strokes, it is a great deal plainer, seeing that the
Magistrate punishes, nothing but that external act, whereby Christ has bin
injuried in his Image, leaving it to the Inquisition to search, whether the
offender have sinned because he believes some false Doctrine, or only
through wilful malice. And to this purpose it is good to consider, that
Heretical blasphemy is not the same as a sincere or cruel blasphemy; most
cruel is that which is most grievous and most abusive. Most Heretical that
whence grows the greatest suspicion of Heresy, though in himself not so
great. The Inquisition regards the greatest suspicion, which carries with it
the greatest signification of there being an error in the mind, though in it
self it were not so abusive, and for this cause sometimes will make more
matter of words spoken against Saints, than against the divine Majesty. The
greatest punishment the Inquisition inflicts upon a blasphemer, is Abjuration,
which punishment, if it be on a person of low degree, may be said to be no
punishment at all. And therefore because offenses of such importance should not
pass unpunished with scandal and evil example, the public determination
that the Magistrate should punish the blasphemy, and leave to the Inquisition
the matters of Heresy, is both just and necessary: But that which seems
absurd to some, vid. that two Judgments should be made in one cause is not
inconvenient, when the punishments which are inflicted are not of the same
kind, and the end of the wrongs is different; the same Cause may be judged as
civil, and afterward as criminal. The end of a civil Judgment, is to give
every own his own; the end of the criminal, is to punish the Usurper. So in
cases of Blasphemy, the end of the Inquisition is, if the blasphemer have a
false belief to teach him the true, and absolve him from the censures he has
incurred by holding of the false. The end of the Magistrate is no other but to
punish the injury done to the divine Majesty. The punishments which the
Inquisition imposes, are spiritual, as Abjurations, Absolutions, or
Advisements: The punishment which the Magistrate inflicts are corporal, yea,
it may be said moreover that they do not make two judgments in one Cause, but
in two several Causes, the Magistrate judging the offense of Blasphemy, and
punishing it with corporal punishment, whereas the Inquisition forgoing the
offense, judges of the quality of the suspicion, and punishes it with
spiritual punishment.

The Exposition of the two and twentieth Chapter.
THe two and twentieth Chapter mentions, that some Inquisitors to extend
their jurisdiction, pretended that the offense of having two Wives did belong
to their Office, who do allege for reason, that it is an abuse of Matrimony,
which is a Sacrament; and that in Spain the case is reserved to the Office of
the Inquisition. Contrary is the common Opinion of Civilians, who seeing the
the Laws have imposed no punishment on this offense, and the Canon Laws do
not speak of it, they conclude by necessary consequence, that it belongs to
the Secular jurisdiction: and this is observed in all Tribunals, also in the
state of Milan, where the Inquisition has more extended her Authority, than in
any other place of Italy; the reason brought to the contrary, that it is an
abuse of the Sacrament of Matrimony, concluded nothing: for the first Wife
taken in true matrimony has the Sacrament annexed to it, and in this there
happens no abuse at all. Then in taking of the second, there is no Sacrament,
nor Matrimony, nor any manner of Spiritual contract, but a mere nullity done
de facto, non de jure; so that there cannot be said to be any abuse of the
Sacrament neither in the first, nor in the second act. Well may it be said,
that by the second wicked act of taking another Wife, there is an injury done
to the first which was a Sacrament, and this is most true, but the injury done
to the Sacrament of Matrimony does not belong to the Inquisition: for adultery
is an injury done to the Sacrament, and yet it does not belong to the
Inquisition to judge of it. And if any one would make having of two Wives, a
token of Heresy, inferring that he that does it believes it to be lawful;
with this reason he might draw all cases to the Inquisition, for it may as
well be said that the adulterer, or the thief do commit those wickednesses,
believing that they are lawful things; and amongst the rest we should put
into the Inquisition, all Gypsies, who get their life by stealing, and much
more your highway robbers. But contrariwise we must always suppose, that
every sinner has a true belief, and Catholic Doctrine, but does sin either
through frailty, or through malice, or through humane compassion, and so ought
to be punished by his ordinary Judge: which ought also to be observed in him
that has two Wives, if there appear no other token of a perverse belief. And
it is not true that in Spain the case is absolutely reserved to the
Inquisition, yea it is ordinarily punished by the Secular, by branding in the
forehead with a hot Iron. But because the Jews and Moors hold plurality of
Wives to be lawful, those who are of Jewish or Moorish race are examined at
the Inquisition, for the suspicion of Heresy, and punished with branding for
the offense. If a Turk, or Jew become a Christian, be found to have two Wives,
he may be tried in the Inquisition for his suspected belief; and for the
offense in the ordinary Court of Justice. But when either for carnality, or to
steal the portion, or for any such ends any one has taken a second Wife, they
ought without any circumstance to proceed, doing Justice in the ordinary
Secular Court, punishing the offense as the quality of the particular
circumstances shall require, preferring the common opinion of Lawyers, and the
Universal custom of Courts, to cavils only invented to confound
jurisdictions.

The Exposition of the three and twentieth Chapter.
IN cases of usury as it is said in this Chapter, it is questionless that the
Inquisition ought not to meddle in them: So have many Popes of Rome answered
Inquisitors, who have purposed to draw cases, and questions of Usury unto their
Office, and the Decree is also Registered in the Canon Law, where to exclude
absolutely all cases of usury out of the Inquisition, and to provide that by no
indirect way, nor under any good color it might be attempted to judge of any,
the Pope says: That though the Inquisition had enjoined some converted
Heretic such penance, as if he had been an Usurer he should make
restitution; yet for all that, not so much as against him can they meddle in
such cases. It is behoovefull both for Gods Service, and the reputation of the
Inquisition Office, with all diligence to keep many causes from them: So this
Chapter being clear* we need not say any more of it.

The Exposition of the four and twenty Chapter.
IN this Chapter is set down, that Jews nor other Infidels shall for no cause
be subject to the Inquisition Office, but only to the Secular Court. It was
said by the Apostle St. Paul plainly, that the Ecclesiastical Power does not
extend to judge those that are not of the Church. And so much has bin held and
observed also in these latter times. Pope Innocent the third, declared that
they were not subject to the Pope, neither to the Law, nor yet to be judged;
since that by virtue of the Law the Judge does exercise his Office. Besides,
the Infidels of what kind soever they be, are not capable of Spiritual
punishments, and therefore are not subject to the Church which punishes with
such. In the Body of the Civil Law there be prohibitions, and punishments
against Jews which blaspheme, or injury Religion, or draw Christians to
Iudaisme; or to offend Jews which are become Christians: And the Popes of Rome
themselves, have not used any other remedy against Jews and other Infidels,
who have offended in wronging or slandering Religion, but only to excite
Princes, and Secular Magistrates to do their duty in punishing them: To this
purpose there be many Decrees in the Canon Law: Some Princes to discharge
themselves of the trouble of judging such causes, have delegated them to the
Bishops, which has not pleased the Popes very well.

The King of Sicily, having delegated power to some Bishops of his Kingdom to
punish the Sarazens of his Kingdom, in certain: cases where they offend
Religion. Pope Alexander the third did write to them that they should only
punish such offenses, for which was sufficient a pecuniary Mulct, or whipping,
without bloodshed: But if the offense did deserve any greater punishment, they
should not meddle with it, but should leave the judging of it to the temporal
Power. This authority established by the saying of St. Paul, confirmed by the
Canon and Civil Laws, and by Customs, none should attempt to contrary it.
But the desire of enlarging authority, does so blind some men, that without
regarding so much plainness, they turn themselves to cavils of no moment,
saying, That if God does punish, and has punished Infidels, the Pope, and the
Inquisitors his Delegates, may and ought also punish them. A reason which would
prove that they might punish both Christians and Infidels, and all manner of
offenders, for all manner of offenses, though never so concealed, and also
sins only conceived in the mind: for God does punish all these. The truth
is, that Christ has not given his Vicars any power but only over his Church,
and in spiritual things, and therefore they can judge none but Christians, nor
punish them but only with spiritual punishments. The temporal punishments
God has committed to the Secular power, for punishing all manner of offenses,
and against all offenders be they of what Religion they will: And certainly to
make an argument from the Divine Omnipotency to humane authority, it agrees
not with the reverence due to the Divine Majesty: But another thing must be
considered, for they say, that although Infidels be not subject to
Ecclesiastical power; yet when they do offend the Church, reason will, that
she may defend her self by punishing them, it being a term of Law, That he
who is not subject to a Territory, by reason of an offense committed in it,
becomes subject to it, which things well understood are all most true, yet do
they not conclude in this purpose: For the Church must not be denied the
defense of her self, if she be offended, but she ought to do it with all
offenders by means of the Magistrate. The Infidel who violates holy things,
and offends Religion must not remain unpunished, and the Church may defend it
self, but not with its own forces, but with the authority of the Magistrate:
to inflict punishment does not belong to him that is offended, but always to
the Judge, and when by an offense the Delinquent should have his Court of
Judgment allotted him, he becomes not subject to him that is offended;
otherwise every private man might chastise him that does offend him, but he
becomes subject to the Judge of the place where the offense is committed.
Wherefore these reasons prove nothing but that the offense done by the Infidels
to the Church, ought to be punished by the ordinary Secular Court of
judgment: and so much the rather ought this to be observed, because both
Divine and Humane Laws do order it so, when such sorts of offenses deserve
greater punishments, as indeed such offenses, for the most part are so grievous
that they will deserve greater punishment than the Inquisition would inflict
upon them.

In the year 1581. Pope Gregory the thirteenth, framed a Bull against Jews,
in which he did subject both them and all other Infidels to the Inquisition in
ten cases so fully set down, that if it should be observed no Infidel might
inhabit nor trade within Christian Dominion. This Bull although it were
imprinted, yet was it published or received but in very few places, and it were
impossible to observe it. Yea, Pope Sixto the fifth, and Clement the eight not
regarding it, did give Infidels safe conducts to come to the City of Ancona.
And that which is most important is, that in the Commission granted by the
Cardinals to the Inquisitors, wherein is expressed how far their authority
extends; there is not the least mention made of Jews or other Infidels; a
manifest proof that they can pretend no power over them. But of that Bull of
Gregory the thirteenth, and other, it will be a more fitting place to speak at
large in the 28. Chapter: To conclude therefore the Inquisition Office is
ordained against Heresy: wherefore it is not fitting it should be enlarged to
other offenses; Infidelity is no Heresy, and the offenses which Infidels
commit to the wrong and dishonor of Religion, have no need of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, but may very well be taken notice of, and punished by the Secular
power, and it ought to be observed, it being commanded by the Divine, Canon,
and Civil Law.

The Exposition of the twenty fifth Chapter.
THe Office of the Inquisition out of this State pretends, that it may judge
your Eastern Christians upon any Articles, even in those wherein the Nation
wholly dissents from the Court of Rome. In this most renowned Dominion,
regarding the protection which the Prince has of the Greek Nation, the
Inquisitors do not extend their pretenses so far, but say: That the Grecians
may be suffered in those three opinions, wherein they dissent from the
Eastern: but if any of them do hold any sinister opinion, in any of those
heads wherein their Nation agrees with ours, that they ought to be subject to
the Inquisition. Which distinction is superfluous, and not less opposite to
the Princes protection, then if they were judged in the three different cases,
also it is superfluous, because that there being no Heresies at all at this
present amongst the Greeks, concerning any of the common Articles, this case
cannot happen against the protection, because that they are bound by their
customs to acknowledge no superior in any thing, but only their own
Priests: which thing whether it may justly be maintained, or no, may very well
be decided by the customs which have ever been observed.

The Eastern and Western Churches continued both in communion and Christian
Charity, for the space of nine hundred years or more, in which times the Pope
of Rome was reverenced, and esteemed no less by the Greeks than by the
Latins. He was acknowledged for St. Peter's Successor, and chief of all the
Eastern Catholic Bishops. In the persecutions of Heretics they implored his
aid, and of other Bishops of Italy, and this peace was easily kept, because
the supreme power was in the Canons, to which both parts acknowledged
themselves subject, Ecclesiastical Discipline was severely maintained in each
Country by the Prelates of it, not arbitrarily, but absolutely, according
Order, and Canonical rigor, none putting his hand into another man's
Government, but advised one another by the observance of the Canons. In those
days never any Pope of Rome did pretend to confer any Benefices in other
Bishops Diocesses; neither was the Custom yet brought in of getting money out
of others by way of Dispensations or Bulls. But as soon as the Court of Rome
began to pretend that it was not subject to Canons, but it was according to
her own discretion, she might after any ancient Order of the Fathers,
Counsels, yea, and of the Apostles themselves, and that it attempted, in stead
of the ancient Primary of the Apostolical Sea, to bring in an absolute
Dominion, not ruled by any Law or Canon, then the Division grew.

And though within these seven hundred years a peace and reunion has been
often attempted, yet could it never be brought to pass, because they have
always hearkened to debates and disputes, and not to the taking away of that
abuse which was the real cause of bringing in the Devision, and has been the
true cause as yet of maintaining it. Whilst the Churches were united, St. Paul's
Doctrine was also jointly held and observed, that in cases of public
Government, every one should be subject to the Prince, because God commands it
so, who is disobeyed by him who does not obey Secular Power, by him appointed
for the governing of mankind. Never did any pretend that he might not be
punished for his offenses, holding it for certain, that to have an exempted
power to do evil, is a thing condemned by God and men: Saint Paul his words
were in every ones mouth, vid. Will thou be exempt from fear of Temporal
punishments, do well, and thou shall not only not be punished, but shall
also be applauded by it. But if thou do evil, thou ought to fear it,
because the Sword of Justice for the Divine service to punish evil deeds has
not been given to it in vain. After the Division of the Churches in the
Eastern^ Church, the same opinion remained, and still remains, vid. that
every Christian for Spiritual businesses is only subject to Ecclesiastical
power, but in Temporal to the Prince. And nothing is more Temporal than
offense, because nothing is more contrary to the Spirit.

There continues also amongst the Greeks, that Doctrine, that Bishops ought
to judge; which opinion is Catholicall, and which heretical, but to punish
those who hold hurtful opinions, belongs to the Secular. Now the truth being
thus in the things aforesaid, which are manifest and clear; the Inquisition
ought not to meddle with the Greeks for four reasons: First, because that
whilst a cause remains undecided, it is not reasonable that the one party
should be judged by the other in their own controversy: But this is the
controversy between the Greeks and the Court of Rome, that they require the
observation of the Canons, which subject each Nation to their proper Prelates;
and the Court of Rome pretends to be above the Canons: Therefore the Greeks
ought not to be judged by the Romish Officers in this controversy* The second
is, because that it is certain that before the division, the Grecians were in
Temporal judgments subject to the Secular Magistrate, and in Spiritual to
their superiors; Therefore it is just to have their right and custom
maintained to them. The third, is because if the Prince should grant the
Inquisition power to judge the Greeks, he should deprive himself of his
proper Authority, which he may withquietnes exercise, and not without troble
give way to have it exercised by others. The power of punishing offenses in the
Greekish Church, has always been in the Prince; and the Greeks in these
days do confess it, and desire it may so continue: So that with quietness
justice may be administered by the Magistrate, whereas the leaving of it to the
Inquisition, with contradiction of the whole Nation, might bring in a thousand
inconveniences. The fourth, because the most renowned Commonwealth gives the
Greeks leave, to live according to their customs; but their custom is, that
in Secular things, and in the punishing of any manner of offense they shall be
subject to the Prince, and in spiritual things they shall obey their Priests:
therefore maintaining the protection which is promised them, they connot be
subject to others. Therefore it is not be suffered, that the Inquisition
should search out what the Greeks do, or believe in secret: And if they
chance to hear that any, lives or speaks scandalously of the Latins, then
have they a ready and easy way to help it, by giving the Magistrate notice of
it, by whom justice shall be administered, and especially in a matter of such
importance, as to provide against scandals and tumults.

The Exposition of the six and twentieth Chapter.
THe six and twentieth Chapter, that no man be publicly cited who is gone
beyond the mountains, upon the imputation of any offense committed in those
Countries, seems at first sight to be a thing which cannot happen, and
happening to be of very small moment: yet if that way were once given, it would
be very frequent and of great importance. Pope Clement the eight, in the year
1595. made a Bull concerning Italians only, commanding that none, no not for
matters of Merchandise should go into a place where there were not a Parish
Priest, and a public Church which exercised the Romish Rites, unless he had
leave from the Inquisitors; adding that those who had leave, should be bound
to send every year a certificate over, that they were confessed, and had
communicated. To bring in the observance of this Bull, as soon as any Italian
comes beyond the mountains, presently the Jesuits come upon him for coming
over without License; and if he does not yield unto them, and promise them
obedience, they presently examine some adherent of his against him, and frame a
secret Process against him, which they send to Rome, from which there is a
process writ to Rome, to the Inquisitor of the place where he was bred up, to
call him by public Citation. This Citation in former times, was wont to be
made from the Inquisition of Rome, but now they are beware of doing so, because
the Cities beyond the Hills do revenge themselves, by proceeding against some
adherents of the Court of Rome, and to avoid this danger, they cite no more to
Rome, but have him cited to the place of his bringing up. This invention though
it be colored with Religion, aims at the making of the Court of Rome
Mistress in Italy, of Merchandises which come from beyond the Mountains; as
three hundred years ago it brought under it, with a less pretense, the
Merchandises of the East. It will not be from the purpose to relate here what
was then done, and what was the event of it; especially within this City, that
we may the better sink into that which is now done. It was ordered and
commanded by the Governors, that Infidels should be forbidden to carry Arms,
or any other instrument where with they might make War with Christians; the
Derree as honest was received by all men: This ready obedience of the World,
gave Pope Clement the fifth, hope of stepping yet one step further: wherefore
in the year of our Lord 1307. he published a Bull, and commanded that none
might carry any Merchandise of any kind into the the Eastern Countries, nor
that there should any be suffered to go out of the Harbors for such a voyage,
upon pain of excommunication, and other grievous penalties, as well spiritual
as temporal: and amongst other that none has carried, or suffered any to be
carried of what kind soever, might be absolved unless he first precisely
paid so much as the principal which was transported amounted unto. The
difficulty, if not impossibility of observing so strict an order, was a cause
that there were many offenders in Venice, who during their life did little
think of it: but at the point of death to receive their absolution, they left
(according to the Popes command) order to have the offense satisfied: Neither
wanted there Confessors to urge it instantly, denying also absolution to such
as did not pay, or give order to be paid, so much as the principal of that
whcih he had carried into the East came unto. Many who have been that voyage
several times, found themselves to owe more than they were worth at their
hour of death: Wherefore for the discharge of their Consciences, they would by
Will leave all they had to the Popes disposing. The Heirs, and the
Commissaries did defer the executing of the Wills, seeing they tended to the
destruction of Families, and of the Commonwealth, especially there being some
who held such Wills to be void and extinguished. By this means in fifteen
years the money due to the Pope, came to a sum sufficient to have emptied the
City of money: to which Pope John the two and twentieth, who was his successor
applying his mind, and gathering the money on all sides, in the year 1322.
sent Ardenato Largo, and Falcone Castario Nuncioes to Venice, to receive that
which by Will was left to the Popes disposal, constraining notaries and others
to produce the Wills, excommunicating them which did not deliver them. Besides
he gave these Nuntioes Commission also to see to, and to excommunicate all
those which were alive, that had sailed thither, and to absolve them, paying
the principal of the Merchandise which was carried thither. These Nuntioes
being come to Venice and having erected a judgment Seat, committed diverse
disorders, amongst the which one was, that they Excommunicated St. Mark his
Proctors, and above two hundred other Persons, men and women for the aforesaid
cause. Those who were then consultors of the Commonwealth, amongst which was
one Andrea, Bishop of Chiozza, did advise that these Nuntioes actions were not
Lawful, and resolved to withstand them with apeales, and other remedies which
were put in practice, to that these Nuntioes attempts did take no effect. Only
as it happens in such cases many inconveniences remained, which continuing with
great danger for the space of two years, the Pope was forced to apply a
remedy, which was worse than the soar. He made a Bull in the year 1324.
confessing that his Nuntioes actions had bin disorderly, suspended the censures
by them pronouced, and gave the Arch Bishop of Ravenna Commission to execute
it; commanding him afterward, that he should set down a convenient time for
men and women who had been censured by the Nuntioes, to appear for that cause
at the Court of Rome, which was then at Avignon, either in Person, or by their
Proctors to treat of their business, excepting none but only the Duke and
the Commonalty. It was a brave increase for the Court of Rome, to have some
200. Persons or more to come thither at once, for money matters of so great
weight. But what happened, and whither the Pope were obeyed by few or many, I
cannot justify: But it is certain that then there did arise an opinion which
said, that it was no sin to carry Merchandises to Infidels, so they were not
things for the use of War, and therefore that the Pope could not hinder it:
which moved him in the year 1326. to make a Bull, declaring them to be
Heretics which said that it was no sin to carry Merchandise to the Infidels,
although they were not useful for War. But then the controversies which the
Pope had with the Emperor, brake out into an open War, so that he being (as
Ludovico Bavaro writes) all the rest of his life employed in greater affairs,
had no time to think on this. Under his successor there was some moderation
found, because he set his hand, not to the revoking of the Decree as it had
been just, but to grant Licenses. And this renowned Commonwealth asked for
them, and obtained them; sometimes for a year, and sometimes for a longer
time, but prefixed; and sometimes restraining the number of ships, sometimes
leaving it free: And these Licenses cost money, but how much it was not always
known. Yet will I speak in this particular, that for one License granted by
Pope Innocent the sixth, in the year 1361. they agreed to pay nine thousand
Ducats of gold of the Chamber, alleging that it could not be done for less;
because that the Apostolical Chamber was exhausted, and in want. This
grievance lasted until a little after the year 1400. for then the truth being
made manifest to the World, that it was free and Lawful for the Merchant to
do it, the Court withdrew it self from her pretenses.

Now to attempt that none should go without a License, into any Lands, which
do not acknowledge the Pope, has a more seeming color than at that time;
saying, that it is done for fear least they should be embrewed with some false
Doctrine: as though a written and sealed paper could be a preservative unto
them, and as though he might not chance to escape untouched which went without
a License, and that it were impossible for him that had it to be infected:
Whence it is evidently seen, that forbidding them to go into those Countries
without leave, is not zeal to Religion, but a desire of commanding, and to
bring the Secular Power under, and to reap some good benefit. If the just
liberty of Merchandising ought not to bear this burden, it neither ought to
be suffered, that one who has here lived as a good Catholic, and is gone
beyond the Mountains, because he has not asked the Inquisitor leave, should
be molested and hindered in his businesses, for any imputation laid upon him
from Rome, to the disgrace of his friends, who are blemished thereby:
especially since they refuse to have this citation made at Rome, fearing the
revenge of those Cities beyond the Mountains, which shall hold themselves
offended thereby: it is not reasonable that they should thus conceal
themselves, and lay on other men's backs, that which is done for their own
proper ends, and so by these indirect ways, make themselves masters of the
Merchandise which comes from beyond the Hills. And therefore, if any Native
of this Dominion, have lived as a good Catholic in this Country, and for his
own occasions have passed the mountains, it were unjust to trouble him any
way before his return, upon any relation that shall be made of him.

The Exposition of the seven and twentieth Chapter,
COncerning the 27. Chapter, that confiscation of Goods shall not be admitted
in this matter of Heresy, it being already brought in, and the custom
established without any contradiction, there needs nothing but only to
continue the observing of it; since it is much for God, and Religious service,
whereof when one treatethit is always hurtful to intermixe any money matter
with it; because that thereby the World is scandalized, and seeing money
happens into the business, it cannot be persuaded (though it were plain and
true) that the Service of God holds the first place therein. The Court of
Rome will never cease upon all occasions to blame this order, believing that
this moderation established by the most renowned Commonwealth, does to
upbraide the Roman Ordinance with too much severity. That which it will
publickely allege is, that Heresy is an offenee of treason against the Divine
Majesty, which ought more to be punished than that against man; wherefore it
is a perverting of order, when greater punishment is inflicted on him who
offends man, than on him who offends God: and therefore if they confiscate
goods for humane treason, much more ought they to confiscate them for Divine
treason, which offense they they run into by Heresy. But this appearance is
but a shadow without a body, for it would condemn their own constitutions,
which do pardon the Delict of Heresy for the first time, but the Delict of
humane Majesty offended, is not pardoned for the first time: so that it would
seem that less account were made of offending God than men. Wherefore the
truth is, that in imposing of punishments, respect is not had only to the
grievousnesse of the offense, but also to the circumstances of the damage
which it brings to others; or to the dishonesty adjoined to it, or to the
more perverse will of the offender. Humane Majesty is not offended, but with a
certain malice, and desire of him that offends, and Heresy very often is
through ignorance; whence this for the most part deserves compassion, but that
never. The confiscation of Goods terrifieth others, who at least abstain for
love of their children, preferring their good before the passions which move
them against their Prince. But in case of Heresy every one seems to be moved
by a spiritual respect, which ought not to be less esteemed than the death
of children. The event shows that this most happy state, with more general
satisfaction, rests as free from heretical dissension, without taking away of
goods, as others where with severity they are taken away. Therefore not
regarding other men's orders or examples, or what others say, we ought to follow
those orders which experience teaches us to be good.

The Exposition of the twenty eight Chapter.
THe twenty eight Chapter, that no Bull or Ordinance of Rome, neither new nor
old, be published without the Prince his express License, is of most important
and necessary consideration for the preserving of the Inquisition; Upon which
Chapter I will first set forth the juridicall and true reason, why it ought to
be so observed, with the inconvenience which would follow, if it were done
otherwise.

It is clear, that as every one may, for his own ends, at his own will and
pleasure, change Orders, and govern a jurisdiction which is wholly his own,
without acquainting one therewith, or asking any ones consent; so where by
contract and agreement between two* there is a Tribunal set up, and a form
given, one of them cannot upon any reason, though never so excellent and
undoubted, make any alteration without the consent of the other contracter:
such is the nature of a contract and agreement, that as it receives his being
and existence by the consent of the Contracters, so it cannot receive the least
alteration without the same consent: So that if any alteration be needful
through change of times, or other circumstances, it cannot be lawfully made but
by both parties. It is plain that the office of the Inquisition within this
dominion was appointed by order of the greater Council, and by consent of the
Pope in the year 1289. with Covenants then established. Wherefore no new thing
which has happened since can alter it, if the same who agreed in the
institution, do not likewise agree in the alteration: And therefore if the
Court of Rome decrees any new thing concerning that matter, it cannot extend
its force upon that Office, but only with the Prince his consent. This is the
true reason why Bulls and Orders made since that time at Rome cannot bind.
Neither can it be aleadged to the contrary, that diverse times do require
diverse Orders, and that Popes for the better government have made other
reasonable Laws, which ought to be received: for the answer to this plain,
that as in the world nothing can be held unchangeable, and every custom ought
to be accommodated to the times and persons, so it is to be done to them whom
in reason it concerns to do it, and by no others. If any one would rule
common business of himself, though he did do it with a good intent and happy
issue, yet did he nevertheless transgress Divine and Humane Laws: the same
reason which caused the Inquisition to be first instituted by agreement, does
now also suffer no new Laws or orders to be made, but by agreement. To give
force unto a Law it is not sufficient that it be convenient and reasonable, but
it is also essential, that it be made by those who have full power: Neither is
that said only for the preservation of power and jurisdiction, but also for
the necessity of a good government. The Inquisition was not then instituted
with the same Conditions, as in the rest of Italy, because the considerations
of this Commonwealth and other States were different. So now likewise diverse
considerations cause that which is expedient at Rome, sometimes not to be
expedient here: Wherefore it may not be convenient presently to execute in this
state, that which the Pope for his own respects has ordered, but first ought
to be considered whether it agree with the respects of this place, which thing
none but the Prince can do, as one who alone knows what is needful for the
public affairs: And therefore although the new or old Bull should seem unto
the Governor honest and profitable, yet ought not he therein to follow his
own judgment, it being proper to the Prince alone to know what is expedient:
Neither ought it to seem grievous to the Bishops or Inquisitors, to have that
which is just and lawful executed in due manner, judgment, and form. The
Inquisition of Spain which is likewise ordained by agreement, proceeds in the
self same manner. It has its own Laws and proper Customs by which it is
governed, neither is it altered, or receives new Orders from Rome; but if for
any public respects the Court believes, that it were good to bring up some
new thing in Spain, they write to the General Royal Counsel over the
Inquisition where it is consulted of, and according as the respects of Spain
will bear, it is received either in part, or in all, or in part, or in all
laid aside.

But that the observance of this Chapter is necessary not only for the
maintaining of the proper Power, and jurisdiction, but also to withstand
infinite inconveniences, he may find it plainly that shall consider these
things following.

First speaking of Bulls already made, many are contrary to the Institutions of
this most renowned Commonwealth; as those that command Heretics to be burned
openly and alive. The confiscation of goods, with censures to those Princes who
do not admit of them. The demolishing of a house where a Heretic is found,
although it be none of his own: That the Inquisition may cause any that it
suspecteth to give it a pecuniary security to live a good Catholic: That the
Inquisition have an armed Court properly belonging to that office, All these
are Pontificiall Ordinances, contrary to the Customs of this State; some do
give Inquisitors excessive authority, as those which will have them, have power
to give leave to wear Arms, and to make Crocesegnati, which things could not
be put in practice, without great confusion: some are so severe, that they
cannot agree with the government of this State, as that of Paul the fourth,
which will not have him pardoned his life, that will come home again, having
held any one of those five Articles, which by him are named: And another of Pio
the fifth, that no sentence given in the behalf of one that was accused and
found innocent, should transire in rem Iudicatam, although it were given after
the Canonical purgation, but that the Office may always take the same cause
in hand again, upon the same proofs, which order if it were in use would be
a continual torment to those wretches.

And that other of the same Pope, that whosoever should offend, or but only
threaten a Notary, or other Officer of the Inquisition, or a Witness examined
in that Office, besides the Excommunication, should be guilty of High Treason,
and should be punished with Capital punishment, his goods confiscated, his
children infamous, and incapable to succeed others by will: To which
punishment should also be subject whosoever should not only case one to escape
out of Prison, but he also that should but attempt it, although the effect did
not follow: and also whosoever should favor any such, or mediate for them,
with other clauses of most cruel temerity, comprehending also titular Persons
and Princes. Yet this is that Bull which was made in the year 1569. but was
never received nor published in this State. The Cardinal Arrigoni, eight and
forty years after that, vid. in the year 1617. commanded the Inquisition of
this City of Venice, that it should print it and publish it, and it had been
done, if the most renowned Reformators of those times, by order of the most
excellent Counsel had not hindered it. Any one may consider how many Processes
might be made for every word that should be spoken to one of the notaries,
witnesses, or denouncers, who had thought themselves wronged, and how many
wretches would have bin daily vexed. It were long to rehearse all those things
which are contrary to the customs of these Countries, but the above said are
sufficient to show that without the disturbance of the public authority and
peace, they cannot be all generally admitted. But if any be necessary or
profitable for the punishment of Heretics, it is fitting that it should be
received: but to know which is such a one, belongs properly* to the prince,
nor can any one else know it. Neither ought any one to be confident that they
may be received without confusion, because they are of force in Rome, and yet
things there are quietly carried, the State of Rome being different from that
of other Princes. The Romans say they are above these Ordinances, if they
think fit they may observe them, if not, they may omit them, or dispense with
them, and they do wonderfully serve for their ends, as well when they are
observed, as when they are disobeyed, because they are not to be ruled by the
Laws, but they do rule the Laws. Contrariwise in other States when they are
once published or received, they are no more in the Prince his power: They must
then run to Rome to seek a remedy, when they are heard, and either they do
get remedy or not; they regarding not what is behoovefull to another State, but
to their own. And this is that which the court of Rome would have, and every
day attempted, vid. to have in their hand, under color of Religion, the
administration of some certain things, without which States cannot be
governed, by which means it would become judge of all governments. For this
cause, the Popes say daily when they would cause their Decrees to be admitted,
that if there be any inconvenience, they should have recourse to them, and they
will help it, but the remedy which comes not from the same Prince, but from
them who have their proper interests, is worser than the sore. God whose works
are perfect, and who is the Author of all Principalities, gives to every one as
much power as is necessary to govern well; neither will he have it
acknowledged from any other, but from his Divine Majesty. All that which a
Prince acknowledges from others, but from God, is slavery and subjection.

So much is said generally of the consideration which ought to be had in
publishing or receiving Pontificiall Orders made of old in matters of Heresy.
But much greater care ought to be had concerning those which shall be made
hereafter. Of them which are made already the number is certain, it is known
whether they be received in other places or no, how they are observed: what
construction they receive, what is their aim, what consequence of good or
evil effects they bring with them: But for the time to come, if the Court
might have her liberty the number would grow to be infinite. When one newly
appears, it is not known whether the World will admit of it or no; the aim
of him that made it, is not yet discovered, experience has not shown what
effects it may bring forth; and therefore all delay and maturity in receiving
of it, will bring forth abundance of convenience with it. It is not said, that
new reasonable orders are not to be accepted, but that they ought not to be
received as of duty, or as subjects, but by agreement and public treaty, the
institution of that Office requiring it as it is said, and with much
consideration, because of the great dangers that novelties do bring with them.
The Court of Rome in making new Bulls, takes no great advice; with ease they
are made, because with ease they are revoked; or derogated from, or dispensed
with; as it falls to be most commodious for their businesses, wherein they
regard their own ends: But that which is profitable for one State, is not
profitable for another. The safety of this Dominion requires that Religion
should be kept inviolate in all her parts, withstanding all change and novelty
whatsoever. The respects of Rome require, that no change shall be made, through
which Pontificiall power may be diminished, nor the Court lose any of her
profits which she draws out of other Statues: But those novelties whereby the
profit of the Court may be increased, or temporal authority may be
diminished, with the exaltation of the Ecclesiastical, are not to be
abhorred, but procured; and that we see daily.

This most renowned Commonwealth, as well as other Catholic Kingdoms, finds
it self between two contraries. The Protestants who have no other aim but to
diminish Ecclesiastical authority; and the Court of Rome, which has no other
aim but to increase it, and to make the temporal her servant: Whence your
Catholic States and Kingdoms to preserve themselves, do withstand all
novelties on the on and the other side, and do keep Religion without any
change at all, being known by experience, that either of the novelties are
pernicious. That reverence which deservedly is given to Religion, is the cause
that those abuses have easy admittance which come covered with that sacred
Mantle. For the maintaining of Religion, the office against Heresy is
respected, and for this cause, when Rome will bring in some novelty, it
willingly makes use of that office, supposing that the true end will not
appear. And that has been wrought in the self same manner in times past,
but very slightly in regard of what was done at this present. Nevertheless the
Senators of those times were always careful. They would have the Office
against Heresy to be mixed; they have opposed themselves against all
novelties: they have not suffered Ecclesiastical Persons to do any thing
unknown, unseene or unexamined. By these footsteps must he walk that will
have the Commonwealth preserved, not suffering new Bulls, or Decrees to be
accepted within the State, if first by mature deliberation it be not made
known, that they will bring in no inconveniences. Which deliberation is proper
to the Prince, who alone comprehends the estate of public things.

The Exposition of the nine and twentieth Chapter.
THe nine and twentieth Chapter which treats of publishing a prohibition of
books, since the agreement of the year 1596. stands in force, there can no
doubt be made of it. But it will be necessary to consider, that the agreement
being made with so much consideration and maturity, as well of the Apostolical
Seas side, as of the most renowned Commonwealths side; the matter ought to be
held of weight. This conference lasted four Months, on the Pontificiall side
there was the Cardinal, the Nuntio, and the Inquisition; and on the other side
the chief Senators of the Commonwealth, clear arguments, that the business
on both sides was held to be of great weight: and nevertheless, though it was
determined by common consent, yet did it not take away all hope from the
Ecclesiastical Persons, to have it forgotten again and out of use: Wherefore
then they treated, that there should be but three score coppies Printed of the
agreement, for nothing else but because there being an innumerable number of
the coppies of the Indexes, of the forbidden books which pass through all
men's hands, every one might see those documents, which give the authority over
the books to Ecclesiastical Persons only, but the moderation of the
agreement might not be known but by few, and so finally it might be lost. And
treading these steps in Rome, there is not a year but there comes forth a
Catalogue of new prohibition, under the name of the Master of the sacred
Palace, with clauses that it shall take place in all Cities, Towns, and places
of every Kingdom, Nation, or People; and that it shall bind all men, although
there be no publication who shall come any way to have notice of the Edict.
This Index is sent to the Inquisitors, that by means of the Confessors they
may get them to work the best effect they can: and by this means the
agreement is deluded, and grows out of use. And that which is worse, when an
Index is printed within this City, they do endeavor to have those new
prohibitions inserted in them: which they also attempted to do this year. And
if diligent care be not always had, as it is at this present, they will one
day set up a Court of Justice, and open a way to the destruction of the
agreement. Their intents to make themselves absolute Masters of Books, and the
respects wherefore the Secular power has need to watch, to the end that they
may not obtain it, though they do not appear at first sight, yet with an
easy consideration they are made manifest. The matter of Books seems to be a
thing of small moment, because it treats of words, but through these words
comes opinions into the world, which cause partialities, seditions, and finally
wars. They are words, it is true, but such as in consequence draw after them
Hosts ofarmed men. In this matter the Romans cannot hide two high pretenses
which they have.

The first, that so they may prohibit books, not only for cause of Religion,
but also for any of her cause.

The second, that the Prince shall not have power within his own state to
forbid any books; for any cause whatsoever: and if that any be by them
approved, the Prince cannot hinder, although he judge it to be dangerous, but
that within his Dominions it may be had printed and publicly sold. And these
two pretenses taking once effect, they should do the Temporal power wrong in
three notable particulars.

The first in prohibiting or corrupting Books which are good and profitable
for the maintenance of a good government.

The second, in prohibiting of Books, which do not belong to them to prohibit.

The third, in hindering the Secular Power from removing what shall find
hurtful to a good government.

Of which three prejudices we ought to treat particulary, for to consider of
the remedies. About the first, concerning the prohibition of Books, which at
Rome are not liked of, though they be good and godly, because they maintain
Temporal Power. It is a clear thing, that a Prince, especially one that
rules with the Arts of Peace, uses this as a chief instrument to cause the
people to believe this to be a firm truth, vid. that the Prince is ordained by
God, and rules with Divine authority, and the Subject consequently in
conscience is bound to obey him, and not doing it, offends God: that the duty
of undergoing public burdens, either personal in bearing office, or real
in Tributes, Customs, or such like, does tie the Conscience, and binds under
the pain of sinning to restitution, he that refuses to bear them, or does
defraud them. Because that the Prince, by the Divine Law, is above any person
that is within his Dominion, and may lay a burden on any man's estate, when
public necessity, according to his judgment, shall require it. Everyone of
himself, without any greater discourse may judge how easily a State may be
governed, where the aforesaid Maxims, as they are most true, shall be so
believed to be, and the disorders which most necessarily happen where contrary
opinions are held Ofthese truths written by the Prophets, taught by Christ, and
preached by the Apostles, ancient Fathers, books are also sull and good
Divines do hold them, as they are necessary to be believed. But as there were
always in Gods Church, those who made use of Religion, for worldly ends, so
the number of them is now sull. These, under a spiritual pretense, but with an
ambitious end and desire of worldly wealth, would free themselves from the
obedience due unto the Prince, and take away the love and reverence due by the
people, to draw it to themselves. To bring these things to pass, they have
newly invented a Doctrine, which talks of nothing but of Ecclesiastical
greatness, liberty, immunity, and of her jurisdiction. This Doctrine was
unheard of, until about the year of 1300. neither is there any book found
concerning it before that time: then did they begin to write of it
scatteringly in some books: but there were not above two books which treated
of nothing else but this, until the year 1400. and three until the year
^500. After this time the number increased a little, but it was tolerable.
After the year 1560. this Doctrine began to increase in such manner, that
they gave over writing, as they did before of the Mysteries of the most Holy
Trinity, of the Creation of the World, of the incarnation of Christ, and other
Mysteries of the Belief, and there is nothing printed in Italy, but Books in
Diminution of Secular Authority, and exhaltation of the Ecclesiastical, and
such Books are are not printed by small numbers, but by thousands: Those
people which have any learning can read nothing else; the Confessors likewise
know none other Doctrine, nor to be approved of need they any other Learning.
Whence comes in a perverse opinion universally, that Princes and Magistrates
are humane inventions, yea, and Tyranicall, that they ought only by compulsion
to be obeyed, that the disobeying of Laws, and defrauding the public
revenewes does not bind one unto sin, but only to punishment; and he that
does not pay if he can but fly from it, remains not guilty before the Divine
Majesty; and contrariwise, that every beck of Ecclesiastical persons, without
any other thought, ought to be taken for a Divine Precept, and binds the
Conscience. And this Doctrine perchance is the cause of all inconveniences
which are felt in this Age. There want not in Italy pious and learned persons
which hold the truth, but they are not suffered to write, nor to print:
Something comes written from another place, but presently it is prohibited: And
little thought is taken of Heretical Books, especially those that treat of
the Articles of Faith; but if any one comes that defends the Prince his
Temporal Authority, and says that Ecclesiastical persons are also subject to
public functions, and punishable if they violate the public tranquillity,
these are condemned books, and persecuted more than others. They have gelded
the books of ancient Authors by new printing of them, and taken out all which
might serve for Tempoporall authority.

In the year 1607. they printed in Rome with public authority, a Book
entitled Index Expurgatorius, where they did note the places which in diverse
Authors ought to be cancelled, in which book every one may with eyes behold
what things are taken away or changed in many good Authors, which did defend
the Authority given by God to the Prince. So that at this present in reading of
a Book, a man can no more find what the Authors meaning was, but only what
is the Court of Romes, who has altered every thing. And that above all things
would be thought incredible, if it were not seen in Print.

Pope Clement the eight, in the year 1595. in the Index published a rule, that
all Catholic Writers Books, written after the year 1515, might be corrected
and amended, not only by taking away what is not conformable to the Doctrine
of Rome, but also with adding to it. This Precept has been put in practice
and executed continually these seventy years, though it has been done
publicly but some few years since. So that if in Authors we find no good
Doctrine favoring Temporal authority, we know who has taken it away. If we
find any that favors the Ecclesiastical, we know who has put it in and
finally, we may be assured to have no book true. Wherefore since the only
aim is to extinguish or corrupt those Books by which only well minded men
might receive necessary instruction: The Secular Magistrate ought also to be
circumspected, and not suffer himself under feigned pretexts to be deprived
of more than heretofore he has been: and when new mention is made of
prohibiting any book which treats not of Articles of Belief, to inform
himself well of the Doctrine which it contains, and of the ends for which the
Court of Rome would forbid it, before he gives his consent: And if any good and
famous Authors Book should be new Printed, to see that the good Maxims be not
taken out, or new ones inserted, contrary to the Authors intention. Yea,
public service, justice, and honesty, would require that good Maxims should
be printed again: and that those Books which have been corrected by taking
away or altering things favoring Temporal Authority given by God, should
again be restored according to the first and uncorrupted Coppies, according to
the Authors meaning. And because by new prohibitions sent out under hand, the
force of the agreement may not be deluded or diminished, when the Index of the
year 1595. is printed, the agreement also should be printed at the end of it.
Taking notice of the prohibiting of Books, is not only necessary to prevent
the extinguishing of good Doctrine in Italy, which begins now to be done,
but also because that under the pretense of good, the Inquisition may not
usurp that authority which does not belong to it; forbidding of Books, which
though they be evil, yet have nothing to do with Religion, which is the
second prejudice.

The Ecclesiasticals have declared unto us that they prohibit books for eleven
causes, of which there be five that do in no wise belong unto them.

The first of them is, when the Book contains any thing against his
neighbouts reputation, especially Ecclesiastical Persons or Princes.

The second, if it contains any thing against Ecclesiastical liberty,
immunity, and jurisdiction.

The third, if with politic propositions of ancient Princes, or Historians,
they favor tyranny.

The fourth, if the Book contains conceits, or quippes against any ones
reputation.

The fifth, if they contain lasciviousnesses, and other things against honesty.

There is no question, but those Books wherein such absurdnesses are found
ought to be condemned: but every one may not do it, it were breeding a
confusion in the World, if every one who knows an order to be good, might
Decree it: That belongs to public authority, which only can make a Law
upon that which belongs to her Government. He that is zealous and sees the
evil which is in a book, let him procure the suppressing of it, and he do
well, by his authority that may lawfully do it.

The diligence in seeking out and discovering of an evil is commendable, but
to go about to remedy it, when it does not belong unto him is usurpation and
ambition. If by a book the neighbors reputation be touched, though he be an
Ecclesiastical man it belongs not to the Inquisition to right it. That
Office is against Heresy, and is not to protect any man's reputation. The
Secular power is protector of men's honors, and he is to defend it, and to
punish any one that does wrong it with deeds, words, or writings. Let the
Inquisition be careful, that by books there is no Doctrine sown against the
Faith; and God has provided a Magistrate to give a remedy if by deeds, words,
or books, any man's reputation is wronged. If Ecclesiastical Persons do see
any injury done to themselves or to others, it is just that they may crave the
Magistrates help, and expect amends through him. If any thing be written
against Ecclesiastical liberty and immunity, because it is enjoyed by
privilege from the Princes; it belongs to the Prince to maintain it to
them, as far as the public Service will permit: it were not good that every
privileged Person might out of his own power defend his privileges. Would
God there were Books which might deserve prohibition for being against
Ecclesiastical liberty, rather than Books that do deserve it; for extending
it so far as it does confound all government: It usurpeth and takes away
that which belongs to the Secular, and shameth Christ's Ministry, which is
for Celestial things, and not to become masters of Terrestrial, committed by
God unto others. It is not a lesser but a greater evil to extend
Ecclesiastical liberty so far, as it may become irregular, then to restrain
it more than it ought to be. What is the cause that no book is censured?
Because it vaunts it too much, and takes away the temporal. The best way to
maintain it is not to prohibit those books which keeps it within the
bounds, but rather those which do make it hideous for the absurdnesse of it:
wherefore it ought not to be denied, but if any one should write in this
behalf contrary to truth, the Magistrate ought to proceed against the author
and the book, and observe the decency and authority due to the Ecclesiastical
order; but it is not just that they should right themselves. If politic
things be written, according to the maxims of Princes, and ancient
Historiographers, according to all men's opinions it belongs not to the
Ecclesiastical to judge of them: if they be tirannicall that belongs only
to Princes* to whom is proper the Government of States. Private men do not
understand it, and much less the Ministers of Christ, to whom is severely
forbidden to entermeddle in it; and if any one will go further, he must not
think to remedy it with his own authority, but to signify it to him, to whom
it belongs to help it. As it is also most plain that those who desire to have
an unresistioned liberty, do give the name of Tyranny to the lawful power
given by God, and to that Doctrine which opposes it self to their attempts: so
that under pretense of Religion they will become arbitrators of all
Governments. The same is to be said of books containing conceits, or biting
quippes, which directly, or indirectly do offend in any one, and if they do
teach ill manners, laciviousnesse, surfeits, which offend the public dignity;
none of these excesses is Heresy, that they should belong to the Inquisition.
The Inquisitor is made a Judge of the belief, and not a censurer of manners.
By St. Paul's Doctrine public quiet, and honor are given into the custody of
Secular power, the Inquisition ought not to put her sickle into another man's
harvest. This conclusion needs no subtilnesse to make it be understood, of it
self it is plain and easy. To the same man belongs to judge and punish
deeds, words, and writings of the same matter, none can make question but that
the offending of ones reputation, favoring of Tyranny, and dishonesty, either
with deeds, or with words, are offenses subject to the Secular Judgment:
Therefore those which are committed in writing also, shall belong to the same.
By what reason can he pretend to censure the books of any of the foresaid
causes, who confesses of himself to have no power to censure the words, and
the deeds? Since that by the Princes Ministers, such a disorder is put in
practice, vid. that under pretense of favroring honesty, and Justice, and
preserving a good name, temporal authority comes to be usurped: peradventure
because it is a very new thing, that the Ecclesiastical power should prohibit
books for any other cause besides that of Religion, since no Pope ever
attempted it before the year 1550. therefore as a fresh thing, it has not yet
been well examined; or because that some who give attendance upon public
affairs, think it not ill to discharge themselves of this burden of looking
over books, and leave it to them as desire it. But as every Government
requires watchfulness and carfulness, and he that discharges himself of
these, dispoileth himself also of his authority, and does not perceive it till
it be lost, and cannot be recovered again; so the most renowned Commonwealth,
which has ordered that her Officers should over-see every book which is
Printed, to prevent any inconvenient Doctrine from coming to light, has
known very well that this care belongs to the Prince, and thence is
necessarily inferred that his Deputies ought also to see whether that there be
any inconveniences in books already printed, which may hinder the reprinting
of them. To the same Person belongs the preventing of evil, to whom the
reforming of an evil already sprung belongs. If the Prince may Lawfully by
the authority he has from God, forbid the printing of a book because it
contains blasphemy against the Godhead, favors Tyranny, offends public
honesty, teaches evil manners, or takes away another man's authority and
reputation: He may also Lawfully and by the same authority prohibit them that
are already printed, and do contain the like inconveniences.

The Index of the books made in the year 1595. is already received with
public authority by agreement; therefore the books contained in it, are to
be prohibited without exception. But if hereafter it be propounded by
Ecclesiastical Persons to have books prohibit for any of the aforesaid
reasons, it must not be granted that they should do it, but notice may be
taken, and the book prohibited by Temporal authority only, leaving it to the
Ecclesiastical power only, when the book is prohibited for cause of
Religion. There remains the third prejudice which is new, but of greater
annoyance than the other two: because that to be deprived of ones authority,
and to lose good books, are indeed very great evils, but tolerable in
respect of this, to be constrained to endure within their own Dominions, a
book known to be hurtful. The Court of Rome though it has assumed to
itself to prohibit books, also for causes which concerned not Religion, and
did not belong to Ecclesiastical power, yet before these last years they have
not dared to go so far as to say, that the Prince may not also forbid those
books which he sees do breed scandal, evil example, sedition or other
perturbance within his Dominion.

Cardinal Baronius would be the first that should free this pass, and speak
it boldly, who being conveniently opposed by that Prince who was particularly
touched, none ever since has dared to this hour to maintain the Cardinal
his enterprise. But because hereafter some may attempt the like with greater
Art, or upon an opportunity, when men's eyes shall not be so open; the business
being of such moment requires to have the success of that business briefly
set down, for a general example and document, adding thereunto the true
Doctrine, with her Grounds, answering the objected cavillations.

That Cardinal in the beginning of the year 1605. printed his eleventh Tome
of the Ecclesiastical Annals, wherein he inserted a very long discourse
against the Monarchy of Sicily. Of which discourse what concerns the Truth
of the relation, is not fitting now to be spoken of, but to be left to his
proper place: This only belongs to the present purpose, that the discourse
is full of slanders, and eagerness against many Kings of Arragon of famous
memory, and especially against King Ferdinand the Catholic, and the
progenitors on the Fathers side of him who now Reigns. The book coming to
Naples, and to Milan, was by the Kings Officers there prohibited, that it
should not be sold, nor had there for the respects of their Prince, which were
too apparent to every vulgar person. The Cardinal having notice of it,
assembled the College of Cardinals in the vacancy of the Sea of Clement the
eight, and made an invictive against those Officers, that in prohibiting of
that book had laid hands on Ecclesiastical authority. And afterward when
Paul the fifth was made Pope, he writ unto the King of Spain, a long Letter
dated the 13. of June in the same year, with this conclufion amongst the rest.
That to the Pope only belongs the approving of books of all kinds, much
more Ecclesiastical ones, complaining greatly that in contempt of
Ecclesiastical authority, the Kings Officers in Italy had prohibited his
book. The wisdom of that King thought it best to answer with deeds, and let
the prohibition run on which was published by his Officers. The Cardinal
could not contain himself, but that printing his 12. Tome in the year 1607.
he must insert to small purpose, a discourse of the same matter, saying
formally, that it was an impious and abominable thing, that in these our most
unfortunate days, the Kings Officers should dare to censure books approved by
the Pope, not suffering them to be sold by the Booke-sellers, but with their
License, which they would grant but when they pleased; yea, and would
absolutely forbid the sale of them: that they do it because the books rebuke
their unjust acts, and that it was to take out of St. Peter's hands, and putting
into the Princes, one of the Keys given him by Christ, vid. that of knowledge
to discern good customs from bad. The Counsel of Spain proceeded still with
their wonted staidness and resolution, nor did not move for the third time,
but let three years more run on. And in the year 1610. the King made an
Edict, whereby he condemned and forbad the book in so grave a manner, that
he aptly touched Cardinal Baronius, as well as he had touched the Kings his
Progenitors. And to give it the more credit and force, he caused the Edict to
be published in Sicily with a Decree, and subscribed by Cardinal Doria; and
was sent in print all the World over. The Court of Rome stood amazed, as well
for the Edict, as for the execution of it done by the Cardinal, yet in Spain
they moved not a whit, and the Edict remains still in force. Certainly there
cannot be imagined a higher enterprise, than to send into a Prince his
Dominions, a book in print against his Government, and to pretend it to be
Lawful, and that the book shall be there read, kept and sold publickely, and
that the Prince shall have no power to discover it and withstand it; and that
under color of Religion, and the authority of Christ given to St. Peter. Which
pretense will be taken away if we do but mark the Catholic Doctrine, and
the custom of the holy Church, whence the truth plainly appears, and
Cardinal Baronius his reasons are plainly confuted. It is a thing well
known, that unto St. Peter were given the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
that many holy Fathers and Catholic Writers, means by the Keys in the
Plural number, the one of Knowledge, and the other of Power; and that the
power ought not to be understood Universally, but only concerning the Kingdom
of Heaven, which is the Spiritual; for the Civil, Royal and Temporal power
is expressly forbidden him by Christ. So the Knowledge is not to be understood
of natural things, nor of corrections, much less of Politic, Civil, or
Moral things; but as St. Paul says plainly, they are made dispencers of
Christ's mysteries only: Wherefore if by the Ecclesiastical authority a book
be approved to be good in matters of Faith, it cannot be condemned as bad, by
any Secular power: but if the book treats of other matters, as of
jurisdiction, of Government, of Merchandise, although it were applauded by all
the Prelates of the World, yet does not that prejudice Temporal authority, but
that it may be condemned. It is a great wrong to pretend that because Christ
has given St Peter the Cognizance, and power of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
forbidden him the Earthly; one may against his precept extend spiritual things
to temporal. St. Augustine often says, that grace does not destroy nor take
any thing away from nature, but leaving all her own unto her, does add unto
it Divine perfections. The Temporal power has of its own nature power to
forbid all things which are repugnant to public quietness, and to honesty;
and amongst the rest writings, and books which are contrary to it. Christ is
not come to take away any of this authority from the Magistrates, but to leave
it entire; only he adds power to his Ministers, over things concerning
Christian Faith, of which men by nature know nothing, but only by Revelation:
Therefore these ought not to assume unto themselves the power of approving of
books which belong not to them, or to endeavor to deprive the Magistrate, of
the authority which is given them by God, and by nature.

Cardinal Baronius alleges the Epistles of certain Writers, who have
dedicated unto Popes their books of Histories, or of Law, or of concerning
Government; and have submitted their Works to the Popes censure: and therefore
he concludes, that to him alone belongs to approve of all sorts of books,
and that once approved by him, none ought any further to meddle with it. But
this is but a vain reason, since it does not make any distinction between
Obligatory and binding words, and words of compliment. Who ever Dedicateth a
Book not only to a Prince, but also to a private man, but that he will submit
it unto him, and that with some Hyperbole of words. If we shall upon these
Rethoricall colors ground Articles of Divinity, we will also find other
Epistles, which we will give the same power to all manner of Persons: and we
shall find many books of Physic, and of Grammar Learning, Dedicated unto
Popes, with such like phrases of speaking; and should that infer therefore
that the Papacy is an Office concerning health, or a Grammar School? Reverence
and civil speaking is one thing, and that which must be holden as an Article
of Faith is another: But because that Baronius taxes the Princes Officers with
forbidding of books, because they reprove their unjust dealings, it will be
good to speak a word concerning that; because it shall not seem that we will
have unjust things defended, nor that any should think that it is Lawful
under color of reproving of things, to disturb the public quietness. One
may speak two ways of a misdeede; by way of Thesis, or Position, vid. in
general without touching either Person, or place; or time: and to reprove in
this manner, has bin always held good for the rooting out of vice: It is
Lawful for any one to write books in this manner. Another way is by
Hipothesis, that is of particular case, naming of Persons and other
circumstances, and that is not permitted to any but to the Lawful Judge. Every
one may write against Usury in general, but to touch any particular instrument
for usury, belongs to none but to the public Judge; and the doing
otherwise, is to put the World in a confusion, leaving the managing of
businesses unto unjust persons. A generality may easily be considered of, and
has need of nothing but of study and authors; but a particularity by reason
of the infinitenesses of circumstances, requires an exquisite prudence and
experience. It is easy to say, and to prove in general, that the usurping the
Sovereignty of a State is unjust; and Cardinal Baronius might have thereupon
made a long Parenthesis. But to come to a particular, and say that the King of
Spain usurpes the Sovereignty of Sicily, is not a cause belonging to him. And
if the Kings Officers in Naples and Milan, have therefore prohibited his book,
they have not forbidden the reproving of unjustice, but rather the small
wisdom of him who judges the present possession of Sicily to be unjust,
without having so much knowledge as was needful for the doing of it. And if
the Pope did approve the book, intending to do it for the places
Ecclesiastical Dominion and State, it is well: but if he did mean it also for
other Princes States, so that it might not be prohibited by those who held it
scandalous, that had been an excess, and usurpation of other men's authority,
which ought not to be supposed of Pope Clement the eight, who was a wise
Prince. And because Cardinal Baronius adds, that public Officers cannot
prohibit Book sellers, to sell books without their License, under pretense of
hindering Heretical books from coming in with false Titles, because that
seeing such a danger, they ought with humbleness to seek that the Bishops may
do it: this also deserves a little consideration. And first, to take away all
ambiguity; neither did any approve of doing any thing under a fained pretense,
that is, to cover evil with the color of good, this being a pernicious
dissimulation; but to set up one good thing behind another, to cause it to
pass without naming of it to make the execution of it easy, or for some other
end, is not to be reproved; and the Holy Scripture does give infinite examples
of it. If an Edict were made by a Secular Magistrate, that no Booke-seller
should sell books without License, because Heretical books should not come
in; having an intent that way, to hinder not only Heretical, but all other
kind of evil books also, it were not a thing to be reproved; neither had the
Cardinal any reason to enveigh against so just a thing. But it is worse when
he says that they must have a recourse to the Bishop, for that would be a
most unperfect Government which in it self had not a means to provide for a
thing so necessary, and should stay for a remedy from him that should give it
according to his proper interests, and not according to the public necessity.
In matter of books we ought to distinguish, that it is one thing to judge
whether a book be Heretical or no, which belongs to Christ's Ministers
only, neither has Secular power any part therein. And another thing it is
when a book is known by the Church to be Heretical, to forbid it by Law,
which is not so proper to the Ecclesiastical, but that it may very laudable
be done by the Secular power.

In the Primative Church, Heretical books were examined, and declared to be
such by the Counsels, but not prohibited by them but by the Prince. The first
Counsel of Nice, condemned of Heretical Doctrine of Arius, the Emperor
Constantine did forbid his books by Imperial Law.

The second Counsel of Constantinople, did declare Eunomias to be a Heretic.
The Emperor Arcadius did prohibit the books of the Eunomians by a Law, which
is in the Theodosian Code.

The third Counsel of Ephesus declared Nestorius to be an Heretic, and his
books were forbidden by a Law of Theodosius, which is in the body of the
Civil Laws.

The fourth Counsel of Calcedon condemned the Entichians, and their books
were forbiden by a Law of the Emperor Martian who is in the same foresaid
book. This was the manner of the ancient Church, until the year 800. since
which time the Popes of Rome have declared diverse Writers to be Heretics. And
the Princes have let that Declaration pass without any other Law of theirs:
but it is not therefore to be said that they have deprived themselves of their
authority of forbidding things hurtful to their State. A Heretical book
offends the Church, and disturbs a peaceable life. The first respect which is
spiritual belongs to the Ecclesiastical, to discern good books from
evil, and to the Secular, as Protector of the Church to help it. But for the
second respect to withstand novelties for the public repose, the Secular
ought not to trust to other men's care, nor have recourse to any one; but to
abound in care, forbidding all what may in any respect hurt a good Government.

It ought to be held for an undoubted conclusion, that the Secular power may
forbid within its own jurisdiction, any book though approved by any other,
and besides his power he ought also watchfully to consider, what danger it is
if his subjects do swallow any opinion which is repugnant to good Government.
I will also put it in remembrance, that as it is a great good to the
Commonwealth, to have every book that is to be printed, examined with such
care, as is accustomed in this State, so it would not be of less good, to have
every book which is printed abroad, and brought hither examined before it be
sold. It is a folly to think that the Commonwealth may be damnified by the
printing of an evil book, and not if it be printed in another place, and so
scattered abroad. It is true, that some things may be suffered in one that is
already printed, which would not be suffered in one which is not printed. But
things of importance ought equally to be handled, as well in those that are
printed, as in those that are to print. And as it is sometimes wisdom in the
prohibiting of a book which is printed without the State, to do it with
silence, only intimating it to the Booke-sellers, to not have the business
regarded nor spoken of, so it should be my respectfull advice, that sometimes
about books which are very pernicious, it should be done by Edict and
writing, for that would be a putting in practice, the proper authority, and
not giving way to them who say, that prohibiting of books is a thing properly,
Ecclesiastical, and that would also accustom the people to it: For if the
exercising of that authority be put off till some most urgent or most
dangerous case should happen, it would run in danger of being thought to be a
novelty, and so be disobeyed.

It is necessary before we come out of this matter, to add, that some others
who have not dared to speak so great an absurdity as Baronius did, have
stumbled upon another not much lesser; granting that the Prince may prohibit
books, as seditious, dishonest or infamous: but adding thereunto, that this
prohibition ought to be obeyed for fear of temporal punishment, and not
because it tyeth the conscience: so that he that reads them, or keeps them
secret is not culpable before God. This is a false and perverse opinion, and
contrary to Christian Doctrine. St. Paul with precepts and plain words says,
that every one is bound to obey temporal power, not only because of the
punishment, but for conscience sake. When one commands any thing, having not
power from God, he that does not obey him, him does not offend his Divine
Majesty. But disobeying in that wherein the authority comes from God, he
himself comes to be disobeyed and offended.

Saint Paul who has been often alleged, but never enough, says, that God
has given the Prince charge of tranquillity, quietness, piety, and honesty:
and if for these respects the Prince prohibits a book because it is seditious,
another because it is impious, another because it is dishonest; it cannot be
said without contradicting St. Paul, that every one is not bound in conscience
to obey. If it would please God to open the eyes of many, to bring to pass
that this Doctrine as it is true and Christian, so it might be taught; and the
contrary as pernicious should be confuted, innumerable inconveniences would
cease, which we do now see daily: Because if there be some in the World who
do work for the love of honesty, the great number of the rest is divided into
two sorts. The one sort are they who do well for fear of spiritual
punishments, and the other for fear of temporal punishments. When spiritual
fear is taken away, their obedience is lost who think that they shall lie
concealed, and shall through favor and other means, hinder and eschew the
punishment: And those also which do make no account of it, which both put
together do make a great number. On the other side let us behold, how easily
some are brought to obedience, through a spiritual fear. Since God then has
given the Prince these two means to cause him to be obeyed, vid. for fear of
temporal punishments, and for conscience sake; for so St. Paul teaches, it
were a great loss to forgo the second of these means, which is not least
necessary, with letting the contrary be spread abroad contrary to Catholic
Doctrine.

Recapitulating then the heads gathered in this matter of books, they will be
ten. The first that those which are contained in the Index of the year 1595.
what cause soever they are prohibited for, the Princes consent having bin to
it, are always to be held for such. The second, that for the time to come no
prohibition be suffered, what clause soever there be in it; although it be
with censure, if it be not admitted by public authority as it was agreed. The
third, that if the Ecclesiastical shall desire the public consent, for
prohibition of books which treat of matters of Faith, so they contain (...),
their proposition being verified shall be agreed unto. The fourth that heed
shall be always taken, that under pretense of Religion, Christian Doctrine be
not forbidden, which defends temporal authority. The fifth, that it shall not
be granted to the Inquisitor to prohibit books for any other cause but only
of Heresy, but if any behad for any other respects, it shall be prohibited by
the Magistrate. The sixth, that books printed elsewhere, though approved by any
one else, by what authority soever; if they be hurtful to the Commonwealth,
they shall be prohibited by the Secular Magistrate or by a public Edict,
according to the occasion. The seventh, that in the printing again of books
heed be taken, that those things be not taken away which favor temporal
power. The eight, that if any of those that are gelded, in which the Doctrine
maintaining temporal power is taken out, be new printed, they shall be printed
again according to the old Coppies. The ninth, that if the Index of the year
1595, be new printed, care be taken that no new names be inserted. The tenth,
that together with the same Index, the agreement be printed.

There remains another point to be briefly touched in this matter which is not
of so great importance, and yet such, as of it self merits some consideration.
Which is, that the prohibition not being used with due moderation, is hurtful
to the sale of books, and to the Art of printing; for if a book be printed
which has bin seen by the Inquisitor and the Bishop, and by them approved,
yet if at Rome any thing be found though of small moment, not against Religion,
for in such a matter nothing can be of small moment, but against somewhat
touching the Court: which the Inquisitor has not entered into, who granted the
License. They prohibit the book, to his loss who caused the book to be
printed, and is in no fault having the Inquisitors approbation: and this
disorder is frequent, and would be more frequent if they did not fear that
upon the Booke-sellers complaints Princes would give ear unto it; for every
Courtier to get credit shows himself careful in marking the prejudices of
the Court, and also the shadows of them, not only in books printed out of
Italy, but in them also which are approved by the Inquisition, and even in them
which are printed in Rome it self. It were just that if any thing were found
contrary to Religion, in a book printed with approbation, the charges should
be paid by him that has approved it, since the Booke-seller is not in fault.
But if any thing be found which for its own proper respects is displeasing to
the Court, it seems not reasonable that a prohibition should be granted,
which seems also to be so resolved on by the agreement of the year 1595.
when it says, that for the time to come no books be prohibited but foreign
ones, or printed without License, or with false License, although such words
might be cavilled upon, because they have made no exception of Religion: but
the agreement being Construed in this Sense, cannot choose but be Commended.

The Exposition of the 30. and 31. Chapters.
THe thirtieth and one and thirtieth Chapters which speak of Secular Arts, and
of Artificers faults, can never be too exactly observed. Every well ordered
Commonwealth when some cruel kind of offense arises, does make a Magistrate
a purpose to take notice of that only, that the care of other things may not
divert him. For this cause, in the Christian Commonwealth, was the office of
the Inquisition appointed, which should tend only to the rooting out of
Heresy. It is most natural for every one who has the universal jurisdiction
to put over many things to him that has the particular jurisdiction, or suffer
him to usurp it, and it uses to be easily done, because of the great power
that is given him, and because that he who has the universal jurisdiction,
employed in many businesses, sometimes does not give heed, and sometimes (if
he he not a man of good knowledge) thinks that it is a helping of him, so that
he does not only not withstand the inconvenience, but does favor it. A cause
not belonging to him that has the particular jurisdiction, being once taken,
serves for example to take it the second time, and from diverse times a Custom
is framed, which afterward serves for a Law, and cannot be taken away without
many difficulties, and the universal jurisdiction comes to be diminished, and
the way is opened to the disturbing of the government. By these ways and
occasions the Inquisitors against Heresy have not only strived to draw diverse
other causes to their Office, but also to appropriate unto themselves the
government of the trade of Books, and to command diverse others alleging
therefore two kinds of reasons: The one is, that they do not command any new
thing, and that which without their command ought to be done; for if they do
enjoyne the Butcher that he shall not sell flesh in Lent, he is bound without
that to not sell it; so that the command ement is an admonishing them of their
duties. So likewise they say that they do not cause such persons to swear any
thing, but what they are bound to do. For if they cause Booke-sellers to
swear that they will not sell prohibited Books, they are already tide to do
it; so there is nothing done but to add a greater provocation to perform
their own duties. But this reason is cavillous, it being one thing to warn
one of his duty, and another to command it him. The Preacher and the Confessor
do admonish, without usurping others authority, because they impose no
penalty, nor use any means to make them obey; this is only a teaching which
is not joined with constraining. That commanding which carries in consequence
a revenge against the disobeyer, although it be a thing which is due to be
done, yet is it an act of superiority and jurisdiction, which not being granted
to the Inquisitors, but only in case of Heresy, which they cannot do it,
without usurping the universal jurisdiction. So to constrain one to swear a
thing, although it be to be done, is also an act of superiority, though without
the oath it ought for to be done. The other reason which they most frequently
use, is yet more cavillous; They say that the judging of Heresies, brings by
necessary consequence all things annexed or depending of it, and that they do
not pretend to command any, nor cause them to swear nor punish, but only in
things conjoined with Heresy: because that Heresies are taught in Books, it
is necessary for them to command Booke-sellers and others, through the hands of
whom Books do pass, and punish them which do against it. In all these
particulars it is most plain to perceive what is just: Without doubt, to whom
the judgment of a thing is committed, to him is also granted all which is
joined to it, so that it cannot be severed. Wherefore all which in such manner
is joined with Heresy, ought to be judged by the Inquisition, but that which
of it own nature is several, and may severally be judged, although by some
far fetched Consequence it might be joined; in this manner every offense, yea,
and every action might be joined with Heresy.

As for the matter of Books, those alone which contain Heresy, are subject
to that Office, and those booke-sellers which do keep or sell any, and these
ought to be punished by the Inquisition: it does not follow therefore that the
Inquisitor may burden Booke-sellers with receiving of visites, to make
Inventaries, to receive Licenses, to sell from them; and such orders as they
often attempt to make: Likewise to eat forbidden food at forbidden times, is
an evidence of an evil conceit in matters of Faith, and other circumstances
which are thereunto adjoined, and the Office proceeds against him that is
accused; but he has nothing to do with it that sels the food or dresses it,
because that it is to be supposed that these do it for their gain. But
because the desire of gain is so unruled, that oftentimes exceeding, it does
induce men to commit things against honesty, if any one should sell in such
manner as that it should provoke to evil, or should cause any other scandal,
this is not joined with Heresy. The Magistrate without speaking of Faith, or
of Doctrine, may punish the fault, and give such order as shall be necessary
for the preservation of honest, and of religious living; and according to the
honor of the City* Wherein the Inquisition may also practice her good zeal,
in showing the Magistrate the inconveniences which it sees, and showing them
the remedy, and procuring also the punishment of offenders: but by the means
of the ordinary Justice, to whom alone it belongs.

The Exposition of the two and thirtieth Chapter.
AS for the two and thirtieth Chapter, that it shall not be permitted to the
Inquisition to make any monitories against a Commonalty, nor against the Judge
in that which concerns ministering of Justice: the reason is clear, because
Heresy is a Personal offense; all those which are of a Commonalty may be
Heretics and suspected, but the Commonalty never. Wherefore if they treat of
offense, they ought not to proceed but against the persons imputed in
particular; and if ordinances, or orders which have bin taken be treated of,
the power of the Inquisition does not stretch it self over them, but only by
means of the Prince his representant, who has authority from the Prince to
command. Likewise the Judge for his private actions or words may be suspected,
for Heresy, but never for that which he does in ministering of Justice, it not
being possible for him in that to fall into Heresy, whereby his judicial
actions should become subject to the Inquisition, but they remain subject to
his superior, and finally to the Prince: So that if by any of them the office
of the Inquisition should be hindered, the Inquisitor can do no more but by the
means of the public representant take away the lets; As if the Inquisitor
should call one either as an offender, or as a witness who were by the Judge
stayed for a surety, or in any other manner the Inquisitor must not be suffered
to make a monitory to the Judge that he may be released, but that shall be the
office of the superior Magistrate; the like is of any other judicial act. vid.
to cite, to suspend, or revoke, to not give way of proceeding to the
Inquisition.

The Exposition of the three and thirtieth Chapter.
AS touching the three and thirtieth Chapter, which treats of the Edict. It
was an ancient custom that when the office of Inquisition was newly settled in
some place, they published first an Edict called of Grace, inviting within a
certain time every heretic to repentance, promising pardon; which time being
past, they published another Edict called of Justice, where all were warned who
had any notice of any Heretic, for to denounce him: This matter in our age
has been diverse ways proceeded in. Some Inquisitors when they have been
deputed into places where the Inquisition is already established, have made
these two Edicts at their coming into their Office, but this has happened but
seldom. Others have made the second of Justice only: and others have repeated
it also many times besides the first, and that was done for to add some new
thing which the accidents might bring along with them. If any Inquisitor should
have a mind to publish the Edict of Grace, he need not be forbidden it, for
it cannot prejudice temporal authority, nor be burdensome to the subject:
only one ought to take heed concerning the Edict of Justice, for oftentimes
they do attempt to insert therein some commands to Booke-sellers, Hosts, or
letters of Chambers; and they cover themselves with saying, that it serves
only to advise them, which must not be permitted them, because to advise by
Edict, Proclamation, or affixion, are signs of superiority: and it is also a
legal thing that he who warns by Edict, may also punish the offenders.
Wherefore if one will not grant them the punishing, they must not give them way
to warn by Edict, in that particular where it names Heretical blasphemers,
it must be all understood, as in the one and twentieth Chapter, and in that
part which is against them who do offend, the ministers of the Office the
denouncers, or the witnesses, the adjoined limitation must be well marked,
that is for deeds which concerns the said Office, because an abuse should not
be brought in, which has bin often attempted by the Inquisitors, that they
might alone do Justice against their own Officers, and against any as have
bin once examined in that Office, and punish all them who do offend them for
what cause soever it be: for this clause for deeds which concern that Office,
does remove all difficulties. If any one offend a Minister of that Office, he
shall not be comprehended, but shall be Judged in the ordinary Court, and
because the case was assumed from the Inquisition, it must plainly appear,
that the offense was done because of the office: and any one may likewise call
the same Ministers into the ordinary Court for any other cause; and
particularly for that cause which shall be unfolded in the nine and thirtieth
Chapter.

The Exposition of the four and thirtieth Chapter.
IT was wisely ordered by the most excellent Counsel of Ten, of cases
happening in Castles or Villages, that they should be handled in the Cities, as
in the 34. Chapter, for doing otherwise, the way was made to take away the
assistance, if the Inquisitors might have gone, or might have sent into
Villages, or Castles to frame Processes, for then they might have framed secret
ones, and so have hit upon all those inconveniences which the Assistance
prevents.

The Exposition of the five and thirtieth Chapter.
LIkewise the five and thirtieth Chapter was needfully ordained which serving
only to take away the competency of the Court amongst the representants, and
being for the Inquisitors good, who may more commodiously deal in the place of
his Residence, there needs no other consideration.

The Exposition of the thirty six and thirty seven Chapter.
Upon the six and seven and thirtieth, there needs likewise no more to be
considered, since they are to give just punishment to the guilty, which can not
be given by the Office, and it is so much the greater favor done to the faith,
as the more severely that the stubborn are punished.

The Exposition of the eight and thirtieth Chapter.
THe eight and thirtieth Chapter, which imposes punishment on them who are
cited, or examined in other places for Heresy, if they retire themselves into
this state, it is not to be supposed for the offense, because that the
examined or cited in other places might be punished with other punishments: and
therefore in the order it reserved to the Inquisittion, to give him also other
punishment. The Inquisitors use to advertise one another when those that are
examined by them, are to go into some other place. Wherefore if any that has
bin ^^amined or cited elsewhere, should happen into this state, the Inquisitor
of this place would be informed of it, and the office would Decree that he
should be retained, to which the representant should agree, then the office
ought to provide according to the tenure of the 16. Chapter. vid. sending of
the Evidences to the Inquisition of that City where the party is in prison,
which should proceed and come to the execution of the cause, whence would
follow that either the accused person would be freed, or receive deserved
punishment, but which soever of the two should happen, the public will is,
that such a one be punished with imprisonment and banishment, only for coming
hither, knowing himself to be examined: and this Ordinance is good to keep it
still alive, because it shows the pious Government of this renowned
Commonwealth, which will purge their State not only of Heretics, but also of
such as are suspected or discovered, and will take away the thought and all
hope from any suspected person, of expecting any better condition in this State
than else where.

The Exposition of the last Chapter.
THe last Chapter of Calumniators and false witnesses, is of great
consideration, not so much to maintain the proper jurisdiction, nor taking
away that which belongs to others, as for the defense, and protection of the
subjects, which being granted by God to the Prince, when he suffers them to
be oppressed without justice, he grievously offends the Divine Majesty. It is
an ordinary custom of the Office of Heresy to punish very seldom times
calumniators or false witnesses, but excuse them upon any the least
seemingnesse that they can show them, moved by a good intention, saying that it
ought not to be supposed that in matters of faith a Christian be moved for any
bad end, and if that they cannot avoyde the punishing of some, they do it with
very slight punishments, and they are spiritual, that so other affrighted by
the punishment of these, might not fear to renounce, or to testify. For
thence it would follow, that many things would be concealed which are
discovered, doing great service to the Faith, which ought to be preferred to
the punishment of them although they deserved it. Whether this caution be just
or no, is a matter which must now be left out, and only consider that it is a
great lightning and comfort to a wretch, that sees himself calumniated, when
there remains a way to-rele^^ himself, with the punishment of the
calumniators, and ^alse witne(...) in other Courts, since that in th^^ they do
not use it. The Inquisitors would not have the accused who have bin calumniated
by no means have power to have recourse to any other Tribunal, and so they
write in their books, alleging for reason, that the injury is done to that
Tribunal, to which that falsary has not borne respect; and therefore it ought
to be judged by it, and that it cannot be judged but only by a process
framed in that Office, which is not just that it should be remitted to other
Courts: But contrariwise, other Doctors do hold that calumny and false
witness being no Heresy, does not belong to the Inquisition, but unto the
ordinary superior Court of the calumniator, or of the false witness, and
especially because these ought rather to be punished with temporal
punishments, of cutting off the Tongue or the head, than by the Inquisition.
Other more discreet Lawyers approving the reasons on both sides, distinguish,
that the calumny or falsity, may either appear out of the Process framed in
the Office of the Inquisition, without any new framing; as when the witness
(which happens often) goes of himself to revoke his saying, and to ask
pardon; and in other like, which do notoriously appear by the only sight of
the Process, and in this case the judgment belongs to the Inquisition, and
the Inquisitors reasons do prevail. But if out of that Process the calumny
cannot appear, and there be need of new instance and Process, either by
complaint, or by office, the judgment belongs to the ordinary Court: which is
effectually proved by the reasons alleged by the contrary part, because that
calumny and falsity are not Heresy, nor Ecclesiastical offenses, but merely
Secular: neither is there any need of seeing the first Process, because it is
proceeded in with other instance, and other Process. This advice as well
grounded, and without interest, ought to be put in practices.

FINIS.

