Be it known to al^ (...) ^^^^entes, that it is prohibited by o^^^^ (...) the
king, by his letters p^ (...) ^^^^ers, book sellers, and (...) others that
(with (...) ^ym, that at (...) ^es printe^ (...) no (...)

(...) ^^^^uer^ (...) ^^^nions (...) call^^ (...) ^^^er, (...) next th(...)
pri^^ (...) ^^ey will answer at the (...) ^yde the penalties mentioned (...)
unto granted.

Imprynted (...) ^letestrete by John^ Bydd^^^^ (...) ^t the sign of the
Sor^^^^ (...) ^^cundite / for wy^^ (...) / the year (...)

A goodly exposition upon the.xxx. psalm In te domine spetaui.
Heaviness has beseged me with a great and strong hooste she has enclosed me,
she has oppressed my heart with clamours and ceasseth not with weapons night and
day to fight against me.

My friends be in her tents, and are become mine enemies. what soever I se,
what soever I hear, bring the banners of heuines, the memory of my friends
makes me sad, the recordynge of my children greueth me, the consyderyng of
my cloister and cell vexes me, the reuoluynge of my studies makes me pensyfe,
the thynkyng of my sins oppresses me. For like as to them, which be sick
of the axesse, all sweet things seem bitter, so to me all things be turned in
to sorrow and heaviness. Undoubtedly a great burden upon the heart is this
heaviness. The venyme of a deadly pestilence grudgeth against god, seaseth not
to blaspheme and exhorts to desperation. Oh unhappy man that I am, who shall
deliver me from her cursed hands? If all yt I se and hear follow her banners
and fight against me, who shall be my protector? who shall help me? whyther
shall I go? whyther shall I flee? I wot what I shall do, I will turn me to
things invisible, and bring them against the visible. And who shall be the
guide of so high and terrible an hooste? Hope, which is of things invisible.
Hope, I say, shall come against heuines, and vaynquyshe her. who can stand
against hope? Hear what the prophet says: Thou art (lord) my hope, thou
haste set thy refuge most high. who shall stand against the lord? who can
win his tower of refuge, which is most high? wherefore I will call her,
doubtless she will come, nor she will not confoundeme. Lo now she comes, she
has brought gladness, she has taught me to fight. and she said to me, Cry,
cease not. And I said, what shall I cry? Cry, quod she, boldly and with all
thy whole heart, say: In te domine speraui non co^funder in eternum / et in
iustitia tua libera me.

That is to say: In the oh lord, I have trusted, I shall not be confounded
for evermore, and in thy justice deliver me.

Oh the wonderful power of hope, whose face heuines can not abide. Now comes
conforte. Let heaviness cry now and struggle agay^st me with her army. Let the
world thrust down, let the enemies make insurrection, I fear nothing, for I
trust (lord) in the, for thou art my hope, for you haste put my refuge most
high. I have already entered it, hope has led me in, I my self entered not
unshamefastly, she shall excuse me before the. Behold, quod hope, o man the
most high refuge of god, open thyn iyes, and se, it is god alone, it is only
he, an infinite see of substance. Other things so be, as though they were
not. For all things depend of him, and onelesse he sustained them, they
should suddenly return to naught, for of naught were they made. Consydre
the power of him, which in the beginning created heaven and earth. Does not he
work all in all things? who can move his hand without him? who can think
any thing of him self?

Ponder his wisdom, which in tranquillity governs all, for he sees all,
and to his iyes all things be naked and open. This is he, which only
knowethe how to deliver the, and only can conforte and save the. Put not thy
trust in the children of men, in whom is no salvation. The heart of men is in
his power, whyther soever he lusts, he will turn it. This is he, which may
and can help the. Do thou suspecte his will? Ponder his goodness, consydre
his tender love. Is not he ye lover of men, which for men became man, and for
sinners was crucified? This is thy true father, which created the, which
redeemed the, which always has done good unto the. Can the father forsake his
son? Cast thy self on him, and he will take the up and save the. Search the
scriptures, and thou shalt find how busely his great tender love moves the
to trust in him. And why does he that? (...) because he coueteth to save. For
what says (...) prophet. Because he trusted in me, I will deliver (...) Lo,
for none other cause he will deliver him, but because he trusted in him. And
what other thing has the prophets, the apostles, yea he him self, the lord
of the apostles preached, but that men should trust in the lord? Sacrifice
therefore (ye men) the sacrifice of justice, and trust in the lord, and he
shall deliver you, and pluck you out of all tribulation. Oh the great virtue
of hope, truly she is spread abroad. For grace is spread abroad in her lyppes.
Oh this is truly thy refuge, so high (good lord) to which the evil of
heaviness can not approach. This I knew and understood, therefore I trusted lord
in the. For though ye weight of syn does grievously press me, yet I can not
despair / for thy goodness so gently provoked me to hope, that I can not be
confounded for evermore. For a time I may well be confounded, but for evermore
surely I can not. For hope, which has led me in to thy most high refuge
has taught me to hope, not temporal things, but everlasting. For hope is of
things invisible.

But tho things that be seen, are temporal. And the things that be not seen,
are everlasting. wherefore I hearing the words of hope, which comes to
pluck me out from the hands of heuines, have trusted lord in the, couetyng
before all things to be delivered from my sins, and through thy mercy and
grace to come to things everlasting, which be invisible. This is my first
and chief desire, for my sins be a great tribulation unto me. For from this
all other tribulation issues. Take away lord my sins, and I am free from
all tribulation. For tribulation and pensy^nes of mind, proceed from the
fountayn of the heart. For every heaviness comes of love. If I love my son,
and he dies, I am troubled because I have lost that I loved. If I love not my
servant, and he dies, I am not heavy, because I have lost that I loved not.

Take away therefore lord my sins through thy grace, what remains, but that I
shall love the with all my whole heart, and despise all temporal things as
vain? If than I have the by faith, of whom also I hope to have, that, which
neither iye has seen, nor ear has herd / nor has not ascended in to the
heart of man.

what thing can trouble me? That, which I have lost beside god, I have lost
that I love not. In the oh lord I have trusted, like as my hope has taught me
to trust / therefore I shall not be confounded for ever, for thou shalt give
me everlasting things. who trusts not in the, but in his own vanity,
shall be confounded for evermore. For he shall descend to eternal confusion. I
may be confounded temporally, both of the, and of all men, but I shall not be
confounded for evermore. For of the I may be confounded, while I desire to be
delivered from temporal vexation, and perauenture thou will not hear me.
Truly than I am confounded temporally. For it is not expedient for me, since
that virtue is made perfect in infirmity. And of men I am temporally
confounded, and they prevail against me, wha^ they pursue me. But this also
thou suffrest them to do, yt I should not be confounded for evermore. wherefore,
if before yt a thousa^de years be but as yesterday, which is passed away, I
will gladly suffer temporal co^fusions, that I be not confounded for evermore.
I will trust in the lord, for hope has taught me to trust, and shortly I
shall be delivered from all tribulation. By what merits shall I be delivered?
Not by mine, lord but by thy justice deliver me. By thy justice I say not by
min. I seek mercy, I offer not my justice. But if by thy grace thou will make
me ryghtwyse, now I have thy justice. For thy grace in us is thy justice. The
pharisees trusted in works of justice, they trusted in their own justice /
and therefore they were not subject to the justice of god. For of the works of
the law shall no creature be justified with the. But the justice of god
appeared by the grace of Jesus Christ, yea without the works of the law. The
philosophers gloried in their justice, and therefore they found not thy
justice, because they entered not in at ye door. They were thieves and robbers,
which came not to save, but to destroy and sley the sheep. wherefore thy grace
is thy justice lord, and it were no longer grace, if it were given of the
merits. wherefore not in my justice, but in thy justice deliver me from my
sins, Or surely deliver me in thy justice, that is to wit, in thy son,
which only amongst men is found just. what is thy son, but the very
justice, in which men be justified? wherefore in thy justice justify me and
deliver me from my sins, that I may be also delivered from other afflictions,
which I suffer therefore, so that ye cause taken away, the effect might also
be taken away.

Lo, the, oh lord, have I besoughte, and I am conforted, hope has so taught
me, I am replenyshed with joy, because I trust in the, therefore I shall not
be co^fou^ded for evermore. Heaviness comes again with great purueyaunce, she
is returned with swerdes and speres on every side, she is defended with great
violence, she walks, she has beseged our city. The cry of her horsemen
has feared me. Standing without, she commanded silence, and a farreof, she
spoke, saying: Oh, quod she, lo, yonder is he ye trusted in the lord, which
said, I shall not be confounded for evermore, which has followed hope, his
confortatrice. And when she perceived me at these words to wax ashamed,
approchyng me nyghe, she said, where be the promyses of thy hope? where is the
conforte? where is the delyueraunce? what have thy tears profited the? what
have thy prayers brought yt from heaven? Thou have cried, and no man has
answered the, thou haste wept, and no man has been moved with pity upon yt,
thou haste called upon thy god, and he holds his peace, thou haste desired
the help of the saints, and none of them has regarded the. Lo, what profit
have the words of hope brought the? Thou haste labored, and you fyndest
nothing in thy hands. Thynkest thou ye god regards the inhabitants of the
earth? Nay he walks about the limittes of heaven, and consydereth not our
matters. Thus she blasphemynge spoke. And when I shoke for fear at her words,
approchyng, she spoke in mine ear, saying: Trowest thou tho things be true
that faith shows? will thou se that they be but men's fantasies? Thou
shalt know hereby.

For if god became man (as they say) and was crucified for men, it could not
be, but that so great love should comfort a man, never so much oppressed
with heuines, weeping and cryenge unto him, if (as they say) infinite goodness
caused him to come down from heaven to take upon him the cross, how should he
not now come down to miserable men, that he might comfort them? Surely this
is more easy, and with like love ought to be helped. why do not the angels
and saints, if they be so pitefull, come to conforte the? How many men
trowest thou, would, if they might, come to the? and with their words and
works (as much as they might) would conforte the, which would also deliver
the from all vexation? why do not the saints this, which are thought to be
far better than men?

Believe me, all things are governed by casualte. There be no things, but tho
that be seen, your spirit shall vanishe away like smoke. who ever came again
from hell or heaven and told us such things as they say do chance to
souls after this life? These are but fables of folyshe women. Arise therefore
and flee to the man's help, that thou may be losened from prison, and live
in pleasure, and not be deceived falsely of this thy hope, and always be in
pain and trouble.

These things said, so great cry was herd in her tents, so great dynne
of the harneis, and noise of the trompettes, that uneath I could stand on my
feet. And if my well-beloved hope had not the sooner helped, heuines had led me
bound with chains to her region. wherefore hope came shynynge with a certain
divine bryghtnes, and smylyng, said: O soldier of Christ, what heart, what
mind haste thou in this battle? which I hearing, forthwith was ashamed. And
she said, fear thou not, this evil shall not take the, thou shalt not
peryshe, lo, I am with the to deliver the.

Know thou not that it is written, The unwise man said in his heart, there is
no god. This heuines has spoken like one of ye folysshe women. Can she
persuade the that there is no god, or that god has not the providence of all
things? Can you doubt of faith, which with so many arguments and reasons
have confirmed it? I wonder that thou art so felled to the ground at her
words. Tell me, I pray the, begannest thou to doubt in thy heart of faith?
O my sweet mother, the living god is my witness and also my conscience, that
I felt no manner prycke of infidelity, for by the grace of Christ, I believe
no less tho things to be true, which be appertaynyng to faith, than tho
things, which I behold with my bodily iyes. But heuines so pressed me, that
rather I should have been brought to disperation than to infidelity. Son, thou
know that this is a great gift of god, and comes not of works, that no
man should glory. Wherefore arise and fear not, but rather know hereby that
the lord has not forsaken the, which although he hears not forth with, ye
ought not despair. If he make tariaunce, abide him, for he will surely come,
and not carye.

The ploughman abides pacie^tly the fruit in the due time. Nature not
forthwith gives the perfect shappe when she brings forth a thing, but
first she prepares the matter, and disposes it by little and little, until she
makes it apt to receive ye shappe. Yet know thou that the lord always
hears him that prays deuoutely and mekely, for they never depart void
from him. Nor I will not labor to prove this with reasons, because thou felest
it in thy self. Tell me, who lyfted up thy heart to god? who induced the to
pray? who made the to sorrow for thy sins, and to weep? who gave the hope?
who made the cherefull in thy prayer, and after thy prayer? And also what is he
that daily confirmed the in thy holy purpose? Is it not the lord, which
works all in all things? If he than gives the continually these gifts, why
does that cursed woman say, where be thy prayers? where be thy tears, and
the other words of blasphemy? Know thou not that the heavenly Jerusalem is
distincted from this terrestral? Know thou not yt it is not convenient nor
necessary, nor profitable, that god or his angels should descend visibly to
men, and speak familiarlye to them. First it is not convenient, so unworthy be
our merits. For how can light and darkness agree?

Diverse cities have citezens of contrary and diverse natures. How be it to
some for their excellent holiness, for asmoche as their life was heavenly, it was
granted to se angels, and to speak with them. But a special privilege
belongs not to all. It is not necessary, because that sith blessed angels
inuisibly govern us, illuminate and comfort us. It needs not to show
visible apparancies. How be it our lord is so good, that also visible
visio^s, when he sees need, he does not omit. For what thing might he have
done for our salvation, and has not done it? Finally it is not profitable, for
ouermoche familiarity engenders co^tempte. For to the Iues miracles both
great and many, nothing auayled. For rare be precious. wherefore let the
invisible visitation suffice the / for the lord knows what thou have need
of. Has not he conforted the? I know what thou thynkest in thy heart. Arise
than and return to prayer. Cry, ask, seek, persevere / for if he will not
give because thou art his friend, yet for thy importunity he will give all
that be necessary. with these words conforted, I arose, and prostrate before
god, I proceeded in my prayer, saying: Inclina ad me aucem tuam acceleta vt
eruas me.

That is to say. Bow down thyn ear unto me, hasten the to pluck me out.

Oh lord my god, to the I return, hope has sent me unto the, I do not come
by mine own presu^ption.

Thy goodness provoke me, thy mercy draws me.

Oh how great a gentleness is this? Surely I joy in my heart / nor I desire
none other consolation. Happy truly is this necessity, which compels me to
come unto the, which constrayneth me to speak with the, which forseth me to
pray. wherefore I speak to my god, though I be my self but duste and ashes.
Bow to me thyn ear. what say thou my soul? Has god ears? Thynkest thou
that he is a bodily thing? No certainly. For sithe the spirit is far better
than the body, who would say that god were a body, onelesse he be mad? But
sta^meryng (as well as we may lord) we sown thy celestial and most high
things. we know the by thy creatures / we speak to the / and of the by the
similitudes of them. Thy ear than what is it lord? Is it thy knowledge? For by
the ears we understand tho things, which be spoken unto us. Thou knew
from the beginning all things yt men speak and think. May we than
understand by thyn ear thy knowledge? Truly thyn ear does insinuate some
what unto us, which is not comprehended in ye name of thy simple knowledge. For
unto some you boweste thyn ear / unto other you turnest it away. But thy
knowledge always abides one. what other thing than is thyn ear / but the
notice of thy alowaunce and disalowaunce. Thou bowest thyn ear, and hear
the words of good men, because they please the, and thou allowest them.
Contrarywyse thou turnest away thyn ear from the words of the wicked /
because they will not depart from their wyckednes / therefore the words please
the not / but thou disalowest them. what is than to incline thyn ear to them,
which speak unto the / but to allow their prayers, and to behold them with the
countenance of pity and mercy, to enlyghten and kyndle them, that with a trust
and a fervent charity they may pray and desire the. For thou will give them yt
they ask humbly. For if the king shows to a poor man, which comes to
speak with him, a merry cou^tenau^ce and turns his iyes unto him, shewy^g him
self ready to hear ye poor man's cause / will not the poor man be glad?
Does not the cou^tenau^ce and the attentifenes of the king cause the poor man
ye more boldly to speak his matter, and minister words and eloquence unto
him? yes undoubtedly? So likewise (lord) we perceive the, than to bow thyn
ear to our prayers, when thou grauntest us in our prayers, to be ferue^te in
spirit. I beseech the therefore (o mercyful lord and father) bow unto me thyn
ear, allow (I beseech the) my prayer, enlighten me, kyndle me, and teach me
that I ought to axe and desire, illuminate and lift up my heart, that at last
also thou may hear my prayer. Haste the (o merciful lord) to pluck me
out, shorten the days, cut of the time. So bow unto me (oh lord) thyn
ear, that shortly I may be herd of the. For unto the, which abydest for
ever, every time is short. For eternity co^prehendeth all, and excedeth every
time. But unto me, every day is long, for time is a numbrynge of the mouynge,
so that he, which feleth no motion, feleth no time, but he that feleth mouynge,
feleth time / and he most of all feleth mouyng, which numbreth the parts
thereof.

I therefore, which number the days and the hours do most of all feel the
time. And therefore like as unto the a thousa^de years are but as yesterday,
that is past, so unto me one day is a thousand years, which are to come.
wherefore hasten the lord to pluck me out from sins, and mine adversaries.
For death hasteneth and in every place awayteth for me. Hye the lord, lest
perchance I prevented of it, have no space of repentance. Pluck me out lord
from the hand of the maliciouse, deliver me from the bonds of sun, take me
from the snare of death, lead me out of the depnes of hell, save me from
oppression, and ye hard bondage of heaviness, that my mind may rise up and joy
in the / and that I may bliss the all the days of my life. I thank the lord
in Jesus my savior, for according to ye multitude of my sorrows in my heart,
thy co^fortes have reioysed my soul. wherefore I will always trust in the /
and I will for my part add unto all thy praise. Thou lord bow thin ear unto
me, hasten yt to pluck me out. Alas wretch that I am, lo, again heaviness
comes instructed with terrible armours. The banner of justice goes before
her / an innumerable hooste follows her feet / each has a spear in his
hand. I behold on every side instruments of death. woe be to me, I am undone
/ with an high and horrible voice she cries, O wretch, that same thy hope
has deceived the.

Lo, thou haste labored in vain, for you saydest. Bow thyn ear to me, hasten
the to pluck me out. Has god bowed his ear unto the? Is thy prayer herd?
where is the delyueraunce? where is the conforte? Has god hastened to pluck
the out? Yet art thou bound and a prisoner, nothing is altered. If thou
beleuest faith to be true, why do only enbrace hope? Knoweste thou not
that god is just? Know not his justice?

He spared not his angels / he pitied not them / nor will pity them / but for
one only sin they be condemned for evermore. Adam sinned, and the justice of
god punyshed the whole mankind with death. Thynkest that god does not as well
love rightwisenes as mercy? Children depertynge in original sin, shall never
se the face of god / so rygorous is ye justice of god, that for the sin,
which they did not, but received by nature, they shall be punyshed with
everlasting pain. For in hell is no redemption. Know not that god spares
not the offender? Did he not destroy in ye time of Noe, almost all mankind?
Did he not consume with fire Sodoma, and the other cities adioynynge unto it?

Nor the divine justice has not so much as taken compassion of infauntes and
innocents. How often punyshed he the Jews offendynge? was not Jerusalem
utterly destroyed by the hands of Nabugodonosor?

Neither spared he his own temple / for it was also destroyed of Titus
the emperor of Rome / where ye Iues were so cruellye punyshed / that there is no
man that hears of it, but quaketh for fear. But se how sharp the justice of
god is / the children for the fathers are punyshed even to this day. Behold,
the Iues be slaves and captives in every place / and dyenge in their blyndnes,
are punyshed with everlasting pains. Troweste thou the mercy of god is
greatter than his justice?

Truly in god it is neither greater nor less. For what soever is in god is
his substance. But let us consydre the works of justice and mercy / and we
shall evidently epsy, that the works of justice do excede the works of
mercy. God him self is witness, saying: Many be called, few elected. Mark
how many infidels be dampened / how many evil christen men there be / how few
live christianly / and thou shalt perceive anon, that there be far more
vessels of justice tha^ of mercy. The elect are the vessels of mercy / the
refuse ye vessels of justice. Let not Mary Magdalen make the trust / nor the
thief / nor Peter / nor Paul / for there was but one Mary / one thief / one
Peter / one Paul. Trowest thou to be accounted amongst so few? which haste
committed so many and so hughe sins / which haste ben a sclaunder in the
church / which haste offended heaven and earth? Lo, thyn iyes has wept / thy
heart has besought mercy / and as yet thou haste obtained none. So many
prayers of them yt loved the / be they herd? no, and why so? Surely because
thou art reputed among the vessels of ire. Thy hope has made the to labor
in vain. Follow my counsel, heaven has cast the up, the earth receive the
not. who can suffer this great confusion? Better it is for the to dye, than to
live / chose death, which, if no man will bring upon the, lay hands upon
thy self, sley thy self.

These words she with wonderful importunity laid on / and all the whole
hooste with loud voices did rehearse the same, saying: Death only is thy
refuge. But I hearing this was sore afraid, and suddenly fell down upon my
face, cryenge out, and saying: Lord help me, lord forsake me not, come my
hope, come my hope. Lo, suddenly hope glysterynge from heaven came down, and
touched my side, and lifted me up, and did set me on my feet, and said: How
long yet shalt thou be a babe? How long will thou be anouice, and a young
soldier? So often thou have ben in battle, and haste walked in the mids of
the darkness of death, and have not yet learned to fight? Be thou not dismayed
of the great justice of god / be thou conforted you fayntherted fellow. Let
them fear, which be not converted to ye lord, which walk in their own
ways, which follow vanities, which know not the way of peace. Let the wicked
tremble, which do grievously sin and say, what have I done? which be not
converted to the heart, which be called and refuse to come / they know not
god, and will not understand that they may do well. Let these fear. what
says the apostle? It is a dredefull thing to fall in to the hands of the
living god. Such, doubtless ye justice of god punysheth / such men perteyne
to her. But sinners, which returning again to them selves do rise again,
and run to the father of mercies, saying: Father, Luc. xv.
I have sinned against heaven and toward the, but be thou merciful unto me
sinner. Let such have trust in the lord, for he that has drawn them,
undoubtedly will receive them and justify them. Let heaviness bring forth, if
she can, one sinner, were he never so great, which converted to the lord,
was not received of him, and justified. For although it be written of Esau, that
he found no place of repentance, though he sought it with tears. This
makes nothing against us / for Esau did not weep for his sins that he had
committed / but for his temporal goods that he had lost, which he could
not recover. Nor think not that justice does so pertayne to the wicked, that
it is clean separate from mercy. Nor again that mercy does so belong to
ryghtwyse men, that it is clean severed from justice. For all the ways of the
lord is mercy and verity. For he shows mercy also to sinners in gyuynge
them for the good deeds that they do te^porally, temporal rewards / and after
this life in punyshyng them not so much as they deserved. Like wise his elect
he pursues with his justice in punyshyng them temporally for their sins,
that they be not punyshed euerlastyngly. Thou therefore suffer pacie^tly the
lord, thou have sinned, be sorry for it / be content that through his grace thy
sins is forgyuen the. My son despise not the correction of the lord /
neither faint thou when thou art checked of him / for whom the lord loves,
he chastises / he scourges every child that he receives. Continue than in
affliction / god shewethe him self to the, as unto his son. And though there
be few chosen children of god, having regard to the disalowed, yet there be
innumerable that shall be saved. Nor there is not only one Mary Magdalen / one
thief / one Peter / one Paul / for innumerable have followed their steps,
doing penance / and are received of the lord, rewarded with many and great
gifts of grace / nor mercy is no less in her works, than justice. For mercy
gives so great good things to rightwyse men, that her works do far excede
the works of justice. Know not that the earth is full of the mercy of god?
what creature can glory yt he has received any thy^g, which has not taken
it of the mercy of god? And if thou haste greuouslye offended god, yet his
mercy is greater than all the sins of the world. Trouble not thy self for
the multitude and greuousnes of thy sins. Has not mercy now come re^nyng and
met the? Has she not taken the up and kyssed the? Lo, thou dydest fall, and
thou werte not hurt. And why so? Art thou not afrayle vessel, which, if it
fall must needs be broused, onles some body put under his hand? why than when
thou fellest, werte thou not hurt? who did put under his hand? who? but the
lord. This is a great sign yt thou art elect / for the elect when he
falls, shall not be broused / for the lord will put under his hand. Does
not the apostle write, that to them that love god, all things work to good?
In so much that the very sin works them to good. Does not that fall
work them to good, whereby they be made both humbler, and warer. Does not the
lord receive him, which is received of humility? Thou have loved the lord
many years / for his love you haste labored. After thou dydest lift up thy
heart, and walk in the vanite of thy wit / the lord withdrewe his hand,
and thou fell / and in to the depnes of the sea thou dydest desce^de. How be
it the goodness of the lord forthwith put under his hand / and thou werte not
broused. Say than, when I was violently shoued forth, I was ouerturned that I
might fall, and the lord took me up. Not so the wicked not so / whom god has
rejected. when they fall they rise not again / but either with great shame
they excuse their sins / or else they have the boldenes of an harlot / and
after they neither fear god nor man. Arise than and be of a strong heart / be
myghttie and valiant / abide the lord and do manfully / and let thy heart be
enstre^gthed, and suffer the lord. Thou have proved thyn own prowess how it
is of no force. Than humble now thy self under the puissau^t hand of god /
and henseforth be more ware. Patience is necessary to the / without ceassynge
pray / and the lord shall hear the in due time. Arise than and lay away al
heuines from thy self / embrace the feet of the lord, and he shall save and
deliver the. These words said, she was rauyshed in to heaven / leaving me
enstrengthed and wonderfully conforted / whom forthwith with all my heart
ensuenge, I stood before god. and falling down before my saviors feet, I
said with a bold confidence, ^to mihi in deum protectorem and in domuni retugii
vt saluum me facias.

That is to say. Be unto me a god protector, and an house of refuge, that thou
may save me.

For thou god art of all the greatest and ye strongest, thou the redemer, and
savior of all / thou the protector of the faithful / to the I flee boldly.
Hope has brought me in / hope, which thou so dearly doste love / whom thou
haste always commended unto us / with her have I not feared to come before thy
face. I grant I am unworthy / but she drew me. I feared to approach nere for
my manyfolde sins, but she has encouraged me. Lo, she standethe before the /
she bears witness / I speak to my lord, being my self flesh, and a
sinner / hope taught me, and said to me, that boldly I should open my mouth.
Sweet and gentle, quod she, is the lord, he will not drive the away / he will
not be angrye / he will gladly hear / what soever you desire he will give. I
believed / for which cause I spoke. But co^syderyng thy majesty, I was
greatly humbled / and I said in my trance / every man is a liar / I will
never more trust in man, but in the only / thou only art faythefull in all
thy words / and every man is a liar. what shall I yield the, oh lord, for all
that thou have given unto me? The cup of salvation I will take / for from
henseforthe I will live not unto me, but unto the / doing good for thy love /
I will suffer all euyls / I will not do this through mine own might / but I
will call on the name of the lord. My vows I will yield to all thy people.
For in the sight of god the death of his saints is precious. Be than unto me
a god protector, defend me from mine enemies. Mine enemies are my sins,
which provoke thy ryghtwysenes against me. I shall not be able to stand
against them / if you do not protecte me. Let thy mercy be my shylde lord,
and with the shylde of thy good will crown me. I have nothing to offer unto him,
wherwt I may te^pre his furour, al yt I bring with me accuse me. wherefore I will
offer thy passion lord. Be not displeased lord god, but rather be unto me god
protector, under thy wings protecte me, with thy shulders shadow me / and under
thy feathers I will trust. what shall justice do to me, if thou kepest me under
thy protection? She will hold her peace lord, and put up the sword of her
fury / she shall be made tame and gentle, saying ye goodness of thy incarnation
/ beholding the wounds of thy passion / consyderyng the blood of thy charity
/ she will depart fro me, and say: Be merry son thou haste found me / eat
in peace / sleep and rest together with me. Be therefore lord to me a god,
protector, an house of refuge, that in ye time of rain and storm, in time of
temptations, I may flee unto the / for in the only is my health / be thou unto
me a house of refuge / open unto me thy side persed with ye spear, that I may
enter the breast of so tender love / in which I may be safe from the feebleness
of spirit, and from tempest / hyde me in thy tabernacle / in the day of euyls
protecte me in an angle of thy tabernacle / let it be the house of my refuge,
that thou may make me safe / for I can not be but safe in the house of thy
refuge / for thou have put thy refuge most high / this place is well fensed /
no enemies is there feared / would god I might always abide in it / who
dwells in it can not be wounded. wherefore at all temptations, at all
tribulations, at all necessities, open lord unto me the house of thy refuge /
spread abroad the bosom of thy tender love / show forth the bowels of thy
mercy / that thou may make me safe / let not the tempter come thither / let
not the sclaunderer clyme up / let not that noughtie accuser of his brethern
approach / I shall be than sure without cure / yea alredye me thinks I am
excedyngly well and quiet. I thank the good Jesus, that you have sent thy hope
unto me / which has raised me of duste and of donge, lift me up, and set me
before the, that thou should be god, my protector, and the house of my
refuge, to thentent thou should save me. My mind is troubled: Lo, heaviness is
at hand, she comes with the banner of justice / from yesterdays conflicte /
she departs not / but she is defended with other weapons / for this night
she has stolen away my weapons / and with my swerdes she has gyrded her
soldiers. wherefore vnweapened and weyke, what shall I do? Lo how bytterly she
cryethe / with what assaute she sets upon me / what a trust she has of ye
victory. where, quod she, is thy protector? where is thy house of refuge?
where is thy health? Continuest still in thy vain hope? Thy confortes proceed
but of imagination. Thou ymagynest god merciful / and thy protector / and the
house of thy refuge / and thou thynkest thou clymmest up to heaven. Surely thou
art illuded of thy fantasye / and comforted with vain hope. Thynkest that
thou werte ravished up to ye third heaven? These are but dreams, Recou^te with
thy self how grievous an offense is ingratitude. Does not this dry up ye
fou^tayn of mercy? Remember, Christ wept for the city of Jerusalem / and
told before ye euyls that should fall upon it, saying: The days shall come upon
the / and thyn enemies shall besege the, and compass the about / and drive
the in to streytes / and beat the down to the ground / and thy children that
be in the / and they shall not leave in the a stone upon a stone. Nor the cause
of so great vengeance he kept not close, but added it, saying: Because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation. Lo, ingratitude deserves not only to
be deprived of benefits, but also grievously to be punyshed. Does not this
belong to the soul? Does not Jerusalem often times in scripture signifies
the soul? which when it will not know the visitation of the lord, is
beseged with dyuels, and with sundry temptations, wherewith it is afflicte,
falls down to earthly things, is prostrate, nor no good virtue, nor no good
deed is left in it, which is not destroyed, for it is spoiled of all grace /
neither is it builded again, she knows not the time of her visitation. Thou,
truly, thou, I say, art this city, enryched of god with many and great
benefits, and thou acknowlegest it not, but werte unkind / he created the to
his own lykelynes / in mids of his church, not among the infidels he made
the to be borne / he did set the in a floryshy^g city / with the water of
baptism he sanctified the / in a religious house he brought the up. But thou
rannest after thy lusts, in the vanity of thy brain thou walkedest / thou
rannest down in to deep sins / the lord called the, and thou answeredest
not. He often advertised the, and you regardedst not his counsel. How often did
he lyghten the? How often did he turn the to thy heart? How often did he awake
the fro sleep? He invited the, and you excusedest thy self / he plucked, and
thou dydest resyst him. At last his ineffable goodness overcome the. Thou dydest
offend, and he visited the / thou fellest, and he plucte the up / thou werte
ignorant, and he taught the / thou werte blind, and he lyghtned the / from
the rumble of the world / from the tempest of the sea, he brought the to
quietenes, and to the port of religion / he gave the the habit of holy
conversation / he made the his preeste / he brought yt to the schools of his
wisdom / and yet thou haste always ben unkind / and negligently thou have
done the will of the lord / when yet thou knew it written. Cursed is he that
does the work of the lord neglige^tly. Nor thus the goodness of god did not
leave the, but always brought the gently to better / and which is most of
all, garnyshed yt with knowledge of scripture, the word of preaching he put in
thy mouth / and did set the in the mids of his people, as one of ye great
and famous men. Thou, this notwithstanding, taughteste other, and regardest not
thy self / other thou healedest, and thy self you sauedeste not / thou
lyftedest up thy heart in thy worship / and therefore thou have lost thy
wisdom in thy worship. Naught werte thou made, and naught shalt thou be for
evermore. Knoweste thou not that the servant knowing the will of the lord,
and doing it not, shall be beaten with many strypes? Do not know that god
resists ye proud? How fellest thou Lucifer / which dydest spring up in ye
morning / which dydest wound the gentyls / which saydeste in thy heart, I
will clym up to heaven. But you werte plucked down, to hell in to the deep of
the lake / under the lyethe the mottes / and thy hyllyng is worms. Thynkest
thou now to find mercy, which haste offended many / which so often called
and monyshed of god, would not answer? where were than the justice of god?
where were than the equity of judgment? Mercy does not always follow sinners /
she has set her bounds. Is it not written: I have called, and ye have becked
away / I have spread abroad my hands, and there was none that would look upon
me / ye have despised my counsel, and neglected my increpations: I also in your
decay will laughe and ieste, when that thing that ye feared come unto you?

Lo, not always mercy gives pardone to the sinner. Do not co^sydre ye
degrees of mercy to have an end / in the which, being adourned with so many
benefits of god, dydest fall into ye deep see / which garnished with so many
graces / for thy pride and vayneglory werte a sclaunder to the world? Let not
than vain hope deceive the, whom thou folowest / live henseforth after thy
lust and appetite / be not punyshed both in this life and in the other with
eternal pains. Chose to dwell with them, which lead their days in
pleasure, and in a moment go down to hell. Nor let not shame hold the back.
Take the foreheed of an harlot / let us eat and drink for to morrow shall we
dye. Thy wound is despayred on, it is made incurable. when she had said these
words, all the hooste cried out with horrible voices, and repeted her words,
saying: Thy wound is despayred on, and made incurable.

I remembryng the aduertiseme^tes of my mother, though I was somewhat deiecte
in mind, yet to my power I plucked up my self, and stood upon my feet,
lyftynge up mine iyes to heaven, from whens I hoped for help. And lo, hope with
a cherefull countenance furnyshed with divine beams, desce^dyng from above
said, who is that that enuolueth sentences with unlearned words, which sets
bounds to infinite mercy? which folyshe person think to bear the waters
of the sea in her hands. Have you not herd the lord, saying: In what hour
soever ye sinner bewayleth his sins, none of all his inquities I will
record? what man is he that synneth not? who can say my heart is clean? The
Pater noster belongs to all, in which all men are compelled to say: Dimitte
nobis debita nostra. Forgive us our sins. Our lord taught ye apostles thus
to pray. Does not than this prayer belo^ge to other? Thapostles received
first the holy ghost. And why taught he them thus to pray, if they had no
sin / and if they had, who can glorify that he is no sinner? Hear the
beloved disciple of the lord. If we say, quod he, that we have no sins, we
begyle our selves, and troth is not in us. James the apostle. In many things,
quod he, we all offend. wherefore all have sinned, and need the mercy of god,
yea the holy men of god. For it is written, Seven times a day fall the just
man, and he shall rise again. wherefore mercy has no limittes nor bounds. But
so often as the sinner lame^teth his gylte, so often he obteyneth mercy. Nor it
skillethe not whether we speak of great or of little offenses. Thou have
fallen, arise, and mercy shall take the up. Thou shrynkest, call, and mercy
shall come unto the. Again thou falleste, again thou shrynkeste / turn the
to the lord, and the bowelles of his pity shall open to the. Thou falleste
the third time, and the fourth. Knock, cry, and mercy will not forsake
the. As often as thou synnest, so often rise again, and mercy shall have none
end. why do thou vpbrayde the benefits that thou haste taken, o thou
wretched woman, heaviness? Did not David the great prophet receive many and
great benefits? Of whom the lord said, I have found a man according to my
heart: and yet he sinned, and that grievously, as well in aduoutrie, as in the
murderyng of a good and innocent person / and yet the lord ended not his
mercy in him. what bryngest thou the sin of pride? Did not David lift up his
heart, and caused to nu^bre the people of Israel? For he gloried as though he
had been a great king and a mighty in his own strength and puissau^ce / and
yet he was not reiecte for this. why? For he did not hyde his syn, he did not
bost it as Sodoma did, but he said: I will confess agay^st my self, mine
injustice to the lord. wherefore mercy has set no limits nor bounds unto
her self / but the wicked and dampened persons do set ends to them selves,
that they may not pass unto it, for she comes to them but they drive her
away. wherefore it is written: Thy perdition Israel is of thy self / of me only
is thy help. Open thy mouth, says mercy, and I will fylle it. Hold out thy
bosom, and I will give the a good measure, and heaped full, and flowynge over.
Continue in prayers and weeping. For he that has begone to love the, and
provoke the with benefits and graces to his love, will not leave the, but give
the encreast and perform rather his work. what natural cause begins a
work, and leaves in the myd way? The virtue of sede ceasseth not until it
has brought the fruit to perfection. what bird leaves her young, before
they be able to rule them selves? why do they this? what profit comes unto
them of this? None truly but only labor. Love than co^pelleth the natural
causes to bring their effects to perfection / goodness co^pelleth them, which
they covet to pour out / for goodness always diffundeth it self. If than the
creatures do this, what shall the creator do? for he is the self love, he is
infinite goodness. Shall not he make perfect his work? Hear the lord Jesus,
It is my work, quod he, to do the will of him ye sent me, that I should make
perfect his work. He than yt began to love the, with his gifts and free
benefits to allure the unto him, to ^^ense the, and also to pourge the from
sin. without doubt he will make perfect his work / for these be the
preparations of everlasting life. why therefore now when thou fellest, werte
thou not broused? was it not because the lord did put under his hand? And why
did he put under his hand? why did he turn to the thy heart? why did he
provoke the to repentance? why did he conforte the? was it not because he
would make the cleave and stick unto him, and make the worthy his grace, and
bring the to everlasting life? These be not illusions, and thy imaginations /
but divine inspirations. But be it, let them be imaginatio^s, be they not good?
Do they not come from the virtue of faith? wherefore sith all good issues from
god, undoubtedly these imaginations are divine illuminations. Rejoice therefore
in these words. At these words my heart was so comforted, that for joy I
began to sing, saying.

Dominus illuminatio mea: et salus mea / quem timebo?

Dn^s protector vite me: a quo trepidabo?

That is to say: The lord is mine enlyghtnyng and my health, whom shall I fear?

The lord is the protector of my life, of whom shall I be abashed?

At the feet of the lord prostrate with weeping I said, Lord, though a field
be pytched against me, my heart shall not fear / for my fortitude, and my
refuge art thou / and for thy names sake thou shalt bring me out and nouryshe
me.

An end of the exsposition of Hierome of Ferrarie upon the psalm of In te
domine speraui, which prevented by death he could not fynyshe.



Men's cujusque is est Quisque
SP




