A Perfect platform of a Hoppe Garden, and necessary Instructions for the
making and mayntenaunce thereof, with notes and rules for reformation of all
abuses, commonly practiced therein, very necessary and expedient for all men to
have, which in any wise have to do with Hops.

Made by Reynolde Scot.

Prouer. 11. Whosoever labors after goodness, finds his desire.
Sap. 7. Wisdom is nymbler than all nymble things:
She goes through and attayneth to all things.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
Sign of the Star. 1574. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the Right worshipful Master Willyam Louelace, Esquire, Sergeaunt at the
Law.
Sir, considering the whole course of your life, how it altogether tends
to the necessity, to the profit, and to the commendation of your Country,
namely, in execution of Justice, in dyrection of Counsel, and in mayntenance
of Hospitality: waying also the disposition of your nature, how it rather
inclyneth to procure commodities, that make to the increase of your expenses,
than to deuyse argument of private profit, to the qualifying of your charges,
and last of all, acknowledging my self bound unto you in many duties, (as
being laden under the burden of your benefits) I thought good to entertayne
your courtesy with some thankful deuyse, which might neither interrupt these
your proceedings, nor empayre your estimation, nor yet obscure the liberal
disposition of your mind, and that none otherwise, but by way of request,
desiring you, to accompanye these your affections, with a matter of profit, or
rather with a point of good Husbandry, (in appearance base and tedious, but in
use necessary and commodious, and in effect pleasant and profitable) (that is
to say) to look down into the bowels of your ground, and to seek about
your house at Beddersden, (which I see you desire to garnishe with many costly
commodities) for a convenient plot to be applied to a Hoppe garden, to the
furtherance and accomplishing whereof, I promise and assure you, the labor of
my hands, the assistance of mine advise, and the effect of mine experience:
And herein I rather crave pardon for my present boldness, than thanks for my
promise past, or praise for my pains to come, as having more cause to ingraue
your benefits in stone, and to proclayme them in the Market place, than to
print them in the dust, or to rake them up in a Hoppe hill, but being desirous
to prosecute the affection I bear unto you, to the uttermost of my power, I
set my good will in stead of better ability, in this sort, to meet with your
friendlynesse toward me, and if it shall please you, being of such condition
and reputation (notwithstanding the indignity of the matter) to allow of this
motion, you shall thereby especially warrant the good opinion which is
generallye conceived of your good nature, increase the measure of your courtesy
toward me, and finally make many other beholding unto you, for whose sake I
shall publishe a note for their profit and commodity, and though it be unto
you a matter of small importance, for that he which is full, abhors the
Honey comb, Prouer. 27.
yet in as much as I present herein a mind that wishes well unto you,
appeaching my disabilitie, and giving in evidence against my sloth, producing
as witness hereof, a hand ready to do, a pen to write, and a tongue to
speak well of you, I hope the well meaning of my device shall be by you
accepted, although the merit of my deed may justly be condemned, my writings
wanting form, my wyshes effect: and be it also known to all men by these
presents, that your acceptance hereof shall not be in any wise prejudicial
unto you, for I deliver it as an Obligation, wherein I acknowledge my self to
stand further bound unto you, without that, that I mean to receive your
courtesy herein, as a release of my further duties, which I owe unto you. And
although my matter be base, my deuyce simple, and my style homely, especially
for the contentacion of a delicate ear, yet I trust it shall be gnitum opus
agricolis, unto whose capacities I have directed the tenor hereof, not
bumbasting the same with the figures and flovvers of eloquence, to the glory
of my pen, or to the obscuring of this mystery, which although it shall seem
plausible unto some (through the exceeding profit levied thereby.) Truly Sir,
mine only meaning is hereby to gratify you, and to satisfy the necessity
of my Country, and not to give the reins to insatiable Heraclitus, or to
niggardlye Aristides, which covet to quench their thirst with the licour (or
rather the lucre) of flowing gaynes, nor to fill the paunche of Epicure, nor
yet to paumper him in his ease and idleness, neither to ballace the belly of
Bacchus, or to lull or rock Aeschilus in his drowsinesse, which sort of people
are greedy to taste of the marrowe of gaynes, and loath to break the bone of
labor, which is the myddle and both ends of this experience, and therefore
this special note I will here set down for a general rule. The covetous man
that lies in wait to spare his halfepenye, the sluggarde that sleeps away
opportunity, and the unskillful that refuses to learn the right order; may
happily rellesse the bitterness of the Hoppe, but shall never savor the
sweetness thereof, and yet if Hoppes would be had with wyshes, or if
commodities might be bought with desire, who vvoulde be better provided than
these men, namelye these, that make their provision lying in their beds, or
sitting by the fire, and in the end buy a great Kyte in stead of a little
Lark, whose minds void of vvysedome, make their Purses many times void of
money, and their doyngs void of effect: for the eschuing of all such
inconveniences, as in this matter may happen, I mean if it shall seem good
unto you, to publishe this Pamphlet, wherein if any thing have escaped
consideration, I submit the same to the correction of any other man better
practysed herein than I am: in the mean time I heartily desire you to allow
of my motion, and to satisfy my request.

Reynolde Scot.

To the Reader.
Although Solomon wysheth us not to take overmuch pains to be rich, Prou. 23.
signifying unto us thereby, that the man that so does, Prou. 28.
cannot be vnguiltie, and though he say further, that greedye traueyle does
nothing herein prevail, Prouer. ^.
in as much as it is the blessing of the Lord that makes men rich, and
albeit, Ibidem.
he also say in appearance to the contentacion of the Idle, that one handful
is better with rest, Ecclesi. 4.
than both hands full with labor and traueyle. Yet the same Solomon also
says, that the slothful body that will not go to the Plough in Winter for
cold, shall beg in the Summer for need, Prou. 20.
giving us to understand thereby, that a simple man that works, Prou. 12.
is in better case than a gorgious man that wants, because the diligent hand
shall proceed in authority, Prou. 13.
while the Idle person shall remain under tribute. He says also in despyte
of Idleness, that, Prou. 10.
the slothful is brother to the waster, and in contempt of sloth, that, the
sluggarde shall go in a ragged coat, Ecclesi. 10.
showing us how through sloth our banks fall down, and how through the
Idleness of our hands, it rayneth into our houses. Ibidem.
Finally, he says to the comfort of the poor, that they which be diligent
shall stand before Kings, Prou. 22.
and not in common places, and therefore. Solomon meant not to impeach a
paynefull hand, but to control a covetous mind, in witness whereof he
sends the Idle sluggard that sleeps at home, to the busy Emmet that
works abroad, Prou. 6.
and the sturdie runnagate that has none abiding, to the seeble Conye that
buyldeth among the rocks, Prou. 30.
even to be taught by those sielye worms to correct themselves, and thus is
the covetous man condemned, because he sets good conscience behind his
greedy desires, and places his private profit before common humanity, to
erect unto himself and his posterity, a kingdom of vanity and idleness.
The slothful man is confounded, because he abuses the time lent unto him, as
though he only among all the Creatures of God, had a special privilege to be
idle and careless: and therefore I am bold to commend this work unto you,
even so far forth as the right use and purpose thereof deserves (that is to
say) as a recompense to the labourer, as a commodity to the housekeeper, as a
comfort to the poor, and as a benefit to the Country or Common wealth,
adding thus much hereunto, that there cannot lightly be employed ground to
more profitable use, nor labor to more certain gaynes: howbeit, with this
note, that no mystery is so perfect, no flower so sweet, no Scripture so
holy, but by abuse a corrupt body, according to his venomous nature, may draw
poison out of the same, and therefore blame not this poor trade for that it
makes men rich in yielding double profit, neither reprove me because by
these presents I give notice thereof, in publishing this order, but condemn the
man, or rather the mind, that wresteth it to serve his miserable affection, or
covetous humor. Truly it greeueth me daily to see time ill spent, labor
lost, cost cast away, much good ground naughtily applied, and many good men
shamefully abused, through ignorance and ignorant workmen that undertake to
deal herin; I see almost every man set his hand to work, or his head to devise
hervpon. Finally, I see the Flemmings envy our practice herein, who altogether
tend their own profit, seeking to impownde us in the ignorance of our
commodities, to cramme us with the wares and fruits of their Country, and to
do any thing that might put impediment to this purpose, dazeling us with the
discommendation of our soil, obscuring and falsifying the order of this
mystery, sending us into Flaunders as far as Poppering, for that which we
may find at home in our own backsides. But it were better (in my judgment)
to unlearn that which is conceived amiss, and to undo that which is
unprofitably done, than to proceed with loss, and to end with derision, it
were better also that Strangers should envy our prosperities, than our
friends should pity our pouerties, or that we our selves should lament and
bewail our own necessities, proceeding from our negligence in this behalf.
Now therefore let this suffyce to entreat you to consider herevppon, and then
let your own consideration prevail to move you to take the work in hand,
and so are you made an arbitrer of your own commodity, as being desired to
measure your charges by your profit: I say therefore to you that shall be
hereby persuaded to be doing herin, give ear to the reading, give diligence
to the woorking, and doubtless you shall give credit and good report to the
sequel hereof. Howbeit, I for my part can better use my hand in doing, than
my pen in descrybing this mystery. Nevertheless, hoping hereby to stand my
friends and country in some profitable stead; I rather choose to incur the
danger of derision in speaking homelye, than the fault of ingratitude in
saying nothing, the respect of duty vanquishing in me the fear of ill report,
mine ignorance craving pardon, mine affection, good will, and let them that are
so dangerous of their cunning go for me with Tymon into the Desert, there
solitarilye to enjoy their dainty wisdom. And to say the troth, to use
eloquent school phrases in a homely rustical matter, were to bring the
Country people to a new form of hearing, wherein they should be longer in
learning to understand the curiosity of the style, than the knowledge of the
Art, for such men (such men I mean whose hope is in their hands) have not
been brought up in a cloase study to discipher the Art of Rhetoric with
their wits, but have been trained in the open fields to practyse the Art of
Husbandry with their Lymmes, as being placed in the frontiers of poverty, to
bear the brunt of traueyle and labor, and therefore it suffyceth, if in a
rude Caske I exhibit wholesome fruit, and write plainly to plain men of the
Country, and yet Saepe etiam est holitor valde oportuna locutus. In this sort
I shall teach I trust without great error or tediousness, and you shall learn
(I hope) without great pain or charges, the manner how, the time when, and
the place where to plant Hoppes with effect: God give you increase according to
his holy will, and to your good desire. In the mean time I desire of the
learned, patience in reading, of the unlearned, diligence in hearing, of the
rich, some expenses toward their great commodity, of the poor, some pain for
much profit, and of them all, good will for mine endeavor. Finallye, I heartily
desire you that when you have once conformed your self to the right order, you
proceed accordinglye, otherwise neither of us shall be any thing the near,
you of your purpose, nor I of my desire, and if there be contained herein any
note of profitable instruction, apply the same to your own commodity. If the
Lord bless your endeavor with increase, yield unto him (as unto whom the
same appertains) all praise and thanks therefore.

Reynolde Scott.

The Printer to the Reader.
FORASMVCH, AS M. Scot could not be present at the printing of this his Book,
whereby I might have used his advise in the correction of the same, and
especially of the Figures and Portratures contained therein, whereof he
delivered unto me such notes as I being unskillful in the matter, could not so
thoroughly conceive, nor so perfectly express, as the expectation of him being
the Author, or of you being the Reader, might be in all points satisfied. J
shall desire you to let his absence serve for mine excuse in this behalf, I
also pray you to take somewhat the more pains in conferring the words with
the figures, which will mutually give light one to the other, and finallye will
assist the understanding of you the Reader, but chieflye of him that cannot
read at all, for whose sake he devised and procured these Figures to be
made, and howsoever the Paynter has performed his office, or I my service
herein, I am persuaded that the Author has perfitelye accomplished his duty,
and plainly delivered unto you the effect of that which he has taken in hand

Farewell.
The Table.
A Perfect Platform of a Hoppe garden. fol. 1. Of unapt and apt ground for
Hoppes. fol. 1 Of the Situation. fol. 3 Of the quantity. fol. 4 A proportion
of the charge and benefit of a Hoppe garden. fol. 4 Of the preparation of a
Hoppe garden. fol. 6 The time to cut and set Hoppe Roots. fol. 7 Rules for the
choice and preparation of Roots. fol. 7 Of the good Hoppe. fol. 8 Of the
unkindly Hoppe. fol. 8 Of the wild Hoppe. fol. 9 Of setting of Hoppe roots.
fol. 9 Abuses and disorders in setting. fol. 13 Provision against annoyaunce,
and spoil of your Garden. fol. 14 Of Poales. fol. 14 Of the erection of
Poales. fol. 18 Of Ramming of Poales. fol. 19 Of Reparation of Poales. fol. 19
Of the preservation of Poales. fol. 20 Of tying of Hoppes to the Poales. fol.
22 Of hylling and hills. fol. 23 Abuses in hylling. fol. 27 Of the gathering
of Hoppes. fol. 29 What there is to be done in vvinter herein. fol. 32 The
order for reforming your ground. fol. 33 The order of cutting Hoppe roots.
fol. 33 Of diverse men's follyes. fol. 36 Of disorders and maintayners thereof.
fol. 37 Of an Oste. fol. 38 Of the several Roumes for an Oste. fol. 38 Of the
Furnace or Keele. fol. 39 Of the bed or upper floor of the Oste, vvhereon
the Hoppes must be dried. fol. 40 The orderly drying of Hoppes. fol. 42 Other
manners of dryings not so good. fol. 45 The very woorst way of drying Hoppes.
fol. 46 Of not drying. fol. 47 Of the packing of Hoppes. fol. 47 The
reformation of a Garden of vvylde Hops. fol. 49 The reformation of a disordered
Garden. fol. 50 Needelesse curiosities used by the unskillful. fol. 51 The
Epilogue. fol. 53
Faults escaped.
In the.xix. Page, and the.xxij. line (that is to say) in the first line of
the title of Reparation of Poales, for, If any of your Poales, read, If any
of the Poales, and in the next line save one, for the broken Poale, read the
same broken Poale.

In the.xxj. Page, and in the.xxiij. line, for overthwart, read cross or
thwart.

In the.xxiiij. Page, and in the second line, and the first word, for sithe,
read, snythe, and in the.xxj. line of the same Page, for appear, read,
declare.

In the.xxvj. Page, line.xxij. for long, read, great. In the same Page, and in
the next line, for longer, read, greater.

In the.xxix. Page, line. xxviij. for, here is instrument, read, one
instrument.

^^d. for, as as, read, as.

In the.xxxiij. Page, line.xxiij. for, you must of necessity, read, you must
now of necessity.

In the.xxxvj. Page, line. j. for the hill, read, and the hill.

In the.xxxix. Page, line.xxix. for, and not, read, and of.

A perfect Platform of a Hoppe garden
AT what time necessity, or any other good consideration shall move you to
deuyse for a Hoppe garden, you are to consider of these three things.

First, whether you have, or can procure unto your self, any ground good for
that purpose.

Secondly, of the convenient standing thereof.

Thirdly, of the quantity.

And this I say by the way, if the ground that you deal withal, be not
your own enheritaunce, procure unto your self some certain term therein,
least another man reap the fruit of your traueyle and charge.

Of apt and unapt ground for Hoppes.
SOme hold at this day (and Ancient writers witness the same) that earth
being salt and bitter of taste, Virgilius.
is neither good, nor apt to be made good.

It is also often written, and generally received, that such earth as you shall
see white and bare (that is to say) wholly chalk, or all sand lacking a
mixture of perfyte earth, Didymus.
or if it be clayie, or so dry, Plinius.
as thereby it shall gape or coane in the summer, is naught. etc.

It is further said, that if you shall feel a clod (being dissolved with
water) to be very clammy, or cleaving like Wax to your fyngers in kneading it,
the same to be profitable land. etc.

I for my part rely not upon other men's opinions, neither mean to dispute
with any man herein, I like not to make my mouth an arbitrer in this matter,
mine eye may be deceived, and my feeling may err in the precyse distinction
of good or bad land, but mine experience has never failed in this thing (that
is to say) that a barren, a moorie or wette soil (though it perhaps do
content a wild Hoppe) shall never please nor maintain a good Hoppe.

I will not say with Varro, that a good ground yields Walwoortes, nor with
Columella, that where Crabbes or Sloes grow, there the ground is rich. I can
say nothing of Florentines experience, in digging a hole, and fylling it up
again, and by the swelling to judge the strength, or by the gaping to defyne
the weakness thereof, but I can say again by sure experience, that a dry
ground, if it be rich, meoloe, and gentle, is the soil that serves best for
this purpose, and such a moulde must either be sought out, or else by cost and
labor be provoked.

If it be a very shallowe rock (except you raise it with greet or good
earth) you shall not set your Poales deep, steddye, and fast enough, to
withstand the force of the wind.

To redress the inconvenience hereof, you shall be taught in the title of
Poales.

A light moulde (though it be very rich) is not very apt for this purpose, for
it is a received and a proved rule, that the heauyest ground will bear the
most weight of Hoppes, I say, so as it be a ground apt for this purpose.

Of the Situation.
IT were good to place your Garden so as the Sun may have free recourse into
it, either the whole day, or the greatest and warmest part thereof, so also as
if may be armed against the violence and contagion of the Easternlye and
Northernlye wind, but this I would wish to be considered rather in the
situation of the place, naturallye defended with a Northernly or Easternlye
hill, than artificiallye be set and guarded with trees. Howbeit, if you be
driven hereunto, provide so (if you can) that your trees may stand aloof,
even that the shadow of them, reach not into your Garden, but in any wise
that they drop not upon the hills.

It should also be placed near to your house, except you be able to warrant
the fruit thereof from such fyngers as put no difference between their own
and other men's goods.

Also your Garden being thus placed, there may be made thereunto the more
speedy and continual recourse, besides that, that the Masters eye shall
many times withstand and prevent the servants negligence.

Finally, by this means, it may be with most ease and least charge helped with
dunge.

Of the quantity.
THe quantity of your Garden, must either be measured by the proportion of
your yearly expenses of Hoppes in your house, or by the cost you mean to
bestow in the preparation and keeping thereof, or by the pains and business
that you are disposed, or able to employe upon it, or else according to the
profit and gaynes, that you mean to levy and win by it, which later
consideration pleases and flattereth much a covetous man's conceyt, whose
vain or humor, (or rather vain humor) is so resisted in the rules
appertayning hereunto, as many times the greediness of his desire, is the
overthrow of his purpose, as shall hereafter appear.

A proportion of the charge and benefit of a Hoppe garden.
But to be resolved in all these points that conscerne the quantity of your
Garden, you must make your account in this voyse.

One man may well keep two thousand hills, and yet reserve his wynters labor
for any other purpose.

Upon every Acre you may erect seven, eight, or nine hundredth hills, as
hereafter shall be declared.

Upon every hill well ordered, you shall have three pounds of Hoppes at the
least.

Three pounds of these Hoppes will largely serve for the bruing of one quarter
of Malt.

One hundredth pounds of these Hoppes, are commonly worth.xxvj. s. viij. d. So
as one acre of ground, and the third part of one man's labor, with small cost
besides, shall yield unto him that orders the same well, fortye marks
yearly, and that for ever.

And here is to be noted, that ground orderly used, does not only yield the
more, the greater, the harder, and the weyghtyer Hoppes, but also they shall
go further, they shall endure longer, they shall be holesommer for the body,
and pleasaunter of verdure or taste, than such as be disorderly handled.

These things considered, you may proceed to the making of your Gardeyn,
wherein you are yet to have counsel, for the laying out thereof, for the due
season and the right trade to cut and set Hoppe roots, what choice you shall
make of them, what charge you shall be at for them, you are yet also to learn
the time, when, and the way how to prepare your ground, and to make it able to
entertain and nourishe them, to frame your hills, to maintain them, and to
pull them down, to cut, to fashion, to erect, and to preserve serve your
Poales, to gather, to dry, and to pack your Hoppes, with many other
circumstances necessarily appertaining hereunto. Finallye, you must be taught
the reformation of many enormities and abuses which are received in most
places for good rules, the which (God willing) I will set forth truly according
to the notes of experience, although not learnedlye after the rules of
Rhetoric.

Of the preparation of a Hoppe Garden.
YOu must lay forth the ground which you determine to imploye this way, in as
level, square, and uniform wise as you may.

If your ground be grassye, roughe, or styffe, it should be first sown with
Hemp, or Beans, which naturally makes the ground moolowe, destroys
weeds, and nevertheless leaves the same in good season for this purpose.

But in what plight or state soever your ground be, till it, in the beginning
of Winter with the Plough, if it be great, or with the spade, if it be small,
and this do, not only the year before you plant it, but also every year
after, even so long as you mean to receive the uttermost commodity of your
Garden, assuring your self that the more pains you take, and the more cost
you bestow rightly hereupon, the more you do double your profit, and the
nearer you resemble the trade of the Flemming.

The time to cut and set Hoppe Roots.
IN the end of March, or in the beginning of April, repair to some good
Garden orderly kept, as wherein the Hoppes are all of a good kind, all yearly
cut, and wherein all the hills are raised very high, (for there the roots will
be greatest) then compounde with the owner or keeper thereof for choice roots,
which in some places will cost six pence an hundredth, but commonly they shall
be given unto you, so as you cut them your self, and leave every hill orderly
and fully dressed, but what order you shall use herein, I will hereafter show.

Rules for the choice and preparation of Roots.
ANd now you must choose the biggest roots you can find (that is to say) such
as are in bigness three or four inches about.

And let every root which you shall provide to set, be nine or ten inches long.

Let there be contained in every such root, three joints.

Let all your roots be but the springes of the year last past.

You must have great regard that you cumber not your Garden with wild Hoppes.

Wild Hoppes are not to be discerned from the good, by the roots, but either
by the fruit, or by the stalk.

Of the good Hoppe.
THe good and the kindly Hoppe bears a great and a green stalk, a large
and a hard bell.

Of the unkindly Hoppe.
THe Hoppe that lykes not his entertaynement, namely his seat, his ground,
his keeper, his dunge, or the manner of his setting. etc. appears at the first
out of the ground green and small in stalk, thick and roughe in leaves,
very like unto a Nettle, which will be commonly devoured, or much bytten with
a little black fly, who also will do harm unto good Hoppes where the Garden
stands bleake, or the Hoppe springs rath, but be not discomforted herewith,
for the heat of the Summer will reform this matter, and the later Springs
will be little annoyed with this Fly, who (though she leave the lease as full
of holes as a net) yet she seldom proceeds to the utter destruction of the
Hoppe.

Of the wild Hoppe.
OF the wild Hoppe, the fruit is either altogether seed, or else loose and
light belles, the stalk is read, howbeit, herein the difference between the
good and the badde Hoppe is not to be discerned, until the stalk be two or
three yardes high, for at their first coming up, the one as well as the other
appears read, and the best Hoppe is then the reddest.

Provide your roots therefore, where you are before hand assured of their
goodness.

Of setting of Hoppe roots.
Having made your provision of roots in this wise, return therewith to your
Garden speedilye, and either set them immediately, or lay them in some Puddle
near thereunto, or bury them in the ground until conueniencie of wind,
weather, and leisure (the want whereof may sometimes prevent good expedicion)
shall serve. Provided always that you leave them not in water or Puddle
above.xxiiij. hours, but in the earth you may leave them as long as the time
of setting endures.

Your Garden being dressed, as before I advised you, it shall be easy for you
to direct your hills aright, and that in equal distance, with a Poale, or
rather with a line (that will not stretche) tying therevppon short threedes,
or placing in it pynnes, according to the proporcion of space which you mean
to leave between your hills, whereof if one be placed out of order, it shall
blemishe and hurt a great part of your Garden.

If your Garden be one act in bigness, and lie square, leave between every
hole, three yardes, or eight foot at the least in space, as well that the
hills may be made the greater, and that the Hops of one Poale reach not to
another, as also that the Sun may the more freely and universally pass
through your Garden, which by this means may yearly be plowed betwixt the
hills, whereas otherwise it must be dug, a more tedious and costly
business.

If your Garden be very little, you may set the hills somewhat nearer
together, namely, seven foot a sunder.

A description of the Line.
pins and line for planting hops

Your line being laid level, you must dygge underneath every threede or pin
placed upon the same, a hole like to a Pitfall, one foot square, and one foot
deep.

When you have made twenty or thirty holes, take up so many roots, from where
you bestowed them, as ought to be set therein, and go to work on this wise,
always watching a time (if you may) that the wind be in some part of the
South or West, but be not so scrupulous herein, that you ouerslip the Month of
April, least Salomons saying be spoken of you: He that regards the wind
shall not sow, Eccle. 11.
and he that has respect to the Clouds shall not reap. For he that
neglects the Month of April, shall have a bad season to cut or plant Hoppes.

bundling hop roots

Take two or three of your roots (which by this time will yield forth green
sciences or buds, and will also have small roots or beardes growing out of
them, the which must be all pared away hard by the old root) join them
close together, so as (in any wise) they may be even in the tops, set them
also altogether bolte upright, directlye under the foresaid threede or pin,
holding them hard together with the one hand, while you fill the hole with the
other, with fine moulde prepared and laid ready before hand, regarding that
the tops of the roots be level with the face or uppermost part of the
ground.

Take good heed also that you set not that end downewarde, that grew before
upward, which you shall know by the buddes that appear in the knots of each
root, and let no part of the dead stalk remain upon the uppermost joint
thereof.

man planting hopsAnd when you have thus done, press down the Earth with
your foot hard to the roots, not treadinge upon them, but dryuinge the loose
earth close to the corner where the roots are set.

And here is to be noted, that the readyest and euenest way, is always to set
your roots at one certain corner of the hole, which corner should always be
right underneath the said pin or threede, as is before showed.

At this time you must make no hill at all, but only cover the tops of your
roots about two inches thick, with the finest moulde you can get.

man planting hopsWhen you are driven to set your roots late, if there be any
green springes upon them, you may take the advantage thereof, leaving the same
spring uncovered, otherwise you both destroy the Spring, and endaunger the
root.

Abuses and disorders in setting.
SOme use to set at every corner of the hole one root, but this is a
naughty and a tedious trade, because a man shall be longer in dressing one of
these, than about four other. To be short, you shall this way so cumber both
your self and your Garden, that you will soon be wearye with woorking, and
your Garden as soon weary of bearing.

Some wind them, and set both ends upward, and herein both the cunning of
the workman, and the goodness of the roots, are together very lively
expressed, for if the roots were good, they could not so be wound, or if the
workman were skylfull, he would not be so fond to set them in that order.

Some use to lay them thwart or flat, but I say flatlye, that the same is an
overthwart and proposterous way, for they can neither prosper well, (as being
set contrary to their nature and kind of growing) nor be kept as they ought to
be.

Some use to make hills, and then set their roots therein, but these conclude
themselves from ministering succor unto them at any time after, besides many
inconveniences hereby ensuing.

Some set their roots, and then bury them with a great hill made upon them,
and this is all one with the other, saving that the hill so choketh these, as
most commonly they grow not at all.

Finally, there be as many evil ways to set, as there be ignorant men to
deuyse.

Provision against annoyance, and spoil of your Garden.
IF your Garden be small, and very nigh to your house, you may arm every
hill with a few thorns, to defend them from the annoyance of Poultrie, which
many times will scrape and bathe among the hills, and so discover and hurt
the Springes, but a Goose is the most noisome vermin that can enter into this
Garden, for (besides the Allegory that may be applied in this case) a Goose
will brut upon every young science or Hoppe budde, that appears out of the
ground, which never will grow afterward, and therefore as well to avoid
the Goose, as other noisome cattle, let your closure be made strong, and kept
right.

Of Poales.
IT remains that I speak now of Poales, because poaling is the next work
now to be done.

If your hills be distant three yardes a sunder, provide for every hill four
Poales, if you will make your hills nearer together, three Poales shall
suffice.

And note that in the first year you must occupy as many Poales as in any
year after, the reason whereof I will declare in the title of Hills. etc.

Alder Poales are best for this purpose, as whereunto the Hoppes seem most
willinglye and naturally to incline, because both the fashion of these Poales
being as a Taper small above, and great below, and also the roughness of the
Alder ryne, stayth the Hoppe stalk more firmly from slyding down, than
either Ash or Oak, which for continuance be somewhat better, howbeit, these
with the order that I shall prescrybe, will endure six or seven years.

These are also best cheap, and easiest to be gotten in most places, and
soonest grown ready for this purpose.

There is in the Springs of these, least danger in growing, or in being
destroyed, or bitten by cattle.

Finallye, by the expense of these, there ensues least annoyaunce to the
common wealth, as well for the causes aforesaid, as also because they grow
not in so great quantity, to so good timber, nor for so many purposes as
either Oak or Ash.

The best time to cut your Poales, is between All hallowentyde and
Christmas, but you must pyle them up immediately after they are cut sharped,
reformed in length, and smoothed, least they rotte before you occupy them.

You may not leave any scragges upon them, the reason whereof you shall
conceive in the title of gathering Hoppes.

Your Poales may not be above.xv. or.xvj. foot long at the most, except your
ground be very rich, and that you have added thereunto great labor in raising
up your hills, and also except your hills stand to near together, if these
three things meet in one Garden, the best way of reformation, is to set the
fewer Poales to an hill, or to let them remain the longer. Otherwise the
Hoppes will grow from one poale to another, and so ouershadow your Garden, the
fault thereof being only to be imputed to the neerenesse of the hills. But
hereof shall be said more in the title of Reformacions.

The Hoppe never stocketh kindly, until it reach higher than the Poale, and
return from it a yard or two, for whylest it tends clyming upward, the
branches which grow out of the principal stalk (wherein consists the
abundance of increase) grow little or nothing.

Let the quantity of your Poales be great (that is to say) nine or ten
inches about at the lower end, so shall they endure the longer, and withstand
the wind the better.

To descrybe the price of Poales, or what it will cost you to furnishe a Garden
containing one acre of ground, it were a hard matter, because the place
alters the price of wood. But in a Wayne you may carye a hundredth and
fyftie Poales, and I see small cause why a load of these should be dearer
than a load of any other wood.

After the first year Poales will be nothing chargeable unto you, for you may
either pick them out of your own provision of Fuel, or buy them of your
neighbors that have no occasion to apply them this way. For, the yearly
supply of two loades of Poales, will maintain one acre continually.

Your rotten and broken Poales will do you good service, for the kindling of
your fires in the Oste, whereupon you should dry your Hoppes, and they should
be preserved chiefly for that purpose.

At Poppering (where both scarcity and experience has taught them to make
provision hereof) they do commonly at the East and North side of their
Gardens, set and preserve Alders, wherewith they continually maintain them.

Before you set up your Poales, lay them all along your Garden between
every row of hills by three or four together, I mean beside every hill so
many Poales as you determine to set thereon, so shall you make the more speed
in your work.

Of the erection of Poales.
WHen your Hoppes appear above the ground, so as you may discern where the
principal roots stand, set up your Poales, preparing their way with a Crow
of Iron, or a forked wooden tool, with a point of two tools iron, somewhat
like unto these. For if you stay till the Hoppes be grown to a greater
length, one inconvenience is, that either in making the hoales, or in erecting
the Poales, or else in ramming the earth to the fastening of them, you shall
hassarde the bruising or breaking of your Hops: another is, that you shall be
feign to tie every stalk to the Poale, whereas otherwise the most part of them
will clyme up of their own accord: the third is, that it will hinder the
growth of the Hop, if it be vnstayde so long.

You must set every Poale a foot and a half deep, and within two or three
inches at the most of the principal root.

If your ground be rockie and shallowe, tarry the longer before you set up
your Poales, so as your Hoppes may be grown two or three foot high, that you
may adventure to make a hill or bank at every Poale to stay and uphold the
same, without burying any of the yoonger springs, which may afterward be
covered with less danger and annoyance to the principal root.

Let the Poales of every hill lean a little outward one from another, as is
hereafter showed.

Of Ramming of Poales.
THen with a piece of wood as bygge below as the great end of one of your
Poales, ram the earth that lies at the man inserting three poles into
planted hops out side of the Poale, thereunto, but meddle not within the
compass of your Poales, as they are placed, least you spoil the springes.

Of Reparation of Poales.
IF any of your Poales chance to break when the Hoppe is grown up, some use
tenderly to vndooe and pull away the broken Poale, and to tie the top of
those Hoppes to the top of a new Poale, then wynding it a turn or two about
according to the course of the Sun, to set it in the hole, or besides the
hole where the broken Poale stood, and some other being loath to take so much
pains, turn it about some of the other Poales that stand upon the same
hille, and so leave it. But the best way is, to set a new Poale beside the
broken Poale, and to tie the broken Poale to the same, which may uphold the
said broken Poale, and preserve the Hoppe.

Of the preservation of Poales.
ANd although we are not yet come to the laying up of Poales, I am bold
herein, as I began to late, so to make an end to rathe, because I would couch
the whole matter of Poales together, laying them by themselves (I mean)
comprehending under one title, the business appertayning unto them.

For the preservation and better continuance of Poales, some make houses of
purpose, and lay them up therein.

Some set them upright to a tree, and over them make a penthouse of boowes or
boordes.

Some lay a great heap of Hoppestalkes upon the ground, and upon them a
great heap of Poales, and upon the Poales again lay another heap of stalks.
etc.

These men do hereby express no great experience, although by their diligence
they signifye a good desire.

You shall need to do no more but thus. At the ends or sides of your Garden,
take three Poales standing upon three hills placed directlye one by another,
and three like Poales upon three other hills of the next row right over
against them, constrayne them to meet together by two and two in the tops,
and so hold them till one with a forked wande may put three Withes (like unto
three Broom bands) which must be made of the stalks of Hoppes, upon each
couple of the said six Poales, so shall the same six Poales being so bound
by two and two together, stand like the roof or rafters of an house.

To keep the Poales that shall lie nethermoste from rotting, by the moystnesse
of the ground: use within the compass of your said six hills, (underneath
the Poales that you have fastened together in the tops,) to raise three little
banks (...) thwart from hill to hill, as though you would make your six
hills to be but three.

Upon those banks lay a few Hoppestalks, and upon them your Poales,
observing that one stand at the one end of the room, and another, at the other
end, ordering the matter so, as the tops of the Poales lie not all one way,
but may be equally and orderly divided: otherwise two men building a shelter
for planted hops one end of the room would be full before the other, This
figure or room is more than half filled with Poales, and not filled up to the
top.
whereas now they shall lie even and sharp above, like an Hayestacke, or the
ridge of an house, and sufficiently defend themselves from the weather.

If you think that you have not Poales ynowe to fylle the room, pull down
the Wyths or bands lower, and your room will be less.

Of tying of Hoppes to the Poales.
WHen your Hoppes are grown about one or two foot high, bind up (with a
Rushe or a Grass) such as declyne from the Poales, wynding them as often about
the same Poales as you can, and directing them always according to the course
of the Sun, but do it not in the morning when the dew remains upon them,
if your leisure may serve to do it at any other time of the day.

If you lay soft green Rushes abroad in the dew and the Sun, within two
or three days, they will be lythie, tough, and handsome for this purpose of
tying, which may not be foreslowed, man tying plant stems to poles for it is
most certain that the Hoppe that lies long upon the ground before he be tied
to the Poale, prospers nothing so well as it, which sooner attayneth thereunto.

Of hylling and hills.
Now you must begin to make your hills, and for the better doing thereof, you
must prepare a tool of Iron fashioned somewhat like to a Coopers Adds, This
tool is here above better proportioned, than that on the other side following.
but not so much boowing, and therefore lykest to the netherpart of a shoouell,
the powle whereof must be made with a round hole to receive a helue, like to
the helue of a Mattocke, and in the powle also a nail hole must be made, to
fasten it to the helue.

This helue should boowe somewhat like to a Sithe, or to the steal of a
Sithe, and it must be little more than a yard long.

scytheWith this tool you may pare away the grass which grows in the
spaces betwixt the hills, and with the same also you may raise your hills,
and pull them down when time requires.

Some think it impertinent and not necessary to make hills the first year,
partly because their distrust of this years profit quallifyeth their
diligence in this behalf, and partly for that they think that the principal
root prospers best, when there be no new roots out of them forced and
mayntained. But experience confuteth both these conjectures, for by industry,
the first years profit will be great, and thereby also the principal settes
much amended, as their prosperity in the second year will plainly appear.

But in this work you must be both paynefull and curious, as wherein
consists the hope of your gaynes and the success of your work. For the
greater in quantity you make your hills, the more in number you shall have of
your Hoppes, and the fewer weeds you shall have on your ground, the more
Hoppes you shall have upon your Poales.

In consideration whereof, I say, your labor must be continual from this time
till the time of gathering, in raising your hills and clearing your ground
from weeds.

In the first year that you plant your Hoppe-garden, suppress not one
science, but suffer them all to clyme up to the Poales, for if you should
bury or cover all the springs of any one of your three roots, which you did
latelye set, the root thereof perishes, and perhaps out of some one root
there will not proceed above one or two springes, which being buried, that
root I say dies, and therefore the more poales are at this time requisite.

After the first year you must not suffer above two or three stalks at the
most to grow up to one Poale, but put down and bury all the rest.

Howbeit, you may let them all grow till they be four or five foot high at
the least, whereby you shall make the better choice of them which you mean to
maintain, whereby also the principal root will be the better. etc

Some suffer their Hoppes to clyme up to the tops of the Poales, and then
make the hills at one instant of such quantity as they mean to leave them,
which is neither the best nor the second way.

But if (for expedition) you be driven here unto, begin sooner (that is to say)
when the Hoppes be four or five foot long, and afterward if leisure shall
serve, refreshe them again with more earth.

But to make them well, and as they ought to be made, you must immediately after
your poales are set, make a little bank or circle round about the outside of
them, as a mention how wide your hill shall be, and as a receptacle to retain
and keep moisture, whereof there cannot lightly come to much, so it come from
above.

If your Garden be great, by that time that you have made an end of these
circles or banks, it will be time to proceed further toward the buylding up
of your hills.

Now therefore return again to the place where you began, or else where
you see the Hoppes highest, and with your tool pare of the uppermost earth
from the Alleys or spaces between the hills, and lay the same to your
Hoppes, upon and within the circle that you made before, always leaving the
same highest of any part of the hill, and so pass through your Garden again
and again, till you have raised your hills by little and little, to so great
a quantity as is before declared, and look how high your hills is, so long
are your new roots, and the longer your new roots or springes be, the more
larger and better your Hoppes will be.

Great and ouergrowen weeds should not be laid upon the hills, as to raise
them to their due quantity, but when with diligence and expedition you pass
through your Garden, continually paring away each green thing as soon as it
appears, you shall do well, with the same; and the vppermoste moulde of your
Garden together, to maintain and increase the substance of your hills, even
till they be almost a yard high.

It shall not be amiss now and then to pass through your Garden, having in
each hand a forked wande, directing aright such Hoppes as man tending to high
plants with long tools declyne from the Poales, but some in stead of the said
forked wandes, use to stand upon a stool, and do it with their hands.

In the first year make not your hill to rathe, least in the doing thereof
you oppress some of those springes which would otherwise have appeared out of
the ground.

Abuses in hylling.
SOme observe no time, and some no measure in making their hills, but (having
heard say that hills are necessary) they make them they care not when nor
how.

Some make hills once for all, and never after pluck down the same, but
better it were to make no hill, than so to do, for after the first year it
does derogate, and not add any comfort to the root, if it be not new made
and dressed. etc.

Some use to break off the tops of the Hoppes when they are grown a.xj.
or.xij. foot high, because thereby they barnish and stock exceedingly,
wherein though I cannot commend their doings, yet do they much better than
such as will have their Poales as long as their Hoppes.

But if your Poale be very long, and that the Hoppe have not attained to the
top thereof before the midst of July, you shall do well then to break or cut
of the top of the same Hoppe, for so shall the residue of the growing time
serve to the maintenance and increase of the branches, which otherwise would
expyre without doing any good in that matter, because that whole time would
then be employed to the lengthening of the stalk, which little preuayleth (I
say) to the stocking or increase of the Hoppe.

And here is to be noted that many covetous men, thinking (in haste) to enlarge
their lucre, do find (at leisure) their commodity diminished, whylest they
make their hills to thick, their Poales to long, and suffer to many stalks
to grow upon one Poale, wherein (I say) while they run away flattering
themselves with the imagination of double gaynes, they are overtaken with
treble damage (that is to say) with the loss of their time, their labor, and
their cost.

Of the gathering of Hoppes.
AT what time (or rather before) that your Hoppes begin to change color (that
is to say) somewhat before Michaelmas, you must gather them, and for the
speedyer dispatch thereof, procure as much help as you can, taking the
advantage of fair weather.

To do the same in the readyest and best order, you must pull down four
hills standing together in the midst of your Garden, cut the roots of all
those hills as you shall be taught in the Title of Cutting. etc. Then pare the
same plot, level it, throw water on it, tread it, and sweep it, so shall it
be a fair floor, whereon the Hoppes must lie to be picked.

Then beginning near unto the same, cut the stalks a sunder close by the
tops of the hills, and if the Hoppes of one Poale be grown fast unto
another, cut them also a sunder with a sharp hook.

You may make the Forke and Hook (which cutteth a sunder the Hoppes that grow
together) here is instrument to serve both these turns, as as is here after
showed.

Then you may with the forked end, thrust up, or shooue off, all such stalks
as remain upon each Hoppe Poale, and carry them to the floor prepared for
that purpose.

The best and readyest way to take the Hoppes from the Poales.
two men removing plants from poles

For the better doing hereof, it is very necessary that your Poales be
straight without scrags or knobbes.

In any wise cut no more stalks than you shall carry away within one hour or
two at the most, for if in the mean time the Sun shine hot, or if it
happen to rain, the Hoppes (remaining cut in that sort) will be much impaired
thereby.

Let all such as help you, stand round about the floor, and suffer them not
to pyngle in picking one by one, but let them speedily strype them into Baskets
prepared ready therefore.

It is not hurtful greatly though the smaller leaves be mingled with the
Hoppes.

Remember always to clear your floor twice or thryce every day, and sweep
it clean at every such time, before you go to work again.

If the wether be unlike to be fair, you may carry these Hoppes into your
house in Blankets or Baskets. etc. and there accomplish this work. Use no
lynnen hereabouts, for the Hoppes will stayne it so, as it can never be washed
out.

If your Poales be scraggye, so as you cannot stryppe the stalks from them in
this order, you must pull them up with main force, and this is paynefull to
your self, hurtful to your Hoppes, and a delay to your work.

Then must you lay these Poales upon a couple of forked stakes driven into the
ground, being two or three yardes distant one from another, as Spittes upon
Raunges, and so dispatch this business if the wether be fair, if it be like
to be foul, you must be feign to carry the Hops together with the Poales into
your Barn or house.

In any wise let not the Hoppes be wet when you cut them from the hills,
neither make any delay of gathering after the same time of cutting, for in
standing abroad they will shed their seed, wherein consists the chief
virtue of the Hoppe, and hereof I cannot warn you to often, nor to earnestly.

Now by order I should declare unto you, the manner of drying your Hoppes,
but because I must therwithall descrybe the places meet for that purpose, with
many circumstances appertayning thereunto, I will be bold first to finish the
work within your Hoppe garden, and then to lead you out of the same, into the
place where you must dry your Hoppes. etc.

When your Hoppes are gathered, as soon as you have leisure, take up your
Poales and pyle them (that remain good) as I have showed you in the title of
Poales.

Then carry out your broken Poales, and the Hoppe straw to the fire.

Now may you depart out of your Garden, till the March following, except in
the mean time you will bring in dunge or good earth to the maintenance thereof,
toward the heigthening of your hills, or else will plowe it. etc.

What there is to be done in Winter herein.
TO be curious in laying dunge upon the hills in Winter, as to comfort or
warm the roots (as some do) it shall be needelesse, rather pluck down the
hills, and let the roots lie bare all the Winter season, and this is usually
done where Hoppes are best ordered, especially to restrain them from to rathe
sprynging.

If the ground be great that you keep, you shall be driven so to do,
otherwise you shall not be able to overcome your work in due time.

In any case you must avoid new horsedung as a very noisome and pernicious
thing for your Hoppes.

Stall dung is the best that can be wyshed for to serve this turn, so it be
thoroughly rotten.

Rather use no dunge than vnrotten dunge about the dressing of your Hoppes, but
omit not to bring into your Garden dung that may there be preserved till it be
good, or needful to be used.

The order for reforming your ground.
IN March you shall return to your Garden, and find it replenished with
weeds, except by tillage. etc. you have prevented that matter already. It must
(as well therefore, as because the earth may be the more fine, and easy to be
delivered unto the hills) be dug over or plowed.

The order of cutting Hoppe Roots.
WHen you pull down your hills (which if you have not already done, you must
of necessity go about to do) you must (with your Garden tool) undermine them
round about, till you come near to the principal roots, and then take the
upper or yoonger roots in your hand, and shake off the earth, which man
cutting back plant roots earth (being again removed away with your said
tool) you shall discern where the new roots grow out of the old settes.

In the doing hereof be careful that you spoil not the old settes, as for
the other roots which are to be cut away, you shall not need to spare them
to the delay of your work.

Take heed that you uncover not any more than the tops of the old settes
in the first year of cutting.

At what time so ever you pull down your hills, cut not your roots before
the end of March, or in the beginning of April, and then remember the wind.

In the first year (I mean) at the first time of cutting and dressing of your
roots, you must (with a sharp knyfe) cut away all such roots or springes as
grew the ye are before, out of your settes, within one ynch of the same.

Every year after you must cut them as close man cutting back plant roots as
you can to the old roots, even as you see an Osyers head cut.

There grows out of the old settes certain Roots right downewardes not
ioynted at all, which serve only for the nourishing and comfort of those sets
or principal roots: there be other like unto them growing outward at the
sides of the settes.

If they be not met withal, and cut a sunder, they will encumber your whole
Garden.

Because it may seem hard to discern the old settes from the new
springes, I thought good to advertise you how easy a thing it is to see the
difference thereof, for first you shall be sure to find your settes where you
did set them, nothing increased in length, but somewhat in bigness enlarged,
and in few years all your settes will be grown into one, so as by the
quantity that thing shall plainly appear: and lastly the difference is
seen by the color, the old root being read, the other white, but if the
hills be not yearly pulled down, and the roots yearly cut, then in deed
the old settes shall not be perceived from the other roots.

If your settes be small, and placed in good ground, the hill well mayntained,
the new roots will be greater than the old.

If there grow in any hill a wild Hoppe, or whenever the stalk waxes
read, or when the Hoppe in any wise decays, pull up every root in that
hill, and set new in their places, at the usual time of cutting and setting.

Of diverse men's follyes.
MAny men seeing the springs so forward, as they will be by this time, are loath
to lose the advantage thereof, and more unwilling to cut away so many goodlye
roots, but they that are dangerous in this behalf, take pity upon their
own profit, and are like unto them that refrain to lay dung upon their
corn land, because they would not beraye it with so vncleanlye a thing.

And some that take upon them great skyll herein, think that for the first
year they may be left vnhilled and vncutte. etc. deceyuing themselves with
this conceypte, that then the settes prosper best within the ground when they
send least of their nature and state out of the ground. In this respect also
they pull away or suppress all such springs (as soon as they appear) which
grow more, and besides them which they mean to assign to each Poale, as
though when a man's fingers were cut off, his hand would grow the greater.
In deed if there be no hill maintained, then the more springes are suffered to
grow from out of the principal root, the more burden and punishment it will
be to the same. But when the springs are maintained with a hill, so much as
remains within the same is converted into roots, which rather add than take
away any state from the principal root, in consideration hereof, the
suppressing of the springes may not be too rathe, for whatsoever opinion be
hereof received, the many springes never hurt the principal root, if the
hills be well mayntained, but it is the cumbring and shadowing of one to
another that woorketh the annoyance.

When you have cut your Hoppes, you must cover them as you were taught in the
title of setting, and proceed according to the order alredye set down.

Of disorders and maintayners thereof.
SOme there be that despise good order, being deceived with a show of increase
which sometimes appears in a disordered ground, to them I say and say it
truly, that the same is a bad and a small increase in respect of the other.

I say also that although disorderly doings at the first may have a
countenance of good success, yet in few years the same, and all hope thereof
will certainly decay.

Some other there be that despise good order, satisfying themselves with this,
that they have sufficiently to serve their own turn, without all these
troubles, and surely it were pity that these should be troubled with any
great abundaunce, that in contempt of their own profit, and of the commonwealth, neglect such a benefit proffered unto them.

Of an Oste.
Now have I showed unto you the perfect platform of a Hoppe garden, out of
the which I led you for a time, and brought you in again when time required,
and there would I leave you about your business, were it not to show you by
description such an Oste as they dry their Hoppes upon at Poppering, with the
order thereof. etc. Which for the small charges and trouble in drying, for the
speedy and well drying, and for the handsome and easy doing thereof, may be
a profitable pattern, and a necessary instruction for as many as have, or
shall have to do herein.

Of the several Roumes for an Oste.
FIrst a little house must be buylt, of length xviij. or.xix. foot, of
wydenesse eight, wherein must be comprehended three several roumes.

The myddle and principal room must be for your Oste, eight foot square. The
forepart which is to contain your green Hoppes, and the hinder part which
must receive your dried Hops, will fall out to be five foot long, and eight
foot wide a piece.

The chief matters that are to be by me descrybed herein, are the Furnace
below wherein the fire is to be made, and the bed above whereon the Hoppes
must lie to be dried: this I have chieflye to advise you of, that you build
the whole house and every part thereof as close as you can, and to place it
near to your Garden for the better expedicion of your work, and somewhat
distant from your house to avoid the danger of fire.

Of the Furnace or Keele.
THe floor or nether part of your Furnace must be about thirteen inches wide.

The depth or heygth thereof must also be thirteen inches.

The length of it must be about six or seven foot (that is to say) reaching
from the forepart of the Oste almost to the further end thereof, so as there
be left no more room but as a man may pass between the wall and the end
of it.

It must be made wide below and narrow above fashioned in outward shape
somewhat like to the roof of an house.

It must have hoales at each side, the length of one Brick a sunder, and not
the bygnesse of half a Brick, placed checkerwise.

Finally, it must be placed upon the ground in the midst of the lower
floor of the Oste, the furnace which floor must be made very perfect, fine,
and level, the reason whereof, you shall perceive in the title of Drying.

Of the bed or upper floor of the Oste, whereon the Hoppes must be dried.
THe bed or upper floor whereon the Hoppes shall lie to be dried, must be
placed five foot above the nether floor, whereon the furnace stands.

The two walls at each side of the house serve for the bed to rest upon two
ways.

Now must two other walls be buylt at each end of your Oste, whereon the
other two parts of the bed must rest, and by this means shall you have a
close square room beneath, betwixt the lower floor and the bed, so as the
floor below shall be as wide as the bed above.

These two walls must also be made four foot above the bed (that is to say)
nine foot high.

At the one end below, besides the mouth of the furnace, you must make a
little door into the room beneath the bed. At the other end above the
bed you must make a window to shooue off from the bed the dried Hoppes,
down into the room below prepared for them.

The bed should be made as the bed of any other Oste, saving that the
Rayles or Lathes which serve therefore must be sawen very even one ynche
square, and laid one quarter of an ynche asunder.

If your Garden be very great, you may build your house somewhat larger,
namely.xxij. foot long, and ten foot broad, and then you must make in this
Oste two furnaces, three or four foot a sunder, placing the door betwixt
them both, otherwise in all points like to that placement of furnace which I
first described, and the groundeworke hereof is so described here, that any
Carpenter will easilye frame the whole house by the same figure.

And now once again wishing you to make every door, window, and ioynte of
this house close, I will leave buylding, and proceed to the drying of Hoppes,
saving that I may not omit to tell you, that you should either build all the
walls of this house with Brick, or else with Lyme and Hair pargit over all
the walls, posts, and beams thereof, or at the least, that room wherein the
furnace stands.

And although I have delayed you from time, to time, and brought you from place
to place, and tediously led you in and out, and to and fro in the demonstration
hereof, yet must I be bold to bring you round about again, even to the place
where I left you picking, from whence you must speedily convey your pyckt
Hoppes to the place built and prepared for them, and with as much speed hasten
the drying of them.

The orderly drying of Hoppes.
THe first business that is to be done herein, is to go up to the bed of the
Oste, and there to receive Baskets filled with Hoppes, at the hands of one
that stands below.

Then beginning at the further end (least you should tread on them) lay
down Basketfull by Basketfull, till the floor or bed be all covered,
always stirring them even and level, with a Cudgel, so as they may lie about
a foot and a half thick, and note that upon this Oste, there is no Oste
cloth to be used.

Now must you come down to make your fire in the furnace, for the kindling
whereof your old broken Poales are very good, howbeit, for the continuance
and maintenance of this fire, that wood is best which is not too dry.

Your Hoppe stalks, or any other straw is not to be used herein.

You shall not need to lay the wood through to the farther end of the
furnace, for the fire made in the forepart thereof, will bend that way, so as
the heat will universally and indifferently ascend and proceed out of every
hole.

You must keep herein a continual and a hot fire, howbeit, you must stir it
as little as you can.

Neither may you stir the Hoppes that lie upon the Oste, until they be
thoroughly dried.

When they are dry above, then are they ready to be removed away, and yet
sometimes it happens that (through the disorderly laying of them) they are
not so soon dry in one place, as they are in another.

The way to help that matter, is to take a little Poale (wherewith you shall
sensiblye feel and perceive which be, and which be not dry, by the rattling of
the Hoppes which you shall therewith touch) and with the same Poale to turn
aside such Hoppes as be not dry, abating the thickness of the moist place.

When your Hoppes are dry, rake up the fire in such sort as there may be no
delay in the renewing thereof.

Then with expedition shooue them out of the window before mentioned into the
room prepared to receive them, with a Rake fashioned like a Coal Rake, having
in stead of teeth a boorde of one foot broad.

This being done, go down into the lower floor, and sweep together such
Hoppes and seeds as are fallen thereinto, and lay them up among the dried
Hoppes, and then without delay cover the bed again with green Hoppes and
kindle your fire.

Lay your dried Hoppes on a heap together till they be cold, and by this
means such as were not perfectlye dried through some disorder upon the Oste,
shall now be reformed.

If they have been well ordered, they will now be brown, and yet bright.

If they be black and darcke, it is a note that they are disordered.

The Flemings pack them not up before they sell them to the Merchant, but lay
them in some corner of a Loft where they tread them close together.

Other manners of dryings not so good.
SOme use to dry their Hoppes upon a common Oste, but that way there can be
no great speed in your work, nor small expense of your wood, besides the
danger of fire, and ill success of your doings.

On this Oste you must have an Oste clothe, otherwise the seed and Hoppes that
fall down shall not only perish, but endaunger the burning of your Oste.

Upon this Oste you may not lay your Hoppes above eight or nine inches thick,
which nevertheless shall not be so soon dry as they which lie upon the other
Oste almost two foot thick, and therefore this way you shall make more toil
in your work, more spoil in your Hoppes, and more expense in your wood.

Some use to dry their Hoppes in a Garret, or upon the floor of a Loft or
Chamber, in the reproof whereof I must say, that as few men have room
enough in their houses to contain any great quantity or multitude of Hoppes,
so the dust that will arise, shall empayre them, the chynkes, creuises, and
open joints of your Loftes being not close byrthed, will devour the seeds of
them, in the end the leaves will endanger them with heating when they are
packt, as being not so soon dry as the Hoppes which thereby shall be utterly
spoiled in color, in cent, and in verdure.

As for any low roumes or earthen floores, they are yet worse for this
purpose than the other, for either they yield dust in drythe, or moisture in
wet weather.

And therefore if you have no Oste, dry them in a Loft as open to the air as
may be, sweep, wash, and rub the boordes, and let your Broom reach to the
walls, and even to the roof of your Loft, for I can teach you no way to
deuyde the dust from your Hoppes, but so to prevent the inconvenience hereof.

Stop the holes and chynkes of your floor, lay them not above half a foot
thick, and turn them once a day at the least, by the space of two or three
weeks.

This being done, sweep them up into a corner of your Loft, and there let them
lie as long more, for yet there remains peril in packing of them.

If the year prove very wette, your Hoppes ask the longer time of drying.

The very woorst way of drying Hoppes.
SOme lay their Hoppes in the Sun to dry, and this takes away the state of
the Hoppes, and nevertheless leaves the purpose of drying undone.

Of not drying.
SOme gather them, and brue with them being green and vndryed, supposing that
in drying, the virtue and state of the Hoppe decays and fades away, wherein
they are deceived, for the verdure is worse, the strength less, and the
quantity must be more of green Hoppes that are to be brued in this sort.

In the first Woorte which the Bruers call the Hoppewoorte (because the time of
seething thereof is short) there goes out of these Hoppes almost no virtue at
all, and therefore experience has taught them that are driven to brue with
these green Hoppes, to sees them again in the Woorte, which they call the
Ney beer, where after long seething they will leave the state which remains
in them, and that is not much.

Of the packing of Hoppes.
IN the making of your Hoppesackes, use your own cunning or invention, for I
have small skill therein, howbeit, I can tell you that the Hoppesackes that are
brought out of Flaunders, may be good samplers for you to work by, the stuff
is not dainty wherewith they are made, the Loome is not costlye wherein they
are wouen, the cunning not curious whereby they are fashioned, but when you have
them, and are ready to pack your Hoppes, do thus.

Thrust into the mouth of your sack (which must be doubled and turned in
stronglye least it break) four strong pynnes half a foot long a piece,
placed in equal distaunce one from the other, then lay two Battes or bygge
Poales cross or thwart two Beams or Couplings of your house, which two
Battes must lie no farther a sunder than the wydenesse of the Sackes mouth.
Fasten upon each pyn a roape, and knit two of those Ropes upon each cross
Batte, so as the bottom of the Sack being empty, may hang within half a
foot of the floor, then stand within the Sack, and receive the Hoppes,
treading them down very hard, and before the Sack be half full, it will
rest upon the ground, whereby you shall be able to press them the harder
together.

But the handsommer way were to make a square hole (as wide as the Sackes
mouth) in the floor of the Lofte, where your Hoppes lie, and to hang down
your Sack at that hoale, and with a Scuppet or Shoouell to shooue down your
Hoppes thereinto, and to receive them as is aforesaid, when the Sack is
almost full, undo the Roapes, and wind those pynnes about for the harder
shutting of the Sack, and fasten them therein.

If you list, you may sow (over the mouth of this Sack) another piece of
Sackcloth, whereof you must leave a little unsown, until you have thrust as
many Hoppes as you can between the Sack and the same, but in beholding the
Hopsackes sent from Poppering, you shall better understand and learn the
doings hereof.

For your own provision you may preserve them in Driefattes, Barrelles, or
such like vessels, for want of room to leave them in, or sacks to pack them
in.

There is, according to the Proverb, much falshoode in packing, I am
unskillful in that Art, if I were otherwise, I would be loath to teach such
doctrine.

But to avoid such deceyte, and to make the more perfect and better choice, it
is usual and lawful in most places where Hoppes are sold, to cut the Sack
that you mean to buy in seven or eight places, and to search at each place
whether the Hoppes be of like goodness.

Such places as you shall feel with your hand to be softer than the reast, you
should specially cut, where perhaps you shall find Hoppes of another
kind, elder or worse than the rest.

The reformation of a Garden of wild Hoppes.
TO reform a Garden where the Hoppes be wild, the work is tedious, and none
other way remains, but to dig over the same with a Spade, so deep as you
may search out and throw out every root and piece of root that may be found
in, or near thereunto, and then to plant according to the order before
declared.

The reformation of a disordered Garden.
TO repair a ruynous Garden, which through ignorauce was disorderlye set,
and through sloth suffered to ouerrunne and decay, where nevertheless the
Hoppes remain of a good kind (though somewhat empayred, as needs they must
be, by this means) the very best way were to do as to the wild Hoppe.

The second way is to forget that it is disordered at all, ymagining that all
were well, and to set your Poales in such order, and so far a sunder as is
prescribed in that title, always directing them right with a line, so as a
stranger beholding them, may suppose that your Garden is kept after the best
manner, then lead unto each Poale two or three stalks which you shall find
nearest thereunto, and there erecte a hill which you may ever after cut and
dress according to the rules before declared, and so by continual digging,
paring, and diligence, you shall at leisure bring it to some reasonable
perfection.

If your Garden be very much matted with roots, so as it be to tedious to
dygge, set your Poales as you are already taught, and bring into your Garden,
and lay near to every such place where you mean to make a hill, one Coorte
load of good earth, with the which, after your Hoppes are tied to your Poales,
begin to make your hylle, and proceed as in the title of Hills, always
cutting down such Hoppes or weeds as grow between the said hills.

If your roots be set orderly, and your hills made accordinglye, and yet left
undressed by the space of two or three years, it will be very hard (I say) to
discern the settes from the other later roots: nevertheless, if your ground
be good, you may yet reform the inconvenience thereof, namely, by pulling
down the hill, and cutting away all the roots contained therein, even with
the face or upper part of the earth, searching also each side, and digging yet
lower, and round about the root which remains, and to take away from the
same all such roots as appear out thereof.

Needelesse curiosities used by the unskillful.
TO water your Garden, as to make the roots grow the better, it were more
tedious than needful, for the hylling thereof serves for that purpose, and
there is time of growing sufficient for them betwixt midde April and August,
and yet it never hurts, but rather does good, if it be before the hill be
made.

To pluck of the leaves, to the end that the Hoppes may prosper the better,
is also needelesse, and to no purpose, and rather hinders than helps the
growth of the Hoppes, for they are hereby deprived of that garment which Nature
has necessarilye provided for them, and clothed them with.

To flawe the Poales, thereby to prolonge their continuance, is more than
needs to be done in this behalf, for it is too tedious to your self, and
hurtful to your Hoppe, and little avails to the purpose aforesaid.

To burn the nether part or great end of your Poales, as some do, to the
end they should last or endure the longer, is also an unnecessary trouble,
only Willowe Poales you may so use to keep them from growing.

To weed the Hills with the hand, whereas the same Weeds shall be buried by
the raising of the hill.

The Epilogue.
THus have I, according to my small skyll and experience, according to my
friends desire, and according to the truth, uttered these few notes
concerning the making and mayntenance of an Hoppe garden, that which remains
more to be said thereof, rests in the skill of skilfuller persons, and is at
this time either without the compass of my knowledge, or beyond the reach of
my memory. I doubt not but I have herein taken upon me to teach some that,
which they know better than I, and also provoked some that need not, and some
that care not, to be employed in these matters: howbeit, I urge nothing, but
that which may be done without great difficulty, charge, labor, or soil,
the matter thereof being in deed to homely and base for the proud and
disdainful, the exercise too tedious and busy for the slothful and idle, but
the charge too costlye for none but Niggards, the cunning too curious for none
but fools, and yet among these estates (I trow) there will some smell out the
profitable savor of this Herb, some will gather the fruit thereof, some will
make a Sallet therewith (which is good in one respect for the bellye, and in
another for the Purse) and when the grace and sweetness hereof is conceived,
some will dippe their fingers therein up to the knuckles, and some will be glad
to lick the Dishe, and they that disdain to be partakers hereof, commonly
prove to be such, as have Mountains in fantasy, and beggary in possession, I
mean that they which have a Hoppe hill in derision, will scant fall out to
leave a Moulehyll in reuersion. Besides that, their security in this behalf
makes room for strangers to depryue us of our commodities, who mayntaine
ignorance in our bosoms, and beggerie in our Purses, while we nourish
disdain in our hearts, and sloth in our hands, and hereby we set our shame
upon a stage for all the world to gaze upon, and make our folly so palpable,
that Strangers from beyond the Seas, (which neither hear nor see us) can
grabbe it out, for we can be content upon our Alebench, to entytle our
Country to the name of fertility, and yet deprave the same with our
peevishness, and slander it with our sloth, expounding and excusing our
negligence by our ignorance, and covering the one with the others weeds, the
goodness of our ground serving us to no other purpose, but to manifest our
ill husbandry, but our abundaunce shall not excuse our unthankfulness,
whylest we abuse the blessings of God to our own destruction, and oppose our
sloth and ignorance against his bounty and goodness, but God forbid that
the provision of the good should rest in the hands of the slothful, from
whom let us depart, and leave them folding their hands together, Proverb. 24.
and so shall poverty come upon them. For, what fellowship can there be
between an holy man and a Dog, Ecclesi. 13.
or between an honest man and an unthrift. Me thinks I might aptlye compare
such men as have ground fit for this purpose, and will not employ it
accordingly, to Alehouse Knights, partly for the small devotion which both the
one and the other have unto Hoppes, but especially for that many of these Ale
Knights having good drink at home of their own, Ale to be commended, but not
the Ale Knight.
can be content to drink worse abroad at an Alehouse, so they may sit close
by it. Let them expound this comparison that buy their Hoppes at Poppering,
and may have them at home with more ease and less charge, I only say that they
resemble and agree together though not in good, yet in that which is evil, for
I see no difference betwixt them, saving that unto the private vnthriftynesse
of the Ale-knights, these men add a public despyte unto the common wealth,
Eccles. 14.
but how can he that is naught himself be good unto others. I for my part
know not how to persuade such, nor what they will learn, that refuse to
harken to their own profit, for no receyte serves against despair, no
Counsel preuayleth against Contempt. Their ground is taught to bear, their
Hoppes to grow, their Poales to stand, their hands to work, their senses to
perceive, if they would but teach their wills to consent to their own
profit, they should have the gaynes, and I my desire. If they will not do so
much for themselves, I pray God that the diligence of the little Emmet which
(through their negligence does much harm to their Hoppe roots) be not called
forth at the last day to witness against their sloth. Now there remains no
more to be said but a word or two to Momus, and his companions, whose office
reaches to the reproof of all things perfect and imperfect, and therefore my
writings ministering much cause of reprehension, must needs be subject to their
scorns, but I appeal from their mockes to wyser men's censures. For I am
persuaded that I deserve rebuke at wyser men's hands than they are, but their
correction will do me no good, for that it tends to the defamation, and not
to the reformation of me and my wrytings, I take not upon me to make a
Philosophye, but a Hoppe garden, and yet I doubt, that because I resemble not
Aristotle, this man and his Mates will counterfeyte Diogenes, (that is to say)
because I render not a Perepateticall reason for every syllable I write, they
will tender a Stoicall frumpe for every word they read. Some say that Momus
for his sawcynesse was torn in three pieces. etc. But that little prevailed to
allaye the lewdenesse of Mockery, for of one piece were engendered corrupt and
hastye Judges, of another, carpcious Controllers, and of his hinder parts,
impudent Scoffers, and this should appear to be true. For some will take
upon them to be Judges, that (for their integrity) are not meet to be
impanelled in a true Jury, nor for their credit scant worthy to be hangmen
to false thieves, their judgments being corrupt, and always tending to the
condemnation of the vnguiltye, their wisdom serving them to no other end,
but to quarrel with other men's simplicities, the sharpness of their wyts to
nothing but to the maintenance of contencion. Some will be Controllers, that
neither have authority in their persons, nor wit in their headdes, reproouing
that which neither they (being fools) know, nor other (being wise) myslyke.
Finally, some are so possessed with the spirit of Scurrillitie, that they
cannot gape, but Tauntes appear in their mouths, confounding jest and
sobriety in such sort, as though all things were but mockery. I say
therefore, that from the highest to the lowest, from the Judge to the Hangman,
from the top of the Gallows, to the nethermost steal of the Ladder, and from
Scoggin to Will Summer, there remains not one of these scoffers more favored
of himself, than abhorred of others, and therefore I would wish them, that
when their grace, and the Majesty of their frumpes fails, (that is to say)
when men leave to laugh at their follyes, either to suppress their ignorance
with such silence, as such as are honest, be not grieved therewith, or to
express their knowledge in such words as such as they themselves are, will
not laughe to scorn.

FINIS.

