OUR DEMANDS OF THE ENGLISH LORDS MANIFESTED, BEING AT RIPPON October. 8. 1640.

WITH ANSWERS TO THE COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES GIVEN IN BY THE BISHOP OF
DURHAM, NORTHUMBERLAND, and some of NEWCASTLE; said to be committed by our
Army.

Printed, by MARGERY MAR-PRELAT. 1640.

I R
decorative illustration consisting of a central Tudor rose surmounted by a
crown with the Tudor rose and English lion on one side and the Scottish thistle
and unicorn on the other
At RIPPON the 8. of October. 1640.
NOTHING is more heartily wished of us, and of those that sent us, then that
the Treaty may begin tymously, and end happily. This moved us in our last
Proposition to desire to know what your Lordships did conceive to be a
competencie for the maintenance of our Army; and now after his Majesty is
acquainted therewith, we desire to know his Majesty's mind, that the Army being
provided for in a competent manner; and so much being made known to such as
sent us, according to the instructions which we have received from them, which
make the maintenance of the Army grievous to the Treaty; we may with all
diligence show them his Majesty's pleasure concerning the change of the place,
and new power to be granted for concluding: And as we are wa ranted to give
this answer, so will we not conceal our own thoughts about all this matter of
the maintenance of the Army, transferring of the Treaty to York, and enlarging
of our power. First, it is universally known that our Army was stayed in the
March by his Majesty's special command, without which they might before this
time, either have been better provided, or further advanced in their Petitions
and Intentions; and that in hope of provision to be made this way, they have
kept up from taking such ways, and using such means, as may serve for their
necessary maintenance, which yet are not to lay any burden upon the Nation or
good People of England, whose weal and happiness we seek as our own; and with
whom we have determined as we have declared, to stand or to fall. But our
meaning is, that our necessary maintenance being denied to the Army, we take
our selves to those Papists and Prelates, with their adherents, our professed
enemies, and the unhappy instruments of all our troubles, and charges and
hazards these years by past, who therefore ought in all equity to suffer in
the same kind.

Next we cannot conceive what danger may be apprehended in our going to York,
and casting our selves and others who may be joined with us into the hands of
an Army, commanded by the Lieutenant of Ireland, against whom as a chief
Incendiary (according to our Demands, which are the subject of the Treaty it
self) we intend to insist; as is expressed, in our Remonstrance and Declaration,
who has in the Parliament of Ireland proceeded against us as Traitors, and
Rebbels, the best Title it pleased his Lordship in his common Table to honor
us with, whose Commission is to subdue and destroy us; and who by all means
professes the breaking up of all Treaties of peace, as fearing to be excluded
in the end; command also by diverse Papists, who conceive our Pacification to
be their ruin and desolation; and where there are diverse others our godless
and disnaturall Contrymen, doing the most offices about his Majesty, and
waiting the occasion of expressing their malice and revenge against us and
their own Nation.

Thirdly, the whole Committie cannot be transmitted to us and them, nor the
want of neither has been, nor needs it to be any hinderance of the speedy
progress and peaceable conclusion of the Treaty, since we have already in the
beginning of our Conference showed to your Lordships what is the subject and
substance of our demands.

ANSWERS TO THE COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES GIVEN IN BY THE BISHOP OF DURHAM,
NORTHUMBRLAND, and some of NEVV-CASTLE; said to be committed by our Army.
1. WE did crave in the Treaty that before Answer was given to them, that
either the suppliants, or some representing them, may put their hands to the
supplications and grievances, to the effect, that if they have Calumniated our
Army, they may have Lex talionis. 2. The necessity of our stay at New Castle,
with our Army, till we sent supplications to his Majesty, which was returned
with a referrnce to the 24. September. and a commandment to come no further into
England. 3. We sent to the Justices of Peace to meet with us, that our reguler
way might be laid and prosecuted, for the entertainment of our Army with less
trouble to the Country, whereof some came, and some refused; those of the
Bishopric offered to lend us 350. pound per diem; those of Northumberland
300. pound per diem, the way of settling it being unknown to us, we conceived
it a voluntary way of friendly borrowing. The projects of this raised almost as
much more of the County; whereupon so many complaints came to us, that we took
another course to prevent the abuse of our selves and the Country. 4. The
offer of New Castle was voluntary, and a contract for borrowed money: If we had
bin such as we are described, we might have used some rygour, which we have not
done, seeing they have neither kept word, nor writ with us. 5. In all our
demands we meant nothing but borrowing from Protestants, and to repay it: but
from Papists and Prelates prize, they having been our adversaries, and borne
Arms against us. 6. We have not 6. pence from any without order, but upon
complaint the offenders being known, they have had redress to the full, and
the offenders punished. 7. For the Complaints of the Bishops, Deanes, Prebends,
Parsons, they rifled their own houses themselves, left their doors open, and
fled from them: so that if there were justice in the Land, they may be accused
before the Chief Justice, for the pillageing their own houses, and accusing
others. 8. If any straggling Soldiers committed any pillageing, we do not
allow it, but knowing it shall punish it. 9. All Robberyes committed cannot be
imputed to our Army, for before we came to Newburne: we took not a groat and
after we came the Kings Army had wasted all, that we found nothing but empty
houses and wast ground. 10. Many English put on blew Bonnets called themselves
Scots, robbed houses, and by the way some of them being now in prison for the
same, 11. Our victuals spent, we demanded victuals and money from the Town
of New Castle upon security; who refused at first to lend us any, only telling
us where the Kings Magdzeens was of Corn, Bread, Cheese, and Munition, which
was not above 300. sterling. 12. They denied us, that their Bakers and Brewers
should provide: us any bread and drink, shifting us off, by telling us they
were fled: our Soldiers for want, gave 12 pence for a loaf of rye Bread of 5.
pound weight, and 4. pence a pottle of sod water, without any substance in it.
13. We finding they had resolution to starve us, told them, if they would not
sell us Corn, it behooved us to take it; and we sent to the Major desiring him
to send C^^^stables, with some of our Officers, which he did, to see what Corn
he could find: we agreed with the Merchants for it, and gave them security; and
where the owners were fled, we made Inventoryes of it, in the presence of the
Constable, for which we are accountable. 14. When we had Corn, we could not
get it ground, they saying their Millers were fled: these difficulties being
put to, it was the mighty hand of God that kept our Army together from
pillaging the Country. 15. The chief m^n of New Castle were gone, and (...)
transported their money and goods, nothing almost being left but some Corn,
which we assured the Lord Almighty provided for us, and not for them. 16. The
Parson of Rye and of Wickham first rifled their own houses, and then fled,
leaving nothing but a few Play-bookes, and Pamphlets; and one old Cloak, with
an old Woman, being the only living Christian in the Town; the rest being
fled. 17. What has been done at Durham, is not so fully known to us, but we
will inform our selves, and make it known to you. 18. What has been done in
any other persons houses is not known to any general Officer of our Army. 19.
If any disorderly act has been committed, none here alows it. 20. Lastly, the
Ships that came with Rye were brought up the River, we wanting victuals, made
a free bargain with the Merchants; paying them nigh 400. pound of their money,
yet have they the victuals in their own possessions.
FINIS.

