AN EPISTLE written by John Scory the late bishope of Chichester unto all the
faithful that be in prison in England, or in any other troble for the defense
of Gods truth: wherein he does as well by the promises of mercy as also by
thensamples of diverse holy martyrs, comfort, encorrage and strenghte^ them
patiently for Christ's sake to suffer the manifold cruel and most tyra^nous
persecutions of ye Antichristian tormentours: exhorting them to continue in
faithful prayers, innocence of life, patience, and hope, that God may the
rather deliver them, restore again the light of his gospel to England, and
confound all the proud, beastly, and deuelishe enterprises of Antichrists
guard, that do imagine nothing else but ye subversion of the gospel of Christ,
and contynually thruste for the blood of all true Christians.

In the world ye shall have tribulacio^: but be of good cheer, I have ouercum
the world,

John. 15. Anno. 1555.

Unto the faithful, and most valeau^t souldyours of the great captain, the
Lord Jesus Christ, that be in prison in England, or any other where in
banyshme^t and trouble, for the defense of Gods word, John Scory willyngly a
banished man for the same word, wishes from God our father, the grace,
comfort, and strength of his holy Ghost through our only mediator Jesus
Christ.
Who will not (dear brethren in Christ) call the state of our time most
miserable, and most wicked, if a man should speak after the manner of men? And
who will not say, that we should not take it in good part, forasmuch as a man
may behold all godly men (as most meke lambs) to be slain of their own
sheperdes: the little flock of our Lord Christ (as fatherles children) to be
spoiled and robbed of their own tutors: And last of all the very sons of God
to be murdered of their own spiritual fathers, as they would be called? Who
is so blind or so foolyshe, that does not evidently behold that sword
sprinkeled with the blood of the godly, which ought only to be drawn out
against the wicked? Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
What is he that visiting the prisons, going to the judgment seats of the
ungodly, knowwyng the fury and woodnes of Antichrist, beholding the gallows,
loking upon the fyres, whose flammes goes up to heaven: To be short, who (I
say) rekenyng the nombre of souls of such, as are so many diverse ways
murdered for the word of God, does not abhor this cruel world? Nevertheless
if a man will consider the matter diligently, he shall perceive that gods
church was never in any age more happy and more blessed, then she is now. For
although in these our days the false prophets, the ministres of Satan, and
of that great Antichrist the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and child of perdicion, being confederate and conspyred together with the
Kings and Princes of the earth, have waged most bloody battayll against the
church of Christ: yet nevertheless through the goodness of our God, she has most
valeau^t champions, which has in such wise defended her, that they fyghtyng
until their heart blood was shed out, and their bodies burned to ashes, have
most valeauntly thrown down, confounded, and put to their wits ends the
subtle and most deadly enemies of God, of his son Jesus Christ, and of his
catholyke church and congregation. O most bappye time wherein poverty, need,
pynyng in prison, fetters, chains, stocks, rebukes, reuilinges, the dens
and caves of the wyldernes, banishementes, gallows, fyres, and the crueltye of
tyrauntes, are again restored to the church.

O most happy Ferrar more strong than iron, the late Bishop and true pastor of
S. David's in Wales. O most diligent and paynful Hoper, the vigilant watch man,
and true bishop latcly of Glocetour. O most hardy and constaunt Rogers,
Taylour, and Saunders, Tardemaker, Bradforde, Glouer, Hichye, anh Causon, with
many more both old and young, men and women, married, wedowes and mayde^s (whose
names and remembrance as they are eternal with God, Sap. 3.
so ought they not to be forgotten of you) which in your life time called all
England, and namely London to repentance, and faith in Christ Jesus, and in
your death gave them an ensample, Mat. 10. and. 24.
to endure in the same to the end, if they will be saved.

O most worthy and blessed martyrs, which have by your pacient sufferinges,
confounded the malice of Christ's adversaries, which by the effusion of your
blood have sealed, rarifyed, and confirmed, the true catholic doctrine of
Christ's most holy gospel, in the consciences of gods elect and chosen
people: which by the contempt of this vain life, have declared that ye sought
a better life that perishes not, 1. Pet. 1.
which is immortal and undefiled, kept for you in heaven: which through your
most willing and constaunt death, have glorified your alone and only
saueour, and strenghtned his feeble afflicted church and congregation. You knew
and were certeynly persuaded (as now appears) that it had been a most vile
change for you, to have redeemed the short use of this miserable life, with
the loss of that joyful and eternal life. You remembered well this saying of
your master Christ. Mat. 10. and. 16. Joan. 12.
He that loves his life, shall destroy it. And he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal. And again, what shall it procyt a man,
though he should win ye hole world, if he lose his own soul? You reioysed
not a little to remember, that by your pacient sufferyng, you should be added
and put unto the nombre and fellowship of the most holy prophets, Apostles, and
martyrs of Christ: Whereof some were racked, Heb. 11.
and word not be delivered, that they might receive a better resurreccion:
other tasted of mockinges and scorginges, moreover of bands and prisonment:
were stoned, were sawen in sounder, were tempted, were slain with sweddes,
walked up and down in shepes skynnes, in gotes skynnes, in need, in
tribulacion, and vexacion, whom the world was not worthy to have. O most
valeaunt (I say) noble and blessed martyrs of our age, which were not
murdered, as in old time, of Emperors or kings that professed manifest
hatered against Christ and his church, but of such as glory of the tytles
and names of the very pastore, and would be counted the defendours, and fathers
of the church, and the faith of Christ. Wherefore be not dismayed dear brethren
at this sudden and fervent heat, which is now come among you to try you, as
though some strange thing had happened unto you: 1. Pet. 4.
but rather rejoice, yea I say, a thousand times rejoice, because ye shall
not be defended by any earthy power, but by the strong arm of the most mighty
and merciful God, and by the most mighty word of Jesus Christ, which was
sharper then any two edged sword. Heb. 4.
For what earthy authority, what power, what kind of armor, what ar tillarye
is able to suppress so great rage and fury, of these most cruel and
mercylesse, that would yet be called pastors and fathers of the church, and
defendours of the faith. Rejoice I say, therefore, for even as ye be now made
like unto the image of ye son of God in suffryng, Romans 8.2. Tim. 2.
and be partakers with him in dyeng: even so shall ye most certainly be
partakers of his life, and reign with him hereafter in his celestial kingdom.
And do not think pour selves better than your brethren the blessed martyrs
that lately have suffered for the testimony of the Lord Jesus among you, and
your forefathers the holy Prophets and Apostles, but say with them: We are
troubled on every side, 2. Cor. 4.
yet ar we not without shifte, we are in poverty, but not utterly without
somewhat: We are persecuted, but are not forsaken, we are cast down,
nevertheless we are not confounded: And we always bear about in our bodies,
Romans 8.
the dyeng of the Lord Jesus: We are killed all the day long, and are counted
as sheep appointed to be slain: Notwythstandyng in all these things, we
myghtely overcome, through his help that loved us. Therefore be not afraid of
your adversaries, which are unto them selves a cause of perdicion, Phil. 1.
but unto you a cause of salvation. For both it has been told you before
hand, and also it is given you now of God through Christ, that you should and
must pass through hungre, nakedness, cold, fetters, stripes, stinche, dark
dongeons, swords, gallows, and fires, and that ye furious rage of most
ravening wolfes should violently assail you. For likewise as the church of
our God (as a man may easily perceive sins the first beginning of the same) did
neither spring up, nor was stably shed by riches, by pleasures, by ydelnes, by
eating and drynkyng, by the power of kyngdo^s, by abundance and ercesse of
earthy things, by glorious styles, tytles, and woridly pomp, but by the blood
shedyng and sufferyng of the saints:

Eue^ so in the last days of this blind and bloody world, the most glorious
spouse of our saueour and Lord Christ (which by Antichrist was almost quit
banished, and rooted up) can not be again planted, watered, and establyshed,
but by many sundry, strange and truel persecucions and effusion of much
innocent blood: which nevertheless the Lord will as certeynly require (and that
shortly, Bloody hands.
of the mercyles tyrauntes of this world, as he required the blood of Abell of
the unnatural brother, and cruel murderer Tam, and as he required the blood
of the Prophets of that most godles and unthankful city Jerusalem. Genesis 4.
Mat. 23.
Be therefore pacient dear brethren a while: Heb. 10.
For within a very little while, he that shall come will come, Iaco. 5.
and will not tarry.

Behold the husband man wayteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and
has long patience thereupon, until he receive the early and latter rain. Be
ye also therefore pacient and satle your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh. 2. Tim. 3.
For as many as will live godly in Christ Jesus, must needs now suffer
persecucion. This is that way, this is that pathe that leads unto life. In
this must ye walk, yea rather ye must run in this: which we trust ye will
do, forasmuch as the Lord yt dwells with you unto ye worlds end, Math. 28.
will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength. 1. Cor. 10.
He has promised to give you a mouth and wisdom, Luc. 21.
where against all your adversaries shall not be able to speak, nor resist,
(which promise as many of you do know, the Lord did most truly keep with
thaforenamed gloryouse martyrs, that did lately suffer among you) he has
promised that not one hear of your heads shall perish. Are not two sparowes
(says the truth that ca^ not lie) sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your father? fear ye not therefore (says he)
ye at of more valor then many sparowes. All ye therefore that have pleasure in
ryghtfulnes, Esa. 55.
and have ye law of your god written in your hearts, fear not the curse of
men, nor be afraid of their blasphemies and reuilynges (says your lord God)
for worms and mothes shall eat them up like clothe and wolle: nevertheless my
ryghtfulnes (says the lord) and my saving health shall endure for ever. And
the saueor of men says, that he came down from heaven, Joan. 6.
not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. And that this is
the fathers will that sent him, that he should lose no thing of all which he
has given him, but should raise the^ up again at the last day. Therefore
comfort your selves (beloved brethren) with these and such like words of the
truth.

And if they shall pursue you, that you shall be compelled to forsake your native
country, with other of your pore brethren and countremen, and to leave your
labors and lyuinges unto mercyles strangers, and blody papists: Remember that
the holl earth is the lords, Psalm. 24.
and all that is in it. Remember also how that holy Dauso was compelled
through the tyranny of Saul, 1. Reg. 28.
not only to forsake his own native country, but also to fle and save himself
among ye heathen idolaters. Mat. 2.
Forget not the most innocent babe Christ, with the most pure virgin his
mother, and good father Joseph, which were compelled through Herodes ambycious
tyranny to fle in to Egypt. Remember also that the same God that helped David,
and the babe Christ in all dangers, and brought them home again in to their
own country, is yet alive, and as hable both to save you now, and also to
throw down your enemies, as ever he was. Therefore if ye shall be compelled to
fle from your native country, say as Danid said, when he was compelled to fle
from his own city Jerusalem, through the rebellyon of his own traiterous
son Absalon: 2. Reg. 15.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me home again
in to mine own country: but if the Lord thus say, I have no lust unto thee,
behold here am I, let him do with me what seems good in his eyes, if they
shall put you in to prison, be myndefull of Jeremy, Paul, and Sylas, Ier. 28.
whereof the one was let down in to a doungeon, Act. 16.
wheare as was no water, but mire: wherein the prophet of God stoke fast: The
other two were thrust in to an inner pryso^, and their fete made fast in the
stocks. If they will rob and spoil you of your goods, Job. 1.
Remember yt naked ye came out of your mothers womb, ^. Tim. 6.
and naked you shall depart hence: Remember the faithful brethren of the
hebrews, Heb. 10.
which took in good worth the spoiling of their goods, and that with gladness,
knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a better and an enduring
substance. If they shall after their common manner revile you, and call you
knaves, thieves, traitors, sedicious, scismatikes, heretics, and falsely
speak al manner of euel sayenges against you for your master Christ's sake,
Mat. 5.
tha^ rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven. For even so
have their forfathers reviled the holy prophets, Christ, and his apostles. And
remember that there is no disciple above his master, nor no servant above his
lord. Mat. 10.
If you shallbe betrayed of your fathers, mothers, brothers, suffers, sons,
daughters, and of your own household, familiars and kynsfolke: remember that
our saueour told you, Math. 10.
both that these unnatural treasons should be committed, Math. 26.
and also that he him self was betrayed and sold of his own familiar Apostle.
if they shall saw you in sounder, think on the Prophet Esaias, which by (the
testimony of Ecclesiastical writers) suffered the same death. if they will
throw you in to the bottom of the waters and drown you, Ion. 1.2.
forget not the history of Jonas. if they will cast you to the Lions, or other
cruel beasts to be devoured of them: Dani. 6.
Consider that the holy prophet Daniel was so handeled before you. if they will
stone you to death, you shall be in that suffering, Act. 7.
companions with the first martyr Stephen. if they will stryke of your heads
with the sword, Mat. 14.
remember that John the Baptiste hade the same end. if they will unjustly lay
sedicion or treason unto your charge, and so hang you up on the gallows, look
up to your head and master Christ, which was in like manner unjustly accused of
the same crimes, Luc* 23*
and so hanged upon the tree among malefactors and thieves. if they will cut out
your tongues and pulle your skynnes over your ears, you have a most noble
ensample to behold, the most excellent mother and her vii. sons, in the.ii.
book of the Machabeis: And forasmuch as ye most wicked enterprises of this
time, ^* Match. 7
in restoring idolatrous and false religion, and persecuting the true
christians, is much like unto the tyrannous time of Antiochus: Read
diligently I pray you among other things, the four first chapters of the
first book of the Machabees, and the.vi. and.vii. chapter of the second book.
Whereby you may be both comforted in your afflictions, and also be the less
offended, that now ye people by heaps, some for flatery, some for fear, and
some for filthy lucre, forsake the law of the Lord, commit much euel in
the land, chase out the secret christians, which had hid themselves in
corners and preuy places, ^* Match. 1.
and join themselves unto the Papists, runnyng an horyng after their most
false, hypocritical and abominable worshippinges, as they were wode. For even
to did they in the time of the cruel tyraunte Antiochus, as you may perceive
in ye first and second chapters, of the first book of the Machabees. And
therefore if you shall perceive yt any for fear of trouble, shall shrink and
recante the open truth of Christ's holy doctrine (which the cursed papists
desire chieflye yt so they may gratefie their father ye Deuel, Joan. 8.
in murderyng both souls and bodies) remember that Christ has both told
you aforehand of such shrinkers in the parable of the sower, Math. 13.
by the sede that fell upon the rock: And also that al his apostles shronke
from him in his most trouble: math. 26.
and of them, one denied and abiured him, as the Papists now compelle men to
abjure that truth, yt is more manifest then the noone day: remember also, 2.
Tim. 4.
that when Paul was first presented before Nero in judgment at Rome, all the
brethren forsook him: for whom he prays unto God, that he will not lay that
shrinkyng and backeslydyng unto their charges.

Therefore if such things have or shall happen, be nothing discouraged (dearly
beloved) to continue your fight against Antichrist, Ephe. 6.
(as ye have begone) with the sword of the spirit, and pacient suffryng: but
pluck up your hearts like valcaunt soldiers. Behold with Steven the Lord
Jesus standing at the right hand of power, Act. 7.
ready to take your part, and to help you, upon whom your faith hangs, and
not upon any worldly creature. For if now again all the disciples should
shrynke from their master, and all the brethren forsake Paul: yet should*
Christ and his word (unto which ye stick, and for the which Antichrist does
persecute you) be the truth, and Paul his faithful servant and Apostle.
Finally if they shall (according to their most cruel custom) burn you also
quick, as that mercyles generation has already burned a great nu^bre of your
faithful pastors (that gladly gave their lives for their flocks) besides a
great number of your innocent fathers, mothers, sons, daughters, brothers,
susters, husbands, and wives, kynsfolke and friends, whom they have in like
manner consumed to ashes, and yet their bloody appetites is not satisfied, nor
wylbe, so long as the long patience of the Lord shall suffer them to have the
sword in their hands, If, I say, they shall also burn you quick, Remember
the.iii. children that were throwe^ in to the fyry furnace, Dani. 3.
because they would not (according to the unlawful commandment of the
Idolatrous King Nabuchodonosor) worship with their body ye golden image, that
he had set up to be worshipped.

Remember also the holy martyr of Christ Policharpus, Euse. eccl. li. 4. ca. 15
the disciple of S. John the Evangelist: which being threatened by the Judge
that he would burn him quick, (as now the Papists threaten you) made him
answer and said: Thou threatnest fire, that shall burn but an hour, and
sone after must be quenched: for because thou know not that fire of the
judgment to come, and of the eternal punishment, that is reserved for the
ungodly. But why taryest thou? do what thou will. If (I say) you shall be by any
of the aforesaid ways, or by any other tormented, above all things lift up
your heads, and look unto your head captain the Lord Jesus, the author and
fynisher of your faith (as S. Paul calls him) which for the joy that was
set before him abode the Heb. 12.
cross, and despised the shame, and is set down on the right hand of the
trone of God. Consider therefore, how that he endured shuche speaking against
him of sinners, lest ye should be wearied and faint in your minds. 2. Cor. 4.
The tribulations ar but mome^tany, short, and light, but the glory that is
prepared for you through Christ, is eternal, 1. Pet. 1. 1. Cor. 2. Romans 8. 1.
Pet. 4.
immortal, undefiled, and such as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor
has entered in to the heart of man: where of the afflictions of this life are
not worthy. Wherefore before al things take heed (dearly beloved) that none of
you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or an evil doer, or as a busibody in
other men's matters: but if any of you shall after the ensample of the late
blessed Martyrs (for which of all the shameless Papists, and most filthy
Sodomites, could or can justly convince the gloriouse Martyrs of Christ,
Ferrar, Hopar, Tailor, Rogers, Sau^ders, Bradford, Glouer, Cardemaker, or any
of them, whom they have most wilfully and maliciousely murdered, of any
notable crime) if, I say, any of you shall after their ensample, suffer as a
Christian man: let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifye God on this
behalf, and commit his soul unto him with well doing, as unto a faithful
creator. These be in deed, I can not deny, stormy and troublesome days,
nevertheless if ye in the holy Ghost, through the most precious death of our
alone and omnisufficient mediator, the man Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2. Hebr. 4.
will now run unto the throne of grace and mercy, and will not cease to call
upon our most mighty and mercyful father: He will undoubtedly, graciously hear
you, he will most certainly deliver you. Psalm. 49.
For he says call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee.
Here is a most plain promise of delyueraunce. Psalm. 145.
God is faithful and true in all his words: he never failed any that called
faithfully upon him. This promise is sealed through the blood of Jesus Christ,
in whom all gods promyses are, yea and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.
Therefore be not weary, be not fainte hearted, shrynke not. 2. Para. 20.
The battle is not yours, but the Lords. Only stand furthe like men, and
behold the Lords help? Say with the most noble Iosaphat, Act. 4.
O Lord there is no strength in us to resyste these furious and ragyng enemies
of thine, neither wot we what to do, but only we lift up our eyes unto thee.
Say with the Apostles of our Lord and saueour: Now Lord behold their
threatenings, and grant unto thy servants with all confidence and boldness to
speak thy word. Dani. 9.
Say with the holy prophet Daniel, O Lord our God thou art ryghteous in all
thy works, we have justly deserved all these plages, that thou have brought
upon us, because we would not harke^ unto thy voice. We have sinned o Lord, and
done wickedly against al thy ryghtfulnes: yet let thy wrathful displeasure be
turned away (we beseech the) from this afflicted realm of England, and thy
sorrowful congregaciou. O our God enclyne thine ear and harken, at the least
for thine own sake, for thy dear sons sake, in whose name thou have promised
to hear us. Open thine eyes, and heholde how we be desolate. We cast not our
prayers before thee in our own ryghteousnes, but only in thy great mercyes. O
Lord hear, o forgive Lord, o Lord consider, tarry not over long, most
mighty Lord and mercyful father we beseech thee* if we shall after this manner:
boldlye and without ceassyng are, call, seek, and knock at the throne of grace
and of mercy, we shall certainly find fanour to help in the time of need.
Hebr. 4.
The unrighteous Judge yt neither feared God, nor cared for man, to be rydde of
the importunate suit and cry of the widow, herd her request, and avenged her
of her enemy. And shall not God (says Christ) avenge his elect, Lucc. 18.
which cry day and night unto him, yea though he defer them? I tell you,
says he, that he will aue^ge them, and that quickly. Mark well this parable,
derely beloved, and it will in a manner co^pel you, will ye, nyl ye, to confess
frankely and plainly, that God can not (because he ca^ not deny himself) but
that he must needs hear your prayers, if ye faynte not, nor ware weary in
calling upon him. This Judge is not a father, but a tyraunte, and yet
nevertheless he herd the widows cry: But God is our father and so would be
called of us, Mat. 6.
and should he not hear us? This Judge is cruel and has no compassion of
other men's calamites. And yet he fulfilled the widows desire: Psalm. 103.
Hebre. 4.
But God is naturally merciful and pitiefull. We have not says S. Paul any
priest, which ca^ not have compassion on our infirmities, but was in all
points tempted like as we are, but yet without sin. And should he contemn our
co^tynuall, humble and faithful suits? The Judge never commanded the wedowe
to cum unto him for healpe, but was rather offeded with her, because she troubled
him with her daily cryeng, and nevertheless he herd her: But God has
commanded us to call upon him. Psalm. 49 Math. 7. And. 26.
Call upon me (says he) in the day of thy trouble: Ask, seek, knock,
says Christ, watch and pray, that ye enter not into temtacion. Seeing than
that he has commanded us to call upon him, will he not hear us, when we do
according to his commandment? The Judge made never promise to ye wedowe to
help her, he never pmysed to hear her cause, but rather did often times deny
either to help her or hear her: And notwythstandyng in conclusion he did
both hear her, and help her. But God has promised to hear us, and has
not only so promised, but has also ratified the same with an oath, sayteng:
Verily, verily I say unto you, Joan. 16.
what so ever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you: how is
it possible now, that God should go from his own promyses? To be short, Luc.
11.
the Judge naturally is euel, and yet do the good unto ye widow in hearing her
cause and helpyng her: And will not god being naturally good, do us good in
hearing our prayers? Therefore al though God seems now to differ us, and to
suffer the bloody and cruel adversaries, to long to triumph ever us: yet let
us not despair, but continue in prayers, being fully persuaded, that though he
seem now to be far of, that yet he will certainly come, and deliver us. He
can not fail nor lie, but will come (as the prophet says) and will not tarry.
Aba. 2. Luc. 18. Genesis 15.
And I say unto you (says Christ) that he will avenge his elect, and that
quyckly. But the iniquity of the English Ammorites is not yet full, neither
their cruel tyranny yet ripe. For so fone as their wyckednes is full, and their
crueltye ripe, Apo. 14.
the Lord will fend his reapers to cut them down (as he revealed unto his
servant John) and they shall be cast into the great wynesat of the wrath of
God: yea they shall be theomen into the pyt, that burns with fire and
brimstone, into that vnque^cheable fire where as shall be weeping and waylyng,
Apo. 19. Marc. 9.
and gnashing of tethe. Go to now ye tender parnelles, that come in proudely
with stretched out necks, Esa. 3.
and with vain wanto^ eyes, trippyng and dau^syng so nycely with your fete,
that can not endure, that a blast of the north east wynd in ye winter, or that
the funne beams in the summer, should ones touch the bare of your own
stynkyng carcases: and yet be so mercyles to the poor members of Christ, to
honest, godly, quiet, and obedient subjects, that never offended you, that
would feign by all means please you (so that they might not thereby displease
God) that pray continually to God for your amendment (so mercyles I say)
that you put them into the mouths of most bloody rauenyng wolfes, and most
currishe hocherlidogges, to be baited, harried, and torn in pieces: to be
spoiled and robbed of lands, houses, lyuynges, liberty, goods, and
countreye, to be pinched and pyned in stynking prisons, with stocks, fetters,
chains, rackes, cold, famine and other rigorous torments: to be strangled
with halters, to spille their innocent blood with swords and axes, to burn
them quick to ashes, Go to I say you tender parnelles, that be now so tender
and dainty over your own vile flesh, Ephe. 5. and. 1. 1. Cor. 6.
and so mercyles to the flesh, blood, bones, bodies, and members of Christ,
and temples of the holy Ghost: tell me what will ye do in the time of the
visitacion and destruction, Esa. 10. Pro. 1.
that shall come upon you suddenly, like a storm and tempest? To whom will ye
ru^ne for help? or to whom will ye give your honor, that he may keep it?
that ye come not among the prisoners, or lie among the dead? Esa. 66. Mar. 9.
Tell me (I pray you) how well you shall be able to endure that unquenchable
fire, wherein for your manyfolde, blodye tyrannies, and murtheryng of Gods
people, you shall most certainly burn world without end, with weeping, wayling,
and gnashinh of tethe, Math. ^^
which are prepared for the devil and his angels. Neither shall your Romish
pardons, nor your Sodomitical massemo^gers with all their tro^pery, be able to
pluck you out of ye fyry lake:

When as ye shall se the ryghteous stand in great stedfastnes against you,
Sap. 5.
that have dealt so extremely with them, and taken away their labors, when you
being vexed with an horrible fear, and wonderyng at the sudden health,
glorious kingdom, and beautiful crown, which the ryghteous shall receive at
the Lords hand, and gronyng for very distress and anguyshe of mind, shall
say within your selves. These are they whom we sometime had in derision, and
iested upon. We fools thought their life very madness, and their end to be
without honor: but lo how they are counted among the children of God, and their
portion is among the saints. Therefore we have erred from the way of truth,
the light of ryghteousnes has not shyned unto us, and the sun of
understanding rose not upon us. We have wearyed our selves in the way of
wyckednes, and destruction. Tedious ways have we gone, but the way of the
Lord we have not known. What good has our pride done unto us? or what
profit has the pomp of riches brought us? al those things are passed away
like a shadow. etc. O ye proud and bloody Papists, such miserable words
shall ye speak being in hell, and burning in fire unquenchable with the deuell
and his angels, whose kingdom you have promoted, maynteyned, and defended.
Wherefore (dear brethren) be not grieved at their most vain pompous, Psalm. 37.
And. 73.
and short pride, and glorious welthe, through the which they are become so
maliciously wood, to practice daily such furious and monstrous madness and
tyranny, against the Lord Christ, his Gospel, and his pure members: but
consydre ye the most horrible ends of Pharao, Exodus 14. 1. Reg. 31. 2. Mac. 9.
Act. 2. Euse. eccl. Li. 9. ca. 9 Theod. li. 4. cap. 25.
Saul, Antiochus, Herod, Maxencius, Iulianus the apostata, and such other
tyrauntes, whose ends the tyrauntes of the Popish Sodomites and princes of
Gomorra will shortly follow: And so thou shall have just cause rather to lament
the most miserable state, wherein they are now holde^ captive of Satan, than to
follow their cursed and cruelenterpryses. The Lord (says David) has set
them in a slippery place, Psalm. 73.
that he may cast them down headlynges, and destroy them. O how suddenly do
they consume, peryshe, and come to a fearful end? yea even as a dream wha^
one awaketh. So make thou their image to vanishe out of the city. This had
David found true by erperience, therefore in an other psalm, Psalm. 37.
I my self (says he) have seen the ungodly in great power, and floryshe like
a grene Baye tree: but I went by, lo he was gone, I sought him, but he could
no where be found. Keep ye therefore innocence, and take heed unto the thing
that is right. Sit still, be quiet, and pacient, embrace and kiss the Lords
rod: Esa. 30.
For in quietness and in hope (says the Lord) shall your strength lie. Call
upon God without ceassyng, and in your prayers be myndfull of the afflicted,
oppressed and scatered church of Christ, which is now once again almost
rooted up by the wild Bore of Rome, Psalm. 80.
and other of that swynishe generation, that God for his mercy sake may yet
again (if it be his blessed will) build up the walls of the English
Jerusalem, Psalm. 50. and. 124.
and turn aways the captivity of our Syon.

The God of all grace, 1. Pet. 5.
which has called you unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own
self (after ye have suffered a little affliccion) make you parfyte, setle,
strengtht, and stablyshe you. To him be glory and dominion for ever, and while
the world endure. Amen. The peace of God, the strength and comfort of the holy
Ghost, Ephi. 6.
be with you all that love the Lord Jesus in pureness. AMEN.

Apoca. 22. Veni Domme Jesus cito.
Anno. 1555.


